Fabyans cronycle newly prynted / with the cronycle, acts, and deeds done in
the time of the reygne of the most excellent prince king Henry the vii.
father unto our most drad sovereign lord king Henry the.viii. To whom be all
honor, reverence, and joyful contynaunce of his prosperous reygne, to the
pleasure of god and weal of this his realm AMEN.

Prentyd at London By wyllyam Rastell. 1533.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.



MVSEVM BRITANNICVM
British Museum blazon or coat of arms

The table of the first volume of Fabyanes cronycle.
Albion / and why this i will of old time so was called, it apereth in the fourth
lefe the first chapter. Brute the son of Siluius / and of his orygynall and
first coming into this land. ca. ii. folio. iiii. Brute of his first
landynge. ca. iii. fo. v. This Brute the son^ of Siluius Posthumus, descended
of the noble blood of Troyans, entered first ye i will of Albion which he after
named Brytayne and now is called England, in the year of the world. iiii.
thousand lxiii / and before the incarnacyon of Christ, as in the beginning of
this work is more openly showed / and reigned years.xxiiii. Troynuaunt or
London of this king was first founded. ca. iiii. fo. v. Locrinus or Locryne,
the eldeste son of Brute / began his reygne over Brytayne in the country
called Leogria or Logiers, that after was named myddell England, in ye year of
the world.iiii. thousand.lxxxvii. and reigned years.xx. capi. v. folio. vi.
Gwendoloena or Gwendoleyn, ye wife of Locryne, began to reygne as queen over
the Brytons or country of Logiers, in the year of the world iiii.
thousand.C.vii. and reigned years. xv. ca. vi. fo. vi. Madan the son of
Locrine and of the said Gwendolyne, began his reygne over the Brytons, in the
year of the world.iiii. thousand.C. and xxii / and reigned after the agreement
of many writers and most years.xl. ca. vii. fo. vi. In the second year of
this kyng^ reygne ended the third age of the world, And Dauyd began to reygne
over Israel. Menpricus or Mempricius the son of Madan, began his rule over
the Brytons, in the year of the world.iiii.M.C.lxii / and the year before
Christ's incarnacyon. and reigned years. xx. ca. viii. folio. vi. Ebrancus or
Ebrank the sonn^ of Mempryce, began to rule the Bryto^s in the year of the
world.iiii.M.C.lxxxii. and reigned years.xii. This king made the city of
york, ye town of Acryncte, and the castelles of Dunbarre and Eddynbourgh in
Scotland ca. ix. fo. vii. Brute vixii scutum or Brute Greneshelde, son of
Ebranke, was made ruler of the Brytons, in ye year of the
world.iiii.M.ii.C.xlii / and reigned years.xii. ca. x. fo. vii. Leylus or Leyr
the son of the forenamed Brute, began his rule over Brytayn, in the year of
ye world iiii.M.ii.C.liiii. and ruled years.xxv This king founded the town of
Carleyll. ca. xi. fo. vii. Lud Hurdibras or Rudibras the sonn^ of Leyl, began
his dominion over ye Bryto^s, in the year of ye world. iiii.M.ii.C.lxxix. and
ruled years.xxxix. This king made wynchester, Caunterbury, and Septo^ now named
Shaftysbury. ca. xii. fo. vii. Baldud the son of Lud, began his domynyon over
the Brytaynes, in the year of the world.iiii. thousand iii.C.xviii / and
reigned years.xx. This king founded the town of Bathe / and the bathes within
the same after some writers. ca. xiii. folio. vii. Leyr or Leyer the son of
Baldud was made ruler over the Brytons, in the year of the world.iiii.M iii.C.
and.xxxviii / and ruled years.lx. This king made the town of Leycestre. ca.
xiiii. fo. vii. Cordeilla the yongeste daughter of the forenamed Leyer, began
to rule the Brytons, in the year of the world.iiii. thousand.iii.C.xcviii.
and ruled years.v. ca. xvi. folio. viii. Cunedagius with Marganus his neuewes,
sons of the two sisters of Cordeilla, began their dominyon over Brytayne,
in the year of ye world iiii. thousand.iiii. hundredth and.iii. and co^tynued
years.ii. ca. xvii. fo. viii. This Cunedagius forenamed, after that he in
battle had slain Marganus, began his senyoury over the Brytons, in the
year of the world.iiii.M.iiii.C.v. and ruled after most writers years.xxxiii.
ca. xviii. fo. ix. Reynaldus or Rilalnus the sonn^ of Cunedagius, began to
rule the Brytons, in the year of the world.iiii. thousand.iiii.C. and.xxxviii.
and reigned years.xlv. The.xxxii. year of this king was Rome bylded, of the
two brethren Remus and Romulus / which was the year of the world ca. xix.
fo. ix. Gurgustius Gurgusto or Gorbodian, the son of Riuallus, was made ruler
of the Brytons, in ye year of the world.iiii.M.iiii.C.lxxxiii. and ruled
years.xxxviii. ca. xx. fo. ix. Sicillius or Siluius the brother or son of
Gurgustus, began his domynyon over the Brytons, in the year of the world.iiii.
thousand.v.C. and.xxi. and ruled years.xlix. ca. xxi. folio. ix. Iago or Lago
the neuewe of Gurgustius, was made ruler of Brytayn in ye year of the
world.iiii. thousand v. hundredth.lxx. and reigned years.xxv. ca. xxii. fo. ix.
Kinimacus the brother of Iago, and after some writers the son of Siluius /
began his seygnyorye over the Brytons, in the year of the world iiii.
thousand.v.C.xcv. and ruled years.liiii. In the.xiiii. year of this king ended
the.iiii. age / and the Jews were captyued by the Babylons. Also Isopus or
Isoppe the feyner of fables, in the latter days of this Kinimacus in the
country of Greece, florysshed and feigned his fables. ca. xxiii. fo. ix. Gorbodug
whom Geffrey of Mo^mouth names Grobodugo, son^ unto Kinimacus, began his
domynion over the Brytons, in the year of the world.iiii. thousand.vi.C.xlix.
and ruled years.lxii. About the.xxvi. year of this kings reygne was Holiferne
slain of Iudyth the wydow in the chamber of Papilio^. As has Iacobus
Philippus. ca. xxiiii. fo. ix. Ferrex with his brother Porrex, sons of
Gorbodug, began jointly to rule ye Bryto^s, in ye year after Adam iiii.M.vii.C.
and.xi. and ruled years.v. Here ends the line or ofspryng of Brute. ca. xxv.
fo. x. The storys agree, that after ye death of the foresaid brethren / the
Bryto^s, because there remained no heir of them, were in great dyscorde a
long season, and were subdued under diverse kings. But because ye foresaid
auctours do not certyfye ye term of this dyscorde, and also do write dyuersly
of the reygnes of the foresaid kings so that some do assyne very few or no
certain years, and some other many years, so that in thaccomptyng of the years
and of times there appears a great alteracyo^. Therefore it is to be noted, as
affermeth Ranulph monk of Chester, Guydo, Galfryde and other / that Cunedagius
only began to reygne in the year of the world.iiii tyousande.iiii. hundredth
and.v. And he reigned.xxxiii. years. which makes the year of the
world.iiii.M.iiii.C. and.xxxviii. And furthermore the foresaid authors with
other afferme, that the.ii. brethren Belinus and Brennus, did enter Italy with
a great noumber of men, in the xi. year of Artaxarses the.xi. king, of Perse.
which was the year of the world.iiii. thousand.viii.C. and.xv. and the.viii.
year of the reygne of the foresaid brethren, as says Martynus super Cronicas.
whereby it plainly appears, that from the last year of Cunedage, until the
eyghte year of the foresaid brethren, there passed.iii.C.lxxvii. years And
furthermore all writers afferme, that ye said Belinus and Brennus did succeed
their father Dumuallo / and that the said Dumuallo reigned.xl. years. The
first year of whose reygne was the year of the world.iiii.M.vii.C.xlviii. So
that from the last year of Cunedage, until the first year of the said
Dunuallo, there passed.iii.C.xxix. years. Of the which years, there passed from
the first year of Riuallus or Renaldus until the last year of Porrex.ii.
hundredth.lxxviii. years. By which account it appears, that the Bryto^s,
after the death of the fore said brethren, were in dyscord by the space of.li.
years. And so the last year of the foresaid dyscorde was the year of the
world.iiii. thousand vii. hundredth.lxvii.
Thus ends the first part of this work that conteyneht.viii. hundredth
and.iiii. years.
MUlumtius du^uallo, yt which of some wrytters is named Donobant, and sonn^ of
Cloton duke or king of Cornwall, was made king of Brytayne, in the year of
the world.iiii. thousand.vii. hundredth lxviii. and reigned years.xi. This was
the first that bare crown in Brytayne. This also founded the town of
Malmesbury and of Uyes. This also began the.iiii. pryncipall hye ways. ca.
xxviii. fo. x. Belinus and Brennus the two sons of the forenamed Dunuallo,
began to reygne jointly over Brytayne, in the year of the world.iiii.
thousand, eight hundredth, and.viii. and ruled years jointly, and Belynus
alone.xxvi. This Belinus made the town of Carleyll. Also in London he caused
to be made the haven of Byllyngysgate / and ended the.iiii. ways begone of
his fader. This also made a temple in London, and named it the Temple of
Concord / which after some writers opynyo^s should be the Temple bar, now
the parysshe church of the temple as appears. ca. xxix. cum folio. xi. In the
time in which these two brethren reigned, auctours somewhat dyscorde. For
Policronicon says that Belinus with Brennus did invade Italy and besege Rome
in the.CC.i. year after the tra^smigragracion of Italy. And also that the same
time Furius Camillus was dyctatour of Rome. whereby it appears that Rome was
spoiled of them about the year of the world.iiii.M.viii.C. and.x. But Iacobus
Phylyppus with other says that ye foresaid Furius Camillus was dictatour of
Rome about the year of our lord.iiii.M.viii. hundredth.lvi. whereby there
appears a dyfference of.xlvi. years. But Radulphus monk of the order of
Cystercieu^ erreth very far, that affermeth in his cronycle that ye said
brethren began to reyne over Brytayn in the year of ye world.iiii.M.v.C.
and.iiii. which dyffereth from other above.ii. hundredth and.l. year. And where
it is noted of some, that ye said Belynus reyned.x. years / that is supposed
for the times of his reyn after his return from Italy. The victory of the said
brethren is showed in the story following. Gurguintus or Gurguyn the son^ of
Belyn, was made king of Brytayne, in the year of the world.iiii.
thousand.viii.C. and.xxxiiii. and reigned.xix. years. ca. xxxii. fo. xiii.
Guithelinus or Guitellius called in the English cronycle Guentolyn^, the
son of Gurguintus, was made king of Brytayne, in the year of the
world.iiii. thousand.viii.C. and.liii. and reigned years.xxvi. Alexander the
great began to reygne about the.xxi. year of this king. ca. xxxiii. fo.
xiiii. Sisillius or Cecilius the sonn^ of Guithelinus, began his reygne over
the Britons, in the year of the world iiii. thousand.viii.C.lxxix. and reigned
years.vii. ca. xxxiiii. fo. xiiii. Kymerus or Kymere the sonn^ of Sisillius,
began his rule over ye Brytons, in the year of the world.iiii.M.viii.C.lxxxvi.
and ruled years.iii. ca. xxxv. fo. xiiii. Elanius the son or brother of
Kymerus, began his reygne over Brytayne, in the year of the world iiii.
thousand.viii. hundredth.lxxxix. and reigned years.ix. ca. xxxvi. folio. xiiii.
Morindus or Marwyth the bastard son of Elanius was made king of Brytayne,
in the year of the world.iiii. thousand.viii. hundredth xci. and reigned
years.viii. ca. xxxvii. fo. xiiii. Gorbomannus or after the English cronycle
Granbodyan son unto Morindus, was ordained king of Brytayne, in the year of
the world iiii. thousand.viii.C.xcviii. and reigned years.xi. ca. xxxviii. fo.
xv Archigallo the second son of Morindus, began his domynyon over the
Brytons, in the year of the world.iiii. thousand.ix.C.x. and reigned years.v.
ca. xxix. fo. xv. Elidurus the.iii. son of Morindus, began his domynyon over
the Brytons, in the year of the world iiii. thousand.ix.C.xv. and ruled
years.v. ca. xl. fo. xv. Archigallo beforenamed, was by the compassyo^ of his
brother again restored to his former dygnyte, in ye year of the world.iiii.
thousand.ix. hundredth.xx. and reyngned after years.x. ca. xli. fo. xv.
Elidurus beforenamed, was again of the Brytons made king, in the year of the
world.iiii. thousand ix. hundredth.xxx. and reigned years ii. ca. xlii. fo. xv.
Uigenius or Migenius with Peridurus his brother, which in the English
cronycle are named Hygamus and Petitur, brethern of Elidurus, deposed by
strength their said brother, and began their reygne in ye year of the
world.iiii. thousand.ix hundredth.xxxii. and reigned jointly and alone
years.ix. This peridurus or Petitur made the town of Pykerynge after the
opinion of diverse writers. ca. xliii. fo. xv. Elidurus beforenamed, was the
third time restored to the crown, in the year of the world.iiii. thousand
ix. hundredth.xli. and reigned. the third time years.iiii. Galfride says ye
during the life of the foresaid brethern, this was enclosed in the tower of
London. which if it be true, than is not true that the flower of hystorys
affermeth, which says that the tower of London was bylded of Cassibelan. ca.
xliiii. fo. xvi. Gorbonianus or Gorbomannus the son^ of Elidure, was made king
of Brytayne, in the year of the world iiii. thousand.ix. hundredth.xlv. And
after him reigned.xxxii. kings, as in the story is after declared / yt which
with the said Gorbonmaus by the reason that follows occupied years lxxxvi. And
in this time duke Haniball of Cartage about the year of the world began to
war against the Romans. And Scipio Affrican vanquyshed Hanyball about the
year of the world.v.M. and ix. And about this time Judas machabeus duke of
Israel began to be their capytayne / that is to say in the year of the
world.v. thousand.xlvi. or there about. ca. xlvi. fo. xvi. To make the
stories to agree, and to keep the order of the years begone, first it is to be
noted that as shows Ranulph with diverse other, Julius Caesar made Brytayn
trybutary to Rome in the.xlviii. year before the incarnacyon of Christ, or in
the year of the world five thousand.C.li. which was in the.ix. year of
Cassybelan. From whe^s taking from ye time of Cassybela^ before the trybute
paid ix. years, and for the time of the reygne of Lud.xi. years / it follows
congruently that king Lud began to reygne in the year of the world five
thousand.C.xxxi. And so from the last year of Elidure, until the beginning
of the reygne of Lud, or in the time of ye.xxxiii. kings / there
passed.C.lxxxvi. years. Lud the son of Hely last king of the foresaid.xxxiii,
was stablysshed king of Brytayne, in the year of the world five
thousand.C.xxxi. and reigned years.ix. This king made Ludgate the westgate of
London, and walled a part of the same, and named the city Caerlud. ca. xlvii.
fo. xvi. Cassibelan the brother of Lud was ordained king of Brytayn, in the
year of the world five thousand.C.xlii / and reigned or he were made trybutary
to the Romans years full and more.viii. ca. xlviii. folio. xvi. The beginning
of this trybute as has Peter Pyctauyensis, Polycronycon and other authors,
was in the year of the world.v. thousand C.li / and the.xlviii. year before
Cristes coming. And Eutropius says in his cronicle, that Caius Julius did
conquer Brytayn by.ii. years before he was create emperor / and he reigned as
emperor.ii. years. And furthermore the said Eutropius affermeth, that
Octauian Augustus successor of the said Julius, began to reygne in the year
of the world.v. thousand.C.lviii. and that he reigned full.xli. years before
Christ was borne. which saying Iacobus Philippus and other auctours afferme.
whereby it follows, that Julius Caesar subdued Brytayne.xlviii. years before the
coming of Christ, and the year of the world, as before is said, v.
thousand.C.li. And so it appears that Christ was incarnate in the year of the
world after the account of the lxx. interpreters.v.M.C.xcix.
Thus ends the second part that conteyneth.iii. C.lxxxiii. years
CAssibelan, as before is said, was made tributarie to the Romans, in the
year of the world v.M.C.li. and reigned after, years vii. ca. l. fo. xviii.
Temancius or Te^nancius brother to Cassibelan, was of the Brytaynes ordained
king, in the year of the world.v. thousand.C. and.lvii. and reigned
years.xxiii. ca. lii. folio. xviii. Kymbelinus the son of The^na^cius, was
made king of the Bryto^s, in the year of the world.v.M.C.lxxx. and reigned
years.xxxv. All writers agree that reygnyng this king, our savior Jesus Christ
was incarnat. And than began the.vi. age. ca. liii. folio. xviii. Of the time
of this king Kymbelyus reygn, diverse auctours trete very darkly, for few of
them do not account any years / for the time of his reygne, except Peter
pictauiensis, and the auctours of the English book, which afferme him to
reygne.xi. years. But Galfrido of Monmouth says, that when he had reigned.
years he begat.ii. sons. But the flower of hystoryes witnesses him to
reygne.xxxv. years, and yt Jesus Christ was borne in.xix. year of his reygne,
which with other chronicles or times does somewhat better agree. Guiderius the
son of Kymbalyne, was made king of Brytayne, in the year of our lords
incarnacyo^ xvi / and in the year of the world.v.M.ii.C.xvii. and reigned
years.xxviii. ca. liiii. fo. xix. Aruiragus the brother of Guiderius, began to
reygne over the Brytons, in the year of our lords incarnacyon.xliiii. and
reigned years.xxx. In this time Glouceter was builded of Claudius. And in
the.xxvi. year of this kings reygne, which was the.lxx. year of the
incarnacyo^ of our lord / began the first persecucio^ of the christen men
under Nero. ca. lv. fo. xix. Marius, which the English cronycle names
westmere, son of Aruiragus, was made king of Brytayne / in the year of our
lord.lxxiiii. and in the year of the world. and reigned years.ii. Chester
town of this king was founded. westmerlande also of this king took his name.
And about the.xxi. year of this kings reygne was the second persecucyon, under
Domicianus. And also the third persecucyon about the xxxv. year of this king
under Tratanus. ca. lvii. fo. xx. Coilus the sonn^ of Marius, was made king of
Brytayne, in the year of our lord.C. and.xxvi. and the year from the first
Adam / and reigned years.liii. And about ye.xlv. year of this Coilus, was the
fourth persecucyon, under Marcus Antonius Amelius. ca. lviii. fo. xxii. Lucius
the son of Coilus, began his reygne over the Brytons, in the year of our
lord an.C.lxxx. and of the world. and reigned years.xii. This was the first
christen king in Brytayne. The image of Christ at the north door in the church
of Poulys, was found in the river of Thames by this Lucius. But an other
authoure says that it was founden in ye.xiiii. year of Coilus or in the year
of the world.C.xl. ca. lix. folio. xxii. Of this Lucius auctours do dout fully
treat. For Galfride says that Lucius dyed in the year of our lord C.lvi. And
Guido de Calu^pna says that Lucius was cristened in the fore said year. And
Peter pictauiensis says that Lucius began to reygne in the year of our
lord.C.lxxx. and that he received the faith in the.viii. year of his reygn.
And the Flower of historyes says that he reigned.xii. years after the faith by
him received. Furthermore it is showed in a certain table hangyng on the north
part of the quyre of Poules in Londont, hat the said Lucius was crowned king
of Brytayne in the year of grace.C.xxiii. and that he reigned.lxxvii. years.
And the English cronycle agrees therewith of his coronacion / but it says
that he reigned but only xii. years. And so there appears a great dyscord
between these writers But all agreen that the said Lucius was converted to ye
faith in the time of pope Eleutherius / which after the concordance of many
stories was made pope about the year of our lord C.lxxviii. wherefore Galfrides
sayng is to be denayd, that says, he died in the year of grace.C.lvi. and also
the saying of Guydo for receyuyng of ye faith. And rather we ought to give
credence to the foresaid table or to Peter pictauiensis that affermeth ye said
Lucius to reygne.xii. year. But some writers that wrote the acts and the
reygnes of kings, have ouerskypt as it seems the time which Lucius reigned
before he received the faith. And if he reigned before he received the
faith.xx. years and yt he received the faith in his.xx. year, and reigned
after.xv. years / they have accounted the.xv. year which he reigned as christian
king, and have let pass the other.xx. year. And so is it to be thought that
the foresaid auctour Peter pictauiens did. which reason being allowed, the said
table may agree with the said Peter without any great dyfference which
testyfyeth ye said Lucius to reygne.lxxvii year as king. After whose death in
so much that he dyed without any lawful heir / a great conte^cion sprange
among the Brytons that endured by.xv. years, as shall apere by the sequel.
Troth it is after all histories, that Seuerus a Romayne succeeded Lucius in
Brytayne. But because ye time is not certainly set when the said Seuerus
subdued the Bryto^s / therefore it is to noted, that when it was showed to the
Romans of the sedicion and discord of the Bryto^s, and of the sleyng of the
Romans than being in Brytayn / the senate sentte thither the foresaid Seuerus
with.ii legions of men. which bare the^ self so manfully, that in short while
he compelled the Brytons to obey to the senate. which Policronicon affermeth
to be about the year of our lord C.xcv. In which year as has Iacobus
Philippus, the said Seuerus began to raygne over the Romans. But that
dysagreeth from other Chronicles. For Eutropius, Matheolus and the forsayde
Iacobus Philippus says, that when the said Seuerus had subdued the Arabyes,
Parthys, and Gallys, after many battayls he came into Brytayn. where he being
troubled with diverse chances / at last died in ye town of york. where by it
is to be supposed that in ye end of his reygn he came hither, and about
the.xii. year of his reygne over the Romans which was the year of our
lord.ii.C.vii. and that after he reigned over the Brytons.v. year. wherefore
it euyde^tly apereth, that the foresaid dyscord dured.xv. years / which time
Brytayne was without a king.
Thus ends the third part which conteyneth CC.lvi. years.
SEuerus emperor of Rome, as before is showed, in the.xii. year of his empire,
and year of our lord.ii.C. and.vii / began his reygne over the Bryto^s, and
year of ye world / and reigned as king years.v. The first persecucyon of the
christen men, was under this Seuerus, about the year of our lord.ii.C.x ca.
lxi. fo. xxii. Bassianus the sonn^ of Seuerus, began his reygne over the
Brytons, in the year of our lord.ii.C.xii / and the year of the world / and
reigned years.vi. ca. lxii. folio. xxii. Carassius a young and lusty Brytayne
of unknown blood, by means as in his story shows, began his domynyon over
the Brytons, in the year of our lord.ii.C. and.xviii. and year of the world.
and ruled years.viii. ca. lxiii. fo. xxiii. Here again authors forget ye years
of the kings following. Of which I not greatly maruyll. For in this time much
discencyon was among the Romayne princes / and also among the Brytons civil
war ceased not. For they were so styrred with dyscencyon and war, yt none
could occupy the kyngedome any determynate time. For which cause and such
like, authors could not assyne any certain time to the princes as me seems.
But that we may come to some knowledge / Policronicon shows that constantius
yt was father to Constantine the great, was sent by the senate into Brytayne,
about the year of our lord.ii.C.lxxix. and in the second year of Probrus
emperor / that he should subdue to ye Romans Coelus than there king. From the
which time of the coming of the said Constantius until the last year of
Bassianus accountynge bakwarde, there passed.lxi. years. In the time of which
years there reigned in this Ilelande these.iiii. kings that is to say
Carassius, Alectus, Asclepiodotus, and Coelus. Allectus a duke or senator of
Rome, began his domynyon over the Brytons, in the year of our lord.ii.C.xxvi.
and of the world / and reigned years.vi. ca. lxiiii. fo. xxiii. Asclepeodotus,
or after the English book Asclepades / began his reygne over the Brytons, in
the year of our lord god.CC.xxxii. And the year of the world / and reigned
years.xxx. The syxt persecucyon of christian men was about the year of our
lord.CC.xxxviii. under Maximian. The.vii. persecucyon was in ye year of our
lord.CC.lv. under Decius. In ye which pope Fabyan was martyred. The.viii.
persecucion was in the year of our lord.CC.lx. under Ualeryan which was
the.xviii. year of this Asclepiodotus. ca. lxv. folio. xxiiiii Coelus or Coyll
earl of Colchester, by exytyng of the Bryto^s was made king of Brytayne, in the
year of our lord.CC.lxii. and reigned years.xxvii. This king after most
writers made the town of Colchester in Essex. ca. lxvi. fo. xxiiii Constancius
a senatoure of Rome, by reason of marriage knyt with Eleyn daughter of Coelus,
began to reygne as king of Brytayne, in ye year of our lord.CC.lxxxix. and of
ye world and reigned years xxx. The.ix. persecucyon of the cryste^men was
under Aurelianus. Saint Albon prothomartyr in the time of this Constancius as
some have, in ye x. persecucyo^ which was under Dioclesian and Maximian, was
martyred. ca. lxvii fo. xxiiii Constancius surnamed the great, sonn^ of
Constancius and of the holy Heleyne, began his reygne over Brytayne, in the
year of our lord.iii.C.xix. and of the world. / and reigned as king years.x.
ca. lxviii folio. xxv Octauius duke of Iesses or Iewesses, and after named
westsaxo^s / by extorte power began his reygne over the Brytons, in the year of
our lord.iii.C. and.xxix. and of the world. and reigned years.liiii ca. lxxi
fo. xxvii Of this king following called Maximius or after some Maximianus,
writers dyuersly speak / so that some say he raygned few years. But in the
concordaunce of chronicles, it plainly apereth that the said Maximis began to
reygn over the Bryto^s in the year of our lord.iii.C.lxxxii / and that he was
slain of Theodosius the elder in the third year of his reygne, which began to
reygne in the year of our lord.iii.C.lxxxviii. And so it appears plainly that
he reigned ix. years. Maximius or Maximianus, the son^ of Leonyne brother to
Trahern^ uncle to Helcyne, began his reygne over Brytayn, in the year of our
lord iii.C.lxxxii / and reigned years.ix ca. lxxii. fo. xxvii Saint Ursula with
her fellows in this kings time were martyred of Enanus and Melga. Gracianus an
offycer or feed knight of Maximius, began to oppress the Brytons, in the year
of our lord.iii.C.xc / and tyrannysed years iiii. ca. lxxiiii fo xxviii The
stories agree, that after that Gracian was slain / Brytayne was vexed a long
while with often dysce^sions and civil war. But how long this dyscord did
last authors trete diversely / for some say it lasted.l. year, and some.xl. and
some.xxx. Therefore to know ye certeynty it is requisite that we dylygently
search, how many years passed from the last year of Gracia^ until the
beginning of the reygne of Constantyne / or the certain time when Consta^tyne
was made king. who as witnesses Guydo was crowned at Cicester in the year of
our lord iiii.C.xxxv. The flower of hystoryes says also that in the third
year of Theodocius the younger emperor, Constantyne began to rule the Brytons.
which Theodocius began to reygne in the year of our lord.iiii.C.xxxi. whereby
it apereth, that from the last year of Gracia^ until the beginning of
Constantyne, there passed about.xl. years. But the very trewrule is yt in the
year of grace.iiii.C.li. the Saxons first perced Brytayne, and in the third
year of Uortigern. From which taking away for the reygne of Uortigern.ii.
years, and fro the reygn of Consta^cius.v. year, and fro the reygn of
Consta^tyne.x. year / it follows yt the said dyssencion or mysery of the
Brytons lasted.xxxix. years full. And here ended the trybute that was paid to
the Romans, that had endured above.iiii.C.lx. years.
Thus ends the fourth part that encludeth.CC.xxv years.
The line of the kings of France.
PHaramundus the son^ of Mercomirus, began his reygne as first king of France,
in the year of our lord.iiii.C.xx / and the mysery of the Brytons the.xxvi.
year / and reigned years.xi. ca. lxxviii. folio. xxxi Clodius or Clodio, or
after some Crynitus and Capillatus the son of Pharamude, was ordained the
second king of France, in the year of our lord.iiii. hundredth and.xxxi / and
the.xxxvii. year of the myserye of the Brytons / and reigned years.xix. capi.
lxxix. folio. xxxi
Here begins the fyfthe part.
COnstantinus the brother of Aldroenus king of little Brytayne, began his
reygn over much Brytayne, Anno domini. iiii. hundredth and.xxxiii / and the
year of Clodio than king of France the third year / and reigned years.x.
capi. lxxx folio. xxxii Constantinus the son of Constantyne before time a
monk, was made king of much Brytayne, in the year of our lord.iiii.
hundredth and.xliii / and the.xiii. year of Clodio than king of France / and
reigned years.v. ca. lxxxi folio xxxii Uortigerus or Uortigernus duke of
Cornewayll or Consul of Iesses, was by treason made king, in the year of our
lord four hundredth and lxviii / and the.xviii. year of Clodio than king of
France / and reyned years.xvii. The Saxons or Englysshemen, in the third year
of this kings reygne first entered this Island. capi. lxxxii folio. xxxii
Meroneus neuewe or next allye unto Clodio, was made king of Frenchemen, in the
year of our lord iiii. hundredth and.l / and the second year of Uortiger than
king of Brytayne / and reigned years.x. capi. lxxxv folio. xxxiiii Meroneus
neuewe or next of Allye unto Clodio, was made king of Frenchemen in the year
of our lord iiii.C. and.l / and the second year of Uortiger than king of
Brytayne / and reigned years.x. ca. lxxxv. fo. xxxiiii. Chyldericus or
Hylderycus the son of Meroneus, was ordained king of France, in the year of
our lord.iiii.C. and.lx / and the.xii. year of Uortiger than king of Brytayne
/ and reigned years.xxiiii. ca. lxxxvi. folio. xxxv. Uortimerus the sonn^ of
Uortiger, was made king of Brytayne, in the year of our lord.iiii.C.lxxxiiii /
and the iiii. year of Chylderych than king of France / and reigned years.vii.
ca. lxxxviii. fo. xxxvi. Uortigernus before named, was again restored to the
kingdom, in the year of our lord.iiii.C.lxxi / and ye xi. year of Chylderyche
than king of France / and reigned years.ix. In this kings time about the
year of our lord.iiii.C.lxxvi. the kingdom of Kent the first kingdom of the
Saxons, began under Hengystas appears. fo. xxxvii. ca. lxxxix. folio. xxxvi.
Aurelius Ambrosius the second son of Constantyne, and brother to Constancius
the monk slain by reason of Uortiger, was made king of Brytayne, in the year
of our lord iiii.C.lxxxi / and the.xi. year of Chylderych than king of
France / and reigned years.xix. In this kings time about the year of our
lord.iiii.C.lxxxii. began the kyngedome of Southsaxones under Ella and his
sons. And also in this kings time that is to say in the year of our
lord.iiii.C.lxxx.xii. began the kingdom of Estangles under U^fa. But Guydo
says it began in the year of our lord.v. hundredth.lxx. as appears. capi.
xciiii. fo. xxxviii. Clodoueus the son of Chyldericus or Hyldericus before
named, was ordained king of France, in the year of our lord.iiii. hundredth
lxxxiiii / and the third year of Aurelius thanne king of Brytayne / and
reigned years.xxx. This was the first christian king which received the faith
of saint Remygius about the year of our lord.iiii. hundredth.xcix. whereby it
appears that the faith came into Brytayne above iii. hundredth year before it
came into France. capi. xcvii. fo. xxxix. Uter surnamed Pendragon, the youngest
son of Constantyne and brother to Aurelius, was made king of Brytayne, in the
year of our lord.v.C / and the.xvi. year of Clodoueus tha^ king of France /
and reigned years xvi. ca. c. fo. xli. Clotharius or Lotharius the son^ of
Clodoueus, began his reygne over the Frenchemen, in the year of our
lord.v.C. and.xiiii / and the year of Uter than king of Brytayne / and reigned
years.l. ca. c.i. fo. xlii. Arthurus the son^ of Uter began his rygne over
the Bryto^s, in ye year of our lord.v.C. and.xvii / and the.iii. year of
Lotharius thanne king of France / and reigned years.xxvi. In this kings time
the kingdom of Saxons began under Serdicus about the year of our
lord.v.C.xxiii. ca. c.iiii. fo. xliiii. Constantius the son of Cador, began
his reygne over the land of Brytayne, in the year of our lord.v. C. and.xliii
/ and the.xxix. year of Lotharius than king of France / and reigned
years.iii. Totila king of Ostragathoris, about this time spoiled Rome and other
cytyes in Italy. ca. c.vii. folio. xlv. Aurelius Conanus the neuewe of
Co^stantyne, began his reygne over Brytayne, in the year of our lord.v.C.
and.xlvi / and ye.xxxii. year of Lotharius forenamed / and reigned years.ii. In
this kings time the kingdom of Northumbers began under Ida, about the year of
our lord.v.C.xivii. ca. c.viii. fo. xlvi. Uortiporius the son^ of Aurelius
Conanus, began to rule the Bryto^s, in the year of our lord.v.C. and.xlviii /
and the year of Clothare king of France xxxiiii / and reigned years.iiii. ca.
c.x. fo. xlvii. Malgo the brother of Uortiporius, began his reygne over the
Brytons, in the year of our lord.v.C. and lii / and.xxxviii. year of Lothayre
fornamed / and reigned years after most accord of writers.xxxv. ca. c.xi.
folio. xlvii. Chilpericus the.iii. sonn^ of Clotharius, began his reygne over
the Frenchmen, in the year of our lord.v.C. and.lxiiii / and the.xiiii. year
of Malx tha^ king of Brytayne / and reigned years xiiii. ca. c.xii. fo. xlvii.
Careticus a Bryton of vncowthe birth began his tyranny over the Brytons, in the
year of our lord.v.C.lxxx and.vi / and.xxii. year of Chylperyche than king of
France / and tyrannysed years.iii. ca. c.xviii. fo. liii. Here it is to be
noted that after ye said Careticus was expulsed out of Brytayne / the Bryto^s
abode in Cambria and these parts, and fought ofte^with the Saxons. Of whose
captains fro this Careticus until Cadwan, the story reme^breth none. yet by
ye co^cordau^ce of other chronicles and hystories, it apereth yt between the
last year of Careticus and beginning of the reygn of Cadwan, there passed
about.xxiii. years as apereth by ye sequel. Furthermore in this time Ethelbert
king of Kent received the faith about the year of our lord.v.C.xcvi. This
Ethelbert bylded Poules church. And about the year of our lord.vi.C.xiii. began
the kingdom Estsaxons under Sebertus. Lotharius or Clotharius ye son^ of
Chylpericus, began his reygne over the Fre^chme^, in the year of our lord.v
C.lxxxviii / and the.ii. year of Careticus than king of Brytayne / and reigned
years.xliii. ca. c.xxii. fo. lvi. Cadwanus duke of Northwalis, was of ye
Brytons chosen king, and began to reygne over a part of Bryto^s, in the year
of our lord.vi.C. and viii / and the.xxv. year of the second Clothayre / and
reigned years.xxii. In this kings time the king done of Mercia began under
Penda. ca. c.xxviii. folio. lxiiii. Dagobertus ye first of ye name, and sonn^
of ye second Clothayre, began his dominion over ye Fre^cheme^, in the year of
our lord.vi.C. and.xxxi / and ye.viii. year of Cadwan than king of Brytayne /
and reigned years.xiiii. Saint Denis with his fellows were found by this king
by miracle. ca. c.xxxi. fo. lxv. Cadwallus the son^ of Cadwan^ began his reygne
over a part of Brytayne, in the year of our lord.vi.C. and xxxv. and
the.iiii. year of the first Dagoberte than king of France / and reigned
years.xlviii. ca. c.xxxiii. folio.lxvii. Elodoueus the yo^ger sonn^ of
Dagobertus, began his reygne over the Frenchmen, in the year of our lord.vi.C.
and.xlv / and the.x. year of Cadwall than king of Brytayn / and reigned
years.xvi. ca. c.xxxvi. fo. lxxi. Clotharius ye third of that name and son
of Clodoueus, was made king of France, in ye year of our lord vi.C.lxii / and
the.xxvi. year of Cadwall than king of Brytayne / and reigned years.iiii. ca.
xxxvii. fo. lxxii. Theodoricus the brother of ye fornamed Lothayre, began his
reygne over France, in the year of our lord vi.C.lxvi / and the.xxx. year of
the fore said Cadwall than king of Brytayne / and reigned years.iii. ca.
c.xxxviii. fo. lxxii. Chylderycus or Hylderycus ye.iii. son of Clodoueus,
began his reygne over the Frenchmen, in the year of our lord.vi.C.lxix / and
ye.xxxiii. of Cadwall yet king of Brytayne / and reigned years.ii. ca. c.xxxix
fo. lxxii Cadwaladrus, or after Bid Cedwalla, son of Cadwallo, began to rule
the Bryto^s, in the year of our lord.vi.C.lxxx. and.iii / and the.xii. year
of Theodoricus tha^ king of France / and reigned years.iii. ca. c.xl.
folio.lxxiii. Of the time of the raygne of this Cadwalader, autours write
diversely and show of him as of.ii. several persons* For Galfryde and other
say that when he had reigned.xii. years, he went to Rome, and thereof pope
Sergius was made a monk, and dyed in the year of our lord.vi.C.lxxix. which
saying differs far from other authors. For Guido de calu^ma says in his
work that he shortly gathered of the kings of Brytayne, that when Cadwallader
that also is named Cadwalla son of Cadwallon had peassably governed Brytayne
iii. years, he went to Rome and of pope Sergius was made monk / and ended his
life in the year of our lord.vi.C.lxxxix. which sayng Policronicon in his.v.
book and.xx. chapyter affermeth, where he names the said Cadwalader king of
Brytons and westsaxo^s, and that king Jew or Iue was his successor. And so by
these authors and other which Policronico^ alleges for him, as Beda and
other, which name this Cadwalader Ced walla, it apereth that it was one person
and that this time he reigned over the Brytons and westsaxones, which was last
king of the stok of the Brytons And because the kings of westsa^o^ in process
of time subdued all the other kings / therefore I will observe the order of
them until I have brought this island to one monarchy. Here ends the line
of the kings of Brytayne which continued from the first Brute by.M.viii.C.
and.xxii. years.
Thus ends the fyft part which includes.CC.liii.
Jew or Iue of ye blod of Saxons, or after some writers Iuo, began his reygne
over the westsaxones to rekyn after the departing of Cadwalader, in the year of
our lord.vi. hundredth.lxxx. and.vii / and the.xvi. year of the second
Theodoricus thanne king of France / and reigned yered.xxxvii. ca. c.xli.
folio.lxxvi Clodoueus the.iii. of that name, and second son of the second
Theodoricus, was made king of France, in ye year of our lord.vi.C.xc / and
the.iii. year of Jew tha^ king of westsaxones / and reigned years.iii. ca.
c.xlii. folio.lxxvi. Chyldebertus the second sonn^ of Theodoryche, began his
reygne over the Fre^cheme^, in ye year of our lord.vi C.lxxx. and.xiii / and
the.vi. year of Iue yet king of westsaxones, and reigned years.xvii. ca.
c.xliii. fo. lxxvi. Dagabertus ye second of ye name, and son of Chyldeberte,
was auctorysed king of Fre^chme^, in ye year of our lord.vii.C. and.x / and
the.xxiii. year of Jew yet king of westsaxones / and reigned years.xi. ca.
c.xliiii. fo. lxxvi. Daniell yt was named Chylperyk a clerk, was made king of
French men, in the year of our lord.vii.C. and xxi / and the.xxiiii. year of
Jew yet king of westsaxons and reigned years.v. ca. c.xlv. fo. lxxvi.
Ethelardus the neuewe of Jew, began his reygne over ye westsaxo^s, in the year
of our lord.vii.C. and.xxiiii / and the third year of Daniell than king of
France / and reigned years.v. ca. c.xlvi. fo. lxxvii. Theodoricus the second
of ye name, and son of the second Dagobert, began his reygne over Frenchmen,
in the year of our lord.vii.C. and.xxvi / and the second year of Ethelardus
than king of westsaxones / and reigned years.xiiii. ca. c.xlvii. fo. lxxvii.
Cutbertus ye neuewe of Ethelard, began to reygne over the westsaxo^s, in the
year of our lord.vii.C. and.xxix / and the third year of the second Theodoricus
/ and reigned years.xvi. ca. c.xlviii. fo. lxxix. Hyldericus or Chyldericus the
second of ye name, and son of Theodoricus, was made king of Frenchmen, in
the year of our lord.vii.C. and.xl / and the.xi. year of Cutbert than king of
westsaxons / and reigned years.x. Here ends the line of Meroneus, and
begins the line of Pepyn. ca. c.xlix. folio.lxxix. Sygebertus the neuewe of
Cutbert, began his reygne over the westsaxo^s, in the year of our lord.vii.C.
and xlv / and the.v. year of Hyldericus the second than king of France / and
reigned years.ii. ca. c.l. fo. lxxx. Kenulphus of the blood and line of
Cerdicus, began his reygne over the westsaxo^s, in the year of our lord.vii.C.
and.xlviii / and ye.vii. year of Hyldericus tha^ king of France / and reigned
years.xxxi. ca. c.li. fo. lxxxi. Pipinus the second son of Charles Martellus,
was first made king of France of ye blood, in ye year of our lord.vii.C. and.l
/ and the second year of Kenulphus tha^ king of westsaxo^s / and reigned
years.xviii. ca. c.liii. fo. lxxxi. Carolomanus with Charlys surnamed ye great
sons of Pepyn, began to reygne over France, in ye year of our
lord.v.C.lxviii / and the.xx. year of Kenulphus / and reigned years jointly and
Charles alone.xlvii. This Charles was ye first emperor of Romans of the stok
of the French men / and reigned.xiiii. years. ca. c.liiii. fo. lxxxiii.
Brightricus of the forenamed blod of Cerdicus, was made king of westsaxons, in
the year of our lord.vii.C.lxxvii / and ye.x. year of Charles than king of
France / and reigned years.xvii About the.ix. year of this king, the Danes
first entered this i will as more plainly apereth in ye story following. ca.
c.lvii. fo. lxxxvi. Egbertus, or after the English book Edbryght, the son^ of
Alumundus, began his reygne over the westsaxo^s, in ye year of our
lord.vii.C.lxxx and.xv / and i^ the..xxvii. year of Charles than king of
France / and reigned years.xxxviii. This king commanded the Saxons to be
Anglys / and Brytayn to be named Anglia, that in England. ca. c.lviii. fo.
lxxxvi. Lodouicus the first of ye name and son of Charles the great, began
to reygne as emperor and king of France, in the year of our lord.viii.C
and.xv / and ye.xx. year of Egbertus tha^ king of westsaxons / and reigned
years.xxvi. ca. c.lix. fo. lxxxvii. Adeulphus or Ethelwolphus the son of
Egbertus, began his reygn over the westsaxo^s and other, in the year of our
lord.viii.C. and.xxxii / and the.xvi. year of Lowys the first than king of
France / and reigned years.xxii ca. c.lxii. fo. xci. Charles the second of
that name, and youngest son of the first Lowys surnamed Balled, began to
reygn over the west part of France, in the year of our lord.viii.C. and.xli /
and the.ix. year of Adeulphus / and reigned years.xxxviii. The country of
Flaunders in this Charles days began first to bear name, as after in the end
of his story is showed. ca. c.lxiii. fo. xcii. Ethelwaldus the eldest son of
Adeulphus, began his reygne over the westsaxo^s, in the year of our lord
viii.C. and.lv / and the.x. year of Charles the Balled than king of France /
and reigned but one year. ca. c.lxvii. folio.xcvi. Ethelbertus the second
son of Adeulphus, was auctorysed king of westsaxo^s, in the year of our
lord viii.C. and.lvi / and the.xi. year of Charles the Ballyd yet king of
France / and reigned years.vi. In the time of this kings reygne / the.vii.
Johan which was a woman was admitted for pope, about the year of our
lord.viii.C.lviii, as says Iacobus Phylyppus. ca. c.lxviii. fo. xcvi.
Etheldredus the third son of Adeulphus, was made king of westsaxons with
other, in the year of our lord.viii.C. and.lxiii / and the.xviii. year of
Charles forenamed yet king of France / and reigned years.viii. In the time of
this kings reygne, saint Edmond king of Eest Angles was martyred of the
princys Danus and Martyrus. ca. c.lxix. fo. xcvi. Aluredus or Alphredus
the.iiii. son of Adeulphus, in ye year of our lord.viii.C.lxxii, began his
reygne over the westsaxo^s / and the.xxxi. year of Charles forenamed yet king
of France / and reigned years.xxviii. ca. clxxi. fo. xcviii. Lowys Balbus, the
second of that name and son of Chales the balled, began his reygne over the
Frenchemen, in ye year of grace.viii.C.lxviii / and the.vi. year of Alerude
tha^ king of westsaxons / and reigned years.ii. ca. c.lxxiiii. fo. ci. Lowys
and Charles the sons of Lowys Balbus, began to reygne jointly over ye
Frenchmen, in the year of our lord.viii.C. and.lxxx / and the.viii. year of
Alurede than king of westsaxons / and reigned years.v. ca. lxxv. folio c.ii.
Lowys the.iiii. of ye name, and son of Charles last remembered, began his
reygn over France, in ye year of grace viii.C.lxxx. and.vi / and the.xiiii.
year of Aluredus yet king of westsaxons / and reigned years viii. ca. lxxvii.
fo. c.iiii. Eudo or Oddo the son^ of Robert earl of Angeowe, began his reygne
over the Frenchmen, in the year of our lord.viii.C.lxxx. and.xv / and
the.xxiii. year of Aluredus yet king of westsaxons / and reigned years.ix. ca.
lxxviii. folio. c.iiii. Edward surnamed the elder, and son of Alurede or
Alphrede, began his reygne over the more part of England, in the year of our
lord.ix.C. and one / and the.vi. year of Eudo than king of France / and
reigned years xxiiii. ca. c.lxxix. fo. c.iiii. Charles surnamed the Simple, and
sonn^ of the.iiii. Lowys, beganen his reygne over the realm of France, in the
year of our lord.ix.C.iiii / and ye.iii. year of Edward than king of England
/ and reigned years.xxiiii. ca. c.lxxxi. fo. c.vi. Radulphus the son of
Rychard duke of Burgoyne, began his reygn over France, in the year of our
lord ix.C. and.xxii / and the.xxi. year of Edward yet king of England / and
reigned years.xii. ca. lxxxiii. fo. c.viii Ethelstanus the sonn^ of Edward the
elder, began his reygne over the more party of England, in ye year of our
lord.ix.C. and.xxv. and the third year of Rauffe tha^ king of France / and
reigned years.xvi. This king brought Brytayne or England to one monarchy. But
yet after some writers Alurede did it. ca. c.lxxxiiii. fo. c.viii. Lowys the.v.
of that name, and son of Charles the Simple, began his reygne over France,
in the year of our lord.ix.C. and.xxxiiii / and ye.ix. year of Ethelstane tha^
king of England / and reigned years.xxi. ca. c.lxxxvi. fo. c.x. Edmou^d the
brother of Ethelstane and son of Edward the elder, began his reygne over
England, in the year of our lord.ix.C. and.xli. / and the.vii. year of ye.v.
Lowys than king of France / and reigned years.vi. ca. c.lxxxviii. folio.
c.xiii. Edredus the brother of Edmou^d, began his reygne over England, in the
year of our lord.ix. and.xlvii / and ye.xiii year of ye forenamed Lowys yet
king of France / and reigned years.ix. ca. c.lxxxix. fo. c.xiiii. Lotharius
the eldest sonn^. of ye.v. Lowis, was anoi^ted king of France, in the year of
our lord.ix.C. and.xl / and viii. year of Edwardus tha^ king of England / and
reigned years after most writers.xxxix. ca. c.xc. fo. c.xiiii. Edwynus ye
eldest son^ of Edmou^d brother of Ethelstane, was enoynted king of England, in
the year of our lord.ix.C.lvi / and the second year of Lothayre tha^ king of
France / and reigned years.iii. ca. c.xcii. fo. c.xvi. Edgarus the second
sonn^ of Edmou^d and brother of Edwyn, began to reygne over England, in the
year of grace.ix.C. and.lx / and ye.v. year of Lotharius than king of France /
and reigned years.xvi ca. c.xciii. fo. c.xvi. Edward the son^ of Edgare
surnamed the Martyr, began his reygne over the i will of England, in the year of
our lord.ix.C.lxxvii / and the.xxii. year of Lothayre yet king of France /
and reigned years.iiii. ca. c.xcvi. fo. c.xix. Egelredus ye sonn^ also of
Edgare, was made king of England, in ye year of grace.ix.C.lxxx. and. one / and
the.xxvi. year of Lothayre yet king of France / and reigned years.xxxvi. ca.
xcvii. folio. c.xx. Lowys ye.vi. of ye name, and son of Lothayr / began his
reygn over Frau^c in ye year of our lord.ix.C.lxxxvi / and the v. year of
Egelbertus tha^ king of England / and reigned years.iii. In this king ends
the line of Pepyn ca. cc.i. fo. c.xxiiii. Hugt Capet ye sonn^ of Roberte ye
tyrau^t, descended of Hugh le grau^de began to take upon him or usurp the
crown of France, in the year of our lord.ix.C. and.ix / and ye.ix. year of
Egelrede / and ruled years.ix. ca. cc.ii. folio. c.xxvi. Robert the sonn^ of
Hughe, began to reygne over the Fre^chme^, in ye year of our lord.ix.C.lxxx /
and.xviii. year of Egelredus than king of England / and reigned years.xxx. ca.
cc.iii. folio. c.xxvii. Edmou^de Ironsyde the son of Egelredus, with also
Canutus ye son^ of Swanus, began to reygn over England, in the year of our
lord.M. and xvii / and ye.xix. year of Robert tha^ king of France / and
reigned one year. ca. cc.iiii. fo. c.xxvii. Kanutus which in ye Englysh book is
named Knougth, began after the death of Edmou^d to reygn alone over England, in
the year of grace.M. and xix / and the.xx. year of Robert tha^ king of France
/ and reigned years.xix. ca. cc.v. fo. c.xxviii. Henry the sonn^ of Robert
began his domynyo^ over France, in the year of our lord.M. and.xxix / and
the.x. year of Canutus tha^ king of England, and reigned years.xxxi. ca.
cc.vii. fo. c.xxx. Harolde surnamed Harefote ye son^ Canutus, began to reygne
over England, in the year of our lord.M. and xxxix / and the.x. year of Henry
tha^ king of France / and ruled years.iii. ca. cc.viii. fo. c.xxxi.
Hardikynitus or Hardiknought, ye son^ of Canutus and of Emma, was made king of
England, in the year of our lord.M. and.xli / and the.xii. year of Henry tha^
king of France / and reigned years.ii. In this king ended the line of the
Danes, that had co^tynued in this land in great persecucio^ above ii.C.l.
years. ca. cc.ix. fo. c.xxxii. Edward the holy confessor, and son^ of
Egelredus and of Emma his last wife, began his reygn over the realm of
England, in the year of our lord a M. and.xliii / and the.iiii. year of Henry
tha^ king of France / and reigned in virtue and holiness years.xxiiii. In this
kings time the chapel of walsynghm^ was first bylded, in ye year of our
lord.M.lxi. ca. cc.x. fo. c.xxxiii. Philippe the first of ye name and son^ of
Henry, began to govern ye French me^, in the year of our lord a.M.lxviii and
the.xvi. year. of Edward the confessor tha^ king of England / and reigned
years.xlviii. Godfrey of Bulyo^ and not Boleyn^, i^ this Philippes time gat by
strength the city of Jerusalem / and was crowned king of ye same, in the year
of our lord M.xcix. ca. cc.xv. fo. c.xxxviii. Harolde ye eldest son^ of earl
Goodwyn, began to reygn over Englyshme^ in the year of our lord.M.lxvi / and ye
viii. year of Philippe than king of France / and reigned years.ix. ca.
cc.xvi. fo. c.xxxviii.
Thus ends the.vi. part that conteyneth.iii.C.lxxxi. years.
WIllyam duke of Normandy the bastard son of Robert the.vi duke of the said
prouynce, began his reygne over the realm of England, in the.xv. day of
Octobre, and year of our lord.M.lxvii / and ye.ix. year of ye first Philipe yet
king of France and reigned year upon.xxii. In the.xx. year of this king, the
church of saint Poule with a great part of London was burned. This kyns
founded the monasteryes of Batell and Barmu^desey. ca. cc.xix. fo. c.xlii.
wyllyam surnamed the Read and son of wyllyam Co^querour, began his reygne
over England, in the month of July and year of our lord a.M.lxxx. and.ix /
and.xxxi. year of Philippe forenamed yet king of France and reigned years.xii.
ca. cc.xxiii. fo. c.xlvii. Henry surnamed Beawclerke and third son^ of wyllyam
Conqueroure, began his reygne over England, in the year of our lord.M.C. and
one / and in the.xliii. year of the foresaid Phylyp yet king of France / and
reigned years xxxv. ca. cc.xxvi. fo. c.l. Lowys surnamed the great, and sonn^
of ye first Philippe, was enoynted king of France, in ye year our lord M.C.
and.vii / and ye.vi. year of the first Henry than king of France / and
reigned years.xxix. capi. cc.xxx. folio c.lv. Stephan earl of Boloyng and sonn^
unto the earl of Blesens, and of the wives sister of Henry the first, began his
reygne over England, in the year of grace.M.C. and.xxxvi / and the last year
of Lowys the great / and reigned years xix. ca. cc.xxxii. fo. c.lvii. Lowys
the.viii. of ye name and son^ of Lowys the great, began his reygne over
France, in the year of our lord M.C.xxxvi / and the first year of Stephan
than king of England / and reigned years.xliii. ca. cc.xxxiiii. folio. c.lx.
Henry the second of that name, and son of Geffrey Plantaginet and of molde
the emperesse, began his reygn in England, in the year of our lord M.C.
and.lv / and the.xix. year of Lowys the.viii. than king of France / and
reigned years.xxxv. Saint Edward the confessor was translated in the.ix. year
of this king. And about the.xvi. year of his reygne saint Thomas of Caunterbury
was martyred. cap. cc.xxxvi. folio. c.lxii. Philippe the second of that name
surnamed a Deu don^e, son of the viii. Lowys, began his reygne in France,
in the year our lord a thousand.C. and.lxxix / and.xxiiii. year of Henry the
second than king of England / and reigned years.xliii. ca. cc.xli. fo.
c.lxviii.
Thus ends the table of the first volume.
FOR THAT IN the accomptynge of the years of the world; from the creacyon of
Adam unto the incarnacyon of Criste; ben many and sondery opynyons / as the
Hebrews, which account for the said term.iii. thousand.ix. hundred.lxiii.
years / the seventy interpretours reken.v.M.C.lxxx. and.xix. years. Some there
be, that reken v.M.lxxx. and.xix. years / and some v. thousand.CC. and.xxviii.
years. In the third book and first chapyter of Polycronycon ben also showed
diverse opinyons, whereof the gretest number and most certain is v. thousand
and.CC. years. And in other places also, some reke^ mo, and some have less /
by reason whereof the times ben diversely set and accounted / as the first
fou^dacyon of Rome / the subuersyon of the famous city of Troy / the first
building of the city of London / and diverse other old things. But for I se,
yt the account of ye seventy interp^tours is of holy Beda, and many other holy
writers allowed and folowyd: therefore I ente^dynge to show in this rude work
following, what year of ye world Brute entered first this i will, then called
Albion, and now England / purpose to keep the said account, whereof the
partyculers ensewe: that is to wit, first from Adam to Noeflowyd.xxii hundred
and xlii. years

From Noe to Abraham flowed.ix hundred and.xlii. years.

From Abraham to David flowyd ix. hundred and xl. years.

From David to the captyuyte of the Iewys passed.iiii. hundred.lxxx. and v.
years.

And from the captyuyte to the coming of Christ.v. hundred.lxxx. and ten
years.

The which in all make.v. thousand, a hundred, lxxx. and xix. years.

AFter which account most according to the purpose of this work, all be yt
that diverse opynyons thereof ben left in writing and of diverse autours: the
famous city of Troy was subverted of ye Greeks, as wytnessyth holy Eusebius
and other, in the year of ye world.iiii.M. and.xxiii.

Also following the said account, as wytnessyth the forsayde Euseby and diverse
other, the cite of Rome was begone to be builded in the xi. year of Ezechias
then king of Judah / the which year makes after the said auctours, the year
of the world.iiii. thousand; four hundred, lxx. And ye said auctours
afferme, that the said city of Rome was edifyed after the subversion of Troy,
iiii. hundred and xlvii. years. By which reason it must follow, that is was
builded in the year of the world, as is above said.

Peter pictauiensis and other testifye, that Brute entered first the i will of
Albion, now called England, in the.xviii. year of the priest and judge of
Israel named Hely. And as after myth diverse auctours / the said Hely began
to rule the Israelites, the year of the third age: that is from Abraham to
David.viii. hundred, lxi. which makes the years of ye world four thousand
and.xlv.

whereunto if there be joined the above said.^xviii. years: then must yt follow,
that Brute should enter this land, in the year of the world four
thousand.lxiii. To this agrees ye auctour of Polycronicon / which says, that
Brute entered Albion.xl. years after the subuersyon of Troy. which xl. years
joined to the former saying of Eusebius, makes ye said number of.iiii.
thousand and.lxiii. years.

Also a writer of hystoryes called Iacobus Philippus, affermeth that Troy was
taken by the Greeks, in the third year yt Abdon or Labdon, judged the
Israelytes. which began his rule over the said Israelytes, after the accord
of most writers / in the year of the world.iiii. thousand and.xx. whereunto
if there be joined three years for ye third year of his rule, in which year
Troy (as before is said) was taken / and.xl. years that passed or Brute
percyd Albion: yt must follow, ye Brute entered first. this i will of Albion (as
before is said) in the year of the world.iiii. thousand and.lxiii.

Then by these foresaid reasons Brute took possession of this i will of Albion /
in the year of the world, as before is said, before the buyldyng of the city
of Rome, as by the foresaid reasons may be also prouyd.iiii. hundred and.vii.
years: and before the incarnacyon of our blessed savior following the same
account / a thousand an hundred.xxx. and vi. years.

Thus ends thaccomptynge of the years of the world, from the creacyon of
Adam unto the incarnacyon of Christ.

THE PROLOGE
When I aduertyse in my remembrance
The manyfolde stories, in order duly set
Of kyng^ and princes, ye whilom had governance
Of Rome and Italye, and other further fette
As of Jews and Greeks, the which have no let
But that men may se in order seryously
How long they reigned, and how successyuely.
Of France and other I might likewise report
To their great honor, as of them does appear,
But to England if I shall resort
Right mysty stories, doutfull and vnclere
Of names, of times, and of the duraunt year
That kings or princes ruled that famous isle
Almost uncertain how I should guide my style.
And for of cunning I am full destytute
To bring to frame so great a mystery:
I nyll presume without other refute
To join such a work, or yt to rectyfye
To me yt semyth so far set awrye
In time of years, to other dyscordaunt
That to my dull wit yt is not atteynaunt
To bring in order a thing of such weight
And cause yt to agree with other old stories,
But yt to remytte to them that been sleyght
And sharp in lecture, and have kept their studyes
And sought the books of many old hystoryes
And have in chronicles full experyence
To frame such a work by their great prudence.
And I like ye pre^tyse, that hewyth the rough stone
And brings yt to square with hard strokes and many
That the master after may it ouergone
And prynte therein his fygures and his storye
Any so to work yt after his proporcynary
That yt may appear to all that shall yt se
A thing right perfyte, and well in each degree.
So have I now set out this rude warke
As rough as the stone not common to the square
That the learned, and the studied clerk
May yt over polyshe, and clean do yt pare
Flowryshe yt with eloquence, whereof yt is bare
And frame yt in order, that yet is out of joint
That it with old authors may gree in every point.
Besechynge him, that will so take the pain
Or any other, that list on this to look
where any error in this by him is said
It to correct and mende this rude book
For by him that never yet any order took
Or gre of scole, or sought for great cunning
This work is gaderyd with small understanding.
Not for any pomp, nor yet for great mede
This work have I taken on hand to compyle
But only because that I would sprede
The famous honor of this fertyle isle
That has continued by many a long while
In excellent honor with many a royal guide
Of whom the deeds have sprung to the world wide.
But of those deeds me list not here to show
For in the sequel they shall well appear
And in short process, and in as words few
As I goodly may, I shall lynke in fere
The stories of England, and france so dear
That to the reader yt may well be say^e
what kings to gyder ruled these lands twain.
And in the pryncypyll of the reygne of every king
As well of one and other more and less
what year of the world he took beginning
To guide his realm: and farther business
I will eke take, to show and express
what term of years every prince did reygne.
And in what honor he did his time maynteyne.
The time also how long the Brytons ruled,
And how by Saxons they lastely were put out.
Then of Danes / which both lands defoyled
By their outrage / and of their fury stout:
Of whom both nacyons stood long in great doubt,
Till France with them allied by marriage
And England lastely voyded that lynage.
Then how the Normayns, by wyllya^ co^querour,
Entrede this land, and held the seygnory
A certain of time, till the high governor
Restored the blood of Saxons enterly
And of the Scotts, that never could apply
To keep their allegeaunce / but many a time rebelled
And to be true were full often compelled.
The fatal war, that has dured so long
Twene France and England, to both their damage
And of the peace, that has been vnderfonge
Both by great oaths / and eke by marriage.
Of walys geryshenesse / and of their light dotage
How they were scourged for their unsteadfastness,
with diverse other, which I shall after express.
And for that London, that ancient city
Has ever perseueryd in virtuous noblesse
To the great honor, as may consydred be,
Of all this land / in wealth and great largess
Therefore I think somewhat to express
Of their good order, and cyuyle polycy
That they so long have ruled their city by.
And of their rulers / as they are yearly chosen
To rule the co^monte by their dyscrecyon,
I shall you show, and to you dysclosen
The names of mayres and shyryffes of that town
And all such acts / as by reuolucyone
In their days fill / so that there shall appear
The princes acts, which changed year by year.
Of France also the cronycle shall ensew
In his dew order / so that ye may know,
when they began their princes to renew
And from the seruage when they were kept low
Of the Romans / whom they did overthrow
And of their names that they whylom did change
Of their first baptysme, and of their names strange.
Thus in this book may you here and se
Of both lands the chronicles entyere,
with other matters / which regystred be
Of old writers, such as wrote full clear
Acts of princes done both far and nere,
And them engrosed with great dylygence:
whereby to their folowers might grow experyence.
Into.vii. parts I have this book dyuyded
So that the reder may chose where he will.
The first conteyneth, how the Brytons guyded
This land from Brute, Moliuncius until.
And from Moliuncius I have set for skyll
To the nynthe year of king Cassibelan
The second part / for that the Romans than
Conquered Brytayne. And thens to Seueryne
The third part I have also assygned.
The fourth endyth then at Constantyne.
The fyfte at Cadwalader I have also dyffned.
At the conquest I have eke determined
The.vi. part. And of the Seventh or last
At our redoubted prince I have the end cast.
Henry the.vii. whom god preserve and save,
And him defend from all aduersyte,
Besechynge them that will the labor have
This book to read / or any part to se
That where defaute is / yt may corrected be
without dysdayne / and that they will supporte
And aid this work with all their comfort.
And for this book includes stories feel,
And to wchyth things done in sundry place
So that one time must with an other dele
To keep the years, the time, and the space
Therefore this name yt shall now purchase
(Concordaunce of stories) by me provided
The auctor sans nome finally devised.
And for this work may have the better speed
To prayer me thinks yt is right necessary
That I should fall, considering my need
That I must have, for lack of due study,
where through that conning and perfyte memory
Of things taken, when I was young and hynde
Ben far set of, and put from my mind.
By this is ignorance now comen in place
And oblyuyon has set in his foot
So that knowledge from me they done race,
whereby in old auctours I might find some boot
In latin and french, that in their dytees swoot
These old writers have so compendyously
Set the old stories in order dylygently.
But in this prayer I think naught to be used
As dyddyn these poetys in their old days,
which made their prayers to gods abused
As Jupiter and Mars, that in their old laws,
were named gods, and feigned in their sawes,
That they were gods of battle and richesse
And had in them great virtue and prowess.
For what may help these feigned gods all
As Saturn or Mercury, or yet bright Apollo,
Bacchus, or Neptune, or Pluto the thrall,
Eolus, Morynos, or blind Cupido,
Or yet that goddess, the fair Juno,
Diana, or Pallas, or Ceres the fre,
Or yet the Musys that been thryes three?
whereto should I call unto Caliope
Mother of Orpheus, with sweet armony
That of eloquence has the soueraynte,
Or to Carmentis, which by her first study
The latyne letters found out perfytly
Syns all these were mynystres of god immortal
And had in them no power dyuynall?
wherefore to the lord, that is celestyall
I will now cry, that of his influence
Of grace and mercy, he will a drop let fall,
And sharp my wit with such experience,
That this may fynyshe with his assystence,
with favor of the virgyn, his mother most excellent,
To whom I thus pray, with mind and hole intent.
Assit principio sancta Maria meo.
Most blessed lady, comfort to such as call
To the for help, in each necessyte,
And what thou aydest, may in no wise apalle
But to the best is formyd in ylke degree:
wherefore good lady, I pray yt may please the
At my beginning my pen so to lead
That by thine aid this work may have good speed
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Syns that I have showed unto you, what season and time of the years of ye
world Brute entered first this isle of Albion: me semyth yt is co^uenyent, that
I also show how and for what cause yt was first named Albion. The which so
took first name, as wytnessyth Strabo and other writers, of the white clyues or
rocks, yt stand upon the sees side, and are far seen in clear wether and
bright days. whereof it was of old writers named Albion, as yt were the white
land. which saying affermyth also Ranulphe and diverse other: so that yt may
certainly be known, that yt took not that first name of Albyne daughter of
Dioclecyan king of Sirye, as in the english cronycle is affermyd. For in all
old stories or chronicles is not found, that any such king of that name
reigned over the Syriens, or yet Assyriens: nor yet any such storye, that
his.xxx. daughters should slay their.xxx. husbands, as there is surmysed, was
put in writynge. which, if any such wonder had been there wrought, should not
have been unremembered of the writers and auctours of that parties: considering
that many less wonders are put in writynge by the said writers. wherefore it
is more apparent, yt yt took that first name of Albion, as above is said /
then of Albyne daughter of the said Dioclecyon.

And as to the Geau^tes that Brute found in this isle at his arryuayll, they
might be brought into this land by some mean of ships or other wise, rather
then to be borne of those women, as there also is imagyned.

Of this isle the auctours Alpherd and Beda tell many wonders / which in the
first book of Policronycon are suffycie^tly towched, where it is said, yt this
isle is called an other world. For as says Solinus, the edge of the French
cliffe should be the end of the world, if this yland ne were not. Many other
things ben there specyfyed, the which I pass over.

This isle is closyd on all sides with ye see / and stretches in length out of
the sowth into the north / having in the sowthest side France / in the south
ye land of Spain / in the north ye country of Norway / and in ye weste the
country of Irland. And has in length from Totnesse to Catenessey.xv. miles
beyond Mychell Stowe in Cornewayle upon.viii. hundred miles. And to reken the
bread from saint Dauyds land in walys called Menema to Dover clyffes: it
co^teyneth after most writers.iii. hundred miles. And if yt be rekened from ye
said place in walys, unto parmouthe in Norfolk, not so much, but less by.lx.
miles, after some writers. And Beda says it co^teineth over.CC. miles. And
this i will was first as above is said, named Albion: and secundaryly Britayne
after Brute: and third (...) of Anglis by co^mau^dme^t of Egberte king of
Anglys, and of westsaxons: all be yt that after some writers yt was called
Anglia, after the name of the queen of this land name Anglia: albe it that
thereof is found little authoryte.

This i will was first co^queryd by ye Romans / and so continued unto them as
trybutary, and under their rule, as after in the end of the story of Gracianus
shall appear, over.iiii. hundred years: secondely by the Saxons: thyrdely by ye
Danys: and fourthly by the Normans: and was divided first by Brute in three
parts / as in the story shall appear following.

THE.II. CHAPTER.
BRute of the ancient and noble blood of Troyans, dyscendyd of Eneas a Troyan
and of the daughter of Pryame king of the Troyans: which Eneas received of
his said wife a son named Ascanius, the which was king of the country of
Italye next after his father Eneas.

For so yt was, that after the foresaid city of Troy was, as before is said,
by the Greeks subuertyd: Eneas, which entendyd to have sauyd from death the
fair Polixena daughter of king Pryam / was for that deed by Agamemnon, duke
or chyefe leder of the Greeks, exyled from Troy: the which acco^panyed with a
great number of Troyans, within iii. years after his departing from Troy,
landed in ye country of Italye. And there after diverse conflyctys and
bataylles had with Latynus then king of Italye: he married by the agreement of
the said Latinus, his daughter named Lauina. Upon ye which he gatte a son,
and named him Syluius Posthumus: of the which after some writers descendyd
Brutus first king of Albion. But for a more concordaunce of this work and
conuenyencye of years, As testyfyeth Policronia, Guydo de Colu^na, writer of
stories, and other: Ascanius the first son of Eneas, gotten upon his first
wife, had a son named Siluius / which after some writers is named Siluius
Eneas: this Siluius Eneas was father to Brute. Of this is diverse opinyons,
whereof some are manyfestly showed in the.xxvii. chapyter of the second book
of Polycronycon.

Then yt follows in ye story: this Brute being of the age of.xv. years, slew
his father in shotyng at a wyld best. And as some authors have / he slew
also his mother in time of his birth. But for the last deed, by agreement of all
writers, he was banyshed the country: and after by fortune landed with his
conpanye in a prouynce of Greece / where at ye time reigned a king named
Pandrasus, or after some writers Pandarus: ye which king, as affermyth
Geffrey of Monmouth, was lynyally descendyd of the blood of Achylles.

In this prouynce Brute found many Troyans, as captiuys and thrall to the
Greeks, with the which he conspyred and faughte with ye Greeks sundry times:
and lastely for a fynall concord took to wife the daughter of the said
Pandrasus, name Ignogen. After which marriage solemnysyd: the said Brute, by
counsel of ye Troyans, with a certain of ships well vytaylled / departed
out of Greece, and sought his adventure. which after many dangers of the
passed / he landed with his company in a part or isle of Africa named (as
says Guydo and other) Lergesia. within which isle at those days stood an old
temple dedycate in ye honor of Diua or Diana a goddess of mysbyleued people.
The which temple, when Brute had apperceyuyd anon he yode into yt / where
knelyng before the altar, with great devotion, said these versys following.
Diua potens nemorum: terror syluestribus apris,
Cui licet amfractus ire per aethereos.
Infernasque domos, terestria iura resolve,
Et dic quas terras nos habitare velis.
Dic certam sedem qua te venerabor in aemon,
Qua tibi virgineis templa dicabo choris.


The which versys are to be understood in our mother tongue as after is
expowned. Celestyall goddess, that weldest fryth a wood
The wild bore and bestes thou feryst by thy might
Guyder of shypmen passing the ragyone flode.
The infernal howses, for and the earth of right,
Behold, and search, and show where I shall fight
Tell the certain place, where euerlastyngly
A temple of virgyne to the I^Balledyfpe.


After which prayer and obseruaunces after ye pagan ryte, with great devotion
done and exercysed about ye auter of ye said goddess or idolle in those days
used: Brute fill in a sleep. In time of which sleep apperyd to him the said
goddess, and said to him in manner and form as follows. Brute sub occasum
solis trans Gallica regna
Insula in oceano est vndeque clausa mari:
Insula in oceano est habitata gigantibus olins,
Nunc deserta quidem, gentibus apta tuit.
Hic de prose tua reges nascentur, and ipsis
Totius terrae subditus orbis erit.
Hanc pete, nanque tibi seeds erit in illa perhennis:
Hic fiet natis altera Troia tuis.


The which versys may be englysshed as here after follows. Brute, far by
wef^e, over the l^nde of France
An isle in occean there is, all closed with the sea
This isle with gyau^tes whilom inhabyt by chance
Now being defe^^e, (...) apt for thy people and the.
In this of the body kings borne shall be
And of this isle. thou shall be lord and king
Search this, for here a perpetual see to the
And here to thy childern a new City shall spryng.


THE.III. CHAPTER.
WHen Brute awoke and remembered him of this vysyon: ano^ he called to him such
as he most trusted / and showed to them what he had seen and hard. whereof they
all being greatly reioysed: caused great fares to be made, in the which they
cast wine, milk, and other lycours, with diverse aromate and spyces of most
swettest odor, as in the old pagan laws and rytes were used.

which obseruaunce with other done: with great joy and myrthe they entryd
into their ships, and pulled up their sails, and took their course
westwarde. And so sailed by the space of.xxx. days passing by many auentures
and dangers / as of Philenes, ye lake called Lacus salinarum or salt lake, or
the place where salt is made, the river called Malea, and Hercules pyllers /
and came lastly to the sea Tyrrhen or Turon, where he encou^tred with a small
navy of ships / of the which a Troyane and neuew to Brute called Corineus
was captain. when either of them had saluted other, and reioysed of their
metynge: they to gyder made toward land, and landyd in the prouynce of Gallia,
now called Guyan: of which prouynce at that day a prince named Groffarius was
ruler. The which having knowledge of ye landynge of these straunges: with his
power made toward them, and to them gave battle. But the Troya^s were
victours and overcame Groffarius with all his knights.

In this battle was slain a noble Troyane and neuewe to Brute named Turonus,
and there buried. wherefore in remembrance of ye said Turonus Brute builded
there a city, and named yt Turon as some authors testyfye. But it should seem
by the saying of Polycronyca / that thylke city Turon was builded before: all
be yt that ye author of Cronica cronicarum affermyth it to be builded by Brute
in remembrance of his said cosyn Turonus, which city at this day is yet
great fame with in the realm of France.

This done, the said Brutes and Co^ineus with their Troyans took again
shyppynge / the which after iii. days or few days saylyng, landyd at an
haven or port in Cornewayll, named at this day Totnesse: and from thens yode
serchyng the land and country, the year as before is said iiii. thousand.lxiii
/ before the building of Rome following the foresaid account.iiii. hundred
and.xx. before the incarnacyon of Christ.xi. hundred, and.xxxvi: and before
Alexander the great conquered the world, eight hundred and.xi: also before any
king reigned over the Frenshe men / or that they were clear quyte of their
trewage again ye Romans, xv. hundred and.lvi.

THE.IIII. CHAPTER.
Return we then to Brute / which after his landyng in this i will of Albion:
circuyd and serchyd ye land over all / and found yt full fertyle and plenteous
of wode and of grass, and garnysshed with many fair ryuers and stremes. And
in his trauaylynge the land / he was encountered with many great and mighty
gyauntes / the which he destroyed. Among ye which as reherseth that English
cronicle: was one of passing strength named Gogmagog / the which he caused to
wrestle with Cormeus or Coryne his neuewe beside Dover: in which wrestlinge
that gyau^t brake a rybbe in the side of Cormeus. where thorough Corineus being
sore amoued, with great strength supprysed that gyaunt, and cast him down the
rock of Dover. By reason whereof as affermyth ye said english cronicle, ye
place was named the fall of Gogmagog.

But after that ye name was changed and called the fall of Dover / which to
this day enduryth. For this deed and other Brute gave unto his said neuewe
Corineus or Coryn the hole country of Cornewayll.

And when Brute had thus destroyed the gyauntes, and serchyd the said isle of
Albyo^ thoroughly: he coming by ye river of Thamis, for pleasure ye he had in
that river, with also the co^modytyes thereunto adioynynge / began there to
build a city in ye remembrance of the city of Troy lately subverted, and
named it Troynouant / which is as myche to say as new Troy: which name
endured till the coming of Lud after king of Brytayne upon the time of a
thousand lxviii. year. But ye said king co^maundyd yt to be called Luddys
town / which by shortness of speech is now called London.

Then when Brute had thus builded his city, and saw yt he was stablysshed in
his realm quyetly: he the^ by thaduise of his lords / commanded ye said i will
and country to be called Britayn and his people Brytons / and so continued his
reygne prosperousely. In the which time he stablysshed and ordered his people
to live in tyllynge of their land and otherwise.

This Brute had received of his wife three sons, whereof the first was named
Locrinus or Locryne / ye second Cambrius or Cambre / and ye third Albanactus
or Albanakt. To the first and eldest, he besette this isle of Brytayne, the
which after was named myddell England / which is to mean Troynouant, with
all ye cou^tres there about lyenge, co^teynynge est, west, and sowth. And for
this cause, and for yt should sound toward the name of the said Locryne: this
part of Brytayne was long after called Loegria or Logiers.

To the second son Cambre, he beset or appointed to him the country of walys
/ the which was first named after him Cambria. This in the eest side was
sometime departed from England by the river of Seuerne: But now in the north
side the river named Dee at Chester departs England and walys: and in the
sowth the river that is called Uaga at the castle of Strynglyng parts
England and walys.

To the third son Albanakt, he besette the north part of this isle, and
named yt Albion / or more verily the said country took after ye name of the
said third son, and was called Albania. This country was after named
Scotland / and is divided from Loegria or Logiers, as says holy Beda by two
armies of ye see, but they mete not. The eest arm of these two begins about
ii. miles from the mynster of Eburcurynge, in the west side of Penulton^. The
weste arm of those twain has in ye right side or sometime had, a strong
city named Acliud, which in ye Brettysshe tunge was called Clynt^ton, and
stands upon the river called Clynt

Thus when Brute had divided this isle of Brytayne, as before is showed in three
parts, and had holden the pryncypate thereof nobly by the term of.xxiiii.
years after most co^cordau^ce of writers: he dyed, and was enteryd or buried at
Troynoua^t or London.

THE.V. CHAPTER.
LOcrinus or Locryne ye first or eldest son of Brute was made king of Brytayne
of ye country of Logiers / the year of the world.iiii. thousand.lxxx.
and.vii. The which held to his part, as says Policronicon, and also Guydo de
Columna, the country that stretches from the south see unto the river of
Humbre, as before is expressyd.

while this Locrinus thus reigned in Logiers: his brother Albanactus being
ruler, as before is said of Albania or Scotland, was warreyd by a duke, whom
the cronycle of Enga^ld names Humbre / ye which slew Albanakt in plain
battle.

ye shall understand yt this Humber at the day of his coming into Albania
was not named Humber / but after old writers he was called king of Hunnys or
king of Sithia without other addicyon. This king as before is said, after he
thus subduyd Albanactus / held the land of Albania, till after ye Locrinus
with his brother Cambre, gathered a great power of men of armies, and yode
against the said king of Hunnys / and by strength of their Britons chasyd and
subduyd the said Hu^nys so sharply, that many of the^ with their king were
drowned in a river, which departyth England and Scotland. And for so myche as
to the writer of the storye of Brytons, his name was declared to be Humber:
therefore the said auctor affermyth, that the said Humber ye river took the
first name of him / which yet contynueth to this day.

Furthermore testyfyeth the said auctour, that after this victory thus
obtained by these two forsayde brotherne: this Locrinus enamowred him self
upon a fair wenche named Estrylde, and daughter of the forenamed Humber / and
her kept vnlefully by a certain of time. where with his wife named Guendoloena
being sore dyscontent / excyted her fader and fre^des to make war upon the
said Locryne her husband. In the which war lastly he was slain / when he
had reigned or ruled Loegria or Logiers after the concordaunce of most
writers.xx. years: and was buried by his fader in the city of Troynouaunt /
leuyng after him a young son gotten upon his wife named Madan.

THE VI. CHAPTER.
GUe^doloena or Gue^doleyne the wife of Locrinus, and daughter of Corineus duke
of Cornewayle / for so myche as Madan her son was young to govern the land:
was by common assent of all ye Bryto^s made ruler of the isle of Brytayne, the
year of the world.iiii. thousand, a hundred and.vii. And so having possession
of the said isle, well and dyscretly she ruled yt, to the comfort of her
subjects / till the time her son Madan came unto his lawful age. At the
which season she gave over the rule and domynyon to him / after she had ruled
(as before is said) this isle xv. years.

THE VII. CHAPTER.
MAdan the son of Locryne and of Gue^dolyne before named: was made ruler of
Britayne, in the year of ye world iiii. thousand.C. and.xxii. Of this is
little or no memory made by any writers / except that some write of him, that
he used great tyranny among his Brytons. Nevertheless all or the more perte
of writers agreen / that he ruled this i will of Britayn by ye term of.xl. years.
At ye end of which term, he being at his dysporte or huntyng, was of wyld
bestes or woluys slain or deuouryd: and left after him two sons, as says
Policronica, named Menprecius and Manlius.

THE VIII. CHAPTER.
MEnprecius the eldest son of Madan was made ruler of Brytayne / in the year
of the world.iiii thousand.C.lxii. But he reigned not long in peace. For his
younger brother Manlius, of a malycyous and couetyse mind entendynge to be
king, and to expel or subdue his brother: excyted the Britons, in such wise
to rebel again Menprecius, ye great and dedly war continued long among
them. How be yt lastely by mediacyons of friends, a day of communycacyon in
loving manner ner attwene these two brethren was appointed. At which day of
assemble Menpricius by treason slew his brother Manlius / after whose death he
lived in more tranquylite and rest. where through he fill into slowth, and by
mean of slowth into unlawful liking and lechery / and by that vice into
hatered of his subjects by taking of their wives and chylder: and finally
became so unhappy, yt he forsook his lefull wife and concudynes, and fill into
the sin of Sodomye. Thus from one vice he grew into a another / so that he
became odyble to god and man: and lastely going on hunting, and lost of his
people / was distroyed of wyld bestes, when he had reigned.xx. years: leuyng
after him a goodly yonlynge begoten of his lefull wife named Ebranke.

THE.IX. CHAPTER.
EBranke the son of Menprecius was made ruler of this land of Brytayne / in
the year of the world four thousand a hundred, lxxx. and.ii: and had, as
testyfyeth Policronica, Gaufryde, and other writers.xxi. wives: of the which he
received.xx. sons and.xxx. daughters / whereof the fairest was named Gwales,
or after some Gualea. He sent these daughters to Albia Siluius, which was
the.xi. king of Italye, or the.vii king of Latynes / to the end to have them
married to the blood of Troyans. This Ebranke was also a man of fair statute,
and of great strength, and by his power and might he enlarged his domynyon /
in so myche that he wanne and occupied a great part of Germania by ye aid and
help of the Latynes / and returned the^s with great pray and riches. After
which return, he builded the city of Caerbrank now called york: which
should be, as says the author named Flos historiaru^, or the Flower of
historyes written in french / in the.xxiii. year of ye reygne of the said
Ebranke. which account to follow, yt should seem that Troynouant or London was
builded before the said city of york, about an hundred and.xl. years:
supposyng the city of London to be begone in the second year of Brutes
reygne.

Also he builded i^ Albania or Scotland the castle of Maidens, the which is
called Edynborgh. After which edyfyces ended and made: he with a great army
sailed into Gallia now France, and subdued the Gallis, and returned with
great triumph and richesse. And when he had guyded this land of Brytayne
nobly by the term of.lx. years, after most concordaunce of writers, he dyed,
and was buried at Caerbrank or york / leuynge after him for his heir his
eldest son (as says Gaufryde) named Brute Greneshyelde.

THE.X. CHAPTER.
BRute Greneshyelde, the son of Ebranke, was made governor of this land of
Brytayne / the year of the world.iiii. thousand.ii. hundred and xlii. Of this
Brute is no memory made touching any fame / except ye Gaufryde says that he
ruled this land of Brytayne (his fader living) a certain time / and after
his fader by the term of.xii. years. The which years expyred or endyd: he
dyed, and lies buried at Caerbra^k or york, leuynge after him a son named
Leyll.

THE.XI. CHAPTER.
LEillus or Leyr son of Brute Greneshielde / was made ruler of Brytayne, in ye
year of ye world iiii.M.CC. and liiii. This was a just man and a lover of
peace and equity / and in his time made the town of Caerleyr or Carlyle, and
ruled this land well and honorably by the term of.xxv. years, as testyfyeth
the forenamed Gaufryde: and after dyed, and was buried at Caerleyr be foresaid.

But of this Leyr speaks some dele the above named author Flower of historyes
saying, yt in the end of his reygne he fill to slowth and unlawful lykyng of
his body: by mean whereof cyuyle strife began to grow with in this realm / ye
which was not pacifyed by some terms after his days: the which saying is
not denied by the foresaid author Gaufrid. This Leyll left after him a son
named Lud, or after some writers he was named Lud Hurdibras.

THE.XII. CHAPTER.
LUd or Lud Hurdibras ye son of Leyll, was made ruler of the land of Brytayne,
in the year of the world.iiii. thousand.ii. hundred and.ixxix. This also of
Gaufryde is called Hurdibras: the which after he was stablyshed in his reygne
/ appeasyd and drew to accord of the dyscorde and varyaunce that had
spronge in his fathers lives time. The which discretely appeasyd and endyd / he
builded the town of Kaerkyn, now called Caunterbury: the town also of
Kaerguen, now called wynton or wynchester: and also a town called Mount
Paladour, now named Septon or Shaftisbury. In the time of buyldyng, of which
town of Septon, as affermyth mine author Gaufride, an egle there spoke certain
words, ye which he says he will not declare or write for any certaynte. Thus
when this said Lud had ruled this land nobly by the term of.xxxix. years,
he dyed, and left after him a son named Baldud.

THE.XIII. CHAPTER.
BAldud ye son of Lud Hurdibras, was made gouernoure of Brytayne in the year
of the world iiii. thousand.iii. hundred and.xviii. This as testyfyed Gaufryde,
Polycronica, and other, was well and suffycyently instruct in the connynges or
scye^ces of astronomy and nigromancye. By the^ he made the hot bathes within
the town of Caerbadon, now named Bathe: the which town or city he also
buyldyd. But to that repugnyth wyllyam de Malmesbury, saying that the foresaid
hot bathes were made by the industrye, or of the industry of Julius caesar
first emperor of Rome. This Baldud as affermyth the foresaid author
Gaufride: taught this lore of nigroma^cy thorough his realm: and finally took
in yt such pride and presumpsyon / yt he took upon him to fle in ye air. But
he fill upon the temple of his god Apolyn, and thereon was all to torn / when
he had ruled Brytayne by the space of.xx. years, leuynge after him a son named
Leyr.

THE.XIIII. CHAPTER.
LEyr ye son of Baldud was made ruler over ye Brito^s, the year of ye
world.iiii.M.ccc. and xxxviii. This Leyr was noble of co^dicyo^s, and guyded
his land and subjects in great wealth. He made ye town of Caerleyr now called
Leyceter or Leycester. And all be yt yt this man held long the pryncypate of
Brytayne: yet of him is nothing left worthy memory, except that Gaufryde
says, yt he received of his wife.iii. daughters only without any son / which
were named Gonorilla, Ragan, and Cordeilla, the which he much loved / but most
specially he loved the youngest, Cordeilla by name.

when this Leyr or Leyth after some writers, was fallen in competente age, to
know the mind of his three daughters, he first asked Gonorilla the eldeste
how well she loved him: the which calling her gods to record, said she
loved him more then her own soul. with this answer the father being well
contented, demanded of Ragan the second daughter, how well she loved him. To
whom she answered, and affermynge with great oaths, said that she could not
with her tongue express the great love that she bare to him: affermynge
furthermore, that she loved him above all creatures. After these pleasant
answers had of those two daughters, he called before him Cordeilla ye youngest.
The which understanding ye dyssymulacyo^ of her.ii. susters, ente^dyng to prove
her fader, said: most reverent fader where my ii. systers have dyssymuled with
the with their pleasant word fruteles, I knowing ye great love and faderly
zele, that toward me ever before this time thou have borne (for ye which I may
not speak to the otherwise the^ my conscience ledyth me) therefore I say to the
father I have loved the ever as my fader, and shall co^tynually while I live,
love the as my natural father. And if thou wylt further be inquisytyfe of the
love that I to the bear: I ascertayne the, that asmyche as thou art worthy to
be beloved / even so myche I love the and no more.

The fader with this answer being disco^tent: married his.ii. elder daughters,
that one unto the duke of Cornewayll, and that other unto the duke of Albania
or Scotland and divided with the^ two in marriage his land of Britayne after
his death, and the one half in hand during his natural life. And for the
third Cordeilla reserved nothing.

It so fortuned after / that Aganippus, which the cronycle of England named
Agamp and king of France / hard of ye beauty and woma^hode of Cordeilla, and
sent unto her fader, and axyd her in marriage. To whom yt was answered, that
the king would gladly give to him his daughter, but for dowar he would not
depart with: for he had all promised unto his other two daughters.

Aganippus thus by his messagyers enfourmed: remembered the virtues of the
forenamed Cordeilla / and without promise of dowar married the said Cordeilla.

But here is to be noted / yt where this Aganippus or Agamp is called in
diverse cronicles king of France: yt can not agree with other hystories, nor
with the cronycle of France. For yt is testyfyed by Polycronica, by Peter
Pictauye^ce, by master Robert Gagwyne, by bishop Antonyne and many other
cronicles: that long after this day was no king in France / nor long after
yt was called France: but at this day the inhabytauntes thereof were called
Galli, and were trybutaryes unto Rome without king, till the time of
Ualentinianus emperor of Rome / as hereafter in this work shall be manyfestly
showed.

The storye of Britons says, that in the time that Leyr reigned in Britayne:
the land of France was under the domynyon of.xii. kings, of the which
Aganippus should be one. The which saying is full unlike to be true, which
might be prouyd by many reasons, which I pass over for length of time.

THE.XV. CHAPTER.
tHen yt follows in the story, after this Leyr was fallen in age, these
forsayde two dukes thynkyng long or the lordshyp of Brytayne was fallen to
their hands: arrose again their father (as testifyeth Gaufryde) and beraft
him the governance of the land upon certain co^dycyons to be continued for
term of life: the which in process of time more and more were minyshyd, as
well by Maglaunus as by He^ninus husbands of the forenamed Gonorild and Ragan.
But most dyspleased Leyr the unkindness of his two daughters, considering
their words to him before spoken and sworn / and now found and prouyd them
all contrary.

For the which he being of necessyte constrained: fled his land, and sailed
into Gallia, for to be comforted of his daughter Cordeilla, whereof she having
knowledge, of natural kyndnesse comforted hi^: and after showing all the manner
to her husband, by his agreement receyuyd him and his to her lords court /
where he was cherished after her best manner.

Long yt were to show unto you ye circumstaunce of ye vtterans of the
unkindness of his two daughters, and of the words of comfort given to him by
Aganippus and Cordeilla, or of the counsel and purueyau^ce made by the said
Aganippus and his lords for restorynge of Leyr again to his dominyo^. But
finally he was by the help of the said Aganippus restored again to his
lordshyp / and so possessed, lived as ruler and governor thereof by the space
of.iii. years after. In which season dyed Aganippus. And when this Leyr had
ruled this land by the term of.xl. years, as affermeth diverse chronicles, he
dyed and was buried at his town of Caerleir or Leycestre: leuynge after him
for to inheryte the land his daughter Cordeilla.

THE.XVI. CHAPTER.
COrdeilla the yongeste daughter of Leyr / was by assente of the Brytons made
lady of Brytayn / in the year of ye world.iiii. thousand iii. hundred
and.lxxxxviii: the which guyded the land full wisely by the time or space
of.v. years complete. The which time expyred and ro^ne her.ii. neuewes called
Margan and Cunedagius, sons of her.ii. susters came upon her land / and made
therein great waste and destruccyon / and at the last took her and cast her
into a strong prison / where she being dyspayred of ye recovery of her estate
(as testyfyeth Gaufryde) slew her self, whenne she had reigned as before is
declared, by the term of five years.

THE.XVII. CHAPTER.
CUnedagius and Marganus neuewes as before is said, of Cordeilla, departed
this land of Brytayne between them, in the year of the world.iiii.
thousand.iiii. hundred and.iii. That is to wit the country over and beyond
Humber fill to Margan toward Catenessey: and the other part of the land
toward weste as reherseth Gaufride, fill to Cunedagius.

After two years were run and ended / some evil dysposyd came unto Margan,
and said, that to him yt was great reproach and dishonor (considering that
he was comen of Gonorilla the elder suster, and of Maglaunus her husband / and
Cunedag was descended of Ragan the younger and Hemnius her husband) that he had
not ye rule of all ye land: to which sedycyous persons Margan gyuynge credence,
was supprysed with pride and couetyse / and anon by their counsel assembled a
great host and made war upon his said brother / brennynge and destroyeng
his land with out mercy. whereof Cunedag being ware, in all have gaderyd his
people: and after certain message sent to him of the reconcylyacyon / seeing
there was no peace to be made, but by the judgment of battle, he met with
his brother in plain field: where ye gods were to him so favorable, that he
slew myche of the people of his brother, and co^pellyd him to fle. After
which vyctory thus had, he pursued Margan from country to country, till he
came within the country or prouynce of Cambria or walys: in the which country
the said Margan gave one other battle unto his brother Cunedag: but for he
was far the weker, he there was ouercomen and slain in the field. which
field or country, where the said Margan fought and was slain, is to this day
called Glaumargan / which is to mean in our vulgar tung, Margan land. And
thus was Margan slain, when he had reigned with his brother two years.

THE.XVIII. CHAPTER.
CUnedagius before named the son of Hemnius and Ragan yo^ger daughter or
myddell daughter of Leyr, was made ruler and lord of all Brytayne, in the year
of the world.iiii. thousand.iiii. hundred and.v. Of the which is nothing
worthy memory left in writing: but that he guyded ye land after the death of
his brother well and honorably by the term of.xxxiii. years. After which term
ended, he dyed and was buried at Troynouant or London: leuynge for his heir a
son (as testyfyeth Gaufryde) named Riuallo or Rinallo / or after some writers
Reyngnolde.

THE.XIX. CHAPTER.
BIuallus the son of Cunedagius, was made gouernoure of the Brytons / in the
year of the world.iiii. thousand.iiii. hundred and.xxxviii: the which of
writers is called fortunat and restfull. This Riuallus ruled ye Bryto^s with
great soberness, and kept the land in great welthe and prosperyte / all be
yt that of him is left no special memory of act done in his time / except
mine author says, that in ye time of his, reygne yt reyned blood by the space
of.iii. days contynually within the land of Brytayne. After the which reyne
ensued so great exceeding number of multitude of flies / the which were to the
people so noyous and co^tagyous, that they slew myche people. And after that
(as says an old author, whose name is unknown) ensued great sykenesse and
mortallytie, to the great desolacyon of this said land.

Then yt follows in the story, when this Riuallus had reigned, after most
co^cordaunce of writers, by the term of.xlvi. years: he dyed, and was buried,
as testyfyeth the said old author, at Caerbrank or york / leuynge after him
a son (as wytnessyth Gaufride) named Gurgustius.

In the time of the reygne of this king, after most concord of writers: ye
famous city of Rome should be builded / as is showed more plainly in the
treatise in the beginning of this warke.

THE.XX. CHAPTER.
GUrgustius the son of ye fore named Riuallus, was made ruler of Brytayne /
in the year of the world.iiii. thousane.iiii. hundred lxxxiii. This in ye
cronicle of England is named Gorbodiam son of Reygnold, Of the which is
little memory made, other of his regne or of his deeds by any authors or
writers of ye hystorye of Brytayne / except the above named old authoure, and
the authoure called the flower of hystoryes, wytnessyth, that he reigned
xxxviii. years: leuynge after him none heir of his body begotten / and
lastely dyed and was buried by his fader at Caerbrank or york.

Rome as above is towched, was first builded and edyfyed in the time of
Riuallus / and after most writers In the year of the world.iiii.
thousand.iiii. hundred.lxx: after the buyldyng of Troynoua^t or London.iiii.
hundred.vii. years: which following that account should be in the.xxxii. year
of the forsayde Riuallus.

THE.XXI. CHAPTER.
SIsillius, or after some writers, Siluius the brother of Gurgustius, as
affermeth the foresaid old cronycle, was made chyef ruler of Brytayne / in
the year of the world.iiii. thousand.v. hundred and.xxi.

This in ye english book is named Seyzill. Of the which is no mencyon made
another of his reygne nor deeds, except that Geffrey of Monmouth writer of ye
hystoryes of Brytons, says that he reigned two years. which saying is not
accordaunte with other writers. But more to the co^uenyency of time and
agreement of other cronyclers, according to the saying of the forenamed old
author: he reigned by ye term of.xlix. years / and after dyed and was buried
at Caerbadon or Bathe / and left after him none heir of his body begotten.

THE.XXII. CHAPTER.
IAgo or Lago / ye cosyne of Gurgustius, as witnesses Gaufryde, as next
inherytoure, was made governor of Britayne / in the year of the world.iiii.
thousand.v. hundred.lxx. This also is vnmynded of writers, other for
restfulnesse of time, or else for rudeness of his deeds, that clerks list
not to spe^de any time in writing of such deeds. Of him is nothing specyfyed,
saving the forenamed old authoure joins to his time of reygne.xxv. years:
and also he says he dyed without issue, and was buried by his cosyn at
Caerbrank or york.

THE.XXIII. CHAPTER
BInimacus the son of Sisillius as some writers have, but more verytably as
says the old cronycle, ye brother of Lago, was made ruler of Brytayne / in
the year of the world.iiii. thousand.iiii. hundred.lxxx and xv: the which (as
his brother before him) passed his time without any notable acts or deeds: so
that of him is no more memory made, the^ of his brother. For the more party
they that wrote the faytes and deeds of Brytons, make but a short rehersayll
of these.v. kings / yt is to say, from Ryuallo to Gorbodug / saying that
after Ryuallo succedyd Gurgustius / after him succedyd Lago, to Lago succedyd
Kinimacus / and after Kinimacus succeeded Gorbodug. Of these.v. kings or rulers
is made little other mencyon. Then yt follows in the said old cronicle /
that when this Kinimacus had reigned liiii. years: he dyed and was buried by
his brother at Caerbra^k or york: leuynge after him a son, as testyfyeth Flos
historiaru^ / which son was named Gorbodug.

THE.XXIIII. CHAPTER.
GOrbodug the son of Kinimacus, was made ruler of Brytayne / in the year of
the world following the foresaid account.iiii. thousand.v. hundred and.xlix.
which all so passed his time like unto the forenamed dukes or kings / without
any special memory of honor noted by writers. This by most lykelyhode to
bring historyes to accord: should reygne over the Brytons the term of.lxiii.
years. which term endyd, he dyed and lies buried at new Troy or London /
leuyng after him two sons named Ferrex and Porrex / or after some writers
Ferreus and Porreus.

THE.XXV. CHAPTER.
FErrex with Porrex his brother, sons of Gorbodug: were jointly made
governors and dukes of Britayne / in the year of the world four
thousand.vii. hundred and.xi / and continued in amytye a certain time. After
which time expyred, as witnessyth Policronica and also Gaufride, Porrex being
couetouse of lordeshyp: gaderyd his people, vnwetynge Ferrex his brother /
entendynge to destroy him. whereof he being warned, for lack of space to
assemble his people / for sauegard of his person, fled suddenly into Gallia or
France, and axyd aid of a duke of Gallia named by Gaufryde Gunhardus or
Suardus: the the which duke him aided and sent him again into Brytayne with
his host of Gallis. After whose la^dynge his brother Porrex with his Bryto^s
him mete, and gave to him battle: in the which battle Ferrex was slain with
ye more part of his people.

But here dyscordeth mine author with some other writers, and with the cronycle
of England: for they testyfye, that Porrex was slain, and Ferrex suruyuyd.
But whether of them was living, the mother of these two brethern named widen
setting a part all moderly pytye: with help of her women entered the chamber
(of him so living) by night / and him there slepynge slew cruelly, and cut
into small pieces. And thus dyed the two foresaid brethren / after they had
thus ruled Brytayne in war and peace to the agreement of most writers.v.
years.

THE.XXVI. CHAPTER.
HEre now ends the line or of spring of Brute / after the affermaunce of
most writers. For Gaufride says after the death of these forenamed brethren /
great discord arose among the Brytons / y^ which long time among them
continued: by mean whereof the people and country was sore vexed and noyed
under v. kings. And further says Guydo de Columna, that the Brytons abhorred
the lynage of Gorbodug / for so myche as first that one brother slew that
other / and more for the innaturall dysposycyon of the morder, that so cruelly
slew her own child.

The cronycle of England says, that after the death of the two forenamed
brethren / no ryghtfull enherytour was left on live. wherefore the the people
were brought in great discord / in so myche that the land was deuydyd in four
parties. So that in Albania was one ruler / in Loegria or Logiers one other
ruler / in Cambria the third duke or ruler / and in Cornewayle the.iiii. duke
or ruler. But of these.iiii. dukes the english cronicle allows Cloton^ duke
of Cornewayll for most ryghtefull heir.

Policronyca says that after ye death of the foresaid two brethren, great
dyscorde was in the land / which greuyd the people sore under.v. kings. But
he another reheseth the names nor the times of their regnes / except he adds
to, that the said dyscorde continued till the time of Moliuncius Dumuallo. So
yt here appears no time certain, how long this varyaunce and dyscorde among
the Brytons continued. But who so list to look upon a draught made by me in
english in ye beginning of this book: he shall se there (if he please to cast
over the times and years there expressed) that this forsayde discord continued
nere to the term of.li. years. In which draught or conceyte if any man here
find error: of his goodness let him amend and correct yt / and all other
places where he shall by good proof find place of correccyon.

THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
THus here endyth ye first part of this work, containing or dyuyded in.vii.
parts, as before is showed. And in a way of a thank to be given to our most
blessed advocate and helper of all wretches, that to her list to call / I
mean ye most blessed vyrgyne our lady saint Mary mother of Christ / for yt her
grace has fortheryd this work hitherto / and for to impetrate of her the
grace and aid of her most merciful contynuau^ce to accomplysh this work
begone as before is showed, under supporte of her most bou^teous grace here
will I with humble mind salute her with the first joy of ye.vii. joys which
begins, Gaude flore virginali etc.
Most virgynall flower of all most excellent
Persynge of angels the highest Hierarchy
Joy and be glad, for god omnipotent
Has the lift up, and set most worthily
Above the number and glorious company
Of his blessed saints, with most hye dignite
Next after him most honored to be.


This first part to be accounted from the first year of Brute, unto the last
year of the foresaid dyscorde, or unto the first year of Mulmutius: includyth
of years.vii. hundred and four.

Thus ends the first part
THE SECOND PART.
THE.XXVIII. CHAPTER.
MUlmutius Dunuallo or as some have Dunuallo Mulmutius, the son of Cloten^ as
testyfyeth the english book, and also Gaufride: was venquesshour of ye other
dukes or rulers / and began his reygn over the hole monarchy of Brytayne, in
the year of the world.iiii. thousand vii. hundred and.xlviii. This is named in
the english cronycle Donebant: the which was a noble man, and caused to be
made within the city of Troynouant a temple, and named it the temple of peace.
The which after some opynyons is that place or feld / where ye market of
woollen cloth is holden called or named Blakwelhall. He also made many good laws
the which were long after used and called Mulmutius laws. These laws holy
Gyldas wrote with great dylygence out of the brettishe speech into latyne. And
long time here after ye, Aluredus king of England turned those laws out of
latyne into english. He also gave pryuylege to temples, to plowghes and
cytyes, and to the ways ledynge to ye same. And as some authors witness / he
began the four hye ways of Brytayne / the which were fynyshed and perfyted
of Belinus his son, as after at length shall be declared. The old cronycle
testyfyeth yt this Mulmutius, which he in his book names Molle, made the two
towns of Malmesbury and Uyes. And all other writers afferme, that this
Mulmutius, after he had stablyshyd his land, and set his Brytons in good
and conuenyent order: by the aduyce of his lords / he ordained him a crown or
dyademe of gold / and caused him self to be crowned with great solempnyte
after the vsaunce of pagane law then used. And for this cause, after the
opinion of some writers / he is named the first king of Britayn. And all ye
other before rehersyd are named rulers, dukes, or governors.

Then yt follows in the storye / when Mulmutius had guyded ye land well and
honorably by the term of xl. years: he dyed and was buried in the foresaid
temple of peace within Troynouant or London / leuynge after him two sons
named Belinus and Brennus.

THE.XXIX. CHAPTER.
BElinus and Brennus the two sons of Mulmutius: began to raygne jointly as
kings of Brytayne / in the year of the world iiii. thousand.viii.C. and viii:
so that Belinus held to him Loegria or Logiers, walys, and Cornewayll / and
Brennus held to his part all ye land over and beyond Humber. with which
partycyon either of them was co^tentyd and pleasyd, as testyfyeth Polycronica,
by the term of.v. years. After the which term endyd and expired Brennus
entendynge to have more land or all: arose against his brother Belyne, and
made upon him mortal war. In the which war Brennus was ouersette, and was
compelled to fly the land and sail unto Armorica now named little Britayn or
as says Gaufryde, into a country called Allebrog, as after shall be more
plainly declared / and there allied him after the foresaid term (as before
is said) of.v. years was expyryd as affermeth Policronica. For Gaufryde says
in his book made of the hystory of Brytons / yt after ye term of.v. years
before said were expyred and run, Brennus by sterynge of young and evil
counsayll, ente^dyng as before is said: sailed vnwetyng his brother into
Norway, and there married the daughter of Elfunge or Elfynge then ruler or duke
of Norwaye, when this was showed unto Belyn, considering the sudden
departing: in all haste he seasyd Albania and all the other land apperteynyng
to Brenne into his own hand, and strengthed the cytyes and other strong
places with his own sowdyours. whereof when Brenne was warned: he in all
possible haste assembled a great people of the Norwayes, and took his shyppynge
to sail into Brytayne. And as he was keeping his course upon the sea: he was
encountered with Guilthdacus king of Denmark, the which had lain in awayte for
him, for love of ye wenche yt Brennus had married: for before time he had
required her of Elfungeher fader. when those.ii. flotes were met: strong
shot and fight was upon both parties. But finally the Danes overcame the
Norwayes or Norganys, and took the ship by strength which the we^che was in /
yt which anon was brought unto the ship of Guilthdake: and Brenne with a
few of his ships left was feign to sauegarde him self by flight.

when Guilthdake had thus obtained ye vyctorye, entendynge to have sailed
toward Denmark: in short while after ye tempests came so hydous upon the sea, that his nauye was divided and scatered that one from the other / in
such wise that he was in fere to have been drowned. And at the end of five
days not wetynge where he was / with few ships landed in the country of
Northumberlande, where at that time was Belyn prouydyng defense again his
brothers coming. whereof when word was brought unto Belyn of the landynge of
the fore said Danoys prince with a small company: he reioysed yt, and
commanded him with his ships and company to be put in sure hold and keeping.

It was not long after but Bre^ne had reculyd and gaderyd to gyder the more
part of his nauye before (as ye have hard) chased. And when he had them
newely ryggyd and vytayled / he herynge of the aryuayll of Guilthdacus in
Norththu^berla^d with his wife, sent words of manace unto his brother Belyn /
wyllyng him to send unto him his wife wrongfully rauyshed by Guilthdacus / and
also to restore unto him his land and patrimony / or else he would shorthely
invade his land, yt for to waste, and his enymy to destroy. The which desire
or request of Belynus was plainly and shortly denied. which knowledge had:
Brennus shortly after landed in a part of Albania, and made toward his
brother / and his brother toward him: so yt their hosts met nere unto a wood
named at that day Calater or Calaterium, where between them was a mortal
battle / in so myche that much people fill upon both parties. But lastly the
Brytons wanne the field, and chasyd the Norganys or Norways unto their ships
/ chasynge and sleyenge them without pyty. And as affermeth mine author, ye
fight was so cruel and sharp: that there was slain to the number of.xl.M.
men.

After this dyscumfyture Brenne was constrained to flee / and with few in
number recoueryd the land of Gallia.

Belinus having thus victory of his enemies / after thanks and oblacyons made
unto his gods, after the pagane law: he then assembled his lords at
Caerbrank or york, to have their advise what he should do with the prince of
Denmark. In ye which counsel yt was concludyd / that the foresaid Guylthdacus
should hold and do homage to the king of Britayn for the land of De^mark, and
yearly bear to him a certain tribute. which done with suerty and hostages
taken: the said Guylthdacus with his love was set at lybertye and leave, to
return into his own country: which yearly tribute as testyfyeth the english
cronycle, was a thousand pound.

THE.XXX. CHAPTER.
Then yt follows in ye hystory, when Belyn had thus vyctory of this enemies,
and was alone possessoure of this realm of Brytayne: the laws before made by
his father he co^fermed, and ordained justice to be mynystred thorough the
land. And for so myche as the.iiii. ways begone by his fader, were not
perfyghtyd and endyd: he therefore caused workmen to be called, and set them to
paue with stone the said ways, that they might suffycyently be known of all
waygoers or traueyllers of the countres as hereafter ensuyth.

The first of these.iiii. ways was named Fosse, the which stretchyd out of
the southe into the north / and begins, or at that days began, at the
corner of Totnesse in Cornewayle, and passed forth by Deuynshyre,
Somersetshyre, and so forth by Tutbury upon Cotteswolde, beside Coue^tre unto
Leycestre, and from thennes by wild playnes toward Newerke, and endyth at the
city of Lyncoln^.

The second way was named watlyngstrete / the which stretches over thwarte ye
ways of Fosse out of the southest into the northest. This began at Dover,
and passes by the myddell of Kente over Thamys beside London by weste of
westmynster / and so forth by saint Albanys in the weste side of Dunstable, of
Stratford, of Towceter, and of we don / by south Kyllyngburne of Kyllebourn^,
by Athicston^, unto Gylbertes hill, that now is named wrekyn / and so forth by
Seuarn^ passing beside wrokceter, and forth unto Stratton^ to the myddell of
walys unto a place called Cardycan / at ye Irysh se.

The third way was named Ermyngstrete. The which stretches out of the weste
northweste unto the eest southeest, and bygynneth at Menema, the which is in
saint Dauies land in weste walys / and so stretches forth unto south Hampton^.

The fourth and last way is called or was called Kykenyldis street. The which
stretches forth by worceter, by wycombe, by Birmyngham, by Lychefyld, by
Derby, by Chesterfyeld, by york. And so forth unto Tymmouth: ye which was
suffycye^tly made. He granted and confermed the^ all such priuyleges as
before were granted by Du^uallo his fader. The which priuyleges with other
laws by him made, who yt is desirous to know: let him read over ye tra^slacyon
ye holy Gildas made of Mulmutius laws out of Brytyshe speech in to latyne /
and there he shall se the circumstaunce of every thing.

In this while that Belyn was thus occupied about the needs of his land / his
brother Brenne being, as before is said, in a prouynce of Gallia taking sore
to mind his expulsyon from his natural country, not having any comfort how
he might attayn to his former dignite, lastely resorted (with.xii. persons
only accompanied) unto the duke or ruler of that prouynce or country.

For ye shall understand that at those days (as testyfyeth Eutropius and
other writers) the Gallis occupied diverse countres. And therefore Titus Liuius,
which wrote ye acts and deeds of the Romans, made disstynccyon of the Gallis
/ and names them that Bre^ne ladde, when he beseigyd the city of Rome and
after ye capitoyll, Cenonenses Galli / which is to name the Gallis of that
country where the city of Cena than stood and yet does (as testyfyeth the
author of cronica cronicaru^, and other) in a country of Italy named at this
day Etruria. The which city, as affermen the said authors, was first
builded of the foresaid Gallis, in ye time of Brenne being their duke or
leder, before the coming or incarnacyon of Christ.iii. hundred.lxxx. and vi.
years: which makes the year of the world following the account of this
work.iiii. thousand.viii. hundred and.xiii. years.

Then yt follows in ye story, when Brenne was comen to the presence of the
duke named by mine author Gaufride Seginus duke of Alebrog / the which is to
understand duke of Armorica, now named little Brytayne, as by Policronica and
the english cronycle is suffycyently declared / and showed unto him his
aduersyte and trouble: ye said duke received him into his court. And for he
was personable and well maneryd, having great experyence in hawkynge and
hunting, and other propertyes apperteynynge to a gentylman: he had him in
short while in especyall favor before any noble man of his court. By mean
whereof, he lastly married his daughter / upon condycyon that if he dyed without
Issuemale, that he then should be ruler of ye country. And if yt happened him to
have an heir male: that then yt not withsta^dyng, to aid and help him to
recover his land before lost.

The which condycyons well and suerly upon the dukes party, by the assent of
ye nobles of his land assured: the said duke within co^pas of ye same year
dyed. After whose death when by a conuenyent term, yt was known that the
duchess his wife was not with child: all the lords to Bre^ne did homage, and
became his men. To the which lords the more to win their loves, he departed
much of his tresour: and shortly after with their assente gadered a great army
/ and so in all have sailed into Britayne to make new war upon his brother
Belyne / and after a certain time there landed. Of whose landyng when Belyne
was enfourmed: he in all haste gaderyd his Brytons in great number, and made
toward him as to his mortal enemy. But the mother of the two brethern named
Co^nuue^na, or after the englysh book Cornewey / considering ye mortal
hateryd attwene her two chylder, and in party of their both persons: of a
moderly and natural pyty, went attwene her two sons, and vsyd her in such
dyscrete manner and moderly co^passyon, as showing her breasts and other
demeanures, that at length she accorded them. After which accord both
brethren with their lords and friends sped them unto Troynouant or London /
and there after many things orderyd and made for the weal of ye land: they
co^descended and agreed to lead their both hosts into Gallia for to subdue to
them the said country. And in as goodly haste as they might p^pare for ye
journey, they took shyppyng, and so sailed into a part of Gallia brennyng and
wasting ye conntre without pyty. And as wytnessyth mine author Gaufryde, in a
short while they subdued a great part of Gallia Italy and Germania.

But here I entend to leave the farther process of mine author Gaufrid for so
myche as here he varieth from other writers of authority, as Eutropius, Titus
Liuius, and other, that did great dilygence in writynge of ye dedys and acts
of the Romans, and of other people dwelling at those days in Italia, Gallia,
and Germania. For where the said Gaufryde says, yt at such time Belyn and
Brenne made war in Italye / Gabius and Porsena were at that day consules of
Rome: that saying is far dyscordaunt unto the other foresaid authors. For as
they afferme at the time whenne Bre^ne besegyd Rome, Claudius Emilius, and
Lucius Lucretius were consulis / and Furius Camillus was at ye time dictatour
of Rome / and none like unto the other were co^sules many years before nor
after.

But troth yt is that the said.ii. brethren did many great acts in ye
forenamed countres / but not all according with the saying of ye said
Gaufride. For where he refers all those dedys to both brethren: the
forenamed Titus Liuius spekyth but of Brenne only, as yt shall some dele be
touched hereafter. wherefore to follow the most writers / when Belyn had
dwelled a certain of time with his brother Brenne in those parties: by
agreement of them both, Belyn returned into Britayn and Brenne remained there.

THE.XXXI. CHAPTER.
WHen Belinus or Belyn was returned into Brytayne: he repaired old cytyes,
and buyldyd upon the river of Uske a city, and called yt Caeruske nere unto
the river of Seuerne. This city was after named ye cyty of Legio^s, for so much
as ye legions of Romans were lodgyd within ye same city / and now yt is
called Caerleon or Carleon. Also he builded an haven with a gate there over
within Troynoua^t / in ye summer or pynacle whereon was set a vessel of brass
/ in the which was closyd the ashes of his brent body when he was deed. This
gate was long after called Belyns or Belinus gate / but at this day yt is
called Belyngesgate.

In this while that Belinus was thus occupied in Brytayne, his brother Brenne
desirous to win fame and honor builded in Italy and other parts of Gallia
these cytyes and towns following.

Mediolana or Mylleyn in Lu^bardy Papya or Papy. Burgamum or Sena or Comum or
Briria or Uerona or Uincentia or Cremona or Mantua or
The which cytyes and towns were builded of the Gallis, or at the least new
repaired, in the time that Brenne was their leder or duke / all be yt that some
writers would mean that Comum and Cremona were builded after Brenne was deed.
Policronica wytnessyth, that the Senons; which he means by ye Gallis dwelling
about the city of Sena / by ye ledyng of Bre^nus overcame the Romans.xi.
mile from Rome, at the river Albia, and chasyd them to Rome and took the city
unto the Capitol / and after leyd syege to ye same Capitol. And upon a night
while the wardeyns of ye Capitol slepte: ye Fre^shemen or Gallys by a way
under the earth / came into the Capitol and were lykely to have won it. But a
noble Romayne named Mallius or Manlius Torquatus, awoke by the crye^g or noise
of a gander or ga^ders. The which Manlius awakyng the other Romans, put of
the Gallys. For which cause ye Romans long time after held a feste of
ganders, ye first day of June.

Nevertheless afterward they called it Ino^s feste, for so much as they
thought that Juno ye gods had by her influence given that grace unto the
ganders, that they should by their noise awake the Romans. But yet the Gallis
or frenchmen held ye Romans so short, yt they were compelled to give unto Bren
their duke a thousand pound weight of gold, as thereof is witness Titus
Liuius. And further more says ye said Liuius, that ye Gallis slew of the
senators many in number, the which first they supposed had been gods
because of their rich apparel, which they sat in. But shortly after this the
forenamyd Furius Camillus, which was called again from the city of Ardea,
where he was outlawed before, and by the comontye of Rome in this need made
again dictatour.

The which pursued Brenne and his people, and to them gave battle, sleynge of
them a great multitude, and wanne from them all the gold and iewellys that
before time ye Gallis had won of the Romans. The which deed was done, as
wytnessyth the foresaid Titus Liuius, the year after the buyldyng of Rome iii.
hundred and.lxv. which was the year of the world, following the account of
this work four thousand viii. hundred and.xxxv: and before Crystys
incarnacyon keeping the same account.iii. hundred and.lxiiii.

Then yt follows in the storye of Brenne, when he was thus dyscomfyted of the
Romans: he turned his people toward the Macedones or Greeks, and dyuyded
his people in two hosts. whereof he retained yt one with him, and that other he
sent into a country called then Gallacia, and after Gallogreci, and lastly
Galates. Then Brenne overcame the Macedons with their duke Sosten^ and after
spoiled the gods and their temples / and said in his game, rich gods
must give to men somedele of their richesse. Also he spoiled the temple of
the god Apolyne Delphicus standing in the hill of the mount Parnasus.
wherefore as testifyeth the writer Policarpus: the people of that country prayed
to god for help / and suddenly the earth began to quake, and a great part of
the hill fell upon the host of Gallis, and the^ slew. And after that ensued
and fill to ground hayle stones of such greatness, yt yt slew one other
great part of the said host / and duke Brennus was sore wounded: where by he
fill in such dyspayre, that he slew him self with his own sword. No man
shall wonder, though this Apolyn took wreche of the^ that spoiled the gods
and their temples. For god suffered Apolyn to destroy many nacyons, because of
their trespasses and evil living. For yt is certain that spyrytes of the
air may use their shrewdnes in the^ that be of mysbyleue and use evil deeds.
For grace is wythdrawen from such manner of men: wherefore the spirits have the
more power to hurt and grieve them.

Then syns I have here showed unto you the fine or end of Brennus, I shall
now return my style unto his brother Belynus, the which, as before is
towched, endeuoryd him about the weal of his land of Brytayne and his people
during ye time of his reygne, in executyng of many notable deeds, the which
for length of time I over pass: so that lastely he dyed and was buried, as
before is said at Belius or Belinus gate within Troynouante or London / when
he had reigned with his brother and alone, after the most concordau^ce of
writers.xxvi. years, leuyng after him a son called Gurguyntus, Gurguynt
Brabtruc, or aftersome writers Gurguynt Barberous, which is to mean Gurguynt
with the red berde.

THE.XXXII. CHAPTER.
GUrguintus or Gurguynt the son of Belyne, was made king of the land of
Brytayne, in the year of the world four.M.viii. hundred and.xxxiiii. This in
the english cronycle is named Corynbratus or Corynbatus. The which for so
myche as the trybute before granted by Guilthdak king of De^mark, unto the
kings of Brytayne for a perpetuyty, was denayed: he arrayed his army and
nauye, and sailed into Denmark / and there wasted and harmed the country with
iron and fire: in such wise that at length the king of Denmark, with the
assent of his Baronage, granted to pay and continue the foresaid tribute
yearly of a thousand pound. After which vyctorye thus had of the Danys: he
with great tryumphe returned toward Britayn. And in keeping of his course /
he encountered with a nauye of.xxx. sail beside the isle of Orchades full of men
and women / of which flote the chyefe captain was called after most writers
Bartholomew. The which when he was brought unto the kings presence, showed
that he with his people were put or exyled out of the country of Spain, and
were named Balenses / and had sailed long time upon the sea, to the end to
find some prince, that would give to them a dwelling place, and they to become
his subiectys and hold their land of him / besechynge the king to have
compassyon of them, and to grant to them some place to enhabyte them in / and
that they should no longer dwell in their ships, co^syderyng their vytayle
was spent by reason of their long lyeng upon ye see. After which request thus
made by their captain / the king with the advise of his barons, granted unto
them a void and waste country, which was and is the farthest i will of all the
isles / toward the weste / the which isle as says the English cronycle, was
then named Irelande, after the name of their captayn called in the English
cronycle Irlamal. But who so will know the first cause of the namynge of this
isle Irlande: let him read the.xxxii. and xxxiii. chapytres of the first book
of Policronica / and there he shall find ye more certainly of ye first namynge
thereof, with many other things touching ye said isle, the which I ouerpasse
for length of ye matter. For there he shall be suffyciently enfourmed of that,
and also of other things.

Then yt follows in the story, after this Gurguintus was returned into his
land of Britayne: he ordained to be stablyshed and kept ye laws made by his
forefaders / and exersysyd justice to his subjects, and guyded his land well
and nobly by the term, after most writers, of.xix. years / and then dyed, and
was buried at new Troy or London, or at Caerleon / leuynge after him a son
named after mine authoure Guynthelinus, but after some he is named Guyntellius.

THE.XXXIII. CHAPTER.
GUinthelinus or Guintellius ye son of Gurguintus / was made king of
Brytayne, in the year of the world.iiii. thousand.viii. hundred and.liii. This
is named in the english cronycle Gwentolyne, the which guyded his land and
Brytons with great meekness and soberness. He had also a noble wife called
Marcia, instruct and learned in many scye^ces / the which among other noble
dedys by her done, studied and brought forth a certain good and conuenyent
law among the Brytons / the which was named long after the Marcyan law.
This law for that yt was thought both good and necessary, Aluredus, which
long after was king of England, translated out of Bretyshe into Saxon
speech / and then was yt called after that translacyon in the Saxon tongue
Marthehelage, which is to mean the law of Marcia. To this woman for her
wisdom was committed all the governance of the land / in so myche, as
wytnessyth mine authoure Gaufryde and other, she reigned as queen of Brytayne a
certain time after her husband was deed. But the years of her reygne be
accounted with the years of her husband, or with the years of her son
Sisillius / so that no time asserteyned is to her deputed or set.

Then yt follows, when this Guinhelinus had reigned well and mekely by the
term of.xxvi. years, he dyed and was buried at new Troy or London, leuyng
after him a son named Sisillius or Cecilius.

THE.XXXIIII. CHAPTER.
SIsillius or Cecilius the son of Guynthelinus, was made king of Brytayne,
in the year of the world.iiii. thousand.viii. hundred and lxxix. This in the
Englysh cronycle is named Seyzyl. Of which no mention nor worthy memory is
made. Al be yt that Gaufryde means, yt this Sisillius was but.vii. years of
age when his father dyed. wherefore the charge of the realm was committed unto
Marcia his mother / the which guyded yt well and suffycyently till her said
son came to his lawful age, and then resygnyd to him all ye rule: which so
continued / but how long he reigned Gaufryde expressyth not. wherefore I now
follow the saying of the forenamed authoure called the Flower of historyes,
which affermeth him to reygne only.vii. years / all be yt the English book
says he reigned.xv. years, which agrees not so well with the concordaunce
of other historyes and times.

This Sisillius, as Gaufryde wytnessyth, left after him a son named Kymarus /
whom the englysh book names Kymor.

THE.XXXV. CHAPTER.
RImarus the son of Sisillius / was made king of Brytayne, in the year of
the world.iiii. thousand.viii. hundred.lxxx. and vi. This in the english
book is called Kymor / of yt which is made no mencyon another of his time of
reygne, nor of his deeds.

For the more party of writers rehearse in most breuest and shorteste manner,
yt after Kimarus reigned Elanius. After Elanius Morindus. But ye old cronycle,
which I have before time spoken of says that this Kymarus, which he names
Kymarchus Elanius* was a wild young man, and lived after his pleasure.
wherefore as he was in his dysporte of hunting, he was by his evil willers
slain, when he had ruled skarsly.iii. years.

THE.XXXVI. CHAPTER.
ELanius the son of Kymarus, as wytnessyth the foresaid Flower of chronicles,
but the brother of Kimarus as says Gaufride / was made king of Brytayne, in
the year of the world four thousand.viii. hundred.lxxx. and.ix. the which in
the english book is named Howan. Of this also is no me^cyon made nor memory
another of act nor of reygn, but as the forenamed old cronycle says, that
Kymarus and Elanius was one person / and reigned as before is said: but the
abouesayd writer called Flower of hystoryes says, he reigned fully two years.

THE.XXXVII. CHAPTER.
MOrindus the bastard son of Elanius, as says Gaufryde and other / was made
king of Brytayne, in ye year of ye world four thousand.viii. hundred.lxxx.
and.xi. the which in the english cronicle is called Morwith. This as
witnesses Gaufryde, was gotten upon the concubyne of Elanius named
Tanguestela, and was a man of worthy fame in dedys of chyualry / but he was so
overcome with wrath and cruelnesse, yt lightly he slew all men that him tened
or angered. He was also beauteouse of person and lyberall of gifts / and with
that he was of a meruelouse strength, in so much that he had not his pere
within his realm of any man of noble birth.

In his time came into Brytayne a prince out of a country called Mauritania /
the which country at those days is assygned by Strabo ye writer* to be
between the kingdoms of Hungary, and of Beam / the which prince with his
cruel and fyers people wasted the la^d of Britayne with iron and fire without
pytye. whereof Morindus being warned / in all haste gaderyd his people, and him
met / and faught in such wise, that he chasyd the said prince again to the sea, and took many of his sowdyours as prisoners, the which in satysfyeng of
his cruelnesse and tyranny, he caused to be put to death in his sight by diverse
manners of torments / as by heedynge, fleing, brennynge, and other cruel
execucyons. Lastely as testyfyeth Guydo de Columpna and other, this Morindus
walking or riding upon the sea stronde espied a wonderful monstre, the
which of his courage and knight hod he thought to sle. And by a ma^ly courage and
force assailed this monstre or best, fyghtyng with yt a certain of time. But
in conclusyon he was devoured and swalowyd of the said monstre: after he had
reigned, after most writers, by the term of viii. years / leuynge after him,
as wytnessyth Gaufryde, five sons, whereof the first was named Gorboma^nus:
the secunde Archygallo, the third Elidurus, the fourth Uigenius or Nigenius,
and the fyfte or youngest, Peredurus.

THE.XXXVIII. CHAPTER.
GOrbama^nus the first son of Morindus / was made king of Brytayne / in the
year of the world four thousand.viii. hundred.lxxx. and.xviii. This in the
english cronycle is named Granbodyan / the which as testifyeth Gaufryde, was
a just and ryghtwyse man to ye gods and to his people, and yielded to either
party that was his / that is to say to his gods he yielded due reverence and
sacrifyce / and to the people justice and equity. And he renewed and repaired
all old temples thorough his realm, and builded some new. And in his time
was more wealth and plente in his realm, much more the^ was in any of his
predecessors days. But finally to ye great sorrow of all his Brytons / he was
taken with sykenesse, and dyed without issue of his body, when he had reigned
after most writers by the term of.xi. years.

THE.XXXIX. CHAPTER.
ARchigallo the second son of Morindus, and brother unto Gorboma^nus, was
made king of Brytayne, in the year of ye world four thousand.ix. hundred
and.x. This in the english book is named Artogayll / the which followed
nothing the works of his brother, but gave him self all to discencyon and
strife / and imagyned causes again his nobles to put them from their goods
and dygnytyes and in their places to set and ordeyne unnoble and of rude
birth and manner / and from the rich by synystre and wrongful means he
plucked their riches and goods. By which inordynate means he enryched him
self and impoueryshed his subjects. For which condycyons his lords and
subjects murmuryd against him / and lastly of one assent took him, or more
verily, depryuyd him of all honor and kyngly dygnyte, when he had reigned
after most concordaunce of writers five years.

THE.XL. CHAPTER.
ELid^rus the third son of Morindus, and the brother of Archigallo / was by
one assent of the Brytons made king of Brytayne, in the year of the
world.iiii.M.ix. hundred and.xv. This in ye english cronycle is named Hisider
or Esodyr. The which became so myld and benygne to the Brytons, that they gave
to him a surname, and called him Elidure ye meke. For he among other dedys of
mekenes, as he was upon a day in his dysporte of hunting, in a wode nere unto
Caerbra^k or york called Calater, or after some writers Caltras: he fande his
elder brother Archigallo late king, maskelyng or wandrynge in the thykest of
the wood / whom louyngly and charitably he in secret manner conveyed unto his
own mancyo^ into ye city then named Aldud or Acliut. And as affermeth mine
author Gaufryde, to thentent to bring his brother to his former dygnytye as
after follows: the said Elidurus feigned him self syke / and in all haste
sent his messagers about his realm to gather and assemble the Barons of his
land. And when the day of assemble was co^myn, and his lords according to
his commandment were present: he called them one by one, as they were of
honor, into his secret cubycle or chamber / and there by his wise and
dyscrete words as well in benygne and loving manner, as other words and
countenance apperteynyng to his royal power and dygnyty / he gat grant of
his said lords, that they should aid and strength him to their powers, to
bring his brother Archigallo to his former honor and regally. After which
grant by the lords made: he assembled a counsayll of his Brytons at Caerbrank
or york / and there caused such means to be made to the commons, that in
conclusion when the said Elidurus had ruled the land.v. years as king, he
there resygned his crown and all kyngly power unto his said brother
Archigallo.

THE.XLI. CHAPTER.
WHen Archigallo was thus restored to his kyngly dygnyte, he remembered well the
evil life that before time he had ladde, and the punishment which he had
suffered for ye same. wherefore in eschewynge of like danger: He changed all
his old condicyons, and became a good and ryghtwyse man, mynystryng to the
people equity and justice / and bare him so nobly again his lords and rulers
under him of his lands, that he was beloved and dradde of all his subjects /
and so continued during the term of his natural life. But finally he paid
the debt of nature, when he had reigned now lastly after most writers.x.
years / and was buried, as says the said old cronycle at Caerbranke or york.

THE XLII. CHAPTER.
ELidurus before named was again by one assent of ye Brytons made king / in
the year of the world.iiii. thousand.ix. hundred and xxx. But his two younger
brethren Uigenius and Peredurus, having of him indignacyon, that he was for
his virtue and good governance so well favored with the Brytons: of malice
conspyryd again him / and gathered an army of soudiours, and made a field with
him. And in the field took him, and commanded him unto the tower of Troynoua^t
as says Gaufryde, there as a prisoner to be sauely kept. After and when he
had reigned now last by the space, as witnesses the old cronycle.ii. years.

THE.XLIII. CHAPTER.
UIgenius and Peredurus ye youngest sons of Morindus, and brethren of
Elidurus before said / were jointly made kings of Brytayne / in the year of
the world four thousand.ix. hundred and.xxxii. These two brethren are named
in ye engleshe cronycle Higanius and Petytur / the which as testyfyeth Gaufryde
departed ye land between the^, so yt all ye land from the water of Hu^ber
westwarde, fill to Uigenius or Nigenius: and the other part of the land with
also Albania or Scotland, fill unto Peredurus. But after the saying of Guydo
de Columna, Uigenius or Nigenius was not king, but alonely Peredurus / the
which, as he says, held his brother Elidurus in prison by his own assent,
for so myche as Elidurus was not wyllyng to be king. And as affermeth the
said Guydo / this Peredurus was cruel and tyrannous to the Britayns, and slew
and entreated ye lords in most cruel manner. wherefore he became so odyous to
them / that they rebelled against him and slew him.

This saying contraryeth and enpugnyth mine authoure Gaufryde, saying yt
Uigenius dyed after he had reigned.vii. years. After whose death Peredurus
seasyd all the land into his own rule / and ruled yt with great soberness,
in such wise that he excelled or was preysed above all his brethern, so that
Elidurus was clean forgoten of the Brytons. The englysh cronycle also says
that this Peredurus founded the town of Pikeryng. But finally he was taken with
sudden sykenesse / whereof he dyed, when he had reigned with his brother and
alone, after the accord of most writers.ix. years / leuynge after him no
child to be his heyr.

THE.XLIIII. CHAPTER.
ELidurus before named so soon as Peredurus was deed, for as myche as he was
next heir to the crown / was taken forth of prison and made the third time
king of Brytayne, in the year of ye world.iiii. thousand.ix. hundred and.xli.
The which as before time he had vsyd him self so he continued still in
mynystrynge to all persons right and justice all the days of his life. And
lastely being of good age he dyed, when he had now reigned after most
concordaunce of writers.iiii. years / leuynge after him a son named Gorbonianus
or Gorbomanus. And as witnesses the old cronycle, and the english cronycle /
ye fore named Elidurus was buried at Caerleyl or Karlele.

THE.XLV. CHAPTER.
YE shall understand yt to the death of the foresaid Elidure, the writers of
the storye of Brytons written dyuersly / so that the one varyeth greatly from
the other, both in ye names, and also in the time of their reygnes / the which
would ask a long time to rehearse in order the dyuersytye of that one from the
other / and also to some reders ye matter thereof should be but small pleasure.
wherefore to such as ben desirous to know of ye time and season that passed
between the last year of Elidurus, and the first year of Lud / in which pass
time reigned in Britayne.xxxii. or after some writers.xxxiii. kyng^: let him
look in a table before ye beginning of this work. And there he shall se my
conceyt for ye declaracyon of ye years passed or spent between the foresaid two
kings Elidurus and Lud / praye^ge him or them that so shall look in the said
draught, that if I have in any point erryd, that of their goodness they would
with good delyberacyon correct and amend yt. But for it seems to me, that of
al such authors as I have read or seen, Guydo de Columna reherseth most
breuely the passetyme of the said kings: therefore I purpose here to rehearse
his saying, as he has left yt to us in latin.

THE XLVI. CHAPTER.
GOrbonianus or Gorboma^nus the son of Regny son of Elidure / was made
king of Brytayne, in the year of the world four thousand.ix. hundred
and.xlv. After whom succedyd Margan. After Marga^ Emerianus brother to ye said
Margan / the which Emerianus was depryuyd for his cruelnes. And after him
reigned.xx. kings successyuely the one after the other / of the which, as
says mine author Guydo, is no mencyon made / either for their rudeness, or
else for crueltye or dyscordaunte means or manners used in ye time of their
reygnes / the which mysorder clerks disdayned to write or put in memory. And
next the last of these foresaid.xx. kings succedyd Blegabridus a conning
musycyan: the which for his excellence in that facultye, was called of the
Brytons god of glemen.

After Blegabridus was thus king and dyed, succeeded.ix. kings / of whom for
the former co^syderacyon is another name nor time of reygne put in memory. The
last of which ix. kings was by the agreement of all writers named Hely /
which Hely after some writers reigned.xl. years, and after some but bare.vii.
months. In the which.xxxiii. kings times, passed or flowed (that is to say
from the last year of Elidure unto the last year of the foresaid Hely, as by
the fornamed table apperyth) a hundred and.lxxxvi. years. which said Hely
left after him.iii. sons, named Lud, Cassibellanus, and Neurius.

THE.XLVII. CHAPTER.
LUd the eldeste son of Hely, was made king of Brytayn, in the year of ye
world.v. thousand a hundred and.xxxi. This man was honorable in all his deeds
/ for he edyfyed new temples, and repaired the old. He also repaired old
cytyes and towns / and specially in the city of Troynouant he caused many
buyldynges to be made / and gyrde the said city about with a strong wall of
lyme and stone. And in the weste part of the said wall he arreryd a fair
and strong gate, and commanded it to be called Luddys gate, which at this
day is clepyd Ludde gate. And for he loved myche this city: he used myche and
most to lie there. By reason whereof yt was called Caerlud or Luddys town /
and after by corrupcyon or shorting of the speech, yt was named London, which
name at this day remains and abides.

This Lud also, as wytnessyth Gaufryde, was strong and mighty in armies in
subduynge his enymyes. He was also lyberall of gifts and plentuouse in his
household / so yt he was myche loved and drad of his Brito^s. But when he had
continued his reygn with great honor by ye term of.xi. years: he dyed, and
was buried in his gate called Portlud or Ludgate / leuynge after him, as
wytnessyth Gaufryde, two sons, Androgeus, and Temancius or Tenancius.

THE.XLVIII. CHAPTER.
CAssibellan the brother of Lud was made king of Brytayn, in the year of the
world.v. thousand a hundred and.xlii. For so myche as the.ii. sons before
named of Lud were to young or insuffycyent for to take on hand so great a
charge. But as wytnessyth the old cronycle, and also the author of the Flower
of historyes: this Cassybellan was not made king, but ruler or protector of
the land, for the time of the nonage of the foresaid brethern: all be yt
mine author Gaufryde says, yt after Cassibellan was set in authorite / he
became so noble and lyberall, that his name sprange far / and by his
exercysynge of justice, the Brytons ought to him more favor, the^ to either of
his neuewes. How be yt he cheryshed them, and brought them forth according to
their birth. And when they came unto years of dyscrecyon, he gave to Androgeus
the city of London, with the dukedom or the erledome of Kent / and to
Temancius the dukedom of Cornewayll.

In this season was Caius Julius, the which is most commonly called Julius
Caesar, sent by the senate of Rome as fellow and consul with Lucius Bubulus
into Gallia now called France, for to subdue them unto the empire of Rome.
The which Julius being upon the sea side, after he had overcome the Gallis,
and beholding the white clyues or rocks of Brytayne: inquired of the country,
and what people dwelled therein. And when he was suffycyently enfourmed of all
the commodytyes thereof: he had great will to bring the said country under the
yocke of the Romans, for so much as at those days a great part of the
world was tributary to Rome. But as says mine author, first he exorted the
Britons by writing and messagers, to give trybute unto Rome. wherefore
Cassybellan having indygnacyon wrote unto him sharp and short answers,
showing that he and every noble man was bound specially to keep his country
from seruage / and to keep his subjects, that they might enjoy lybertye and
franchise. The which to observe, he would do the uttermost of his power and
might. with the which answer Julius being nothing co^tentyd, in all have
made ready his navy and people, and sailed toward Brytayne. And when the
Romans were common nere the land of Brytayne, and should have landed: ye
Brytons pyght sharp stakes and long upon the banks / which caused them to win land with great danger. And not long after their landynge, Cassibellan
with a strong host of Britons encountered the Romans / gyuynge or yeldyng to
them such fight and battle that they were feign to resort to their ships
for their suertye. Not with standing ye, as witnesses Gaufride and other /
Julius after he had renewed his knights, and also ryggyd his nauye: he came
again the second time, entendynge to subdue the land to the empire of Rome.
But as before time he was by the manhood of the king and his Brytons manfully
and knyghtly wythsta^den and chasyd: so this second time he was in like wise
overcome, and compelled to flee without honor. For which vyctory thus twyes
obtained by the Brytons, Cassibellan entendynge to give thank unto his gods,
and reward to his knights: in goodly haste caused an assemble to be made of
his lords and knights at the city of Caerlud or London. where after dew
obseruaunces done to their gods, after ye use of their pagan laws, a great
and solemn feste was holden by the king to all that would come, with most
lyberalytye and plentye in all that was necessary to such a feste. And the
more to increase the kings honor / and to the more comfort and dilectacion
of his lords and other there being present: there was all manner kynes of
games that at those days were exercysed and used. Contynewynge which feste,
two noble and young knights among other hapened to assey either other in
wrastlyng / whereof that one was neuew to king Cassibellan named Hirelda / and
ye other named Euelinus, was allied unto Androgeus earl or duke of London. By
mean of this wrastlynge dyuysyon or vnfyttynge words fill between the two
young knights, yt after words ensued strokes / by mean whereof parties were
taken on either side, which ran to gyder in great ^re and malice, so that on
either part many and diverse were hurt and wounded. Among whom Hirelda neuew
to the king was slain / which caused great dysturbaunce in the court and
among the lords.

when the knowledge of the death of Hirelda was brought unto ye king: he was
therwyth greatly amoued / and entendynge dew justice to be had and mynystred
by thaduyce of his Barons, caused the forenamed cosyn of Androgeus Euelinus to
be sommoned for to appear before him and his counsayll, and there to acquyte
him of such crime as to him was laid for the death of Hirelda before slain.
But Euelinus by cou^sayll of Androgeus wythstode that commandment / and
shortly after the said Androgeus and Euelyne departed the court without
taking leave of the king.

The king dysdaynynge this demeanure of Androgeus / after diverse monycyons to
him given, gathered his knights and made war upon Androgeus. wherefore he
co^syderyng after many ways and means thought yt he was not of power to
wythstand the kings great indignacyon / sent his letters unto Caius Julius
Caesar, showing to him the circumstaunce of the matter / and aduoydynge him of
all gylt, besought and prayed him in most humble wise, that he would shortly
return with his army into Brytayne / and he with his hole power should be ready
to aid and help him again the Brytons.

Of this message was Julius very glad / and in all haste made toward Brytayne
with a great power. To whom ye wind was so favorable / yt in short time after
this message he drew nere ye land. But as affermeth mine author Gaufryde / or
he would land, ferynge the treason of Androgeus, he received from him in
hostage his son named Scena, with.xxx. other of the most noble of his
lordshyppe / and that done he landed with the help and aid of Androgeus.
whereof when Cassibellan had warning, in all haste he made toward the
Romans / and in a valey nere unto Dorobernia now named Canterbury, there he
found the host of ye said Julius lodged, and with him Androgeus with all his
power. After which knowledge had either of other / with their habylleme^tes of
war either grieved other, till at length both hosts met hand for hand and
faught vygerously, in such wise that many fell on either party.

But when the Brytons, as says Gaufryde, had long foughten and knyghtly
defended the Romans: Androgeus with his people came by a wynge of the Brytons
/ and them so sharply assailed, that they were constreyned to forsake the feld
and place yt they before had kept. The which flight dysco^forted so the
other, that finally all fled and gave place to the Romans, the which
pursued and slew them without pytye. So that Cassibellan with his Brytons
that were left, were feign to get them to a place of suerty / there to rest
till they might newly provide to with stand their enemies.

But finally as all writers agree, Julius held the king so short, that for an
unity and concord he was feign to become trybutary to the Romans, and to
pay to them yearly a certain trybute, which Gaufryd affermeth to be.iii.
thousand pound. And when the said trybute was set in a suertye / so that the
said Romans were with yt contented, and Julius had accomplyshed his will
and pleasure in things to him thought necessary: he with Androgeus departed
the land, and so spedde him toward Rome / where soon after he was again, by
the will of ye most of ye senators made emperor. And this tribute thus was
granted when Cassibellan had reigned as king of Britayne fully.viii. years
and more.

THE.XLIX. CHAPTER.
THis beginning of this trybute paid by Cassibellan unto the Romans, should
seem by most concordaunce of writers to be upon xl. and.viii. years before
Crystes incarnacyon, or after some.l. But for proof of the first saying / I
have showed my conceyte in the tabyll before named / the which I remytte to the
correccyon of such as have profit vndertandynge in calculynge of hystoryes and
times.

And here I make an end of the second part of this work / in yeldynge
graces to our most consolatryce, that most blessed virgyne our lady saint
Mary, the which here I again salute with the second of the forsayde.vii.
joys, which begins, Gaude sponsa chara dei. etc.
Be joyous thou spouse of god most (...)
Which like to the son, most clerest of sight
When in the day he shyneth most clear
The world illumynest by means full right
And through the virtue of thy full might
Causest the world to be resplendissaunt
By mean of thy peace, which is full habundaunt.


This second part to be accounted from the last year of the dyscorde of the
Brytons to the end of the.ix. year of Cassybellan, includes of years.iii.
hundred.lxxx. and.iii.

THE THIRD PART.
THE.L. CHAPTER.
THus may we understand, that by the apoyntme^t before made / Cassibellan
continued still as king and governor of this land of Brytayn / which by
most co^cordaunce of writers had reigned before or he were made trybutarye
upon.ix. years / which said.ix. years made the year of the world following
thaccompte before expressyd, five thousand a hundred and.l. And after he
reigned by thagreme^t of all writers as king of this land, fully.vii. years.
So that in all before the grant of ye tribute, and after / he reigned
upon.xvi. years.

THE.LI. CHAPTER.
Now then have I showed to you how that Julius Caesar by aid and help of
Androgeus earl of Kent / made this land of Brytayn trybutarye to the Romans,
when Cassibelan had been king of the said land upon.ix. years / which.ix.
years I have set for the end of the second part of this work. So that
the.x. year of Cassibellan is the first year of the third part of the said
work. Then as all writers testyfye / Cassibellan continued after the
departing of Julius, as king by the term or space of.vii. years, as before is
declared. In the time of ye which vii. years is none noble act nor deed of him
put in memory or writing.

But for some would think that after Caius Julius Caesar, had thorough help
of Androgeus earl of Kent, and eldest son of Lud, thus as before is said,
subdued Cassibellan: that the said Julius would have restoryd the said
Androgeus to the crown of Brytayne, as his ryghtfull inherytau^ce / and
clearly to have expelled and put out the said Cassibellan from all kyngly
dygnyty. To this answers the old cronycle and says, that Cassibellan was
not the son of Hely, but that he was the eldeste son of Lud, by reason
whereof he was first made king / and so as ryghtfull heir continued during
his life, king of Brytayne. The which when he had reigned.ix. years or he
were trybutary, and.vii. years after as affermeth the said old cronicle in
all.xvi. years / he the^ dyed without issue, and was buried at Caerbranke or
york.

THE.LII. CHAPTER.
TEmancius or Te^nancius the youngest son of Lud, as affermeth Gaufryde, was
made king of ye Bryto^s, in the year of the world five thousand a hundred
and.lvii. This is named in the english cronycle Tormace, and not king, as the
said book affermeth. But his elder brother, which in the said book is named
Androgen, was after the affyrmaunce of the said english cronycle made king.
But the foresaid Gaufryde and other testyfyen / that for so myche as Androgeus
feryd to be ever hated of ye Brytons, for his treason wroughte against the king
and the land: he therefore chase to go with Caius Julius to Rome, rather the^
to be king of such as he thought would never have him in their love and favor.

Then yt follows in ye storye, this Te^na^cius ruled the land with great
dylygence and justice / and defended the land well and knyghtly again all
alyau^tis and strangers / and paid his trybute to the Romans y^ Cassibellan
had granted / and lastly dyed when he had reigned after most writers.xxiii.
years, and was buried at Caerlud or London / leuynge after him a son, the
which was called Kymbeline.

THE.LIII. CHAPTER.
Kymbelinus or Kymbelyne the son of Te^nancius / was of ye Bryto^s made
king, in the year of the world.v. thousand a hundred and.lxxx. This man as
witnesses Guydo was brought up at Rome among the Romans, and there made a
knight / and had of them such favor, that he was at lyberty to pay the
trybute or not. Of him is little memory made / except all writers agreen,
that in ye season that he was king, our sauyoure Christ Jesus was incarnate of
that most blessed virgin our lady saint Mary. which should be to accord
historyes, in the xix. year of his reygne.

Of the reygne of this Kymbelyn authors write dyuersly / so yt some show no
years, and some but few, which can not accord with the time of other
chronicles. But the author of the hystorye called Flower of historyes
wytnessyth, yt he reigned.xxxv. years. The which saying who list to se ye
table before rehearsed: he shall there have knowledge, that this said auctoure
accords best with other stories and chronicles.

And when that this Kymbelyne had reigned gloryously over ye Brytons by all the
season before expressyd, he dyed and was buried at Caerlud or London / leuynge
after him two sons named Guyderius and Aruiragus.

NOw before have I showed unto you in ye later chapyter, yt Criste was
incarnate, in the.xix. year of Kymbelyne / which makes the year of the
world, that is to say from the first creacyon of Adam to the incarnacyon.v.
thousand a hundred lxxx. and.xix. the which account is approuyd by holy
Isodore, Beda, and other.

Then Christ was incarnate the year of ye world, as before is expressed. From
Noes flood or after.ii. thousand ix. hundred and.lvii. After Abraham.ii
thousand and.xvii. After David king of Israel, a thousand and.lxxv. From or
after the tra^smygracyon of the Jews to Babylon, v. hundred lxxx. and.x. After
Brute entered Britayne.xi. hundred and.xxxvi. After Alexander the great, nere
upon.iii. hundred and.xxv. After the building of Rome.vii. hundred and.xxix.
And in the beginning of ye.xlii. year of Octauius Augustus, then emperor of
Rome.
THE.LIIII. CHAPTER.
GUyderius the first son of Kymbalyne / began his reygne over the Britons,
the year of the world.v. thousand.CC. and.xvi. And the year after Cristes
incarnacyon ye xvii. year. This man was welthy and trusted much in his
strength. And for he thought the Romans had the forenamed trybute with
wrong: he therefore of a knyghtly courage denied to the Romans the said
trybute. wherefore Claudius which was uncle unto Caius Caligula the.iiii.
emperor of Rome: came into Brytayne with a great army of Romans / and as
wytnessyth Policronica, co^queryd and wanne again the said trybute without
great fight. And yt done / he also subdued the yles of Orchades or Orkeys,
which stand beyond Scotland within the great Occean / and after turned
again to Rome the.vi. month after that he came thens.

The cronycle of England, and also Gaufryde say, that in the host of the
Romans was a captain named Hame or Hamo / the which entendynge hurt and
destruccyon of ye Brytons, changed his shield or armure, and did upon him the
armure of a Britayne. And by that mean as a Briton mysclad, he entered into the
thyckest of the host / and lastely unto the place where as king Guyderius
faught, and shortly after slew the king. But Aruiragus seeing this sudden
myschyefe, to the end yt the Brytons should not give back: he hastily caused
him self to be armed with the cognysaunce of the king. And so for king
co^tynued the fight, with such ma^hode, that the Romans were put to flight.

Thus by accord of writers Guyderius was slain of the foresaid Hamo / when
he had reigned over the Brytons by the concordaunce of other
hystoryes.xxviii. years, leuyng after him none heir of his body to guide the
land after his death.

THE.LV. CHAPTER.
ARuiragus the youngest son of Kymbelyne, and brother to Guyderius before
slain, was ordained king of Brytons, in the year of our lord.xliiii. This in
the english book is named Armager / the which as there is showed, well and
knyghtly maynteyned the war again the Romans, and after slew the forenamed
Hamo nere unto an haven or port of the sea. And him so slain, threw gobet
meal into the same see. And for this skyll, was this haue^ long time after
called Hamo^s haven / which at this day is called Southampton.

Then yt follows in the.viii. chapyter of the.iiii. book of Policronicon, that
Claudius after diverse happes of battle, took Aruiragus to his grace / and
brought his daughter Gennissa by name from Rome, and married her unto Aruiragus.
And for he would make the place of ye marriage more solemn, he therefore called
the town of marriage Claudiocestria after his name, the which before was called
in bretyshe tunge Caerleon, and after Glouernia after a duke of Demecia that
hight Glorio / but now this town is named Glouceter.

All otherwise tells the english cronycle / and says that Armager scomfyted
Claudius, and compelled him to give his daughter Ge^nissa or Ge^nen to the
said Armager to wife / with condycyon that the Romans should never after that
day claim any trybute of Brytayne, except alonely feawte / which saying
appears doutefull for diverse causes. whereof one is, that the said Armager
should not constrayne Claudius to give his daughter to him / for so myche as
the said Armager had never seen the said Gennen before time, nor knew not
of her co^uersacyon. Then marvel yt were, that he should force her father to
give him a wife, that he had cast no love unto before time. One other reason
is, that the said cronycle testyfyeth / that after he had married the said
Gennen, he was at London crowned king of England. For I would think if he had
ouercome^ Claudius, as there is surmytted, he would first have crowned him
self king, and then have married his daughter. But by the same reason yt
certifyeth more strenger the former saying of Policronica. For by all
lykelyhode Claudius would not suffer him to be crowned king, till he had full
performed his promise in marriage of his daughter.

And all be yt that mine authoure Gaufryde varyeth not myche from the english
cronicle: I think in ye doing he took example of Homerus, that wrote the
dedis and acts of the Greeks / the which showed and put in memory all the
noble acts by the^ done, and specially in the recuyll or book made by him of
the syege of Troy. But the other dedys concerning their dyshonoure / he hyd
yt as much as he might. And in like manner do many other writers, which I pass
over. And so Gaufride for he was a Bryton, he showed the best for Brytons.

Then yt follows, after the solemnysacyon of this marriage, which was with all
honor finyshed: Claudius sent certain legyons of his knights into Irlande
to rule that country, and returned him self to Rome.

THE.LVI. CHAPTER.
IT was not long after the departing of Claudius: but yt Aruiragus rode
about his realm, and with great dylygence repaired cytyes and towns before
decayed and broken with the strength of the Romans / and entreated his
subjects with such justice and good order, that they loved and drad him more
then any of his progenitors. This in tracte of time made him welthy. And by
mean of this welthynes ensued pride / so yt him thought great shame to be
under the rule or guydynge of ye Romans / wherefore lastly he denied the
tribute before granted. whereof when knowledge came unto ye senate of Rome: in
all have was sent a duke of Rome called Uespasyan, with a certain of legyons
to subdue Aruiragus.

ye shall understand, that a legyon of knights, is.vi. thousand.vi.
hundred.lxvi.

when Uespasyan was landed in Brytayne, as testyfyeth Polycronica / he spedde
him so, that in short while he subdued Aruiragus to the empire, and caused him
to grant payment of the foresaid trybute. which was done, as says Gaufride
by entreatye of the queen Gennissa, and of no constraynt nor coaccyon.

when Uespasyan had thus recoueryd the trybute, he then also made subject to
the empire / an isle in the sea lyenge upon the southsyde of Britayne, now
called the isle of weight, and after returned to Rome.

when Aruiragus was thus secondely brought under the yocke of ye Romans: he
became more mylde toward them / so that while he lived after he paid his
trybute with less grudge, and continued him in their favors, in such wise
that he was of them well beloved. And so lastely dyed when he had ruled the
Bryto^s well and nobly by the term of.xxx. years / and was buried at
Caerglon^, Caerleon^, Claudiocestria, or Glouceter / leuynge after him a son
named Marius

THE.LVII. CHAPTER.
Marius the son of Aruiragus was ordained king of Brytons, in the year of
our lord.lxxiiii. This in the cronycle of England is named westmer. which
Marius, as wytnessyth Gaufryde, was an excellent wise man / and guyded his
Brytons most honorably, and in great prosperyte and welthe. In the time of
the reygne of this Marius a duke or king of a nacyon called Pyctes / which as
wytnessyth Uirgilius, are descendyd of a people called of old times Scythis.
They also are named Gothis or Hunys. This foresaid leder of Pictes is named of
Gaufryde Londricus / the which landed with a great navy, in the prouynce of
Albania now called Scotland / and yt began to waste with iron and with fire.
whereof when Marius was warned / he in all haste assembled his knights, and
made toward his enymyes / and gave unto them strong battle. In the which
Lo^dricus or after some Rodicus was slain, and a great part of his people
were slain. In remembrance of which vyctorye, king Marius let arrere a
great stone / and in this he commanded to be graven Marii victoria, which is
to mean the victory of Marius.

wyllyam of Malmesburye says, that this stone was arered in mind of Marius
the consul of Rome.

The english cronycle says, that this battle was foughte^ in a place, the
which now is called Stanysmore. But where so this stone is set / the country
there about was long after called westmaria, and now westmerlande.

Then yt follows in the story, that when the resydue of the people of
Lodricus, which were fled from the field, understood that their hedde and
captain was slain: they made humble request unto ye king, yt he would
accept the^ unto his grace / and that he would grant to them some land and
country to dwell in. which granted unto the^ a place in the far end of
Scotland, which is named of mine authoure Cathenesia, where the said Scythis
or Pictes first inhabyted them. And for so myche as the Brytons dysdayned to
give unto the^ their daughters in marriage: therefore they acqueynted them with
the Iryshe men, and married their daughters, and grew in process into a great
people. And for this allyaunce attwene the Iryshe and them: their country, as
wytnessyth Policronycon ye.xxxvii. chapyter of his first book, was called
Irlande, and after Pictauia, and lastely Scotland.

And when Marius had thus subdued his enemies / he attendyd and set his mind
to the common well of this land and subjects / and continued ye resydue of
his life in great tranquillite and rest. And so lastely paid his natural
tribute, and was buried at Caerleyll, leuyng after him a son named Coillus or
Coyll, when he had reigned after most writers.lii. years.

THE.LVIII. CHAPTER.
COyllus the son of Marius was after the death of his father made king of
Brytons, in the year of our lords incarnacyon a hundred and.xxvi. This was
from his infancy noryshed and brought up among the Romans in Italia or
Rome / by reason whereof he was to them loving and kind, and they unto him.
And he, for so myche as he knew the power of the Romans great / in auoydyng
of war and other danger, paid unto them the foresaid trybute during his
life. This Coillus also, as wytnessyth Gaufryde, was a lyberall man of gifts /
by reason whereof he obtained great love of his nobles, and also of his commons.
And as some authors have: this Coyll made the town of Colchester / which at
this day is a fair town in the shyre of Essex. But other ascrybe yt to Coell
or Coill, that was king next after Asclepeodotus.

But when this Coillus had reigned in soueraygne peace by ye term of.liiii.
years, he dyed and was buried at Caerbrank or york / and left after him a
son, the which was named Lucius or Lucy.

THE.LIX. CHAPTER.
Lucius or Lucy the son of Coillus, was made king of Brytons, in the year of
our lord a hundred and.lxxx. The which in all acts and deeds of goodness
followed his forefaders / in such wise that he of all men was beloved and drad.
Of this is litell or none act notable put in memory / except that all
writers agree, that this Lucius sent to Eleutherius then pope of Rome certain
pystles or letters, prayeng him that he and his Britons might be received to
the faith of Crystes church. whereof the pope being very joyous and glad /
sent into Brytayne two noble clerks named Faganus and Dunianus: or after
some, Fugacius and Dimianus. These two good and virtuous clerks were
honorably received of Lucius / the which by their good doctrine and virtuous
examples gyuynge, co^uertyd the king and a great part of the Brytons.

But for so myche authors and writers write dyuersly of ye time of this
receyuynge of the faith by Lucius / so that the one varyeth greatly from the
other: therefore I have showed in the forenamed table, that yt shall under
correccyon appear, yt the faith was received by Lucius, as affermeth Petrus
Pictauiens. the.viii. year of the reygne of the said Lucius. And yt year after
Cristes incarnacion a hundred and.lxxxviii. The which Lucye after the faith
thus by him received, by the aduyce of the foresaid clerks, and with the
instruccyons sent to them by the foresaid pope Eleuthery: instituted and
ordained, that all or the more party of Archeflamynys and flamynys / which is
to mean archbysshoppes and bysshoppes of the pagan law, which at that day
were in number, as wytnessyth Gaufryde and other.iii. of the archeflamynys,
and.xxviii. of the flamynys / were made and ordained archebyshoppes and
bishops of ye church of Criste, as after follows.

Archeflamynys bishops constytuted. THE.LX. CHAPTER.
THe first of the archeflamynys see, rule, or iurysdyccyo^ / was as wytnessyth
Gaufride and Policronica, at London, the second at york, and the third at
Caerurst or Kaerglon^ or Glouceter. To these.iii. archbyshopes were subject
the foresaid.xxviii. flamynys or bishops. To the archebyshoppes see of London
was subject Cornewayll and all myddel England unto Humber. To the
archebyshoppes see of york was subject all Northumberlande, from the bow of
Humber, with all Scotland. And to the third archbyshoppes see, which was at
Glowceter, was subject all walys. In which prouynce of walys were.vii.
bishops, where as now ben but iiii. And at ye day Seuaru^ departed Brytayne
and Cambria or walys. But in the time of Saxons, after they had the rule of the
land of Brytayne, as testyfyeth wylhelmus de Pontific, all be yt that saint
Gregory had granted unto London pryuylege of that archbishoppes see:
nevertheless saint Austayn, the which with other was sent into England by the
foresaid Gregorye, turned the archebyshoppes see out of London into
Caunterbury, after the death of saint Gregory, by means of prayer of king
Egbert or Ethelbert, and other cytyzeyns and burgesys of Caunterbury / where yt
has continued to this day / except that for the time of Offa king of Mercia
or Mercheryk, for dyspleasure that he had to the cytezeyns of Caunterburye
byna^me and took from them that dygnyte / and worshypped Adulphe bishop of
Lychefelde with the pall of Caunterbury by the assent of Adryan the first of
that name then pope. Nevertheless in the time of Kenulphus, which not long
after was king of the said Mercia or Mercheryk / yt was again restoryd to
Caunterbury.

The worship of ye see of york has endured there always and yet does, though
Scotland be withdrawe^ from his subieccyon. The archbyshoppes see of Caerglon^
or Glowceter, was turned from the^s to Menenia, which is in ye west side of
Demecia upon the Iryshe see, which now is called saint David's land. In this
prouynce from the days of saint David, unto the days of Sampson bishop /
sat.xxiii. bishops. But in the said Sampsons days then archebyshop, fill
such mortalyte through walys of the yelowe evil called the Iaundyes / that
myche people thereof dyed. wherefore the said Sampson took with him the pall,
and sailed into Armorita or little Brytayne / and was there bishop of
Dolence or Dolences. And from that time unto the first Henry^s time king of
England / had sytten at Menenia or saint David's.xxi. bishops, and all
without pall. But whether yt were for lack of conning, or else for poverty,
it is not asserteyned. Nevertheless always from the time of the said Sampson
unto the foresaid Henry the first time / all the bishops of wales were
sacred of ye bishop of Menenia or saint David's. And the archebyshop of
Menenia was at all times sacred of ye bysshoppes of walys, as of his
suffragans, and made no profession nor obieccyon to any other church. But
after these days other bishops yt sat there / were compelled to be sacred at
Canterbury. In token of which subieccyon Bonyface archbyshoppe of Canterbury,
and legate of the cross / sange in every cathedral church of walys a solemn
mass, which was done by the said Boniface in the time of Henry the second
being king of England.

But now ye shall understand there ben but two prymates or archbysshoppes in
all England and walys. That one is at Caunterburye, and that other is at
york. To the prymate of Caunterburye ben subject xiii. bishops in England,
and.iiii. in walys. And the prymate of york has but two suffragans in
England, which be the bishops of Caerleyll and Durham.

And who so will be further instruct of the order and chau^ges of bysshoppes
see of England let him read over the.lii.liii.lv.lvi. and lvii. chapyters of
the first book of Polycronycon / or a perte of holy Bedys work, which he
compyled of the same matter called historia Anglicana: and there he shall have
every thing set out clearly and truly.

And for to contynewe my process of Lucius as wytnessyth mine authoure
Gaufride / when he had, as before is said stablyssyd and orderyd the
foresaid archeflamyns and flamyns / and that they were also confermed of the
pope: he then endowed them with such lands and possessions, as before time
were occupied or given to the maynteynynge and vpholdynge of the pagan rytes
and law vsyd before time. And the temples of idollys thorough his land he
caused to be dedycate to Jesus Criste and his saints / and honored them with
myche great and large gifts. And when he had done, after most accord of
writers by ye term of.xii. years: he dyed and was buried in ye city of
Claudiocestre or Glouceter without heir of his body / the which after grew to
great damage of the Brytons, as after shall be showed.

Of this Lucius yt is showed in a table hanging upon the wall of the north
side of the isle, in the back of the quere of saint Paul's church in London /
that the said Lucius reigned over the Brytons.lxxvii. years. And over that the
authoure of cronica cronicarum testyfyeth, that after Lucius had received the
faith, he assembled a great host of Brytons and sailed over into Gallia or
France / and thens into other countres passing by Becia and the city called
Augusta / and there subdued many of the enymyes of Crystes faith / where after
many virtuous dedys he restyd in good peace. And his suster called Emerita, as
says the said author, was also martyred for Cristes sake. But of this saying
and other the doubt is assoyled in the foresaid table in ye beginning of this
work / where yt shall apere, that he reigned but.xii. years, as above is
showed.

And for so myche as in this Lucius ends for a time the line of Brito^s, and
the land after this day was ruled some dele by the Romans: therefore I will
here end the third part of this work. And for ye good speed I have hyderto
had / and to the end to inpetre the more grace in accomplyshyng ye other dele
of this work: I here salute our most blessed lady with the third joy of the
foresaid vii. joys, which begins.

Gaude splendens vas virtutum etc.
Hayle and be glad thou vessel most shynynge
Of virtues and grace, at whose commandment
The hole court of heaven is ever and bidding
And thou also art among them meant
Most benygne and happy to every good intent
As dygne mother of Jesus, with most excellence
Honored in glory, with all their assystence.
This third part to be accounted from the end of the.ix. year of
Cassibellan, to the last year of Lucius, includes of years two hundred
and.xli.

Troth yt is, as affermyn all writers / that after the death of the forenamed
Lucius, for so much as of his body remained non heir: the Brytons among them
self fill at great dystaunce and war. The which war and trouble endured
to the great dystourbaunce of the land. But how long, the certain is not
set out by any writer that I have seen / except the english cronycle says,
that yt endured.l. years. The which saying under correccyo^ can not stand with
the concordau^ce of other writers / as yt is more plainly declared in the
foresaid table. where also yt shall appear, that the said dyscorde among the
Britons continued but only.xv. years.

After which term of.xv. years expyred, as after more clearly shall be
showed: Seuerus being the^ emperor of Rome, began his domynyon over this
land of Brytayne. So that ye shall now understand that ye last year of this
discord was the year of our lord two hundred and vii. By reason whereof yt
follows, that the said.xv. years joined unto the foresaid third part: that
the third part co^teyneth and includes of years.ii. hundred and.lvi.

Thus ends the third part.
THE FOVRTH PART.
THE.LXI. CHAPTER.
SEuerus a Romayn at this day emperor of Rome / begane to rule this land of
Brytayn in the year of our lords incarnacyon.ii. hundred and viii. The which
as witnesses Gaufryde, was before time sent from the senate of Rome with two
legyons of knights into Brytayne, to appease the war and strife among them
/ and also for to wythsta^de the Pictes and other enymyes, which daily invaded
the land. For diverse writers agree, that this Seuerus was made emperor, the
year of Crystes incarnacyon a hundred.lxxx. and.xv / and ruled the said empire
after the most writers.xvi. years. By which rule yt should appear that he should
be taken for governor of this realm of Brytayne, the.xii. year of his empire.

It is said of this man, that after he had subdued the Parthis and the Arabis,
he was named Particus / and was sent, as before is said, of the senate of Rome
into Brytayne / where he caused to be made at the cost of the commoute, a
wall of turues and great stakes of the length, as wytnes sith Policronica of a
hundred and.xii. miles / as in the.xviii. chapyter of his.iiii. book apperyth.
This wall after the exposycyon of the said Polycronica, began at the river of
Tyne, and enduryd to the Scottyshe see / or from the end of the lordshyp of
Deira, unto the said Scottyshe see / or after some writers from Durham, to the sea beforesayde.

Then yt follows, the Pictes with their leder Fulgenius / issued from Albany
or Scotland into the land of Brytayne / and destroyed myche of ye country
beyond Durham. wherefore this Seuerus with and host of Brytons and of Romans
met with the said Fulgenius in a place nere unto york, where after sore
fight the said Seuerus was slain / when he had ruled this land after most
concordaunce of writers by ye term of.v. years / and was after buried at
york, leuynge behind him two sons, that one named Geta, and that other
Bassianus.

THE.LXII. CHAPTER.
BAssianus the son of Seuerus and of the moders side a Bryton / began to
rule this land of Britayne in the year of Cirstes incarnacyon two hundred
and.xii. Of this man spekyth nothing the english cronycle. But troth yt is,
as wytnessyth Gaufride and other, that after / ye death of Seuerus strife arose
between the Brytons and the Romans, then being within the land of Brytayne.
For the commons held for their king Bassianus, for so myche as he was borne
of a Bryton woman. And upon that other party in like manner the Romans allowed
Geta for their king, because he was descended of a Romayne. And as far there
affermeth the forenamed Gaufryde / for this dyscencyon a battle was had
between the said two brethren / in ye which Geta was slain, and Bassianus
remained for king of all the land.

But from this saying varyeth greatly Eutropius, and other that write of the
chronicles of Rome. For by the^ yt is witnessed, that Geta was slain at a city
named Edessa, when he faught again the Parthiens / and Bassianus succedyd his
fader in the dignyte of emperor / which as in ye said cronycle of Rome is
testyfyed, was also called Marcus Aurelius Antonnius and Caracalla a man of
right evil condycyon, and unreasonable of lechery, so yt he lay by his
stepdame named Iuliana and weddyd her, and did other many cruel dedys / and
lastely he was slain at the forenamed city of Edessa, when he had been
emperor upon.vii. years.

In the time that Bassianus was thus king of Brytayne, one named Carassius a
Bryton of low birth, but valyant and hardy in mercyall dedys: purchaced of
the senate of Rome the keeping of ye costs of Brytayne, and to wythsta^de the
malice of strangers, as Pictes and other. By mean of this, Carassius drew
unto him many knights, and specially of the Brytons / promising to them, yt
if they would make him king he would clearly deliver them from all seruytude of
ye Romans. where thorough ye Britons (as wytnessyth Gaufryde) rebelled again
Bassianus / and with their duke and leder Carassius, arreryd again him dedely
war. By mean whereof Bassianus was slain, when he had ruled this land by
most concordaunce vi. years.

THE.LXIII. CHAPTER.
CArassius a Briton of unknown birth was of the Bryto^s made ruler, in the
year of our lord.ii. hundred and.xviii. the which as before is touched, was by
the senate of Rome deputed for a substytute or a ruler under the Romans, as
yt is showed in their chronicles, in the absence, or while Bassianus then
emperor of Rome and king of Brytayne, was occupied about the needs of the
empire. This Carassius for that he was not of power to withstand the Pictes /
or for the favor that he bare toward the^ for aydyng him again the Romans:
he gave to them the country of Albania, that now is called Scotland.

But ye shall understand, yt here is not meant all Scotland. For as wytnessyth
Policronica / this part yt was given thus to the Pictes, was the south part
of Albania, and began at Twede, and enduryd to the Scottysh see. Of the kind
of those Pictes is somewhat showed before in the story of Marius / but more
after shall be showed of them in convenient place, both of their ofsprynge and
manners.

Then yt follows in the story, when the Romans had knolege of the death of
Bassianus / anon they sent a duke from Rome named Alectus with iii. legyons of
knights, for to slay Carassius, and to subdue the Brytons to the empire. To
the which Alectus fortune was so favorable, that he chased Carassius, and
lastely slew him / when he had ruled the Brytons by most accord of writers
viii. years.

But Iacobus Philippus author of a book named Supplementu^ cronicarum says,
that in the time that Maximianus or Maxymyan surnamed Herculeus, and Dioclecyan
Dalmatheus were emperoures of Rome: they hard that this Carassius had taken
upon him to were ye purpure that only was reserved to emperors / and also yt
he ruled the realm of Brytayne as to his synguler use / and furthermore were
credybly enfourmed, that Narsetus an other substytute had or occupied the
eest lands with cruel battle / and other princes the great country of
Africa / and many other also by the instygacyon and leuyng of one named
Achilleus had subdued the country of Greece. For which said nouellys and
tidings / these two emperors, to the end to refourme all these said
rebellyons, chase unto them two noble men / of the which that one was named
Galerius, and that other Co^stancius, as cesars or fellows to rule the empire.
And yt done / the said.ii. cesars were sent with great powers, that one i^to
Africa, and ye other into Egypt. This forenamed Maximyan came with great
power of people into Britayne, and overcame the said Carassius more by gyle
then by strength / when the said Carassius had ruled the Brytons, as says the
forenamed author Iacobus Philippus, by the term of.x. years.

In the which saying appears error, for dyuersytie of time and years. For
after most accord of writers / and also by the affyrmacyon of the said
Iacobus Philippus, the said emperoures Dioclesian and Maxymyan, ruled the
empire of Rome about the year of Crystes incarnacyon two hundred and.lxxxx.
And this Carassius was ruler in Britayne long before, as in the time of
Bassianus emperor of Rome, ye reigned about the year of our lord two hundred
and.xiii. as testyfyeth Polycrocon and other.

Also a book in french called la Mere de hystoryes, which may be englyshed
ye Mother of hystoryes, says that this Carassius was first a treasourer or
such a high offycer among the Romans. By reason whereof he sought great
abundaunce of riches, and fill by reason thereof in favor of the senators of
Rome / so that finally he was made senator, and became a man of great
authorytye / in so myche that Bassianus then emperor made him protector of
the city and country of Alexandrye. But then he was supprysyd with such
pride, that he exercysed tyranny and other unlawful means, in so exceeding
manner that the country waxed weary of him, and conspired his death. wherefore
after punysheme^t done upon some of his enymyes / he feryng the sequel and
reuengement of the same: left that country and returned unto Rome / where
after he had a season restyd, he was by the senate of Rome assygned for his
sternesse unto the rule of Brytayne, with the aid of.iii. legyo^s of knights.
And so being garnyshed with all abyly mentes of war, entered this isle of
Brytayne / and with great travail subdued them to the empire / and so
continued the lives time of the emperor Bassianus.

But so sone as he was assertayned that ye emperor was slain at Edessa, as
before in the story of Bassianus is showed / thinking that among the Romans
should grow strife and dyssencyon for the electyon of a new emperor / by
reason of which strife he might the rather live so far from them without any
correctyon: confederyd with the Scotts and certain other of the Britons / and
slew many of the Romans, such of the^ as he thought would not consent to his
treason / and by that mean finally was made king of Brytayne. And so
continued, as affermeth the said author to account from his first having
rule under the Romans, unto the time yt he was slain of Alectus.viii. years,
not without exercysynge of his old accustomed tyrannyes and other unsitting
condycyons.

THE.LXIIII. CHAPTER.
ALectus a duke or consul of Rome, sent as before is said from the senate /
began to rule the Brytons, in the year of our lord.ii. hundred and.xxvi.
This in the englysh cronycle is named Allec. which when he had restoryd the
land to the subieccyon of Rome / he the^ pursued certain of the Bryto^s, that
had favored Carassius again the Romans. And in that doing used and
exercysyd many tyrannyes and exaccyons / by reason whereof he fill in great
grudge of ye Brytons. wherefore they entendynge to oppress and subdue the power
of the Romans / purchasyd and excyted a noble man of ye Britons called
Asclepiodotus and duke of Cornewayle. The which gathered a great host of the
Brytons, and made war upon the Romans, and chasyd them from country to
country, and from town to town / and lastly Alectus with his Romans drew him
to London, and there kept him for his most suertye. whereof being warned
Asclepiodotus: he with his Brytons came nere unto the said city / where by
means of prouocacyon on either party used, lastely ye Romans issued out of
the city and gave battle to the Brytons. In the which fight many fill on
either party / but ye more on the party of ye Romans / among the which was
also slain Alectus. wherefore a captayn of the Romans called Liuius Gallus,
aduertysynge this myschyef, and the great danger that the Romans were in:
drew back into the city with the Romans that were left on live, and
defendyd yt with their powers.

Thus then appears, that Alectus was slain of the Brytons / which was by
most accord of writers when he had ruled this land under ye Romans by the
term of.vi. year.

THE.LXV. CHAPTER.
ASclepiodotus duke of Cornewayle, as says Gaufryde (but after the saying of
Eutropius and Beda, he was presydente of the Pretory of Rome) began his
domynyon over the Brytons, in the year of our lord two hundred and.xxxii. The
which as before is said, with his Brytons gyrt the city of London with a
strong syege / and kept the forsayde Liuius Gallus and his Romans in streyte
hold / and finally, as affermyth mine author Gaufride, with knyghtly force
and violence entered the said city, and slew ye forenamyd Liuius Gallus nere
unto a broke there at that day rynnynge, and him threw into the said broke.
By reason whereof long after yt was called Gallus or wallus broke. And at this
day ye street where some time ran the said broke, is now called walbroke.
And after he had thus venquyshed the Romans: he held this land a certain
of time in peasyble wise, and ruled the Bryto^s with good justice / in
rewardynge and exalting the good men, and punysshynge of the evil.

In this while by styrynge of dysclaunderous and dyuylyshe persons / a grudge
was arreryd attwene the king and a duke of his land called Coill or Coillus,
the which was duke or earl of Kaercolym or Colchester / whereof the cause is
not apparaunt. But how it was, great people were assembled on both parties /
and finally met in the feld, where was faughte^ a great and strong battle.
In the which Asclepiodotus was slain / when he had reigned to the
concordaunce of other histories, and after the affermaunce of the old cronycle
by the space of.xxx. years.

THE.LXVI. CHAPTER.
COelus earl of Colchester began his domynyon over the Brytons, in the year of
the incarnacyon of Christ.ii. hou^dred.lxii. This in the english book is
called Coyll / the which guyded the land to the pleasure of the Brytons a
certain time. But as witnesses Gaufryde, when the senate of Rome had under
standing of the death of Asclepiodotus, they were joyous of the death of him,
for so myche as he had ever ben an enemy to ye empire. But for so much as at
that days was great dyssencyon among them self, as witnesses ye cronycle of
Rome: they could not conuenyently send any army of knights for to war
upon this Coelus. wherefore he continued ye longer in rest and good peace.
After the cronycle regestred within the monastery of saint Alboon / the said
holy martyr suffered his passyo^ in the year of our lord.ii. houndred lxxx.
and.vi / which should be the.xxiiii. year of this present king. But this
dyscordeth from such writers, as affermen the holy man to be martyred in
the.x. persecucyon under Dioclesian and Maximian emperors.

Nevertheless at length was sent from ye senate a noble wise man called
Constancius / the which as affermeth the forenamed auctour, had before time
subdued to the empire a great part of the country of Spain. But that saying
dysagreeth to the writing of Eutropius. For the country of Spain was not
subdued by him till after yt he was emperor.

Than it follows, when this Constancius was arrived in Brytayne with his army
/ anon Coelus assembled his Brytons. But for he dredyd the strength and fame
of this Consta^cius, he sent to him an enbassad, affyrmynge unto him co^dycyons
of peace, with grant of paymentes of the trybute, which before was denied /
or else as means Polycroni^a, within a month after the landynge of this
Constancius, Coelus was deed. wherefore the Brytons to have the more peace /
wyllyd this knight to take to wife Heleyn the daughter of Coelus, with the
possessyon of the land of Britayne / which by him was granted. Then as before
is said, Coelus dyed, when he had ruled the Brytons after most accord of
writers.xxvii. years.

THE.LXVII. CHAPTER.
COnstancius a senatoure of Rome, as says Policronica / began to rule the
Brytons in the year of our lord two hundred.lxxx. and.ix. This as before is
showed married Heleyn the daughter of Coelus last king of Brytayne. But ye shall
understand, that this Constancius was first married unto Theodora the
stepdoughter of Herculeus Maximianus / and had by her syx sons. So that this
Heleyn was his second wife, which was fairest of all maidens, and therewyth
learned, and suffycyenly lettred. She is also noted of many writers to be a
captyue or a prisoner to the Romans.

Of this Constantius little memory is left in the bretyshe or english
chronicles / except that he received of the foresaid Heleyn a son named
Constantinus / the which after for his knyghtly and marcyall dedys, was called
Constantyne the great.

But for the noble dedys of so vyctoryous a duke should not be hid, as was
this Co^stantius: therefore I shall now follow the story of Rome, which says,
that for so myche as in the time of Dioclesianus and Maximianus being
emperors, many cou^tres rebellyd again the empire: therefore the said
emperoures admyttyd this Constantius, and one Galerius as cesars, which was a
dignyte next of authoryte to the emperors. And so ye empire was at those days
guyded by two emperors, and by two cesars. This Consta^tius, as wytnessyth
Policronica made subject to the empire the Almaynes, and slew of them in one
day.lx. thousand. And after other many vyctoryous dedys, when the said.ii.
emperors had of their free wylles resygned and given over all imperial
dygnyte: this said Constantius with his forenamed fellow Galerius, were made
emperors / yt is to wit Galerius was emperor of all Iliricum, which now is
named Grecia or Greece with all the eest lands, and Co^stantius had to him
all the west lands. But he held him content with Gallia or France, and
Spain with Britayn / and granted Italia unto Galerius before said. Then he
subdued the country of Spain, as before is touched in the storye of Coelus,
and a part of Gallia / and after soiourned and abode in this land of Brytayne
in guydynge and rulynge the same with great soberness, and ordained his son
gotten upon Helayne to rule Gallia and Spain.

But for to make this story more apparent and open to ye readers, and also to
ye herers: it is here to be noted, that Dioclesianus or Dioclesian began his
empire over the Romans after most writers, in the year of our lord two
hundred.lxxx. and.vii. and he was emperor.xx. years. And this Co^stantius was
sent into Brytayne from the senate as before is said, in the second year of
ye said Dioclesian, or the year of our lord two hundred.lxxx. and.ix.

which Constancius after he had in due manner spedde the needs of the empire,
as in subduynge this land of Brytayne, as before is said: he returned again
to Rome / where he was shortly after made caesar, and so continued his life, as
before is touchyd.

And in the time of his being thus caesar and rule^ of Brytayne under ye
emperor, the blessed and holy prothomartyr, of Brytayn saint Alboon at Uerolan
was martyred / in the.x. persecucyon of the church, as wytnessyth
Policronicon. which persecucyon began, as testyfye Eusebius and Beda,
the.xviii. year of the forenamed emperors Dioclesian and Maximyan, and
endured.x. years / that is to say in ye eest under Dioclesian / and in the
weste under Ma^^^yan. The which was so sharp and fervent, that within ye
space of one month, in diverse places of the world were.xvii. thousand holy
men and women martyred for Crystes faith. And when the said emperors left or
resygned their imperyall dygnytye, and ^adde a pryuate life: this said
Constancius with his fellow Galerius, departed the empire between them, as
before is touched / so that he reigned as ruler of Brytayn by the term
of.xvii. years and more or he were emperor. And after as emperor of the
weste party of the empire* and king of Brytayn.xii. years and more. And so in
all ye said Co^stantius reigned over Brytayne xxx. years. And lastely dyed and
was buried at york, leuyng after him ye foresaid son called Co^stantinus
without mo that any me^cyon is made of.

THE.LXVIII. CHAPTER.
COnstantinus the son of Co^stancius, and of Heleyne daughter of king
Coelus, in the year of our lord.iii. hundred and.xix. was made king of
Brytayne. Antoninus archbishop of Florence, and writer of hystoryes, shows in
the first chapter of the.ix. title of his work called S^^ Antonini / that
this Constantine was made emperor, or began to rule the empire, in the year
of our lords incarnacyon.iii. hundred and.ix. which saying also affermeth
Uynce^t historyall and other authors / whereof the cause is yt the said
authors account not the years of the reygne of Constancius, but follow the
acco^pte of Galerius fellow of Constancius / which reigned as emperor but.iii.
years. After the which rule yt must nedis follow, that this Constantyne began
his empire, as the said Antoninus wytnessyth / and following ye other account
yt should varye.

Then to pursue or continue ye storye of this Constantyne / yt follows yt at
the time of the decease of Constancius his fader, he was occupied in wars in
Gallia and those perties. After whose death he by a certain term ruled
Brytayne, and the other lands, the which his fader before held in due manner.
And all be yt yt at ye day he was a mysereant and pagan: yet he used no
tyrannyes, nor compelled not the Brytons to refuse the law, and to worship
idollys, as other tyrauntes at those days used. In this while that Constantyne
ruled thus the weste part of this empire / one Maxentius which was the son of
Herculeus Maximianus, sometime fellow in the empire with Dioclesian as before is
showed / was of the knights of the pretory declared emperor. This Maxentius
was there worste of all men. And as testyfyeth Eusebius and other / he first
began mekely, to win thereby love and favor. But when he was stablysshed in
authorite / he exercysed all tyranny, and pursued all crystyens with all kind
of torment. Also he expulsed and put out from Rome and all honor his fader
Herculeus Maximianus, yt ente^dyd again to have been emperor. Of ye tyranny of
this Maxe^tius when Co^stantyne had wyttyng: he assembled a great host of
Brytons and Gallis, for to oppress the malice of the said Maxentius.

And for to rule and guide this la^d of Brytane in his absence, he deputed and
ordained a man of might called Octauius / the which Polycronica names duke of
Iewessis, that after were named west Saxons. And when the said Constantyne had
all peparyd for his voyage: he betoke the land of Brytayne unto the said
Octauius, and after spedde him upon his journey. And as he was toward his
said journey, he saw in his sleep the sign of the cross shynynge in the
fyrmament, as yt had been a brennyng light of fire / and an angel standing
thereby and saying: Constantyne toicanata / which is to mean, Constantyne by
this token thou shalt win vyctorye. when he awoke, he called this vysyon to
mind, and told unto his secrets / by whose counsayll he commanded the sign
of the cross to be peynted and set in his baners and penons, and all his
knights.

THE.LXIX. CHAPTER.
WHen Constantyne had thus ordained the sign of the cross: he spedde him
forth toward ye said tyrante Maxentius / and met with him at a bridge called
Ponte Miluium. where after long fight, he chasyd the said Maxentius / and him
with a great part of his host drowned in the water of the said bridge, when
he had reigned as emperor upon.v. years. After which victory thus had: the
said Constantyne went unto Rome / where he was received of ye senate with
most triumph. And there caused the sign of the cross to be peynted in the
right hands of the images, which the senators of old time had areryd in
worship of their vyctoryes. And under the feet of the images / he caused to be
written: This is the sign and token of the living god, that may not be
ouercomen.

Soon after this, Consta^tyne was conuertyd from his pagan law unto Crystes
faith, by virtue of ye blessed Uernacle as some have been / or by the good
doctrine of that blessed pope saint Siluester first of y^ name / the which was
made pope in ye year following Crystes incarnacyon.iii. hundred and.xiii. Then
Constantyne opened the prysons, and desstroyed the temples of false gods, and
dedycate them in the worship of god and his saints. He also opened them that
tofore were shytte and kept close / and caused dyuyne service in them to be
said, and gave to the church of Rome first possessions. And also he ordained
that ye bishop of Rome should be hedde of all bishops, and all other to be
obedyent unto him. He also bare claye upon his shoulders to the foundacyon of
saint Peter's church, as wytnessyth Policronica and other.

Of this first indowement of the church are diverse things showed, as
reherseth Gwaldus Cambrens. saint Hierom, and other / the which I over pass
for lengthynge of time of this work.

And while that Constantyne was thus occupied in Rome: his mother Heleyne then
being far from him, and herynge that he was become a Christian man: sent unto
him letters of recommendacyon, that he had forsaken the worshyppynge of
idollys. But she dyspreysed him, in that that he worshypped a man that was
nailed upon a cross. But after receyte of these letters / he wrote answer to
his mother, that he should suffycyently prove, that he byleued and worshypped
him, that was first creator and maker of the world. And not only a man but
also god and man, with diverse other points touching the faith, which I
ouerpasse.

For resonynge and proof of this, was after assygned.vii. score jews / and
Siluester with a certain number of christian clerks, to dyspute the artycles of
Crystes faith. where after diverse miracles showed, and good proof made by holy
scripture: the said jews were confounded / and the said Heleyne was
converted unto the faith of Crystes church / and traueyled soon after to
Jerusalem, where she by her industrye and labor fande out the holy cross,
with the.iii. nails that our lord was nailed with to the same cross. whereof
she left there a part / and the other dele was brought unto Bizancium now
called Constantyne noble. which city the said Constantyne greatly augmentyd
with excellent building / and therein also caused to be arcryd a church of
meruaylous beautye, and named yt Sophia. when the emperor had received the
foresaid part of the cross with the.iii. nails: he after some authors put
two of the said nails in the brydell of his horse, which he used in battle.
And the third he cast or caused to be cast (as wytnessyth saint Ambrose) in
a swalowe of the sea called mare Adriaticu^. which swalowe was before that time
so peryllous, that uneaths any ship escapyd that danger / and garnysshed
the cross with many rich stones freyt with gold / and after with great
reverence conueyde it to Rome, as in diverse hystories is declared. Then this
Co^stantyne removed the emperyall see unto his city of Constantyne the noble /
and there for the more party kept his emperyall honor, and other emperors
in like wise after him. By reason whereof the emperors were long after called
emperors of Constantyne noble. This man was so mighty and mercyall in his
feats and all his dedys / that for his more honor he had an addycyon put
to his name, and was called for his great might and power, Constantyne the
great. He was also the first christian emperor / and did many notable acts
for the weal of Crystes faith. Among the which seven are noted by the
forenamed Antoninus, in the ix. title of ye second part of his work before
named: whereof the first was that Christ should be worshypped as god thorough
the cyty of Rome.

The second was, that who so of Jesus Christ spoke any blasphemy, he should be
grievously punyshed.

The third was, what person that did any iniurye or wrong to a Christian man /
he should be depryuyd or put to ye loss of half his goods. The fourth, that
like as the emperor of Rome is head of all te^porall princes: so the bishop
or pope of Rome is head of all bishops. The fyfte, that what person fled to
the church for his sauegarde or suerty / that there he should be defended from
all peril and danger. The syxte, that no man should presume to buyld any
temple or church within any city or town, without the special license of
his bishop. The seventh, that every prince should give the.x. part of his
possessions to the buyldyng and meynteynyng of chirches.

The which law he first executed / and after with a pykax or mattoke with
his own hand, brake the ground where as now stands saint Peter's church.
and.xii. cophyns or treys full of earth he bare away upon his shulders / as
wytnessyth the foresaid Antoninus and other.

But after those manyfolde good dedys / he fill into the heresye called
Ariannys heresy. By mean whereof he was so blinded, that he then became an
enymye to Cristes church, and persecuted cryste^ men, and exyled ye pope
Siluester / or as some mean ye said Siluester fled the cite for fere.

For this as wytnessyth Iacobus Philippus and other writers / this Constantyne
was smyten with the evil of lepry. For curing whereof iii. thousand children
were brought to the^perours paleys to be slain, yt he in the blood of them
might be bathed, and so cle^syd of his lepry. But when he saw the childern and
the moders sorowyng for them, he was moved with pytye, and said: the dygnitye
of the^pyre comes of myldnesse. For yt is demyd, that he should dye ye sleeth a
child in battle. Then what crueltye were this to sle so many innocents
wylfully? yet better yt were to us to dye and save those chylders lives / then
to get a cruel life by ye death of so many innocents.

For this myldnesse it is read that saint Peter and Poule apperyd to him the
night following, warnyng him to send again for Siluestre ye pope, and he
should be by him restoryd to perfytte health. which was done, and he heled as
the legende of saints bears witness.

Thus have I showed to you a part of the dedys of Constantyne / which if I
should co^tynue the hole process of his reygne, that endured as emperor by
the space of.xxx. years: I should thereof make a large volume. But it concernyth
nothing of thentent of this work, as touching the land of Brytayne:
therefore I woll return my style to Octauius from whom I have made a long
digressyo^.

THE.LXX. CHAPTER.
IN this passetyme while Constantyne occupied him in needs of thempyre as above
is showed: Octauius being lieutenant in the land of Brytayne under
Constantyne, ruled the land to the pleasure of the Brytons a certain of time.
But when he perceived that he was in favor of them, and that Constantyne was
far from him / casting also in his mind, that ye said Constantyne being
then emperor, would or might not lightly return into Britayn: he therefore
with help of his affynyte and fre^des, withstode the Romans left in
Brytayne of Constantyne / and vsurpyd the rule and domynyon of ye land. whereof
when certayntie came to ye knowledge of Co^stantyne: he in all have sent into
Brytayne a duke named Trahern^, the which was uncle unto Heleyne mother of
Constantyne. when this Trahern^ was arrived in Brytayne with iii. legions of
knights: anon Octauius made toward him with his Brytons / and with him met
nere the city, then called Kaerperis, now called Port chestre or Porchestre /
but more verily in a field nere unto the city of Kaerguent, that now is called
wynchester / which field then was named Maesurian. The.ii. hosts met with
great ire, and fough ten long while. But in ye end Trahern^ was compelled to
forsake the field / and after drew with his Romans toward Albania or
Scotland. whereof Octauius being warned, followed him / and in the country of
westmerlande gave unto him the second battle, where then Octauius was chasyd
and Trahern^ was vyctour / the which pursued Octauius so egerly, that he
compelled him to forsake the land of Britayne, and to sail into the country
of Norway for his sauegarde.

But yt was not long after, that the said Octauius gaderyd a new people of
Brytons and Norways, and was ready to return again into Britayne. In which
time, as testyfyeth mine author Gaufryde / an earl of Brytayne that entyerly
loved Octauius, by treason slew the said Trahern^ a little before the landynge
of the said Octauius. which shortly subdued the Romans and ye land to his
own use. This should be after most concordaunce of writers, when Constantyne
with also the aid of Trahern^, had ruled this land of Brytayne by the term
of.x. years.

THE.LXXI. CHAPTER.
OCtauius duke of ye Iessis, otherwise westsaxons / began his reygne over the
Brytons, in the year of our lord.iii. hundred.xxix. This in the english book
is called Octauian / the which as testyfyeth Gaufryde, gaderyd in short while
after so great plentye of treasoure and richesse, that he feryd no man / and
ruled this land in peasyble wise. So that of him or of his acts is left
little memory / except that when he was fallen into age, by the counsayll of
Brytons he sent unto Rome for a noble young man of the aliy of Heleyne, mother
unto Constantyne called Maximianus, as after more plainly shall be showed: all be
yt that some aduysed him to make one Conan Meryadok his cosyne, king after
him. But by the instant labor of Caradok then duke of Cornewayll / Octauius
lastly sent unto Rome Mauryce the son of the forenamed Caradok / to bring or
convey the said Maximianus into Brytayne, for to mary the only daughter of
Octauius / and by reason thereof, to enjoy ye realm of Brytayne. This
Maximianus is of some auctour named Maximius / the which as wytnessyth
Gaufride, was the son of Leonyne, brother to Heleyne, and uncle unto
Co^stantyne the great. which saying affermeth also Iacobus Philippus author of
a book called Supplementum cronicarum / wherein he names the said Maximianus a
knight of the Bryton blood.

Then it follows, when the forenamed Maurice had spedde his needs, so yt he
came to the presence of Maximianus, and showed theffecte of his Message: the
said Maximianus to him granted, and in all haste prepared for his voyage into
Brytayne / and shortly after with convenient cu^pany landed at Southampton.
whereof being warned Conan Meryadok: he with a certain of knights of his
affinytye, was purposed to have frayed with the said Maximianus, and to have
destressed him / for so much as he well knew, that by him he should be pu^ from
the rule of the land. But this purpose was let by the commandment of the
king or otherwise, so yt the said Maximianus was conveyed safely to the kings
presence, and shortly after with consent of the more party of his lords, gave
his daughter unto the said Maximianus with possessyon of this isle of Brytayne.
The which marriage solemnysed and endyd, the said Octauius dyed shortly after.
But how long he reigned, none of the foresaid authors testystye / except
diverse of them agree, yt he continued his reygne till ye time that Gracyan and
Ualentinyan ruled the empire / the which began to reygne the year of our
lord.iii. hundred.lxxx. and.ii. By which reason yt must follow, that the
said Octauius reigned at the leest.liiii. years.

THE.LXXII. CHAPTER.
MAximianus or Maximius ye son of Leonine and cosyn Germayn of Constantyne the
great / was made king of Bryton, in the year of our lord.iii. hundred.lxxx.
and.ii. This in the english book is named Maximian / the which as testyfyeth
Gaufryde and other, was stalworth and mighty of his hands.

But for he was cruel and pursued somdele the christian: he therefore of all
writers is called Maximianus the tyrant. Attwene this and Conan before named,
was strife and debate / and diverse conflyctes attwene the^ was foughten, in the
which either of them spedde dyuersly / all be yt that lastely they were made
friends. So that Maximianus reigned a season in quyete, and gaderyd richesse,
and treasour not all with out grudge. Lastely he was moved and exyted to war
upon the Galls / through which counsel he with a great host of Bryto^s sailed
into Armorica that now is called little Brytayne / and bare him so knyghtly,
that he subdued that country unto his lordshyp / and after gave the said
country to Conan Meryadok, to hold of him and of the kyngees of great Brytayn
for ever. And then commanded the said land to be called little Brytayne.

For this vyctory his knights proclaimed him emperor. where thorough he being
the more exaltyd in pride / passed farther in the lands of the emprye, and
vyctoryously subdued a great part of Gallia or France, and all Germania. For
this deed / diverse authors account him false and periuryd. wherefore yt should
seem that before his departing from Rome, he was sworn unto Gracian and
Ualentynyane emperors, that he should never after claim any part of the
empire. And also for the brekynge of this oath / he was after chalengyd or
blamed of saint Martyne bishop of Turon. To whom he answered that he was
compelled of his knights to take upon him as emperor / or else he should of
the^ have been slain. Nevertheless the said bishop showed unto him, that
for his untruth he should not long prospere or reygne.

After that word was brought unto the emperors, that Maximianus had with
hard bataylles thus subdued Gallia and Germania: Gracianus with a great host
came down to resyste him. But when he hard of ye marciall deeds of Maximianus
/ he was a drade and fled back to the city of Lugdun or Lyo^s in France.
where after the said Gracianus was slain / and his brother Ualentinian was
compelled to flee to Constantyne the noble. Then Maximianus to have the more
strength to wythsta^de his enimyes: made his son named Uictour fellow of the
emperor. In this while that Maximianus warred thus in Italy: Conan Meryadoke,
to whom as before is said Maximianus had given the land of little Brytayne /
for so much as he and his knights had no will to mary the daughters of
Frenschmen, but rather to have wives of their own blood: therefore this Conan
sent messagers unto Dionotus then duke of Cornewayll, and chyfe ruler of
Brytayne / willing him to send his daughter Ursula with a certain number of
virgyns, to be coupled to him and to his knights in marriage. The which soon
after prepared according ye request of Conan, the foresaid Ursula acco^panyed
with.xi. thousand vyrgyns, and were sent by her said father toward little
Brytayne / as witnesses the english cronycle, Gaufryde, and also Policronica.

But yt should appear by the saying of Antoninus, Iacobus Philippus, and other
writers / that this Ursula with her company should not be sent forth of much
Brytayne, nor married about this time / but in the time of Marcianus being
emperor / the which began his empire after most accord of writers, in the
year of our lord.iiii. hundred and.li. Of the martyrdom of these maidens
diverse authors write dyuersly. wherefore I remytte them that will have farther
understanding in this matter, unto ye legende of saints read yearly in the
church, where they may be suffycyenly taught and informed.

THE.LXXIII. CHAPTER.
ANd as before is showed Maximianus being occupied in wars in Italy: two
dukes named Gwanus, and Melga / the which as Gaufryde testyfyeth and other,
were sent from Gracian and Ualentinian emperors, to punyshe and subdue the
Brytons that favored the party of Maximianus / warred sore upon the costs of
great Brytayne, and occupied a great part of Albania. whereof when Maximianus
had knowledge / he sent into great Brytayne a knight and captayn named
Gracianus or Gracyan. The which with two legyons of knights bare him so
knyghtly / that in short process he chasyd the said.ii. dukes into Irlande /
and held the land of Brytayne in good peace to the behalf of Maximianus.

In this while Maximianus contynuyng his war again the empire / and
entendynge to be emperor: Theodocius named the elder then emperor of the eest
part of the world, herynge of the death of Gracyan, and chasynge of
Ualentynyan, with a great power spedde him toward the said Maximianus. And
shortly after at a city in Italy named Aquilia / took the said Maximianus,
and him behedded. when knowledge of the death of Maximianus was comen to Gracyan,
that then had the rule of much Brytayn: he seasyd the land and made him self
by strength king of Brytayne / when or after that Maximianus had governed the
same, by most accord of writers by the space of.viii. years.

THE.LXXIIII. CHAPTER.
GRacianus the which of Gaufryde is called Municeps, yt may be taken for an
hired or waged knight, or for ye keeper of gifts, or berynge the chyef rule of
a city: began to rule the Brytons, in the year of our lord.iii.
hundred.lxxx. and x. The which exercysyd all tyranny and exaccyon upon his
subjects / for the which he was had in wonder full hatered among the Brytons
/ and among them cast and sought many ways and means for his destruccyon /
but he by diverse means escapyd their dangers, and punysshed grievously all
such fautours. wherefore lastly as says Gaufryde they fill upon him of an hole
assent and killed him / when he had reigned or more verily usurped by the term
of.iiii. years.

THE.LXXV. CHAPTER.
AFter that Gracian was thus slain of the Brytons / the foresaid Gwanus and
Melga knowing the Brytons to be without head or ruler: assembled also people
and returned into much Brytayne / wasting and brennynge on every side, and
destroyed great plenty of Brytons, as wytnessyth Gaufryde and other.

But Policronica says that when the Romans knew of the death of Gracyan /
they sent a knight called Constantyne to have the rule of Brytayne and other
countrees there about. But he was after demed an enemy to the empire, for
harm and s^athes by him done in France. wherefore by commandment of Honorius
then emperor / a knight or earl called Constancius was sent again the
forenamed Constantine / and slew him at a place or town called Arelet. After
this the Bryto^s were again vexed by the Pictes and other strange nacyons. By
reason whereof they were constrained to send again to Rome: requyrynge them of
aid, upon condycyon that they should always be subject unto Rome. The which
request and promise thus herd of the senate: Honorius aforenamed was sent
into Britayne with a legyon of knights / which is.vi. thousand.vi.
houndred.lxvi. The which legyon with help of the Brytons / chasyd ye foresaid
Pictes and other enemies / and taught the Bryto^s to make a wall overthwart
the land from see to see / that is to mean from the water of Humber to the
Scottyshe see, and ordained the^ wardeynes and kepars of the wall / and after
returned to Rome. This wall as testyfyeth Policronica, was made of turuys /
and strechyd from Pemilton^ or Penulton^, unto ye city of Acliut or Acliud.
But for this wall was of small strength: the enemies before named dystroyed
certain parties of this said wall, and ouerrode the country, and took great
prays daily, and did as myche harm as they had done before time. wherefore the
Brytons were constrained to seek for new socour to the Romans. Then did
Foloaynes send an other legion / the which again chased the said Pictes and
other enemies / and made than a wall of stone of the thycknesse of.viii. foot,
and in heyght.xii. foot, in the self place where before Seuerus had made a
dyke and wall of turfes. And yt done the Romans comforted and exorted the
Brytons to be manly and corageous to wythstande their enemies / showing to them
forther that they should trust to their own strength, for so myche as the
Romans being so far from the^, might not lightly come from so far with an
army of knights / and also not without great cost and travail. After which
monycyon and exortacyon thus given to the Brytons, by the mouth of the
archebysshop of London, with other instruccyons apperteynynge to the feytes of
war: the said Romans took leave of ye Brytons, as though they should after
ye time no more return i^to Britayne

But it was not long after that the Romans were thus departed / that the
Pictes and Scotts began to break out of their de^nes and caves. These two
nacyons after some authors, should seem to be one. But by the declaracion of
Ranulphe in his.lviii. chapyter of his first book, they should appear to be
two manner of peoples / or at the last dwelled in two sundry countres. As the
Pictes in the northsyde of Scotland, or after Beda in ye southsyde, which
conteyneth Galeway and Lodeway. And the Scotts by ledyng of their duke Renda
should possede Irland: all be yt after an arm of the north part of the sea
passing by Deyra, should depart the Pictes. But in the time that ye Saxons
ruled the land / ye Scotts by manner of treason slew the mighty men and rulers
of the Pictes / and so after kept that country for their own. These two
nacyons dyscorde in manners, but not in clothing and in faith, and in couetyse
of the shedynge of man's blood, they be one.

Then as before is said, these Pictes and Scotts entered the land, and brake
ye wall before made, and slew the wardeyns thereof / and after spoiled and
robbed the cou^tres, and chased so cruelly the commons and other, that they
were comfortless. By mean whereof the Britons were brought in such danger
and myserye / that either of them robbed and slew other. And over this ye
ground was untilled and vnsowen / whereof ensued great scarcytye and hunger:
and after hunger ensued death.

Thus after one mychyef came an other / as death upon death, and sorrow upon
sorrow, which fill upon them by strife medlyd with the great hunger. The which
mysery in this wise co^tynuynge the chyef of them took advise among them self
/ and finally concludyd that for remedy of this myschyef, they would send
unto Aecius then being king in France. which Aecius was master of the
chyualry of Honorius then emperor, and occupied in wars in a part of
Gallia. To this Aecius was sent writing, whereof theffecte was this. To thy
manhood Aecius be it understood the mysery of the Brytons / the which
strange nacyons chase unto the sea / and the sea dryueth us again to strange
nacyons. Of the which ensew two manner of carayns / ye one by violence of ye
enemies swerd, and that other by wilful drownyng. But all their writing was
but in vain / so that from the said Aecius, nor yet from the Romans, had
they no refuge nor comfort. In this while the hunger increased / and the people
were so ouerset with their enymyes, that many of the^ were as yolden and took
party again their own neighbors. And ye other that were of more power, and
dwelled farther within the land / defendyd them in their best manner. Lastely
the noble and wysest of them / and specially ye archbishop of London with other
of the land, kept a counsayll at London. By the which yt was concludyd yt an
embassade should be made unto the king of little Brytayne, to impetre and ask
of him aid and comfort in their great necessyte. Of which ambassade the
said archebyshop was appointed for the chyef and pryncypall / the which is
named of Gaufryde Guethelinus / and of ye english cronycle Gosseleyne. which
said bishop with the other unto him assygned, so spedde them, that in short
and conuenyent time they came unto the presence of Aldroenus then king of
little Brytayn / and to him declared the effect of their message. The which
having compassyon of the lamentable request made unto him by the said
ambassade / after advise taken of his lords, he granted unto the bishop,
upon condycyon that if god sent to them victory of their enemies, that they
should crown his brother king of great Brytayne / the which he entendyd to
send thither with a conuenyent army. which condycyon the said bishop with
the other gladly acceptyd and fermely granted.

So that thus it is apparent unto you, that this land was long without hedde
or gouernoure / which length of time is of some authors determined to be
long, and of some but short / so that little certentye is thereof left.

wherefore I have showed and driven certain reasons after mine opinion and dull
mind, in the table before expressed / wherein it shall appear under correccyon,
that the said season and time of this land being without king, to rekyn from
the last year of Gracian unto the first year of Constantyne no we next
ensuynge, was fully.xxxix. year.

FINIT TRIBVYVM.
YE shall also forthermore understand, that here ends finally ye trybute and
domynyon of the Romans. For after this day they had no trybute to them paid
/ nor no Romayn prince after this days ruled this land of Brytayne. The
which trybute and domynyon endured from the.ix. year of Cassybellan, unto the
time of Seuerus by the term of two houndred and.lv. years. And from the time
of Seuerus unto the first year of Gracyan a houndred.lxxx. and.iii. years. And
from the first year of Gracyan unto the last year of this mysery.xliii. years.
So that from the year that Julius Caesar made first this I Will of Brytayne
trybutary unto the empire / unto the last year or end of this foresaid misery,
flowyd.iiii. houndred.xxxi. years. But Polycronyca says that the Romans
ruled and had trybute of this land about.iiii. houndred.lxx. years. which
saying is full like to be true, if the end of their dominyon be determined at
ye last departing of the Romans out of this land.

ANd thus here an end of the iiii. part of this work / for so myche as the
fornamed Gracianus was the last of Romayne kings yt reigned in myche Brytayne
/ or that no trybute was after this day paid unto the Romans.

wherefore in gyuynge thanks to that most blessed vyrgyne our lady saint
Mary, for the good exployte and speed had to this time, and to opteyne her
most habundau^t grace for the perfourmaunce of the rest or other dele of the
same: I here with all humbleness salute her with the iiii. joy of the
forenamed vii. joys, the which begins, Gaude nexu voluntatis. etc.
O excellent pryncesse and queen celestyall /
Be joyous and glad, for thou eternally
By knot of charity, and dygnyte pryncypall
Art to the highest joined celestyally
That thou may impetre, what is necessary
For thy servants, thou virgyn most pure
Of thy swetteste Ihesu, and obtain it sure.


This.iiii. part to be accounted from ye first year of Seuerus, unto the last
end or year of this misery: includes of years.CC. and.xxvi.

Thus ends the fourth part.
THE FYFT PART.
THE.LXXVI. CHAPTER.
HEre according to the promise made by me in ye beginning of this work: I
shall bring in and show unto you the beginning of the reygne of ye kings of
France / and set them in such a direct order, that it shall be apparent to the
reder, that it shall be certainly known what king reigned in France when such a
king reigned in England. And also I shall somdele touch the acts and dedys
of the said kings of France / so yt the chronicles of both realms shall in
this work appear, and the names of the princes which at ones reigned in
England and in France.

Then for the perfourmau^ce of the same, first is to be noted, that after the
subuercyon of Troy by the Greeks (as in ye beginning of this work is showed)
diverse Troyans being under the rule of nobles of the same lygnage, as Helenus
son of Pryamus, Eneas, Anthenorus, and other / serchyd ye world and landyd
in diverse countries. As Helenus in Greece or Grecia / Eneas in Italia or Italy /
and so of other among. The which nobles one named Turchus, and an other named
Franco cosyn Germayns / as Turchus the son of Troylus, and Fra^co or Francio
the son of Ector / which said two cosyns serchyng their adventure: after many
and diverse dangers and ieopardyes passyd by the sea, lastly landed in a
country called Tracea or Tracia in Greece. And there with their company
enhabyted them nere unto a river called Dion. And after they had continued
there a season of time: Turchus departed with a certain of Troyans from his
said cosyn Francio / and sailed after into a country called Faso the less.
where he with his people dwelled long time. which Faso should be in the
country of Sithia. Of this Turchus dyscendyd as says ye French cronycle.iiii.
manner of people. That is to say, Austrogothis, Ipogothis, wandalis, and
Normans. And Fra^cio or Fra^co removed after with his company into a country
named Pannoma / which country now should seem to be a part of Hungery or
ioynynge nere to it. There nere unto a river called Thanais they builded them a
city, and named it Sicambria / by reason whereof they were long after called
Sicambri. They were also named Franci, as says the French cronycle, after
this man Francio. Turpinus that wrote the gestes of the great Charles / says
that when Charles had made the country of Spain subject, and was returned
into France: he made all the bond me^ dwelling about or nere unto Paris or
in all Gallia fre, in the wourshyppe of saint Denis and of saint Iamys of
Galis / upon condycyon that they should yearly offer four pence to this work
of saint Denis church. By reason whereof they were named Franci, as men freed
that to fore were bond. Policronica says they were named Franci of Ualentynyan
the emperor, as it were for fyersnes. But how so ever they came by that name
they were called Franci as Frenschemen.

This said people were also named long time Galli / and were trybutaries to Rome
and under their rule, till the time of Ualentinyan emperor, about the year of
Christ.iii. hou^dreth and.lxvi. This Ualentinyan having the rule of the west
part of ye world made war upon a people called Aleynys, that dwelled nere
unto the forenamed Gallis. These Aleynys were egre of fight / and over yt they
were so closyd with fennys and marrys, that the Romans might not win to
them by force / whereof they often rebellyd again the empire. wherefore in the
end Ualentinyan considering the fyersnes of ye Gallis, with their nere
dwelling unto the said Aleynys / couenau^ted with them if they would subdue
the said people, they should have releace of.x. years trybute. which
covenant well and suffycyently confermed to the Gallis / they in short while
after by their knyghthode and polycy, subdued or utterly chased the said
Aleynys. For the which deed they continued the foresaid.x. years without
payenge of any trybute. which.x. years run and expyred / ye Romans again
claymed the former accustomed trybute. To whom it was answered, yt they had
redeemed the said tribute with the price of their blood, and ought not any more
to be charged with any such trybute.

with which answer the Romans being sore dyscontentyd / made new war
upon ye said Sica^bris. Of which war the Sicambris or Gallis had the worse,
and were chasyd from their city of Sicambria. Then as wytnessyth Polycronica
and other, they drew nere unto the water of Ryne / and grew in short
process to such a multitude and of such strength, that they in short while
after by ledynge of their.iii. dukes named Marcomirus, Somomus or Simon, and
Genebaur / warred upon the lands of the empire, and such as were subject
unto ye same. whereof Theodosius surnamed the younger then emperor being
warned: he anon sent.ii. of his dukes with a great host for to subdue the
said Gallis or Sicambris. But they defendyd them so knyghtly, yt the said
dukes were chasyd / and as wytnessyth master Robert Gagwyne, a great number
of the Romans were slain.

THE.LXXVII. CHAPTER.
AFter this victory thus opteyned by the Sicambris: they waxed so strong that
they wan from the Almaynes diverse towns and strong holds within Germania.
And after that they opteyned the famous city named Treueris / which as
wytnessyth the aucthour of Cronica cronicarum, was first foundyd in the time of
the patryarche Abraham, before the incarnacyo^ of Christ a thousand.ix.
houndred.lxv. years. And so daily wan upon the nacyo^s adioynynge to them, till
they came to the river of Seyn / where they restyd them, and builded the
country all there about. In so much that they than named them self Franci / as
men freed and out of all danger of the empire of Rome / and their land after
them they named France, which syns that time is greatly encreasyd. So that at
this day it is a country of great wealth and honor, and conteyneth many
prouynces and lordshyppes / as after the affyrmau^s of Policronica is touchyd
in ye.xxvii. chapyter of his first book / where it is showed that Gallia which
now is France, had that name Gallia of whytenesse of people. This Gallia or
France has in the North side, Germania / in the Eest, the river of Ryne / in
the Southest, the Alpis or the high mountains / and in the west, the sea
Occean, which is called both Brytannicum and Gallicu^, which is to mean,
English see and French see. For yt departyth England and France, in the
south see of myddell eerth, yt wassheth about by the the prouynce of Narbon. In
the time of Julius Caesar, Gallia was departed in three / but for diverse happes
that befell after in that land / the country and land that stretches from the
Ryne to Seyn^, is now called Gallia Belgica, which is very France. And that
country that stretches from Seyn^ to ye river of Leyr, is called Gallia
Lugdunensis / whereof the over part hight or is named Burgundia that is
Burgoyne, and the nether part is Nestria or Normandye.

And the country that stretches from the river of Leyr to the river of
Geround, is called Gallia Aquitania / which is Guyan, and stretches out of the
eest from the river of Roon^, unto the west Occean. whereof the over part
thereof hight Celtica, which is to mean Heavenly, because that high mountains
be therein.

From the water of Gerounde to the sea of middell eerth, and to the Mountains
called mo^tes Pireni or great hills of Spain / is clepyd Gallia Narbonensis.
And now a part thereof is called Gothia, and some Uasconia, which is to mean
Gascoyne.

And so Gallia is closyd about with three noble waters / with the river of Ryne
in the north side / with the river of Roone in the eest / and with the Brytyshe
occean in ye weste. In Gallia or France ben many noble cytyes, whereof Paris is
head and pryncypall / which in the first foundacyon was clepyd Parydes, after
Parides a Troyane, that departed from Troy with Eneas and other, as wytnessyth
Carinus and other writers of histories. But the french cronycle says it was
first founded by ye Sycambris, and named by them Lutecia, before the
incarnacyon of Christ.iii. hundred.lxxx. and.xv. years. And in the while that
the forenamed Marcomyrus was as there chyefe hedde and governor: for the more
beauty of the name / and also in mind of Paris son of Pryame king of Troy,
of the which he was lynyally descendyd, he therefore changed the name, and
commanded yt to be called Paris.

In Gallia also be these prouynces and lordshyppes following / Braban,
Flaundres, Normandye, Pycardye, Brytayn the less, Poytowe, Gascoyne, Guyan,
Tolowse, Burgoyne, Angeo, and Main, Prouynce, Champayne, and Aluerne. All
which sygnouries and lordeshippes belonged or apperteyned unto the crown of
France / all be yt that diverse of them has been given out by marriage or
otherwise. So that the king of France claymeth to be chyef lord of them,
and at this day has the possessyon of them / except Burgoyne, Flaundres
Braban, and Normandye / for the which he is trybutarye unto the king of
England.

Then yt folowyth, when the said Gallis or Frenchmen had thus conquered
these foresaid countres, or the more part of them, or at less made them
unto the said Gallis trybutary: then the forenamed Marcomyrus as their chyef
hedde or governor, closyd cytyes with strong walls, and builded strong
holds and castelles / and after dyed, leuyng after him a son garnyshed with
all knyghtly virtue, named Pharamundus or Pharamonde.

Francio. THE.LXXVIII. CHAPTER.
PHaramundus the son of Marcomyrus beforenamed / was after the death of his said
fader, made or ordained the first king of Frenchmen, by the agreement of
hystoryes / and also as affermeth master Robert Gagwyne and other, in the year
of our lords incarnacion four hundred and.xx. And of the world, or after ye
creacyon of the first Adam following the account of this work, as before is
showed, five thousand vi. hundred and.xix. After Brute began his domynyon in
this isle of Brytayne, a thousand, five hundred and.lvi. And the year of mysery
of the Brytons.xxvi.

Of this Pharamundus is little thing left in memory / except that mine
authoure Gagwyne testyfyfyeth, that he made certain laws which long time
enduryd after. But for the names of the laws and use of them be derke to
english understanding: therefore I ouerpasse them, and follow the story /
which affermeth, that when the said Pharamonde had ruled the Frenchmen well
and nobly by the space of.xi. years, he dyed / and left after him a son
named Clodio Crinitus or Capellatus.

THE.LXXIX. CHAPTER.
CLodio ye son of Pharamonde was made king of France, in the year of our
lord.iiii. hundred and xxxi. And the.xxxvii. year of the foresaid mysery of
Brytons. The which as before is said was surnamed Crinitus and Capellatus / by
reason whereof the kings of Frenchmen long time after, were called Criniti.
This to augment his lordshyppe, made war upon a people called Turynges / and
by great and sore fight made them at length subject to him / which country as
says the french cronycle, is a part of Almayne. And at this day or time of
this Clodio his reygne / the Romans had no more of the land of Gallia or
France in their rule, then that which lies from ye river of Leyr unto ye
river of Ryne, which is called Gallia Lugdunensis. And when he had thus
subdued the Turynges / he then sent his espyes over the Ryne to se what
strength they were of, that inhabyted that country. And after report to him
brought of the said espyes, that the country was fertyll and rich, and the
people thereof but of small defense: he with his army over spread the country /
and after shortly beseged the cytyes of Cambrey, and Turney and them wanne.
But in ye city of Turney was a certain number of Romans / which manfully
defendyd the town long time. And when they perceived that they might no
longer hold the town / they then manfully issued out, and gave to the
Frenchmen hard battle. But fortune was to them froward / so that they were
dystressyd. After which countres and towns thus gotten by Clodio, with other
vyctoryous deeds by him done: he lastely dyed, when he had ruled the
frenchmen.xix. years without issue of his body.

Anglia.
Now then let us return unto tharchbyshop of London and the other Brytons
being in Britayne the less / the which upon the promise before rehearsed,
received of Albroenus king of little Brytayne, his brother named Constantyne /
ye which with a certain number of knights shortly after la^ded at Totnesse in
much Brytayne, and gaderyd to them the flower of ye Bryto^s which before
their landynge were hid in diverse places of the land. By whose power and
marcyall knyghthod / the enymyes of the land were she^dfully chasyd and
utterly confounded. which victory thus by the Brito^s obtained: they of one
mind conueyde their chefetayne Constantyne unto the town of Kaercegent now
called Cicestre / and there crowned him (according to the promise made unto
his brother) king of this isle of the more Brytayne.

THE.LXXX. CHAPTER.
COnstantinus the brother of Aldroenus king of little Brytayn, was crowned
king of myche Brytayne, in the year of our lord four hundred and.xxxiii /
and the third year of Clodio then king of France. The which guyded the
land with such manhood and polyce, that he kept yt from danger of enymyes /
and for time of his life held yt in god quyete and rest. Of this Co^stantyne
is little mind made or left in writing / except that he receyuyd of his
wife three sons / the which he named Constante, Aurely, or Co^stantius,
Aurelius, Ambrosius, and Uter, which was surnamed Pendragon.

But for he saw and perceived, that his eldest son named Constant was dull
and insolent of wit: he therefore made him a monk in the monasterye of saint
Amphyabyll of wynchester / which monasterye at this day is called saint
Suythynes abbey. And to the other two brethren he betoke unto Guethelinus
archbyshoppe, to noryshe and bring forth.

In the court of this Co^stantyne, as witnesses Gaufryde, was a Pict that was
myche loved and greatly fauouryd of Constantyne / so that he might at all
times come to the kings presence. The which being an erraunt traytoure / and
sechynge conuenyent time to execute his detestable treason: by a secret mean
slew the king in his chamber / when he had been king, after most writers
ten years

THE.LXXXI. CHAPTER.
COnstantius son of Constantyne, by mean of Uortigernus was made king of
Brytayne, in the year of our lord four hundred and.xliii. This as before is
touched, for so myche as his fader thought he was not very apt to take so great
a charge as to govern the land after him, became a relygious man in the
monastery before named. Or as some writers mean, the said Constante of pure
devotion that he had to god and saint Amphiabyl, made him self a monk
vnwyttynge the king his fader and other his friends.

But how or in what manner so ever he became a monk / troth it is that
Uortigerus or Uortigernus after ye death of Constantyne, found such means
that he was taken out of the abbey, and crowned king of Brytayne. By mean
whereof the said Uortiger had all the rule of the land so that Constante had
but only the name. This Uortyger then considering the innocencye and myldenes
of the king / cast in his mind how he might be king him self. And among
other means / found to have about ye kings person an hundred Pictes, or
after some Scotts / ye which he ordained for a guard for the kings person.
which done / he bare him in such wise again the Pictes by means of great
gifts and otherwise, that they at length had Uortyger in such favor, that
they feryd not to say openly that Uortyger was more worthy to be king the^
Constant. In this while Uortyger gatte into his possessyon the kings treasour
/ and what was of him commanded was done, though other thereat murmured and
grudge. And ever in right and wrong he favored the foresaid Pictes or
Scotts. The which at length perceiving his corrupt mind, when they saw
that they had conuenyent time, fill upon the king, and him slew or murderyd.

After which cruel deed by them done / they presentyd the head of Constante
unto Uortiger, then being at London. whereof when he was ware / to the end that
the Brytons should think that deed to be done again his mind and will: wept
and made semblaunt of all sorrow and heuenes / and caused the said hundred
knights to be taken in all haste after, and them by dome and law of ye la^d
to be be heddyd / by reason whereof he was taken not culpable, or innocent of
the kings death. when the kings death was known to such persons as had the
keeping of the two younger brethren, Aurelius and Uter: they in all haste for
the more sauegarde of them, fled into little Brytayne / and there kept them
till yt pleasyd god ortherwyse to purueye for them. And thus as ye have herd
was king Constante slain / when he had reigned after most writers five
year.

THE.LXXXII. CHAPTER.
UOrtigernus duke of ye Iuesses, or Uortigerus earl of Iewesses, after called
westsaxons / was made king of Brytayne, in the year of our lord.iiii. hundred
and.xlviii. and the.xviii. year of Clodio king of France / which after ye death
of Constant by strength and otherwise was made king, and ruled the land not
all without trouble. For yt was not long or the Pictes, which having knowledge
of the death and judgment of their knights and kynsmen, that they invaded the
north parts of the land, doing therein great harm and damage. And over that
many and diverse of the great of the Brytons, perceyuyng that the king Constant
was not murderyd all without consent of the said Uortyger: rebelled again him
/ and daily sent and say led over into little Brytayne, to the aid and
assystence of the foresaid chyldern of Constant / which put the said
Uortiger to great vnrestfulnesse / and the more for that, that he wist not nor
knew not in whom he might put his trust and confydence in.

with these perturbau^ces was meddled plenty of corn and fruit, yt the like
thereof had not ben seen many years passyd. wherwyth was joined lechery and
pestylence, with many other inco^ueniences / so ye vice was accounted for small
or none offense. The which reigned not only in the temporalty, but also in the
spirituality and hedes of the same. So ye every man turned the point of his
spear against the true and innocent man / and the commons gave them all to
dronke^nes and ydelnes / where thorough ensued fighting, strife, and much
envy. Of which foresaid myschyues ensued much mortalyte and death of men, that
the living scantly suffysed in some countres to bury the deed. And over this ye
king was so hard beset with ye forenamed enymyes / that he was constrained, as
affermyth Policronica, to send for paynems, as the Saxons, to help to
withstand his enemies and defend his land / and also he daily ferid the
landyng of Aurely and Uther.

Uortyger thus being beset with many aduersytyes in vysytynge his land / and
then being for diverse causes him mouyng at Dorobernia or Caunterbury:
tidings came to him of the arryuynge of three long ships full of armed men
at the isle of Tenet. whereof first he made countenance as though he had been
in doubt whether it had been the two brethern of Constant or none. But when the
same was blown about, yt they were none enymyes: anon he caused the leders of
them to be brought unto his presence / freynynge of them the cause of their
landyng and of their nacyon and country. The which answered unto the king and
said they were of the country of Germany / and put out of their country by a
manner sort or lot at so^dry times used with in the said land / the which
was used for so myche as the people therein encreasyd so fast, that without
such prouysyon had, the country should not suffyce for the people / the which
was such as follows.

At sundry times when the said country was replenyshed of people: the princes
and rulers thereof would assemble at a certain place, and call before them the
lusty young folks. Of the which they would chose out a certain number / and
appoynte to them certain dukes or leders, with all thing necessary to the
war. And them so garnyshed / would command to search their adventure, and to win some land by their knyghthode, where they might inhabyte themself. By
which use and custom thus long vsyd / now was fallen to their lotte, to do as
their fore faders had done before them.

wherefore syns fortune had brought them to this land / they besought the king,
that he would take them to his service, and they would be ready to fight for ye
defense of him and his country. And when the king had inquired farther: he
found that they had two leders named Hengistus and Horsus / and they and their
people were called Saxons.

The king thus being asserteyned of the manner of these strangers, and that
they were of the gentyle of pagan law: said he was very heavy and sorry, that
they were myscreantes. But he was joyous and glad of their coming / for so
myche as he had need of such sowdyours to defend him and his land again his
enymyes. And so received them to his wages and service, as is wytnessed of
Gaufryde and other mo writers.

THE.LXXXIII. CHAPTER.
BEda the holy man says, that Uortyger sent for the Saxons strong men of
arms, that had no land to dwell in. The which came in three long ships
called Obylas / and received a place of him to dwell in, in the Eest side of
Brytayne called the isle of Tenet beside Kent. Guillelmus de regibus a writer of
hystoryes ^ayth, that the Saxons came out of Germany by will to win
worship and land / and not by lotte or compulsyon.

And also that they worshypped at that days a god named woden, and a goddess
named Frya. In the worship of the which god the third feryall day in the
weke they named wodnesd aye / which at this day we call wednysdaye. And in
worship of the said gods they called the fyfth day friys day / the
which we call now frydaye.

Of these foresaid people came three manner of people, or three manner of names /
that is to say Saxons, Anglys, and Iewetes. Of the Saxons came the eest Saxons,
westsaxons, and the south Saxons. Of ye Anglys came the eest Anglys, the
myddell Angl^s or Merceys, which held myddell England, that stretches
westwarde toward the river of Dee beside Chestre, and to Seuern^ beside
Shroysbury, and so forth to Brystowe / and eestwarde toward the sea, and
southwarde to Thamys, and so forth to London, and northwarde to Humber, and
turned downewarde and westward to the river Mercea / and so forth to the weste
see.

And of the Iewetys come the Kentyshmen, and men of the isle of weight. Of the
first coming of these Saxons into great Britayn, authors in party varrey.
wherefore in the table before named / it shall appear under correccyon, that the
forenamed Hengistus and Horsus with their company first landed in the foresaid
isle of great Brytayne in the year of our lord.iiii. hundred and.l, and the
third year of Uortiger.

Then yt follows these Saxons with the kings power beat down the enymyes
before said, and defendyd the land in most knyghtly wise, so that the king
had the Saxons in great love and favor. which favor Hengistus well
apperceyuyng / upon a season when he saw conuenyent time, he axed of the king
so myche ground as the hyde of a bull or other best would compare / which the
king to him granted. After which grant, the said Hengyste to the end to
win a large ground / caused the said bestes skyn to be cut into a small and
slender thonge. And with the same met out a large and great circuyte of
ground / upon the which he shortly after builded and set a large and
strong castle. By reason of which thonge the said castle was long afternamed
Thonge castle / which was set by the agreement of all writers in the country
of Lyndesey. After these tidings sprange into Germania, of the plentye and
fatnes of the land of Brytayne, with other commodytyes perteynyng to the same.
By mean whereof the Saxons daily drew to the said land / and conuenau^ted
with the Brytons, that the Britons should entende their worldlynes and other
necessaryes / and ye Saxons as their sowdiours, should defend the land from
incursyon of all enymyes. For the which the Brytons should give to them
competent mete and wages.

Then by the sonde of Hengiste, came with.xvi. sails Ronowen the daughter of
the said Hengist / which was a maiden of excellent beauty. After whose coming
/ Hengiste upon a day besought the king yt he would se his castle, which he
had newely edyfyed. To whose request the king was agreeable / and at the day
assygned came to ye said castle, where he was ioyously received. And there
among other passetymes the said Ronowe^ with a cup of gold full of wine
presentyd the king, salutynge and saying wassayle. The king which before that
time had herd no like salutacyon, nor yet understood what she meant / axed of
her fader what she mente by that word wassayle. To whom yt was answered by
Hengistus that yt was a salutacyon of good and gladness / and that the king
should drink after her, ioynynge there unto this answer, drink hayl^ wherefore
the king as he was enfourmed took the cup of the maidens hand and drank / and
after beheld the we^che in such manner, that he was wounded with the darte of
the blind god Cupide, that never after he could wythdrawe his love from ye
wenche / but lastely by instygacyon of the devil, axed her in marriage of her
fader. And by force thereof, as wytnessyth Policronica, he put from him his
laufull wife / of the which he had before time received.iii. noble sons
called Uortimerus, Ca^agrinus, and Pascentius. Then the king gave unto
Hengistus the lord ship of Kent, though Garangonus then earl thereof thereat
grudged with many of his Brytons.

For this and for that that ye king had married a woman of vncought believe:
well nere all the Brytons forsook him and his works. Nevertheless some there
were as well nobles and other, that comforted the king in his evil doing. By
which mean and other unlawful dedys then daily vsyd / the faith of Christ
began sore to apalle. And over that an heresye called Arianes heresy, began
then to spring in Brytayn. For the which, two holy bishops named Germanus
and Lupus, as of Gaufryde is wytnessyd / came into Brytayne to refourme the
king and all other yt erred from the way of troth.

Of this holy man saint Germayn / Uincent historyall says, that upon an
evening, when the weder was passing cold, and the snow fill very fast / he
axed lodgyng of the king of Brytayne, for him and his comperys / which was
denied. Then he after syttyng under a bushe in the feld, the kings herdmen
passyd by / and seeing this bishop with his company sittyng in the weder /
desired him to his house to take there such poor lodging as he had* whereof
the bishop being glad and feign ^yode unto the house of the said herdman,
the which received him with glad chere. And for him and his company wysled his
wife to kill his only calfe / and to dress yt for his gestes souper, ye which
was also done. when the holy man had souped, he called to him his hosts,
willing and desiring her that she should dylygently gader to gyder all the
bones of the deed calfe / and them so gaderyd, to wrappe to gyder within the
skin of the said calfe / and then it lay in the stall before the rack nere
unto the dame. which done according to the commandment of the holy man I
shortly after the calfe was restoryd to life, and forth with e^e hay with the
dame at ye rack. Of which marvel all the household was greatly astonyed /
and yeldyd thanking unto almighty god, and to that holy bishop.

Upon the morrow this holy bishop took with him the herdman, and yode unto
the presence of ye king / and axed of him in sharp wise, why that over night
he had denied to him lodging. wherwyth the king was so abas^hed, that he
had no power to give unto the holy man answer. Then saint Germayne said to
him: I charge the in the name of my lord god, that thou and thine depart from
this paleys / and resygne yt and the rule of thy land to him that is more
worthy this rome then thou art. The which all thing by power divine was
observed and done / and the said herdman by the holy bishops authoryte, was
set into ye same dygnyte. Of whom after descendyd all the kings of Brytayne.

THE.LXXXIIII. CHAPTER.
This story is also confermed of Antoninus archebysshoppe of Florence / and at
length by him showed in the.xvii. chapyter and.ix. day of the second part of
his work called Some Antonini. But by who^ so ever this story was first
written: I think he was none that descended of the walshmen, nor yet of their
blood. For they come all of Pryamys blood, and not of an herdman, except that
they fetch their line from Dauyd the holy king and prophet. This storye
seems to be of more fame then of credence. For other writers tell this story
to be done in the region of Powys by Buly their king. And also for so much as
the foresaid author makes no mencyon of the more Brytayne nor of the less:
it is doutefull whyther this hap fill in that one regyon or in that other.
All be yt in the life of saint Germayne it is read, that the said saint
Germayne deposyd Uortiger and enhaunced the herdman, as before is declared, as
affermeth Polycronica. Then it follows in ye story, when saint Germayne had
restoryd some part of Brytayne to the true faith: he returned into France,
fro whens he was before comen. But in this said saying should appear dyscorde
in Chronicles. For as at this day was not the faith of Christ received in
France, as after more clearly shall appear / wherefore no bishop of Crystes
faith might then keep any see in France. And also as affermeth Iacobus
Phylyppus and other / holy Remigius was the first yt turned France to Crystes
relygyon / and that, after most concord of writers, to be in the year of our
lord.iiii. hundred lxxx. and.xix. and the.xv. year of the reygne of Clodoueus
Lewys first Christian king of ye realm of France.

Then to furnysshe or perform the story of Uortiger, needful it is or
necessary to return to the matter where we before left. And to show that for
so much as the Brytons wythdrewe them from Uortyger / he was therefore
constrained to hold with him the Saxons. By whose counsel he after sent for
Octa the son of Hengyst / ye which brought with him an other company of
Saxons.

when the lords of Britayne saw and consyderyd the great multitude of
Saxons, and their daily repair into this land: they assembled them together,
and showed to the king the inconvenience and ieopardy that might ensue to him
and his land, by reason of the great power of these strangers / and
aduertysed him in aduoydyng of greter danger, to expelle and put them out of
his realm or the more part of them.

But all was in vain / for Uortyger bare such a mind to the Saxons, by
reason of his wife / that he preferred the love of them before the love of his
own natural kynnesmen and friends. wherefore the Brytons of one will and mind
crowned for their king Uortimerus the eldest son of Uortyger, and depryued
him of all kyngly dygnyte / when he had reigned after most concord of
hystoryes.xvi. years.

THE.LXXXV. CHAPTER.
MEroneus next of allie unto Clodio last king of France, for so much as of
Clodeo remained none issue / was made king of France in ye year of our
lord.iiii. hundred and.l / and the second year year of Uortiger than king of
Brytayne. The which was strong and marcyall in all his deeds / and there unto
right profitable for the realm. And among other notable deeds by him done /
he slew in one day of Hunes (the which by the commandment of Atti^a inuadyd
and dystroyed diverse countres, as Italy, Germany, and other) an hundredth and
lxxx. thousand / as is wytnessyd of master Robert Gagwine compyler and
gaderer of the acts and deeds of Frenshmen. This forenamed Attila was king of
Hunes / and led in one host.ii. hundred thousand men of war, as testyfyeth
Policronica. And after diverse baytayles by him won / he came into ye feldes
called Catulyntes, the which contained an hundred legys in length and.lxx. in
bread, whereof every lege conteyneth.iii. English miles. In the which feldes
or playnes he was encountered with the power of the Romans / in whose aid was
ye king of France Meroneus, the king or duke of Burgoyne, and other. where
after a long fight was slain on both sides the foresaid hundred and.lxxx.
thousand. Of the which number the said king or duke of Burgoyne was one / as
is more plainly showed in the.xxxiii. chapter in the.iiii. book of the said
Polycronicon, with other wonders which I ouerpasse.

Of this Meroneus dyscendyd all the kings of Frensshemen, till the time of
Pepyn the which was father unto Charles the great or emperor. And finally
dyed this Meroneus when he had reigned after most writers.x. years / leuynge
after him a son named Chylderych or Hylderych.

THE.LXXXVI. CHAPTER.
CHyldericus or Hildericus the son of Meroneus / was ordained king of
France, in the year of our lord god.iiii. hundred and.lx / and the.xii. year
of Uortiger than king of Brytayne. The which ensued no thing the wars of
his father / but allied him with all vice and cruelnesse, in such exterme wise
that he became odyble unto his subjects. wherefore the said Childerich /
perceyuyng the murmur and grudge among the people / and ferynge his sudden
distruccyon: cou^sayled with a friend and lord of his named Guynomadus or
Guynemeus / by whose counsel in avoiding greater paryll, he avoided
secretly his land, and yode unto the king of Thurynges named Besygne, of
whom he was ioyously received. But the at departing of the king from ye said
Guynemeus, he took a piece of gold and brake it in two pieces / whereof ye one
piece he delivered unto the king, and that other piece he kept to him self /
saying to the king that when so ever that he received from him that piece of
gold, that he should be sure to be restored again to his regally and dygnyte.

After the king was departed his land / the Frenshmen of one assent, chase
for their governor and head a Romayne named Gylf / which at that day had a
part of Gallia or France in his rule to the behofe of the Romans / which
part was named or now is named Soisons. wha^ this Gilf was stablyssed in his
authoryte / the forenamed Guynemeus behauyd him in such wise toward this
Gylf, that he had him in special favor above all the nobles of France / and
would execute no thing of charge without his and counsayll. whereof the said
Guynemeus being ware / and remembrynge how he might restore Chylderych to his
former dygnyte, aduysed the said Gill to set more grievous taskys upon the
Frenschmen / enfourmynge him further, that if any grudged there at, that he
should punyshe some of the myghtyeste of them / by reason whereof he should fere
the other.

which thus done according to the forsayde counsayll / shortly after to
bring his purpose the better about, the said Guynemeus accused certain
rulers of France such as he well knew were great enymyes unto Chylderych /
the which he caused to be taken and sent unto Gill, and Gill upon them did
sharp execucyon. In the which he so perseuered, that the Frenschmen for
remedy complained them to Guynemeus. To whom it was by him answered, that he
greatly meruayled of their vnstastablenesse that they had chosen to them a
king, and now so suddenly would have him deposed / showing furthermore that
other they must call again Childerich that exercysyd his life in voluptuousness
of living / or else they must dwell under the king, which is cruel and
full of blood shedynge, with diverse other exhortacyons concerning the again
calling of Childerych to his fourmer dygnyte, which for length I omytte and
pass over.

By mean of which exhortacyon, Childerich was secretly sent for / and
received from his trustye friend the foresaid piece of gold / and spedde him
hastily into France. Again whom the foresaid Guynemeus in likewise sped him
/ so that they met at a castle in the country of Champion, where they with
other to them allied / gaderyd a great host, and made toward the foresaid
Gill or Gillion. The which having knowledge of the said conspyracye / ordained
an army of knights, and yode again his enymyes. But he was ouerset and
compelled for his sauegarde to fle into the country of Soisons beforenamed,
where he after endyd his natural life / and Childerych was again restoryd and
made king.

Childerych then thus restoryd unto his regally / subdued soon after a Saxon
prince named Onager / and besegyd the city of Orleaunce, and yt received unto
his subieccyon and after passyd the river of Leyr, and subdued to his sygnory
the country of Angeo and Main.

when the fame of Childerich was brought unto Basyna the wife of Besygne king
of Turrynges: she anon forsook her own lord, and sped her into France, and
so to the presence of Childerich, whom he received with all gladness. And when
he had of her frayned the cause of her coming: she answered, for that that
she knew and understood to be in him more virtue and honor, the^ in any other
man at ye day living / she was therefore common unto him to continue the
remanaunt of her life in his company / addyng also thereunto that if in any
country she knew his better, she would then search see and land to have him to
her lord or husband. But for she was assured, that he had no pere / she
besought him to accept her in his company.

THE.LXXXVII. CHAPTER.
THen Childerych putting a part and forgetting kyndenesse to him before
showed by her housbande Besynge / married the said Basina yet being a pagan.
And when the first night was comen that they should go to bed / she exorted
him yt he should yt night absteyn from all fleshly lykyng, and watch the gates
of his paleys / and to make report to her of such vysyons as he saw there yt
night. To the which he was agreeable. where he so standing, saw first a
multitude of vnycornes, lions, and lybardes, passing foreby the paleys gate.
And within a short space of time after, he saw a great company of berys and
wolves re^nyng after the other. And thyrdly and lastly he saw a multitude of
dogs and other small ravenous bestes / the which in his syghte fill upon
the other.ii. companyes and utterly devoured them all.

when he had seen the fine of his vision / not a little astonyed, he returned
to his wife / showing to her what he had seen. To whom she said / sir of me
ye shall receive a son / the which in all his deeds shall be noble and
honorable, like to ye vnycornes and lions showed to you in ye first vysyon. Of
the which shall discende one other son, the which shall be ravenous and
shall set his mind all to pyllage and rauyne, like unto the ravenous wolf and
here. And after him shall come a child or chyldern that shall be of such
insolency and wasting, that like as the ravenous hounde stroyeth and wastyth
all that he may tere with his teeth / so shall these persons wast and destroy
by their folyes all that other noble men has purchased to their hands. And
the multitude which that ye saw of other small ravenous bestes / betokens
the common people, which in those days for lack of a good and wise prince
shall run either upon other and rob and s^e each other.

Of this exposycyon the king was somdele troubled. But yet he reioysed of the
issue that should come of his body. Then it follows when this Chylderych had
ouercomen some baytayles in Almayne, and them subdued to his empire: he lastly
dyed when he had reigned, with the.viii. years allowed to his reygne for the
time that he was exyled / and with the resydue that he reigned before and after
in all.xxiiii. years / leuyng after him a son begotten upon the forenamed
Basina called Clodio or after most writers Clodoueus.

Anglia. THE.LXXXVIII. CHAPTER.
UOrtimerus the eldest son of Uortiger / was by assent of the Bryto^s made
king of Brytayn, in the year of our lord.iiii. hundred lxiiii / and the.iiii.
year of Chyldericus than king of France. The which in all have pursued the
Saxons, and gave unto them a great battle upon the river of Darwent / where
he had of them vyctory. And secundaryly he faught wi^h them upon the foord
called Epi^^ord or Agliffhorp. In the which fight Catrignus the brother to
Uortimer, and Horsus brother to Hengyst or Cosyn, after long fight attwene
them.ii. either of the^ slew other / in which fight also the Brytons were
vyctours.

The third battle he faught with them nere unto the sea side / where also the
Brytons chasyd ye Saxons, and compelled them to take the isle of wyghte for
their suertye.

This battle as witnesses Alfredus; was more won by virtue of the prayers
of the holy bishop saint Germayne, than by might of ye Brytons. For when the
holy man saw ye Brytons give back / he held his hands toward heaven, and
cried thryse alleluya / which is to our understanding as much to say, as save
us good lord. Thorough which prayer the Britons by dyuyne help obtained ye
victory of their enimyes.

The fourth battle was nere unto a moore called Cole moore. The which was long
and sore foughten by the Saxons / by reason that the said moore closyd a part
of their host so strongly, that the Brytons might not win unto them for
danger of their shot / All be yt that finally they were chasyd, and many of
the^ of co^straynt drowned and swalowed in the said moore

And over and beside these four pryncypall bataylles: Uortimerus had with the
Saxons diverse other conflictes / as in Kent, at Thetfoord in Northfolke, and in
Essex nere unto Colchestre / and left not till he had byrafte from them the
more part of such possessions as before time they had won / and kept them
only to the isle of Thanet, the which Uortymer often greuyd by such navy as he
then had.

when that Ronowen daughter of Hengiste apperceyued the great myschy^f, that
her fader and the Saxons were in, by the mraciall knyghthode of Uortymer: she
sought such means, that shortly after, as testyfyeth Gaufryde and other,
Uortimer was poisoned / when he had ruled the Britons after most concord of
writers seven years.

THE.LXXXIX. CHAPTER.
UOrtigernus fader of Uortymerus last deed, was again restoryd to the kingdom
of myche Brytayne / in the year of our lords incarnacyon four hundred.lxxi /
and the.xi. year of Childericus then king of France / the which all the time
of the reygne of his son Uortimer, had restyd him in the country of Cambria
or walys. where in this pass time after some writers, he buyldyd a strong
castle in a place called Generon^ or Gwayneren, in the west side of walys nere
unto the river of Gwana, in an hill or upon an hill called Cloarcius. But the
old cronycle before spoken of, says y^ this Uortiger was kept somewhat under
rule of certain tutours to him assygned in ye town of Caerlegion or Chester /
and demeaned him so well toward his son in aydynge of him with his counsayll
and otherwise, that the Brytons for it cast to him such a favor, that they
after the death of Uortimer made him again king.

It was not long after that Uortiger was thus set in authoryte, but that
Hengistus percyd this land with a great multitude of Saxons. whereof herynge
Uortyger / in all haste assembled his Brytons, and made toward them. And when
Hengistus had experyence of the great host of Brytons: he then ordained
means of treaty and peace. where lastly yt was concluded that a certain number
of Brytons, and as many of Saxons, should upon a May day assemble upon the
plain of Ambrii, now called Salesbury. which day certainly prefyxyd /
Hengistus using a new manner of treason, chargyd all his Saxons by him
appointed, that each of them should put secretly a long knyfe in their hose
/ and at such season as he gave to the^ this watch or by word, Nempnyth your
sexis, that eueryche of them should draw his knyfe and slay a Bryton, not
sparynge any one / except Uortiger ye king. And at ye day before appointed the
king with a certain of Brytons not ware of this purposed treason, came in
peasyble wise to ye place before assygned / where he fande ready Hengistus with
his Saxons. The which after due obeysaunce made unto the king / received him
with a cou^tenau^ce of all love. where after a time of co^munycacyon had /
Hengiste being minded to execute his former purposed treason, showed his
watch word. By reason whereof anon the Brytons were slain as sheep among
woluys, having no manner of wepyn to defend them self / except yt any of them
might by his manhood and strength get the knyfe of his enymye. Among the
number of these Brytons was an Earl called Edoll or Edolf earl of Caerlegion or
Chestre / ye which seeing his fellows and friends thus murdered, as affermeth
mine authoure Gaufryde and other: he by his manhood wanne a stake in the hedge
or else where / with the which he knyghtly sauyd his own life, and slew of
the Saxons.xvii, and fled to the city or town of Ambry now named
Salysburye. After which treason thus executyd / the king remained with
Hengistus as prisoner.

Of the taking of Uortyger, and sleynge of the lords of Brytayne / an
authoure called Guillelmus de regibus says, that Hengistus agreed with
Uortyger and his Brytons / and that he should enjoy the castle by him before
made, with a certain of land thereunto adioynynge for him and his Saxons to
dwell upon. And when the said agreement was suerly stablyshed / this Hengiste
entendynge treason / desired the king with a certain number of his lords to
come to him to dinner within his said castle. The which of ye king was
granted. And at the day assygned the king with his lords came to the said
Thongcastell to dinner / where he with his was well and honorably received and
also deyntely served.

But when the king and his lords were in their most mirth / this Hengiste
had commanded before, yt his own knights should fall at varyau^ce among the^
self. which so done the remenaunt of his Saxons, as yt were in partynge of
frayes, should fall upon the Britons and slay them all, out take only the
king. The which was done like as ye have before hard devised / and the king
was holden as prisoner.

THE.XC. CHAPTER.
HEngistus then having the king as prisoner, and a great part of the rulers
of Britayne thus as before is said subdued: was some deal exalted in pride /
and compellyd the king to give unto him, as wytnessyth Policronica, three
prouynces in the eest part of Brytayne. which three prouynces should be Ke^t,
Southsaxon or Sussex, and Eestanglys, which is to mean Norff. and Suff. as
affermeth the authoure of the flower of hystoryes. But Guydo de columna says,
that the foresaid three prouynces was Kent, Eestsaxon or Essex, and Eestanglys
/ which is Norff. and Suff. Of the which said prouynces when Hengist was
possessyd / he suffered the king to go at his lybertye. And then Hengiste
began his lordshyppe over the prouynce of Kent, and sent other of his Saxons
to beweld the other two prouynces / that is to say Eestanglys and Eestsaxons,
till he had sent for other of his kynnesmen, yt he ente^dyd to give the said
prouynces unto.

The kingdom of Kent here begynnyth

THE.XCI. CHAPTER.
THus Hengistus being in the possessyon of this prouynce of Kent: commanded
his Saxons to call yt Hengistus land / whereof as some authors mean the hole
land of Brytayn took his first name of England. But that saying shall appear
contrary, as shall be showed hereafter in the storye of Egbert king of
westsaxons. The which after he had subdued ye more part of the kyngedomes of
Saxons, and made of all but one monarchye: he then co^maundyd this land to be
called Anglia, and his Saxons Anglys / which after by corrupcyon of speech was
called England, and the people Englyshemen.

This lordshyppe or kyngedome of Kent had his beginning under Hengiste, in the
year of our lord after most concordaunce of writers, and by reason of ye
time.iiii. hundred.lxxvi. And the fyfte year of Uortygers last reygne.

But Denis and other, that account this kingdom to begin in the year of our
lord four hundred and.lv. allow the beginning thereof to be when Hengistus
had first gift of the same, by reason that Uortyger married his daughter.

This lordeshyppe contained the country that stretches from eest Occean unto
the river of Thamys / and had upon the southeest Southerye / and upon the
weste London / upon the northeest the Thamys aforesaid and Eestsaxon now
Essex. And this lordshyppe contained also the isle of Thanet.

which lordshyppe or kingdom endured after most writers, from the time of
the first year of the reygne of Hengiste, till the.xxv. year of Egbert before
named, by the term of.iii. hundred and.xlii. years following that account. At
which season the said Egbert then king of westsaxons, subdued Baldredus the^
king of Kent, and joined yt to his own kingdom.

Al be yt that the authoure of Policronica affermeth yt to endure by the space
of three hundred and.lxviii, under.xv. kings, whereof Baldredus was the last:
which folowyth nere unto the account of Denis before named. The first christian
king of this lordshippe was Ethelbertus, or Ethelbert / the which received the
faith of Christ by that holy man saint Austayne or Augustayne, nere about the
year of our lords incarnacyon four hundred.lxxx. and.xvi. The which
Ethelbert caused soon after to be edyfyed the monastery of saint Peter and
Paul, in the eestsyde or end of the city of Dorobernia now Caunterbury. He
gave unto this Austayn and his successors bishops of Caunterbury, a place
for the bishops see at Christ's church within the said city, and endowed it
with many rich possessions.

This Hengiste and all the other Saxons which ruled the.xvii. pryncypates of
Brytayne, as after shall be showed, are called of most writers reguli / which
is to mean in our vulgar or speech as small or little kings. So that this
Hengist is accounted a little king. The which when he had thus rule of the
foresaid.iii. prouynces, he sent for mo Saxons / and gathered them yt were
sparkled abroad / so yt in these prouynces the faith of Christ was all
quenchyd and in sleep.

Then Hengist with Octa his son gaderyd a great strength of Saxons / and faught
with the Brytons, and overcame the Brytons, and chasyd them in such wise, that
Hengiste kept his lordesshyppe in peace and war by the space of.xxiiii.
years, as most writers testyfye.

THE.XCII. CHAPTER.
Now then let us return again to Uortiger / ye which when he saw the
Saxons in such wise increase their strength, and the Brytons daily dyscreace /
for as writes mine author Gaufryde, yt Saxons had the rule of London, york,
Lincoln, or Lindecoln^, and Kaergue^t, that is wynchester, with other good
towns / wherefore as affermeth the said Gaufryde, the king for fere of ye
Saxons, and also for that y^ he was some deal warned of the coming of the.ii.
brethren Aurely and Uter sons of Constantyne: he therefore considering these
many and great dangers, fled into Cambria or walys, and there held him for
the more suertye / where as wytnessyth the said Gaufryde he then builded the
castle before minded. Of ye which building and impediment thereof / and also of
the getting or birth of Merlyne, and of his prophecyes he made a long work,
the which I pass over for diverse consyderacyons, and return again to
Uortiger.

Troth yt is, that while Uortygernus was thus besyed in walys / the forenamed
brethern Aurely and Uter preparyd their navy and men of armies, and passed the sea, and landed at Totnesse as says the englysh cronycle. whereof when the
Brytons were ware that were disparklyd and seueryd in many cou^tres / they
drew to them in all hasty wise. The which said brethren when they saw that
they had a competent number of knights / they made toward walys to
dystresse Uortyger.

whereof he being warned / for so myche as he well knew, yt he might not make
sufficye^t defense by strength of knights: he therefore garnyshed his castle
with strength of men and vytayll / entendynge to sauegarde him self by that
mean / but all in vain. For the said two brethren with their army, besegyd
the said castle / and finally after many assautes, with wild fire consumed
the said castle with Uortiger, and all that was therein.

Of him yt is read, that he should lie by his own daughter, in trust ye
kings should come of his blood. For the which deed he was accursyd of saint
Germayne / and lastely ended his life as hefore is expressed, when he had
reigned now last ix. years.

THE.XCIII. CHAPTER.
Aurelius Ambrosius the second son of Co^stantyne, and brother to
Constancius slain by the treason of Uortyger / was king made of the Brytons
in the year of oar lord.iiii. hundred.lxxx. and one / and the.xxi. year of
Childericus then king of France. Of this yt is said, that when he hard of the
dyuysion that was in the land of Brytayne between Uortiger and the Saxons / and
in what manner the Saxons had subdued the Brytons he in all goodly haste with
aid of the king of little Brytayne, spedde him into this land. where after
the above said vyctory had of Uortiger / he spedde him toward york, as
affermeth Gaufride, and there chasyd the Saxons that held the city with Octa
or Osca son of Hengist / and took the said Octa, and kept him as a prisoner
somewhat of time.

But how so yt was by treason of his keeper or otherwise he brake prison. And
he with his fader gaderyd after a great host / and met Aurelius and his
Brytons at a place called Crekynford, where was foughten a strong and mighty
battle / to ye loss of both parties / but the more loss fill to the Saxons.
For of them was slain four dukes, and.iiii. thousand of other men, and that
other dele chasyd to their great danger. yet this not wytstandynge Hengiste
continued his lordshyppe in Kent / and Aurelius Ambrose, which the english
cronycle names Aurilambrose, kept the country called Logiers or myddell
England with walys / and chasyd the Saxons y^ dwelled in ye.ii. foresaid
prouynces of eest Saxon and eest Anglis, out of those countres.

The second kingdom.

THE.XCIIII. CHAPTER.
IN this pass time a Saxo^ named Ella, with his three sons called Symen or
Simon, Plettynger, and Cissa / came with three ships called Obilas, and landed
in the south part of Brytayne, and slew many Brytons at a place that then was
named Cuneueshore / and chased many unto a wood the^ called Andresleger / and
after occupied ye country, and inhabyted him and his Saxons within the said
prouynce / making him self king and lord thereof. By reason whereof by his
might and power the said prouynce or country was after named ye kingdom or
lordshyp of Southsaxons. The which after most concord of writers should have
his beginning y^.xxxii. year after the first coming of He^gist. which
following ye account should be in the year of our lord.iiii. hundred.lxxxii /
and in the second year of Aurely then king of Brytayne.

This kingdom or lordshippe had in the eestsyde Kent, in the south the sea and
the isle of wight, in the west Hampsyre, and in the north Southrey / and
contained as wytnessyth Guydo Southampton, Somersetshyre, Deuenshyre / and
Cornewayl. Of which said kingdom Ethelbaldus or Ethelwaldus was the.iiii.
king, and the first christian king. This kingdom endured shorteste season of
all the other kingdoms, and passyd soonest into the other. For yt endured not
above an hundred and.xii. years, under.v. or.vii. kings at most.

THE.XCV. CHAPTER.
THen to return where we left Aurely, which as before ye have hard held and
occupied the myddell part of Brytayne with Ca^bria or walys, did his dylygence
to repair ruynous places, as well temples as other / and caused ye service of
god to be said and done, which by mean of the Saxons was greatly decade
thorough all Brytayne. And after this Aurelius beseged y^ Saxons in ye hill of
Badon or Badowe, where he slew many of them. But daily the Saxons encreasyd
and landed in myche Brytayn, as after shall appear. For shortly after a Saxon
named Porth / landed with his two sons at an haue^ in Southsex. After whom
as some authors mean, ye haue^ was after called Portismouth, which keeps
the name at this day. And in likewise they came to land in diverse places of
Britayne / so that Aurelius had with them many conflyctys and bataylles, in the
which he spedde dyuersly / for he was sometime vyctour, and some season over
set. It is wryte^ of him in ye english cronicle and other, that he by ye help
of Merlyn should fetch the great stones now standing upon the plain of
Salysburye, and called the stone henge, out of Irlande, and caused them to be
set there as they now stand / in remembrance of the Brytons that there
were slain and buried in the time of the communycacyon had with Hengiste and
his Saxons, as before in the storye of Uortiger is touchyd. But Polycronica
alledgyth yt honor unto Uter Pendragon his brother. In the time of this
Aurelius, as wytnessyth also ye said Policronica / dyed Hengist in his bed,
when he had reigned over ye Kentysh Saxons.xxiiii. years. After whose death Octa
or Osca his son, ruled ye said kingdom other.xxiiii. years. All be yt that
the brytyshe books, and also the chronicles of Enlande shows / that after that
Aurelius had in battle slain Hengiste: he took unto his grace Octa his son,
and gave unto him a dwelling place in the country of Galewey for him and his
Saxons then left on live. which seems not to be true, for matter that shall
after ensue / and also for y^ that before is touchyd of the Pictes and Scotts,
in the time of the myserye of the Brytons. Then yt follows, this Octa another
augmented nor mynyshed his lordshyp / but held him therwyth contented as his
fader had to him left yt.

Lastely and in the end of the reygne of Aurely, Pascentius the youngest son of
Uortiger, which after ye death of his fader was fled into Irland for fere of
Aurely, purchasyd aid of Guilamour king of Irla^de. And with a great army
inuadyd this land of Brytayne by the country of walys / in taking the city
of Menenia, and in wasting the said country with iron and fire. In the which
season and time Aurelius lay syke in his city of Kaerguent or wynchester. For
which cause he desired his brother Uter to gather an host of Brito^s, and to
appease ye malice of Pascencius and his adhere^tis. The which accordyngly
preparyd his host / and at length overcame the host of Pasce^cius, and slew
him and the forenamed Guillamour in the same fight.

In this while and season that Uter was thus gone again Pascentius / a Saxon
or other stranger feynynge him a Bryton, and a connyng man in physyke, by the
intycemet of Pascencius came unto Aurely, where he lay syke / and by his
subtyle and false means purchasyd such favor with those yt were nyghe unto
the prince, that he was put in trust to mynystre medycines unto the king. This
is named of writers Coppa or of some Eoppa.

The which when he had espied his time co^uenyent to bring about his false
purpose / he gave to Aurelius a pocyon enpoysoned / by vyolence whereof he
shortly after was deed, when he had reigned after most writers upon.xix.
years.

The third or fyfte.

THE.XCVI. CHAPTER.
IN the time of ye reygne of this Aurelius as witnesses the author of
Policronica and other / ye kingdom of Eestanglis began under a Saxon named
Uffa, about the year of our lord.iiii. hundred.lxxx. and xii, and the.xi. year
of Aurelius. The which kingdom contained Norlf. and Suff. now called. This
had in this eest and north sides, the sea / in the northweste, Cambryge shyre
/ and in the weste, saint Edmundes dytche, and Hertfordshyre / and in the
southe Essex. This lordshyppe was called first Uffynys lordshyp / and the
kings thereof were named Uffynys, or after some authoures the people. But
finally they were named eest Anglys.

The first christian king of this pryncypate was Redwaldus the third king / but
he was not so steadfast as belonged to his relygyon. His son named Corpwaldus
was more steadfast / which after was slain of a mysbyleuynge man, and for
Crystes faith as some write. But Guydo says that Sebertus was first christian
king of this lordshyppe / and that he made saint Poulys church of London. This
under.xii. kings endured, till the martyrdom of blessed saint Edmunde last
king thereof / the which was martyred nere about the year of our lord.viii.
hundred and lxix. By the which reason yt should follow, that this kingdom
should endure by the term of.iii.C.lxxvii. years. And of this lordshyp, at
that days was Elman or Thetforde the chyfe town. But after Guydo, this
lordeshyppe should begin the year of Grace.v. hundred and.lxx / and then
should yt endure but.ii. hundred.iiii. score and.xix. years.

Francia. THE.XCVII. CHAPTER.
CLodoueus the son of Childericus or Hildericus before named, was after the
death of his fader ordained king of France, in ye year of our lord.iiii.
hundred.lxxx. and.iiii / and the third year of Aurelius then king of Brytayne.
This of some writers is named Clodoueus Lowys. The which shortly after that
he of this realm was authorysyd for king / heryng report of the beauty and
great virtue of Clotildis neuewe to Cundebald king or ruler of Burgoyne: sent
unto him a knight named Aurelius to treat a marriage between the king and
Clotyld or Crotild. The which Cundebald more for fere then for love assentyd.

The cause whereof as mine author says was, for yt this Crotyld was enherytour
unto the said land of Burgoyne / and that she be reason of yt marriage should
recover her right and put him from the rule thereof. This Crotild had before
that day receyuyd the faith of Christ / and so co^tynuynge her relygyon was
married to Clodoueus then a paynym, and so endured a certain of time. But yet
she left not to enduce and turn her lord to the faith in all that she might.

And after a certain of time she was delyueryd of a son / the which by
means of the holy man Remigius bishop of Raynes, and of the queen Crotyld, was
crystyned and named Clodomerus / the which dyed with in short process after.
For yt hap the king said that his gods were dyscontented with him, that he
had suffered his child to be crystyned, and for wrath thereof had taken from
him his child. The queen taking the kings saying in pacyence / conceived
the second son, which also by the kings agreement was also baptized.

This also after a certain of time was vexed with a grievous sekenes, in such
wise that yt was lykely to have dyed. wherefore the king was then more
impacyent, and blamed ye relygyon of his wife in most impacyent manner. The
which sayenges the queen took pacye^tly, and put all her confidence in god / to
whom both she and Remigeus prayed so effectuously, that the child was restored
unto perfyte health.

Thus Clodoueus persevering in his erronyous law / made war upon the
Almaynes. In which war being one day occupied in fight again his enymyes /
he with his people was put to the werse. whereof when Clodoueus was ware /
having great dread of him self, called to mind the often exortacyon of his
wife, and of the great virtue of her gods law / and suddenly lift his eyes
toward heaven and said, god the which Clotylde my wife does honor, now
help me. And if this day I may pass this danger and opteyne vyctory / I
shall ever after worship the with true faith. The which prayer skantly
fynysshed the Frenchemen by dyuyne power were so united and knyt together, and
so knyghtly wythstode their enemies / that in short while after they opteyned
vyctory. which vyctory had / ye king with great tryumphe returned into
France. whereof when Clotylde was warned / she anon received him with all joy
and gladness, thanking her lord god of his great vyctory / but more for that ye
he had forsaken his idolatrye, and was becomen servant of ye only god fourmer
of all the world.

THE.XCVIII. CHAPTER.
IT was not long after yt blessed Remigius was sent for. The which enfourmed
the king suffycyently in the faith of Christ / and upon an Eester day
following, with great solempnyte baptized the king. In time of which
solempnysacyon doing / the holy Crysine or oil by negligence of the mynysters
or otherwise, lacking / a dove discendyng from heaven, brought in her beck or
byll a vyoll filled with oil of most swetest savor / and delivered it to
saint Remigius. The which was construed to be done by virtue of ye holy ghost.
And with this holy oil when the king was anointed / the surplusage thereof was
kept with most reverence. I have herd reported, that this oil is kept at the
city of Reins or at Paris, and that yt never fails or wastes / and that al
ryghtfull enherytours of ye crown of France be therwyth at their coronacyo^
anointed. But and it happen any mighty man to usurp ye crown by might / when
the bishop comes for this holy oil, he fyndeth yt vyoll or glass dry,
and else not.

To this report every man may give credence as him lyketh / for I fande not
this written in the gospel, nor yet in no book of holy scripture.

Then it follows after this sole^pnyte done / the king had certain words
to the people, in exortynge them to leave their idolatrye, and to believe in
Christ and his faith, by whose might and power only he had venquysshed his
enemies. By the which exortacyo^ and other means of the holy bishop Remigius
/ myche people were some after conuertyd and baptized.

Then the king builded certain new monasteryes / and dedycat the old temples
of idollys in honor of Crystes saints. Among ye which one was nere unto the
city of Paris, in the honor of the apostles Peter and Paul. It is wytnessed
of master Robert Gagwyne / that before these days all French kings used to
bear in their arms.iii. todys But after this Clodoueus had received Crystes
relygyon.iii. flower de lyse were sent to him by dyuyne power, set in a
shylde of asure / the which syns ye time has been borne of all French kings.

The said author myndeth also that in a monastery of France called the
monastery of saint Bartylmewe / was sometime kept a clothe of read sylke,
which was named the aurysflambe, and borne for a baner in the field again the
Barbaris or hethen people / by virtue whereof the french princes wan many
vyctoryes. But after when this precious relyke or aurysfla^be was borne again
Christian princes / the virtue thereof seasyd, and lastly was lost. But yet the
like thereof is kept at saint Denis / and had in great reverence of the
bysshoppes and abbottes of the same place.

Then it follows in ye storye / when Clodoueus had set his realm in due
order: Clotyld calling to mind the treason done to her fader, and also the
wrongful wythholdynge of her ryghtfull enherytaunce by her uncle Cundebalde /
exorted her lord Clodoueus to send an embassade, and to require restytucyon
of her said right / yt which was sone after done. And when the king had
received an answer, yt the said Cundebalde would not restore the said right
of his wife: he in all goodly wise prepared an army, and made war upon the
said Cundebalde. And after great waste and dystruccyon of the country:
Clodoueus finally besegyd him in a city / and after took the said city by
strength / and the said Cundebalde within ye same as prisoner. But by medyacyon
of friends and great gifts / with also a yearly trybute to be paid to
Clodoueus, the said Cundebalde was releaced and set at lybertye.

THE.XCIX. CHAPTER.
THis voyage thus spedde and orderyd: the king left behind him an army
of.v. thousand knights, under the gydyng of Gu^defyll brother of the foresaid
Cundebalde / and after returned into France. But sone after the kings
departing / Cundebalde contrary to the promise before made, gaderyd a power of
knights, and made war upon his said brother / and lastly beseged him in
the city of Uienne / where upon either part was by skyrmysshes and assautes
great people slain. All be yt in the end Cundebalde wanne the city / and his
brother therein being, he afterward behedyd. About this time great discencyon
grew atwene Clodoueus and the king of Gothys called Alericus. which
varyau^ce by agreement of both parties was put to the judgment of Theodorycus
than king of Longobardes or of Italya^s. The which after the said causes were
well and suffycyently argued and debatyd before him and his counsel: he
finally gave sentence yt a knight of Clodoueus should stand upon an hylle
holding a spear vpryghte in his hand / and that the king of Gothys should
throw or lay so much silver as should in process cover the point of the said
spear. which sentence as testyfyeth master Robert Gagwyne, the Gothis
despised saying that they had not suffycyent silver within their land to
perform the said sentence. And for despyte of the same / certain Gothys
espyenge a prince of France named Pattern, being assocyate with some diverse
Frenshmen in a lofte or chamber / the which Pattern had been solycytour for the
Frenshe king in ye foresaid matter: the said Gothys by crafty and false means
caused the floorth of the said chamber to fall / by which mean the said
Pattern was grievously hurt, and many of the other in likewise, and some slain.

whereof when Clodoueus had writing / he being therwyth greatly amoued, and
also because ye Gothys dysobeyde the foresaid awarde: he gadered shortly after
a great host. And after certain offerynges done to saint Martyn / with also
passing the river of Uian by miracle and ledynge of an heart: he lastly came to
the syghte of his enemies. Then Clodoueus lodged his host nere unto the
monastery of saint Hillary / where in the night before ye battle, he received
tokens of vyctory, the which I pass over.

And upon the morn he set his people in array, and made toward his enemies /
and met with them in a field called Noglodien^, nere unto ye river of Cleue
or Clyue. where after sore and long fight / he slew the abouesayde Alaricus
king of Gothys (as says mine author) with his own hand.

But here should seem some discord of time with other writers. For Cronica
cronicarum, Iacobus Philippus, and other / testyfye that this Alaricus was deed
many years before. For he should be king of Gothys by their saying in the
time yt Honorius brother unto Archadius was emperor which was about the year
of our lord.iiii. hundred and.ix. that he began his empire. wherefore master
Robert Gagwyne means some other king of Gothys than Alaricus. For the said
authors also affyrmen, that this Alaricus dyed of sudden sykenesse at a city
named Cesancia / wha^ he had reigned after most writers.vi. year.

Then it follows in ye story / when Clodoueus had thus opteyned vyctory of the
Gothys, and set the country of Guyan in order: he sped him again into France.

And when he was comen into the country of Turon^ / he was encou^tred with
ambassadors of themperours Anastasius, and presented from the said emperor
with gifts and great price and honor, and also admytted for a consul of
Rome, which at that days was a dygnyte of most honor. which done, he
remytted the said embassade with great gifts. This saying is affyrmed of the
other writers / the which show this honor to him to be done, for as much as
he had ouercomen the Gothys, enemies of Crystes faith. But they name not the
kings name that then reigned over the Gothys.

This business ouerpassed / Clodoueus continued his journey till he came to
the monastery or church of faint Martyn. where with great devotion according
to his former promysse / he offered his stead that he occupied that journey
again the Gothys. And after for that he intended to occupye the said horse if
he had like need: he redeemed him with a competent sum of gold. But yet the
horse might not be removed. Then ye king added to an hundredth pecys of gold /
which at those days were named golden shyllynges / and so received his stead.
wherefore the king said after in game, that saint Martyn was a good helper at
need / but he was costelewe.

Thus this noble and first christian prince co^tynued his life in noble and
marcyall dedys / in augmentynge his kingdom by knyghtly batayles and other
worldy prouysyons / and lastly dyed of gods visytacyo^ with all stedfastnes
of faith, when he had reigned.xxx. years / leuyng after him.iiii. sons of
Clotylde his wife / that is to say Clodomyrus, Chyldebertus, Theodoricus, and
Clotharius / or after some Latarius / and was buried in ye monastery that he
before nere unto Paris had builded, with such epytaphy or superscripcyon
upon his tumbe as after shall be showed.

But or I proceed to the declaryng of the foresaid epitaphy / for so much as I
have hard diverse hold an opinion, that the faith of Christ was received in
France or it were received in this land of Brytayne: therefore I shall note
here the time that this Clodoueus first took baptyme. which was as Ranulphe
monk and other testyfye, in the.xv. year of his reygne / or nere about. which
was ye year of our lord.iiii.C.lxxx. and.xix.

whereby yt apperyth, considering the time of Lucius first cryste^ prince that
ever was of Brytayne as before is showed / that Cristes faith was by a long
time honored in Brytayn, or it were honored in France / except that such
as hold the foresaid opynyo^, account the first coming of Crystes faith into
Brytayne at ye first conuersyon of the Saxons, whenne yt was preached by the
holy monk saint Augustyne and his fellows / which is not to the purpose. Than
to the foresaid epitaphy or superscrypcyon as follows.

Dives opum, virtute potens, clarusque triumpho,
Condidit have sedem, rex Clodoueus idem.
Patricius magno, subsimis fulsit honor.
Pfemis amore dei, contempsit credere nusso
Lumina qui varijs horrent potenta figuris,
Mox pur gatus aquis, and Christi font renatus
Fragrantem gessit, infulso crisinate crinem.
Exemplu^'que dedit, sequitur quod plurima tur^a
Gentisis populi / spretoque errore suorum.
Doctorem cultura deum; verumque parentem.
Hijs felix meritis, superauit gesta priorum
Semper concilio, castris bellisque tremendus.
Hortatu dux ipse bonus, ac pectore fortis
Co^structas acies formauit in a gmine primus.
The which verses may be thus expouned in our mother tu^ge as here after
follows.

Rich of goods, strong in virtue, in triumph re shynynge,
King Clodoueus, this temple buyste of stone
Fader of common profete, clad with his honor excellynge.
Replenyshed with gods love, despised his old foon
And his pagaun law, with the strange fygurs echone.
Purgid with holy water, by cristes font born new
And holy crisine enointed floured with virtue dew
Example gyuyng, him follows many a man,
Forsakyng their error and their falls gods all
And by his techynge honor but one god than
Thus by his merytes he excelled his parentall /
And thorough his counsel made city and castle thrall.
He was a noble duke, and therewith of great might
And in front of battle was ever the first knight
Anglia. THE.C. CHAPTER.
VTer the last or youngest son of Co^stantyne, and brother of Aurelius / was
made king of Britayn in the year of our lord.v. huudred even / and the.xvi.
year of Clodoueus than king of France. This as before is touched, was
surnamed Pendrago^. The cause thereof was as wytnessyth ye English cronycle,
for so much as Merlyn lykened him unto a dragon under a sterre apperynge in the
firmament. whereof there is made a long process, and by Gaufryde in his
Brytyshe book also affermed / the which to me seems of little crede^ce. But
trought it is, that after Uter was (as before is said) made king / he was
enamowryd upon the dukes wife of Cornewayll named Igwarne or Igorne / and for
to optayn his unlawful lust, sought many and diverse means. So ye lastly he
made war upon her husband named Garolus or Gorleis / and at length slew ye
said duke at his castle called Tyntagell, standing in Cornewayle / and after
married his wife, and received of her the noble knight Arthur, and a daughter
named Amye, as says the english cronycle.

More is not left of any writer of authoryte in remembrance of this Uter /
all be it that some testifye, that he by the help of Merlyne should fetch
Coria gigantum otherwise called the stone henge, out of Irla^d as before I have
showed in the story of Aurelius. And of Gaufryde is showed, that Uter also
should win the forsayde lady by the enchauntement of Merlyn. which is not
comely to any christen relygyon to give to any such fantastycall illusyons any
mind or credence. wherefore I pass over, leuynge all the other matter, which
also is there rehersyd of the war between Uter and Osca, son of Hengyste,
for so much as it is dyscordaunt unto other writers / and finally conclude that
this Uter Pendragon dyed by force of venym, when he had ruled this isle of
Brytayne by the full term of.xvi years / and after was buried by his brother
Aurely in Coria gigantum or stone henge, leuynge after him the forenamed son
the puyssaunt Arthur.

Francia. THE.CI. CHAPTER.
LOtharius or Clotharius the youngest son of Clodoueus / was made king of a
part of France called Soisons, in ye year of our lord.v. hundred and.xiiii /
and the.xiiii. year of Uter then king of myche Brytayne. ye shall understand
that after the death of Clodoueus last king of France / the land by him was
dyuyded to his four sons. That is to say to the eldest son Clodomirus was
appointed the lordshyppe of Orlyaunce / to Theodoricus the second son
Austracye / to Childebertus ye third son myddell France, or the country lyenge
about Paris / and to this Lothayr, the above said lordshyppe of Soisons. Of
which said lordshyppes either of them possessyd / they were of their subiettes
called kings, and so continued in good rest a certain of time. In the which
season Clotyld their mother, berynge in mind the unnatural death of her
parents / wylled her sons to venge their death. which death as testyfyeth
Uincent historyall, and also Antoninus, was in this form following. Gundenchus
the grau^d father of Clotildis had.iiii. sons / that is to say Cundebaldus,
Gondigisillus, Hilpericus, and Godomarus: To these.iiii. sons Gundenchus
besette the land of Burgoyne. Gondigisillus and Godomarus dyed / wherefore the
land of Burgoyne fill to Cundebaldus and Hilpericus. Then Cundebaldus for
couetyse of the hole lordeshyp, slew his brother Hilpericus / and fastened a
great stone to the neck of his wife, and cast her into a deep water. And of
his.ii. daughters, whereof the eldest hight Trona / he exyled in poor wede or
clothing. And the younger he kept in seruage within his own court. The
which after as before is showed was married again his will unto Clodoueus
fader to this Lotharius.

Then yt follows, this Lotharius son of Clotild made sharp war upon
Sigismonde son of Cundebaldus, which then was deed. In the which war the
eldest son Clodomyrus was slain / leuyng after him.iii. sons named
Theobaldus, Guntherus or Guntharre, and Clodoaldus. which.iii. sons took to
her tuycyon and guydynge. But the other brother maynteyned the war again yt
Burgoynio^s / in such wise ye finally they obtained ye right porcyon of their
mother Clotilde.

After this war was fynyshed in Burgoyne: Childebertus the third son
herynge that Almarcus king of Spain mysse entreated his suster / made war
upon him, and lastly him subdued and set his suster in her former estate.

But while the said Childebert was thus in Spain occupied: Theodorus his
brother took from him a city to him belongyng called Mou^tclere / and slew
the knights which Childebertus had left there to keep the said city. For
this myscheuous deed arose great debate between these two brethren / but by
medyacyon of friends they were at length accordyd. Then Theodorus sought new
means of dyspleasure again his said brother, as well treason as other wise /
the which Childebert by his polycye and wisdom and with good fortune escapyd.

Childebertus than casting in his mind how he might win to him the
patrimony or the lordeshyp that lately belo^ged unto his eldest brother
Clodomyrus: took counsel of his brother Clotharius. In such wise yt they to
gyder or of one assent, sent unto their mother Clotyld for their neuewes,
childern of their brother And she nothing mystrustynge them / sent the said
childern unto the said ii. brethern. But within short time of their coming
unto their said uncles, as testifyeth master Robert Gagwyne, and also the
french cronicle / Lotharius tyra^nously with his sword slew two of ye said
childern. And then the third fled for his sauegarde unto such as him
fauouryd. He was after again taken and compelled to make a solemn oath, yt he
should become a relygyous man, and never claim any part of his right or
enherytaunce. By which unlawful mean the.ii. brothern obtained the hole
lordshyppe of Orleaunce / and partyd the reuennues thereof between them / but
that enduryd but a while. And here I pass over the sorrow that Clotylde made
for the childern of her son Clodomyrus / and also the orderyng of the youngest
son called Clodoaldus, which escaped the danger of his uncles, as before is
showed / the which would ask a long season.

THE.CII. CHAPTER.
IT was not long after but that the second brother king or duke of Austracy,
dyed of gods visytacyon / leuynge after him a son named Theodobertus. The
which of his two foresaid uncles was grievously warred by long tract of time,
the which he defendyd thorough his marciall knighthode. And when he by diverse
means had sought peace, and might not purchase it: he then found such
means by rich gifts and otherwise, that he wa^ne the favor of his uncle
Childebert / and cherysshyd him as his friend. Then fill unkindness between
Childebert and Lotharius / in so myche that either of the^ assembled a great
host to subdue that one the other. But the forenamed Theodobertus made all ye
power he might, to aid and assyste Chyldebert. So that upon both parties was
a great multitude of knights armed ready to fight. Clotilde then herynge of
this mortal war between her two sons / and also considering the
lykelyhode of the great effusyon of man's blood that might ensue, by the
reason of the ioynynge of these foresaid two hosts: in all have yode unto the
sepulture or shryne of saint Martyn. where with due devotion she made her
special prayers / besechynge god and that blessed saint to send by heavenly
power some let or impedyment, yt the said hosts should not join in battle. By
mean of which prayer when the said two hosts were in preparyng for to have
run to gyther: suddenly fill such a tempeste of wind and hayll with thunder
and lyghtnynge, that both hosts were so grievously beten with the said
tempeste and wederynge, that either of them had most mind how they might
defend them self from danger of the said wederyng. And over that, as
testyfyeth ye above named Author / either of the hosts thought in their
minds, that they were chased of their enemies / in such wise that either of
them fled from other by a long space.

After this either of them sent means of treatise either to other / and at
length confermed a peace between them. The which peace surely on both parties
assured Childebert excytyd his brother to war upon a people or country
called Terra Conens^ in the prouynce of Spayn, and besegyd the city of
Saragounce otherwise called Augusta / and finally kept the cytesyns so short,
that they to appeace their enimyes, caused the bishop of the city to open
the sepulcher of saint Uyncent, and give to Lotharius a part of y^ holy
martyrs body.

But yet that notwythstandynge / though the syege were wythdrawen and the city
spared: yet the country there about they pylled and wasted without pity. And
after with great richesse of pray, returned in to France. where at Paris by
Childebert soon after was builded a monastery in the worship of god and of
saint Uincent / where the foresaid relyke was set and reuere^tly kept. which
monastery at this day is called saint Germayns de Pree.

In this while, I can not say by what hap / these two brethern newly
malygned again their neuewe Theodobert the son of their brother Theodorich.
And entendyd by they^ malice to byreue him of the lordeshyppe of Austracy. And
to that intent gathered their people to war upon the said Theodobert. whereof
when ye said Theodobert was ware, considering he could not so shortly
assemble his people to wythstande the malice of his said uncles* he ^^lowly and
good manner rode again them in a peasyble wise. And to them behaved him so well
in word and deed, that they alonely forgave no^ his trespass / but also sent
him ^^gayne with great richesse of gifts.

Soon after this time dyed Clo^tilde the wife of Clodoueus / y^ which with
great pomp of her two sons was buried by her said husband* And shortly
after dyed Theodobert aforenamed / leuynge after him ^ son named Theobalde.
In this pass time Lotherius of his wife r^ceyued.vii. sons and two
daughters. Of the which Cramyris the eldest son he sent into Guyan, to have
the rule thereof under his father. But he contrary to his fathers mind /
oppressyd the inhabytauntes thereof with grievous exaccyons and tribute /
wherefore his father being dyscontent, called him thens. Cramyris with this
being sore amoued / in great anger departed his fathers court, and yode unto
Childebert his uncle, excytynge him to make war upon his father / imagynynge
falls occasyons to bring the two brethern at dystaunce / and made a solemn oath
to his uncle, that during his life he should strength his party again his own
father. which assurance thus made, Chyldebert preparyd his host to war
again his brother Lotharius. But ye said Lotharius of this being warned / for
such let as he then haddde, sent again his enymyes two sons of his, named
Gunthranus and Aribertus / and while these two fonnes made toward Childebert,
he in that while made great waste in the country of Champayne / and taking
great pryses, returned into his own country of myddell France. whereof herynge
the forenamed Guntranus and his brother / and also that in Guyan was moved
war by Cramyr^: spedde them thither with all their people. But they did
nothing worthy memory or laud.

In this season dyed the forsayde Chyldeberte brother of Lotharius without
heir / when he had ruled myddell France.xivii. years, as says the French
cronycle / and was enterred in ye monastery of saint Uyncent, otherwise called
saint Germayne de Pree.

THE.CIII. CHAPTER.
AFter the death of Childebert / for so myche as he dyed without heir,
Lotharius forenamed seasyd all myddell France into his possessyon. And after
he had somdele set yt in order / not forgetynge the innaturall rebellyon of
his son Cramyris: chase unto him a puryd company of knights and of competent
number / and in all haste made toward Guyan, where ye said Cramyr^ was then
abiding. But when he hard of the coming of his father again him with his
chosyn army: he withdrewe him to the uttermost parties of France / and
requyryd aid of a king or duke to that party adioynynge named Gonobalde /
the which to him promised aid to his power.

Lotharius of this affinyte being warned / pursued the said Gonobalde so
sharply, that he constrained him at length to take the church of saint
Martyne, and to hold yt for his sauegarde. But when Lotharius had assayd by
diverse means, as well by fair promise as words of Manasses, and might not
get the said Gonobalde out of that holy place: he set the church on fire,
and brent the duke in the same / the which shortly after he reedifyed and made
in more better manner then yt before had been.

when Cramyris was thus dispoynted of ye aid of Gonobalde: he then fled into
little Brytayne, and required aid of the earl thereof named Cenabutus / where
by comfort of yt said earl he assembled a great host to wythstand his
father. whereof the father being asserteyned drew toward him. And when both
hosts were nere: they sent messagers to ye father to entreat a peace. But
Lotharius included so many hard condycyons within the said peace / or as some
writersmeane, Cramyris desired such unlawful desires of his father / that the
said treaty might take none effect. And for trust that he had in the Brytons
and his strength he was utterly bent to try his cause by dynt of sword.

Lotharius having experience that fortune of batayl is in victory doutfull and
uncertain: he therefore made his prayer to god / besechynge him of aid again
the innaturall and obstynate rebellyon of his son. After which prayer endyd /
he commanded in the name of god to set upon his enymyes. which met with
so great ire / that shortly ye grene feld was dyed into a perfyght read / and
many knights upon both parties lay slain, and gruntynge upon the earth. The
father comfortynge and calling upon his knights upon the one part, and the
son upon his knights upon that other part / either of them entendynge ye death
and utter destruccyon of each other / thus this battle hanging in suspense to
whether of them the vyctorye should turn: suddenly the Britons gave back / and
gave place to the Frenchemen. with the which the French party being comforted
/ enforced yt Britons with so sharp fight, that they were compelled to forsake
the field, and took them to flight / whom the Frenchemen chasyd and slew
without mercy.

In the which chase Cramyris with his wife and chyldern were taken and
presentyd unto Lotharius. The which shortly after, setting a part all
faderly love, compassion, and pytye, caused a great fire to be made / into the
which he commanded to be cast the said Cramyris with also his wife and
chyldern. Or as wytnessyth the french cronycle, they were all enclosyd in a
house / and the house and they to gether consumyd with fire.

Thus the most cruel father without pity chastysyd ye inobedyent son, to the
example and lernyng of other, to bear dew obedience unto their parents. After
this vyctory and cruel chastysement executed by Lotharius: he returned into
France. And so to the sepulcre or shryne of saint Martyne / yeldynge to god
and him thanks of this vyctorye, and offeryd there many and rich gifts. And
after spedde him to Soisons / where he as king of all France / except the
lordshyppe of Austracy, which Theobald son of his brother sons Theodorich
then held. The father of this Theobald was Theodobert. Then Lotharius seeing
his land in rest and quietness / gave him to hunting and chase of wild
bestes, a game of great use among all French princes.

In which dysporte he being one day greatly trauayled, caught some surfeit /
of the which ensued a mortal sykenes, so that he dyed shortly after, when he
had reigned as before is specifyed over the lordshyppe of Soysons and other,
by the term of.l. winter full. And was after buried at Soisons with great
pomp / leuynge after him four sons, Gu^thranus, Aribertus, Chilpericus, and
Sigebertus.

It is testyfyed of master Robert Gagwyne, that saint Radegunde borne of the
country of Thurynge, of a pagan father named Bernigarius, was wife to this
Lothar^. whose virtuous life Antoninus in his book called Sm^ Antonini, in
the.viii. chapyter and.xii. title of the second part of his work, shewyth
co^pe^dyously.

Anglia. THE.CIIII. CHAPTER.
ARthurus the son of Uter Pendragon a strepelynge of.xv. years of age began
his reygne as king of Brytayne, in the year of our lord v. hundred and.xvii
/ and the third year of Lotharius, then king of France, or of a part
thereof, as before is declared. Of this Arthure is by Gaufryde recyted a long
storye, and allowed by the englysh cronycle, the which from other writers is
greatly dyscordaunte. But yet all authors agreen that he was noble an
victoryous in all his dedys.

Feign I would declare the fame of this noble prince, to the comfort of other
to follow his marcyall dedis / so that I might somewhat justly fie my report by
some authoure of authoryte. But the more I am in doubt, because of the saying
of Ranulphe monk of Chestre / which vouchyth yt upon wyllyam writer of
hystoryes of kings, as is rehearsed at length in the.vi. chapyter of the.v.
book of Policronico^ / which is there open to every man that is desirous to
know the said report or opinion / the which for the length thereof I
ouerpasse. And somewhat to the honor of so great a champyon as was this Arthur,
I shall lay unto the reder, that he may with authoryte show unto the herers /
and there with glad the welsheman that he should desce^de of so noble a vyctour
/ which so many dedys of honor executed in his days.

Then as testyfyeth Polycronycon and other / Arthur faught.xii. no table
batayllis again the Saxons, and of them all was victour.

wherefore the first was upon the river of Cleuy / and.iiii. the next were
foughten upon the river Douglys, which rynneth under the town of wygan, upon
ten miles from the river of Merse in Lancashyre.

The.vi. battle was upon the river called Bassa.

The.vii. beside Lyncoln^ in a wood called Celidon^.

The.viii. and the.ix. were foughten about york.

The.x. was about Nycolf town, which is named warwyk as after some writers.

The.xi. was at Bathe / where he long besegyd Cerdicus king of westsaxons.

The.xii. and last was at a place called Badon or Babowe hill / in which he
slew many Saxons. But that notwythstandynge he might not clearly void them
his land / but that they kept their cou^tes, which they were before possessyd
of / as Kente, Southerey, and Norff: all be it that some authors testyfy that
they held these countres as trybutaryes unto Arthure.

This noble warryour as wytnessyth holy Gildas, slew with his own hand in one
day by ye help of our lady saint Marye / whose picture he bare peynted in
his shield, a hundred and.xl. Saxons. which shield he called Prydwen^ / his
swerd was called Caliboure / and his spear was called Ron^, after the brytyshe
tunge or speech.

The third or fourth.

THE.CV. CHAPTER.
ABout the.v. year of this Arthur, after the agreement of most writers began
the lord ship of westsaxo^s, under ye Saxon called Cerdicus and Kenricus his
son. For Denis and other witness, that this lordshyppe or kingdom should
have his beginning the.lxxi. year. after the first coming of Hengiste / or
the year of our lord five hundred.xxii. which agrees with the.v. year of
Arthure aforesaid.

This lordshyppe contained the weste country of England / as wylt wyltshyre,
Somersetshyre, Berkes, Dors. and other / as Deuonshyre, and Cornewayll / and
had in the Eest side Southampton / in ye north Thamys the famous river / in
the south and weste the sea Occean.

This foresaid Cerdicus, which of some authors is named Childricus / la^ded
first at Cerdyshore which now is called yermouth, an haven town in the
country of Norff. And by help of other Saxons then inhabyted in that country
then called eest Anglys: the said Cerdicus at length obtained the foresaid
country and named yt westsaxon or westsaxonia / and reigned therein as lord or
king a certain of years, and Kenricus his son after him.

The first christen king of this prouynce was named Kyngilsus / and co^uertyd
by means of that blessed man Berinus bishop of Dorchester. To whom
Quichelinus brother of the foresaid Kyngilsus, gave the said city to make
there his see, after he also had received baptyme of the said Berinus. And as
Guydo wytnessyth the said Quichelinus gave after to the bishop of
wynchester.vii. miles compass of land, to build there a bishops see / the
which was accomplyshed and finyshed by Kenwalcus his son. This kingdom
enduryd longeste of all the other / which were.vii. in number, or.vi. beside
this. Some writers account the term of the duraunce of this kingdom, from
Cerdicus to Egbert / and some to the last year of Aluredus. But Guydo
accomptyth the enduraunce of this kingdom, from the first year of Cerdicus
unto the last year of Edward the confessor. By reason whereof yt should endure
five hundred and and.liiii. years. But most accordyngly yt should be rekened
from the first year of Cerdicus to the last year of Aluredus. For he made one
monarchye of all.vii. kingdoms / in which time did flow or pass three hundred
lxxviii. years.

THE.CVI. CHAPTER.
Now then I will return unto Arthur / the which by a long time dwelled in
war and mortal battle with ye Saxons, by mean of their daily repair into
this land. The which also alyed them with Pictes and other nacyons, and made
their party the strenger by ye mean. But yet Arthur by his marciall knyghthod
brought them in such frame / that he was accounted for chyef lord of Brytayne.

Finally when he had by a long time maynteyned his wars again the Saxons
/ and specially again Cerdicus or Childricus king of westesaxons: he for a
fynall concord gave unto the said Cerdicus as testyfyeth Policronica in
the.vi. chapyter of his.v. book. the two cou^tres of Hampshyre and Somerset.
And when he had set his land in some quietness, he betoke the rule thereof
unto his neuewe Mordred / and with a chosyn army sailed, as says Gaufryde and
other, unto France / where by the report of Gaufryde he wrought wonders.

But the writers of French chronicles touch nothing of such notable deeds /
nor yet the writers of Romans mind nothing of such acts done again their
consul or emperor called by Gaufryde Lucius Hybertus. Therefore I will spare
all that long matter: remyttyng the welshemen as touching ye process unto the
said Gaufride. And here I will follow Policronicon, where he says, that for as
much as the forenamed Mordred was desirous to be king / and feryd some dele
the might of Cerdicus king of westsaxons: he therefore drew to him the said
Cerdicus by great gifts, as of towns and castelles and other means / where
thorough the said Cerdicus to him assented, so that Mordred was at London
crowned king of Brytayn / and Cerdicus after the use of paga^s was at
wynchester then called Kaerguent crowned king of westsaxons.

when relacyo^ came to Arthur of all this treason wrought by his neuewe
Mordred: he in all haste made toward Brytayn, as yt is read in the english
cronycle / and la^ded at Sandwyche, where he was met of Mordred and his
people / which gave unto him strong battle in time of his landyng, and lost
there many of his knights, as the famous knight Gawyne and other. But yet
this not withstandyng Arthur at length wa^ne the land, and chasyd his enymyes
/ and after the entering of his cosyn Gawyn and other of his knights there
slain, he set forward his host to pursue his enymyes. Mordred thus being
ouersette of his uncle at the sea side / withdrewe him to wynchester. where he
being furnysshed of new soudyours, gave unto Arthur, as says Gaufryde, ye
second fight / wherein also Mordred was put to the worse, and constrained to
flee. Thyrdely and lastely the said Mordred faught with his uncle Arthur
besides Glastynbury / where after a long and daungerouse fight, Mordred was
slain / and ye victorious Arthur wounded unto the death / and after buried in
the vale of Aualon beside Glastynbury beforesayde.

Of this last end and buryenge of Arthur in the brytyshe books are told many
fables. But to oppress ye errors of Brytons ye think or believe yt Arthur yet
lives: Policroniconshe with in his forenamed chapyter of his.v. book, yt in
the second Henryes time king of England the bonys of the said Arthur and
Gwaynour his wife were fou^den / and translated into the forsayde church of
Glastynbury, and there new buried in the year of our lord.xi. hundred.lxxx.
And more specially yt is noted in the xxiii. chapyter of the.vii. book of
Policronicon above said.

wherefore to be at co^clusyon of a fine of this noble warryour / he was as
before is showed slain or wounded to death, when he had reigned over the
Britons by ye term of.xxvi. years / willing before his death that Constantyne
the son of Cador duke of Cornewayle, for so much as of his body remained none
heir, that he should be his heir and enheryte the land of much Britayn after
his death.

Anglia. THE.CVII. CHAPTER.
CONstantinus the son of Cador duke of Cornewayle / by assent of the Brytons
was of them crowned king of myche Brytayne, in the year of Crystes incarnacyon
five hundred.xliii / and the.xix. year of Lotharius then king of France. This
was nere kynnesman unto Arthur / and was by the two sons of Mordred grievously
vexed, for so myche as they claymed the land by the right or title of their
father. So yt between him and them were foughten many and sundry bataylles.
whereof another of place nor of time is left any conuenyent memory / nor yet of
the names of the said two sons.

But as diverse authors agreen, after these forsayde batayllys thus foughten /
fynylly the two sons of Mordred were constrained of pure force to seche
strong holds for their refuge* wherefore that one took London, and that other
wynchester.

whereof Constantyne being warned / left not till he had slain that one
within the monastery of saint Amphiabil^ at wynchester / and that other within
a temple or church of London, which temple is named of Gaufryde an house of
freres. But ye saying is doutefull / for at that days yt is to be supposed that
there was none house of freres within London nor by a long time after.

when Constantine had thus subdued his enymyes, and thought himself in a
manner of suertye of his regyon: then fortune as she had enuyed his glory,
arreryd again him his own kynnesman named Aurelius Conanus / the which again
him made mortal battle / and finally or at the last slew him in ye field,
when he had reigned after most accord of writers.iii. years / the which was
then huryed at Stone hyenge by the sepulture of Uter Pe^dragon / with great
solemnytye.

THE.CVIII. CHAPTER.
Aurelius Conanus the cosyn of Constantync last named / was crowned king
Brytayne, in the year of our lord.v. hundred and.xlvi / and the.xxxii. year of
Lotharius before named then king of France. This was noble and lyberall. But
he was a man that cherysshed such as loved strife and dyscencyon with in his
land / and gave light credence to them yt accused other, were yt right or
wrong. And as testyfyeth Gaufryde and other / he took by strength his uncle
which of right should have been king, and cast him in a strong prison / and
after s^ew tyrannously the.ii. sons of his said uncle. But he reioysed his
reygne but short while. For as wytnessyth the said Gaufryde, when he had
reigned two years he dyed, were yt of the sonde of god or otherwise / leuynge
after him a son named Uortiporius, as has the authoure of the book named
Flower of hystoryes.

Of this Uortiporius speaks nothing the english cronycle / but tells of
two kings that should reygne next after Constantyne both at ones / whereof
that one he names Adelbryght, and that other Edyll. whereunto none other writer
agrees except that he names them for some of the kings of the Saxons. For
about that time reigned in kent or soon after, Ethelbert or Athelbert /
which might be taken of some for Adelbryght. And that other which he named
Edylf, might be taken for Ella king of Southsaxons. But this Ella should not
by concord of writers be living at this time. It might with more conuenyency
accord, that yt should be a king of Deira or of Northu^berlande named Ella,
the which reigned more about this time and season.

Of these two kings, the said english cronycle tells a long process /
the which for I find none author of authoryte that writes or speaks of the
same, I pass yt over.

ye shall also furthermore understand, that after this day the Brytons daily
dyscreasyd of lordshyppe and rule within Brytayne, and drew them toward
Cambyr or walys / so that the country about Chestre was the chyefe of their
lordshyp within Brytayne. For daily the Saxons landed with companyes, and
occupied ye princypall parts of ye same / as shortly here after shall appear.

The fyfthe kingdom of the Saxons.

THE.CIX. CHAPTER.
IN the time of the reygne of this fore named Aurelius Conanus / as wytnessyth
Polycronica, Guido, and other: began the kingdom or lordshyp of Brenicia
under a Saxon named Ida / the year of our lord.v. hundred and.xlvii / and the
second or last year of the said Conanus. This lordshyp was in the north part
of Brytayne / and grew in short while more and more, so that finally it was
named the kingdom of Northumberlande. But ye shall understand, that this
lordshyp was first divided in two kingdoms / whereof the first, as above is
said was called Brenicia, and that other Deyra. The meris or markis of this
kingdom of Northu^berlande were by East and by west the occean see / by south
the river of Humber, and so downwarde toward the weste by the endys of ye
shyres of Notynghm and Derby, unto the river of Merse or Mercia / and by north
the Scottysshe see, which is called forth in Scottysh / and in Brettyshe the
werde.

The southsyde of this lordshyppe was called Deyra, which is now called the
bysshopryke of Durham, and the north side was called Brenicia / which were
than departed or severed by the river of Tyne. Deyra contained the land from
Humber to the river of Tyne / and Brenicia included the country from Tyne to
the Scottysshe see.

In Brenicia reigned first as is above said Ida or Idas / and in Deyra reigned
first Ella / which lordshyppes began both within.iii. years. But in process
of time both in one were named the kingdom of Northumberlande / which so
continued somwhyle under one king, and somewhyle under two, by the term
of.iii. hundred and.xxi. years, as says Ranulphe munke of Chester. And after
forth continued ye name under Saxons and Danes, till the coming of Edredus
brother of Ethelstane and son of Edward ye elder. The which Edredus in
the.ix. or last year of his reygne, joined this to his own kingdom. By which
reason it should seem, that this kingdom endured under that name upon.iiii.
hundred and.ix. years.

The first christian prince of this kingdom was named Edwynus / that received
the faith of saint Paulyne, as testyfyeth Guydo. In this lordshyppe also were
included these shyres and countrees now called york, Notyngham shyre or
Snothyngham shyre, Derby shyre, ye bysshopryke of Durham, Copelande, and other.

Among the many kings yt reigned in this lordshyppe, which after some writers
were to the number of xxiii. reigned one accounted the.viii. king by Guydo,
named Ethelfridus and son of Ethelricus. which Ethelfridus destroyed mo
Brytons than all ye other kings of Saxons. This was fader to saint Oswold and
Oswi.

He slew also many of the Bryto^s at a battle that he had again them beside
Kaerlegyon or Chester, and two thousand and a hundred of monks of the house
of Bangor, as it is testyfyed of Polycronicon in the.x. chapyter of his.v. book
/ the which monks were comen thither to pray for the good speed of the
Brytons. And over this forsayde number of monks.l. fled / whereby they with
their leder named Brucyuall were sauyd. Of such a number of monks of one
house / might be demyd a wonder. But the said Policronica, with Guydo, and
other writers / affermyn that in that house of Bangor were at those days for
the more party three times. vii, hundred monks, the which lived by the travail
of their hands only.

The forenamed Oswye, was after Oswolde king of this prouynce / which gave
with his daughter Elfleda a nonne.xii. lordshyppes into ye church, to build
with.xii. monasteryes / whereof.vi. of the said lordshyppes were in Brenicia,
and.vi. in Deyra / as says Guydo. And also Ranulphe in his.v. book of
Polycronyca and.xvi. chapyter affermyth the same.

THE.CX. CHAPTER.
UOrtiporius son of Aurelius Conanus after the opinion before said / was
ordained king of Brytayne in the year of our lord.v. hundred and.xlviii. and
the.xxxiiii. year of Clotharius then king of France. Of the which is little
memory left in any cronycler or writer / except yt Guydo testyfyeth him to be
a vyctoryous knight / showing breefly that he in sundry batayles scomfyted the
Saxons / and defendyd his land and Brytons from ye danger of them and other
that the Saxons alyed them with.

In the time of the reygne of this king / a Saxon named Ella the son of Iffus,
began to reygne in ye south side of the kingdom of Northumberlande called
Deyra / as before is touchyd in the chapyter of the said kingdom.

Then yt follows / when this Uortiporius had ruled the Brytons knyghtly by
the term of.iiii. years / he dyed, and was put to his fader / leuynge none
heir of his body.

For as myche as all writers agreen, that the kings of westsaxon at length
subdued all the other kingdoms / and made of the hole land of much Brytayne
but one kingdom or monarchye / and all other as well of Brytons as of Saxons
failed or left of, that all only excepted: therefore I entende to bring in,
the name of euerych king of westsaxon from the first Cerdycus or Chyldricus,
and join them with the kings of Brytons / for so long as hereafter ye said
Brytons continued their reygne within any part of Brytayne.

THE.CXI. CHAPTER.
MAlgo a duke of the Brytons and neuewe of Aurelius Conanus, as says the
author of the Flower of hystories / began his reign over the Brytons in the
year of our lord.v. hundred.lii / and the.xxxviii. year of Clotharius then
still king of France / and also the.xv. year of Kenricus the son of
Cerdicus and second king of westsaxo^ aforesaid: accomptyng.xv. years of the
reygne of his fader, as Guydo allowyth. This Malgo after ye accord of all
writers that make mencyon / was ye comlyest and most personable man of all
Brytons than living, and therewyth endowed with knyghtly manhood. The which
wythstode ye Saxons and kept them of, that they damaged not the land / the
which he then had possessyon of. And as wytnessyth Gaufryde and other / he by
his manhood subdued ye isles of Iseland, Orchades or Orkeys, and Norway with
other.

In the time of the reygne of this Malgo / reigned in the lordshyp or kingdom
of Kent Ethelbertus / the which as wytnessyth Polycronyco^, assembled an host
of his knights, and gave battle unto Ceawlmus son of Kenricus and then king
of westsaxon / the cause whereof is not expressyd. But this battle was ye
first battle that was foughten by twene the Saxons, after that they opteyned
land and dwelling with in Brytayne / which was foughten in a place called
wylbaldowne. And in the fight was slain.ii. dukes of Ethelbertus / and him
self with his people chasyd.

Also yt'ys wytnessyd of the said Polycronica, that ye year following
Cutwolfus the brother of Ceawimus before named / faughte strongely again the
Brytons at Bedforde / and berafte them.iiii. cytyes or towns named
Liganbroght, Egelsborgth, Besyngton, and Euysham.

Then to return again to Malgo king of the Brytons / the author of the
Flower of historyes says, that not wythstandynge the many virtues, the which
god had endowed him with / he lastely forgate god for sakynge all virtue, and
gave him to sundry vices and sins, whereof the odible sins of Sodomy was one
/ wherefore fell to him great persecucyo^ of his enemies the Saxons, as before
so^dele is showed and more ensues

It was not long after the forenamed battle done at Bedforde / but that the
foresaid Cutwolfus dyed. But yet his said brother Ceawlmus couetouse of
worship, maynteyned his war again the Brytons / so that after he made a
new voyage again them, and made of them an other scomfyture / and took from
them ye famous cytyes of Bathe, of Glouceter, and w^rceter / which should be
by ye meaning of Ranulfe about the year of the reygne of this Malgo.xxix.

Of all this spekyth nothing the cronycle of England / but he makes his
process of a king named Cortyf. By the which as yt should seem by the
rehersall following that he makyth of Gurmunde / that Careticus ruled the
Bryto^s next after the death of this Malgo / as when the time comes more
plainly yt shall appear. Then it follows about the.xxxiii. year of this Malgo
/ Ceawlmus before named gadered his Saxons, and fought with the Brytons at a
place called Fechanlege. where after long fight Ceawlmus chasyd the Brytons,
and wan of them vyctory. But his brother called Cutha, was slain in ye fight /
for whom he made great sorrow. Thus in his latter days Malgo being oppressyd
and pursued of his enemies lastly dyed / when he had reigned after most
co^corde of stories.xxxv. years.

Francia. THE.CXII. CHAPTER.
CHilpericus the.iii. son of Lotharius or Clotharius before named / began his
reygne over ye part of France called Soysons, in the year of our lord
god.v. hundred.lxiiii / and the xiiii. year of Malgo then king of Brytayne.
This not being content with such as his fader had him be set / so soon as the
obsequy and enterreme^t of his fader was fynysshed, he spedde him unto Paris
and possessyd him of his faders treasoure. whereof his.iii. brethren being
warned / purchasyd to the^ such fre^dshyp of the nobles of France, that they
vnwetynge their said brother had enter into Paris / and lykely to have takyn
him there in, if he had not the sooner escaped.

For this inco^uenyence great disce^cyon was lykely to have grown by twene
these.iiii. brethren / had not ben the mediacyon of friends upon both
parties. The which by good and polityke ways, at length pacyfied all
varyau^ces among them / and concluded for a fynall pease, yt either of the
said brethren should hold him content with such porcyo^ as was before assygned
to the^ by their fader. That is to say to the eldest brother named Aribertus
or after some writers Cherebris, should fall the country that is lyenge about
Paris called mydle France / to Guntranus should fall the prouynce of
Orleaunce / and to this Chylpericus / the prouynce of Soysons / and to
Sygebertus the youngest brother, should belong the country of Mees or of
Austracy. which lordshyp begins at Champeyne as affyrmeth the French
cronicle, and stretchyth to the lordshyp or prouynce of Lorayne upon one
part, and to Almayne upon that other part. After which co^corde and agreement
thus fynysshed / either of ye said brethern depted unto his proper lordshyp

If I should here discribe the manners and condycyons of these.iiii. princes /
or to express ye unlawful lechery of the eldest brother Aribertus, in refusyng
his laufull wife Ingebryda or Ingeberta / or of the rauyshement of wives and
virgyns by him done / or yet the unstableness of living that was also in ye
second brother Guntranus, with virtues and vices of the other: I should thereof
make a long work. wherefore to bring this story to some co^uenye^ce, I thus
begin.

Troth it is that this Chilpericus or after some Hilpericus / took to wife the
daughter of the king of Spain called Athanahildus, whose name was Golsanda.
The which had to her handmayden a maid called Fredegunda, the which was of
passing beauty, and shappe of body. But to her was joined subtle wit and evil
condycyons / contrary to her lady and masters, which was simple and of
virtuous condycyo^s.

To the youngest brother named Sigebert was coupled in marriage the sister of the
said Golsanda named Brunechildis, or after ye Frensh cronicle Brunecheuste / a
woman of peruers and wicked co^dicyo^ as after shall appear. Then it follows,
Chilperich within short time that he was thus married unto Golsanda, cast
unlawful love unto her woman Fredegu^da. By reason whereof fell such
unkindness between them, ye lastly she was fou^den in her chamber deed and
strangelyd with a cord / which was done by the hand of her housbande, as
testyfyeth ye french book.

Then secondly he married a another wife named Audouera a woman of great birth:
how be it mine author nor yet ye french cronycle declaryth not her progeny /
with ye which he co^tynued and kept her after her honor. But yet he withdrew
not his unlawful love from ye forenamed Fredegu^d.

In this passetyme / cause of war was moved between Sigebert the younger
brother, and men of the country of Sweuy / for the which the said Sigebert
required aid of his brother Chilperich. At whose request he in all haste
assembled his people and spedde him toward his brother / leuynge his wife
great with child, in the keeping of the soresayde Fredegunde. Of the which
wife as testyfyeth the French book, he had before received.iii. sons
named Theodobertus, Meronens, and Clodoueus.

It was not long after that Chilperiche, as before is said, in aid of his
brother was departed / but that his wife was delyueryd of a daughter. And when
this child should be confermed of the bishop / this Fredegunde entendynge to
make a deuorce between Chilperich and his wife, by her subtyle and false
coniectoure counsayled the queen that she should for the more honor conferme
her own child. And the queen trustyng her counsel / supposing her counsel
had been for the best, confermed her own child.

THE.CXIII. CHAPTER.
IN this while the king with his brother occupied in war again y^ Suytzers
or men of Sweuy / bare them so knyghtly, that they subdued their enymyes, and
after returned into their countres. whereof when Fredegunde was ware, she in
secret manner met with the king / and showed to him all the demeanure of his
wife, but nothing of her own crafty workyng, wherewyth king was grievously
dyscontente in showing of his outward contenaunce / and said, if that were
true, she should from him be deuorcyd / and that she should be queen in her
stead.

After this the king coming to his paleys / the queen to the intent to be
the more accepted in his presence, not knowing of the malicyous workynge of
Fredegu^de, brought in her arms the young baby, to the which she was mother
both naturally and spirytually / and welcomed ye king her lord in right
humble manner, salutynge him with words of all comfort. But the king being
warned of her simple demeanure / and as some authors write, glad that he had
occasyon to find matter to her of displeasure / blamed her in grievous manner,
and commanded her out of his presence for that time / and after by counsel
of spyrytuall men, caused her from him to be deuorcyd / and her with her young
daughter to be put into an house of relygyon, to the which he gave possessions
for the fyndyng of her and of her young daughter named Childeynda.

And when Chilpericus had thus fynyshed this foresaid business / he
shortly after took to wife the fornamed Fredegu^d, not without grudge of some
of his lords and other.

It was not long after this marriage, that strife and discencyon fell between
this Chilpericus and Sigebert his brother / the which grew for certain land
that Chilpericus claymed to have of his brother before said. Then Chilpericus
assembled his knights and made war upon the land of his brother Sigebert /
the which then was besyed in like war again a people called Hunes / by
reason whereof Chilpericus had the more fordell, and wan by strength the city
of Reynys.

But yt was not long after or Sigebert was warned of his brothers unkindness.
wherefore he after his enymyes were by him somdele subdued / went with his army
into the country of Soysons belonging to his brother Chilpericus / and warred
in likewise in that land as his brother did in his / and at length took ye
city of Soysons, and therein the eldest son of Chilpericus named Theodobert,
and held him as his prisoner. Then Chilpericus herynge of the scomfyture of
his people and taking of his son, was again his brother more fervently
amoued / and cast in his mind all ways and means how he might revenge him
upon his brother. But yt was in vain. For his brother at that time had such
advantage of him / that he well apperceyuyd, that he had no better mean then a
treaty of peace, by mean whereof he shortly after obtained his son out of
danger, with other things concerning his profit / assuring to his said
brother by solemn oath, that after that day he should never were arms, nor
yet warrey his brother.

This co^corde and unite in due manner fynyshed, and suffycyently by both
counsayles stablysshed / yet Chilpericus being always minded to be reuengyd
upon his brother Sigebert / sent his youngest son named Clodoueus, and caused
him to war upon a city called Bordeaux, in the pronice of Neustria / now
called Norma^ dye. But by the manhood of a captain of Sigebert named
Singulphus, the said Clodoueus was over comen and compelled to void the
country, and so fled to Paris.

For this hap Chilpericus was fyryd with all malice / and in all have
commanded his forenamed son Theodobert with a great army to invade the said
country of Neustria, or Normandye. The which according to his fathers
commandment spedde him thither / and there by his extorte might and power,
took many cytyes and strong holds / not sparynge chyrches, howses of
relygyon, as nuns and other / and robbed and spoiled the country in most
cruel wise.

Lastly this persecucion thus done, a cheuetayne or duke named Gundoaldus of
the erldome of Poitowe / assembled a great power, and wythstode Theodobert /
and finally slew him in plain battle, and a great part of his people. whereof
herynge Chilpericus gathered a great host, and yode into the country of
Champayne / wasting and destroyenge the country with fire and iron to the
vttermoste of his power, and at length took the city of Reins, and spoylyd yt
without mercy.

THE.CXIIII. CHAPTER.
SIgebertus aduertysynge / and casting in his mind the innaturall dysposycyo^
of his brother / perceyuyng well that he entendyd his utter destruccyon:
provided in his best manner for to wythstande his malice. And for to bring his
continued malice to a fynall end / he gathered to him a puysant power / and
after sped him toward his said brother. whereof Chilpericus being aduertysed /
by his covert means sought ways of entreaty and peace, in such wise that or
the hosts met, a peace was concluded.

Then these two brethren thus accordyd / condescendyd in short time after to
make war upon their brother Gunthranus then lord of Orleaunce / the which
sygnory at that day belonged to the country or prouynce of Burgoyne. The
cause of this war is not expressyd / except yt they enuyed their brother to
have so great lordshyp. But by medyatours on both parts / after great array
purueyed on all sides, a concord and peace was concludyd in the temple of
saint Lowpe at ye city of Trois in Uyncent.

when this said peace was fynyshed / the said.iii. brethern in sight departed
as friends either of them from other. But as peace sometime contentyth not
saudyours / and specially such as delight them in pyllage and robbery: right so
among the knights of Sigebert was spronge a great rumoure / saying that they
were not co^tente and rewardyd for their great labor and travail according
to their desert / and specially for ye first journey of these.ii had again
his brother Chilpericus / thinking the peace with him made was nothing
honorable, consyderyng ye great doubleness and untruth that in him was
prouyd. For the which they excytyd Sygebert in all that in them was / to
break those bounds of peace, and to make new war upon him. And in like
manner some evil dysposyd persons were more agreeable to war then to peace,
upon the party of Chilpericus, and murmured in likewise. And for they thought
to have been better rewarded of Sygebert, then they were of their own master,
they therefore left him and yode to ye host of Sygeberte. By whose eueytynge
and report, Sygebert was more kyndelyd to set upon his brother.

Chilpericus having notycyon of his brothers purpose / with also the murmoure
and departing of his knights, and having in the other sum mystruste: he
anon with his wife and children and chief of his treasoure, went unto ye cyty
of Tourney / ente^dyng to keep that for their and his sauegarde. But when
Sygebert knew thereof, he was nothing in the pursuynge of him found slow / but
follows straight after, and closyd him within the said city with a strong
syege / where Chilpericus was in a manner dyspayred of ye welfare of him and his
Fredegunde. But she that was replenyshed of all iniquyte, called to her two
wicked persons / and promised unto them great gifts, if they would by venym
or otherwise slay her brother Sigebert. The which two fellows dysceyued with
the fair speech and great gifts of the said Fredegunda, took upon them
that unlawful charge / and by their subtell and false imagynacyon, brought
their cursed purpose to an end / but to their own confusyon. For after they
had wounded the king Sygebert to death, and would then have escapyd / the
kings knights espyeng their treason, fell soon upon them, and all to hewed
them. And when ye death of the king was known / a great noise and cry was
areryd in the host. By mean whereof the kings death was blown in to the
city, and after to the ceres of Chilpericus / whereof he was not a little
ameruayled, nor would to yt give ferme credence, till he was enfourmed of his
wife Fredegunde of all her subtyle workynge.

It was not long after or the knights or some of the captains of the host
of Sygebert presentyd the^ unto Chylpericus, besegynge him of his grace and
pardon / the which he gladly accepted. And when he had set his charges in
order / he then commanded prouysyon to be made for the beryenge of his said
brother within the monasterye of saint Medarde of Soysons.

And when all that business after a kyngely manner where fynyshed and endyd /
he then exylyd Brunechyeldys and Childebert, the wife and son of his brother
Sygebert, unto the city of Roane / taking from them great treasour that they
were possessyd of. But shortly after the son of Sygebert by help of Gun
debolde or Gundealde duke of Poy towe here before named / was delyueryd from
the danger of the said Chilperycus, and sent into his own lordeshyppe of
Austracye, which his father Sygebert was lord of.

In this passetyme he had sent his son Meroneus into a country called
Buturynges, to appeace certain rebellyons there areysyd. But when he hard of
the death of his uncle Sygebert / and of the being of his wife Bruncchyelde at
the city of Roane / he set a part all the charge of his father, and sped
him straight thither, keeping company with her. In whom he took such
consolacoin and pleasure / that lastely he married her, and kept her as his
wife. And when his father was thereof warned / he feryd lest by the counsel
of his said wife, he would arryse again him / wherefore he in all haste
assembled his people, and spedde him toward Roane.

when tidings came to Meroneus of the conunynge of his father with so great
array / and he as then vupurucyed of strength of knights to resyste his father
/ for his most suertye fled with his unlawful wife to the temple or church of
saint Martyne, taking the pryuylege thereof for their defense. And when
Chilpericus had temptyd by many sundry means to have them out of the said
pryuylege, and might not without brekynge of the same: he to bring about his
cautelouse purpose, made to them assuryd promise, that if they wyllfully would
renounce the said place, and put them in his grace / he would utterly
pardon their trespace, and suffer them from that time for to continue their
life to gether as man and wife. Upon which promise the said Meronees with his
wife renou^ced the said pryuylege, and put them hole in the kings mercy /
the which them receyuyd with all contenaunce of love and favor, and them
festyd and cherysshyd louyngly, by the space of two days only. But the third
day the feast was fynyshed / for then he sent his son unto Paris under sure
guydes / and there caused him to be professyd in a house of relygyon. But by
the means of his uncle Gunthranus he was after taken thens / and so restoryd
to his former knyghthode. For the which his father him newly pursued and
constrained him to take for his sauegarde ye church of saint Martyne in Turon.

And when he was warned that his fader perforce would take him thens / he then
fled unto a city of Champayne accompanied with.vi. servants only / where
he was in so great fere to be taken and in such despair to obtain grace of
his father, that he caused one of the said vi. persons to slay him with his
sword / and the foresaid Bruncchyeldis his wife put in sure keeping.

THE.CXV. CHAPTER.
CHilpericus then being asserteyned of the does of his son Meroneus, and the
sure keeping of Brunechieldis, he thought himself somdele assuryd / for ye
mystruste yt he had in them many times inquieted him. But yet he was not i^
quiet or rest. For shortly after ye people of Turon rebellyd again him. Again
whom he sent his son Clodoueus / and a noble man of his court named
Desiderius, ye which he sent as a gyde and a counsayloure of his said son. And
upon the party of his enymyes was a captain of the king Gunthranus / for so
much as the said Gunthranus claymed part of those lands about Turon. This
captain named Momelues heryng of the coming of the foresaid host, with a
chosen company made taward them / and gave unto Clodoueus a great sharp fight
/ and not without great loss of his men wanne of him the field, and compellyd
him to forsake that country.

Thus Chilperyche was wrapped in war and troubles of the world, sometime
with right, and some while with wrong / so that he some time wanne worship
and other while he lost. whereof to tell all the cyrcumstaunce I think yt
should be tedyouse both to the reders / and also to ye herers. wherefore I
pass over, in abrydgynge and shorting somedele of this storye.

Then follows within ye storye / after Chylpericus had by intyceme^t of
Fredegunde / wrongfully tormentyd the archebyshoppe of Roan named Breteste, and
him after the sufferaunce of many vylanyes exyled (for the which and other god
sent unto him some correccyom, in taking away by sodeyne death the chyldern
that he had by Fredegunde) he then began to know god, and took great
repentance / in promising to god amendment of his life. And to thentent that
he might have the more prayers of the common people to stand in state of grace:
he first releasyd a grievous trybute or imposicyon that he had lately set
upon all vynes thorough his regyon. And that done he reedyfyed old chyrches
and some he made new, and endowed them with great possessions. And over this
he releuyd greatly ye poor people, by enlargynge of his lyberall alms / and
became very humble and meke, where before time he was right stern and cruel.
But like as often it happens that hot love is soon cold / so this sudden
devotion was soon aswaged. For like as his troubles began to aswage, and his
prosperyte to increase: right so his old co^dycyons began in him to reuyue
and quycken / so that at length he returned to his old accustomed vices.

In this time a pleople called Longobardes, and now Italyans / warred sore
upon the lands of the empire. wherefore Mauricius then being emperor of
Constantyne the noble / for so much as he tought that the french kings might
was less cost and pain to subdue them, then he might being so far from
them / he therefore sent to him a great su^me of gold / with letters of
recommendacyon, exortyng him in the defense of the church of Rome, to assemble
his people and to withstand ye said Longobardes / and not to sease there of
till he had expellyd them from the lands of the empire.

which sum of gold he goodly receyuyd / promising to the bryngers thereof,
that he with all dylygence should execute the vttermoste of his power to
accomplish the request of the emperor. And according to a parcel of his
said promise / he assembled a great people, and made toward the said
Longobardes. Of whom the said Longobardes ferynge ye great might, made mean
of entreaty / offrynge to him great sums of money. By reason whereof he left
them in rest, and so returned into France. when Mauricius had understanding
yt the foresaid enymyes remained still in the foresaid lands, and continued
in their malice: he sent again to Chilpericus / requyryng him other to
perform his promise or else to restore his money, which he had taken for ye
perfourmaunce of the same. But all was in vain / for he would neither execute
that one nor that other. But at length as affermeth mine author, he was by
gods ordinance compelled for to restore the said money or a great part
thereof, by mean of his suster with her child that was as a prisoner to the
said emperor, which suster was before time married unto the king of Spain.

THE.CXVI. CHAPTER.
CHilpericus thus encreasynge in vice and dyshonoure, lastely repugned again
god / so that he fell into that detestable heresye of the Arianes / and
commanded certain artycles of the same touching the deuysyon of the trynyte
to be preached thorough his regyon. But the holy bishop of Towers withstode
that precepte, and blamed him grievously for that deed / all be yt the said
bishop named Gregory with great assystence of the other bishops of France,
had great labor to remove him from the said opinion.

This with many other crimes passed by Chilpericus / Fredegunde, which ever
encreasyd in perverse and malycyouse purpose, sought many unlawful means how
she might bring to confusyon the third son of her husbonde / knowing well
ye while he leuyd, her chyldern should never enheryte the crown of France.
This purpose to bring about many and diverse ways she attemted, which were
long to rehearse. But finally she caused him wrongfully to be accusyd, and by
mean thereof to be cast in prison. where he so being, she hired a felon to
sle him / and after showed to her husband yt the said Clodoueus had stayne
him self. In proof whereof she had appointed the foresaid murderer to leave a
sword styckyng in him, as though he had wylfully slain him self upon the
same sword. which when the king saw / he demed him gylty of such offense as
before was put upon him.

ye have hard before of the son of Sygeberte named Childebert, that was
delivered from the hands of Chilpericus his uncle by the means of Gundoald
duke or earl of Poitowe / the which in this time was grown to man's stature
and ruled at this day his enherytaunce of Austracye, not without great strife
had between him and his said uncle, which were to long to write ye
cyrcu^staunce thereof. whereof at this day somdele was vndyscussyd / all be yt
they at this day vsyd either other as friends.

About this time the other uncle of Chyldebert called Gu^thranus / sought
occasyon again him, for cause of a bishop named Theodorus, and bishop of
Marsill or Marsyle / ye which was put from his see by Gu^thranus, and receyuyd
of Chyldebert, and by him again restoryd to the said see of Marsyle. For the
which Gunthrane was sore amoued / and entendyd to make war upon him. But by
medyatours it was somdeale appeasyd and set in quyete / upon certain
condycyons to be observed and also performed upon the party of Gunthranus /
the which after were not upon his side kept nor performed. wherefore after
request to him made for reformacyon of all such points / and answer again
receyuyd of no reformacyon: Chyldebert to have his party the strenger / and
also for that that he well knew, that his uncle Chilpericus bare toward the
said Gunthranus not very fraternall love / he therefore sent unto him a noble
man of his court named Gyllon, requiryng him of aid again his uncle / the
which by many-seasons had as well broken promise again him, as now he had
again Childebert. Of this Chilpe rich being right feign, assentyd to the
desire of Gyllon / and after in all haste preparyd their hosts / and by two
sundry companyes inuadyd the countres of Orleaunce, whereof Gunthranus was king
or ruler. But ye inhabytauntes of that prouynce defendyd them in so strong
manner / yt their enymyes had of them little advantage. In which mean
season Gunthranus assembled a mighty host, and spedde him toward his enymyes,
at a place called Mediolan^, he supprysed a part of his said enymies / and
after drew nere to the great number of both hosts, where was made
preparacyon on both sides to have foughten. But as before time ye have often
hard, that by discrete and wise men the fight was put by, and means of
accord was founden: so now at this time by labor of good and wise prelates
and other / these kynnesmen were set in unity, and departed without great
shedyng of christian blood.

In this passetyme / death which sparyth no creature, berafte Chilpericus a
son borne of Fredegu^de and named Theodorus / for the which the king and
also the queen took great heaviness. But as she yt was pro^pte and ready to all
evil / cast in her mind that this child was slain by poison, or by some
other purposed malice. For the which lastely was accusyd a baylyfe or lefe
offycer called Monuole, with diverse wytches and sorseresses, that should imagyne
this chyldes death. The which she payned and torme^tyd in such wise / that
lastly the said wytches confessed, that they had destroyed the child, and
not without consent of the said Monuole. wherefore she after caused the said
sorceresses to dye by cruel death, as by fire and otherwise / and the said
baylyffe to be so tourmentyd that he dyed soon after.

The french cronycle says, that by the mean of the taking a way of the life
of the kings child / a child of the said Monuole was restoryd to health,
which before was in great ieoperdye / which is for folys to believe. This sorrow
and heuenesse of Chilpericus and Fredegunde his wife / was somdele aswaged by
the birth of a son shortly after borne of ye said Fredegunde / which the king
let call Lotharius, or Clotharius. For joy whereof the king let open the
prysones / and suffered the prisoners to goo at their lyberte / and specially
such as concerned causes touching him self for debt or otherwise, with
other things concerning his honor.

But like as dame Fortune is accustomed to meddle her joys of this world with
some bytternesse: so did she now with Chilpericus. For where he was now in
great tranquillyte and rest / and thought to have ladde the resydue of his
life in pleasure: so deynly word was brought unto him that his brother
Gunthranus, and his neuewe Childebert / was allied and fermely accorded to make
war upon him / for the which they had assemblyd a great army. wherefore he in
all haste commanded all his treasour and chyfe iewellys to be had to the city
of Cambria / where he with his wife and friends intended to co^tynue the
resydue of his life. And yt done spedde him thither in all haste / and fortyfyed
the said city in such wise, that he feryd little or nothing his enymyes /
where he so kept him within the said city a certain of time. And when he
saw nor hard not of the coming of his said brother nor neuewe / he then
walked more at large / and sportyd him in haukynge and chase of the wild
bestes, as wolves and other / which at those days was greatly vsyd of the
kings of France, and yet is continued.

Upon a day as he was purposyd toward this dysporte, and all thing ready
preparyd for the same / so that the queen thought verily he had be gone out of
the paleys / for what hap I can not tell, the queen yode into her chamber,
and there rested her upon her bed. where she so lyeng the king passyd by /
and with a little wande, which he bare in his hand, in manner of game struck the
queen with yt upon the back. The queen supposing the king had been gone to
the field, and not lokyng up said, Laundrye why dareste thou thus stryke me.
This Laundrye was a great man in the kings court / and had been peramoure to
the queen long time. But the king herynge these words, made semblaunt as he
had not herd them, and so passyd on his way.

THE.CXVII. CHAPTER.
FRedegunda apperceyuynge and after seeing yt was the king, to whom she had
thus said / sore was abashed, and in great fere and agony. And after she had
by a long season coniected in her mind what remedy she might find for this
mishappe: she lastely dyuely shely determined to sle her said husband and
lord. And this to bring about she sent in all haste for the said Laundrye,
and showed to him in order all the cyrcumstaunce of the foresaid matter.
wherafter he was stryke^ with such a fere / that his wit and counsel
faylyd him to deuyse in such a case any remedy. wherefore the queen as she that
was fully determined to execute her detestable and cursyd purpose / said to
him boldly: Lau^dry thou see well yt this case is brought to so strayte a
point, that other thou must think to destroy my lord and husband, or else
thou and I must both be shamefully confounded. Of which thou well know our
own is most to be regarded / therefore dyspose the to do after my counsayll.
Thou know well that the king is accustomed to come late from his dysporte.
wherefore provide to the a certain, that thou well trustyst / and in the
evening when he retourneth aspye thy time and fall upon him suddenly, and so
rydde him. And after make an out cry, and send to search about as thou would
take the homicydes / and cause some of thine own company to flee from the, as
though thou should the^ pursue. Laundry heryng this cursyd cou^sayll, allowed
it well and thereunto assentyd / and incontynently went about the perfourmaunce
of the same. And when he had purueyde his accessaryes / he toward night
assemblyd the^, gyuynge to the^ informacyon how they in yt mischyef should
behave them in that thing, taking of them assuryd oaths, for keeping of his
counsel. The king not mysdemynge any thing of this conspyred treason / took
his delectacyon and pleasoure in following of his game, so that he lost myche
of his company / and toward night as he before time was accustomed, with few
acco^panyed drew homewarde. whereof Laundry being warned / met the king
salutynge him and sayng that he was comen with his company to co^dute him home,
for so much as he douted how he was garnyshed of his meyneyall servants or
other.

What should I longer make delay or farther reharsall in this matyer, or to
tell the cyrcumstaunce of this purposyd treason. But finally when the king was
nere his paleys / or as reherseth the French cronycle within the court of his
paleys / as he light from his horse he was suddenly wounded to the heart, that
he straight fell to the earth deed.

After which murder thus committed: a great cry was areryd, the king is
slain / so yt this Laundrye made in great haste to be called certain persons
to attend upon ye corpse, while he with other pursued such as were dempte
gylty of this offense. But lastly he returned, and said that this deed was
done by the knights of Chyldebert / the which by the derkenes of the night
were escapyd.

To show here the vain and dissymuled sorrow yt Fredegund made for the king,
it were but lettyng of time. For every wise man knows well, that all such as
ben of that disposycyon, can feign right well in such semblable casys. But to
my purpose / when the king was thus slain, and at that time another the queen
nor yet Laundrye suspectyd / prouysyon was made for enterryng of ye corpse. The
which was shortly after shypped at the next river / and so conuayed unto saint
Germayns de Pree before spoken of / and there with great sole^pnyty buried,
when he had reigned, as before is said xxiiii. years / leuynge after him a
son before minded called Clotharius or Lotharius.

Thus as affermyth mine author master Robert Gagwyne endyd Chylperych
myserably his life / which in pride and mysery before time it co^tynued. And
where in his life he cherysshed no friend / at his end he fande few or no
friends. This gave the patrimony of ye church to lewd and simple clerkys, and
was an enmye to all holy relygyous places / and favored more such as had
lately been converted to the faith, than he did them that had co^tynued by holy
life a long season therein / and gave unto such persons the rule of Crystes
church. Among the which, one there was of perfyght living and bishop of
Paris / that garnysshed his to^be with this cpytaphy as after in meter follows.

Ecclesiae specusum, patriae vigor, ara reorum,
Et pater and medicus, pastor, amorque gregit,
Gernianus Virtuti, fide cord ore beatus:
Carne tenet tumulum, mentis honor posunt.
Vir cui dura nihil nocuerunt fata sepulchri.
Viuit enim, nam mors quam tulit ipsa timet.
Creuit ad hue pocius, iustus post funera: nam qu^
Fictile vas fucrat, gemma superba micat.
Huius open ac meritu^ mutis data verba loquu^tur.
Redditus and caecis, praedicatore dies
Nunc vir apostolicus, rapiens de carne tropheum.
Iure triumphale confidet arce throni.
The which verses in our mother tunge, may thus be expounded in meters as
follows.

Myrrour to the church, and of the country the strength.
Compassyon of gylty, to them showing mercy,
A fader and a leche, an herd and lover at length
Of his people / cosyn to virtue and of allye
In faith and in heart, and eke in mouth holy,
Of whom the flesh now holdyth this sepulture.
But the spyryte is in heaven ever to endure.
To this nothing noyed, nor fault of sepulture.
He lives southly / for death which he not dread /
Has him hense taken. But yet he hoped sure /
This ryghtwyse man, though sometime he were ladde.
As a bryttell vessel, which myth the earth was cladde
And somewhyle fell, yet often he rose anon /
Wherefore he now shyneth as does an Orient stone.
By help and merit now has the dumb his speech
Of this blessed man, and to the blind his syghte
Restoryd of god / as this day does us teache.
And he of the flesh has gotten now the fight
And vpperhande with a tryumphant might
By virtue whereof he like a conqueror.
Of the high heuyn, now fytteth in the tower.
Thus may ye well apperceyue and know / that as erthly men favor, so woll
they write / as now shewyth by this superscrypcyo^. But to god all thing is
manyfestyd and known / and nothing to him hyd, whatsoever erthly man writes
/ or demyth / to whom all the premysses I remytte.

Anglia. THE.CXVIII. CHAPTER.
CAreticus or Lareticus after yt writing of Guydo, of whom another yt progeny
nor yet other addicyon of honor is of writers of him remembered / began to rule
the Brytons, the year of our lord.v. hundred.iiii. score and.vi. as the said
author recordyth / and ye.xxii. year of Chylperyche than king of France /
and also the ix. year of Ceawlmus then king of westsaxons. This as wytnessyth
all writers was a lover of cyuyle battle and was worst of all men / so yt he
was odible to god and his subjects, in such wise that they excyted the Saxons
to war upon him, as testyfyeth Guydo / and chasyd him from city to city,
and town to town, till they had berafte him the most^ part of such land as
his predeces sour Malgo had holde^ before him.

But Polycronyco^, Gaufryde and other, add more there unto / and sayen yt for
as much as the Saxons knew of the discensyon between Careticus and his Brytons
/ they in all haste sent into Irelande for the king called Gurmundus
Affricanus / ye which of some writers are named two persons, as Gurmu^dus and
Affricanus. But by the rehersall that Ranulfe monk of Chester makes in
ye.xxiii. chapyter of his first book of Polycronyco^, it should seem, that he
should be named Gurmundus / the which by his meaning should war in Brytayne
and France, while his brother Turgecius reigned as king in Irelande, as in the
said chapyter is more at length declared. which fayd Gurmundus with the
strength of ye Saxons, warred so sore again the Bryto^s / that lastly the said
Careticus was feign to take the town of Kaersegent now called Sichester / and
therein besegyd him with his Brytons by a certain of time / where by daily
skyrmysshes and assautes he lost much of his people.

when Careticus had a season assayed and prouyd the strength of his enemies /
and saw that they encreasyd, and his knights lassed and mynysshed: he suddenly
left that town / and with a certain of Brytons took over Seuarne water, and
so into walys then called Ca^bria. which should be after most accord of
writers, ye iii. year of ye reygne of this Careticus.

About this time as means Antoninus / the great Gregory then beyuge a monk
and after pope, saw at Rome childyrn of Anglis or Saxons to sell at Rome. And
when he had aryd of them what country they were of, and it was answered to him
that they were named Anglis / he said ye Alleluya should be song in that
country, that so fair chylderne were borne in Alleluya before in the.iiii.
score and.viii. chapyter rehersyd / is there taken after ye exposycyo^ of saint
Austayne, for aid and help of god. But here it is meant for loving and
praysynge of god / as to him ye laud and thanks should be given unto, that
sendyth to men so fair frewte. wherefore as after shall be showed the said
Gregory being Pope / sent yt holy man Austayne with other, for to preach to
the said Anglis the faith of Christ.

Then to return to Careticus, whom the Englysh cronycle names Cortife.
Troth it is, that after he with his Brytons were driven into Cambria or walis:
yet he left not contynually to make reyses and assautes upon the Saxons next
to him adioynaunte.

In this time or soon after / ruled Ethelfridus the north Saxons. For as
witnesses the foresaid author Guydo / he began the reygne of Deira and
Brenicia, in the year of our lord.v.C.lxxx. and.xiii. This is Ethelfridus son
of Ethelricus, ye pursued so sore the Brytons, and slew so great a number of
ye monks of the town of Bangor, as is before rehersyd in the.C. and.ix.
chapyter of this work The which daily warred upon the Brytons, and the
Brytons upon him / so y^ he destroyed or subverted myche of Crystes faith with
the help of ye foresaid Gurmunde thorough Loegria or myddle England / in so
much that the bysshoppes of London and york with other mynysters of the
church, with such goods and relykes as they might carry, fled into diverse
countrees / so that their chyrchdores were shytte after them, or else occupied
in worship of their falls gods

Thus the faith that had endured in Brytayne from the time of Lucius first
christian king in Brytayne till this day, nere upon the season of iiii.C.
years and odd / was well nere extyncte thorough all the land.

And when ye forenamed Gurmu^de had fynysshed his tyranny within the land of
Brytayne / he then sailed into France, where he was after slain, as
wytnessyth Polycronyco^ / all be it ye french cronycle speaks nothing of any
such man during this persecucyon, as wytnessyth Guydo.

The church or monastery before builded in Uerolamy now called saint
Albanes, was by the said myscreauntes beten down / which there was builded
of the Bryto^s in the honor of ye holy prothomartyr saint Albo^, with diverse
many other the which are lost out of memory.

During also this trouble between the Saxons and Bryto^s / the lordshyp or
kingdom of Eest Saxon began to take place as after shall be showed.

THE.CXIX. CHAPTER.
IN this time also after the accord of most writers, as wytnessyth
Polycronyca and other, Ethelbertus reigned in Kent / and by knyghthode and
great might bare him / and behaved him so victoryously, that he enlarged his
kingdom to the boundys of Humbyr. In which time Gregory, which for his
notable deeds was surnamed great / was made pope of Rome. The which as before
is touchyd in the precedynge chapyter / having compassyon that the country
from whens so fair chylderne came as he before had seyne, should be inhabyte
with Pagans or people of mysbyleue / sent into Brytayne that holy man Austayne
with other of his brethren, to preche to the Anglis the faith of Christ. But
as wytnessyth Antoninus in the.iii. chapyter and.xii. title of his foresaid
work, when Austayn was.iii. days journey gone and passed / such a sodeyne
fere entryd in him and his feloushyppe, that they turned again. Then Gregory
comforted the said company / and sent them with letters to the bishop
Arelatensis / willing him to help and aid Austayne in all that in him nedyd.
The tenoure of which letters and other sent to Ethelbert king of Kent with
their answers / are wryte^ with other questyons in the regester of Gregory,
and in the books of Beda and other.

Austayne thus comfortyd / sped his journey, and landed in the Eest side of
Kent in the i will of Thauet with.xl. fellows / whereof some were interpretours or
such as cowde speak all langages. Nere unto the place before named where holy
Austayne landed stood at those days the manoyre or palayes of the said king
Ethelbert / whereof at this day appear sum of the ruynous walls, and is
called of the inhabytaunces of that i will Rychbourgh. It is apparent between the
i will and the town of Sandwych, upon a mile and a half from the said town
Eestwarde from Caunterbury. The^ when Austayne was landed, he sent the said
interpretours unto Ethelberte / saying yt they were sent from Rome for the
hele and salvation of the king and his realm. The king before time had herd
of the faith of Christ / for he had to wife as says Polycronycon a french
woman that was cristened / and had received her upon condycyon that he should
suffer her to live after her law.

Then after a certain time ye king spoke with Austayne / but that was without
ye house after the manner of his law. Again his coming he arreryd a baner of ye
crucifyx, and sange ye lateny, and preachyd to him the word of god. Then ye
king said it is fair that ye promise. But for it is to me vncowth and new / I
may not so soon assent to you. But for ye be comen so far for my sake / ye
shall be fair entreatyd, and have all thing yt is to you necessary / and we
grant to you leave to torn of our people whom ye may. when they had received
this comfort of the king / they went with processyo^ to the city of
Dorobernia or Canterbury, singing Alleluya / where they lad their lives as
holy faders did in the beginning of the church / as in fasting, prayeng,
watchyng, and preaching of the word of health / and sange masses / and
crystened such as they co^uertyd in ye Eest side of the city in the old church
of saint Martyne, unto the time yt the king was co^uertyd. At length when the
king had well consyderyd the co^uersacyo^ and holy life of Austayn and his
fellows, he hard them more gladly / and lastly by their good exortacyo^s and
gostly love, was by them co^uertyd and crystened / in ye year of our lord
after most accord of writers.v.C. lxxx. and xvi / and the.xxxvi. year of his
reygne, as affermeth Policronicon.

Then he gave to Austayne a place for his bishops see at Cristes church in
Dorobernia / and builded the abbey of saint Peter and Paul in the eest side
of the said city / where after Austayne and all the kings of Kent were
buried / and that place is now called saint Augustyne.

In this while Augustyne saylyd into France to the bishop Arelatens^ / and
was of him sacryd archebyshoppe.

when holy Gregory was certyfyed of the good expedycyon of Augustyne / he sent
then to him mo helpers as Melytus, Iustus, and Paulinus, with books and relykes
of holy saints / and answers to saint Augustynes questyons / that was that
all such goods as fell to the church should be divided in fou^re pertes /
that is to mean the first should go to the household of the bishops house
and charge of the same / the second to the clergy / the third to the
amendeme^t of chyrches / the fourth to the relyfe of the poor people and other
dedys of mercy.

when Austayne had baptized a great part of the kingdom of Kent / he after
made two archebyshoppes by the commandment of saint Gregorye, as wytnessyth
Polycronicon: that one at London, and that other at porke / and by the help of
Ethelbert, he assembled and gathered together the bishops and doctoures of
Brytayne, that were before dysperkled. The place of assemble was called long
after Austeyns oak, which is expowned to be Austeyns strength, and is in the
march of wykeres and of the westsaxons.

In this place he charged the said bishops, yt they should with him preach
the word of god to the Anglys / and also that they should among them self
amend certain errors then vsyd in the church, and specially for keeping of
their Ester tide. where again the bishops of Brytayne held opinion, till
Austayne by his prayers showed there a miracle by a blind Angle or Saxon.
After the which miracle showed / ye said bishops applied them to the will of
Austayne in that cause. But for all this there was of them that said, that
they might not leave the custom, which they so long had continued, without
assent of all such as had vsyd the same. Then he gathered a synod / to the
which came seven bishops of Brytons, with the wysest me^ of that famous
abbey of Bangor, But first they took counsel of an holy man and heremyte /
whether they should be obedyent to Austayne or not. The heremyte said if ye
find him humble or meke, as to Crystes dyscyple belonged / yt then they should
assent to him. which meekness they should perceive in him, if he at their
coming into the synod or council, arose again them. when the said
bishops entered ye said synod / Austayne sat still in the chair and
removed not. wherefore they were wroth and dysdaynyd him, and would not obey to
his requests. Then he said to them / syns ye woll not assente to my hestes
generally / assent ye to me specially in three things.

The first is, yt ye keep Ester day in due form and time as yt is ordeynyd.

The second, that ye give crystendome to the chyldern in the manner yt is used
in the church of Rome.

And the third is, that ye preach unto the Anglys the word of god, as a fore
times I have exhorted you. And all the other deal I shall suffer you to amend
and refourme within your self / but they would not thereof. of. Then saint
Augustyne said unto them, and warned them by manner of inspyracyon / that syns
they would not receive peace of their brethren, they should of other receive
war and wreche / the which was after put in experyence by Ethelfrydus king
of Northumberlande.

Long yt were to tell the cyrcumstau^ce of the life of this blessed man,
wherefore I pass over. Lastly when he had in one day crystyned.x. thousand
of Saxons or Anglys, in the weste river that is called Swale beside york, and
knew that he should shortly dye after / he ordained a successor named
Laurence while he lived / for the state of holy church in Brytayn was as yet
but rude and boystous. But in yt doing he followed the ensample of Peter that
was first pope / which made Clement by his life helper and successor. Also
this Augustyne made Mellitus bishop of London and of Eestsaxo^s / which after
most writers were then newly entered the land. The river of Thamys departed
them and Kent / and after dyed and was buried in ye monastery before rehearsed,
without the wallys of Dorobernia or Caunterburye.

THE.CXX. CHAPTER.
EThelbertus then confermyd in the faith / among other costly dedys began he
foundacyon of Paulys church within the city of London / and ordained yt for
the bysshoppes see of London. For the archbyshoppes see that before time was at
London / was by Augustyne and Ethelbert at the prayer of ye cytezyns of
Dorobernia translated to the said city / as in the.lix. chapyter of this
treatise yt is more at length declared. But of the building of this church of
saint Paul, diverse opynyons ben. For some writers testyfye, that yt was
builded or begone to build, by Sygebertus king of Eestanglys, but more
verily king of Eestsaxo^s or Eestsex. This Ethelbert also founded the church
of said Andrew, in the city of Dorubres in Kent now called Rochester / of
the which Iustus was bishop ordained before of saint Albane.

About ye time or a season after / the forenamed Ethelfrydus, which in the
english cronycle is named Elfryde / fought with the Brytons at the city of
Legyscestre or Chestre / and slew of the Brytons a great number. At which time
and season, a great number of the monks of Bangor were also there assembled,
for to pray for the good speed of the Brytons. whereof when Ethelfrydus was
warned / he fell also upon them, and flewe of them at that time, as
wytnessyth diverse authors.xxi. hundred as yt is before showed in the.C. and
ix. chapyter of this book.

This forenamed Ethelbert excyted a dweller or cytezen of London, to make a
church or chapel in the worship of saint Peter, in the west end of London
then called Thorney, and now the town of westmynster / the which that time
was forgrowen with bushes and b^eres excedyngly. where the said cytezen be
ganne, and builded the first church of westmynster in ye honor of saint
Peter, which was after by saint Edward the confessor enlarged or new builded.
But of the third Henry, when he reigned as king of England / yt was new
edyfyed and made as yt now is a beauteous monastery, and rychely endowed both
with possessyon and relykes, and rich iewellys.

It is showed in the English cronycle of England / that this Ethelbert should
be slain in a fight between him and Ethelfryde king of Northumberlande. But
Policronicon says that he dyed and went to heaven / when he had reigned over
the lordshyppe of Kent.lvi. years / and the.xxi. year after that he had
receyuyd Crystendome.

The kingdom of Eestsaxons.

THE.CXXI. CHAPTER.
During also the foresaid persecucyon of ye Bryto^s, or any ruler of the^
were specially named / began the reygne of Eestsaxons as wytnessyth
Policronicon, under Sebertus their first king / nere about the year of our
lords incarnacyon.vi. hundred and.xiiii. All be yt that Guydo de Columna says
that yt began nere about the time and season, when the kingdom of Eestanglys
began. But I follow Polycronicon / for he leyeth holy Beda for his Author in
myche of his work. This kingdom which is to mean Essex / had in the eest
side the sea / in the weste Myddelsex and London / in the southe the cyuer of
Thamys / and in the north Suffolk / and endured after most writers by the
term of two hundred and odd years. But by y^ saying of Policronica yt should
not endure over two hundred years. Nevertheless yt should appear by the storye
of Edward the elder son of Aluredus, yt yt should co^tynue under the Danys
and other wise, till the.viii. year of his reygne. And by that reason yt should
endure two hundred.lxxx. and.xiii. years. The contynuau^ce thereof is more
doutfull to be justly determined, for so myche as writers be of diverse opynyons
of the beginning thereof. All be it ye Polycronycon in the.li. chapyter of his
first book, says that yt began under Sebertus, and under.x. kings / till
Egbertus king of westsaxons subdued yt and joined yt to his own kyngedome.

The first christian king of this lordshyppe was the forenamed Sebertus,
conuertyd by means of Mellitus bishop of London, as says Guydo. But after
his saying this Sebertus should be the third king of Essex. All writers agreen
that the kings of this lordshyp were more comynly named under kings, and were
more subject to other kings / and chefely unto the kings of Mercia or
Mercheryke.

Then to return again unto the Brytons, which by all this season occupied a
part of Cornewayl and the countres of Cambria / as Uenedocia, which now is
called Northwalys, ad Demecea which now is called Southwalys / and there held
them in making assautes upon the Saxons, as before is touchyd, some while in
one cost, and some while in that other, under sondrye dukes, as witnessyth
Gaufryde and also the englysh cronycle. The which so continued after most
accord of time, and to accord this hystorye with other, by the term
of.xxiiii. years / over and above three years allowed for the reygne of Careticus
aforesaid. So that from the first year of Caretycus, to the last of
these.xxiiii. years. / expyryd or flowyd.xxvii. years. At which time the
Brytons of one assent chase for their hedde or ruler, y^ duke of Uenedocia, or
Southwalys, named Cadwanus.

Francia. THE.CXXII. CHAPTER.
CLotharius or Lotharius the son of Chilpericus, and second of yt name / was
made king of a part of France in ye year of our lord.v. hundred lxxx.
and.viii / and the.ii. year of Careticus then king of the Brytons. This
Clotharius by the report of master Robert Gagwyne, is notyd to be descendyd
of Clodoueus Lowis first crystened king of France / and not expressly to be
the son of Chilpericus.

But for so myche as in the cronycle of Chilperych, I have showed to you
somewhat of the dedys of Fredegund wife of Chylperiche: therefore I entende in
the declarynge of this story of Clothayre, to express the remanaunte, in as
short wise as I goodly may. And first ye shall understand, that after this
fredegunde had as before is showed, caused her lord to be slain: she ferynge
that at length her untruth should be dyscoueryd / with all her goods in
short time after yode unto Paris / and there in the monasterye or house of our
lady held her. And for she would be in more suerty / and also her son the said
Clotharius should be the stre^ger in his domynyon and kingdom: therefore she
sent messengers unto Gunthranus king of Orleaunce and brother to her lord
Chilperich / requyryng him of favor and aid / and that he would of his
goodness be tutour and defendour of her young son Clotharius. The which not
denyenge the request of Fredegunde, spedde toward Paris in all haste / where
with the assent of other nobles of the realm, he took the gydynge of the young
king. By whose advise and commandment, the said Clotharius was conveyed and
showed thorough many of the chief cytyes of his land. But in likewise as
Gunthranus with other bysyed them self to strength Lotharius in his right /
even so were other of the nobles of France (by the means of Brunechyeldis,
wife some time of Sygebert, youngest son of Lothayre the first / the which
Sygebert received of his said wife two sons named Chilperich and Chyldebert
/ of the which two, Chilperich suruyued the other) that did all their intent to
promote Chyldebert to the porcyon of his father / that Chilpericus father of
Lotharius occupied after the death of Sigebert forenamed.

Here dyscordeth the french cronycle from mine author Gagwyne. For there yt
is said, ye Brunechield with the other of her assent / would then by their
means have p^ferred a bastard son of the forenamed Sygebert called
Theodoricus, to the kingdom of France. An other author says that this
Theodorich was the son of Childericus before named, which was the son of
Sygebert.

But to follow master Gagwyne / This Childebert which by ye former saying
rehersyd in yt.C. and.xiiii. chapter of this treatise, was delyueryd from ye
hands of Chilperich his uncle, by means of the earl of Poytow named
Gu^debald: this with a small company came unto Paris / where of ye cytese^s he
was kept out. For ye which soon after he sent a noble man of his named Gillon
with other, as ambassadors unto Gu^thranus. And where among other things of
him required, they axed of him Fredegu^d to suffer death, for y^ she had by her
subtylty caused to be murdered both Sygebert father to their king, and also
Chilpericus her own husband: yt was of him utterly denied. Wherefore this said
Gyllon said unto Gu^thranus / sir king know thou for certain, sins thou
haste refused this peace to the offeryd of thy neuewe / that the death of thy
brother shall cleu^ to thy hedde. with these words the king being greatly
amoued / commanded the ambassadors to be put out of his court / and when
they were in the street, all fylthe and ordoure to be cast upon them as
enymytyes.

And varyaunces thus kyndelyng between these two kings / Gunthranus soon
after sent Fredegunde into Neustria or Normandy / and caused her there to be
kept not far from ye city of Roan, whyther to her came many noble men of
France in co^fortynge her, and also mouynge her for the trouble she was in /
promising to her aid to the vttermoste of their power. But when that
Fredegunde apperceyuyd the great favor that Brunechyelde stood in, of the
nobles of Orleaunce or France, she enuyenge her wealth and honor, called to
her an homycyde and a felon called Holderyche / to whom the said Fredegu^de
pmysyd great treasour, if he could by venyme or otherwise bring to death the
said Brunechieldis. By mean of which promise he granted to bring her intent
about / and shortly after drew unto the court of the said Brunechyeldis.
where he fill in such famylyaryte with diverse of her court, that he came
many seasons to the p^sence of ye queen. But by what hap I can not say /
lastely he was taken in suspeccyon / and so tormentyd and pyned, that he
co^fessyd ye cause of his thither coming, and by whom he was sent / with all ye
other cyrcu^staunce of the matter. After which co^fessyon so made / he was to
betyn and arrayed in most vile manner, and so sent again to Fredegu^d. And when
he was comen to her presence, and showed what tourment he had suffered for her
cause: she incontyne^t in fulfyllyng of her malycyous purpose / commanded that
his hands and fete should be stryken of and so let go / to the end that yt
should be thought that she had not desired him to that business. About this
time and season arose a young man in a corner of France / the which by his
subtyle wit named him self to be the son of the first Lotharius, and
brother unto Gunthranus. The which by synystre means and crafty, gatte the
favor of the lords of Guyan / and by their assystence held and occupied a
great part thereof.

And after somdele of his counsay les to Gunthranus by his espyes disclosyd /
this said young man being named Gu^doaldus, sent unto Gunthranus an ambassade
/ and requyryd him to be restoryd to a porcyon of his faders goods. Addyng
thereto that if he denied / the said Gundoaldus would with a strong army
repair out of Gwyan, and get his right with strength / and that to bring about
he should also have great aid of Chyldebert his neuewe above named. when king
Gunthranus had at leyser herd the message: he in dysdaynyng the same
commanded them to be set upon horse backs their facys toward the tail /
and so with betynge and vylanye to be driven thorough the town. It was not long
after that a day was appoyntyd between Gunthranus and Childebert / at which
day both princes met with great companyes and lords. And when they were set
in their counsayll / Gunthranus commanded the foresaid messyngers of
Gundoaldus to be brought to fore them, and there again to recyte, their
foresaid message. which done, he showed furthermore that the said Gundoalde
had before time dispoyled the daughter of Chil peryche named Rygonde, of all
such richesse as she with her conveyed, when she went toward Spain to be
married / of the which some lords of Childebert were of counsayll. which unto
the said two princes was thought true / for so myche as the said lords then
accusyd, were absent from that great counsayll.

THE.CXXIII. CHAPTER.
AFter many and great acts concludyd by this counsayll between these two
foresaid princes: Gunthranus in open audyence admytted his neuewe Chyldebert
for his heir, for so much as he had none heir of his body / committing the
rule thereof to him before all that were there. And after took him aperte, and
showed to him which of his nobles he should take to counsayll, and which he
should refuse. And specially he warnyd him to be well ware of his mother
Brunechyeldis, for that he knew in her so great untruth and subtylty / and
also of Gyllon the bishop, the which he also said he was not to be
trusted. when he had thus aduertysed his neuewe, they both returned unto the
place of cou^sayll / where by them and their counsayllys certain things
concerning the comone well were set in an order. And that done, the said
counsayll was fynyshed / and purueyau^ce for their dinner pronyded, the princes
with their baronye went unto dinner. In the season of which dinner the said
Gunthranus said unto ye great number of lords being present / ye my lords
and nobles of France, the which to me have ever more ben true and dear / here
is mine neuew, the which as mine heir I have allowed and ordeynyd, whom I
pray you to honor, and with true faith be unto him obedyent as to your king.
For of ye great worthynesse that of him is to come, I am in great hope / which
is allied with might and virtue. And to the augmentacyon of these words /
shortly after restored to him all such cytyes, as Chilpericus by his life had
with holden from him. And soon after either from other in most humble and
loving manner departed.

Of this peace between these two princes thus stablysshyd, the fame ran wide.
wherefore certain lords being upon the party of Gundoaldus refused him / and
went unto the party of Gunthranus.

Soon after with his people Gu^doaldus resortyd unto a city over the river of
Gerounde named Conuena / where for the strength thereof, he thought to abide his
fortune. whereof when Gunthranus was warned / he in goodly speed made thither
ward, and laid his people nere unto the said city. But when he had espied
the strength thereof / and knew well yt was dangerous for to obteyn: he the^
vsyd gyle, where strength might not prevail / and devised or forged certain
letters in the name of Brunechyeldys, wherein was feigned, that the said
Brunechyeldys should desire Gundoaldus in all hasty wise, to resort unto the
city of Bordeaux.

Of which fraud Gundoaldus no thing suspectynge / commaundyd his treasoure
with other his stuff under saufe gydynge thyderward to be conveyed. whereof the
knights of Gunthranus having knowledge, with a strong company made over the
fore said water of Gerou^de, and laid such watch for them, that they
encountered the said people that carried the said treasure and stuff / and
parforce took it from the knights of Gundoaldus and presentyd it unto
Gunthranus.

Like as before ye have hard that certain lords of the host of Gundoalde
fled unto the host of Gunthranus / so in this pass time.iiii. capytaynes or
rulers of the host of Gunthranus fled unto Gundoalde / yt which mine author
names Desiderius, Mommolus, Bladascus, and Sagyttaryus. which.iiii. after
their coming to Gundoalde stood in such favor / that he was by their
counsel myche what aduysed and gyded. It was not long after that ye knights
of Gunthranus had thus won ye foresaid treasoure and stuff / that Gundoald
was so sore pursued that he was feign to close him with in a strong city /
the which Lendegylsus master of the host of Gu^thranus assailed by diverse
feats of war to win. But wha^ he saw his labor lost / than he cautelously
fande y^ mean to speak secretly with one of the foresaid.iiii. capytaynes
named Mommolus, and with him treatyd of the betrayenge of ye city. The which
after many and long exhortacyons, with the assurau^ce of their lives and
other, grau^tyd unto the said treason / whereof the manner should be thus. This
said Mommolus with the forenamed Bladascus and other of that affynyte / should
set a fire an old temple within yt city. And when the people of ye city were
besyed to quench the fire / the said Mommolus with his adherentes to open the
gates, and so to let in Lyndegylsus and his knights. But yet this treason set
a part / Mo^molus goes to Go^doalde, and shows to him the great danger
that he stands in of his enemies. wherefore he counsayled him that he with the
other rulers about him go unto the tentys of Gunthranus and yield them all unto
his grace and mercy. And also to the intent that he should there show and
prove, that he was the indubytate son of the first Clothayre / the which to
the king and all his host was very doutfull, and the more because he so fled
from them. when Gundoaldus had at ley sour hard the counsel of Mommole,
gyuynge to him credence / for so much as by his counsel before times he had
fortheryd his causes / and also by comfort that he reportyd to have by means
of Lyndegylsus before named: he setting a part all fere, with certain number
in peasyble wise issued the city. And when he had a little space gone: ii.
earls of Gunthranus host named Bole and Boson received him, and delivered him
to the power of Lyndegylsus / and Mommole returned with the other of his
confederey, unto ye city / and closed fast the gates between ye city and the
pauyllyons of Gu^thranus. where was a little coppyd hill / to the heyght
whereof when Gundoalde was comen, the said Boso^ him suddenly threw down. And
as he was rollynge down the hill / with a great stone he struck him on the
head, by vyole^ce whereof he was forthwith slain or deed. And Mommole, the which
as before is towched was reentred the city / first dyspoyled the goods of
the said Gundoalde / and after fell upon the citesyns, and robbed and spoiled
them in like manner, not sparynge prestes nor other / and after burnt chyrches,
temples, and houses without pytye / which done he sped him unto the tentys of
Lyndegylsus. But he not being sure of the sauegarde of the said Mo^mole and
his company from the murmoure of his knights / or more verily for he would not
be a known of the provided death of them / commanded the said Mo^mole with
his adherentes to tarry without, and not to come in the prese of his knights,
till he had somedele pacyfyed them. which was done, but not all without strife
/ for some there were that began to quarrel with him and his. But when
Lyndegylse saw that this Mo^mole and his company were somdele withdrawe^ from
his pauylyon, he made a token to his knights / whereby they knowing his mind,
fell upon him and slew him. Sagyttarius one of the foresaid.iiii. of that
company, the which mine author reports to be a bishop, fled to have
sauegarded him self / but in his flight he was slain. And when these enymyes
where thus brought out of life / Gunthranus commanded the goods of the said
Mommole to be brought unto his tresorye / which were of great valor, and
after were egallye divided between him and Childebert his neuewe. It was not
long after but certain tokens and fygures appeared in the fyrmament, the which
by astronomers were iuged the fine of some prince / which after a year showed
to be true. For the said Gunthranus dyed upon a year following the said fygures
or signs / when he had been king of Orleaunce by the term of.xxxvii. years /
and was buried with great pomp in the city of Cabylon within the prouynce of
Burgoyne, in ye monastery of saint Mark, which he before had builded / and
left for his heir of that kingdom his neuewe the foresaid Chyldebert.

THE.CXXIIII. CHAPTER.
CHildebertus then having the rule and possessyon of his own enherytaunce,
that is to say of Austracy, and also of Orleaunce / casting in his mind how
he might be revenged of Fredegunde, ye which as before is showed in the.C.
and.xiii. chapyter of this lybell slew his father Sygebert: called unto him
his old friend and councelloure Gundebald earl of Poytowe / and then
commanded yt he should with his power invade the country of Soysons, the which
was in the rule of Clotharius. whereof Fredegunde being warned / assembled to
her ye lords of the country, and exhorted them to wythstande the malice of
their enymyes / showing to them furthermore that that thing they should of
justice and equity do, considering that their king Clotharius was yet tender
of age, and had as yet no knyghtely prowess to defend him self and his
land. And after a long exhortacyon to them made / she with her son prepared
to go again the said enymyes. And when all thing to the war was preparyd
and ready / she with a great army made toward the host of Gundebalde. And when
she knew she was nere unto the host / she commaundyd her captains to rest
and fortyfye her people upon all pertes for brekyng in of her enymyes. And
again night she called to her Laundry her old paramoure with other / wyllyng
them that in the deed of the night they would manfully set upon the other
party / for so myche as she said to them that she was certainly enfourmed by
her espies, that her said enymyes were sore weryed by reason of that days
labor. After whose counseyll the said Laundry with other wrought / and
supprysed their enymyes so vnwarelye, that of them she slew a part and
chasyd the remanaunt. And that done spedde them unto Champayne nere unto
Reins, and spoiled and brent a part of that country. This feat of war thus
compassyd by the subtyle wit of Fredegunde was nere to a place called Truet.

Then Childebert entendyd after certentye had of the overthrow of
Gundebalde, for to have made new war upon Fredegunde. But he was let by
mean of the Longobardis, which than made war upon him. Of the which war
he had somdeale his intent / and more should if Mauricius emperor of
Consta^tyne the noble had kept all promise with him before made. After ye
which war in party endyd, he returned into his own country / and shortly
after he and also his wife dyed, and not without suspeccyon of venym / leuyng
after him two sons named Theodobert and Theodorych / gyuynge to the eldest
the lordshyppe of Austraci, and to the younger the prouynce of Burgoyne.

About this time the Hunes brake out of their places, and warryd upon certain
parties of myddle France and did therein great harm. But lastly by means of
great gifts by them received / they left the country and drew toward
Soysons. Again whom Fredegu^de gaderyng a great powar / sent Clotharius her
son and king, to the intent to defend the said Hunes / that they should not
invade their countrees. And shortly after both hosts met in the field /
where after long and sharp fight the Frenchmen were vyctours, and chased the
Hunes in such wise, that the more part of them were slain and taken, for the
which vyctory Fredegunde made exceeding joy to her son Clothayre / and
received him with great pleasure, and exceeding gifts. After the which
passyd not long while, but that she fell syke and dyed / and than buried by
her housbonde Chylperich.

when the forenamed brethren had knowledge of the death of Fredegu^de / they by
the exhortacyon and styryng of Brunechieldis their graundmother, calling to
mind the wrongs to their auncesters done by Fredegund, and somdele by
Lothayre: assembled a great powar, and met with Lothayre and his powar at the
river of Arrune or Arue^ne. In ye which place was so sore fight and so many
slain, that the cource of the river was let, by the multitude of the caryens
or deed bodies yt were therein cast. But the more part fell of the knights
of Lothayre / so yt he was forcyd to forsake the feld, and thens to flee to the
cyty of Meleon, and from thens to Paris: whom the said brethren followed / and
compelled him to make peace after their pleasure. The effect of which peace was
this. Theodobert ye elder brother of these two, should enjoy all the land
lyeng between the river of Seyn and Leyr, unto the Bryttysh Occean, or the sea
of little Brytayne. And Theodorich the younger brother, to have all the land
from the said river of Seyn unto the river of Isayr to the brynk of the sea.
And to Clothayr should remain.xii. provinces, which the said two ryuers of
Isayr and Seyne flowen by or thorough.

which peace thus confermed and granted / Theodobert to whom Neustria or
Normandye belonged, sent thither a cheuetayne of his court called Berthalde, to
defend the said country. But Clothayre of this former accord being nothing
contentyd / sent his son Meroneus under the gydynge of Laundry prefect or
ruler of his paleys into Neustria to war in that country. And for so much as
Berthalde saw well he lakked power to wythstande so great an host / he
therefore took the city of Orleaunce, till he had gaderyd more company. Then
Laundry seasyd that part of ye country, and came to the wallys of the city /
and by diverse words of reproach, excyted ye said Berthalde to give battle
to him in the plain field. The which he refusyd because of the inequalyte of
number of knights. But he offeryd to issue out of ye city, and to fight with
Laundry hand to hand / with that he might be assuryd again his people / the
which offer Laundrye refusyd.

It was not long after or both kings with great hosts drew into that
country / and at the river of Stampis met, where between the^ was foughten a
strong battle. But by the polycye of Theodobert / Lothary was put to a
disuau^tage. For while the said Lotharye was co^ueyeng his people over the
river at a narowe passage / Theodobert began so fyersly and kept the passage
so streyt, that the people of Clotharye came not two parts of them to the
field. Nevertheless the fight co^tynued by a long season / in which time
Berthalde encountered many times Laundrye, and provoked him to battle / but
ever that other refusyd. Lastly he seeing and knowing well that he should win
great worsshyppe and also profit, if he might slay or take this Lau^dry / he
therefore put him self in the more danger of his enymys, and finally of the^
was slain. But Theodobert in pursuyng Lotharye and in comfortynge of his
knights bare him so well, that he caused his enimyes to lose ground / and at
length put them to flight, the which he follows to the gates of Paris, to the
great damage of ye people of Lothary. In this chase was taken Meroneus the
son of Clotharye with many other / but Laundry was gotten within the city.
And when Theodobert had thus gotten the vyctory of his enemies / he list no
longer to tarry about them at that season / but shortly after returned to his
country.

In the court of Theodorich brother of this Theodobert, was at this day
dwelling an Italian named Prothadius / the which as mine author says was
paramour unto Brunechyeld before said. The which, Brunechyeld by her means had
exalted from poor estate unto high authoryte / the which was of a subtyle
and far casting wit, and therwyth exceeding covetous / and in great favor
of the king, but to all his lords odyous and hateful: for the which unlawful
means by him to the nobles and commons of the land used / and for the ill
condycyons and bad counceyll that Brunechyelde and this Prothadius used within
ye court of Theodobert / he bannysshed them both as well of his land as of his
court. wherefore ever after they malygned again Theodobert. And for the
execucyon of their malicious purpose / they told unto Theodoryche, that his
enemy and not brother Theodobert, had wythdrawen from him the chief of his
faders treasoure / alledgyng also, that he was not the son of Chyldebert his
fader, but gotten of a gardener / and wyllyd him therefore to send unto him and
to ask restytucyon of the said goods. By the which wicked counceyle
Theodoryche was so lad, that he sent unto his brother / and in such wise so
vexyd and styryd him, that dedely malice was kyndelyd between them. In so myche
that either of them assembled great hosts / and lastely met nere unto a town
named Carysse. where the said hosts being ready to have run togyders / the
lords of Theodoberte so demeaned them unto him, that by their wise counsel
he agreed to send to his brother, and to have a co^municacyon of peace. And
when the embassade was comen to the pauylyon of Theodoryche, and there had
showed the unkindness of this war, with the ieopardy that might ensue of
the same / anon the foresaid Prothadius took upon him the answer, and said:
it is not requysyte so lightly to grant peace / but necessary it is to
attempt the will of our enemy by battle, whether he woll be agreeable to
condescende to our desires. The which words thus expressyd of him, anon the
more party of the lords dysdayned it / and conspyryd within them self how
they might put him to death. And forthwyth arose among them such a murmur,
that ye king apperceyued well that they entendyd some harm to Prothadius. For
the which he called unto him a knight named Uselyne / chargynge him to go unto
the lords, commaundynge them that they in no wise should do any harm to
Prothadius. The which Uselyne being of the mind of the other / said that the
king would that they should slay Prothayde. After which message done / they
ran in all haste and him slew, as he sat playenge at dyce or tables with
one Peter a physicyon / and that done all hoolly ran unto ye kings tent,
besechyng him to take no dyspleasure of ye death of so evil a man, that as well
was known, was enemy to all frendshyp and peace. But for Theodoryche
apperceyued well, that he cowde not revenge his death without ponysheme^t of a
multitude / he therefore took patience, and suffered the offense to pass
unpunished. After which man thus murdered / both princes without notable
act deperted either into his country.

THE.CXXV. CHAPTER
TO this day Theodoryche had taken no wife / all be yt of his concubyne he
received two sons. He therefore by thaduertysement of his friends, set his
mind to mary some noble woman / and soon after sent certain ambassadors
unto Berthricus then king of Spain / wyllyng to grant unto him Memberge his
daughter in marriage. The which upon certain condicyons was performed, and
with great riches to him shortly after sent and married / ^ by a certain time
well entreated and cheryshed. But that season ro^ne and spent / Brunechyeld so
turned the kings mind from the queen, that lastely he with such treasoure
and iewellys as he of her received, sent her home again. The which injury
Berthricus her father took at heart grievously / and shortly after sent his
messengers unto Clothary king of Soysons, requiryng him of aid to war upon
Theodoriche, which had done unto him great dyspleasure / and the rather for
ye war that the said Theodoryche with his brother lately made again him /
the which with both their strengthes they might then well revenge. To whom
Clotharius granted. And to have his party the stronger, he sent unto his
neuewe Theodobert and brother to Theodoriche, to styre him again his said
brother.

whereof when Berthricus had receyuyd knowledge of his said messengers / he
the^ sent unto Agon king of Longobardys / or more verily Adoaldus the.v. king
after Alboynus / requyryng him in like manner. And he desirous of wreche / made
fast and sure promise to give aid to the vttermoste of his power.

when Theodoryche was warned of the co^spyracy of these.iiii. kings, that
entendyd to war jointly upon him / he was therwyth greatly amoued, and
provided for his defense in his best^ manner. Then Theodobert trustyng the
appoyntme^t before made, assembled a great host / and made speed first toward
ye place between them appointed, which was nere to ye castle of Salas. But
or any preparacyon was made toward battle / a mean was found that the
forenamed two brethren should mete either with other, acco^panyed with.x.
thousand knights. But Theodobertus enter^^ynge to dysceyue his said brother,
and to force him to grant to his pleasure / brought with him far above ye
number. wherefore Theodoricus being ouersette with strength / granted all his
brothers will. which was that over certain things and appoyntementes
concluded between Berthricus and him / Theodobert should hold to him and his
heirs two lordshippes called Champayne and Turon. which conclusyon fynysshed /
either taking leave of other departed unto their countries / but not without
great vnrestfulnesse of the said Theodorych, berynge in mind the wrong
doing of his brother. wherefore he shortly after made means to his neuewe
Clothayre desiring him that he would not assyste his brother again him / but
to suffer his quarrel to be demyd by dynt of sword between them two. This
request, Lothayre by the advise of saint Columbane munke of Irelande than
being in those costs, granted.

And the french cronicle says, that he was warned of this foresaid holy munke
and abbot, that he should not meddle between the said two brethren / for so
myche as yt was provided of god, that he should be heir to them both.

when Theodorych had received this answer, he gaderyd his strength and spedde
him upon his journey to the city of Langresse, and from thens to Uerdune or
Uerdoune. Theodoberte having knowledge of his malycyouse brothers purpose,
gaderyd in Austracy a great host / and so sped him till he came to the city
of Toull. where both hosts shortly after met / and in the feldes or playnes
nere to the city fought a strong battle. In the which was slain great
people upon both sides / but the more part upon the side of Theodobert.
wherefore he finally was compelled to forsake the field, and fled unto Coleyne.
where he gaderyng a new powar / fought again with his brother. In the which
fight he had like fortune / and was again chasyd to his great shame and loss /
whom Theodoricus as his mortal enemy followed, fyrynge and wasting the
countries as he went / in so myche that the inhabytauntes of the countries fell
before him, besechynge his grace, that for the offense of one man, he would not
destroy so many innocents / assuring him forthermore that they would become
his lyegemen, and hold their land of him for ever. At which request he said
gladly he would to them grant their petycyon, if that they would present to
him the hedde of his brother. After the which answer by them of Theodorych
received / they among them self appointed out a certain of persons most
apt to their purpose / and wyllyd them to go unto Theodobert to execute their
intent. The which sped their journey till they came to the presence of
Theodobert / and showed unto him that if he would be agreeable to depart with
such stuff and iewellys as he had of his faders, so that Theodoryche might
be partener thereof / he should have perfyght amyte and rest with him. To the
which words he gyuynge confydence and trust / called with him the said
persons / and brought them into ye howses, where the said stuff and iewellys
lay. And while he was busyed to deuyde out and appoynte ye porcyon of his, one
of the said persons slew him suddenly / and after of one agreement struck of
his head, and in secret wise caused yt to be conveyed unto his brother. when
Theodoryche had received the head of his brother, he sped him to Coleyne where
this treason was wrought / and received the city into his possessyon, with all
ye kingdom of Austracy to his brother belonging. And when he had there ordered
his needs after his mind / with two sons and an exceeding fair daughter of
Theodobert, he spedde him unto Mees the chief city of Austracy / where with
him met his graundmoder Brunechyelde. The which persevering in all malice and
myschefe / caused ye said two sons to be shortly slain.

Theodorych then restoryd or delivered unto Clothayre, all such lands as to
him he had before promised.

Theodoryche thus ending his war, the which by a long season spent his
time in keeping of concubynes / was now rauyshed with the beauty of his
brothers daughter, the which he had brought from Coleyne. But that doing
Brunechyeld wythstode with all her power, because the maid was so ^e^e of his
kynne. For the which he being with herfore dysco^tent said, o thou most wicked
and false woman / did not thou make me to believe, that Theodobert was not the
son of my father / but that he was the son of a gardyner. For what cause
have thou caused me to persecute my brother, and lastely to ^lee him. After the
which words he would have slain her, if he of his lords had not ben
let. which deed not forgotten of this ungoodly woman / ever after imagyned
how she might bring Theodoryche out of life. And lastely she hyryd such as
were about him to consent to her iniquyte / so that upon a season when he came
out of his stew or bayn, he axyd drink by ye force whereof he was poisoned and
^yed soon after, when he had reigned.xviii. years. How be yt Antoninus in
the.vi. chapyter and.xii. title of the second part of his work, says that
he was brent with fire by the dyuyne power.

THE.CXXVI. CHAPTER.
NOw that I have showed unto you the fine and end of these two brethren / by
reason of whose death the hole pryncypate of France fell unto the abouenamed
Clothayr: I shall now express unto you the dedys by him done after he had
all the rule only.

So yt was that ye forenamed Brunechyelde malygned ever again Lothayr. And to
the fortherau^ce of her malice* she behauyd her in such wise with some of the
rulers and lords of Austracy, that she caused them to admytte own named
Sygebert to be ryghtfull enherytoure of that land* But for that some of them
had good experyence of theyll dysposycyon of this woman / they therefore sent
two noblemen of that land name Pepyn and Arnold unto Clothayre / willing him
to send hastily into that prouynce. After the which message by these two
lords reported, Clotharius shortly after spedde him into Austracy / and at a
castle called Cathomat he lodgyd him with his people. whereof herynge
Brunechielde sent unto him / and gave unto him monicyon that he should void the
land, for so myche as Sygebert the eldest son of Theodoryche was thereof
ryghtefull enherytour.

ye have hard before that Theodoryche vsyd lemmans / of the which he received
four sons, yt is to say Sygebert, Corbe, Chyldebert, and Merone. wherefore ye
foresaid Brunechyelde entendynge to dystourbe Lothayre and all the land /
fortyfyed the said Sygebert to claim the land of Austracye. And when
Clothayre had received knowledge of this maundeme^t from Brunechielde or
Bruncheuste / he sent to her answer that he would assemble the lords of
Austracy, and be demed by them, whyther this land belonged to him, or
Sygebert. And she ferynge that sentence / excyted people of the prouynce of
Germanye to strength her party, with all the people that she might make of the
said country of Austracy. And that to bring about / she sent one Garnery an
other Albon. Of this Garnery she had suspeccyon that he should favor ye
party of Lothayre / wherefore to Albone his fellow she sent letters, that he
should put the said Garnery away. when Albone had over rad the letter / he
brake yt in pieces and threw them from him. And afterward a friend of
Garneryes gaderyd the pieces / and so joined them that he conceyuyd the
sentence of the letter, and forthwyth showed yt unto Garnery. when Garnery
perceived the malycyous intent of Brunechielde, he kept yt secret to him
self: all be it that he by his secret means caused the Germanyes that they
should take no party with Brunechyelde. And that done he returned into
Burgoyne / where with her and in her company he solycyted so the lords of
Burgoyne, that some of them abhorred the crudelite of that woman. And when
Garnery had in this wise compassed his matters / he sent unto Lothayr, and
showed that if he might have his grace and safecondute / he would come to him
and show to him things concerning his advantage. All the which was granted.

Then Clothayre by counsel of ye said Garnery assembled his power / and
shortly sent a strenght of them in to Champayne and Cathaloyne / where yt was
showed that Sigebert had gathered great strenghtys. Then forsook the party of
Sigebert many nobles of Austracye / among the which mine authoure names
Rucco, Sigoldus, and Enulanus, and yielded them to the mercy of Clothayre. Then
shortly after the hosts of Clothayre and Sygebert met / where Garnerye, by
tokens between him and diverse of the captains of Sygebert before assygned, ye
said captains with their people wythdrewe them, so that Sygebert with his two
brethren Corbo and Meroneus gave back while they came to the river of Sigoune
/ where after little resystence the foresaid two brethren were taken. But the
french cronicle says that all four brethern were there taken. All be yt
master Gagwyn says, that Sygeberte by the virtue of his horse escapyd / so
that he was not after that day seen.

And soon after this victory Brunechyeldes, which also of the french cronycle
is named Bruneheuste / was brought as prisoner unto the presence of Lothayre,
with a suster of Theodoryche, which Garnery or Gerney had taken in the tents
of his enymyes. Then Lotharius forthwyth commanded Corbon to be behedded / and
preseruyd Meroneus, for so much as he was to him godfather / and ever after
cheryshed him as his kynnesman.

Lotharius thus having ye victory of his enimyes, made great joy. And after he
had somedeale set that country and other in quyete / he then took advise
of his lords how he should be demeaned with Brunechielde, that had been
authoryce of so manyfolde mychyefes and crymynous deeds. The which of one
consent and mind condescendyd and agreed, that she should be put to most
paynfull and vile death. And finally after fore betynges she was set upon a
horse / and so conveyed thorough the host / that all men might behold and se
her / and after brought again to ye kings presence. where then the king
rehearsed unto her a long process of all her murdurs, conspyracis, and wicked
deeds / affermynge that she had been the occasyon and cause of the death of.x.
princes, beside other mean persons. And when he had said his pleasure / he
then commanded her to be bounden to a wild horse tail by the here of her
hedde / and so to be drawn while she were deed.

And when this judgment was executed / she by the license of the king was
buried in an house of relygyon within the city of Hosdon^ or Osdon^, that she
before time had buyldyd in the honor of saint Martyne, beside other many
that she in her life buyldyd in diverse other places, endowyng them with great
and rich possessions.

THE.CXXVII. CHAPTER.
THus dame Fortune favored the party of Lotharius / that this kingdom,
which had from the time of Clodoueus Jews co^tynued under.iiii. governors
or rulers for the more party, now was fallen to him / so that he had all
under obeysaunce and rule / then anon this Lotharius made Garnery prefecte and
master of his paleys / and releasyd unto the Longebardes or Lombardes a
trybute of.xii. thousand pound yearly paid to the kings of Frannce / the
which was first set upon them by Gunthranus his uncle.

And in this while to his more encreace of wordely joy / he receyuyd of his
wife Bergeruda a son, the which he named Dagobertus. The which when he came
to couenable age / he betoke to the lore of Arnolde then bishop of Men's. And
when the first wife of Lotharius was ded / he married a second named Sichilde,
of whom he received a child and named yt Haybert. when Dagobert the first
son was comen to a lawful age / after vsuell custom of all princes of
France, he gave him myche to the chase of wild bestys. And as by chance one
day he followed the chase of an heart / and tried yt so sore yt he brought him
to a bay in a place that then was called the street of Catulyen. In the which
street was then an old little chapel / to the which the forsayde heart entered,
and there held him / all be yt that a great number of hounds followed him to
ye chapel door, and none of them would enter, but there stood bayenge. And
when Dagobertus came after and beheld the manner of the hounds, and did what
he could to cause them to enter the chapel and might not / he thus departed
without more doing at that season, not without great meru^^^lynge in his mind.

It was not long after, that Clothayr co^syderynge the frowardness of growyng
in his son Dagobert / assygned to him a tutour or lerner of worldely and
knyghtely manners, whose name was Sadragesyle. And for his son should have him
in the more awe and fere / the king gave unto the said tutoure the dukedom of
Guyan. But so yt was one day that for a cause this Sadragesyle would have
chastyzed this Dagobert / whereof he being ware, associated unto him certain
wanton persons and beat his master / and after in way of dyspyte caused the
berd of his tutour to be shaven of. For the which deed Lothayre was again him
grievously dyspleasyd / and in greatire and haste, sent for his son Dagobert.
But he feryng punyshement, wythdrewe him, and went unto the forenamed chapel /
trustyng verily that wheretofore a best was shewid such comfort, that he by
holy prayers should there be comforted till such time as he might atteyne
unto the grace of his father.

ye shall understand that before time after he had experyence of that wonder
showed by the heart / he learned that the holy martyrs saint Denis, and his two
fellows Rusticus and Eleutherius should be buried within the said chapel /
the which were martyryd in the persecucyon of Domycyane the emperor, about
the year of Crystes incarnacyon.lxxx. and.xvi. In the honor of ye which
martyrs the foresaid poor chapel was arreryd, as witnessyth the french
cronycel, by the means of a devout french man whose name is not expressyd.
Thus Dagobert in this chapel abiding in prayer / in the first night he being
in sleep, apperyd unto him.iii. old faders, saying unto him / young man we be
those martyrs, which many years passyd were slain for the faith of Christ,
and buried in this place by Catula that good woman. which place is not duly
nor suffyciently honored / nor yet the people of France has not us in due
reverence and worship. And therefore when thou art of might and power, then
remember us, and help this place to be otherwise buyldyd / which shall not be
long to. And for thou shalt not take this for a dreme or fantasye / dygge
hereafter this ground, and thou shalt find our three bodies hole and
vncorrupt / and upon eueryche of us our names with letters fresshely written.
And after this they vanyshed away.

when Dagobert awoke / he called well to mind this vysyon. And promised
inwardely between god and him, that if he were recouncylyd to his father as to
him they had promised / he would fulfill that they had desired. After this
the father being warnyd that Dagobert was in this chapel / sent unto the
place certain of his knights to pull or take him thens per force. And when
they came within a mile of ye said chapel / they were so astonyed that they
might not go one foot forward to do the best they could.

when they had long stryue^ with out preuaylynge / they retournyd to the
king, and showed to him ye truth in all thing as they had done.

The king being dyscontent with their report, blamed them, and said that
they feryd his son, for the which cause they had feigned that excuse.

And incontynently he sent forth an other company / the which were delte with
in like manner as ye other. were Lotharius somdele troubled with the report of
his servants / consyderyd the chapel to be nere unto Paris where he then lay
/ and co^maundyd his horse to be brought, for he would prove the matter him
self. But like as his servants were served, even so became of him / so that
he might go or ride froward or sydewarde / but toward the chapel might he
in no wise atteyne.

when this was known to ye king / he co^sydered well yt was the handyworke of
god. wherefore by fair and easy means he called home his son, and recouncylyd
him, and forgave all trespace. To this accordyth the legende of the life of
saint Denis, with more that shall after follow in the storye of this Dagobert.

After this reconcylyacyon, Lotharius ordained under him his son Dagobert to
be ruler of the sygnory of Austracye. But whyther yt were by the elacyon of his
own mind, or by badde counsayll, he shortly after rebellyd again his father
/ and would have retained that prouynce to his own use.

For this were chosen.xii. noble men of France, to arbytre and deem between
the father and the son. The which Lords after they had long debated this
matter / by fair entreatyse contentyd so the father, that he gave unto the
son the said lordshyppe of Austracy.

Soon after this accord, Clothayre made war upon the Gothis or Saxons /
and them at length subdued. For yt is to be known, that like as the said
Saxons inuadyd myche Brytayne or England / in likewise warryd they in France
/ and lastely subdued the prouynce of Neustria and named yt after them
Normandye, as after in the storye of Charlis the simple shall more euydently
appear.

Of this vyctorye of Saxons is made a long rehersayll / and how lastly when
Clothayre had slain the king or ruler of them named Berthrande, he after
yode into the country of Germanye, and slew man and child that passyd ye
length of his sword.

Of this and other deeds by this Lothayre done, I might make a long work /
but I pass over.

Then yt follows, when Lothayre had set his country in some rest / he
assembled his lords at a city or town called Traacas or Trecas. And after
diverse matters dyscussyd and endyd / he axed of them perfyte allegeaunce and
fydelite to him and his heirs to be kept. The wyche by the said lords
fyrmely promised and assuryd / he commaundyd eueryche of them to repair to
their own countries. And soon after he made an assemble of his bishops and
spyrytuall men at the city or town of Troys / by whose counsayllys he orderyd
things and matters concerning the well of the church. And shortly after he
was vexyd with grievous sekenes / whereof he finally dyed, when he had reigned
after most writers.xliii. years, leuynge for heir the forenamed Dagobert /
the which enterryd his fader with great po^pe at the abbey of saint Uincent
without the wallys of Paris / the which abbey is at this day called saint
Germaynes.

The foresaid years accomptyd for the reygne of Lothayre / be accomptyd from
the first day that he was ordained king of Soysons, unto the day of his
death. whereof he reygnyd after some writers over a part.xxvii. years / and
ouerall France xvi. years. which make the full of xliii. years.

Anglia. THE.CXXVIII. CHAPTER.
CAdwanus or Cadwan, the which of Guydo is named duke of Uenedoyce or of
Northwalys / was by one assente of the Brito^s lastly made their sovereign or
governor, in the year of our lord.vi. hundred and xiii / and the.xxv. year of
the second Clothayre king of France / and also the first year of Colwolphus
then king of westsoxons / accomptynge for the reygne of Ceawlmus king of the
said westsaxons.xxxi. years. And for Colricus next succedynge him.v. years.

ye have before hard what dyscorde and trouble was among the Brytons in the
time of Careticus last king and long after, by reason where of the Saxons
wanne the more land / and as before is rehersyd in the.C. and.xx. chapyter,
how Ethelfryde king of Northumberlande over set the Brytons at the city of
Chestre / and forcyd the^ to take over Seuarne, and so into walys / where they
then chase this Eadwane to their duke and leder. The which after he was put
in authoryte / assembled his Brytons, and came again into Britayne / and gave
battle unto the said Ethelfryde. In the which they spedde dyuersly, so that
some season the Saxons wanne / and some while the Brytons. But the Brytons held
Chestre and other good towns / which they had recoueryd seen their last
coming.

It should seem by the meaning of Policronica, that this Cadwan or Cedwall
should at length slay the said Ethelfryde and Osricus both kings of
Brennicia and Deyra. But Guydo and also Gaufryde wytnessen, that after this
Cadwan had the better of Ethelfryde / by medyatours yt was agreed that
Ethelfryd should enjoy all the land over and beyond Humber unto Scotland /
and Cadwan should have the land from Humber toward the sowthe. To the which
saying agrees the english cronycle, affermynge also that he should be the
son of Brucyuall king of Leyceter, the which of other writers is not
testyfyed.

It is also there showed that after ye said accord between Ethelfryde and
Cadwan confyrmed / that they continued during the life of Cadwan as two
especial lovers and friends / and during the reygne of this Cadwan the two
sons of Colricus, Kyngilsus and Quichillynus, after the death of their fathers
brother Colwolphus, ruled jointly the pryncypate of westsaxons. The which in
their beginning faught again the Brytons at Ampton beside Oxynford / and wanne
of them the town and other holds, which the Brytons in yt country occupied.
But by agreement of writers this Cadwan was not at this co^flycte, nor yet
medlyd him so far within ye land. But as yt should seem by Guydo / these
Brytons should be some company that should live under trybute of the Saxons /
ye which for the manhood yt they hard reported of Cadwan, rebelled again ye
Saxons. Then it follows, when this Cadwan had thus continued his amite with
Ethelfryde / a change fell, that this Ethelfryde for hatered or otherwise put
from him his wife being great with child, and took to him an other. wherefore
this woman being reedlesse / calling to mind ye great love, that was between
her husband and Cadwan, she went unto him, and specially besoughte him to
recoenyle her lord and husband, that she might be restoryd to his company.
But for Cadwan after many means and requestis might not bring that about / he
therefore tenderynge her necessyte, kept her in his own court till she were
lyghted. The which at time brought fourth a man child whom she let call
Edwyn. And soon after was the wife of Cadwan delyueryd of a son, whom the
father called Cadwalyn. But the author of the Flower of hystoryes says yt
these two chyldern were long borne before this time. The which should seem to be
true, for so myche as this Cadwalyn was of lawful age to beweld his land when
his father dyed / the which he could not do, if he had now be borne. But as
affermeth Policronycon, yt should seem like to a fable, all the rehersayll that
Gaufride makes in the end of his book / as well for Cadwalyn and Edwyn, as
for the other cyrcu^staunce of the matter there rehersyd. which varyeth from
other writers both for the time, and also for the matter, as somdeale is more in
the hystorye hereof before made mencyon / and also by the co^tynuau^ce of this
storye. For as Giraldus Cambrens and other seyen / this Edwyn was the son of
Elle or Ella king of Deyra / the which was persecutyd of Ethelfridus before
named the^ king of both prouynces, that is to mean Brennicia and Deyra, so
sore that he was compellyd to flee to Redwaldus then king of Gestanglys. The
which for mede or fere of the said Ethelfride, was lastely consenting to
have betrayed Edwyn / of which danger the said Edwyn was delyueryd by
warning of a friend of his.

After this escape as Edwyn satte upon a time in a great study alone / a
stranger apperyd to him suddenly, and said, I know well the cause of thy
thought and heaviness. Therefore if thyn enymyes were slain, and thou restoryd
unto thy kingdom and set the in better manner then any of thy forefathers /
woldyst thou not admytte such one for thy friend, and assent and do by his read
and cou^sayll. yes trewly said Edwyn / and that I surely and fastely promise
the. Then this man laid his hand upon Edwynes hedde and said to him, Edwyn
when this token is brought to the / then have thou mind of this time of
trybulacyon, and of this promise thou haste made. And anon as this was spoken
this man vanyshed out of his sight suddenly.

In a conuenyent season after, Edwyn assemblyd his host and gave battle unto
Ethelfryde in the country of Mercia by eest the river of Idle / and slew him
in that fight, with a great number of his knights / and the^ seasyd in his
possessyon both the foresaid pryncypates / and was king of Northumberlande by
the term of.xvii. years.

ye shall understand that the forenamed Ethelfride had.iii. sons, which
are minded beside other. The first and eldest was named Eaufricus, the second
Oswaldus, and the third Oswye. The first was of lawful age / so that he might
help and shyft for him self. But Oswald was but.xii. years of age / and Oswy
far younger. wherefore their wardeyns immediately after their faders death, sent
them into Armorica or little Brytayne, there to be brought up / or more
verily into Albania or Scotland.

THE.CXXIX. CHAPTER.
About this time and season, as wytnessen Policronica, Guydo, and other /
began the kingdom or lordshyp of Mercia, under the strong paynym and Saxon
called Penda. The which Mercia or Mercherike contained Huntyngdon shyre,
Hertfortshyre, Gloucetershyre, with diverse other / and was grettest and
largeste of all the other / and was closyd in ye west side with the river of
Dee, stretchynge to Chestre and Seuarne, and so to Shrouesburye and Brystowe /
in the eest yt was closyd with the sea Occean / in the South with Thamys unto
London / and in the north with ye river of Ho^ber / and had his beginning
under the fore named Penda, as the accord of diverse authors wytnessyth, in
the year of our lords incarnacyon.vi. hundred and.xxvi / and after the first
coming of Hengyste a hundred and lxxvi. years. All be yt that of the first
king diverse opynyons there ben / whereof a cause may be, for so myche as this
lordshyppe in the first beginning was departed in.iii / that is to say y^ first
was called eest Mercia, the.ii. was named myddell Mercia, and the.iii. weste
Mercia. But after yt was brought to one pryncypate and called Mercherike, or of
some writer myddell England. Of this lordshyppe the first christian king was
called wolpherus that was the son of the forenamed Penda. But of all the
kings of this kingdom of Mercia, which were.xviii. in number, as testyfyeth
Policronica / Offa was of most might and power, as after shall more plainly
appear.

This lordshippe endured to reken most certainly, till the year of our
lord.viii. hundred and.lxxvi. In the which year Alurede or Alhered then king
of westsaxons, joined yt unto his own kingdom / which by that account should
be two hundred and.l. years. All be yt that some account the endurau^ce
thereof, to the last year of Burdredus that was put out by the Danes / by
which reckoning yt should then endure.iiii. years less. And some writers
acco^pte the term thereof while the time of Edward called the elder / which
after the death of his fader Alured put out the Danes from the said lordshyppe,
and joined yt again to westsaxon / and by that account yt should last.ii.
hundred.lxxx. years and odd.

ye shall also understand, that in this kingdom reigned diverse holy kings,
which now be allowed by the church for saints / as Offa, Kenelphus,
Kenelmus, and other, as hereafter somedeale shall appear.

I have seen an old regyster within the church of Poulys of London / wherein is
contained many things concerning the first foundacyon of that church, with
certain old chronicles of this land. Among the which yt is there notyd,
that in the time and season when Cadwan was king or ruler of the Brytons /
that in the same moment and time reigned in diverse parts of this land
these.vii. kings under written. As first Sybertus, that then was king of
Eestsaxons no Essex, Redwaldus was then king of Eestanglys now Norff. and
Suff. Ethelbertus was then king of Ke^t, Ethelwaldus was king of Southsex.
Kyngylsus was king of westsaxons. Penda was king of Mercheryke. And
Ethelfridus was then king of the North country or Northumb. All which
regyster this work accordyth with, if the storys of this Cadwan, Careticus,
and Cadwall be duly serchyd.

THE.CXXX. CHAPTER
Let us than return to the perfourmau^ce of the story of Cadwan / and of
such deeds as were done in his days. About the.xiiii. year of his reygne,
Quincellinus y^ was brother unto Kyngylsus, and king with him, as before in
the.C. and.xxviii. chapyter is touchyd, ruled ye westsaxo^s / sent upon an
Eester day a swerdman to sle Edwyn king of Northumberland. This swerdeman came
to a city beside the water of Darwent in Derbysshyre, and waited his time /
and lastly fand the king smally accompanied, and intended to have run
thorough the king with a sword enuenemed. But one Lilla the kings trusty
servant, dysgarnysshed of shylde or other wepyn to defend his master /
starte between the knyg and the sword, and was stryken thorough the body and
dyed / and the king was wounded with the same stroke. And after he wounded the
third / and was taken and confessyd by whom he was sent to work that treason.
The other knight that was secondly wounded dyed / and the king lay after
long syke or he were helyd. And the same night following the queen was
delivered of a daughter / the which king Edwyn caused to be crystened of
Paulinus ye bishop, in toke^ that he would fulfylle all such promise as he
before had made. And she was named Enfleda / and hallowed unto god. And after
whytsontyde y^ king being scantly hole of the wound, assembled his host and
made toward the kings of westsaxon / and after a great and sore fight
venquysshed them and their host. But Edwyn for all this vyctory and other
things given to him of god / as he that was in health of the world, forgate
his former promise, and had little mind thereof / except that he by the
preaching of Paulinus forsook his maume^trye, and for his excuse said that he
might not clearly renye his old law that his forefaders had kept so
long, and suddenly be crystened without authoryte and good advise of his
counceyle. He also received letters of exhortacyon and comfort to take the
baptyme, from ye.v. Boniface tha^ pope. The which also sent to the queen like
letters, with a myrrour garnysshed with silver and a comb of iuory, and for
the king a shyrte wrought in so^dry places with letters of gold. But all this
prevailed nothing.

Then Paulinus made his special prayers to god / and had it showed to him by
reuelacyon, of the token that was given to Edwyn in time of his trybulacyon.
After the which knowledge had / Paulinus shortly after came unto the king /
and layeng his hand on his head, frayned of him whyther he had any like
remembrance of any like token. The which when the king had confessyd / the
holy bishop said unto him. Lo thou have ouercomen thine enemies and won
thy kingdom, and hold it in most large wise / therefore perform thy
promise, and be true to him that has helped thy.

It was not long after that the king assemblyd his counceyll / and by their
agreement he was of the said Paulinus bishop of york baptized within the said
city the.xi. year of his reygne / and the year of grace, as testifyeth
Guido.vi.C.xxvii. He was the first christian king that reigned in that country.
And after him many of his lords and subjects were also crystened of the said
Paulinus / and the flamyns or bysshoppes of their false gods, were turned to
Crystes faith. In token whereof they armed them as knights, and bestrode good
horses / where before by their law they might use none armoure nor ride but
only on a mare.

From that time forthwardes by the term of.vi. years, during the life of king
Edwyn, Paulinus crystened contynuelly in both prouynces of Deyra and in
Bre^nicia in the ryuers of Gweuy and Swala, which he used for his fontes / and
preached in the shyre of Lyndesey / and builded there a church of stone at
Lyndecoln or Lyncolne.

In this time was so great peace in that kingdom of Edwyne, that a woman
might have gone from one town to an other without grefe or noyaunce.

And for the refresshynge of way goers / this Edwyn ordained at clear wellys
cups or dysshes of iron or brass to be fastened to posts standing by the
said wellys sides, and no man was so hardy to take away those cups / he kept
so good justice and with that he was knyghtely of his deeds.

He was the first that wanne this i will of Eubonia now called the i will of man.
And by his means / Orpewaldus or Corpewaldus, the son of Redwaldus king of
Eest anglis or Norphis / to whom as before is touchyd Edwyn had fled for
socoure, was converted to the true faith, and a great part of his men with
him. And for this Edwyn excellyd ye other kings / they enuyed at him, and
specially Penda king of Mercia / the which excyted Cadwan king of Brytons
again him. So that they two assemblyd a great host again Edwyn, and lastly
met in a palce called Hatfelde / and after sharp fight on both sides there
Edwyne was slain, when he had reigned over ye Northumbris.xvii. years, in the
year of our lord, as says Guydo.vi.C. xxxiii. when these two kings Cadwan or
Cedwalla and Penda, had thus ouercomen the king and him slain and much of
his people / they became so cruel to men of that country, that they destroyed
therein much people, as men, women, and children, as well religyous as other.
wherefore Paulinus the archebysshop beholding their cruelnesse / took with him
the queen and Enfleda her daughter, and fled by water into Kent. And for the
bysshoprych of Rochester was than void, by reason that Romanus the last
bishop was adreynte / Paulyne was there ordained and made bishop of that see,
and there dyed. And also left there his Paull, as affyrmeth Policronycon and
other / the archebysshoppes see of york was void.xxx. years after. But ye
queen which was named Etherberga became a menchon, and sailed into Gallia or
France / wherein an abbaye called Brydgence or Bryggence, she lived an holy
life and dyed / and her daughter Enfleda co^tynued her professyon, and was
afterward abbess of Strenshalt in the vale of whitby.

After the death of Edwyn Osrycus that was the son of Elfricus which was
brother of Ethelfridus, took upon him to be king of Deyra / and Eaufricus the
eldest son of Ethelfrida, as before in the.C. and. xxviii. chapter is
touched, was made king of Brennicia / the which turned the^ both from Crystes
faith, and became myscreau^tes. For the which gods wrech fell upon them in
short while after / for they were both slain in ye year following, of ye
fornamed Cadwan and Penda.

And when these said two kings were thus slain / Oswalde y^ second son of
Ethelfrid began his reygne over the prouynce of Brennicia, as chief of that
kingdom of Northumberlande / and had the rule of Deira in like wise. whereof
when Cadwan or Cedwalla was ware / he gathered his Brytons and thought to slay
Oswalde as he had before slain his brother Eaufricus. But Oswald when he was
warned of the great strength of this Cadwan / he made his prayers to god, and
besoughte him mekely of help to withstand his enemies. And or he yode to
prayer he arreryd a cross of tree / before the which he knelyd a long while
in a field / which long after was called Heuynfelde, and at this day is had
in great worship. That place is nere unto the town or church of Agustalde
in Brennicia / the which church was there builded by Oswalde after the
wynnyng of that battle. And of the spones of that cross are told many
wounders the which I over pass.

Than after Oswalde had prayed for the salvation of his people / the two hosts
met in a field named tha^ Denysborne or Denyslake, where was foughten a strong
battle. But finally Cadwan, which Polycronyca names Cedwalla, was slain and
his people chasyd / which were far exceeding the number of Oswaldus host /
when the said Cadwan had reigned over the Brytons after most accord of
writers and also of the time, by the term of xxii. years / leuynge after him a
son, as affermeth Gaufryde, named Cadwallus or Cadwalyn.

Francia. THE.CXXXI. CHAPTER.
DAgobertus the first of that name, and son of Clothayr before rehearsed /
began his reygne over the hole monarchye of France in the year of our
lord.vi. hundred xxxi / and the.xviii. year of Cadwan than king of Brytons.
The which at the time of his faders death was in the prouynce of Austracy, given
to him by his fader, as before is showed in the.C.xxvii. chapyter precedynge.
But anon as word came to him of his faders decease / he sped him well
accompanied into France. And when he was comen to the cyty of Reins thither
came unto him many nobles / as well out of Burgoyne as out of other parties of
France, and did unto him feauty and homage.

It is showed in the.C.xxvi. chapyter of this work, how Clothayre had by his
second wife a son named Heybert / the which claymed his part of the
kingdom of France, and for ye same began to make some styrynge. But by the
good polycy and means of one Brunulphe uncle to the said Haybert, and brother
to Sichyld his mother, the matter was appeased / so that he had unto him certain
cytyes assygned, with lands in Guyan. with the which he was co^tentyd / and
ordained Toulouse for the chief city of his pryncypate. And after that peace
confermed / Dagobert was in quiet by the term of iii. years following. But
the.iiii. year the Gascoynes rebelled again him / the which by his manhood he
shortly subdued. And when he had set his land in a quietness / he called to
mind ye promise before time which he had made to saint Denis and his
fellows. wherefore he with great solempnite caused the ground, where these holy
bodies lay to be opened / and with great reverence to be taken up. Upon the
which bodies he fand fresshely written either of their names, so that he might
perfyghtely know that one from that other / and then caused the^ to be laid in
a sumptuouse shryne. And over them in the said place he builded a royal
mynster of lyme and stone, and conueryd it with plates of silver instead of
sclate or lead / and assygned unto ye prestes and mynysters thereof great and
rich possessions. And for so goodly a temple that was of such beautye
outward, should not lack of garnysshynge within: he therefore caused hangynges
to be made to hang within the same temple / of the which tapettes such as
scruyd for the quere, were garnyshed and set with diverse stones in those days
used. And by the foresaid place or shryne where the holy martyrs bodies lay
he ordained a cheste or tru^ke of clean silver / to the intent yt all such
iewelles and rich gifts as were offered to ye holy saints, should therein be
kept to the use of the mynysters of ye same place, and over that endowed yt
same place with many great lybertyes and pryuyleges. And this place thus
fynysshed / he caused a cross of gold to be made, and to be garnysshed with
most precious stones of a great bygnesse and value / and caused it to be set
over the high altar within the said monastery.

This translacyon of these blessed saints should be as wytnessyth the French
Cronycle, in the.v. year of the reygne of the said Dagobert / which made ye
year of our lord.vi.C.xxxvi. The which wha^ he had clearly with all honor and
due reverence fynysshed / he tha^ vysyted and cyrcued his land in mynystrynge
justice to all persons / and ordained such means as bylles of supplicacyon and
other, that the causes and matters of poor men might come to his knowledge by
mean whereof he gate great love and favor of his commons.

But among his many notable deeds / one deed by him was committed, the which
somdeale long after blemysshyd his honor. And that was that he without
judgment or process of the laws / caused to be slain the forenamed
Brunulphe uncle unto Haybert his brother, for malice yt he bare to him, for the
fauouryng of ye said Haybertis party.

After this the king was deuorsyd from his wife named Gertrude, for that she
was bareyne and brought forth no fruit / and was after married to a fair
wenche named Ranetrude, of the which he received at conuenyent time after, a
son that was named Sigebert. Of this child it is told that when he was brought
to the holy bishop Amandus to be confermed, being than of the age of.xl.
days / and the bishop said over him certain prayers concerning the office
of confyrmacyon, and none of the cyrcumstauntes by neglyge^ce gave answer unto
ye bishop at conuenyent time: the child by dyuyne power said, Amen, in so
loud manner that all the people about standing might well under stand it /
whereof the bishop and all the people were hougely ameruayled.

Than it follows, this Dagobert all this passetyme was ruled by a noble man of
France, or more properly of the prouynce of Austracy, named in the French
book saint Arnulphe bishop of Mees / and by Pepyn, which was ruler of the
kings paleys. By which season, he and also his land were in great honor
and prosperyte, till the death of the forenamed Arnulphe / which dyed about the
season that the king began to alter and change his co^dycyons, to the hurt
of his commons and of his land.

THE.CXXXII. CHAPTER.
DAgobertus yt before exercised him in all honor and virtue, began now to
exercise iniustyce and tyranny / in pyllynge his commons by exaccyons and
trybutes, in such wise that those that dwelled in the outward parties of his
realm, and nere unto the Turkys and other strange lands and nations, were
feign to be under the rule of them then of their own natural prince. But
how so ever he bare him again his subjects, in pyllynge and taking from the^
what he might yet he ever had such a favor to saint Denis, that he gave to
him what he might purchase, were yt with right or otherwise. Contynuynge
which season / he went into the country of Poytiers and robbyd and spoiled
there the church of saint Hyllary, of many great iewellys / and after took
with him the body of that blessed man, and caused yt to be had into the
monasterye of saint Denis, and there shrynyd him. And that done / he destroyed
the country of Poytiers with iron and fire / and the wallys of the city he
made plain with the ground. And for yt more cruelty or terror to the people
to be showed / he eryd the stretys of the said city, and sewe them wythsalte
for a sign and token that he would have that city subuertyd for ever. The
which ruin to this day appears / for there where the old city stood, is
now called ye old Poytiers / and where that other standyth now, is called the
new city of Poytiers. The cause of this destruction of the city and country
as says master Roberte Gagwyne / was for, that that ye earl of Poytiers
rebellyd again the king.

Thus this man that whylome was a lamb / was now turned to a tygre. And over
his cruelnesse he was given to all sensual lust of his body / in so myche
that where so he rode he had following him a company of strumpettes, beside
such as he kept in diverse places of his realm, appareylyd and fed like unto
queen's.

For this rule and other vices vsyd by the king / Pepyn then master of the
paleys was put in great wit and blame of diverse lords of the land /
thinking that by his counsel and sufferaunce, the king was so lad and
guyded. This was ye first Pepyn. The second was master of the placys in that
time of the second reygne of the first Theodoricus / and was surnamed Uetulus
and Breuis, which is to mean old and little. And ye.iii. Pepyn was son of
Carolus Marcellus. The first Pepyn was graundefader to the second by the
moders side / and the second was graunsyr to the.iii. by ye man's side.
which third Pepyn was by hole assent of Frenchmen ordained king of France as
after shall appear / and was father unto the king named Charlis the great and
emperor of Rome. All which Pepyns descendyd of the blood of Austracye / and
had great possessions within that prouynce. when the forenamed Pepyn
understood the grudge and murmour of the lords, which they bare again him
for the kings demeanor / he by their aduyces took unto him a another great
lord named Martyn, to be unto him assystent / and over that he caused ye
blessed man Amandus to accompany ye king. By whose counsel the king somdeale
refrayned him from vice / but not all as the good bishop him aduertysed.

In this time Heybart the kings half brother dyed, and also his son shortly
after named Chilperych. By reason of whose dethes / the lordshyp and country
of Toulouse fell to the possessyon of Dagobert. It was not long after that a
people called Asclauons or Sclauons, made war upon the country of Austracy.
These also are called Bulgaris, and join upon a part of Austracy. Of these
tidings when Dagobert was learned / he sped him into Austracy, and there
assembled a mighty host of knights / and so sped him till he came nere his
enymyes. But ye said Sclauons having knowledge of the kings great host,
agreed by orators to him sent, to continue the trybute that they before time
paid / ye which was yearly five hundred oxen. where thorough ye war was
appesyd for that time / and new allyaunce upon both parties confermed.

After the which peace thus stablysshyd / ye king made his son Sigebert as
king and ruler of that lordshyp of Austracy / assygnynge to him the bishop of
Colayn named Cunbert, and the earl Palatyne named Agasyle, to be his tutours
and rulers contynuynge his years of youth. And that done, ye king returned
into France, where soon after he received of his wife a son named
Clodoueus, the which of many writers is called Lodouicus or Lowes. To this
Lowes the father at couenable time after gave the countyes of Burgoyne and
Neustria or Normandy.

Then the king granted to the house of saint Denis, a fair to be kept
yearly in the month of June in a field nere unto the said monasterye / and
that no marchaunte of Paris nor good town there about; should sell any
marchaundyse but only in the fair / with many other customs to the great
auauncement of that house.

And after the king had subdued the Gascoynes, and the Brytons of Armorica
or little Brytayne / he then assembled a multitude of bysshoppes for to dedycate
and halowe the monasterye of saint Denis in most solemn wise. where a great
miracle was showed of the clensyng of a leper or lazar / that during the night
lay within the said church, and there being in his devout prayers, saw our
savior Christ accompanied with Peter and Paul, and also the holy martyrs
saint Denis with his two fellows, enter the church by one of the wyndowes /
and after hallowed the said church. which after came to the said lazar / and
commanded him to show unto the bishops, yt he in proper person had hallowed
the said church / and for a token and knowledge of ye same, he had received
his health. And for more record of the troth of this matter / our savior
Christ, as wytnessyth master Robert Gagwyn, and also the french cronicle,
drew of the skin of the face of the said lazar, and threw yt again a
stone, where yt remains at this day to be seen. The which token when
Dagobert and his bishops upon the morn after beheld and saw / they being
greatly ameruaylyd, laft of any forther business touching the dedyfyenge of
the said church. For this miracle great concurse of people yearly in the.vi.
kalendis of March co^myth with great devotion unto ye said monastery, there
making their oblacions / fermly beleuyng that the said church was hallowed with
Crystes own hand. when Dagobert had this business with other perfyted and
endyd / he then called a great counsayll of his lords spyrytuall and te^porall
at his city of Biguage, where he being set between his.ii. sons Sigebert and
Clodoueus / he made a long preposycyon and oracyon concerning the allegyaunce
/ which he exhorted his lords to owe and bear to him for the term of his
life, and after to his two sons there being prensent. And then he exhorted
his.ii. sons charitably to love / and that they should in most fraternall
wise continue their lives. The which preposycyon fynyshed / he there in that
presence made his testament, that before he had caused to be written in iiii.
sundry skynnes endentyd, to be rad, and then sealyd with certain of their
sealys / whereof that one he wyllyd to be kept in the treasory of saint Denis,
the.ii. in the treasorye of the city of Lions, the.iii. in the tresory of Mees
in Austracy, which how is named Lorayne, and the.iiii. in the kings
tresorye. And when the king had orderyd his matiers some deal to his purpose /
he dyssoluyd this counsayll, and co^maundyd eueryche estate unto his own
country / and after was somewhat besyed with the rebellyon of the forenamed
Bryto^s and Gascoynes and such other matters, the which I pass over for length
of time.

Then the king lastely was syke of the flyx / and was brought by his desire
unto the monastery of saint Denis. where after he had committed his wise
Nantyld with her son Clodoueus unto the guydyng and tuycyon of a noble man of
France, and the^ master of his Paleys named Agaynus / he dyed, when he had
reigned xiiii. years / and was buried with great pomp in the forenamed
monastery.

Of this Dagobert is reported by mine author, and also the french cronycle
beside other writers, that an holy ancre or heremyte of France being in his
medytacyons, should se a company of fendes / which being in the sea should have
among them in a boat the soul of Dagobert, and were conueyenge yt toward
pain. But this spirit ceasyd not to cry and to call to saint Denis and his
fellows for help / the which lastely came clad in white vestymentes and
delivered that soul from the pains of his enymyes, and conveyed it unto
everlasting joy / as more at length and with more cyrcu^staunce yt is declared
in the bokys beforesayde.

Anglia. THE.CXXXIII. CHAPTER.
CAdwallus or Cadwalyne the son of Cadwan lastely spoken of in ye cronycle of
much Britayn as testyfyeth Guydo, Gaufryde, and other / began his reygne over
the Brytons in the year of Crystes incarnacyon.vi. hundred and.xxxv / and ye
first year of the first Dagobert then king of France / and also the.xii. year
of Kyngilsus and Quichillinus then kings of westsaxon. This Cadwallus was
strong and mighty, and warryd strongly upon the Saxons nere unto him / and
wanne from them both castles and towns, and drove them back into the land
toward London. whereof herynge Penda king of Mercia / he assembled his Saxons
and made toward Cadwall. But he was in the end dystressyd / and fayn to seche
and purchase the favor of Cadwal, and live under his tribute. This Penda
after this was in great favor with Cadwall / in so myche yt he took part with
Cadwall again his other Saxon kings, as after shall appear. About this time
Kyngylsus one of the kings of westsaxons / was by the doctrine of ye blessed
man Berinus co^uertyd to ye right believe, and cristyned of him at the city of
Dortyke or Dorchester. And Oswald king of Northumberland was his godfather /
and weddyd his daughter afterward. And then that city was given to the
bishop, to the end that he should there ordeyne his see / where the said
Berinus sat.xiiii. years after, and there was buried / till Beda bishop of
wynchester tra^slatyd his body to ye city of wynchester: all be it yt the
chano^s of Dorchester saye^, that the said body of holy Beryne was not taken
thens but a another in the stead of him. And yet in toke^ thereof / a beers of
wonder work sta^dyth at this day over that grave / where ye holy man was first
buried. It should seem that this city of Dorchester is now called Dorset. This
see was in the time of wyllyam conqueroure changed to Lyncolne.

About this time Sigebertus or after some Segebertus king of Eestenglande or
Norfolk, which reigned there next his brother Corpwaldus / ordained letters
to be lernyd, and set scolys in diverse places of his kingdom / and ordained
over the^ schole masters and pedagoges, as he sometime had seen in France.
The which Sygebert was conuertyd to Crystes faith by the doctrine of an holy
man named Felix / ye which he was first acqueynted with in France or in
Burgoyne. The which Felix came soon after that acquaintance into Eestanglia
or Norfolk / where the king made him bishop of Du^wyche now called Thetford.
Lastelye the king betoke his kingdom unto his neuew Egritus / and became a
munke in an abbay which he him self buyldyd.

But when Penda king of Mercia warryd after in that country / the said
Sygebert was again his will pulled out of the said monastery, and went in
arms, or as some testyfye vnarmyd with a white rod in his hand nycely, and so
was slain, and well nere all his host of knights that came with him to that
feld.

By this rehersayll apperyth here dyscorde of writers of the beginning of this
said kingdom of Eestanglis. For if yt were true that this began as
wytnessyth Policronycon in the.iiii. chapyter of his fyfte book, in the year of
grace.iiii. hundred lxxx. and.xii, as before also I have showed in the.lxxx.
and.xvi. chapyter of this work: then might yt not agree with conuenyency of
time, that this Sygebert or Sebert should reygne as king at those days now
minded. wherefore ye saying of Guydo is more concordaunte / which shewyth this
kingdom to have his beginning in the year of grace.v.C. and.lxx, as in the
end of the foresaid chapyter yt is there shortly touched.

Then yt follows in the story / after the death of this Sigebert, Anna was made
king of Eestanglis.

And during the reygne of Sigebertus, befell the wonder yt is told of that
holy man Furceus / as is showed at length in the.xiii. chapter of the.v. book
of Policronicon aforesaid / and in the.xiii. title of the.vi. chapyter of
the.ii. part of ye famous work called Summa Antonini.

And about this season reigned or began to reygne the cursyd sect of ye
detestable and false prophet Machomet / ye which syns ye time has so enfected
/ yt it has enfectyd.ii. pri^cipall pertes of ye world, as Asia, and Africa /
and the more part of ye third named Europa / and daily wynneth upon the christian
people great lands and possessions. About the.vii. year of this forenamed
Cadwall king of Britons / reigned in Kent a Saxon king named Ercombertus, the
which had that pryncypate.xx. years nobly.

And among other of his famous dedys / he reuyued and quyckened again the
faith of Christ, that in some places of his kyngedome was sore appallyd. For he
destroyed the temples of false gods thorough all that country / and ordained
by the advise of his clergy, the time of lent to be fasted. He wedded the
daughter of Anna king of Eestanglis named Sexburga / of whom he receyuyd a
daughter and named her Eukengoda / ye which after was a menchon or nun in
the abbey of Brydgence in France before minded, where Ethelburga ye wife
sometime of Edwyn king of Northoumberlande served god, as in the hundred
and.xxx. chapyter precedynge yt is showed / and either of them was abbess of
the same place. And though at those days there were many abbeys in this isle of
myche Brytayne / yet many both of men and of women sailed into other lands /
as France, and Burgoyne and other places, because the conuersacyon and living
of those countres were of more fame and perfeccyon then was then vsyd in this
isle of Brytayne.

About this time as yt were about the.viii. year of Cadwall / dyed kyngylsus
king of westsaxons, when he had reigned with his brother and alone.xxxi. years.
And Kenwalcus his son was king after him / ye which in ye beginning of his
reygne would not be crystyned / and forsook his wife the daughter of Pe^da, and
took to him a another. wherefore Penda in aduengynge his daughter / gathered his
host, and chasyd Kynwalcus out of his kingdom / and kept him thens.iii.
years. By which season was Anna king of Eestanglis / and there conuertyd to
the feyth of Christ, and cristyned of Felix aforenamed then bishop of Du^wyke
or Thetforde / and after he recoueryd his kingdom, by the aid and assystence
of the said Anna. when Kenwalcus was restoryd to his land / he made a
bishops see at Kaerguent or wynchestre / and ordained there a bishop named
Agilbert a french man of birth, but he was called out of Irla^d. The which
when he had sytten there a certain of time / he was put the^s I ne wot for
what cause / and in his place was set an other named wyn. Of this wyn, as
says Policronicon, the town of wynchester took ye name, as he declaryth in
ye.liii. chapyter of his first book / as yt were wynnes city. But he was also
putthens / and then was Leutherius bishop, and after Leutherius succedyd Cedda.
And after Theodorus the archbishop of Caunterbury ordained two bishops to
that prouynce of westsaxo^. That one at wynchester / and to that was subject
two countries Southrey and South hampshyre. And that other see he ordained at
Shyreborne, to the which were subject.vi. countries, that is to say
Berkshyre, wyltshyre, Somersetshyre, Dorsetshyre, Deuenshyre, and Cornewayll.
But in wyllyam the co^querours time ye see of Shyreborne was turned to
Salysbury with the sea of Ra^mysburye.

It was not long after that Kenwalcus was warreyd with the king of Brytons /
the which fought with him at a place called wight Gosneborough, and were of
him there ouercomyn. Then Cadwall assembled a new host of Brytons / and met
with Kenwalcus at a place called the hill of Pent / where after long fight
the Brytons were put to flyghte.

YE have hard before how that blessed man Oswall the son of Ethelfryde, was
ordained king of Northumberlande / the which continued his life in justice
and virtue as king, by the term of.ix. years. But Penda king of Mercia, that
to him and to all christian men had great disdain and envy / about the ix. year
of Cadwall made war upon Oswald, and slew him in a feld called Meserfeld /
where after his death god showed for him many miracles. But after one year of
his death Oswy his younger brother recoueryd the kingdom / and buried his head in
the chyrcheyarde of Lyndesar, for the body was conveyed by the Pagans and
divided in sundry pieces. But yt is said that the head is now at Durham between
saint Cutberttus arms. And the other part of ye body which was long after
founden / was had to the abbay of Bordeaux, by Ostrida daughter of Oswy and
queen of Mercia. where strau^gnesse was made by the ruler of that house for the
receyte of those relykes, till a miracle or dyuyne token there was showed. But
after the said body and bones were brought to Glowceter to an house of chano^s
/ and one of his arms is at Peterboroughe, hole of flesh and fell as some
have and tellen. when Oswy had a season ruled his kingdom / he fande unlawful
means to slay Oswyn that was king of Deyra. This Oswyn was the son of
Eaufrycus eldest brother of Oswalde / which Oswyn was good of condycyon, and
there with both meke and mylde. when this Oswyn was slain by the consent of his
neuewe Oswy / then Oswy took to him as fellow of that kingdom his broders son
Odylwaldus the son of Oswalde. This Oswalde gave unto Cedda bishop of
whynchester before named a ground in a place of the North country in the high
hills called Lastyngaye, for to build upon an abbay, which he there buyldyd /
and after there taught his brother Chymbyllus how he should rule that place.
Pe^da king of Mercia, which forgate not the strengthynge and fauourynge that
Anna king of Eestanglys had showed to Kenwalchus his daughters husband and his
enymye / gaderyd a power of knights, and yode again the said Anna, and slew
him in plain battle. And the same year one Botulphus buyldyd an abbay beside
Lindecolne or Lincoln, in a place that hight I canno.

And as wytnessyth Beda in the.iiii. chapter of his third book / this year
which should be the.xxi. year of ye reygne of Cadwall, Penda that of this former
vyctory was supprysyd with great pride, came with his host into the bounds of
Northumland / entendynge to slay Oswy, as before he had slain his brother
Oswalde. whereof when Oswy was ware he assemblyd his knights and made toward
him. And for affynyte of marriage ye was between their children, as after shall
be showed, and other causes / Oswy offeryd to him many great offers, to the
entente to have had him refused that battle, and to have had peace with him.
when Oswy perceived the obstynacye and pride of Pe^da, and saw that by no
reasonable offers he might of him win no peace / he said / sens this paynym
can not receive our gifts and proffers that we have offeryd to him, we shall
offer the^ to him that can receive them.

And anon he made his auowe unto god, that if he might have vyctory of his
enymyes, he should offer his daughter Elfleda to him with suffycyent possessions
for to build.xii. abbayes / and after joined in battle with the said Penda
in the country of Ledis not far from york / which was so sore foughten, yt
the like thereof was not seen many years beforne. But finally Penda was slain,
and xxx. of his chief captayns with him / and yet he had thryes the people that
Oswy had. And those that escaped the shot and the sword / were for the more
party drowned in the river of wynwed, which was nere unto the place of that
battle. And among the prisoners that were taken at this field / the wife of
Penda was one, and her sons uncle named Egfridus was an other. Then Oswy
yielded his thanks to god / and according to his former promise, he offryd his
daughter Elfleda or Enfleda of the age of.iii. years unto god, and took her to
the lore of Hylda abbess of Hertsey or Hertis island. And after that the said
Hylda removed to the abbaye of Stremshalte in the vale of whitby.xxx. mile from
york / where she was after abbess, and ye said Elfleda also. And Oswy as he
had promised / gave lands and rentes to buyld.xii. abbeys. whereof.vi. were in
the prouynce of Bre^nicia, and.vi. in the prouynce of Deyra.

This fornamed Penda had diverse sons by accord of writers / that is to
mean wolferus weda, and Egfridus, beside other not minded. To this second
son weda, Oswy had beforetyme married a daughter of his by consent of Penda
his fader / The which weda by help of Oswy was made king of south Mercia,
the which lordshyp is seueryd from the north Mercia by the river of Trent,
and contained by record of holy Beda five thousand housholdes. This weda also
promised when he married the said daughter of Oswy, that he should become a
christian man / the which he perfourmyd after the death of his father. But when
he had scantly reigned three years over the said Southmercis / he was by the
treason of his wife slain. And after that kingdom fell to wolferus the other
brother / the which had weddyd the daughter of Ercombert king of Kent named
Ermenylda. This wolferus was shortly after crystyned or before / so that he is
accounted for the first cristened king that reigned in Mercia. This was fader
to Keneredus, and that holy virgyne and menchon wereburga.

And for yt is long that I spoke of Kenwalcus king of westsaxons / yt is to
be noted that after he had ouercomen the Brytons, as before is showed, and at
that time had not perfyted the bishops see of Kaerguent or wynchester, he
then besyed him there about. And according to the will of kyngylsus his father
/ he gave to the sustentacyon of the said see all the land which lay within
vii. miles of the said city, as affermeth the authoure of the Flower of
hystoryes / and fynyshed yt somdele to his purpose.

But let no man think that it was builded as yt is now. For another yt nor
none other ben at this day standing monastery, paleys, nor other / but yt
they have been sens those days alteryd, and new changed, and some clearly
throwe^ down, and some new builded / all be yt that many stand upon their
first foundacyon as this yet does.

Soon after that Kenwalcus had endyd this work / he made war upon wolferus
of Mercia. But in that journey fortune was not to him favorable / for he lost
thereby, and wan nothing of his intent.

It was not long after that Ercombert king of Kent dyed / and his son Egbert
was king after him.ix. year.

And soon thereafter fell great mortalyte and sickness in this land of
Brytayne / the which co^tynued and encreasyd more and more during ye life of
Cadwall now king of Brytons and of Cadwaldyr his successor or son, after
some writers. In the which season and beginning of this mortalyte and
sickness, dyed many bishops in this land / in so myche that Uitalcanus then
being pope, ordained Theodorus archbysshoppe of Canterbury to have ye rule of
the chyrches of Brytayne.

Somewhat before this time, Benet that was in good favor with king Ofwy, and
dyscendyd of rich kynne forsook service and house, and all his kynred, and
became Crystes servant. He went.v. sythes to Rome and came again / and at
every time he brought with him relykes or books of Crystes lore. And lastely he
was made munke / and buyldyd.ii. abbeys, that one over again ye other upon the
river of wyre, that renneth in the country of.

This Benet was the first yt brought the craft of glasyng into this land /
and he was Abbot of both the foresaid abbayes / and took to his lore Beda when
he was but.vii. years of age, and taught him during his life. Of the virtue
and pacyence of this holy munke and bishop Benet, I might make a long
rehersayll. But for the holiness of his life is declared in the legende of
saints and other books of authoryte / here for lengthynge of the time I over
pass yt, and will return again to Oswy. The which when he had long
reigned over the Northumbers / he made Cedda that was abbotte of Lastyngay,
archbishop of york, more by will then by skyll / and put out wylfrida the
archbishop of that see. But yt was not long after that Cedda was depryued of
that dygnyte by the authoryte of tharchebisshop Theodorus / as he depryuyd
diverse other that time, which came to their benefyces again the ordinance of
the holy laws of Crystes church / and made him by great instaunce after this,
bishop of westsaxons. And about the.xxx. year of the reygne of Cadwall Cissa
that was father to Ine king of westsaxons / buyldyd ye abbey of Abyndon. In
these days the munkes and clergy of Brytayne, set all their minds to serve
god and not the world, the heart and not the womb. wherefore they were then
had in great reverence and honor / so yt they were the^ receyuyd with all
worship. And as they went by ye stretys and ways / men that saw them, would
run to them and desire the^ blessings. And well was him that the^ might give
unto them possessions, and buyldyd to them houses and chyrches. But as they
encreasyd in riches of the worldly treasoure / so they dyscreaced in heavenly
treasour / as in the days of Aluredus somdeale began, and sythen that time
has spronge not all to the pleasure of god / whereof all is to be committed to
his pleasure. Then they plied nothing that was worldely / but gave them to
prechynge and techynge of the word of our savior / and folowyd the life that
they preachyd, by gyuynge of good example. And over that they were so void of
couetyse, that they receyuyd no possessions, but if yt were perforce.

THE.CXXXV. CHAPTER.
OSwy king of Northumberlande dyed / and Edfrydus his son was king after
him.xv. years His fader had reigned with his fellows Oswynus and Odyswalde
xxviii. years. Edfrydus or Egfrydus had to wife that holy woman Ethelfryde, yt
before was the wife of Tonbertus prince of the south Eyrwayes, the which when
Egfrydus had holden.xii. years as his wife, and might not in that while have
leave of her to deal with her carnally for prayer nor great gift / he then
gave to her license to be a menchyon at Colud under Aebba, that than was awnte
unto him. And after she remened to Ely, and there was abbess, and lived in
great penance and abstynence / and dyed there, after she had been.vii. year
abesse.

And Kenwalcus king of weste Saxon, dyed about the year of the reygne of
Cadwall king of Bryto^s, the.xxxix. when he had reigned over them.xxx. years.
And his son Kenewinus succedyd him / after that Sexburga his mother or wife
to his fader, had ruled that prouynce one year.

Cedda the bishop of westsaxons dyed / and his deken wenfrede was his
successoure. And when he was put down / the abbot of Meda^pstede that now is
called Peterboroughe, was there bishop after him.

Sone after this time dyed wyna bishop of London / after whom was bishop
Erkenwald, the which was brother to Ethelburga or Alborough the Menchen, and
after abbess of Berkynge in Essex. This holy bishop Erkenwalde foundyd the
monasteryes of Chertsey in Southery, and Berkynge before said / which place
has been preserved sens ye first foundacyon. But that of Chertsey was thrown
down by the Danes and reedyfyed by Edgar king of England, as after follows.

After the death of wolpherus king of Mercia / reigned his brother Etheldredus.
And the wife of wolpherus named Ermenilda, was made a menchon at Ely / and
wereburga his daughter was also made a nonne at Trikyngham, and dyed at
hamburgam, where she lay in the Earth.iii. hundred years hole and sound / and
after that she was conueyde to Chester. This Etheldredus king of Mercia
had.iii. holy daughters / yt is to say Mylburga, Myldreda, and Mylguida / and a
son of great holiness named Meresyn. But after some writers all these
forsayde children should be the children of wolpherus and not of Etheldrede.
And wolpherus also had.ii. holy susters named Kynedda and Kyneswyda, both
nonnes and buried at Peterborough / where saint Ethelwolde buyldyd after an
abbey of maidens.

ye have hard before how wylfryd was put out of ye see of york / wherefore he
went to Rome and complained him to Agathon the pope / and was well allowed in
some things. But the king and Theodorus had there such protectours and
friends / that he returned without spedynge of his cause. wherefore he
returned unto the South Saxons, and builded an abbey in Silesey, and preachyd
to the south Saxons.xv. years, and conuertyd myche people / and showed there a
great wonder. For where by ye term of.iii. years before his coming there
fell no rain upon the ground / by his prayer / god sent to them rain, and
the ground began to burgen and wax grene, yt before was bareyn and dried for
lack of water. He also taught to them the craft of fysshynge.

Egfrydus king of Northumberlande claymed the land that Etheldrede king of
Mercia held / for the which diverse assembles of treaty between them were
had, but all were dyssoluyd without agreement. wherefore either perty gathered
his strength and met upon a plain nere unto ye river of Trent / where was
foughte^ between them a long and sharp fight. In the which among a great
nombre on both parties, was slain ye brother of Egfryde named Elswynus / but
Edfryde or Egfryde had the better. Than after this battle means of peace were
again treatyd / so yt finally Edfryde had great sums of Money in
recompencement of his Brothers death / and so restyd the said.ii. kings
accorded. In this battle was taken as prisoner a knight of Egfryde, the which
after his taking was sold to one Fryson by the knights of Ethelfryde. This
Fryson to thentent to have his prisoner the shortelyer redeemed kept him in
bands of iron which prisoner had to his brother a priest and a virtuous man,
that for the delyuere of his brother prayed daily By mean of whose prayers as
often as ye said priest sang mass / so often were the bands of iron lousyd
from the prisoner during the time of the mass. The which so co^tynued, till
he was clearly delivered, and his raunson paid.

And in this year apperyd stella comata a blasynge sterre, which betokens
death or mortalyte of ye people And in the year following dyed of ye Epedemye
sykenesse, the holy abbes of Ely saint Etheldrede / her suster Sexburga that
sometime had been wife to Ercobert king of Kent, was her successoure. And this
year also dyed Helda ye holy abbess of whythy before spoken of, which was
neuew to Edwyne lately king of Northu^berlande. In this abbey were also
brethren under the rule of Hylda, as at these days ben at Syo^ under the
abbess there. wherefore sundry of the^ were made bisshoppes, as Besa, wylfryde,
and other. Among these brethren was one named Cedman a man of great
perfeccyon / ye which by inspyracyon was taught to make dytyes and songs to
move men to devotion, wherein he passyd all other at those days.

Soon after this time Theodorus for diverse causes, kept a synod or
counceyll of Bysshoppes and other men of the church at Hatfelde. By authoryte
of which counceyll he divided the prouynce of Mercia, that Sexwolphus then
ruled alone, into v. bysshopryches / that is one to Chestre, the second to
worcetyr, ye third to Lychefelde, the fourth to Cedema in Lyndesey, and the.v.
to Dorchester.

About the.xlvi. year of the reygne of Cadwall, Kenewynus king of westsaxons
had occasyon of war again ye Brytons, so that they met nere unto the west
see / where after a sharp skyrmysshe ye Bryto^s were chasyd. And soon after
Egfrydus king of Northumberlande made war upon the Pyctes or Scotts /
because they fauouryd greatly ye cest anglis again him. But lastly by color
or fleyng back / they brought Edfryde into a streyte among Hills and
mountains, and slew him there with a great part of his people. And after his
death a bastard brother of his named Alfridus Notus was king of
Northumberlande, and reigned there.xviii. years, as wytnessyth willyam writer
of stories of kings And shortly after dyed Cadwall or Cadwalyne king of
Bryto^s / when he had reigned as testyfyeth Galfryde, Guydo, and
other.xlviii. years. But another Polycronyca, nor none of the other authors of
authoryte, which Policronica allegyd / shewyth any like acts of this Cadwall
as Galfryde does / nor yet that he should be buried to the terror and fere of
the Saxons / or an image of brass set of him upon an horse over the west gate
of London called Ludgate or yet the church of saint Martyne there now
stondynge should be buyldyd by the Brytons, to the end to pray for the said
Cadwall and his Friends / or ye Cadwaladrus, which of Beda is named Cedwalla,
should be his son / as of ye said Gaufryde is affermed.

Francia. THE.CXXXVI. CHAPTER.
CLodoueus ye younger son of Dagobert, and of Nautylda his wife / began his
reygne over the myddell part of France and other parts thereof, in the year
of our lord.vi.C.xlv / and the.x. year of Cadwall then king of Brytons. And
his elder brother Sigebert was made king of Austracy or Lorayne according to
the will of Dagobert their fader. This as before is said of some writers is
called Lowes / the which was guyded by his mother and by the counsel of
Agaynus than master of his Paleys / to whom the fader had by his life
committed him, for he at this day was young of age and of dyscrecyon. And
shortly after he was made king / all such porcyon as belonged to the right of
his brother Sigebert, which was the third of his faders treasour and iewelles,
was to him delivered. which dystrybucyon made / he sped him to Orleaunce, and
thither called to him the lords of Burgoyne, and received of them feauty and
homage / and ordained there for his leutenaunte or deputye a noble Burgonyon
named Flantas^ / and gave to him in marriage the neuew of his mother Nautylda
named Ranebert. And after with a due charge to him given for guydyng of the
said country / sent him and the other lords into Burgoyn. But within a season
of time after wilibaldus a great man of birth and might, enuyed this Flantas^ /
in such wise that he had him in dysdaynynge, and began to dystourbe the
country and the kings peace. whereof herynge Clodoueus / in all have
commanded the said wilibaldus to appear before him. But while wilibaldus sent
an earl and a bishop to ye kings court to purchase him frendys about the
king / he was in that while slain by the gyle of his enemy Flantas^.

About the.iiii. year of the reygne of Clodoueus dyed his mother Nautylda, a
woman of great wisdom and of virtuous condition / and was honorably buried by
Dagobert her husband in the church of saint Denis. Soon after ensued such
scarcety of corn / y^ whete and other greynes were at an exceeding price. For
after the rate of money now curra^t, a quarter of whete was worth.ii. marks
and a half / by mean of which scarcitye myche poor people were famisshed and
dyed for defaut. wherefore the king entendyng a remedy for the nedy people /
caused y^e house or church of saint Denis that his fader before time had
coueryd with plates of silver, to be rased of and coueryd with led / and that
silver to be dystributyd among the poor como^s, to socoure the^ again the
great and huge famyn that then reigned / all be it that this ded was somedeale
withstanden by Agulphus Abbot of that place for that time.

About the.viii. year of his reygne / the first Pepyn that than ruled the
house of Sigebert king of Austracy, dyed. And soon after dyed Agaynus master
of the paleys of Clodoueus. For which.ii. princis in either Countries that they
ruled, great dole and sorrow was for them made. After the death of which said
Pri^cis / a noble man and cosyn to Dagoberte late king, was chosen master of
the paleys with Clodoueus

Thus king Clodoueus otherwise called Lowes, continued his reygne in great
peace and prosperyte, till lastly it fell in his mi^de that he would vysyte ye
sepulcre of saint Denis where after he had done certain obseruau^ces, and made
his prayers / he would nedely se the holy relykes and handle them. with the
doing whereof it seemed the holy martyrs were not contentyd. For immedyately
ensued such a derknes, that the king and all that were about him were with
it greatly astonyed and aferde, in so much that the king lost the use of
reason, and went from him self more than two years following. It is written of
some authors, that the king handelyd the body of saint Denis so rabbysshely
that he brake one of his arms. But the French book and master Roberte
Gagwyne sayen, yt he dysseueryd one of the arms from the said holy body / the
which he after when he was somdele restoryd to his health, closyd in gold and
precious stoones, and restored it to the said monasterye / and lived upon two
years following that he was amendyd, but not like unto his former being / so
yt he lastly dyed when he had reigned syke and hole by ye term of.xvi. years,
not without vice as glotony, lechery, and excedyng aueryce. And was buried by
his parents in the monasterye forenamed / leuynge after him three sons named
Clotharius, Chyldericus, and Theodorych. After whose death his wife named
Batylde / became a nonne in the monastery of Corbye, that she before time had
newly renewed or reedyfyed / and ended there in holy life.

THE.CXXXVII. CHAPTER
CLotharius the eldest son of Clodoueus / was ordained king of France, in
the year of our lords incarnacyon.vi. hundred.lxii / and the.xxvi. year of
Cadwall than king of Bryto^s. The which anon as he was somewhat stablysshed /
he made the master of his palayes, a mighty man and tyrannous of condycyon
named Eboryn / as shall appear by his condycyons ensuynge, when the time
conuenyent of the expressement of them shall come. But of this Clotharius is
left nothing in writing of worthy memory / except that the French cronicle
says that he reigned.iiii. years.

THE.CXXXVIII. CHAPTER.
THeodoricus the second son of Clodoueus / began his reygne over the
Frenchemen, in the year of grace.vi. hundred.lxvi / and the.xxx. year of
Cadwall than king of Brytons. The which by cou^ceyll of his lords sent his
younger brother Chylderych into the lordshyp of Austracy or Lorayne, to guide
that country / with the aid and assystence of wolphanus a noble man of ye
country. For Sigeberte last king of that prouynce / was before this time
deed without heir of his body. This Theodorych gave him all to slowth and rest
/ so that the governance of the realm was all in the power of the master of
ye paleys, which was still contynuynge, the forenamed Eboryne. The which among
other cruel dedys by him done / he emprysoned the holy bishop of Oston
called Leodegayr. And lastely after many torments and vylanyes to him done /
he raced his eyes out of his hedde. This deed with many other to the kings
dishonor he ^momysyd / which all were laid to ye kings charge, for so myche
as the king kept most what his paleys. Except ye one season of the year in the
month of may / he should be brought with great pomp into a place where the
people should behold him, and give and offer unto him gifts / and return unto
ye paleys yt he was brought fro, and there to rest all the year following. By
mean whereof Eboryn did what to him was liking / and vexyd and troubled the
people grievously. wherefore by one assent ye lords assembled them / and by
authoryte depryued the king of all dignytye / and closyd him in a monastery,
there to continue the resydue of his life, when he had borne the name of a
king without execucyon of the act thereunto belonging.iii. years / and the
cruel Eboryn they exyled to Luxon or Luxunborgh in the prouynce of Burgoyne /
and not to depart thens upon pain of his life.

THE.CXXXIX. CHAPTER.
CHildericus or Hildericus the third son of Clodoueus, that was sent to rule
the prouynce of Austracy / was ordained king of France in the year of
grace.vi. hundred.lxix. and the.xxxiii. year of Cadwal before named. Of the
which deed the said lords shortly after repended the^. For this Chylderych
which was young and of light manners, oppressyd his subjects grievously / and
used the laws of his progenytours after his pleasure and will / and would
nothing be advertised nor ruled by wolphanus before named, ye which was
before time assigned to him for his counceyllour and guide. But in augmentynge
his malice / he caused a noble man of his realm named Bolyde, without gylte or
trespace or grievous offense doing, to be bounden to a stake, and there betyn
till he yielded the spyrite. For ye which crueltye and other / the lords with
the commons murmuryd sore again him, ferynge like punyssyon without
deseruynge. wherefore they conspyryd against him, and most specially two noble
men of birth and of might named Iugebert and Amabert. which two with other
awayted their time and season when they might find time convenient to bring ye
king out of life. And upon a day when yt king with his wife and small company
with them, were in the wood in their dysporte and game / the said two lords
accompanied purposely fell upon him and slew him there and his wife also
great with child, ye which ran between her lord and them, to ye intent to
have sauyd her lord and husband from the dynt of ye sword. The which deed
was done when ye said Childeriche had reigned over the Frenchemen after most
writers two years.

THE.CXL. CHAPTER.
THeodoricus before deposyd / was by the lords of France again restoryd to
his former dygnyty, in the year of our lord.vi. hundred.lx. and.xi / and
the.xxxv. year of Cadwall forenamed. Thereof when Eboryn was warned, he anon
drew unto the kings presence. By whose favor and his own strength he was
again restoryd to his former dignytie and honor / so that he was in like
authorite as he before time had been.

Then he gathered to him great strength, and chasyd Lyndesyle then master of
the paleys unto a place named Boccauyle / and shortly after was possessyd of
the kings treasorye. After the which season, this Eboryn faynynge love and
amytye unto the said Lyndesyle, trayterouslye slew him. And when Eboryne had
thus delivered Li^desyle / he thought he might the better exercise his old
tyranny and wylfull acts. So that then he exylyd diverse prelates and men of
the church / and set in their places such as him lyked. whereof the nobles
of France being aduertysed / and specially Martyne and Pepyn two of the most
nobles of the regyon: they called to them assyste^ce to wythstande the tyranny
of Eboryne / the which if yt might be so suffered, should destroy the
comonwele of the land. Then this Pepyn (which after the rehersayle before
made in the.C. and.xxxii. chapyter, should be the second of that name, and
surnamed Uetulus and Breuis / also yet by conuenyency of the time to me yt
seems to be one man that ruled in the time of Dagobert and now, all be yt the
french cronycle means two sundry persons) with the forenamed Martyne,
assembled a great host, and gave battle unto the said Eboryn. But that was
to their harm / for the lost they field, and were coacted to flee, the one to
the city of Laon, and that other to Austracye.

And Eboryne which among used his accustomyd treason, under dyssymyled love
slew the said Martyne, as he before had slain Lyndesyle.

In this time flouryd Harmefreditus a nere kynnesman of the holy bishop
Leodegayre, that Eboryn before had martyred, as before is showed. The which
Harmefreditus berynge in mind the passion of his said kynnesman / waytyd his
time, and slew the said Eboryne. After whose death dyssencyon grew among the
French men, for the admyssyon of a master of the paleys / all be yt that
after the said varyaunce one Graccon was chosen and admytted. But yt was long
after that Gyllomarus his son, put his father from the rule thereof. This
after he had a while occupied / he dyed of sudden death. After whom succedyd
again his father Graccon or Garacon / the which also dyed shortly after.

Then began new questyons among the nobles of France for this office / so
that lastely they chase a man of low birth and unmeet to that Rome named
Bethayr or Barthayr. But Pepyn which by all this season was in ye country of
Austracy, and hard of the contrauersies and diverse opynyons of the French
men / assembled to him a strong host, and spedde him toward the king /
entendynge to have the rule of him, rather then such other that were of less
authoryte and honor. whereof the king being warned / by the prouysyon of
Barthayer foresaid, he gathered his army and met with Pepyn. And after a
sharp fight between both hosts had / Barthayre was slain and the king
chasyd / and finally was forced to admyt Pepyn for the master and governor of
his paleys. But for as much as Pepyn had the^ the rule of Austracy, and might
not well ouerse both charges / he therefore purueyed under him a substitute
named Nordobert, while he returned into Austracy or Lorayne. And shortly after
dyed the king / when he had borne ye name thereof by the term of.xix. years
/ leuynge after him two sons named Clodoueus and Childebertus.

Anglia. THE.CXL. CHAPTER.
CAdwaladrus that of ye reuerente Beda is named Cedwalla / began to arise and
rule the Brytons and also the westsaxons, in the year of grace vi.
hundred.lxxx. and three / and ye.xii. year of Theodoricus then king of France
/ and also the last year of Kenewinus or Kentwinus then king of westsaxon.
This of Gaufryde and other authors with ye english cronicle is called the
son of Cedwall. But wyllyam that wrote the acts and dedys of kings says,
that he was the son of Kenebryght / and descendyd lynyally of the blood of
Cerdicus the first king of the westsaxons. The which Cadwaladyr or Cedwalla
made war upon Lotharius king of Kent, and destroyed myche of that prouynce /
and wan the isle of wight, and gave the fourth part thereof unto saint wylfryde
/ in the which said.iiii. part were accounted.iii. hundred housholdes.

The while that Calwaladyr was besyed in one part of Kent / his brother named
Mulkyn with a certain of knights was beseged, and lastely burnt in a another
part thereof. In reuengement whereof, Cadwaladyr of new destroyed a more part
of the said prouynce.

Contynuynge the which war, Lotharius forenamed was wounded and dyed. After
whom Edricus was king / ye which reigned but a short season.

About this time saint Cutbert was bishop of Hogulstald or Durham / and after
bishop of Lyndefarn. But lastely he rufusyd that / and became an anchor in the
isle of Farne, and there dyed. This i will now is called holy island.

The^ Cadwaladyr made war upon Athelwold king of Southsaxons or Southsex /
and slew him in plain battle, and after made his prouynce thrall to him. But
this agrees not with ye former saying rehersyd in the.lxxx. and.xiiii.
chapyter of this work precedynge / where yt is said that the kingdom of
Southsaxons enduryd but a hundred.xii. years. By which reason this Ethelwolde
or Athelwolde should not at this season be king of Southsaxo^s. For the term
of a hundred and.xii. years was expyrd more then.lxxx. and.viii. years before
this day. But ye shall understand yt this forsayde term of a hundred
and.xii. years / is meant for the contynuaunce of this kyngedome or they were
subdued, and the kings thereof named under kings as this Ethelwold was.

Then yt follows when Cadwaladyr had ruled the Brytons and also the
westsaxons, by the term of three years, as wytnessyth Ranulphe munke of Chester
/ he then of pure devotion renouncyd the pomp and pride of the world, and
yode in pilgrimage to Rome / where of the first Sergius then pope, he was
confyrmyd and after made a white munke, and continued there his life time in
perfyte holiness.

Of this Cadwaladyr or Cedwalla many and diverse opynyons are written of
authors, both of his reygne and also of the contynuaunce thereof / and over
that, of the time when he forsook his land. wherein is great varyaunce, as I
have showed in the table in the beginning of this simple work. So that it
should seem that these two names should sound to be sundry persons / whereof
the contrary is a certayned by the foresaid Ranulphe / where as he says that
Cadwaladrus or Cedwalla was but one person, the which was last king of
Britons and of westsaxons. Also for so much as they joined next unto Cambria or
walys.

If I should here bring in the cause of the avoiding of this land by
Cadwaladyr, as is rehersyd by Gaufryde / yt would ask a long tracte of time /
and also to me yt apperyth the more doutefull, that yt is not testyfyed of the
author of Policronycon / considering the great number of authors, which he
sought and allegyd for his authoryte, as yt shewyth in the first chapyter of
his first book. And specially syns that holy Gyldas and Bid is among the
said authors accomptyd / ye which did great dilygence in searching of the
deeds and acts of the Brytons / and of the aungellis monycyon that to him was
given / with also the prophecye of Merlyn, that the Brytons should not recover
this land till the relykes of Cadwaladyr with other of holy saints, were
brought hither out of Rome. I hold that for no part of my believe though many
welshemen yt do. wherefore to follow the most authoryte as before is said /
when this Cadwaladyr had reigned three years, he went to Rome / and there
lastely dyed, and was buried in the church of saint Peter, with this
epythaphye or superscrypcyon upon his toumbe, as follows in metyr, Culmen
opus sobolem pollencia regna triumphos,
Eximias proceros moenia castra lares,
Quaeque patrum virtus, and quae congesserat ipse.
Cadwald armipotens, linquit amore dei.
The which versys may be englysshed in manner as follows. worshypfull riches,
kynred, triumphs assuryd,
Plenteous wealth, with clothes rychly dyghte,
Houses, castellys, and towns strongly muryd,
And other honors which by his parents might /
And his ownes this marcyall virtuous knight,
Cadwalde the strong, descendyd of kings blood,
For Crystes love renouncyd all his good.
And thus here ends the life and rule of the Brytons now called welshemen /
which took that name of their duke or leder as says Guydo called wallo or
Guallo / or else of a queen of walys named Galaes or walaes. But how so ye
name came first to the^, onw are they called welshe me^, yt sometime were named
Brytons or Brutons, descendyd first of Troyans, and after of Brute, and
lastely of Du^wallo Moliuncius or Molmucius Du^wallo. All be yt they were
greatly mynglyd or medelyd with other nacyo^s, as Romans, Pictes, and other /
as by the redyng of the premises ye may well perceive and know. And now be they
english, that in their beginning were named Saxons or Anglis

But yet for so myche as welchme^ extolle so hougely their blood and allyau^ce,
fetchyng yt from Pryam but not from Eneas, and regarded so little the progeny or
lynyall descent of ye Saxons or Anglis: therefore to ye intent to kele somewhat
their high courage, or to opp^sse in perty their brutyshe blastes, I will bring
in here ye sayng of Guydo and other, ye auau^ce the blood or dyssent of the
Saxons to be far above the Britons / as they yt ar descendyd of gods and
men immortal / where the Britons claim the ofsprynge to come of men they were
mortal / and not most to be allowed in honor, if they think upon Eneas
untruth and treason.

Then to follow the foresaid author Guydo, that says. woden, of whom the
Saxons taken their orygynall, was ye son of Frealoffe the son of
Fredewolfe, the son of Flyn, the son of Flokwald, the son of Geta, that was
the son of Minos, that is next in honor to Pluto god of hell, and chief
judge of his infernal iurisdyccyon.

Therefore ye welshe men here after nurture lere.

And despise not Saxons that been to god so nere.

Thus then apperyth by the conueyaunce of this work, yt the last or third year
of Cadwaldyr was ye year of grace.vi. hundred.lxxx. and vi. which makes the
year of ye world.v. thousand.viii. hundred.lxxx. and.v. By which reason yt
apperyth, that the Britons had the rule of this land for the more party, to
reken from the first coming of the duke or leader Brute, by the space of a
thousand.viii. hundred and xxii. years.

And thus here an end of the fyfte part of this work, for the consyderacyon
before rehersyd, that Briton kings after this day, reigned none in this realm
/ and the Saxons or Anglis began fully to have domynyon thereof.

wherefore as before time I have used and done in the other parties before
specyfyed, so now I here again salute and give thanks to that most excellent
virgyn our lady saint Mary, with the.v. joys of the forenamed seven joys,
beginning. Gaude matter miserorum etc.
Thou mother to wretches and other disconsolate,
Hayll and be glad, for god of worlds all
To them that here in this present state
Done to the worship, he reward shall,
With condygne merit passing all temporal,
In heaven to be stallyd, with most felicyte,
Evermore to reygne with thy son and the.
This.v. part to be accounted from the last year of the mysery of Brytons, or
the first year of Constantyne brother to king of Armorica / unto the third or
last year of Cadwaladyr, includyth of years.CCliii.

Thus endyth the fyfte part.
THE SEXTE PART.
After that Cadwaladyr was thus departed ye land / as some authors mean,
this land of Brytayne was in great dyscensyon, by mean of the Brytons and
Saxons, by the term of a.xi. years. And over that the mortalyte before spoken
of encreasyd so hugely, and therewyth great hunger and famyne over sprad the
land / that by occasion of one and other the people of this realm was
wonderfully mynyshed and lassed / so ferforthly that as wytnessyth Gaufryde and
also the english cronycle, the quycke bodies suffysed not to bury ye ded. But
in so much as of this spekyth not the mu^ke of Chester nor other authors as
before is showed in the forsayde table, the which I remytte to the correccyon
of such as be learned / and not only to english reders as there is fortherly
declared: I therefore, as before is said follow the said Ranulph mu^ke of Chester
/ where he says that Jew or Iue was king of westsaxons next after ye
forenamed Cadwaladyr. The which I shall first show the story of, and so of the
successors of him in that kyngedome, for that that they subdued lastly all the
other kyngedomes / and somdeale touch of the other kingdoms or lordshyppes as
time conuenyente shall require / in expressing of the stories of the said
westsaxon kings, till the land be brought again to one monarchye.

And for the dyuysyon of the said kingdoms stand somdeale farte asonder / so
that to the reders yt were somewhat paynfull to search for eueryche of them: I
therefore have set them out in the compass following, that yt may appear to
the reder the beginning of eueryche of them / and how long a season or time
either of the said kingdoms continued or enduryd / the names also of every
kingdom / and in what part of this land every lordshyp was stablyshed for
the time and set.

THE.CXLI. CHAPTER.
IUe or Jew discendyd of the blood of Saxons / was ruler or king of
westsaxons, next after that ye forenamed Cadwaladyr had renounced the pomp of
the world. The which to follow the opinion of Policronicon, began his reygne
the year of grace.vi. hundred.lxxx. and vii, and the.xvi. year of the second
Theodoricus then king of France / and ruled the westsaxons knyghtly, and
maynteyned such war again the Kentyshe Saxons, yt the men of Dorobernia or
Caunterbury grauntyd unto him to have peace. And also for a recompensement of
the death of Mulkynge brother to Cadwaladyr before slain, as is showed in the
precedynge chapyter by the said Kentyshe Saxons / they gave unto him for the
said consyderacyo^s three thousand pound.

About ye year of the reygne of Iue / the holy man Cutlake about ye.xxiiii.
year of his age, renouncyd the po^pe and pride of this world / and took ye
order of munkes in the abbay of Repyndon. And the.iii. year after he went to
Crowlande / and there lad for the while an holy Ankers life, and did there many
miracles, and there finally was buried.

In which isle and place of his buryenge stands now a fair abbay, the
which for the great resort of gestes that thither drawyth, and for the good
and frendely chere that gestes there receive and take / the said place has
purchasyd a surname and is named Crowlande the curteys / the which is a place
of good fame. And there lies also the holy confessoure Neotus, sometime
dyscyple of Erkenwalde bishop of London.

In the.xi. year of the reygne of Iue, befell the wounder and marvel that is
told of Bryghtwaldus / the which after he had been a long while ded, was
restoryd to life again, and told many things of great wonder to many men /
whereby he caused great almys, and many other deeds of charity to be executyd.

And after the dysposycyon of his own goods, by the agreement of his wife he
went unto ye abbay of Maylroos / and there in great holiness continued the
resydue of his life.

About the.xvi. year of the reygne of Iue / Etheldredus before minded in the.C.
and xxxv. chapter king of Mercia, forsook this wordly honor, and became a
munke at Bardeney / when he had long time ruled the men of Mercia or myddell
Anglys. His brother Kenredus was king after him / the which also after he had
reigned five years, left his kingdom unto Colredus the son of his uncle /
and he with Offa the son of Iue now king of westsaxons, and with Egwinus
bishop of wykcies or of wyke, which see is now at worceter / with this forsayde
company this Kenredus yode unto Rome in pilgrimage and there endyd his life.

And about the.xviii. year of the reygne of Iue dyed the holy bishop Aldelme,
which first was munke and abbot of Malmesbury, and the last bishop. Of him
yt is written, that when he was styryd by his gostly enymy to the sin of the
flesh / he to do the more torment to him self and of his body / would hold
within his bed by him a fair maiden, by so long time as he might say over
the hole sauter / all be yt that such holiness is no article of saint Benettis
lore, yor yet for diverse inconuenyence most alowyd by holy doctors. And
among many of his virtuous and holy dedys / Ranulph mu^ke of Chester she with,
that for the same of his holiness sprange wide, Sergius the first of that name
being pope, sent for him to Rome. In which season of his there being / the
said Sergius was accusyd or defamed of the getting of a child, the which
the.ix. day of the said chyldes age, was brought to holy Aldelme to be
crystyned. By virtue of whose prayer, the said child answered unto certain
questyons, and cleryd the pope of that crime yt was before put upon him.

Nere about the.xxiii. year of Iue / Colredus then king of Mercia, for cause
of variaunce between him and Ine unremembered of mine author, assembled his
knights, and began to war upon him. whereof ye other having knowledge, in
likewise gathered his power / and lastely met to both their harms, at a place
called wodynsburgth. where after long fight either of them sped so unhappily,
that yt was not known whether host had most damage.

And nere about ye.xxv. year of Iue, as wytnessyth holy Beda / saint Johan of
Beuerlay that then was bishop of york, dyed / and was buried in the porche
of the mynster of Deyrwood or Beuerlay. The^ Jew or Iue calling to mind the
counsayll of holy Aldelme, yt beforetyme had cou^saylyd him to build an abbay
at Glastenbury / began the said work about the.xxxii. year of his reygne / and
founded there an abbaye, the which continued prosperously till ye coming of
ye Danis / by whose cruelty yt was then sore blemyshed. But afterward by the
help of saint Dunstane, in the times of Edmond and Edgare, yt was again
suffycyently repaired, and so co^tynued till the coming of the Norma^s / after
which season yt was again besette with hard happes. But now at this day yt
stands a place of great welthe and honor.

Then yt folowyth, when Iue had ruled the westsaxons nobly by the term
of.xxxvii. years / by the assyduate labor of his holy wife Ethelburga, as she
that long had labored him to leave the world and could not bring about her
purpose / upon a season when the king and she had restyd them in a fair paleys
rychely behanged, and were upon the morn thens departed, she by her
commandment caused the said paleys to be replenysshyd with all kind of fylth
and dunge / and hogs and vile bestes there in to be laid, as well in ye
chambers as other houses of office. And when she knew that this paleys was
thus deformyd / she besought the king to vysyte the said paleys. And when she
had brought him thereunto, she said to him: I pray you my lord behold now
this house. where are now the rich tappets and clothes of gold and of silk
and other rich apparel that we left here this other day. And where be the
delyces and plesaunt seruytours and costly dyshes, that you and I lately were
served with. Be not all these passyd and gone? My lord in like manner shall we
pass and suddenly, as ye se these worldely things ben passyd. And our bodies
which now ben delycately kepyd / shall fall and turn into fylth of ye earth.
wherefore have in mind my words that before this time to you I have often
showed and told / and busy you to purchase that paleys ye ever shall endure in
joy without transmutacyon.

By mean of these words and other / the queen turnyd so ye kings mind, that
shortly after he resygned the governance of his kingdom unto Ethellardus his
neuewe / and he for the love of Christ took upon him the habyte of a poor man
/ and setting a part all pomp and pride of this world, accompanied him in
the fellowship of poor men, and yode unto Rome in pilgrimage with great
devotion, when he had been king of the westsaxons, as before is said xxxvii.
years. After whose departing the foresaid Etheldreda his wife went unto
barkynge.vii. mylys from London / where in the abbay before of Erkenwalde
foundyd, she continued and ended an holy life, when she had been abbess of
the same place a certain of time. It is said and testified of wyllyam writer of
kings, that this Iue was the first king that grauntyd a penny of every fire
house through this realm to be paid to the court of Rome, which at this day
is called Rome stote or Peter pens, and yet is paid in many places of
England. But why yt was granted the cause is not here showed, how be it yt
shall be showed after.

Francia. THE.CXLII. CHAPTER.
CLodoueus ye third of ye name, and son of the second Theodoricus / began his
domynyon over the realm of France, in the year of grace.vi. hundred.lxxx.
and.x / and the third year of Iue then king of westsaxons. Of this Clodoueus is
of writers left no manner of memory soundynge to good or evil / but Pepyn
before named continued as master of the paleys by all the time of the reygne of
ye said Clodoueus. The which after that he had borne the name by the space
of.iii. years, he dyed without issue / and was buried by his father. By reason
of whose death the said kyngedome fell by succession unto his brother
Childebert.

THE.CXLIII. CHAPTER.
CHildebertus the second son to Theodoryche, and brother of Clodoueus
foresaid / began his domynyon over ye realm of France, in the year of
grace.vi. hundred.lxxx. and.xiii / and the.vi. year of Iue then king of
westsaxons. In time of whose reygne also the foresaid Pepyn continued as chief
ruler of the kings house / all be yt ye he for such other charge as he had of
ouerseyng of the realm, set in his place a subst^tute or depute, as his son
Grimonart and other.

This Pepyn contrary to the law of the church / held beside his lawful wife
called Ple^trude, a woman named Alpayd. For the which the holy bishop of
Treet named Lamberte, blaming and rebukynge the said Pepyn / of the brother
of the forenamed Alpayde, which is called Dodon or Dodoin, was slain and
martyred, in the year of our lord.vi. hundred.lxxx. and.xii / as testyfyeth
Antoninus in the.vi. chapyter of the ^iii. title of the second part of his
work called summa Antonini. And as affermeth the said Antoninus and also the
French cronycle / the said Pepyn received of the said Alpayde a son, whom
he named Charlys / which Charlys was after surnamed Marcellus, and was right
profitable to the realm of France, as after shall appear.

Of the foresaid king Chyldebert is nothing left in writing worthy memory /
except that he received of his wife a son named Dagobert / and kept the
name of a king by ye term of.xvii. years, as says the cronycle in French /
and than dyed / and was buried in the abbey of Cause in ye church or chapel of
saint Stephan.

THE.CXLIIII. CHAPTER
DAgobertus the second of that name, and son of Chyldebert before named /
began his reygne over the Frenchmen, in the year of grace.vii. hundred and.x /
and the.xxiii. of Iue than king of westsaxons. The which was under the rule
of Plectrude the wife of Pepyn than deed, and of Theodowald than master of the
paleys. This Plectrude as before is showed was stepmother to Charlys son of
Pepyn and of Alpayde, wherefore she berynge malice to the said Charlys, caused
him to be holden as prisoner within Coleyne, where he so as prisoner remaining
/ the foresaid Theoldowalde exercysed such tyrannys, and put upon the people
such exaccyons, ye dyscensyon grew between him and the lords of France, so
that diverse co^flyctes and skyrmysshes were had among the nobles of France /
for parties were taken upon either sides, whereby the kings party at length
was wekyd. And finally the said Theoldowalde was depryued of his rome / and one
Rangafredus was made master of ye paleys. The which being Accompanied with
conuenyent strength / took with him the king, and conveyed him through the
forest of Charbo^nur, till he came unto ye river of Mense. In ye which
passetyme the forenamed Charlys being, as above is said prisoner / by favor
of his kepars or otherwise, brake prison and escapyd. And shortly after dyed
the king / when he had reigned or borne the name of a king as other of his
progenytours had done, by ye term of.xi. years / leuyng after him another
child, as than knowing, nor nere of a lie / which was cause of mysorder of
the title of France, as afterward shall appear.

THE.CXLV. CHAPTER.
DAnyell that of ye Frenchmen was after named Chilperich was by assente of them
made king, in the year of grace.vii. hundred and xxi / and the.xxxiiii. year
of Iue than king of westsaxons.

Thus as testyfyeth master Robert Gagwyne and also the French cronycle, was a
priest or clerk / and for his wisdom was cherysshed before time in the
kings paleys / in ye which time and season he suffered his crown to be over
grown. Or else after Antoninus, this Danyell after ye death of Dagobert, for
so much as he left after him none of ye royal blood / the Frenchemen
supposing him to be apt for ye rule of the land, for such experyence as
before time in him had be proved / kept him secret a certain of time till
his heir was fully grown / and than declared him to be the brother of
Dagobert, and chaungyd his name / and called him Chylperych / and so by one
assente admytted him for king of France.

Charles before spoken of son of Pepyn, being escapyd the danger of
prysonement / sought and compassyd by all manner of ways, how he might obtain
the rome that sometime his fader occupied. And this to bring to effect / he
purchasyd to him a yonglynge of fair and goodly manners and stature named
Clothayre, and said that he was descendyd of ye royal blood of France / by
mean whereof in short time he gaderyd to him great strength. whereof heryng
Chylperych / commanded Rangafrede to assemble his knights to wythsto^de the
purpose of Charlys. And soon after both hosts met, nere unto the forenamed
river of Mense / where was fought a strong and cruel battle / of ye which
Rangafrede was vyctor, and compellyd Charles to forsake the field. But he
shortly afterward assemblyd and gaderyd again together all such as before were
dysperklyd / and fought efte with the said Rangafrede at a Place called
Ablane. Of the which battle with great dyffyculte Charlys was lastly wyctour
/ and chasyd Rangafrede, and his host greatly demynysshed and lassyd. Than
thyrdly these two hosts met in a field called the wine field / where also was
present the said Danyell or Chilperych having in his aid among other princes
the duke of Gascoyne / and there fought a sore and cruel battle. whereof
lastly was vyctor the said Charlys / and constrained the king with the said
duke to fle unto Orleaunce. where they taking with them such treasoure as
belonged to the king / fled from thens unto the Duchye of Gascoyne.

when Charlys conceived that the king was escapyd his danger, and knew that
Raganfrede was in the cyty of Aungie^s / he sped him thither in all haste: and
compassyd the city with so strong a syege, that finally he obtained the city
with all that was therein. But it was not long after that Charlys showed unto
Raga^frede such benyuolence, that he was set at his lyberte and fredome.

The next year following the duke of Gascoyn before minded, having parfyte
informacyon by ambassade or otherwise / that Charlys ente^dyd to make sharp
and cruel war upon the Gascoynes, for that that they fauouryd and kept with
them Danyell or Chilperych / he in auoydyng the said danger of war, in
short time after sent unto Charlys, under certain condycyons between them
agreed, the said Chylperyche / with al such treasour and iewellys as to him or
the crown of France belongyd.

In this passetyme and season dyed the forenamed Clothayre, that Charles before
had made king. wherefore to the more restfulnesse of ye realm, he allowed the
forenamed Chylperyche for king / and he as master of the kings paleys, as
other his predecessors, ruled the land of France. Than Charlys having thus
the rule and governance / ruled it well and substancyally, and defended yt
from all enemies during the life of the said Chylperyche. And after the which
/ Chylperych when he had continued as king by the term of v. years dyed / and
was buried, as says the French cronycle in ye city of Noen or Noyen /
without issue of his body.

Anglia. THE.CXLVI. CHAPTER.
EThelardus the neuew of Iue / began his reygne over the westsaxons, in the
year of grace.vii. hundred and.xxiiii / and the third year of Danyell
otherwise called Chylperyche than king of France. This after some writers is
named Etheldredus.

In the time of his reygne, Ofricus as king reigned in Northumberlande / to
whom holy Beda wrote the story called historia Anglicana / or more verily to
his successoure Colwoifus. Of the which Beda and of his works Ranulphe mu^ke
of Chester shows a compedyous process, in the.xxiii. chapyter of his.v. book
called Policronycon.

The foresaid Ofricus is named in the English cronycle Osbryght / of the which
in the said cronycle is rehearsed a long work. But for I se no author of
authoryte afferme the same / I therefore in this work pass it over.

It should appear also by the meaning of Polycronycon, that about this time
dyed Etheldredus before touchyd king of Mercia / the which when he had long
time ruled that country, he lastly renouncyd the pomp of this world, and
was shorn a munke at Bardony.

Of ye soresayd Ethelarde king of westsaxon, is left no memory of any acts or
deeds by him done. But as agree many writers, he dyed when he had reigned.v.
years, without issue of his body.

And in Northumberlande after ye forenamed Ofricus, reigned Colwolphus / after
whom Egbertus / and after whom Oswolph / and after Oswolphe reigned Ethelbald
or Ethelwalde. All be it that diverse authors of these names of kings and
contynuaunce of their reygnes so dyuersly and sundryly report and write.

Francia. THE.CXLVII. CHAPTER.
THeodoricus, the which of master Robert Gagwyne is allowed to be the son of
ye second Dagobert / began his reygne over ye Frenchmen, in the year of
grace.vii. hundred and.xxvi / and the second year of Ethelardus than king of
westsaxo^s. The which was from his young and tender age fosteryd and norysshed
in a house of nonnys in woman's clothing / and lastly espied, and by consent of
Charlys master of the paleys admytted for king.

After the which solempnyte fynysshed / Charlys herynge of the rebellyon of a
people called the Sweuys or Swetesers / assembled an host, and lastly them
subdued. which done / he turned him toward an other part of the Almaynes, and
in like wise overcame them / and after returned into France with great
tryumphe and riches, that he had won at those two iourneyes.

It was not long afterward, that Charlys had thus subdued the foresaid people
of Almayne, with also a great part of Germany / but that tydyng came to him,
yt Endo duke of Gascoyne rebelled again ye king of France. wherefore he in all
goodly haste preparyd his army, and sped him into Gascoyne / where he made so
cruel war, that he in short time damagyd greatly the country / and held the
duke Endo so streyte, that he was compellyd to hyde him in secret places of
the countreye / where after great search he might not be found, wherefore he
setting the country in some restfulnesse, returned him into France.

when Endo was sure of the return of Charlys into France / for so much as he
had prouyd the marcyall knyghthode of him, and knew well he might not him
self wythstand his knyghtly power / he therefore allied him with the king of
Spain than being a pagan or myscreaunt and named Abyderamus, and excyted and
styred him to make war upon the land of France / promising to him not all
only vyctory, but also that land to him and to his heirs for ever. Upon
comfort of which promise, and also aid of the said Endo / this forenamed
Arbyderamus thrystyng christian mannys blood, and entendynge utter desolacyon and
destruccyon of the realm of France / assemblyd an exceeding hooste of people,
and with their wives children and catayle entryd the land of France. And what
they wan, they enjoyed it as their own. And so in process came unto the city
of Bordeaux / the which after a certain time of ye cytesens defendyd, the
said myscreau^tes wan into their possessyon, and dystroyed the people thereof,
with all their chyrches and temples of the same. And from thens passing the
countreye in wasting it with iron and with fire, lastly came unto Poytiers.
which city as before ye have hard in the story of the first Dagoberte in
the.C. and.xxxii. chapyter, was by him subuertyd / and at this day newely
reedyfyed.

This city also of them possessyd / they in like manner as they had dalte with
Bordeaux, so did they with this / not sparynge that holy place of saint
Hyllary, but did unto yt great shame and vylany. And from thens they yode unto
Towers / wasting and sleynge the people without mercy by all the way that
they passyd, and wasted that city as they had done the other.

In the which passetyme Charlys herynge of the cruelte of this Arbideramus /
assembled his power, and shortly met with him nere unto Towers. where he bare
him so knyghtely / that he slew of the Paganys to exceeding a number to be
accordaunt with reason. But for I se it testyfyed of so many writers yt boldeth
me to express the number / which was.iii. hundred.iiii. score and.v.
thousand and odd. And of the Frenchemen were slain but.xv. hundred only.

For the which vyctoryous act / the said Charlys obtained a surname, and was
called after that day Carolus Martellus, the which is to mean Charles the
hamer. For like as the hamer makes all metallys pliable / so Charlys made his
foes or enemies pliable to his hestis. And as the hamer cutteth, breketh, or
dysseueryth iron and other hard metallys / so did this Charlys dysme^ber and
cut or break the enemies of France thorough his high prowess.

It is showed in the books called Cronica cronicarum, Supplementum cronicarum,
Policronica, and other / that this vyctory was obtained by Charlis of the
Sarasins, but not as inhabytauns or incolers of Spain / but that they were
yssuyd out of Africa, and then warryd and had won great countries in
Spain. The which is more accordaunt with hystoryes. For in the plegys or
rehersayllys of the names of kings of Spain, I find no king of that name.
Then yt follows in the story / when Charlis Martell had thus obtained
vyctory, he commanded all ye pillage to be brought to one place. That done, he
divided it among his knights. And shortly after Endo knowlegynge his offense,
and sekyng means of mercy / was again restoryd to the land of Gascoyne.

THE.CXLVIII. CHAPTER.
CHarles Martell having the duke of Gascoyne thus recou^cylyd / sent him with
a certain of knights again the rest of the said Sarazyns / the which by his
man hode he oppressyd and subdued, and clearly voydyd the land of them. Then
soon upon this began the Burgonyons to rebelle / and made sharp war upon
the Frenchemen next adioynaunte to them, and did unto the country and
inhabitau^tes of the same great harm. The which war / the said Martell that
therein took great pain, not without great pain, lastely yt appeasyd and them
subduyd.

In time of the which war so contynuynge / Endo before rehersyd duke of
Gascoyne dyed. wherefore Charlis to set that prouynce in an order and due
obeysaunce, yode thither. where he being busyed about the needs of the same /
tidings to him were brought that the wandalys which ben of the kind or
lynage of the Hunys before touched, had entered the land with an houge power
and in wasting the country, approchyd ye city of Seno^s or Sens, and yt
enuyroned or beclypped with a strong syege. But by the virtue and strength of
the archbishop of ye city named Ebe, Ebb, or Obbo, with the assystence of the
cytezyns of the same / the said city was defendyd and delyueryd from the
power of the fayde wandalys / and the power of them abbatyd and subduyd.

For these manyfolde incurcyons and assautys of enymyes, and rebellyon of the
countrees that were subject to the crown of France / the treasour of
France, and specially of ye temporal people was sore minyshed and wastyd.
wherefore in defense of all the land / Charlis Martell made request to the
spiritual men / and with great dyffyculte had yt granted, that he might
leuy certain dymys to wage therewith soudyours, and prepayre other necessaryes
for ye war. This after the opinyon of some writers, was the first time that
every spirytuall man's money within ye realm was occupied to temporal use.
wherefore as yt is reported of diverse cronyclars / the said Charlis when he
was ded, was seen by the bishop of Orleaunce named Ethereus, to be in great
pain and tourment.

Then Charlis moved his host toward the Burgonyons, that again were of new
styred and exhortyd by diverse persons to new rebellyon. And after his
coming thither, did execucyon upon such persons as he found culpable / and
not without battle, set the country again in quiet / and then returned
into France.

But he rested not long there, or he hard word that the Almaynes, which
dwelled over or beyond the river called the Ryne / brake over in to France.
These people are named in ye French book Sesues / ye which did great damage
upon the countries adioynynge to the said river. But yt was not long after, or
he had them chasyd and subduyd / with al so an another people called the Hunis
or Gothys, that he before had also vaynquyshed. The which after this second
sco^fyture / they assocyat unto them the king of Longobardes named
Luytprandus. By whose assystens and power, the forsayde Gothis wan the city of
Auygnon and other strong holds, to the great hurt of the French men.

And for at this season Charlis was grieved with sykenesse / he therefore sent
his brother named Chyldebert to wythstande the said enymyes / ye which bare
him so manfully, that he chasyd the said enymyes.

But this saying dyscordyth with other authors, which shown that between
this Charlis and Luytprandus was contynuall amyte and frendshyppe / in so myche
that Luytprandus aided and assysted the said Charlis to avoid ye Sarasins
that were entryd a country of France called then Gallia cisalpina.

In this time that France was thus wrapped in these hard happes and batayllys
/ dyed the king Theodoricus, when he had occupied the name only of a
king.xiiii. years.

Anglia. THE.CXLIX. CHAPTER.
CUtbertus the neuew of Ethelardus / began his reygne over ye westsaxo^s, in
the year of grace.vii. hundred and.xxix / and the third year of the second
Theodoricus then king of France. In time of whose reygn Colwolphus reigned in
Northumberland / to whom as before in the story of Ethelarde is touched, holy
Beda wrote the story called Historia Anglicana. About the.ii. year of the
reygne of this Cutberte apperyd in the fyrmament.ii. blasynge starrys or.ii.
starris with crestes / and cast as yt were brennynge brondes toward the
North.

And about the.vi. year of the reygn of Cutbert dyed the foresaid holy Beda /
the which in his time made and wrote.lxxviii. books, over and beside his
manyfold works of virtue that he vsyd by all his life time. It is told of him,
that in his later days when he was blind, he was brought by ye frawde of his
leder unto a great hepe of stonys / the which his leder showed to him was an
assemble of men and women, that were thither common to here him preach the word
of god. Then he thinking his report to be true / anon with great devotion
began there a collacyon. And thereof when he came to the end the stonys by
dyuyne power, in likeness of a great multitude of people said Amen / or after
the sayng of Antoninus, Deo gratias.

He was so noble of learning and excellent in conning / that the first
Sergius pope of Rome sent for him to assoyle q^styons there made in the popes
vniuersyte. Also his connyng is apparent in the books which he wrote super
Genesim, super Thobiam, super Esdriam, super Neemiam, with other, which would
ask a long tracte of time to rehearse, with also the omelies made upon the
gospellys / but I pass over* when he was deed / he was buried at ye abbay of
Gyruy / all be yt the comynyng is that he restyth now with saint Cutbert of
Durham. About the.ix. year of this kings reygne / the holy vyrgyne saint
Fredeswide dyed. Of her yt is said, for vylanye that to her should have been
done, by a king in Oxynford / that kings of England at the seasons syns have
spared to enter that town for dread of myshappe. who so will know the
cyrcu^staunce of the matter, and the holiness of her life / let him search
the works of holy Gyldas, where he shall be suffycyently informed.

Soon after this time and season / Colwolphus king of Northu^berlande when he
had reigned.viii. years, he resygned his domynyon to his cosyn Egbertus / and
was shorn a monk in the abbay of Geruy, or after some writers in the abbay of
Lyndesar or holy ylande.

Thus for as much as little is showed of the dedis of Cutbert king of
westsaxons, therefore I have made the more rehersayll of other chynges done in
his time. For of him is nothing left in writing worthy to be remembryd or
minded / saving that he often and many times made war upon Ethelwalde king
of Mercia and spedde therein diversely / and lastely dyed when he had reigned
after most writers.xvi. years.

Francia. THE.CXLIX. CHAPTER.
HIldericus or Childericus ye second of that name, and son of Theodoricus /
began his reygne over the Frenshemen in ye year of our lords incarnacyon.vii.
hundred and xl / and the.xi. year of Cutbertus then king of westsaxons. Of the
which for his dullness and his other enormytes in him exercysed / little or no
thing of his acts or deeds are put in memory.

ye have before in the story of Theodoryche, hard of the puyssaunt and strong
dedys of Charlis Martell / the which still during his life, co^tynued in
great honor, to the great suertye of the realm of France, and to the great
terror and fere of their enymyes / whereof to rehearse all the cyrcumstaunce yt
would occupye a long time. wherefore shortly to conclude / lastely after his
manyfolde trauayllys sustained for the weal of the realm of France, he dyed
/ leuynge after him three sons, that is to wit Charlemayne, Pepyn, and
Gryffon / to the which he bequethed his possessions and goods. But for the
youngest named Gryffon held him not contentyd with such bequest as his father
to him gave / he therefore made war upon his other two brethren. The which
behaved them so wisely / that without notable battle, they took their said
brother, and put him in a safe keeping. And that done / the said two
brethren assemblyd their knights, and spedde them again Hanualde duke of
Guyan, then rebellyng again the crown of France. The which duke with the
country, they brought under their first obeysaunce. After the which victory
of the said country obtained, the said two brethren spedde them to the city
of Poytyers, where they by advise of the nobles of the land, considering the
unableness of Hilderyche ye king, that he was vnsuffycyent to rule so great a
charge / dyuyded the land of France between them. So that either of them
should under the king, rule and govern such porcyon as then there was to them
appointed.

After the which porcyon Charlmayne herynge of the dyuysyon and strife among
the Almaynes / as thing belonging to his charge, spedde him thither in all
haste. And after a part of that country wastyd and spoylyd / and diverse of
their strong holdys cast plain with the earth / he brought them to due
subieccyon.

And soon after he went again the Bauarys / ye which by his knyghtely
strength, he appeased in likewise. In all which time and season / Pepyn his
brother was occupied in defending of the other parties of France.

Then this foresaid Charlmayne steryd by dyuyne inspyracyon, or as some
authors mean, as he before time had auowyd / sodeynely renouncyd and gave
over all worldely prosperyte and domynyon, and with pure devotion yode to Rome.
where of the pope then named zacharias / he with all honor and joy was
receyuyd, and of him shorn a munke, and dwelled a season in an abbaye of him
self builded in the mount Sarapte. But for he saw that daily drew to him
many great lords of France / by mean whereof he was let from his dyuyne
service and contemplacyon: he therefore yode thens to the mount Cassyne, and
there endyd his natural life.

After whose thus departing or gyuynge over of the said Charlemayne / Pepyn
as only ruler, took upon him the charge of the hole realm.

In this pass time Gryffon the younger brother was enlargyd from prysone / and
by favor of his brethren was assygned to such possessions, as to him was
demed suffycyent to lead an honorable life.

How be yt when he saw that his brother Pepyn had all the rule and he
nothing: he dysdayned his said brother / and thought no longer to continue
in that manner, but to be partener of the rule of the land as Charlemayne his
brother had been. And this to bring to his purpose, he fled unto the
Saxons, which as after shall appear were named Normans. And with the prince of
them made alyaunce / so that with their aid he mouyd war again his
brother, and assembled a strong host. whereof Pepyn being warnyd, gaderyd his
people / and passing through came to the river of Sunaha, or after the latyne
tongue Smussaha / and Gryffon sped him till he came to a river called Onacre.

when these.ii. hosts were thus nere, means of treatye were sought on both
parties. During which communycacyon / Gryffon having susspeccyon to the
Saxons that were on his part, lest they would betraye him and yield him into
the hands of his brother, made for that time a sleyght agreement / and shortly
after departed from the said Saxons, and fled to the Bauarys or into Bayon.
where he allyeng him with diverse nobles and barons of France / vexyd and
distourbed sore the duke and lord of that country called Tassylon / and
lastly dysceasyd him of that lordshyppe. whereof Pepyn being warned, spedde him
thither with great strength / and so bare him that he had the better of his
brother, and restoryd the said Tassylon unto his right / and after returned
into France, ledynge with him his brother Gryffon as his prisoner.

But ye was not long after, that by medyatours the said Gryffon was reconcilyd
to his brother. And for he should be content and have no more cause to vary with
his brother, there was assygned to him, as wytnessyth ye french cronicle and
other, xii. erldomes with in the realm of France. with the which bounteous
gift he not being co^tente / the self same year fled unto ye duke of Guyan
named Gayffer / and with him newly conspyred again his said brother. But
lastely he was there slain as after shall appear.

Pepyn then considering in his mind in what danger and trouble his father
before him had ruled the land, and he now for his time in like agony and
trouble / and the king, to whom belonged all the charge, kept his paleys and
followed all his delytes and pleasures, without taking of any pain / wherefore
considering the premysses, and for a reformacyon of the same: sent his
ambassade to the pope then being zacharye before named, askyng his advise,
whether yt was more necessary or welfull for the realm of France that he
should be admytted for king that did nothing but apply his mind to all
pleasure of his body, without cure or charge taking upon him for the
guydynge of the land and the people of the same / or he that took upon him all
the charge and pain, in defense of the land, and keeping of the people in due
subieccyon. To this the pope answered and wrote unto Pepyn, that he was best
worthy and most profitable for the realm to be admyttyd for king, that ruled
well the comynaltye by justice and prudence, and the enymyes thereof defendyth
and subdueth by his polycy and manhood. The which answer thus received from
the pope, and declared unto the lords and barons of the realm: anon they of
one assente and mind procedyd and went to the deposynge and putting down of
their king and governor Hylderyche. And in short space after closyd him in a
monastery or house of relygyon, when he had been occupyer of a kings rome by
the name only.x. years. And that done, the French men electyd and chase Pepyn
for their sovereign and king.

In the which Hilderyche or Childerych endyd the life or progeny of Meroneus /
of whom the French kings lynyally descendyd by contynuaunce of time as
follows.

Meroneus. x. years. Childericus xxiiii. years. Clodoueus xxx. years.
Dagobertus xiiii. years. Clodoueus xvi. years. Clotharius iiii. years.
Theodoricus iii. years. Childericus ii. years. Lotharius l. years. Chilpericus
xxiiii. years. Lotharius xliii. years. Clodoueus iii. years. Childebertus xvii.
years. Dagobertus xi. years. Danyel v. years. Theodoricus xiiii. years.
Theodoricus xix. years Hildericus x. years
Anglia. THE.CL. CHAPTER.
SIgebertus or Sigbertus the cosyne of Cutbert last king of the westsaxons /
began his reygne over ye said Saxons, in the years of ye incarnacyon of
Christ.vii. hundred and xlv / and the.v. year of Hildericus then king of
France. He was cruel and tyrannous to his subjects / and turnyd their laws
and customs of his fore fathers after his own will and pleasure. And for ye
one of the noble men of his dominyon somdele sharply aduertysed him to change
his manners, and to behave him more prudently toward his pleople / he therefore
malycyously caused him to be put to cruel death.

About this time Egbertus, after the younger wylfryde, was made archbyshoppe of
york. The which brought again thither the pall that his predecessors had
forgone, syns the time that the first Paulinus had left that see and fled to
Rochester in Kent, and there left the said pall. This Egbert was brother unto
Egbert king of Northumberla^d / by whose assystence and comfort, he did many
things for the weal of ye see, and made there a noble library.

Then yt folowyth, for so myche as the king Sygebert continued in his malice
and cruel condycyons / his subjects conspired again him, and put him from
all kyngely dygnyte. So yt he fell after to great desolacyon and mysery / in
such wise yt he was founden after in a wood or desolate place wandryng alone
without comfort. where he being so founde^ by a swyne herd or vylayne, some
time belongyng to the earl Co^branus yt he before time wyckydly had slain / in
auengement of his said lords death slew him in ye said place. which said
Sigebertus was thus depryued from al houour / when he after most writers had
reigned or tyrannysed.ii. years.

THE.CLI. CHAPTER.
KEnulphus of the line or blood of Cerdicus first king of westsaxons / began
his domynyon over the said westsaxons in the year of grace.vii. hundred
and.xlviii / and the vii. year of Hildericus then king of France. The virtue
of this man passyd his fame. For after he had with the agreement of the
westsaxons depryued Sygebert their king from his authorite and regally / he
first appeasyd diverse murmurs and grudgis that kyndelyd among his subjects /
and set his lordshyp in great quietness and rest touching their ciuyle
dyscorde.

About the.viii. year of the reygne of this Kenulphus / Offa slew a tyrant
named Beoruredus, yt before had slain Ethelwald king of Mercia. After whose
death the said Offa as neuew to the said Ethelwald, reigned as king of that
prouynce. Of this Offa is told many notable deeds, whereof somewhat I entende to
show. He had war with the Northumbres, and the^ for a time subdued. He also
had war with Etheldrede king of eest anglys / and with Egbert otherwise
called Pren king of Kent. whom he took prisoner, and led him bounden with him
into Mercia.

Then after these vyctoryes, Offa builded the church of wychcom. In time of the
which building, in presens of.xiii. bishops and many other great estatys /
king Offa enlargyd the said Egbert of imprysonement. In token whereof the
people being there present / made such an exclamacyon of joy and gladness,
that the church thereof range.

This king Offa had such dyspleasure unto the cytyzens of Caunterburye /
that he removed the archbyshoppes see by the agremente of the first Adryane
then pope, unto Lychefelde. He also chased the Brytons or welshme^ into walys /
and made a famous dyke between walys and the utter bondys of Mercia or mydle
England / the which to this day is named Offedyche. And after he buyldyd
there a church, which long time after was called Offekyrke. This Offa also by
angelycall inspyracyon, translatyd the holy prothomartyr saint Albone / and was
first founder of that famous monasterye over that holy body. The which syns
the first foundacyon has by sundry times ben perished and hurt by Danys and
other / and newely syns that time reedyfyed. This holy Albon was martyred as
before apperyth in the.lxvii. chapyter and storye of Co^stantius, about the
year of our lord two hundred.lxxx. and.xvii. By which reason he should lie or
he were translatyd, over four hundred and lx. years. This Offa also married one
of his daughters to Bryghtricus y^ was king of westsaxons. And for that in his
time was varyaunce between him and the French men, that passage of merchants
was forboden: therefore he sent that famous doctor Anselmus unto Charlis the
great then king of France, to common the means of a peace. which Charlis
had after this Anselmus in such favor / that he became his discyple.

Then return we to Kenelphus / yt which before time had had often war with
Offa, and with him many conflyctes, and lastely agreed. About the.xi. year of
this Kenelphus / Egbert king of Northumbres renouncyd his kyngly dignyte, and
became a munke.

And lastely the said Offa, when he had reigned over Mercia.xxxix. years, as
says Guydo / he left the kingdom to his son also named Kenelphus, and yode
to Rome.

And this Kenulphus king of westsaxon / kept strongely his lordshyp again ye
power of all his enymyes, and had his subjects in due order of obedyence.
Lastly Kenulph was supprysed with the love of a woman that he kept at Merton /
and hauntyd her more secretly then stood with his honor. whereof having
knowledge a kynnesman of Sygebert late king, entendynge to revenge the deposynge
of his kynnesma^ / awayted the time, and beset the house where Kenulphe and his
paramour was smally acco^panyed. But so soon as Kenulph had espied his enymyes
/ he serte upon them, which as says Policronicon were.lxxx. in number, and
fought with them a long while. But in the end he was slain of Clyto or Clyton
his enymye.

It was not long after or word sprang of the kings death. wherefore Offricus
then being master of the kings knights / took with him a certain of the
said chyualry, and pursued upon the said murderers / and lastly encountered
with them, and slew the said Clyto their captain with the more part of his
company. And that done he returned to Merton / and there took the corpse of
Kenulphe, and with great solemnyte conveyed yt unto wynchester / where yt was
with all reverence enterryd / when he had ruled the westsaxons (all be yt
that of him the english cronycle makes no mencyon).xxxi. years.

Francia. THE.CLII. CHAPTER.
PIpinus the second son of Charlis Martell, began his reygne over ye
Frenchemen, in ye year of grace.vii. hundred and.l / and the second year of
Kenulphus then king of westsaxons. This as before ye have hard, was elected to
that honor, by assent of Pope zachary, and the consent of the nobles of
France / and after he was confermyd of the second Stephan, when he satte
after as Pope.

The first year of his reygne / the Saxons otherwise called Danys or
Normannys, began to war upon him. The which he encountered at the river of
Isayr / and them knyghtly overcame, and chased and brought them finally under
his subieccyon. And in his returning into the country of France / word was
brought to him of the death of his brother Gryffon / the which as before is
said fled unto Gayferus duke of Guyan, and there held him to the end for
to have caused the people of Guyan to have rebellid, and to make war again
his brother Pepyn. whereof when some of them consyderyd the malycyous and
unstable condycyons of him / in auoydyng more danger, that to their country
by his means might ensue, they fell suddenly upon him and slew him.

when Pepyn was returned into France / he by the advise of Remigius then
bishop of Roan, amendyd the state of the church / and caused gods service
to be song, that before time had been with little devotion and reverence done
and vtteryd. And other spyrytuall things that before were mysorderyd / he
caused them to be set in a better form. And shortly after Stepha^ above
named, confyrmed this Pepyn and his heirs for kings of France / and of him
axyd aid and assystence to wythsta^de the power of Aystulphus then king of
Longobardes / ye which then warryd upon certain lands belongyng unto the
chirch of Rome. The which kenge Pepyn to him with good will grau^tid / and the
beginning of the next year following, with a great host enteryd the bounds
of Italy / and in the same made sharp and cruel war. In defense whereof the
said Aystulphus made his best prouysyon / and defendyd ye straytes and
mountains, by ye which the French men should have further enter into his land
/ and there gave unto his enymyes a strong fight. All be yt he with his
people was forcyd to give back / and for his refuge took ye city of Papye.
whereof Pepyn having informacyon / beclyppyd ye said city with a strong syege.
when Aystulphus had a season defended his city / and saw by experience daily
his enimyes encreace, and his power mynyshe and feeble / in avoiding of extreme
danger, he sought means of peace / and in such wise pursued the same, that
he finally had peace to him granted / upon condycyon that he by a day
lymytted, should restore to ye pope all right to his chirch belonging, that he
or any for him held or before time had wytholden / with other things
concerning the said peace. And for the perfourmaunce of the said condycyo^s
/ he deliueryd immediately good hostages and pledgys. After which peace thus
substancially confermed / Pepyn with his host with great tryumphe returned
into France.

But not wythstandyng this assuryd peace, by the confyrmacyon of oath and other
cyrcumstaunce before showed / the next year following he trusting upon
better fortune of war, denied and reuokyd all his former grauntes / and
refused to do as before he had fyrmyly promised. For this unstableness and
untruth to remedy / the pope of new made request unto Pepyn. The which
without long taryeng resembled his knights, and made good sped toward Italy
/ and not without danger passyd the mountains / and finally besyeged
Aystulphus within ye foresaid city of Papy. By mean whereof he lastly was
constrained to restore certain cities and other possessions that before time
he had taken from the pope.

After the which agreement endyd and perfyted / within a short term the said
Aistulphus being in his dysporte of hunting, fell from his horse or with his
horse. By vyolence whereof he was so brosyd, that he dyed shortly after / when
he had ruled the Longobardes, Lumbardys, or Italyans.viii. years.

After this vyctory thus obtained by Pepyn / the lords and princes that
dwelled about him, feryd and drad him, and sought to him for allyaunce and
amyte. Among the which Tassylon duke of Bayon before spoken of, that newly
had conspyred again him / yielded him to the king, and became his true lyege
man / and swore to him and to his two sons feawte.

But the Saxons, which in the French book are named Soysons / could never
hold them content without dystorbynge of the Frenchemen. wherefore king Pepyn
assembled a great host and made toward the^, and had with them diverse
conflyctes and batayles. So that at length they were driven to ask peace /
upon condicyo^ that yearly after they should yield unto the king of France
iii. hundred good horses in way of trybute.

And that done he returned into France / and immedyatly after ordained by the
advise of his counceyle a court or counceyle / ye which at this day is called
ye parlyame^t of France, and is like unto the court of requests now at this
day holden in England. How be it yt of much greater resort of people, and
therwyth very delayous / in so much that as I have herd credyble persons say
/ some one matter has hanged there in dysputacyon over.xx. years. The which
parlyament at this day is kept at Paris, at Roan, and other two places of the
land. And for judges of this counceyll or parlyament, is deputyd of the kings
cost in every place where it is kept an hundred persons, what of one and what
of an other.

Than it follows, Gayfer duke of Guyan before minded / of will more than of
reason, set a trybute or imposycyon upon the spyrytuall lands within his
land without agreement of the clergy. wherefore the bishops for a redress and
remedy co^playned them unto king Pepyn. Then Pepyn sent unto him / monestynge
him in fair and goodly manner, that he should exchew and forbere such doing. And
for the duke would not abstain for the kings commandment / he in short
while assembled his army, and entered the territory of Guyan / in wasting and
spoylynge the country. And in so short while after put the duke in such
fere, that he was feign to aplye him to ye kings mind and pleasure / and
bound him to restore to the clergy all that he had before taken by extort
power. But when the said duke was assuryd of ye kings return into France /
he gathered a strength of knights, and sent them to the city of Chalours in
Burgoyne / and did that he cowde or might to the damage of that town and
country. In which season the king was at the town or city called Dury /
whyther and to the which town tidings were brought to him of the untrue
dealing of this foresaid duke. where with he being sore dyscontent /
retournyd with his people into Guya^ and therein beat down many strong holdys
and castlellys / and took or wo^ne at length burbon, Cancaruyle, and Cleremou^t
/ and from thens wasting the country with iron and fire, yode till he came to
Lymoges. And for ye winter came on hand / the king for the ease and sauegard
of his people, strengthyd these foresaid cytyes, towns, and holds, that he
before had won / and than yode to a place called Cause or Cause, and there
kept his crystmasse and ester. And when the new season was come / not
forgetting his former purpose, reentryd the foresaid duchy of Guyan, in
wasting the land as he before had done / and after took by strength the
cytyes of Burgies and Towrs. In which season and time the duke would never
apere in plain field, but kept him in strong holds / and as one was wone, he
fled into another.

This war thus contynuynge / the countreye and people were sore
empouerysshed. wherefore they lastly considering the obstynacy of their duke /
with also the great danger which they stood in: murderyd their said duke /
and after yielded them and the country to the kings obeysau^ce, with all such
treasure and iewelles as to the said duke belonged / where of Pepyn offered a
great part of the^ unto saint Denis.

This war thus ended, with many other notable works whereof the rehersall in
order would ask a long tracte of time: this vyctoryous prince Pepyn was vexed
with grievous sykenesse. wherefore in all haste he sped him unto saint Martynes,
where he made certain oblacyons and prayers / and thens his sykenesse
encreasyng, was conveyed unto Paris / where he shortly after dyed, when he had
reigned as king by the term of.xviii. years / leuynge after him.ii. sons,
that is for to say Charle main and Charlys.

THE.CLIIII. CHAPTER.
CArolomanus and Charlys sons of Pepyn / began their reygne jointly over the
Frenchmen, in the year of our lord.vii. hundred lxviii / and the.xx. year of
Kenulphe than king of westesaxons / so that Charlemayne had to his part
myddell France, and Charlys had Austracy with ye other deal of France.

Of ye elder brother Charlemayne little is left in memory / for he dyed when
he had reigned little over.ii. years. wherefore to Charlys fell the hole realm
of France / the which of all the nobles was ioyously admytted.

It was not long after / Hunyldys whom Pepyn by his life had ordained ruler
of Guyan, rebellyd again the king, wherefore Charlys preparyd anon his army,
and sped him thither / and in process of time constrained the said Hunyldus to
forsake the country, and for his tuycyon to flee unto Lupus than duke of
Gascoyne, wherefore Charlys being aduertysed, sent his message to the said
Lupus / willing and commaundyng him that he in spedy manner, should send to
him his rebel Hunyldus, or else he would with his army invade and spoil his
people and country. Upon resceyt of which message, Lupus by cou^ceyll
condescendyd to the kings pleasure / so yt he caused Hunyldus to submyt him
unto the kings grace and mercy. wherewyth the king was so well contentyd,
that upon assurance taken of the said Hunyldus, yt there after he should be
of good aberynge toward the king / he clearly forgave unto him all his former
offense. And after he had set that country in a rule and order / he retornyd
into France. where to him soon after came an embassade from the first Adryan
than pope / requyrynge him of aid again Desyderius tha^ king of Longobardys /
the which than had taken from the church of Rome many cytyes and other
possessions.

Than Charlys acceptyng the popes request / or he began any war again the
said Desyderius, sent unto him an embassade / willing and requyrynge him in
all honorable wise to restore unto the church of Rome, all such possessions
as he from the same church before time had taken and yet withhelde / and
also to refrain him from all such war as he daily made upon the londys of
the said church. But for he saw no fruit ensue of ye message / he made
prouysyon for all thing needful to such a journey. And shortly after passed
the mountains, not all without battle / and in process constrained
Desyderius to take the city of Uercyle. where after he had refresshed his
Italyans / he gave unto the Frenchemen a sharp and cruel battle. But in the
end, Desyderius was compellyd to forsake the field, and fled after to the
forenamed city of Papy / where he kept him as after shall appear a long
while.

And for to show you somewhat of the foresaid battle / ye shall understand
that for the great occysyo^ of men yt there was slain / the place was called
long after Mortaria, that is to mean in our vulgar or mother tongue the place
of death. In this fight were slain among other two knights greatly famyd,
Amys and Amylyon / of whom some fables are reportyd, because they were so like
of semblaunt.

These two knights as wytnessyth the French story and also Antoninus / were
brought up in the court of the foresaid Charles, and with him well
cherysshed / and finally here slain and buried after some writers in the two
chappellys, which in the foresaid place were builded to pray for the great
multitude of the souls of these knights that there were slain. But who that
is desirous to know the hole life of those two foresaid knights / let him
ouerse the third chapyter of the.xiiii. title of Antoninus / and he shall
there find a compendyous and goodly story / the which for length I ouerpasse
and return my style again to Charlys. The which when he was ware that
Desyderius had taken this city of Papy / and it greatly strengthyd both with
men and vytell, in such wise that he well understood yt it might not be
shortly won: he therefore laid about it a strong syege with the ouersyght of
sure and wise capytayns / and after yode to Rome to vysyte the holy apostles
Peter and Poule, and also to speak with the pope for diverse matters. where he
tarried a great part of the winter following, and after returned unto Papy /
which as yet was not delyueryd nor given up.

But it was not long after his return that the city was won / wherein was
takyn as prisoner the said Desyderius with his wife and children. The which
to make short process, he at length forcyd him to restore unto the pope all
such possessions as he before time had taken from his church / and addyd
more there unto, the two cytyes of Spoletys and Beneuent. And finally depryued
him of all kyngely honor, and ladde him as prisoner into France / and as a
prisoner or exyle from his natural countreye kept him at the city of Lions,
as wytnessyth Cronica cronicarum, Iacobus Philippus, and other. And after by
agreement the pope gave that kingdom unto Pypynus his son / the which co^tynued
so in the French men's rule and possessyon, over the term of two hundred years.

For this vyctoryous deed thus obtained by Charlis / the forenamed pope
granted unto him many great pryuyleges. Among the number whereof, one was
that no pope during the life of Charlys, should be in no wise electid or
chosyn till there came from him a commandment to go to that eleccyon. And
also he granted unto him inuestyture of benefyces spyrytuall. which grauntes
and pryuyleges were confermed and authorysed in a Synod of an hundredth
and.liii. bysshoppes, kept in France by commandment of the foresaid Adryan.

Of this Charlys long and tedyous it were to tell the hole of his acts and
deeds. wherefore I entende to towche but a part of them / and for the other
deal I remitte to them yt have further desire of knowledge, unto the books of
Turpyn and Egyueaux chaplayne to the said Charlys / or else to the said
bishop Turpyn, which wrote a long work of his virtuous deeds.

THE.CLV. CHAPTER.
THis Charlys marcyall after his return into France / without there long
taryeng sped him again to the forenamed people called Soysons or Saxons,
which newly rebellyd / and warryd sharply upon them, and fought with them
sundry batayles. Among the which two ben specially noted / whereof that one
was foughten at a place called Onacre, and that other at the river of Esam or
Hesayre. By which two batayls the Saxons lost much of their people, and were
so sore feblysshed that they were feign shortly after to put them in the mercy
of Charlys. By reason whereof he bond them unto certain laws and ordynaunces
/ whereof specially one as pryncypall of them, was that they from that day
forth, should renounce and forsake their worshyppynge of idollys and falls
gods, and believe in the faith of Crystes church, with many other. For the
performynge of the which couenauntes / the king took of them good pledgys and
hostages. And more over to the end to mynysshe and make less their strength
/ he chase out of them.x. thousand of the most apt men for the warrys, and
conveyed them with him into France. And after he had clothed them with the
mantell of baptyme / taking of the^ assuryd oath to be true to him and to his
heirs: he after inhabyted them in diverse places of his realm. Of the which
people, as affermeth mine authoure, descendyd the Flemmynges and Braba^ders.
And thus endyd the war of the Saxons or Soysons, that had continued by the
term of many years passyd.

And forthwyth by assent and advise of his counceyle / he preparyd all
abilymentes and ordinance of war, to go again ye Hunys yt then had won
great ground in Spain. And for to bring this war to ye more effectual end /
he chase.xii. perys, which after some writers are called dozeperys or kings.
Of the which vi. were bishops and.vi. temporal lords. Of the which
bishops three were named dukes, which were archbyshops / and.iii. erlys, which
were bishops. Of the temporal lords three were dukes and three erlys / that
is to say the duke of Burgoyne, the duke of Neustria or Normandy, and the duke
of Guyan / and for.iii. erlys, the earl of Palantyne, ye earl of Tholons, and
the earl of Champayn. Of yt which also some writers afferme, that ye famous
knights Rowland and Olyuer were.ii / as Roula^d earl of Pala^tyne. and Olyuer
earl of Tholous. when Charlis had prepared all things necessary to this great
journey / he first made his pilgrimage unto saint Denis, and there offered
rich great gifts, and after procedyd toward his journey / and first
besyegyd the city called Pa^pilona / the which after.iii. months he subdued
to his obeysaunce. This city stood in the enter of Spain in the montaynes
called montes Pyreni. After the obteynynge of which city, and by miracle of
saint Iamys as says Antoninus / Charlis commanded all such as to Crystes
faith would be conuertyd, should be sauyd / and the other to pass by sentence
of the sword. And after he had won ye first city he wanne all the
country adioynynge to the same / by reason whereof he cast great fere unto the
myscreantis / and wan by his strength and by appoynteme^t (so that they became
his trybutaryes) these cou^tres and prouynces hereafter ensuynge / that is to
say as wytnessyth Uynce^t historyall, Antoninus, and other ye land of
Laudeluffe, the land of Pardis, the land of Castyll, the land of Maurys, the
prouynce of Nauerne, the country of Portyngall, the land of Byscaye, and the
land of Palarge / and destroyed in them all idollis and buyldyd in them
chyrches and monasteryes / and brought the more party of them to Crystes
relygyon. And most specially the church of saint Iamys he builded in
Co^postella with sumptuous cost / and gave there unto great possessions, to
the maynteynyng of the divine service of god and the mynysters of ye same. And
over that with the treasour that he gate in these foresaid countries / he
buyldyd many diverse chyrches, as well in other places as there.

Long yt were to tell all the cyrcu^staunce of this vyage and vyctoryes of the
same. wherefore I pass over. And when Charlys had sped his nedys / he had
good will to return into France. In the which return Carlis casting no
dought nor parell / by the treason of Gauelon a knight or ruler of Gascoyn / ye
which Gauelon had receyuyd of a Paynym king named Marsyll, great and rich
gifts for to betraye the host of Charlis, was dysceyuyd as after shewyth.
This Gauelon the better to compass and bring to effect his purpose / advised
Charlis with a certain of his people to pass the port of Cesayre, and to
leave behind him in the rerewarde Rouland and Olyuer with.xx. thousand of the
resydue of his host. And when the king was passyd with his host / he gave
warning unto the forenamed Marsyll and other, that they should close the said
Rowlande in the place called Rounceuale. The which according to that false
counsayll / with an host of.lx. thousand or mo, beclyppyd Rowlande and his
people on every side, and there fell upon the Cryste^ men and slew them
without mercy or pytye. In the which fight, not wythstandynge the great
slaughter that they made of the Sarasyns / finally was there slain the said
Rowlande, Olyuer, and many of the nobles of France. But this Gauelon scapyd
not without punyshement. For he was after taken / and with other to him
condesce^dyng, were put to most cruel death at the city of Aquisgrany.

Of this great vyctory of Charlis in subduynge of Spayn / are diverse opynyons.
For the French cronycle and Antoninus agreen, that it should be after that
Charlis was ennoynted emperor of Rome. But master Robert Gaywyn and other
say, that yt was before he was emperor.

Thus this victoryous prince retournynge into France, subdued tha^ after
diverse countries, as Gallia Narbonensis, Campania or Champayn, and
Beneuentana, and other / which of one mind had rebellyd again him.

About the.xxxi. year of his reygne as most writers agree / certain persons
of Italy conspyred again Leo the.iii. then Pope of Rome, and him ungoodly
entreatyd. But he lastely escapyng their danger / came unto Charlis, and
requyryd him of his comfort and aid / whereof he was not dangerous. But when
he had well serchyd, and understood that ye pope had sustained wrong / he with
all dylygence spedde him thither. And after he had subdued ye popes enemies /
he restoryd the said pope to his former dignyte. For the which deed and other
that he had done for ye defense of the church of Rome / he was by the said pope
Leo or Leon sacryd or enoyntyd emperor of Rome.

THE.CLVI. CHAPTER.
CHarlis then thus sacryd as emperor, in the year of our lord.viii. hundred
and one / when he had accomplyshed his nedys for the weal of the church and
the pope, he then with great gifts returned into France.

In this time or soon after as witnessyth the French cronycle, landed in
France the famous clerks Alcinnus or Albinus, Rabanus, and Johannes, and
other of the discyples of Beda. The which Charlis received with great honor /
and by their cou^saylys instytuted and ordained first the scole of Paris, and
an other at Papia in Italy before minded. wherefore yt should seem that the
said Alcinnus was not sent for any entreatyse of peace between the two realms
of France and great Britayn, as in the storye of Kenulphus before is showed.

After this time and season many great and noble dedis were done by this said
Charlis, and by his sons and capytaynes under him, and by his commandment.

And for the personage of so noble a prince should be had in mind / therefore
diverse authors testyfye yt he was fair and welfaryng of body, and stern of
look and of face. His body was viii. foot long / and his arms and legs well
lengthed and strengthed after the proporcyon of the body. His face of a spa^ne
bread / and his berde very long. Of his strength wonders are told. He would at
one mele ete an hole hare or two hens, or a hole gose, or like qua^tyte of
other mete / and drink there to a little wine mynglyd with water.

Among his other notable dedis, he made a bridge over the river of Ryne of.v.
hundred pace long, by the city of Magunce. And he builded as wytnessyth
Antoninus and other / as many abbayes or monasteryes as there ben letters in
the cross row of the A.B.C.

And in the front of either of ye said abbayes, after the time of their
fou^dacion / he pight or set a letter of gold of the value of an hundred pound
turnoys, which is nere to the value of englysh money now curraunt.xx. mark. For
a pound turnoys is much like.ii. s.viii. d. starlyng / and a pound Parysyen is
nere upon.xl. d. starlyng. But it standyth at no certaynte, for hyghtynge and
lowynge of their coins.

He also builded or new reedyfyed the city of Aquisgrany / and endowyd the
church of our lady there with many great gifts and precyouse relyques, which
yet remain there to this day / in which city and nere about, he vsyd myche
to abide and lie. And for his great deeds and vyctoryes / he deserved to be
named Charlis ye great. And for all his great might and honor / yet yt not
wythsta^dynge he was meke and lowly in heart, and mylde and gracyous to the
poor, and merciful to wretches and nedy / and set his sons to learn, as
well letters as marcyall and knyghtly featys. And his daughter he set to
spynnynge and woll work. And he was expert in all spechys / so that he neded
none interpretours to explane or express to him ye message of strange
ambassatours. And in the time of his dinner or meals / he vsyd to have red
before him lessons and pystles / and specially of the works of saint Austayne
de Ciuitate dei. In him was nothing to be dyscommendyd / but that he held his
daughter so long unmarried.

This noble man Charlis.iii. years before his death / he had peace with all
countries, as well such as were obeysaunt unto ye empire, as such as longed to
his domynyon of France. In the time of rest among other goodly and virtuous
dedys, he made his testament / and dystrybuted his temporal mouable goods
in.iii. pertes. whereof two part he gave to ye maynteynynge of bishops and
other mynysters of the church, and for the reparacion of chyrches and
necessaries to the same, and to the maynteynynge of the dyuyne service of god,
with also aid and fedynge of poor and nedy people / and the third part to
his children and other of his allye.

ye shall understand, this Charlis had in his treasory specially noted before
his other iewellys, iiii. tables or bordes / whereof three were of silver and the
fourth of gold. In one was graue^ the lykenes of the city of Co^stantyne the
noble, the which he bequath to the church of Rome^. In an other was graven or
wrought the lykenysse of the city of Rome / and that he gave to the bishop of
Reins and to his church. And the third table of silver, wherein was graven the
mappa mundi / and the fourth of gold he gave to his sons.

Many things there were and causys of the exaltyng of ye fame of this prince.
But among other one is specially remembryd of mine authoure Gagwyne / that the
king of Percye then rulynge a great part of ye Orient / sent unto Charlis an
ambassad honorable with many rich presentis. Among the which was an horologe
of a clock of laten of a wonder artyfycyall making, that at every our of the
day and night when the said clock should stryke, images on horse back
apperyd out of sundry places, and after departid again by mean of certain
vices.

He sent to him also tentys of rich sylke and balm natural, with certain
Olyfauntys / requyrynge him of amyty and frendshyppe. And in like wise did the
emperor of Co^stantyne the noble / all be yt thathe in his mind was not well
contentyd, that the pope had in ye wise dyuyded the empire, and set such a
man of might in the rome thereof.

This Charlis had diverse wives. But of the second named Eldegard he
received.iii. sons / that is to say Lewys, Pepyn, and Charlis / ye which
Pepyn he made king of Longobardes or Italy, as before is showed.

Of this great conqueroure what should I hold longer process? For like as I
before showed / of his notable dedys might I make a great volume, if I should of
them show the clerenesse, and the circu^staunce of every conquest that he in
his time acheuyd. But death that is to all persons egall / lastly took him in
his dymme dau^ce, when he had been king of France with his brother and
alone.xlvii. years. Of the which he ruled the empire as before is
shewyth.xiiii. years, in ye year of his age as sayen the french
chronicles.lxxii / and was buried at Aquisgrany with great pomp, in ye year of
our lords incarnacyon.viii. hundred and.xv. with this superscripcyon upon his
toumbe.

Caroli Magne christianissimi imperatoris Romanoru^ corpus, sub hoc sepulchro
conditu^ est. which may be englished as folowith.

Of Charlis the great and emperor most christian.

Of Rome, the body is hyd this toumbe within.

Of the forenamed sons of Charlys suruyued ye eldest Lewys by name / and the
other two Pepin and Charlys dyed, before their father.

Anglia. THE.CLVII. CHAPTER.
BRigthricus of the blood of Cerdicus first king of westsaxons desce^dyd /
began his reygne over the said Saxons, in year of our lord.vii. hundred
and.lxxviii / and the.x. year of Charlis the great then king of France.

This before time had married one of the daughters of Offa king of Mercia, as
before is touchyd / by whose aid and power he put out of his rule Egbert the
son of Alcumundus / the which Egbert at that day was an under king or
ruler in the lordshyppe of westsaxon, which Egbert was descendyd of ye blood
of the holy Genulphus / of whom some part of the storye is declared in
the.xxv. chapyter of the.v. book of Policronica. And after he was thus of
Brigthricus expulsyd / he saylyd into France, and there exercysyd himself in
featys of war with the knights of Charlys court, during the life of the
said Brigthricus.

About the.ii. year of this Brigthricus, was seen in great Brytayne a wonder
syghte. For suddenly as men walked in ye street / crossys like unto blood fell
upon their clothes, and blood fell from heaven like drops of rain.

This after some exposytours / betokened the coming of the Danes into this
land, the which entryd shortly after. For as wytnessyth Polycronica, about
the.ix. year of Brigthricus the Danys first entryd this land. In defense
whereof / this said king sent forth his steward of household with a small
company, which shortly was slain. But by the strength of Brygthricus and the
other kings of Saxons / they were co^pellyd to void the land for that time
and season.

Brigthricus thus well and knyghtly rulynge his land / his wife named
Ethelburga not with him co^tentyd as she ought to be, sought diverse ways
and means how she might bring her lord out of life / so that finally she
poisoned him with many other of his household meyny. wherefore she ferynge
punyshement, fled into France / and by such fre^dshyppe as she there had,
was well cheryshed in Charlis court surnamed the great.

Of her yt is told, that when he had had some informacyon of the unstableness
of this woman's condycyons / he at that season being a wydowar, upon a season
in passing of the time with her / said, now I put to your choice whyther ye
will have me unto your wedded lord, or else my son sta^dyng here in your
presence. And him that you chose / him shall you have and enjoy for your
husband. But she chase ye son and left the father. Then said the king / if
thou had chosen me, thou should have had my son. But for thou haste
forsaken me thou shall have another of us. And after he closyd her in an abbey,
where in process a lewd man kept with her such company, that she was voydyd
that place / and after demeaned her so vycyously, that in process of tynie she
fell in such pouerte, that she dyed in great penurye and myserye. For the
which mysse demeanure of this woman, that she had innaturally slain her lord
and husband / the king of Anglis and specially of westsaxons, would not suffer
the wives to be called Sueuys / nor yet suffer them to set by them in places
of great honor or kyngely sete by a long time after. Thus as before is showed
by the impoysonynge of his own wife, dyed ye king Brigthricus / when he had
ruled ye westsaxo^s after most concord of writers by the term of.xvii. years.

THE.CLVIII. CHAPTER.
EGbertus the son of Alcumu^dus as before is showed / began his reygne over
the westsaxons in ye year of grace.vii. hundred.lxxx. and xv / and ye.xxvii.
year of Charlis the great then king of France. This as before is said was
driven out of the land of Britayne by ye strength of Brigthricus. But he
having knowledge of his death / spedde out of France, and in so knyghtely wise
him demeaned, that he obtained the regiment and governance of the above said
king.

Bernulphus king of Mercia had this Egbert in derysyon / and made thereof
diverse scoffys and iapynge rymes, yt which he sustained for a time. But when
he was somdeale stablysshed, and had prouyd the minds and hartis of his
subjects / he lastly assembled his knights, and gave to him a battle in a
place called Elyndome, in the prouynce of Hampton. And all be yt that in that
fight was great dyuersyte of number, as.vi. or viii. again one / yet Egbert
had the victory. For his knights were lene, megre, pale, and long brethed, so
that they might endure to fight. But Bernulphus knights were fat,
corpulent, and short brethed / so that they were soon overcome with swet and
short labor.

Here is to be noted, that after the death of Offa king of Mercia or middell
England (of whom somewhat is touched in the story of Kenulphus) reigned his
son Egfertus / and after Egfertus reigned Kenulfus or Ke^wolfus ye which
Kenwolphus was father to ye holy martyr Kenelme, and to.ii. fair vyrgyns
Ouindred and Burgenulda or Ermenilda. And after Kenwolfus succedyd the foresaid
Kenelme / and after Kenelme reigned Colwolphus / and after him succedyd
Bernulphus before named.

Then to return again to Egbert / the which when he had as before is said
overcome Bernulphus, he seasyd that lordshyppe into his hand. And that done,
he made war upon the Kentyshe Saxons / and at length in like wise of them
obtained vyctorye. And as wytnessyth Polycronica, he also subdued the
Northumbrys / and caused the kings of these three kingdoms to live under him
as trybutaryes or joined them to his kyngedome as testyfyeth the author of the
Flower of hystories.

This Egbert also wanne from ye Brytons or walshemen the town of Chester, that
they had kept possessyon of till that day. For the which vyctoryes thus by
him obtained / he shortly after called a counsayll of his lords at wynchester
/ and there by their aduysys crowned him king and chese lord of this land,
that to fore this day is called Brytayne / and sent then out into all costs
of this land his commandments and commyssyons, chargyng straytly that from
that day forthward, the Saxons should be called Anglys / and the land Anglia.

About the.xxiiii. year of the reygne of Egbert, which should be the year of
our lord as means Policronica viii. hundred and.xix. Kenelmus before minded
the son of Kenwolfus, was admytted for king of Mercia, being then a child of
the age of.vii years. The which by treason of his sister Ouendreda was slain
in a thycke wood, by a tyrant callid Hesbertus / and his body after found by
a pyller of the son beam, or of light dyuyne that shone from his body
toward heaven. It is also read of him, that a coluer bare a scrowle written in
english then used / and let yt fall from her upon the altar of saint
Peter in Rome / whereof the words were these. At cleanse in Cowbacch, Kenelme
Kenebern lies under Thorn hewyd beweuyd. which is to mean in english now
vsyd: at Clent in Cow vale under a thorn, lies Kenelmus hedlesse slain by
fraud.

when this holy body was found, and was borne toward the place of his
sepulture / his forenamed sister entendynge some derysyon or other vylanye to
be done to the corpse, lenyd out of a wyndowe where by the corpse should pass.
And to bring her malycyouse purpose about, I note by what sorcery she meant /
there she read the psalm of the Sauter / beginning Deus laudem, bacward, But
what so her entente was / she there incontynently fell blind, and her eyes
dystylled dropes of blood, that fell upon the Sauter book. The which in token
of gods wretch, in that book remain at this day to be seen. Of the holiness
of this martyr and of his virtue, ye lege^de of saints reportyth the
surplusage.

In the.xxix. year of the reygne of Egbert, or after the english cronycle
Edbryght / the Danys with a great host enteryd the second time this land,
and spoiled the isle of Shepey in Kent or nere to kent. whereof herynge the king
Egbert / assembled his people, and met with them at a place called Carrum. But
he wanne of that fight little worship / for the Danys compellyd him and his
knights to forsake the field. And by presumpcyon of ye vyctorye they drew
westwarde / and made a confederey with weste Brytons that lived in seruage. By
whose power they assayllyd Egbertus lands, and did myche harm in many placys
of his domynyon and else where / so that after this day they were
contynuallye abiding in one place of the realm of England or other, till ye
time of hard Kynytus last king of the Danys blood / so that many of them
were married to English women, and many that now ben or in time passed were
called english men, are dyscendyd of them. And all be yt that they were many
and sundry times driven out of that land, and chasyd from one country to a
another, as after ye shall here: yet that not wythsta^dyng they ever gaderyd
new strengthes and power / so that they abode still within the land.

Of the king of these Danys, and of what people they be dyscended, diverse
opynyons of writers there be / which now I pass over, for so much as I entende
to show somewhat of them in this work following.

Then it folowyth in the storye / the time contynuyng of the persecucion of
these foresaid Paganys and Danes, Egbert or Edbryght dyed / when he had well
and nobly ruled the westsaxons and other the more part of England, by the
term after most writers of.xxxvii. years / and was buried at wynchester as
says Guydo, and left after him a son named Athenulphus.

Francia. THE.CLIX. CHAPTER.
LOdouicus ye first of that name, and son of Charlis the great / began his
reygne over ye realm of France, and also his empire over the Romans, in the
year of grace.viii. hundred and.xv / and the.xx. year of Egbertus then king of
westsaxons. This for his meekness was called Lewys the mylde or meke.

In time of his fathers decease he was occupied in Guyan / the which he before
time had the rule and domynyon of by commandment of his father. But when he
was advertised of his faders death, he anon sped him toward Aquisgrani / so yt
ye.xxx. day after his departing out of Guyan he came unto the foresaid city,
where he was met with all the nobles and barons of France. And first or he
meddled or took upon him any cure or charge of his own besynes / he with most
devotion caused great obseruaunces and myche dyuyne service to be done about
the sepulture of his father, which obseruaunce and prayers fynyshed and endyd
/ ye said Jews commaundyd to come before him diverse ambassadors, that from
diverse princes were sent unto his father Charlis, and to them gave answers
concerning their legacyo^s and messagis / and then proceeded unto the needs of
his realm for ye weal thereof and of his people.

wherein he being besyed / word was brought to him of an ambassad royal, yt
was comen from Michael the emperor of Constantyne the noble. Again the which
he sent certain of his lords to receive them / and so with all honor to
bring the^ unto his presence. Of whose coming the entente was, to present
him with certain rich gifts, and to desire him of his amyte and frendshyppe.

Also soon after came unto him messengers from the Beneue^tanys / offering
unto his magnyfycence obligacyons and bonds to be his true lyeges, and to pay
to him yearly in way of trybute.vi. thousand ducates of gold. A ducate is of
sundry valuys / but the least in value is.iii. s.iii. d. ob, and the
best.iiii. s.vii. d.

Then the Soysons or Saxons that were so diverse of condycyon / began to
murmoure and rebel again this Lowys. wherefore or he would assemble any people
again them / he sent thither certain persons to know ye cause of their
rebellyon. And when he was enfourmed, that yt was for the taking away from
them of certain lands and possessions by his father / he then restored again
the said lands / and so recouncylyd the country to his subieccyon. For this
deed some of his lords grudged / and said such myldenes was not to be vsyd to
people of such obstynacy and sternesse / but to have forcyd them by dynte of
sword to have lived in due obedyence.

In this passetyme dyed pope Stephan the fourth of that name / after whose death
was elected to that dygnyte the first Pascall, without co^sente or knowledge of
this Lowys, and somdeale to the dyscontentynge of his mind and pleasure. But
in short time after he received such words and presents from the said pope,
that he was well satysfyed and pleasyd. And for at those days in France was
vsyd of prestes and men of the church precyouse and showing vesture, and
golden and rich staring gyrdelles, with rings and other ornaments of gold /
the said Lowys purchasyd of the pope a correccyon for all such as vsyd such
dysordynate apparel / and caused them to use and were brown and sad colors,
according to their honors and sadness.

This Lowys had three sons, that is to say Lothayre, whom he made fellow
of the empire / Pepyn the second, whom he made duke of Guyan / and Lowys the
third, to whom he betoke the rule of Bayton. To this yongeste son word was
brought, that Bernarde a ruler in Italy had assembled a great power / and with
ye aids of two other captains named Iylys and Reyner, the which Charlis the
great by his life greatly fauouryd / occupied ye stre^gthys of the mountains,
and entendyd to keep the country of Italye from the subieccyon of his father
the emperor. whereof he gyuynge his father knowledge / strong power was
gaderyd, as well by the father as by Lothayre his son, and sped them toward
the mountayns. But when the said Bernarde was ware of the emperors coming
with so great a strength / and consyderyd his lack of power to mayntayn his
purpose / with also the great mercy and pytye that he knew to be in the
emperor: he submytted him holy to his grace and mercy, and dyscoueryd to him
the authors of that rebellyon / the which this Lowys caused under safe
keeping to be had unto the city of Aquisgrany. The which rebellys were the
bishop of Mylayne, the bishop of Cremoun, and the bishop of Orleaunce.

The king passed all the winter following at the foresaid city / and lastely
caused to be brought before him the foresaid transgressors, and examyned the
cyrcumstaunce of the foresaid treason, and after remytted them to the rygour of
Lowes / where by process they were condemnyd to death as many of them as were
temporal men.

Then the emperor having compassion of the forenamed Bernarde, for so myche
as he was the son of Pepyn last king of Italy, and his nere kynnesman /
transmutyd the sentence of death unto perpetuyte of prison and losing of his
syghte. But for the said Bernarde, Reyner, and other, chase rather to dye the^
to live in prison with that deformyte / they passyd by dinte of the sword, and
were beheddyd within or nere to the said city of Aquisgrani. And the said
bysshoppes were depryued of their dygnyteys and put into pryuate houses of
relygyon.

And while this Lewys was occupied in little Brytayne, in subduynge of that
country / Lothayre the eldest son of this Lewys was sent to rule the lo^des
of ye empire. where he bare him right nobly, and executed diverse acts for the
weal of the empire. But in this season.ii. friends of his father and his /
were for certain crimes to them put, most cruelly conde^pned to vile death
with in the city of Rome. whereof heryng Lothayre than being at the city of
Papy, sent word thereof to his father in all hasty wise / the which was like to
have turnyd ye pope to great trowble, if he by polytyke and wise means had
not shortly pacifyed the matter. That one of the foresaid two persons so
condemned was scrybe to the pope, and that other was Donar.

ye shall understand that this Lewys had two wives / by the first he had
the forenamed three sons, and of the second he received a son and named him
Charlys / the which when he came to man's stature, was surnamed Charlys ye
bold. He loved entyerly this Charlys, and would often kiss him in the presence
of his brethern. For the which they enuyed their said brother / and also
dysdayned their father as here after shall appear.

Thus in process of time Lewys gave unto this Charlys the country of Neustria
or Normandy / the which caused great dyscencyon among the brethren / and
also for this and other causes, Lotharius took party again his father.

THE.CLX. CHAPTER.
This second wife of Lewys was named Indith / ye which was accusyd to the pope
to be within such degree of allyaunce to her husbonde, that she might not
lawfully contynewe his wife. wherefore contrary to the will of Leuys, by the
labor of some bysshoppes and other lords of France, she was deuorcyd from
him / and put into a house of nonnys, and there straytly kept.

But Lewys for a time sustained this iniuryes, to ye end yt he might know
whyther his sons favored the cause or not. But in process of time when he
had experyence of his friends / and of his sons / he tha^ assembled to him
a strong host, and recoueryd his wife malgre to all his enmyes. For the which
deed Lothayre, with diverse of the Barons of France, assemblyd their people /
and entendyd to depryue Lewys from all imperyall and kyngly dygnyte. wherefore
Lewys ferynge his son and his assystens / and also for the intent that he
might assemble the strength of ye empire: he yode unto Magunce. And after he
had purueyed and garnysshed his retynewe / he retornyd toward France, and
met with some of his enemies and them subdued / and so kept on his journey
till he came to Aquysgrany, where he restyd him and his people.

Thus contynuynge this dyssencyon / the sons sent writing to the pope than
being named Gregory ye fourth, requyrynge him of aid and counceyle to deuyse
a concord and peace between their fader and them.

At whose request / and for to cause a natural charity to be quyckenyd between
the father and his.iii. sons / he came in his proper person into France,
and endeuoryd him to the vttermoste of his wits to agree to the said parties.
In the time of this entreaty made by the pope / I can not say for what cause,
many of the lords / on the party of Lowys forsook him, and fled to the
so^nys party / so that the emperor was in great feere of him self, and of
his parson. when Lewys had seen his friends thus in time of his need refuse and
flee from him, and left him in great feere and danger of strangers he than
thought better for him to put him self under the Rule and tuycion of his own
children, than to abide the doubt of the said strangers. wherefore he sent
unto his said sons / requyrynge them to provide for his safegarde and
assuring of his person, and that he were not there oppressyd or murdryd. And
within short space after this message sent to them without answer of them
again receyuyd, he rode toward them smally accompanied. where of than
Lothayre and his brother having warning in all homble wise encountered him,
and received him upon their knees / and so conveyed him with all reverence
unto their pauylyon or tent. And after for a beginning of a peace to be
stablysshed between him and them / he to satysfye their minds, refused the
forenamed Indith, and closyd her in a place of relygyon called Torton, as
testyfyeth mine author master Robert Gagwyne. But the French book says that
this deed was done by Frederyke bishop or Utryke / where fore he was after
pyteously slain by such as favored ye queen / and not all without her
concent, as wytnessyth the said cronycle.

And when Lewys had in this and other things agreed unto his sons / and
thought him self to be in surete of their amyte and favors: suddenly he was
conveyed unto the monastery of saint Medrid / or as says the French book he
was conveyed to a town called in French Melanguy, with his young son
Charlys. And that done / the said three sons divided their fathers possessions
among them three. That is to say Lothayre the eldeste, had to his porcyon the
lands of the empire / Pepyn, the country of Guyan / and to Lewys the youngest,
fell the country of Bayon.

which mysery of the emperor when the pope had beholden and seen / he with
great morning returned into July and so unto Rome. In which time of
prysoneme^t of the emperor the said Lewys made dyteys and pystelles of great
sorrow and lamentacyon, to the ensample of all erthlye princes / and to the
intent that his sons should of him have the more compassyon and pytye. The
which I over pass for length of time / and the rather, for in time of
prysoneme^t of Edward the second called Carnaruan was by him made a like
co^playnt / where of when time and place comyth, I entende to express some
part thereof.

when Lewys had thus a season remained in prison / for so myche as the commons
should not think that this should be done by the authoryte of ye three sons
only: therefore they caused a counsel to be called at the city of Compeyne /
and there by their means and labors caused their father by authoryte of
spyrytuall and temporal lordys, to be discharged of all rule and domynyon, as
well of the empire as of the realm of France, by authoryte of the said
counsel or parliament / and after caused him to renounce all his temporal
habyte, and to become a munke in the monastery of saint Matke / where he was
left of his son Lothayre, not with out sure watch and keeping.

But full often it is seen, that wha^ the erthlye power of man faylyth or
wekyth / god of his great mercy the repentaunt sinner to grace callyth, and
him by his dyuyne power aydeth and strengtheth / and so he did this Lewys. For
after this mysery and trybulacyon thus to him fallen / the people in diverse
placys of this land murmured and grudgyd very sore, again the innaturall
dealing of the sons again their father.

In these days was a great ruler in France named Guyllyam, and stuarde or
constable of that land / ye which with one Egebard or Edgare a man of great
birth and alyaunce, cou^sayled together for the enlargyng of ye emperor. And
lastly with aid of their friends assembled a great people. And than drew unto
them.ii. noble men of Burgoyne called Barnarde and Gueryn, the which sometime
had been well cherysshed with the emperor Lewys.

All this season Lothayre had restyd him for ye more party at Aquysgrany. But
when he hard of the assemblynge of these foresaid lords, he sped him toward
Paris. And when he was thither comen / the foresaid lords sent unto him two
noble men Rowlande and Gantelyne / the which made request unto Lothayre in the
name of the other lords, that it would like him to restore his father unto his
former dygnyte / with other things concerning their legacyon. To the which
two lords Lothayre gave answer, that of his fathers restorynge to his first
or former dygnyte, no man living would be thereof more feign than he would. But
ye deposyng of him was done by the hole authoryte of ye land. wherefore if he
should be again restoryd / it must be by the same authoryte, and not by him
only. All be yt that they might know of his benyuole^ce and favor that he
bare toward his father / he wylled them to stand a part, while he had some
co^munycacyon of his lords for ye same matter. By reason whereof were it for
fere or for favor / the emperor was shortly after put at his lybertye, and
restoryd to all his first honor and dygnyte / and than with great honor
conveyed to a city or town called Ciriciake, where met with him his other two
sons Pepyn and Lewys / and there restyd him certain days in making all
feast and joy / and after rode unto Aquysgrany, and there restyd an other
season.

In which time of his there being / was brought unto him from ye place where
she had been prisoner, his wife Indyth. But when Lotharius knew that his father
had her again received contrary to his mind and pleasure / he in wrath and
dyspleasure entryd the country of Burgoyne / and made in it sharp and cruel
war, and executed therein many spoylynges and other inordynate dedys. The
which cruelty to wythstande and let / his father with his son Pepyn with a
great host sped him thither ward. But anon as he had knowledge thereof /
mystrustyng his strength, he yielded him unto his faders grace and mercy / whom
the meke fader received and forgave to him his trespass.

And after that of him and diverse of his lords he had taken assuryd oaths and
other suretyes / he tha^ sent the said Lothayre into Italy with a certain
number of knights, to defend the country from danger of enemies, and
strengthynge of the straytes and mountains.

And that with other things orderyd and done for the weal of his realm /
Lewys than took upon him to ride about his land, to thentent that he might be
somewhat informed of the rule of his officers / and how the countries were ruled
by the rulers of them. And where he found any mysgouernaunce / he punysshed the
executers thereof, as well ye bysshoppes as other, as far as his authoryte in
that behalf stretchyd.

Than Indith considering the emperor fell into great age / and her son
and his Charlis by name, had as yet no suffycyent lands nor possessions to
maynteyne any estate with: she compassed many ways in her mind, how she
might acheue her intent, and to bring it to good purpose. where finally by
counceyll of her friends, to ye end to purchase the love and favor of
Lothayre / she axed of her lord and husbonde, that the said Lothayre might be
tutour and gyder of his young son Charles. Of this request ye emperor was
very glad, and granted her, her peticion. And so it fell soon after, certain
messengers came to the emperor from Lothayre his son. To the which when
Lewys had given answer to such matters as they were sent fore, and given unto
them other instruccyons / he sent them forth again, and with them certain
other to will his said son to come unto him in as goodly wise as he might.
But at that season he excusyd him by sykenesse / and when he was recovered he
feigned an other excuse.

In this mean time word was brougth to the emperor, that his son Lothayre
had grieved ye church of Rome / and takyn from it certain possessions.
wherewyth Lewys being before amoued, sent unto his son / co^maundynge him in
sharp words, yt he should have in mind the oath before by him made / and
that he should in exchewynge his dyspleasure, make restytucyo^ of all things
that he before had taken from the church / the which commandment Lothayre
promised to obey in all wise. And where Lewys was determined to have gone unto
Rome, to have seen ye said promise fulfilled / and also to have spoken with
the pope for diverse matters needful for the church: he was let by occasyon
of Danes or Normannes, yt than had newly invaded the lo^des of France / the
which he shortly after expellyd and drove out of his londys.

And that done, the emperor yode unto Aquysgrany / where by the friends of
Indith and other of the nobles of France, the emperor gave unto his youngest
son Charlis a porcyo^ of ye empire, which after shall more clearly appear.
And soon after at a counsel holdyn at Cirycyake, before named in the
presence of his son Lewys / he gave to him the order of knyghthode, and
adournyd him with kings clothing.

And over all this in the presence of many lords of France / he gave to the
said Charlys the hole country of Neustria that now is named Normandye. Of
which honor and gifts though his mother were joyous and glad / yet his
brother Lewys was therewyth nothing contentyd, which of Indith and of her
friends was well apperceyuyd and known. wherefore as she before time had done
/ than of new she made request unto her lord and husband, that he would of
his most especyall grace grant unto her, that Lothayre might have the
governance of her son Charlys / the which of him was the second time
granted. Upon which grant thus to her made / the emperor sent unto his
son Lothayre pleasant letters, wyllyng him in all goodly have to resort unto
his court. The which obeyenge his fathers commandment / returned into
France shortly after the receyte of the said letters, and came unto his father
to the city of Uernayse, of whom he was ioyously received. And after he had
a season dwelled with the emperor, he gave unto him the country of Austracy /
the which country as shall after be showed in this Lotharius story, was after
his name named Lorayne. But a part of the said prouynce or country that
stretchyd toward Hungrye / the said Lowys gave unto his youngest son Charlys.
And immedyatly after this gifts before many lords confermyd / the emperor
in presence of the said lords, took Charlys by the hand, and delyueryd him
unto his brother Lothayre / willing and straytly chargynge him that he should
take him unto his cure, and be to him as curyouse as he would be unto his own
child, and to guide him and his possessions, as the father should guide the
child. And to Charlys he commanded that he should take and obey him as his
father, and love and worship him as his brother / ye which upon either
party was promised to be obseruyd. And shortly after the said Lothayr with his
brother Charlys, took congy of father and mother, and returned again into Italy.

About this time dyed Pepyn the second son of Lewys, and duke of Guyan / the
which if all should be expressyd, put his father to great trouble and vexacyon
/ wherefore for him was made the less mourning. This left after him a son
named Pepyn, of whom somewhat the storye spekyth after. But now I will return
to Lewys the third son of the emperor.

THE.CLXI. CHAPTER.
Troth yt is that when the younger brother Lewys saw the bountye of his father
so largely extend toward his two brethern, and to him nothing / he was
therwyth in his mind greatly dyscontent, all be yt that for the time he kept
yt secret to him self. But when he was departed from his father, and returnyd
to his own lordshyppe / he gaderyd a mighty power, and began to make war
upon the dwellers nere about the Ryne. wherefore the emperor with a conuenyent
power approchyd unto the city of Dodayng / and sent from thens unto his said
son words of reconcylyacyon / by mean whereof the said Lowes put him holy
in the grace of his father, and was to him reconcyled without shedynge of
mannys blood.

But while the emperor was beside at the city of Cleremou^t in the countye of
Auerne, to set a dyreccion among the Gascoynes, for opynyons that were reryd
among them for the son of Pepyn there lately king or duke dyscessyd,
which son as above is said was also named Pepyn / and there about had taken
great pain and labor: thither to him tidings were newly brought, that his
said son Lewys had with ye Saxons or Soysons, and with the Thorynges made
alliance / and was entryd into Germany, and therein made war in most cruel
wise. with which tidings Lowis was so grievously passyoned / that to his great
age was by mean of this unkind anger, fyxyd a sykenes that left him not
while he lived.

After yet this not wythstandyng / he like a strong hartyd knight showed forth
a good and comfortable countenance. And after he had in knyghtly wise
preparyd all thing necessary to the war / he spedde him toward Almayne,
and continued his journey till he came unto Thorynge / where a season he restyd
him and his people till he might be better assuryd where his son Lewys restyd
him. But the son having knowledge of the great power of his father / and also
being in despair of purchasing of mercy, consyderyng his many offenses: fled
by the country of Sclauony, and so by that costs returned into Bayon or
Bauery / and so escapyd the danger of his father.

Then the emperor being surely enformyd of the escape of his son / held on
his journey till he came to Magou^ce. And after came unto the city of Uermayse
/ where he called a counsel of his lords spyrytuall and temporal, and
ordained there diverse things for the state of the empire. And more entendyd
to have done / but sykenesse increasyd so sore in him, that by the space of.xl.
days he took no temporal sustenaunce. But in that time he vsyd often to take
the blessed sacrament / the which as he often said, strengthyd both the soul
and the body.

Then he sent for Lothayre to come unto him / the which without taryenge
obeyed his commandment, and abode still with him.

Of this Lewys Policronicon makes a short rehersall / and says y^ by his
first wife named Hermyngarde, he had.iii. sons / Lothayre, Pepyn and Lewys.
The first being fellow with his father of the empire, was crowned of pope
Pascall upon an Ester day / and he was also king of Italy. And Pepyn he made
duke of Gascoyne and Guyan. And Lewys was made ruler of Bauary.

And by his second wife named Indyth and daughter of ye duke of Bayon, he had
Charlis the Ballyd / to whom he gave the country of Burgoyn as the said
Policronica says. And for this Lewys was mylde / he was often troubled of his
own men and of other, till he delte with them more sharply and wisely, and
ruled the people more straytly.

It is there also showed, that when this Lewys had promotyd a young man named
Frederyke to the sea of Utryke / and to him had given sad and good
exhortacyon, that he should follow the stablenes of his antecessours, and that
he should purpose the sothe and troth without excepcyon of persons / and
punyshe mysdoers, as well the rich as the poor: the said bishop should
answer to him and say, I beseech thy majesty sir emperor to take in
pacyence, that I may dysclose to the that thing that has long walowed and
turned in my mind. Say thy pleasure said the emperor. I pray thy sir emperor
show me thy mind / whyther is more according, to attame this fyshe here
present first at the hedde or at the tail. The emperor answered shortly
and said, at the hedde the fyshe shall be first attamyd. So yt is lord
emperor said the bishop, that christian faith may cause the to cease of
thine error, that thy subjects be not boldyd to follow thy mysdoynge.
wherefore first forsake thou thy unlawful wedloke, that thou haste made with
Indyth thy nere kynnes woman.

By mean of those words the king was reconcylyd, and left the company of his
wife, till he had purchasyd a license of the pope. And the emperor forgave
the said bishop all trespassys / but the woman hired two knights that slew
him in his vestymentes, when he had ended his mass.

After this the empress was falsely accused of wrong crime, and made a
menchon. But the same year the emperor delyueryd her from that habyte, when
he had suffycyently prouyd the said crime to be false.

Then to return where I left / wha^ this Lewys had long lain in this
agonyous sykenes, and knew well that he amendyd nothing / but feblyd more and
more / he commaundyd his iewellys to be brought before him. whereof by his own
hand he have a part unto the church of Rome / and to Lotharius his son
there present he gave his crown and his sword / commaundynge him straytly
upon his blessing that he should have in honor his mother Indith, and that to
Charlis his brother he should owe true love and amyte, and that he should him
and his lands deffende to the vttermoste of his power.

Then the lords spiritual and temporal, and specially the archebysshoppe of
Meaws / made a lamentable request to the emperor for his son Lewys, that
he would accept him to his grace and mercy, and to forgive him his insolente
and wanton wild dedys. whereof when the emperor hard / he fell in such
weeping, that he might not speak of a good while after.

And when he had refrayned him thereof / he remembryd to ye lords the many
and great benefytes yt he had done to him, and the innaturall unkindness that
the said Lewys had again showed unto him / and how often times he had perdoned
his unkind sons trespass. And finally all this not wythstandyng / he was at
ye our in perfyte charity with him, and forgave him as he trusted to be
forgyuen / prayenge the lords there present, and specially chargynge ye said
bishop, that he would show unto his said son that great danger that he was in
against god for the dyspleasures done to him / and specially that he was a
cause of the abrygement or shorting of his days.

Then to bring this story to effect, whereof if I should declare the special
ties thereof, would ask a long time (for ye shall understand that these.ii.
stories of the great Charlis and of this Lewys, occupye in French of leuys of
great scantelyn over.lxiiii) wherefore I conclude yt he dyed like a good christian
prince, when he had been emperor of Rome and king of France by the term
of.xxvi. years / and was buried with great solemnyte at Meaws or at Mettis by
his mother Hyldegarde as says master Robert Gaguyne, in the year of his
age.lxiiii / leuynge after him the foresaid three sons Lothayre, Lewys and
Charlys the Ballyd.

Anglia. THE.CLXII. CHAPTER.
ADeulpus or Ethelwolphus the son of Egbertus / began his reygne over the
westesaxons or Anglys, in the year of our lords incarnacyon.viii. hundred
and.xxxii / and the xvii. year of Lewys the mylde then king of France.

This in his youth was willing to be a priest, and was enteryd the order of
subdeacon.

But there after by dyspensacyon of Pascall the first of that name pope / he
was married to Osburga a woman of low birth. By whom he had four sons /
that is to mean Ethelwalde, Ethelbert, Etheldrede, and Alurede / the which
after their father reigned as kings of England that one after that other, as
after shall appear.

This Adeulphus after he had a certain time ben king / he went to Rome, and
took with him his youngest son Alurede or Alphrede / and tarried there by the
space of a year. In the which season he repaired the Saxon scole / the which
before time was there founden by Offa king of Mercia, as Guydo says and
other / but more verily of Iue king of westsaxons, as says the authoure of
the Flower of historyes. And for that he granted of every house of his
kingdom a penny, as in his storye is before showed.

But this scole was sore decayed, and the house thereof lately brent / the
which this Adeulphus newely repaired, and set yt in better order then yt
before was vsyd.

This king also to refourme the greuouse correccyons that he saw there
executyd to English men for spyrytuall offensys, as in werynge of irons and
guyues: he granted of every fire house of his land.i. d, as Iue foresaid
had done.

By the which saying yt should seem / that by these two kings should be
grauntyd unto Rome.ii. d. of every fire house thorough their land.

But that may not be so understand / for this Rome scot is gaderyd of every
house a penny without more.

wherefore yt must follow, that yt is mysse taken of writers, that allege this
deed to that one king for that other. How be yt, yt may stand by reason,
that Iue made the first grant, and this king after confermyd the same. But
the authoure of Cronica cronycarum says, that this Adeulphus granted to
saint Peter these said Peter pens / and spekyth no word of Iue nor of none
other.

It is also showed of this king by Policronica / that he should for the
acquytynge of the chyrches of England of all manner of kings trybute, paid
yearly to Rome three hundred marks. That is to mean to saint Peter's church a
hundred marks / to the light of saint Paul a hundred mark / and to the
popys treasorye a hundred mark. And over all this of his pure devotion, he
offered to god and to saint Peter the.x. part of his moveable goods.

And also one cronycler says, that this king founded first the vnyuersytye
of Oxynforde / which was lykely to be done by Offa king of Mercia, for so
myche as in his days flowred that famous clerk Alcumus or Albinus / the which
as says the french cronycle, was first fou^der of the scole of Paris and of
Papya, as is before showed in ye story of Charlys the great, in the third
chapyter of the said storye.

when Adeulphus had thus sped his besynes and pilgrimage at Rome, he
retournyd by France / where at that time was king of that land Charlys the
Ballyd, of whom he was ioyouslye received. And after he had dysportyd him
there a season / he spousyd the daughter of the said Charlys, in the.xx. year
of the reygne of the said Adeulphus, as testyfyeth Policronica in the.xxx.
chapter of his.v. book / which should be the year of the reygne of the said
Charlis the.xi. But of this marriage is nothing touchyd in the french cronycle.

Then Adeulphus taking leave of the king / took shyppynge and landed in
England with his wife Indyth by name. And for that he contrary the law made in
ye time of Brigthricus, set his wife in the kings trowne, and magnyfyed her
like a queen / the lords of his land arose again him, and pullyd from him a
great part of his domynyon, and made his eldeste son ruler thereof. which
all was done in reproach of Ethelburga, which slew her lord Brigthricus as
before is showed. Lastly the matter was appeasyd, and he to his kyngly honor
restoryd.

About this time Bertulphus king of Mercia, slew wyckydly in the holy time of
Penthecoste saint will stone / whose holy body was buried at Repyngedo^. And
in ye place where this holy wylstone was slain stood a pyller of light.xxx.
days after.

And in the year following dyed the said Bertulphus. After whose death,
Burdredus was made king of Mercia or myddell England / the which before time
had spousyd the daughter of king Adeulphus.

In the later days of this Adeulphus, the Danys did myche harm in Lyndesey,
and also in kent / and from thens came to London, and robbed and spoiled the
city. wherefore Adeulphus gaderyd his people, and lastely met with them in
Southerey upon a down called Oclea / and there dyscomfyted them, not
without shedynge of great plente of the Anglis blood, and forsyd them to take
the sea / so that after they landed in eest Anglia as after shall appear. Then
lastely dyed this good king Adeulphus or Ethelwolphus / when he had ruled
his subictes nobly by accord of most wrytes fully.xxii. year / and was buried
at wynchester, leuynge after him four sonnys aforesaid.

Francia. THE.CLXIII. CHAPTER.
CHarlys ye yongeste son of Lewys the mylde / began his reygne over the chief
part of France, in ye year of our lord.ix. hundred and.xli / and the.ix. year
of Adeulphus then king of westsaxons / the which as before is said was
surnamed Ballyd.

Anon as his father was buried / his brother Lothayre, to whom the father, as
ye fore behave hard, had co^myttyd ye guydynge of this Charlys, by the
entysynge of his brother Lewys malygned again this Charlis / and sought many
ways to put him from such lands as his father had given him. This said
Lothayr was after the death of his father emperor / and Lewys the younger
brother was duke or knight of Bayon. But for Charlis was youngest, and had to
his part the pryncypall porcyon of France, which was called myddell France /
therefore his.ii. brethren and specially Lewys, malygned grievously again him.
whereof this Charlis being somdeale infourmed / bare him so wisely and so
egally to his subjects, that he had their loves and favors / and trustyd
always by their good aid that he should be of power to wythstande their unkind
malice. And like as the hid fire in process breketh out and shewyth great
light and flammy blase, even so did this couerde malice at the last break
out, to great ire and open wrath. For after four years was passyd / the said
two brethren with out defyaunce or groundely cause of war, assygned or
assembled a great host / such like before this day had not ben seen / and
entryd the lymyttes of king Charlys.

Then Charlis assembled in all ye haste his lords / and required their aids
and counsayll to wythstande the malice of his brethren. And when he had
knowelege of their good minds, anon their knights were gaderyd and all thing
was ready to the fight.

Now in this while the two brethren with their people were comen to a place
called Fountayns or Fou^tanet, where to Charlis spedde him. And when both
hosts were nere / either party made prouysyon to subdue his enymye.

Then were the bataylles on both parties orderyd and assygned to their
standards and capytaynes, and the wings set to the most advantage. what
should I longer process of this ordinance make, finally the shote of
arblasters began on both sides which over threw many an horse and man / and
specially the fore rydars, that put them self in prese with their long and
sharp launcys, to win the first brunte of the field.

Pytye yt was to behold the goodly bright armyd knights, lye^g and walowynge
with their great stedys in the field, with dedly wounds gapynge again the
son, yt were slain at the first encountre. But when the shote was spent, and
the speres to shateryd / then both hosts ran to gyther with Rowlandes song
/ so that in short while the grene field was dyed into a perfyte read. For
there was heddes, arms, legs, and trunkys of ded mennys bodies lyenge, as
thycke as flowers grow in time of may in the floryshynge medowys / miserable
and pyteouse yt was to behold the persons half living and half ded / with
their grysely wounds pyteously gronynge and cryenge without comfort. So that
there was showed all rygoure without mercy, and all crueltyes without
compassyon.

Thus duryd this mortal fight by a long season / that doutefull yt was to
know which party had thauau^tage of other. Howbeit Charlys was put to an
afterdeale by.ii. means. The first was for so much as Charlis entendyd to
have forborne, for the reverence of the high feste as the day of the ascensyon
of our lord, and that day not to have foughten. And the second was, that he
was far less in number. which two causes of dysauau^tage not with standing
/ yet in the conclusyon he wanne the honor of that journey. But not without
great loss of his people and many of the nobles of his land / where of the
french book rehersith the names. But for they be to us unknown, I pass them
over. And as yet is testyfyed of many writers / there was slain that day mo
Frencheman, then was slain at any field ever before that day. whereof the number
is not expressyd / for yt was so great. Then Lothayre was forced to take
Aquisgrany for his safeguard, and Lewys else where. But Charlys with a small
company that to him were left / followed his Brethren, and constrained
Lothayre to forsake ye city, and thens to go unto Lion a city ye stands at
this day in the utter most border of France, and after to Uyenne. To ye which
city of Uyen shortly after came unto him his brother Lewys / where they two
assembled a new host.

In the which passetyme, as Charlis was coming toward his brethren /
messyngers met with him, sent from his brethren to common of a peace. So that
finally he was accordyd, that the realm of France should be dyuyded in.iii,
as the father had before dysposyd yt. That is to mean, Lothayr should enjoy
over the lands belongyng to the empire the country of Austracy / the which in
process of time was called Lothayre or Lotharingia, which is to mean Lorayne
after his name. And to Lewys should remain the prouynce of Germany, with the
country of Buyan or Benery. And to Charlys should remain the country called
myddell or chief France, with the prouynces of Normandy and Burgoyne. which
said myddle France is reportyd to be in space from ye Occean of Brytayne to
the river of Mawze.

The which concord thus fermely stablyshed and fynyshed / either of other
took their departing, and resorted unto their own lordshyppes. But Lothayre
dyed shortly after / leuynge after him three sons, named Lewys, Lothayre, and
Charlis. But this death of Lothayre is not taken for temporal death / for yt is
said yt he forsook the travail of ye world, and became a munke at the abbaye
of Pruny, and lived there a solytary life many years after.

THE.CLXIIII. CHAPTER.
CHarlis ye Ballyd thus being in peaseble possessyon of the chief part of the
realm of France, and guydynge yt with all sobernes and indifferent justice /
was well drad and also beloved of his subjects.

In process of time, as upon.viii. years after that Lothayr abouesayd
renouncyd the pomp of the world / dyed first Charlys the youngest son of the
three of the foresaid Lothayre. And after dyed Lothayre the second son / so
that the said Lewys only suruyued, which was after his father enoynted
emperor.

when Charlis king of France knew certaynely of the death of these two
forsayde brethern, and that with out yssu / anon he assembled his power and
entered the prouynce of Austracy or Lorayne / the which his brother Lothayre
had given to Lothayre his son. And in short while after crowned him king
of that prouynce, within the church of saint Stephan of the city of Meaws,
chief cyty of that lordshyppe and kingdom. with the which deed Lewys his
brother, and king of Germany and Bayon was dyscontentyd / thynkyng him self
more ryghtfull enheritour then Charlis, for so myche as he was ye elder
brother, and also brother to the first Lothayre of father and of mother /
where as Charlis was but half brother, and by the fathers side only.

For this ye said Lewys sent to Charlys the Ballyd certain messyngers / gyuynge
to him monycyon that he should call to memory the couenauntes between them
before time stablyshed / and that he should not meddell him nor have to do
within the lands of his cosyn lately deed, unto such time as yt were
determined by their both counsayles, whyther of them had the better right /
and this to be obseruyd upon pain of exco^munycacyon or cursyng.

But for to Lewys was well seen, that his brother Charlis nothing absteyned him
from the occupyenge of the forenamed country / he therefore gaderyd an army to
war upon his said brother.

In the which pass time Charlys took to his second wife a woman named Rychent
or Ricent / the which he before time had vsyd as his co^cubyne or paramoure.

And soon after the Danys or Normans inuadyd the lands of Charlys / the which
for that time he was feign to appease and please with rich gifts and other
pleasures.

Then Charlys received from his brother a second ambassade or message / the
which showed unto him except he would void his knights and strengthes, that
he had set and put in diverse places of the land of Austracy, he should be
sure to have of his said brother an enymy / and that in all haste he would
enter his land with great force and war. wheruppon was such answer sent,
that by both their agrementes the matter was had in such co^munycacyon / that
finally yt was agreed that the said lands should egally be departed between
them. which conclusyon perfyted. Lewys with his people retournyd into Germany.

But yt was not long after that Lewys repented him of his agreement / so that
new legacyons were made upon both parties / and lastely with myche pain
newly agreed. After which agreement and accord fynyshed / Lewys the emperor
and son of the first Lothayre, sent an ambassade to both the fornamed
brethren / admonestynge and warnyng them that another the one nor ye other
should intermyt with the foresaid lands, for so myche as the right thereof
belonged to him as next heir to his brother / and not to them that were a
degree forther. The answer of this was deferryd by Charlys / how be it his
brother Lewis as says mine author, gave over his part shortly after to Lewys
ye emperor.

In this pass time Charlys the son of Charlis the Ballyd by his first wife,
whom the father had made ruler of a country called Belge / had ruled him
insolently, and done in that country diverse outragiouse deeds. For the which
he being co^playned of, was brought unto his father / and so by him commaundyd
to prison. But shortly after he was deliueryd at ye request of some nobles of
France / and kept after in his fathers court, where he continued but a short
while. For within a little season after his father being at Lions / he departed
from ye said court, and gaderyd to him a wild company of evil dysposyd
persons, and went again into the said country of Belge / and did more harm
then he had done before season / and so contynuyd a long while. But lastly he
was taken and cast again in prison / where after long punyshement he was
reued of his sight / and then sent unto the monastery of Corbenyke, there
safely to be kept. But at length by the entyceme^t of his uncle Lewys king of
Germany, and the treason of two mu^kes of ye place / he scapyd thens, and
fled unto the said Lewys his uncle. In the which time Charlys his father was
occupied in the defense of the Danys or Normannys, that then by strength had
won the city of Angyers and done therein myche harm / whom the king
closyd within the said city with a strong syege, and finally compellyd them
to seek meanys of peace at the kings pleasure. After which peace co^cludyd,
and the said Danys auoydyd / the king repossessyd the said city.

It was not long after, that tidings were brought unto Charlis of the death of
Lewys the emperor. After knowledge whereof / the king sent his other son
named Lewys into Austracy, to have the rule and ye guydynge of ye country. And
after other things ordered for ye weal of his realm / he with a strong
company of men of armies passyd ye mountains, and so into Italy toward Rome.
But Lewys his brother and king of Germanye being thereof warnyd / sent in all
haste his son Lewys with a strong host to let his passage. But how it was
for fere or other mean / the said Lewys yeldyd him to his uncle Charlys the
Ballyd. wherewith the father being grievously dyspleasyd / sent his second
son named Charlo^, to withstand the passage of the said Charlys. But this
for fere or other cause that he saw that he might not prevail again his
uncle / retornyd him again to his father. After whose return, he for so much
as the said Lewys king of Germany well perceived that his brother Charlys was
paste his danger / he than with a more number joined unto his sons host,
entryd ye land of France, in domagynge it to the vttermoste of his power.

In which season Charlys the Ballyd kept on his journey toward Rome. whereof
heryng the.viii. John^ than pope / sent again him certain persons of honor,
and welcomyd him as Augustus or emperor. And after his coming thither the
said pope received him with great reverence / and crowned him with the
imperyall dyademe and denouncyd him as emperor.

THE.CLXV. CHAPTER.
CHarlys ye Ballyd thus being authorysed for emperor / exersyd him for a time
for the nedys of the church of Rome / and after took his leave of the pope and
returned unto Papye a city of Italy. where he calling a general counceyle of
the lords of the empire and other / he by their aduyses provided and ordered
diverse things for the weal of ye said empire. And over that by their
agrementes he ordained for his lyeu tenant or debyte of the said empire in
his absence, a noble man brother to his wife recent named Besonne or Beson /
and assygned to him such people as was thought necessary and conuenyent.

when Charlys had sped his nedys in Papye, he hyed him into France. But or he
came within the terrytory thereof / word was brought to him that his brother
Lewys was returned into his own countreye, without great damage done to the
realm of France.

In process the emperor came to Paris / where he was received of the
cytesens with most tryumphe and joy / and kept his Eester tide at saint
Denis.

It was not long after that Charlys was thus returnyd into France / but that
he received messengers from his brother king of Germany, the which in his name
claymed his part of the empire as his right and enherytaunce. which answer
for that time was deferryd with pleasant words / so that at the next word
yt he had from his said brother, was that he was deed and buried in the
church of saint Nazer in Frankeborught. whereof wha^ Charlys was ascerteyned,
anon he yode unto Fou^tenays / and sent his messengers to the lords of the
country, commau^dynge them that they should meet him at the city of Mettes.

This foresaid Lewys left after him two sons named Lewys and Charlon as
before is towched / the which divided between them their fathers patrimony / so
that Lewys had Germany, and Charlon had Bayon.

This Lewys ferynge his uncle Charlys / gaderyd to him a strong power of
Saxons and of Thorynges. And in the time of their assemble / he sent an
ambassade of certain byshhoppes and temporal lords unto his uncle Charlys,
prayeng him of his love and favor / with other requests to him made, of the
which they might purchase no grant. whereof when they were retornyd he
having by them knowledge / ye said Lewys incontinently with his host drew
nere unto the Ryne. But this Lewys was not so covert i^ his work and
assemblynge of his people / but that his uncle had thereof wyttynge, and
purueyed his people as fast upon that other side / so that he with an host
was ready to fight with the said Lewys.

when Lewys was ware of ye great power that the emperor had assembled, he
made no haste to pass ye water / but houed and caused his people to fall unto
prayer. And Charlys also ferynge his neuewe / under a color sent alegacyon of
entreaty. During the which entreaty / the emperor contrary to his honor,
led his people by a secret way thynkyng to have fallen upon his neuew
suddenly, and by that mean to have dystressyd him. But Lewys being ware of
his uncles treason / provided so for his people, and kept them in such array,
that they received their foo men upon their speres points and to their great
damage. For where the great rain and tedyousnesse of the hard and strayte
ways, which they had passyd, had sore tired and weryed them: than the
fresshe fyersnesse of their enemies, which they thought they should have
taken slepynge and unpurveyed, abashed the^ in such wise that they were soon
ouercomen, and fled from the field as sheep fle from the wolf. By mean of the
which flight great slaughter of them was made / and many nobles and great
estates of France both slain and taken prisoners / and the emperor him
self scapyd with great danger. And of the prisoners that were taken they
were so nere spoiled / yt they were feign to take vine leaves to cover with
their secret me^bres.

ye shall understand y^ this war between the emperor Charlys the Ballyd and
his brothers son Lewys / was for the prouynce of Austracy or Lorayne, the
which sometime belonged to the emperor Lothayr and half brother to Charlys.
The which countreye after this battle, was by medyatours set in an order.

Than the emperor with great travail came to a town called Tyguy. And Lewys
kept his way to Dandonyquyke / and from thens to Ayes the chapel.

In this while the Danes or Normans knowing that Charlys was occupied in the
war again his neuewe / apparayled them a strong host, and entered often the
lands of France. But for Charlys was at ye time let with chargeable
business / he therefore sent a noble man again them called Comarde, unto the
river of Said, to wythstande the said enemies. And also to him was given
counceyle, to have with them co^municacyon to make a peace if he might.

And to this trouble immedyatly was joined another. For i^ this time and season
a city belongyng to the church of Rome rebellyd. wherefore to wythstand their
malice / the pope than being John^ the.viii. of that name, sent messengers to
Charlys for the defense of the said lo^des and other. And soon after the pope
for to haste the said emperor, or else to quycke^ his deputye before named
to assemble the Italyans and other people there adioynau^t / came down to the
city of Papye, and tarried there the emperors coming.

Charlys tha^ beset with trowbles / assembled his knights and sped him toward
Italy. And when he was passyd the mountains / word was brought to him of the
popes being in Papy / wherefore he sped him thither with all dylygence.

In this time and season Charlone the brother of Lewys and son of Lewys king
of Germany / which Charlone as before is showed was duke of Bayon or Bayory /
gaderyd a strong host, and entered the bounds of Italy. whereof herynge ye
pope and the emperor, than (as before is said) being at Papye, busyed in a
great counceyle / dissoluyd the same. And the pope incontyne^tly took leave of
the emperor / and departed again to Rome. And Charlys with a great power that
he had gaderyd, as well of Italyans as of his own people / made toward his
neuewe. whereof herynge the said Charlone / turned again by the way that he
had comen, till he came to his own country, as says mine author and also ye
French book. But more verily Charlone keeping together his host, and having
favor of diverse lords of Italye / the emperor Charlys removed to ye city
of Mantue / where he was grudged with a fever. For remedy whereof he took a
pocyon of a physycyon Jew named Sedechias, which was intoxicat / by mean of
which venomous pocyon he dyed shortly after when he had reigned as king and
emperor after most accord of writers, by ye space of.xxxvii. years, whereof
he reigned as emperor.iii. years / leuynge after him a son named Lewys,
which as before is showed was ruler of the country of Austracy or Lorayne.

when this Charlys was deed / his friends entendynge to have carried the corpse
into France / caused it to be seryd and enoynted with rich and precious
bawmes, and other oyntmentes and aromatykes. But all might not stop the
intolerable air of his body / so that they were feign to bury him at Uercyle,
within the monastery of saint Euseby. where he lay over.vii. years after / and
then taken up and conveyed to saint Denis in France, and there honorably
buried.

THE.CLXVI. CHAPTER
IN the time of this Charlys the Ballyd, as wytnessen many writers, began the
erledome of Flaunders / the which ever before these days, the ruler thereof
was called the forester of the king of France. which erledome had his
beginning by this mean.

ye have hard before in the story of Adeulphus king of westsaxons / how in
his retornynge from Rome, he married the daughter of Charlys ye Ballyd named
Indith. The which Indyth after the death of her said husbonde retornyd by
Flaunders toward France / thinking to pass without danger, because the
said country was under the obedyence or her father. But at those days was
ruler or forester in that parties a noble young amerous man called Bawdewyne /
the which herynge of the great beautye of this Indith, gave attendaunce upon
her. And received her in his best manner, making to her all the chere that to
him was possible / and finally cast to her such love, that when she supposed
to depart and to have gone into France / he delayed the matter in such
curteys and wise manner, that he wan such favor of her, that she made no great
haste to depart from him / all be it that most authors agree, that he kept
her perforce.

when Charlys had wyttynge that Bawdewyne thus held his daughter Indith / he
sent to him, straytly chargynge him to send home his daughter / but that help
not the matter. Tha^ he purchasyd again him the censures of holy church, and
accursed the said Bawdewyne. But when the king conceived that the young man
had such love to Indyth that he set not by that punysshement / and also
was certeynly informed that her heart was given unto him: he in process by ye
mean of some bysshoppes and friends of the said Bawdewine, agreed that he
should take her to wife / and in the name of her dowar, he should hold and
enjoy the said country of Flanders. And for he would have his daughter to be
the more honored / he created the said Bawdewyne an earl, and commanded him
to be called after that day earl of Flanders.

It is also showed in the French cronycle and of other writers / that three
days before his death, his spirit should be rauysshed from his body, and unto
places of pain and turment / where this Charlys by the ledynge of an angel,
should se hills and mountains brenne, and pyttes full of sulphyr, pytche, and
hot boylynge led. In which pains the said Charlys should se many of his
progenytours and bysshoppes, that counceyled princes to debate or strife, or
gave counceyle to them to raise of their subiectys unlawful taskys or
imposycyons / with many other things, which I pass over for length of the
matter.

Anglia. THE.CLXVII. CHAPTER.
EThelwaldus or Ethelwoldus ye eldeste son of Adeulphus, began his reygne
over the westesaxons or over ye more party of England, in the year of our
lord viii. hundred and.lv / and the.x. year of Charlys the Ballyd than king
of France. The which became so unhappy / that he married ye woman which his
father had sometime kept or holden for his concubyne, as wytnessyth ye
author of ye Flower of hystoryes. But Polycronycon says that he wedded his
stepmoder / which dysaccordyth with the saying of other writers, which
testifye his stepmoder to be married to Bawdewyn earl of Flanders, as in ye
story of Charlys last before is showed.

This Ethelwolde though it be not expressyd by what hap he dyed, when he had
reigned one year, as says Polycronyca. But another cronycle beryth witness,
that he was slain as a martyr, of Hungar and Hubba princes of Danys.

About this time the holy king saint Edmund co^tynued his reygne over the Eest
Anglis or Norfolk.

THE.CLXVIII. CHAPTER.
EThelbertus the second son of Adeulphus / began his reygn over the more
party of England, in the year of our lord.viii. hundred lvi / and the.xi.
year of Charlis ye Ballid then king of France. In whose time the Danys with
more strengthes entered ye west part of this land / and robbed and spoiled the
country before them till they came to wynchester / and took the city by
strength, and did therein what they would. But the king made such prouysyon /
that by him and his dukes they were forcyd to forsake the city. And as they
yode toward their ships / they were fought with, and a great part of them
slain and taken.

Of this king is nothing else left in memory more then before is showed /
but that he dyed when had reigned after most writers.vi. years / and was
buried at Shyrborne, leuynge after him none yssu of his body. wherefore the rule
of the land fell to his brother Etheldrede.

THE.CLXIX. CHAPTER.
ETheldredus the third son of Adeulphus / began his reygne over the west
Anglis and the more part England, in the year of our lord.viii. hundred
and.lxiii / and the xviii. year of Charlis ye Ballyd then king of France.

In the beginning of this kings reygne, the Danes landed in eest England or
Norff. and Suff. But they were compellyd to forsake that country / and so took
again shyppynge and saylyd northwarde, and landed in Northumberlande. where
they were met with of the kings then there reynynge called Osbryghte and
Ella / which gave to them a strong fight. But that not wythstandynge the
Danys with help of such as enhabyted ye country, wan the city of york, and
held yt a certain of time.

Then the people of Northumberland varyed with in them self / and had more
lever aid the Danys then to reygne under the king of westsaxo^s. For here is
to be notyd that all such kings as reigned there after Egbert, which as
before is said subdued that prouynce and other / reigned as trybutaryes to the
king of of westsaxons or Anglys.

wherefore Etheldredus herynge of the advantage that the Danys then had,
assembled his people and sped him thytherwarde / and sent unto the foresaid
two kings, commaundynge them also to prepare their people again his coming.
But how yt was or the king came with his host / the Danys so prouokyd the
Northumbres to battle, that they met in plain feld and fought a long
battle. But finally the Danys wan the price / and slew both the foresaid
kings with a great multitude of their people.

After which vyctory they subdued myche of the said country, and destroyed ye
town of Aklynt or Aclynd / the which, as testyfyeth Beda, was sometime one of
the strongest towns of the North.

when Etheldrede had preparyd all thing for the war / and was purposyd
toward the North, for co^syderacyon aforesaid: word was brought unto the
said king Etheldrede of the dyscomfyture of the Northumbres / and also of
diverse of the said Danys with other that were comen to Mercia, and had
won the town of Snotyngham or Notyngham / which tidings lettyd him of his
forth spedde in that journey. But this saying is dysagreable unto
Policronicon. For he says that the Northumbres were yet of their king
Osbrutus or Osritus after some authors / and chase unto the^ a tyrant named
Ella / by mean whereof great dissensyon grew among them to the great hurt of
the country. But when the Danys had passed the country, and won the city
of york, that then was febly wallyd: then by constraynte and of fere, for the
defense of their country, they were feign to agree and to gather strength on
all sides / so that both the foresaid kings went again the foresaid Danis,
and both were slain. After which scomfyture the people as desolate / some
fled the country, and some made peace with the Danys, and lived under their
tuycyon. And so the Danys kept the possessyon of that country / in such wise
that no Angle had rule thereof, till the time of Adelstone or Ethelstone, or
after some writers till the time of Edredus / so that they held the possessyon
thereof over the term of.lx. years.

Then the Danys being thus possessyd of the North country / manned the same,
and fortyfyed the strong holds thereof. And the other of them came down into
Mercia or myddell England / and wanne a part thereof with the forsayde town
of Nothyngam / and dwelled there ye more part of the year following.

wherefore king Etheldrede with aid of Burdredus then king of Mercia, laid
seage unto the town. The which when the Danys perceived should be won /
they refusyd the town, and took the tower or castle, and defendyd yt in so
strong manner, that they held yt till a peace or apoyntement was concludyd
between the two kings and them. which was that they should go free where
they would, and carye with them their horse and harness without any pyllage.
And when this peace was thus made, either of the kings departed to their own
/ and the Danys returned unto york, and dwelled there the year following.

And the year following that said year / a part of the said Danys taking
shyppynge in the North, entendynge to sail toward eest England / met in
the sea with a flote of Danys, whereof the captains or ledars were named
Hynguoar and Hubba. The which by exhortacyon of the other coming out of the
North / made all one course, and lastly landed in eest England or Norffolk /
and in process of time came unto Therforde.

Thereof herynge Edmundus then king of that prouynce / assembled an host, that
gave unto them battle. But Edmu^de and his host was forsed to forsake ye feld
/ and the king with a few persons fled unto the castle of Framilyngha^ or
Framyngeham / whom the Danys pursued. But he in short while after yielded him
self unto the persecucyon of the Danys. And for this blessed man Edmunde would
not renye or deny Christ and his lawys / they therefore most cruelly bond him
unto a tree, and caused him to be shot to death / and lastely caused his hedde
to be smytten from the body, and cast among the thycke of the bushes. But
when his friends came after to burye this holy treasoure and lacked the head,
and made for yt busy search / the hedde being in the clawys of a wild wolf
spoke, and said three times dystynctely, here, here, here. By reason of which
speech they came unto ye place where the hedde in the said bestys keeping lay.
which said wolf contrary to his kind / anon as he saw the people, fled
from the hedde and suffered them to take yt up / and folowyd them after a
certain of time as he had been rame.

Then they with great solempnyte carried the body and head unto Eglydon or
Eglysdon now called saint Edmundes bury / and there buried him, about the
year of our lord as wytnessen Policronica, Guydo, and other, viii. hundred.
and.lxix / as before it is showed in ye chapyter of this work four score
and.xiv, for whom daily god showed there many miracles.

THE.CLXX. CHAPTER.
When this blessed Edmu^de was thus martyred for the love that he bare toward
his master Criste and his laws / his brother named Edwoldus setting a part
the liking and pleasure of the world, all be yt that to him belongyd the
right of that kingdom, took upon him the habyte of an heremyte, and lived
only by bread and water at the abbay of Cern^ in the countye of Dorset / by
the clear well that saint Austyne by his prayers made to spring, when he
conuertyd first the Saxons of that prouynce to ye faith of Christ.

Of this said abbay of Ceru^, Policronica says yt it was after these days
rich and right welthy. But the governors thereof mysspent the patrimony thereof
in excess glotony, and not among the servants of god.

wherefore he says farther, that couetyse and pride had so changed all thing
in England in these days / that all things that before time were given to
abbays, were then more wasted in glotony and outrage of the owners, then in
sustenaunce and aid of nedy men and of gestes or nedy waygoers. Albe yt he
says the first doers or gyuer lose not their reward. For their will and
intent is full euenly paysed in a balaunce, before him that is the rewarder of
all good. But though Treuysa yt was the translatoure of this book of
Polycronycon out of laten into our vulgar tunge / report this to be done, or
this mysorder to be vsyd in this days, which lived in the time of that
honorable prince Edward the third / if he now lived, he would not in no
governors of munkes black or yet white, lay no such outrage. For now at
these days pride and glotony is clearly banyshed from their monasteryes and
cellys / and in the rome of pride with his friend dysobedyence, have they now
lodgyd humylyte with his suffer obedyence. And in the stead of glotonye and
uncleaness of living / have they now newely professyd them unto all
chastyte, temperaunce, abstynence, avoiding all slowth and idelnesse / and
exercise them in gostely study and preaching of the word of god with all
dylygence. So that now the holy rulys and ordynaunces made by that holy father
and abbote saint Benet, which by ignorance have long time slepte / now by
grace of good governance are newely renyued and quyckened. And here and end,
lest I be accused of dyssymulacyon.

Then to retourn unto the Danys, from whom I have made a long dygressyon /
troth yt is that when they had as before is said, martyred the blessed man
Edmunde, and robbed and spoiled that country / and they took again their
ships and landed again in Southerye / and there continued their journey till
they came to the town of Redynge, and wanne the town with the castle.

Policronyca says yt the third day of their thither coming / Hingwar and
Hubba as they went in purchasyng of prays, were slain at a place called
Engelfelde. which princes of Danys thus slain / the other dele of them kept
hole to gyther, in such wise that the weste Saxons might take of them none
advantage. But yet within few days after the Danys were holden so short, that
they were forced to issue out of the castle, and to defend them in plain
battle. In yt which by comfort of king Etheldrede and of Alurede his brother
/ the Danys were dyscomfyted, and many of them slain. whereof the other being
ware / fled again to the castle, and kept them with in the same a certain
of time.

Then the king commanded Etelwold then duke of Baroke or Barkshyre, to
attend with his people upon that castle / and to se that the Danys break not
out at large while he went in other costs of that country to subdue other of
the said Danys But when the Danys knew of the kings departure / they brake
out so daynly anon of their hold, and took the duke vnpuruayed and slew him
and myche of his people / and caused the other to with draw them farther from
that town or castle.

Then these Danys drew them to other that were their lords in that country /
and enbatelled them in such wise, that of them was gathered a strong host.

It was not long after duke Ethel would was slain, but the king was
ascertayned thereof. The which renewed his heuenesse, and made him full heavy /
to consider the loss of his friend, and the encreace and multyplyenge of his
enymyes. For ye day before report of these tidings as affermeth an old
cronycle / word was brought to him of the landyng of a Dane named Osryk,
which of Policronyca is named king of Denmark. The which in short time
after with assystence of the other Danys / had gaderyd a great host, and
were enbatellyd upon ash down. To his battle Alured was forced by great
need to come before his brother the king, that then was herynge of a mass
with great devotion, not knowing of that hasty speed of his brother. where ye
king thus being in his medytacyons / ye hosts of Anglys and Danys struck to
gyders with houge vyole^ce. And how be yt the Danys had won the hyllande and
ye christian men were in the valley / yet by grace and virtue of ye kings holy
prayers and manhood of them self, they at length wanne the hill of the Danis,
and slew their duke or king called Osryke, or after the english cronycle
Oseg, and five of their dukes, with myche of their people / and chased ye other
dele unto Redynge town.

wherefore the Danys resembled their people, and gathered a new host / so that
within.xv. days they met at a town called Basynge Stoke / and there gave
battle unto the king, and had the better.

Then the king gathered his people, the which at that field were chachyd and
dysparklyd / and with fresh soldyours to them accompanied, met the Danys
within two months after at a town called Merton / and gave to them a sharp
battle, so that myche people were slain as well of the christian as of the
Danys. But in the end the Danys had the honor of the field / and the king
of Anglys was wounded, and feign to sauegarde him self by polycy when might
failed.

After these two feldes thus won by the Danys / they obtained great cyrcuyte of
ground, and destroyed man and child that to them were inobedye^t. And chyrches
and temples they turned to use of stables, and other vile occupacyons. And to
this sorrow was added an other.

For where the king hoped well to recover his losses by aid of his subjects,
as well of other pertes of his land as of his own of westsaxon / when he had
sent his commyssyons into Northumberland into Mercia, and eest Anglia: He had
of them small or little comfort / so that the country of west Saxon was
brought in great desolacyon. For the king was beset with enymyes upon every
side / and over that his knights and soldyours were tired and palled with over
watch and labor. which manyfolde aduersytyes and troubles synkynge in the
kings mind / with brose or hurt ensuyng of the wound before taken at ye
battle beside Merton, shortened his days / so that he dyed when he had
reigned in great persecucion of the Danys after most writers.viii. years,
without issue of his body. By reason whereof the rule of the land fill unto his
brother Alurede.

It is wytnessyd of some chronicles that not wythstandynge the great trouble and
vexacion that this king Etheldrede had with the Danys, he founded the house
or college of chanons at Exeter, and was buried at the abbaye of wynbourne or
wobourne.

THE.CLXXI. CHAPTER.
ALuredus the.iiii. son of Adolfus and brother to Etheldredus last king /
began his reygne over the westsaxons and other prouynces of England, in the
year of our lord.viii. hundred and.lxxii / and the.xxxi. year of Charlis
forenamed, then king in France. This Alured or after some writers Alphred was
xii. year of age or he were set to scole. But for all that he spedde so well
his time, that he passed his brother and other that were long set forth before
him. And by the counsayll of Neotus or Notus / he ordained the first grammar
scole at Oxenford, and other free scoles, and fraunchaysyd that town with many
great lybertyes / and translated many laws, and Marcyan law and other, out of
Bretyshe speech unto Saxon tunge. He was also a subtle master in buyldyng and
deuysynge thereof, and excellent connyng in all hunting. Fair he was of
stature / and most beloved of his father of all his children.

Long time it would ask to rehearse all his virtue. But for he was in his youth
dysposed to ye syn of the flesh, and thereby let from many a virtuous
purpose: he lastely after many resystences by him done to avoid ye temtacyon
thereof / besought god enterly, that he would send to him some contynuall sykenes
in quenchyng of ye vice, and that he were not unprofitable to wordely business
and serve god the better.

Then at gods ordinance he had ye evil called Fycus / with the which
sekenes he was grieved many years, and lastely cured of that holy virgyn saint
Modwenna then dwelling in Irlande. But after this cure by her done she came
into England, for so myche as her monastery or church yt she there dwelled in
was destroyed. wherefore Adulfus father to Alured, knowing the virtue and
holiness of this maiden / gave to her ground to build upon.ii. abbays of
maidens. That is to say one in Arderne at a place called Polliswortham, another
at Strenesalte in the North. But this holy maiden dyed in the yland of Andrese
beside Burton, after many years of the building of these said two abbays, and
after.vii. years yt she had been closyd within stone walls in the isle before
named.

when Alurede was cured of this sekynes, to him fill an other / the which
continued with him from the.xx. year of his age till the.xlv. year of his said
age. But yt not wythsta^dynge he wedded a noble woman named Ethelwyda / of the
which he received two sons, Edward surnamed the elder, and Egelwarde /
and.iii. daughters, Elphleda yt after was lady of Mercia Ethelgota a me^chon
or nu^ne, and ye third was named Elfrida. The which he caused all as well
daughters as other* to study the art or science of gra^mer, and to be
noryshed with all virtue. And when this Alurede was admyttyd to be king, he
well consyderyd the great danger yt his land was in. wherefore he gaderyd to
him his lords / and such as he might not wyn without strife, he wanne with
great justice and fair hosts. So yt he shorlty assembled a strong host /
and in the second month yt he was made king, he met with the Danys beside
wylton, and yielded to them battle, but not without great loss of men on both
parties.

Then he remeuyd his pleople, and in sundry places faught with ye Danys in the
first year.vi. times. By mean whereof his people were so sore mynyshed and
wekyd / that he was forsed to take peace with his enymyes, upon covenant that
they should avoid the countres and prouynces yt he had domynyon of.

Upon which agreement fermely concluded the Danis for a time voyded those
countries / and drew toward London, and rested them about ye cost the more
part of the year following / and from thens to Lyndesey, in robbyng and
spoylyng the towns and villages as they went, and holding ye common people
under their seruage / and so continued over the term of two years. But or the
third year were endyd they yode unto Repindon / and there put down or slew
Burdredus then king of Mercia / and betoke ye kingdom unto a servant of his
named Colwolphus, upon condicyon on that he should keep it to their behofe.
And then they besegyd a town thereby called Hambourgth, and assauted yt right
sharply. wherefore the people thereof being in great dread and fere / took the
body of that holy vyrgyne saint werbourgth, by virtue of whose body the enymyes
were somewhat put a back. And after for a more suerty / ye inhabytauntes of ye
town of Hamburgth with that holy treasure, fled unto westchester / where at
this day she lies honorably shryned.

Then the king made often peace with the Danys, in trust whereof he rode with the
fewer people, whereof they being ware, laid busheme^tes for him, and set so nere
him, yt they slew a great part of his company in a night as he rode toward
wynchester.

For this treason the hyng was sore amouyd again the Danys / and in as secret
manner as he might he assembled a chosen company of knights / and as wytnessyth
Guydo, fill upon the^ suddenly, and dystressed many of them, and left them not
till he had chased them to Chester, or after an other author to Exetour. And
there king Alurede kept the Danys so short / yt he constrained them to give to
him pledges to keep the peace, and to dwell no longer there then they might
puruey shyppynge at the next port to sail into Denmark.

After which accord thus fynyshed the king returned unto Mercia or myddell
England. And for he hard yt Colwolphus was deed, to whom the Danys had taken
that lordshyp to keep: he therefore seasyd yt kyngedome, and joined yt to his
own of west Saxons. By which reason the kyngedome of Mercia surseasyd ye had
continued from their first king named Penda, as in the chapyter of this
work.C.xxix. precedynge, is more at length declared.

About the.v. year of the reygne of Alurede / the Danys as affermeth
Policronica, sailed fro warham toward Exetour / in the which journey they
lost.vi. score of their small ships by a tempeste in the sea. But some of
them occupied the town of Chepynham and the country thereunto adioynynge / and
chasyd ye Angles, or made them as subjects to ye Danys. And so sore the power
of the^ augmentyd / that the Angles lost daily and they encresyd / and ye more
by reason of the landyng of a prince of the Danys named Gutteron or Gowthram,
which is named king of Denmark.

THE.CLXXII. CHAPTER.
ALurede being thus ouerset in multitude of enymyes, as affermeth Policronica
and other / ladde an uncertain life and uneasy with few folks about him, in
the wode country of Somersetshyre / and had right scante to live with, but
such as he and his people might purchase be huntyng and fyshynge. In which
mysery he thus by a certain of time contynuynge / he was by a vysyon to him
showed of saint Cutbert comforted, as folowyth. Upon a time when his company
was from him departed and besyed in purchasyng of vytayle, and he for a
passetyme was redynge on a book / a pilgryme came to him and required his alms
in gods name. The king lift up his hands toward heaven and said, I thank
god that of his grace, he vysyteth his poor man this day by an other poor man
/ and that he woll wytsaue to ask of me yt he has given to me. Then the king
anon called his servant that had but one lofe and a little what of wine /
and badde him give the half thereof unto the poor man. The which received yt
thankefully / and suddenly vanished from his sight, so that no step of him was
seen in the nesshe fenne or more yt he passed thorough. And also all that was
given to him / was left there by in such wise as yt was to him given. And
shortly after his company returned to their master / and brought with them
great plenty of fyshe that they had then taken.

The night following when the king was at his rest / one apperyd to him in a
bishops wede, and chargyd him that he should love god, and keep justice, and
be mercyable to the poor men, and worship prestes. And said more over,
Alurede Criste knowyth thy conscience and thy will, and now will put an end
of thy sorrow and care. For to morrow strong helpers shall come to the, by whose
help thou shalt subdue thine enymyes. who art thou said the king. I am
Cutbert said he, ye pilgrim yt yester day was here with yt / to whom thou
gave both bread and wine. I am besy for the and thine wherefore have thou
mind hereof when yt is well with the. But how he had his pilgryme in mind
after, by the fredam that he gave with the possessions unto Durham church / yt
is well and euydently seen.

Then Alurede after this vysyon, was well comforted, and showed him more at
large / so that daily resortyd to him men of wylshyre, Somersetshyre, and
Hamshyre / till that he was strongly companied. Then the king put him in a
great ieoperdye, as says wyllyam de regibus. For he did on him the habit of a
mynstrell / and with his instrument of musyke, he entered the tents and
pauylyons of the Danys / and in showing there his interlude and songs, he
espied all their sloth and idelnesse, and hard much of their counsayll / and
after returned unto his company, and told to them all the manner of the Danys.

Then the king with a chosen company / fill upon ye Danys by night, and
dystressyd and slew of them a great multitude, and chasyd them from that
cost. And when the king had thus chasyd the Danys / by cou^sayll of his
knights, he builded there a toure and named it Edelyng, which is to mean in
our speech a toure of noble men. Out of which toure he and his soldyers made
many assautes upon their enymyes, and did to them myche harm and scath / and
clearly voyded the country of them between that and Selwood.

This Edelynge or Ethelyngyssey, stands in a great marys or more / so that
men may not wyn to yt without ship or bote, and conteynyth no great ground
/ but yet therein is venyson and other wyld bestes, and foul, and fyshe great
plenty.

Thus king Alurede daily pursuyd his enymyes by help of god and his subjects
/ which heryng of his vyctoryes and manfull deeds, drew to him daily out of
all costs. By whose powers and assistens he held the Danys so short / that
he wanne from them wynchester, and many other good towns / and forced them
lastly to seche for peace, the which was co^cludyd upon certain couenauntis.
whereof one and principal was / that their king named as before is said
Guttrun or Gothram, or after ye English cronycle Gurmunde, should be crystyned,
and a certain of his dukes with him. And for ye king would have the Danys
banyshed out of the west parties of England / he granted to him eest Anglia
to abide and dwell in.

Then this prince of Danys according to the couenauntes, was crystyned at
wynchester / and.xx. of the grettest of his dukes. And to this said Danys
prince Alurede was godfather at the funte stone, and named him Athelstane. And
after he had a season feasted the said Daues / he according to his promys^
gave unto their king the country of eest Anglia, which then contained
Norffolk and Suffolk, and part of Cambrydshyre. And also as wytnessyth
Policronica he granted to ye Danys that were crystened the country of
Northumberlande. And the other that would not be crystyned, departed the land
and failed into France / where they restyd them with their cosyns and
Kynnesmen, that at those days wasted the land of France, as in the french
storys is somewhat apparent. when this Danys king Athelstane had the
possessyon of these countries / ye shall understand yt all such Angles as
dwelled there, and within the precyncte of them, were under his obedyence. And
all be yt that he held the said prouynce as in fee of ye king, and promised to
dwell there as his lyege man / yet that promise not wythstandynge, he continued
like a tyraunte by the term of.xi. years full, and dyed in the.xii.

In the which time king Alurede amended the city of Septon^ that now is
called Shaftesburye / and other towns and strong holds yt by the Danys were
sore abatyd and enpayred. And as wytnessyth Guydo and other / he builded ye
house of nonnes at Shaftesbury, or was first founder thereof.

He also founded an house of relygyon in the above named place of Ethelyngesey
/ and a another in wynchester, that was named the new monastery. In the which
he was after buried. And over this he endowed the church of saint Cuthberte
in Doreham, as before is touched.

About the.xv. year of the reygne of Alurede / ye Danys which before as ye
have hard sailed into France, returned into England and landed in Kent / and
so lastly came unto Rochester and beseged that city / and lay there so long,
that they builded a tower of timber and not of stone, again the gates of the
city. But by strength of ye cytesyns that tower was destroyed, and the city
defended till king Alurede restowed the^. The which had made such
purueyaunce for the dystressyng of them by water and land / that they were so
nere trapped, that for fere they left their horses behind them and fled to
their ships by night. But wha^ the king was thereof ware / he sent after them
and took.xvi. of their ships, and slew many of the said Danys. After this
journey, the king returned to London / and repaired certain placys thereof,
that before had been hurt or febled with the Danys / and betoke the guydyng
thereof unto Etheldredus than earl or duke of Mercia, to whom as wife he had
given his daughter Elfleda.

About this time dyed Dunbertus than bishop of wynchester / and the king made
Dunwolfus bishop after him. The which as says Polycronycon the king fande
in the wodde keeping of bestes, in the time when he him self kept the woddes
for fere of the Danys.

About the.xxi. year of the reygne of this king Alurede / the Danys landed
in.iiii. places of this land, that is to wit in the Eest England and the
North, and in the west in.ii. places. But for ye king before their landynge
had warning of the death of Athelstan^ king of Danys of Eest England, and of
other complayntes of ye Danys / he therefore yode thither in which time of his
there being these tidings came unto him.

THE.CLXXIII. CHAPTER
When king Alurede was acertayned of these tidings / for so much as some of
the said Danes were landed in that cost, and knew well that ye ferther they
drew unto these parties, the more they should be aided and strengthed: he
therefore sent messengers in all haste unto Etheldred earl or duke of Mercia /
chargynge him to assemble an host of the men of Mercia and the border there
about / and to make resystens again the Danes, which landed in the west. And
that done / ye king sped him toward his enmyes, and pursued them so sharply,
that in ye end he drove them out of Eest Anglia. The which than landed in
Kent / whyther the king with his people spedde him, and in like manner drove
the Danes from thens. How be it of any special fight or battle authors
thereof leave no memory. After this again the Danes took shyppynge and sailed
into North wales, and there robbed and spoiled the Brito^s / and from thens
returned by the sea into the Eest Anglia, and there rested them, for so much as
the king than was gone westwarde.

In this while some of the foresaid Danys had won the town of Chester. But
for the countrees adioynau^t presed so sore upon them / the said Danys were
compelled to keep them within the said town or city, and to defend them by
that manner. But that holdyng of ye town lasted so long, that the Danys were
compellyd to eat their horses for hunger. But by apoyntement they lastely gave
over the town, and went thens into Northumberland. And in the while that the
king with his host spedde him thyderwarde / they leuynge the strong holds
and castles garnysshed with men and vytayle, took again shyppynge and fet
their course in such wise that they landed in Sussex / and so came unto the
town of Jews, and from thens toward London / and builded a tower or castle
nere unto the river of Jews. But the Londoners heryng of their doings, ma^ned
out a certain number of men of arms / the which with assystens of the men of
ye country, put the Danys from that tower and after beat it down to the
ground.

Soon after ye king came down thither / and for he thought that river should
be a mean to bring enemies efte soones into that country: therefore he
commanded ye streme to be divided into diverse stremes / so yt by reason thereof
there a ship might sail in time before passed, tha^ a little bote might
scantly row. Than by presence of the king, the Danes were forsed to fle that
country, and from thens took again way toward walys, and kept a part of the
river of Seuerne / and upon the border thereof builded them a castle nere unto
walys, and so rested them there for a time. So that.iii. years after this land
was vexed with three manner of sorrows / with war of the Danes, pestylence of
men, and moreyne of bestes. which troubles and aduersytees not wythstandynge /
the king knyghtly and manfully resysted the malice of his enmyes / and thanked
god always what trouble so ever fill to him or to his realm / and sustained it
with great humylyte and pacyence.

It is told of him yt he divided ye day and night in three parties if he were
not let by war or other great besynes. whereof.viii. hours he spent in study
and lernyng of science / and other.viii. he spente in preayer and alms deeds
with other charytable deeds / and other.viii. hours he spent in his natural
rest, sustinau^ce of his body, and the needs of the realm. The which order he
kept duly by waxen tapers kept by certain persons.

Thus this marcyall knight contynuyng in all prowess and virtue, lastly dyed /
when he had reigned over the more part of this land by the term of.xxviii.
years full. And was first buried at wylto^, and after certain years removed
and carried unto wynchester / leuynge after him a son named Edward, surnamed
Edward the elder. For the other b^other called Egelwarde dyed before his
father.

Francia. THE.CLXXIIII. CHAPTER.
LEwys the second of that name, and son of Charlis ye Balled / began his
reygne over the Frenchmen, in the year of our lord.viii. hundred lxxviii / and
the.vi. year of Aluredus than king of the more part of England. This was
named Lodowicus Balbus, which is to mean Lewys the stamerer / for so much as
he had an impedyment in his tunge.

ye have before in ye story of Charlys the Balled herd, How Charlon the neuew
of Charlys foresaid, with his host had entered Italy, and intended toward
Rome. The which after the death of his said uncle Charlys, kept on his way,
and lastly came unto Rome. But for the pope than being John^ the.viii. of that
name / favored the above named Lewys Balbus, and intended to make him
emperor: therefore he refrayned yt enoyntyng of the said Charlon. For the
which deed he finally was compelled to avoid the town and country, and fled
into France. where he being honorably of Lewys received / declared and
admytted him for emperor, as shows the Chronicles of Rome. But after two
years of his reygne or short time of this admyssyon to that dygnyte, this Lewys
dyed. wherefore the said pope to enjoy his papasy in rest / returned to Rome,
and anointed the forenamed Charlon, and crowned him with the imperyall dyademe
/ the which in ye Roman^ cronycle is named Carolus tertius, the third
emperor, that is to mean of that name.

But of all this speaks nothing the French Cronycle / except that it is
there testyfyed, that he was of the said pope admytted for emperor.

Polycronycon shows, that the second Lewys king of France, was accursed of
the pope Nicolas ye first of that name / for so myche as he refused his
lawful wife, and took to him his concubine named waldrada. But that is
understand by Lewys the second emperor of that name / which was son of
Lothayre, which Lothayre was eldest son of Lewys the mylde, as in the story
of Charlys the Ballyd appears. And for the genelogy of Charlis the
conqueroure, or of his ofspyng may the clerelyer appear / and also that ye
reder may have the more certain of the names, which were emperors, which
kings of France, and which were kings of Germany: I shall in the story of
Lewys the.v. (in whom for a time surseasyd ye blood) make a remembrance of
every emperor, and kings of France and Germany, that reigned from ye said
Charlis ye great or conqueror, till Hugh Capet / the which Hugh usurped the
crown of France, as after shall appear.

Than it follows in the story, that for partycyon of the land of Austracy or
Lorayn, grudge and varyau^ce continued always between the kings of France and
Germany / which both kings at this day were named Lewys, albeit that the
king of France was surnamed Balbus, as before is showed. For the which
varyaunce by labor of friends these two kings met at ye city or place
called Gundeuyle. where after long co^munycacyo^ it was finally agreed, that
the said prouynce of Austracy should than be divided, as it sometime had been
parted between Charlys the Balled and Lewys king of Germany their both
fathers.

After which peace thus concluded, either parted from other in frendely wise.
And Lewys Balbus yode unto Ardern^, where he hallowed the feste of Crystmas. And
from thens he yode unto Compeyne / where he herd of the rebellyon of a marquis
of his realm called Barnarde, or more verily after the Romayn story a marquis
of Italy. For this Barnarde with one Helberde had before time taken from the
church of Rome certain possessions / which by mean of this Lewys and the
sentence of the church denounced again them by the foresaid pope John^, were
again restored, and the parties also reconcyled. But now of new this Barnarde
rebelled again. wherefore the pope as to Lewys for the defensour of the church
of Rome sent for aid / for, as before I have showed you, this Lewys of the
said pope John^ was authorysed for emperor. But for he was not crowned at
Rome with the imperyall dyademe / he is not accounted among ye emperors.

For this new rebellyon of Barnarde, Lewys assembled his army at Co^payne
foresaid / and from thens rode to ye city of Troyes in Uince^t, where he was
taken with sudden malady, of ye which he dyed shortly after, and not without
suspeccyon of venym, when he had been king of France fully two years / leuyng
after him two sons, that is to say Lewys and Charlys, or after some writers
Charlemayne.

THE.CLXXV. CHAPTER.
LEwys and Charlys / the sons of Lewys Balbus or Lewys ye stamerer / began
their reygne over the Frenchemen, in the year of our lords
incarnacion.viii.C.lxxx / and the.viii. year of ye reygne of Alurede than king
of England. The which for they were young of age, were put under tuyssyo^ and
gydyng of Barnarde the earl of Auuergii / to whom the father by his life had
the^ committed. wherefore the said Barnarde with other of his affynyte assembled
shortly after at Meaux in Lorayne / and thither called unto them the lords of
the land, to treat matters for the common weal of ye same.

In those days was a man of great might in France named Gosseleyn^ / the
which enuyed the foresaid earl Barnarde and other, for certain harms to him
by them done in time be fore passed. In auengynge whereof the said Gosseleyn^
intended to put him and other from the rule of the land, which he knew well
they should occupye while the said two childern had rule of the same.

And this evil purpose to bring to effect / he went unto Conrade earl of
Paris, and showed to him much of his will. And among other things let him
wit, that if Lewys king of Germany might with his help be made king of
France / that he should by him be greatly auaunced. By which means he caused
the said Conrade to take his part / so that he and other of his affynyte when
they came unto the foresaid counsel at Meaux / said that Lewys king of
Germany, was more apt to rule the land of France than any other was. And
also after some writers / these Lewis and Charlys before said were not the
legyttymate sons of the forenamed Lewis Balbus, but gotten in baste of a
concubyne of the said Lewys.

This matter thus debated and argued among the counsel / lastly by most in
number it was agreed, that Lewys king of Germanye should be by ambassade
required to come and take upon him the rule of the land of myddell France.
The which with small request was agreeable / and in short time after came unto
the said city of Meaux, and after to Uerdune. But as soon as the knowledge was
come to Barnarde and other of his affynyte / by counceyle of Hughe and Terry
two nobles of France, the bishop of Orlyaunce with an earl and other were
sent to Uerdune unto the said king of Germany with this message. That if he
were content to take unto him all such part of the prouynce of Lorayne, as
Charlys the Balled kept from his fader Lewys, without more claim of the land
or realm of France / he should gladly have it. And if not, he should abide the
judgment of Mars and his battle. with which offer Lewys was well contented /
and being of it in a suertye, departed again into Germanye.

Thorough that doing, the forenamed Gosselyne and Conrade with other of their
fre^des, were with yt sore dysco^tentyd of the departure of Lewys forsayde. But
the said Bernarde with other of his side, in goodly have after conveyed the
said two children unto the city of Ferrer / and there crowned and proclaimed
them for kings, as wytnessyth master Robert Gaguyne. But the forenamed
Gosselyne and Conrade not leuynge so the matter / sent messengers unto ye queen
of Germanye, co^playnynge them unto her of the unstableness and tymerousnesse
of her lord / whereby he had not alonely lost the possessyon of the realm of
France, but also he had put them and all their friends in great fere and
danger. whereof herynge the queen / in her mind was sore dyscontentyd with her
lord and husband, and as she durst showed yt to him as his reproach and
dishonor. And finally to satysfye the minds of the said Gosselyn^ and
Conrade, she sent into Guyan her brother named Boso / by whose aids and
assystence he was of that prouynce proclaimed king.

Endurynge which troubles / the Danys entered the land, and came unto the
river of Lyger, and robbed and spoiled the country without mercy. wherefore
the kings assembled their people / and gave to them battle nere unto the
river of Uyen. where they dystressyd the said Danys and slew of them.ix.
thousand, and drowned of the^ over that a great multitude in the said river.
After which vyctory by the kings obtained / a new vexacyon and trouble was to
them ascertayned, yt Lewys king of Germany with a great puysaunce was comen
unto a place called Ducy / and to him was gone the forenamed Gosselyn^ and
Conrade with all the power that they might make / and by their ledynge was
from thens conveyed unto Rybemaunt. But how so yt was, for lack of
performaunce of promise made by the said two earls unto the king of Germany
and not observed / he herynge of the kings of France drawing toward him
with strong host, concluded a peace, and returned into Germany. And the two
brethren rode to gyder unto the city of Damens or Demeus / where they divided
the land of France between them. So that Jews held to him the country nere
and about Paris, with the province of Neustria or Normandye / and Charles had
unto his part Burgoyn and Guyan / with promise made and assured on either
party, that either of them should aid and assyste other.

THE.CLXXVI. CHAPTER.
AFter this partycyon between the two brethren thus made / by the means of
Lewys king of Germany the foresaid earls Gosselyn^ and Conrade were unto the
said brethren recouncyled and agreed. And for to them ready word was
brought, y^ Bose before named king of Guyan had won the city of Uyen / and
therein left his wife while that he occupied ye hills and mountains being
there about: they jointly assembled their knights, and sped the^ thither, and
laid their seage about the city. But during this syege the Danis often
wasted ye land of France. wherefore Lewys the elder brother, departed from that
syege / leuynge there his brother Charlys. But or the said Lewis might wyn to
the said Danys, they as tyrauntes and cruel enymyes to Crystes faith, had
spoiled many chyrches and temples, and a monasterye of saint Peter in Corby,
and thrown yt down to the ground. After which vile and cruel deed by them
done / Lewys gave unto them battle, and slew of them great number, and chased
the remanaunt.

But after this vyctorye ensuyd a great wonder. For when the christian had as
before is said chasyd the pagans or Danys / they returned as confused and
dysparkled, like as all the host of Danys had them pursued / so that well
was him that might run fastest, and hyde him self from the danger of his
enymy. For yt was thought to them and apparent to their sight, that their
enymyes followed at their backs with all kind of wepyn / and yet followed the^
no man. The which fere and flight of French men, as says mine author, was
sent to them by dyuyne purueaunce / for so myche as they so often before time
had won the price of their enymyes, and had not therefore given due thank unto
god, but referred yt to their own strenghtes and virtue.

Then the Danys herynge of this dysparklyng of the christian host / reassembled
their power and ppayred them to new fight. wherefore ye king called to gyther
his knights, so as before is said dysparkled / and met with them nere unto
the above named river of Lyger. But when both hosts were within a days journey
/ the king was aduysed by some of his cou^sayll, yt he should not as then
fight with the^. For the which cause he yode unto Compeynge, and there kept the
feast of Crystemasse.

And while the king was lodged in Co^peynge / he delyueryd his host unto a
noble man of his land named Theodorych / willing him to go again the Danys.
Of whose exployt or speed mine authoure makes no mencyon / but says that
soon after the foresaid feast, the king spedde him to Turon^ / where he sent
to raise the Bryto^s of little Britayn to with stand the foresaid enymyes.

In the which passetyme he was there taken with a maladye, and from thens in a
lytter carried unto saint Denis, where he dyed and was buried. Or as says
master Gaguyn, he dyed at Turon^, and was after conveyed unto saint Denis, and
there buried. But for all writers join the reygn of these two brethren in one
/ therefore I will now show unto you the fine or conclusyon of the other
brother called Charlys or Charlemayn / the which all this while mayntened the
syege about Uyenne, where his brother as before is touchyd left him. To whom
the lords of France sent in all haste, gyuynge to him knowledge of the death
of his brother / and also of the great danger that the land was in by reason
of the Danys. whereof when the said Charlys had thus wyttynge / he left a
part of his people at the said syege, and with the other deal he sped him
toward Champayne, for so much as he was enfourmed that the Danys were drawn
toward that cost. And as he was in his journey / word was brought unto him
that Uyenne was delyueryd unto such persons as he had there left to
maynteyne the syege.

And after this came a another messenger / which showed to him that the Danys
had destroyed diverse chyrches in Champayne and other places / and how the
bishop of Meaws that again them had ladde an host of people, was of them
slain, and his people chasyd / and over this at the foresaid river of Lyger
an other host of Danis, with their leder called Hastynges was assembled. The
which in that parties wasted the country as the other in other places did /
which somdeale apasled the heart of the king Charlys. How beyt by the
comfort that he had daily received from the lords of France / he kept on
his journey, and made toward the next of his enymyes.

But when he drew nere unto them / were yt for his own cowardyse, or of the
counsayll of his lords / he fell to a communycacyon of peace. And finally
concluded that Godfrey the prince of Danys, to confess the faith of Christ and
to be crystened / should enjoy the hole prouynce of Fryse. And with in the
same / he with his Danys to inhabyte them.

The which condycyon of peace was the beginning of great sorrow and loss
unto France, as after shall appear. For all be yt that the said Godfrey to
deceive the Frenchmen, showed outward countenance to be christian man for a
while / he shortly after with an host of.xl. thousand Danys, entered the
land, wasting the country till he came to Paris / and laid there his syege
about the same city. But by the arch bishop of Paris then named Iosselen^,
and the inhabytaunces of the same, the city was manfully defended / so that he
with his Danys was feign to break his syege / and from thens yode to the city
of Laon^, and wan yt by strength / and after yt spoiled and robbed, and after
brent. And fro thens to Soysons in pyllynge and destroyeng the country as they
went, in so cruel wise, that the bysshoppes and prestys fled from their
chyrches, with relyques and anournamentes or orname^tes belongyng to the same /
as the bodies of saint Germanye, saint Remigius, and diverse other.

In ye time of this persecucyo^ / like as the land of England was in great
danger, so also was the land of France / by mean of these pagans or
myscreauntes Danys. The which resortyd from that one realm to that other /
and releued them self in that one land, when they were chased out of that
other. But one myshappe among other befell in France at these days. For
Charlys their king was taken from them in such wise, that no writer leueth
of him any mencyon how he dyed, nor when he dyed / nor no mencyon is made in
the french cronycle nor of mine auhoure, how long while he and his brother
Lewys reigned. All by Uyncent historyall, and Antoninus, which grounded him
upon the said Uyncent, and Iacobus Philippus say / that these two foresaid
brethren reigned together and alone, by the term of.v. years without more.

And the french cronycle and also mine author sayen, that Lewys dyed without
heir / and that Charlys left after him a son, which was named Lewys, and
after for his simple deeds surnamed in laten Nihil faciens, or in french Ryen
fezant / which is to mean in our speech naught doing.

But who that lysteth well to aduertyse and remember the order of this cronycle
/ he shall find in this latter saying some dyscorde. For where yt is said
that this Charlis should leave a son after him, to my yt seems, that
considering his youth he should not be of any lawful age to get a child.
For by all lyklyhode of conuenyence of the storye / if all be veryfyed as yt is
before declared / he could not pass ye age of.viii. years at the most.

wherefore yt must follow of a congruence / that other they reigned longer
time, or else this child or heir Lewys above named, was the son of some
other man. But to follow mine author I shall proceed as follows.

THE.CLXXVII. CHAPTER.
LEwys the fourth af that name, and son of Charlis as before is said /
began his reygne over ye Frenchmen, in the year of our lord.viii.
hundred.lxxx. and.vi / and the.xiiii. year of Aluredus then king of England.
Of this Lewys yt is testyfyed of diverse writers, that he should enamoure him
self upon a menchon of the monastery of Chyell, and her draw out by force,
and marye her unto his wife. For the which deed and other, he purchasyd the
above said name / and was called Lewis naught doing.

In this time the Danys, contrary to their promise before made / made new war
within the land of France. wherefore the Frenchmen having little hope in their
king / sent unto Charlon or Charlys ye emperor, son of Lewys king of
Germany as before is showed / requyryng him in all humble wise to vysyte ye
realm of France / and to defend yt from the persecucyon of the Danys.

In these days also was living in France the forenamed Hugh / which as ye
before have herd / maynteyned the quarrel of Lewys and Charlys last kings,
again Lewys king of Germanye. The which Hugh of some writers is called Hue le
grau^d, that is Hugh the great. This man gaderyd an host of Frenchmen, and
gave battle unto the Danys, and slew of them a great number.

It should seem by the writers of the french storye, that these noble men of
France, as this Hugh and other, should have the rule of the spyrytuall
possessions of abbayes and other houses of relygyon. For of mine Author
master Gagwyne, they are in laten named abbates / and in the French book
abbis, which is to mean abbottes.

And also yt is testyfyed of the said writers / that this Hugh and Robert earl
of Paris, were the first that left the dystrybucyon of those spyrytuall goods
unto their knights / and gave over that name of abbotte, the which in some
other estates continued till the days of Roberte king of France.

Then yt folowyth, according to the request made unto the emperor as above is
showed / he gathered a strong host of Italyons, and parced the land of
France / and bare him so vyctoryously again the Danys, that he forced them
to obey to all their former promise and condycyons. But Eusebius and other yt
wrote the acts of the emperors / sayen, yt this Charlis which they name the
third of y^ name, and also Grossus, yt is great / subdued the Danys of France,
and compellyd their leder or prince named there Rodefredus, to take the habyte
of Crystes relygyon, and received him at the could wa / ter. In which time or
soon after (whereof ye time is not duly ascertayned) dyed the forenamed king
Lewys surnamed naught doing / when he had reigned after most writers viii.
years / leuyng after him a son named Charlis, yt which after was surnamed
simple. But for he was to young to take upon him such a charge / the lords put
him under good and conuenyent guydynge / and chase an other as follows to
guide ye land till he were come to his laufull age, which was named Eudo.

THE.CLXXVIII. CHAPTER.
EUdo the son of Robert earl of Angeowe / began his reygne over the French
men, in the year of our lord.viii. hundred.lxxx. and.xv / and the.xxiii. year
of Alurede then king of England.

ye shall understand that the above named Robert earl of Angeow was as tutor
and guyder unto the forenamed kings of France Lewys and Charlys / and lastely
was slain of the Danys. The which Robert left after him.ii. sons, Eudo and
Robert. which Eudo for the great fame that he was of, and also for ye great
troth that in him was prouyd and known / ye lords of one assent chose him to
be king of the land for the term of his life. And as affermeth the french
book and other he was crowned of walter then archebyshoppe of Senys.

How be yt this is somdele doutfull to be given credence unto, for diverse
reasons that thereunto might be made. Master Gagwyne says, that he has seen
some authoures, that testyfye this forenamed Charlis the simple, to be the
lawful son of Lewys Balbus / and the foresaid Lewys and Charlis late kings
of France, to be the bastard sons of the said Lewys Balbus.

Then to follow the matter, this Eudo in co^syderacyon that the said Charlis the
simple was insuffycye^t to guide the land, he was put under the guydyng of
this said Eudo / and he was made king in his stead. The which myghtly
defendyd the land from all danger of enymyes. And over yt he caused the said
Charlys the simple to be noryshed and brought up with most dylygence / so
that he was informed and exercysed with all virtues doctrine, and other things
necessary unto a princes son. And finally when this noble and virtuous knight
Eudo knew yt he should dye / he called before him the lords and nobles of
France / yt which he charched by solemn oath, that after his death, they
immedyatly should crown Charlis for their king / and dyed soon after, when he
had reigned as affermeth authors by the term of.ix. years.

Anglia. THE.CLXXIX. CHAPTER.
Edward surnamed the elder and son of Aluredus / began his reygne over ye more
part of England, in ye year of our lord.ix hundred and one / and the.vii. year
of Eudo then king of France. This was lower then his father in letter and
conning / but he was higher in honor and worship. By his first wife he had a
son named Ethelstane, the which was king after him. By his second wife he had
two sons Edredus and Edwynus / and vii. daughters. And of ye third wife he
received two sons, Edmunde and Edrede / and two daughters Edburga and Edgina.

The first of these.iii. wyfes hight Edwyna the second hight Edgina / and the
third was named Ethleeswyda. Of ye forenamed.vii. daughters, which he had by
his second wife / one named Alunda or Almyda, was married to the first Otto the
emperor. And a another named Algina, was married to Charlis the simple king of
west France. And the yo^gest of his daughters as says Policronica / he wedded
unto Lewys king of Guyan. But thereof speaks nothing the french cronicle. He
set his sons to scole / and his daughters he set to woll work, taking
exemple of Charlis the conquestour.

By authoryte of Formosus the pope, he made.vii. bishops in Enlande. whereof
he ordained.v. in west Saxon, one in southe Saxon, and one in Mercia at
Dorchester. He also for that the munkes of wynchester said that his father
Alurede walked / caused him to be removed unto the new abbay. About the.v. year
of his reygne Clyto Ethelwaldus a nere kynnesman of his / rebellyd again him,
and occupied ye town of wymborne besides Bathe / and took thens by force and
nun / and went thens unto the Danys dwelling in Northu^berlande, and excyted
them to rise again king Edward. But the king pursued him so sharply, that he
was constrained to leave the country / and sailed into France, and left the
nu^ne behind him / the which the king caused to be restoryd again to the
house yt she was taken fro.

The next year following, the said Clito with his company landed in eest
England, and gaderyd to him ye Danys of that country, and with their aid
destroyed and pylled the country about Crekynforde and Criklade. And then
passed ye river of Thamis and spoiled the land to Bradenestoke / and so from
thens returned into eest Anglia, yt is Norffolke and Suffolk.

The king followed his enymyes and spoiled of their lands, which they held
by composycyon from the river of Owse, to the bordure of saint Edmundus land
/ commaundynge his knights of his host that none should dragge or tarry after
his host, for fere that they were not beclyppyd of their enmyes. But the
Kentyshe men, which trusted to myche in their own strength, dysobeyed that
commandment. wherefore the Danys awaytynge their pray / fill upon them by
bushementes, and slew the more party of them, wherwyth the king was sore
dyscontentyd.

Soon after both hosts met. where after long fight Clyto with many of the
Danys was slain, and the remenaunt constrained to seche peace / the which was
granted upon certain condycyons, that they should hold them within the
bounds to them lymytted / and over that pay yearly a certain money in way
of trybute.

After which peace with them stablyshed / he repaired cytyes, towns, and
castellys, that by the said Danys were shatered and broken.

And about the.viii. year of his reygne / king Edward repaired the wallys and
also the city of Kaerlyon, that now is called Chester. To the which were great
helpers Etheldredus duke of Mercia, and Elfleda his wife, daughter of Alurede
as before is showed, and suster of this king Edward. And that done the king
builded a strong castle at Herforde in ye egg of walys. And he enlarged so
greatly ye walls of Chester / yt the castle which before time was with out
the wall, is now within.

And the.ix. year of his reygn / Etheldredus duke of Mercia by cou^sayll of his
wife translated ye bones of ye holy king Oswald, from Bradony to Gloucestre /
and there builded a fair monastery in the worship of saint Peter.

In the.xii. year of king Edwardes reygne / the Danes repenting them of their
couenauntes before made, myndyng and ente^dyng ye breche of the same /
assembled an host and met with ye king in Staffordeshyre, at a place called
Toten halle, and soon after at wodenesseylde. At which.ii. places the king
slew two kings, two erlys, and many thousands of the Danys that then occupied
the country of Northumberlande.

And soon after dyed the noble man Etheldredus duke or earl of Mercia or
myddell England. After whose death, the king for so myche as he had often
prouyd her wisdom / he took the rule of that country to his wife Elfleda,
London alonely exceptyd, the which he took under his onwe rule.

THE.CLXXX. CHAPTER.
OF this noble woman Elfleda, if I should show all the virtues, yt should ask
a long time and leisure. But among other of her noble deeds / she builded and
newly repaired many towns, cytyes, and castellys / as Tomworth beside
Lychefeld, Stafforde, warwyke, Shrowesbury, watrysbury, Eldysbury, in the
forest beside Chester, that now is over turned and destroyed. Also she
builded a city with a castle in the North end of Mercia upon yt river
Merce, that in those days was named Runcofan^, but now yt is called Runcorn^.
And she also builded a bridge over the river of Seuern^, which is or was named
Brymmysburye bridge. This strong virago favor of cytezeyns and fere of
enymyes / halpe myche the king her brother, in gyuynge of counsayll and
building of cytyes. Of her is told that when she had ones assayed, the woe
and sorrow that women feel and suffer in berynge of a child, she hated the
enbrasynge of her husband ever / and took witness of god and said, that yt
was not co^uenyent or semely to a kings daughter to use such flesshely
liking, whereof such sorrow should ensue or follow.

In the.xiii. year of the reygne of this Edward / a great navy of Danys, which
in time of Alurede were driven into France, now returned again and sailed
about the west country / and landed in diverse places, and took prays, and
went to their ships again. And at one time among other they robbed and
spoiled at a place called Irchynfeylde, and took a Brytyshe bishop and carried
him to their ships, and finally raunsomed him at.xl. pound. But as soon as
king Edward had knowledge of their being / he assembled his knights, and sped
him westwarde by land / and sent a another host by ship to encounter the
Danys upon the sea. whereof heryng the said Danys fled into Irlande / and by
that course voyded the land and hands of the king.

Then the king for strengthynge of the country / made a castle at the mouth
of the water of Auene, and a another castle at Bokyngham / and the third fast
thereby, yt is to mean upon either side of ye river of Owseone. And after
returned into Northamtonshyre and Bedfordshyre, and faughte there with the
Danys of these cou^tres / and at length subdued the^ with their leder or duke
called Turketyllus.

About the.xvii. year of this kings reigned / Elfleda lady of Mercia before
minded, gaderyd her knights. And where the Brytons or walshe men brake into
the land about Brekenoke, she with her people wythstode them / and among
other prisoners and prays, took there the queen of walshemen.

And the year following king Edward builded or newly reedyfyed the towns of
Towsetour and wygmore / and destroyed the castle that the Danys had made at
Temesforde. And that year the noble Elfleda wanne the town of Derby from the
power of the Danys / where they put her in such adventure, that four knights,
which were called Gardeyns of her corpse, were slain fast by her.

And ye.xviii. year of his reygne dyed that noble pryncesse Elfleda in the
month of June / and was buried in the monastery of saint Peter, which her
lord and she before time had builded within the town of Gloucetour as above
is touched, over the bones of that holy king saint Oswalde / which monastery
was after thrown to ground by the Danys. But Aldredus bishop both of york
and of worcetour, made there an other / which is now chief house or abbay of
that town or city.

when Elfleda was deed / her daughter named Elswyna held the lordeshyppe of
Mercia a season. But for the king co^sydered yt to be to great a thing for
her to rule / he therefore dyscharged her thereof, and joined it to his
kyngedome, but not all without strife. For diverse towns kept of the king for
a time / as Snotyngham or Nothyngam, Tomworth, Derbye, and other / supposing
the daughter would have defended them as the mother by her life had done. But
finally they came to the kings subieccyon.

Henry archbyshoppe of Huntyngdon, that wrote myche of the chronicles of
England / in praise of this noble woman Elfleda made diverse dytyes / of the
which some ben expressyd as follows.

Cesers tryu^phes were not so myche to praise,
As was of Elfleda, that sheldes so often did raise
Again her enymyes this noble ven queresse
Uirago and made whose virtue can I not express.
WHen Edward had reconciled these foresaid towns / he then builded a new
town for again the old town of Nothyngham, on the south side of the river of
Trent / and made a bridge over the said river between the said.ii. twones. And
as wytnessyth Policronica, the year following in the said town or city of
Notyngham, two kings, that is to say, of Scotland and walys yeldyd them unto
king Edward. The cause why, nor of war between them to be continued, is
not of him expressyd.

How be yt diverse books of writers of chronicles of England, as of Marianus the
Scot, wyllam of Malmesbury, Henry of Huntyngdon, and other yt is showed that
this Edward subdued the kings of Scotland and of Cu^brys, about the.ix.
year of his reygne. And of the said authors yt is also testified, that about
the.xx. year of the reygne of the said Edward, these said kings of Scotts
and Cumbrys, should chose this king Edward for their chief lord and patron,
which should be about this season before expressyd.

Then this noble prince Edward, after these things set by him in an order /
he in the north end of Mercia by the river of Merce, builded a city or
town, and named yt Thylwall, and strengthyd yt with knights. And after
repaired the city of Maynchester / that sore was defaced with war of ye
Danys. After which notable dedis by ye puyssaunt prince fynyshed / with the
marriage of his chylder and many other, which I omytte and pass over for
length of time: finally this noble man dyed, when he had reigned with great
travail by the term of.xxiiii. years at Faryngdon / and from thens conveyed
to wynchester, and there enteryd in the monastery of saint Swythyne / leuyng
after him diverse sons as before is showed, of the which Ethelstane was eldest.

Francia. THE.CLXXXI. CHAPTER.
CHarlys surnamed the simple, and son of Lewys the.iiii. or Ryen Fayzand /
began his reygne over the Frenchemen, in the year of our lords incarnacyon, as
wytnessyth Iacobus Philippus and other.ix. hundred and.iiii / and the third
year of Edward the elder than king of England. In time of whose reygne the
Danys, which contynuelly over the term of.l. wynters / that is to say from
ye x. year of Charlys the Ballyd sometime king of France, unto ye said days,
had wasted and spoiled the land, not wythstandyng ye agrementes made between
Charlys the emperor and them, as before in ye story of the.iiii. Lewys is
showed: yet they with great hosts aryued in the country of Neustria or
Normandy, and robbed and spoiled the country before them, and slew the people
thereof without pytye / and from city to city kept on their journey till
they came unto the city of Roan. whereof the bishop being in great dread, of
subuersyon of the city and destruccyon of the christian people with in the same
/ delivered the city by appointment, that he with ye people might depart
thens without bodily harm / which unto the said Danys was a great strength,
and hurt to the land of France.

Of this host of Danys was ruler and leder a myscreaunt named Rollo / the
which was a man of low birth, but he was of great strength. The which when
he had a season rested him and his host, and refresshed them within the city
of Roan / he than set forth his way, co^mau^dyng his vawnewarde to keep their
journey toward Paris. And for ye more speed to be made / he shypped his Danis
right there / and one part he sent by the river of Sean, the second by the
river of Lyger or Leyr, and the third by the water Geronde.

Than the Danys that passyd by the river of Leyr came at length to the cite of
Nauntes / and wan that city by strength, and slew therein much people. And
the bishop of the same named Guymerte being at mass, they slew at the
altar. And when they had spoiled that city and the country there about / than
yode they to the city of Angiers, and brent and robbyd it most cruelly. And
that done they yode unto Towers, and laid syege to that city. The which by
the presens of the holy body of saint Martyne, which at that time was within ye
city / it was a while preserved. But soon after the munkes feryng the sword
of the Danys fled the city secretly, and took the body with them. And soon
after the Danes had the town at their will / and brent the abbay before the
town or sta^dynge without the town / and spoiled and robbed the city and
towns thorough the country of Guyan.

when the Danys had thus subdued the more part of Neustria or Normandy. They
with their duke Rollo by ye river of Seyn^ drew toward Paris. And first
entered the lands of Burgoyne and Auerne and in effect to Senons. whereof
heryng the monks of the monastery of Flory, where the body of saint Benet
than rested, they took that holy treasoure and bare it unto Orlyaunce / and
laid it in the church of saint Anyan, till the persecucyon were over passed.

Of this monastery was at that days living a defensour by promise before
made, whose name in latyne is called Sigillosus, and in French Sigillophes an
earl / which was taken for patron of the same abbaye. To whom in the night
following that the monks were fled, as before is said / saint Benet appeared,
and blamed him yt he none other wise had defended ye place of his Sepulture.
with which visyon the said earl being feryd / gaderyd unto him upon the day
following such small power as he than might make, and set upon the Danys and
drove them back, and slew of them a great number. And ye prays that he there
wan, he offered to god and saint Benet / by whose prayers he knew well that
he opteyned that vyctory.

In time yt the Danys thus persecuted the country of France, and the king was
not of power them to resyst / for so much as Charles knew well that the bishop
of Roan named Frank, was in good favor of Rollo: he therefore sent him in
ambassade to the said Rollo, to require a true or trewse for three months /
the which was granted. The which trewse ended, the said Rollo beseged the
city of Chartrys. During which syege / the duke of Burgoyne named Richard
with his retynue assailed the Danys. In time of which fight Ebalde earl of
Poytowe was present, and drove back ye Danys. wherwyth the bishop of the
city being encoraged / took with him ye smock of our lady, which at those
days was kept there with great reverence / and with the cytesyns and other
issued out of the city, and made upon the Danys a great scomfyture So that by
the prowess of the foresaid two temporal lords, and assystens of this
spyrituall man / Rollo was compelled to fle and forsake his siege, and not
without huge slaughter.

Rollo then having great dysdayne and dyspleasure of this overthrow and
scumfyture of his Danys / reassembled them that were abroad scatered, and
commanded the^ to over ride the country, and to destroy it in all that they
might. After which commandment thus to them given / this cruel people slew
man, women, and child, that were not apt to do to them service / and brent
the chyrches and temples, and rauyshed virgyns as well religious as other / So
that miserable it was to behold the great abhomynacyon of these tyrannous
Danys, that brent, robbed; and slew that innocent people without mercy.

The lords and commons thus beset with cruel fury of their enmyes, assembled
them by sundry co^panyes and went unto the king / showing unto him their
mysery, and blamed as they durst his ferefulnesse and negligence, that he nor
none for him otherwise wythstode the crueltye of the Danys / that had
destroyed a great part of his land.

THE.CLXXXII. CHAPTER.
CHarlys herynge this exclamacyon of his subgettes, and co^syderyng his lack
of power to withstand that malice of his enemies, was right pensyfe and heavy
in his heart / and casting in his mind many sundry ways, he lastly
determined to send again the above named Frank bishop of Roan unto Rollo
prince of Danys / showing him that if he would renye his pagan law and become
a christian man, he would to him give in marriage Gylda his daughter, with the
hole country of Neustria for her dowar.

when Rollo had received this tidings from the king by the mouth of his friend
Frank / he somewhat attempred his fury and crueltye, and condescended to a
true, by the counsel of his lords for ye term of.iii. months / in the
which time he might have some co^munycacyon with the king, for ferther
process of this matter. So that after it was concluded by the counsel of
both princes / that their metynge should be upon ye river or flode named Ept.
where shortly after the said princes had co^munycacyon the one with the other /
their people standing upon either side of the said river. where it was
concluded, that Rollo should forsake his pagan law, and take upon him the
lyuerey of Crystes baptym / and after to marye the forenamed Gylda, and to
receive with her as is above showed. which conclusyon thus taken either fro
other departed / and shortly after at the city of Roan, all the foresaid
couenau^tes were executed and fulfilled. And when the said Rollo was crystened
/ his name was changed and called Robert, after the earl of Poytowe / which
received him at the font stone.

Of this Rollo or Robert, dyscended lynyally duke wyllyam of Normandy, which
conquered England / as after shall be more clearly showed.

Than this Robert thus crystened, was seized of the country of Neustria / whom
the king created duke, and named him duke of Neustria.

But it was not long after, yt this name of Neustria was changed and called
Normandye / after the name of Normayns, or men coming out of the North / or of
Nor, that is to mean North, and men, which two syllables together make Norman,
or a man of the North.

which Normans or Danys after the exposycyon of master Gagwyne / should be
descended of the nacyon called the Goths. which Goths of the city or men of
Sithica ben descended. The which Gothys in the days of the great Constantine
/ for their feersnesse and cruelty, were driven from their country then by them
inhabyted nere unto the river called Thamys, in ye North parties of Europe /
and now ben inhabyted in Dacia, which in our speech is called De^marke. And
where some men hold an opinion, that Danys and Saxons should be one manner of
people / it may congruly follow. For Saxons ben of the country of Germany / and
contain the land after the saying of Strabo, in the west part of Germania.
From the flode called Uistergus or wysera, unto the famous river called the
Ryne. And Dacia or Denmark is in the North parties.

Than to return to this Rollo or Robert / the story says yt he became a good
christian man. In token whereof as affermeth the French book / he gave unto diverse
chyrches and monasteryes of France great gifts, as well of possessions as of
mouable goods / and continued his pease with the king as he before had
promised.

After which pease thus stablysshed between the king and the Danys / Robert
brother unto Eudo last king of France, contrary his troth and allegyaunce,
seized certain cytyes and other holds of the kings enherytaunce. wherefore
the king seeing that he could not refourme him of that error, by no means of
entreaty or other like ways / assembled an host and met with him in plain
battle / in the which ye said Robert was slain. This Robert had a suster,
which was married unto Hebert earl of Uermendoys / which earl herynge of the
death of his brother in law, by enticement of his wife, as the story demeth,
met the king at the return of the field / and required him in most humble
wise, that he would vouchesafe to lodge with him in his manor called the
castle of Perone.

The king casting no parell, thanked him of his kind request, and granted
to go with him / where he was received and fested with all honor. But when
this earl had conveyed the kings friends and strength from him / he tha^
kept him there as a prisoner or murdered him / so that he never came at large
after. which tidings certainly known / Algina wife unto the said Charlys the
simple mystrustynge the Frenchmen / with few acco^panyed took secret shyppyng
/ and with her young son named Lewys sailed into England, there to be
comforted of her fader Edward surnamed the elder. And thus ended the reygne of
this Charlys the simple / when he had reigned after the saying of Uynsent
hystoryall and other, by the term of xvi. year full / leuynge after him the
foresaid child named Lewys.

THE.CLXXXIII. CHAPTER.
RAdulphus the son of Richard duke of Burgoyne / began his reygne over the
Frenchmen, in the year of our lord.ix. hundred and xxii / and the.xxi. year of
Edward ye elder than king of England.

Here is to be noted that for so much as Algina wife unto Charlys the simple,
was thus secretly voyded ye land of France with her son Lewys / and that
the land might not be with out a ruler / the lords assembled at Paris, and
there took their counsel for the admyssyon of an head or king of the land.
which lords after long debatynge of this matter, finally agreed that this
abouer^amed Radulphus or Rauf. son of the duke of Burgoyne, as above is said /
as next heir to the crown should be admytted for king, and so was admytted.
Of the which little of his deeds are put in memory / except that in the time
of his reygne the Sarasyns entered the land of Burgoyne with a great army, and
did much harm in that duchy. wherefore the king gaderynge his host, met with
them at a place called in latyne Carrolas, and in French Callo the less /
where the Frenchmen were vyctours, but not without great loss of their people.

Than it follows, when this Rauff. had ruled the land of France by ye
space of.xii. years / he dyed with out issue male. And was buried in the
church of saint Calumb in the prouynce of Senys.

Anglia. THE.CLXXXIIII. CHAPTER.
EThelstan^ ye son of Edward the elder, began his reygne over the more part of
England, in ye year of our lord.ix. hundred and.xxv / and the third year of
Rauff. than king of France.

In the first year of the reygne of Ethelstan^ / the holy child Dunstane was
borne in the country of Glastenbury, whose life shone after with many miracles.

This was sometime abbot of Glaste^bury / and lastly archbishop of Caunterbury.
whose holiness and prophecyes are showed at length, in the.vi. chapyter of
the.xvi. title of the work called Sin^ Antonini, and in the legende of the
church also.

In the second year of the reygne of Ethelstane / for an unity and a peace to
be had between the king and the Danis of Northumberland, he married to
Sithyricus their king his suster. But after.v. years this Sithyricus dyed.
After whose death he seasyd the country into his own hand / and put out the
son of the foresaid Sythyricus. And when he had thus accorded with the
Danys of Northumberlande / he shortly after made subject to him Co^stantyn
king of Scotts. But the said Co^stantyne meked him so lowely to the king /
that he restoryd him to his former dygnytye. wherefore the said Constantyne
said in praise of the king / that yt was more honor to make a king, then to
be a king. which act was done by the affyrmaunce of Polycronycon, in the
year of grace.ix. hundred and.xxvi / which then after that saying should be the
second year of the reygn of this Ethelstane. It is testyfyed of Policronica,
that this Ethelstane should marye one of his susters named Editha or Edyth, unto
Otto the first of that name emperor of Almayne, and received from him many
precious iewellys and relyques. But of this speaks nothing the cronicle of
Romans. How be yt yt is showed there, that the foresaid Ottho or Otto had a
wife named Alunda / which as before is said in the storye of Edward the elder,
might be the daughter of the said Edward and of Edgina his second wife. But
Uincentius historialis says / that Henry duke of Saxony, which was father
unto the first Otto / sent unto Ethelstane, requyrynge of him his suster to
mary unto his son Otto. By which reason I may follow, that this Ottho married
the suster of Ethelstane, but not Edythe.

Of these foresaid iewelles sent by Otto / one was a precyouse vessel of
stone called Onechynus / which was of such clerenesse, and also so subtily and
craftily wrought, that yt apperyd to man's sight as grene corn had grown
within yt, and moved and waued as corn does standing in the field. More over
in yt apperyd vynes burgenyng and berynge fruit / and men also to sight
mouynge and styrynge. He also received the great Constantynes sword / wherein
was graven with great letters of gold, the name of the owner. And the hyltes
thereof were coueryd with great plates of gold. And one of the nails was
fastenyd to the cross of the said sword, that Criste suffered with his
passion. But in this report or saying, Polycronycon varyeth from his former
sayng / were he reports two of the said nails to be spent upon the brydell
of the said Constantyne, and the third nail to be cast into a dangerous
swalowe of the sea, as before is rehearsed in the.lxix. chapter of this work.
He also received the spear of Charlys the great, which after the opinion of some
writers, was the spear that Longeus opened with Crystes side. And the baner of
saint Morys, a relyque of great price / with a part of the holy cross, and a
part of the crown of thorn of our sauyoure.

Of the which iewellys king Ethelstane gave a part unto saint Swithunys of
wynchester / and some he gave unto ye abbay of Malmesbury.

I have seen a cronycle of England, which testyfyeth, that this Ethilstan^ was
ye first king that ever was enoynted in this land. All be yt I find thereof
little authorytye / except that Guydo and other testyfyen, that he was crowned
at the kings town now called Kyngestone, x. miles from London, of Athelyne
their archbyshoppe of Caunterbury. But that proves not or argues him to be
the first for that reason. For right so was his fader Edward crowned of
Plemounde archbyshoppe of the said see. But Guydo aforesaid affyrmeth that
Alurede graund fader to this Ethylstane / was enoyntyd king by authoryte of Leo
ye.v. then pope. wherefore it agrees better that he should be the first.

Then yt follows in the story, that about the.viii. year of the reygne of
this Ethilstane, dyed Frystane bishop of wynchester / and Brystane was
bishop after him. Of whom yt is radde, that he sange every day mass for all
Christian souls. And as the bishop Brystane went upon a night about a chirch
yerde, and said his deuocyons for all christian souls, and lastly said,
requiescant in pace / he hard a voice as yt had been a great host of people
saying. Amen.

Soon after Constantyne king of Scotts, brake covenant with king
Ethylstane. wherefore he assembled his knights and made toward Scotland. And
in his way he turned to saint John^ of Beuerley and offeryd there his knyfe
upon the altar / saying that if he returned with vyctorye, he should redeem
his knyfe with a noble price / and that done proceeded upon his journey, and in
co^clusyon scomfyted the Scotts, and brought them again unto dew
subieccyon. And after according to the promise before made / he returned to
york, and so to the church where the corpse of saint John^ of Beuerley lay /
redemynge his knyfe worthily as he before had promised.

In the.vi. chapyter of the.vi. book of Polycronycon / yt is remembered that
king Ethilstane after this subduynge of the Scotts, being with his lords and
famylyers nere unto the castle of Dunbar / prayed to god and saint John^ if
Beuerley, that in that country he might leave some remembrance or token, that
those that then were living, and also such as should come after, might know
that the Scotts by right should be subjects to Englyshmen. And soon after
with his sword he smote upon a great stone standing nere unto the said
castle / with which stroke the stone was ryuen to an elle in length, that in
the time of Edward the third was there remaynyng to be seen. And whyther at
this day yt is so / that I am in doubt.

ye have hard before, that king Ethilstane after the death of Sythericus king
of Northumberlande / seasyd that land or prouynce into his own hands, and
put out his son. which after allied him with Constantyne king of Scotts,
and married his daughter. By whose styrynge and exhortacyon, he gathered a
company of Danys, Scotts, and other / and entered the mouth of Humber with a
strong navy.

whereof herynge Ethilstane, in all goodly haste prepared his army / and at
length met with him and his people at a place called Brymforde, where he had
a great and solemn vyctorye. For as yt is showed in the foresaid chapyter and
book / after the king by help of god and saint Adelyne had defended the
subtle assaute made upon him by night of his enymyes / he upon the morn by
help of his brother Edmunde and Dodo the archbyshoppe, chased his said
enymyes, and slew there Constantyne king of Scotts, and.v. small or under
kings, and.xii. dukes, with the more party of all the strange nacyons at ye
time there gaderyd. which battle should be done by the meaning of the said
Policronicon, about ye last year of his reygn.

THE.CLXXXV. CHAPTER.
IT is also testyfyed of diverse writers, that Ethylstane after this vyctory
thus obtained of the Danys and Scotts, or Scotts and Danys / he also subdued
the North Brytons that dwelled at Herforde and there about / and compelled
them to pay to him yearly for a tribute.iii. hundred pound of silver, xxv.
hundred head of nete, and.xx. pound in gold. But Guydo says that king
Ethilstane caused to come before him at Herforde city the rulers of all the
North Brytayne / and there had with them such communycacyon / that he forced
them to grant unto him as a yearly trybute.xx. pound of gold. iii. hundred
pound in silver, and of heddes of nete.xxv. hundred / with dogs and hawks
to a certain number. After which vyctories he went unto Exeter, and repaired
yt and the wallys thereof suffycyently.

Dane John^ Lydgate a munke sometime of saint Edmundes bury, made a goodly
treatise of this king Ethilstane / showing that he was in so great persecucyon
of the Danys, yt he was constrained to call at wynchester a great counsayll of
his lords. where after long debatyng of the matter, and diverse ambassades and
messages sent about by ye king and the Danys / It was fastly concluded that the
king should puruey him a champyon to fight with Colibronde or Colbronde a
geaunt and Dane, which the Danys had appointed for their cheuetayne. wherefore
the king enserchyng thorough his lands for such a knight, and might none find
/ was in great danger and dystresse and heaviness. And for so much as he well
perceuyd ye man's power failed / he by the advise of lords spyrituall and
temporal fill to fasting and prayer, and co^tynued therein by a certain of
time, with perfyte and charitable devotion.

In time of which said abstynence / a vysyon was showed unto Ethilstane,
co^fortyng him, and also co^maundyng him, yt erely upon the next morning he
should stand at the North gate of the city of winchester and there he should
find among ye porayll / a pilgrim clad in palmers wede, whom he should
chose for his champyon. After which vysyon thus to him showed, he did
accordyngly / and found a man of goodly stature, and somdeale stryken in age,
and clade as he was monyshed by the vysyon. whereof he first gave unto god
thankynges / and after made request to this pilgrim, that he would take upon
him this battle for the defense of the land / which laid for him many
reasonable excuses, as well for his age as otherwise. How be it finally he
granted ye king to fullfyll his request and commandment. And at the day
before lymytted and assygned met in the feld with the forenamed geaunt called
Colbronde, without the gate of ye city in a meadow or pasture called Hydemede
/ where between them two was faughten a long and cruel fight, so that the
king was in great fere of his champyon. But finally by help of god the
pilgrim wanne the honor of that fight / and slew that geaunt that was of
exceeding stature, and thereunto of great and passing strength. which vyctorye
by the pilgrim thus by grace obtained / the king with his barony fette him
into the city of wynchester with solemn processyon, and conveyed him unto the
cathedral chirch of the same / where he thanked god with great devotion, and
offryd there the axe, with the which he had slain the Danys champyon. After
which oblacyon with dew reverence and other obseruances by him and other
fynyshed / the king caused him to be conveyed unto his court, where he tarried
that night with myche danger. And upon the morn erely he made such means /
that he would nedely depart, and yt in the same apparel yt he came thither.
when the king was aduertysed that his pilgrim would so hastly depart / whom
he entendyd to have holden with him in his court, and to have endowed with
rich possessions: he commanded him to be brought unto his presence. And when
he saw he could not cause him to tarry, he required him to show his name /
whereof also he besought the king to pardon him. wherefore the king co^syderyng
his hasty departing, with many other things in him to be considered / was the
more desirous to have of him some knowledge. And for that he was effectuose in
his desire, when the pilgrim perceived that he could not with the kings
pleasure depart without dysclosynge of his name / he said he might not
dyscouer his name within the walls of the city, without the offense of his
conscience.

wherefore the king granted to go with him till he were in the broad feldes.
Upon which grant thus made / the king commanded diverse great gifts to be
to him presented, which all he utterly refused. Shortly to conclude / the
king with a certain of his lords conveyed this said pilgrim unto the towns
end. And when he was thither common / he there required of the performaunce of
the promise. where this pilgrim sitting one his kne / besoughte the king of
his especyall grace, that he would put a part his lords and other, so that he
might show unto him his name only.

which done / he in most humble wise besoughte him, that he would keep his
name secret for the space of.xxiiii. ours. where of by ye king affyrmaunce to
him fyrmely made / he showed unto him, that he was his natural lyege man and
subject, and that his name was Guy of warwike. Of which tidings the king was
very joyous, and offeryd him then of new many rich rewards and gifts. But
all was in vain, for he would nothing receive / so that the king and he
lastely departed with weeping eyes. And after as affyrmeth my said authoure /
not far from warwyke in a wilderness, he purchased by gods purueyaunce a
lodging in a heremytage / where by the term of two years and more he dwelled
and kept an hard life.

And herynge that dame Felyce his own wife fed daily.xiii. poor men for
Cristes sake / he went thither sundry times and fette there his aims / his
said wife then lyenge at the castle of warwyke, not knowing of any man what
he was / till lastely he was visited with so sore sykenes, that he knew well
that he should dye. wherefore he sent his wedding ring unto his wife /
requyrynge her in all haste to come and speak with him. which she obeyed in
humble wise / and sped her unto the said Heremytage with all womanly dylygence,
and fande him deed at her coming / whom she besprent with many a salt tere.
And as she was enfourmed of the messenger as he dyed she buried him right
there. And more over as says my said author he monyshed her by the said
messenger, that she should provide for her self / for she should also alter her
mortal life the.xv. day following. which also she obeyed, and made such
prouisyon, that she was in that place buried by him. All which matter the said
Dane John^ Lydgate affyrmeth, that he took out of the book of Gerarde Cambres^
/ which wrote much of the deeds and stories of the princes of England, as
Policronica and other author testyfyen / and as the said Lydgate in the end
of his said treatise wytnessyth, as by the matter following appears.

For more authorite, as of this matter This translacyon, such as in sentence Out
of laten made by the cronycler Called of old Gerardus Cambre^ce / which wrote
the deeds, with great dylygence.

Of them that were in weste Saxon crowned kings,
Greatly co^mendyd for their knyghtly excellence
Guy of warwyke, in his famous wrytynges.
AL which said treatise is showed at length in meter of viii. stauys, after
the manner of the precedentes, by the dylygent labor of the said Dane John^
Lydgate. The which I have here set in / for so much as yt concernyth matter
that was done in the time of the reygne of this Ethylstane. The which after
the accord of most writers* brought this land again to one monarchye / and
reigned as king thereof by the full term of.xvi. years / and was buried at the
monastery of Malmysbury, leuynge after him no child. wherefore the rule of the
land fill unto Edmunde his brother.

Francia. THE.CLXXXVI. CHAPTER.
LEwys the son of Charlis ye simple / began his reygne over the Frenchmen,
in ye year of our lord ix. hundred and xxxiiii / and the.ix year of Ethelstane
then king of England. ye have hard before in the end of the storye of
Charlys ye simple, how Elgina the queen with Lewys her younger son, was fled
into England to her father Edward the elder. wherefore ye lords of France not
knowing where she with the Child was gone / chose the forenamed Rauf. for
their king. After whose death the said lords of France being ascertayned of
the being of the said Lewys in England / sent unto him the archbishop of
Senys, and Hughe surnamed le graunde / desiring him to restore into France,
and take thereof possessyon.

Then Elgina herynge the message of the lords, and trustyng unto the^ / by
counsayll of her friends made her ready with her son, and sailed shortly after
into France. where she was received with myche honor / and shortly after
crowned her son Lewys king / at the city of Laon^.

This Lewys is named ye.v. Lewys. In the third year of whose reygne fill a
scarcytye of corn and vytayll / by reason whereof ensued a great famyn in so
myche that people voyded the realm, and many dyed for defaut. For as
witnesses the french cronycle / a quarter of whete was then worth.xx. pound.
of ye money / which is of value after sterlynge money.l. s. or there about.
This king beryng in mind the murder and treason done again his father by
Hebert, as before in the storye of Charlis the simple is declared / cast and
ymagined in his mind how he might without shedynge of blood, revenge the death
of his fader / and after many ymagynacyons and thought is reuolued in his
mind, he lastely dyuysed a letter / the which he charged a servant of his to
bring to his presence when he was set among his lords in counsayll. when
king Lewys had compassed this in his mind / he for needs of his realm
called a great cou^sayll of his barony at Laon^ / whyther among the other,
the said Heberte earl of Uermendoys was warned to come. And when the king was
ascertayned of their commynges / he appointed a secret company in harnes to be
in a secret chamber, nere unto the place of the said counsayll / and at
convenient time after yode unto the same, and all his lords with him. And when
he had a season commoned with his lords of such matters as him lyked /
suddenly came one to him and said that a man was common with a letter dyrected
to his grace out of England / the which he commanded to be brought unto his
syghte.

when the king had unfold the letter, and radde a part thereof, he smyled.
whereof the lords being ware purposed the king to have received some
iewyllys or joyous nouellys out of England.

while the king was about to deliver this letter to his scribe or secretory /
one of his lords said unto him. Sir we trust ye have some iocande and merry
tidings out of England, that ye have cause of smilyng. I shall show the
cause to you said the king. There is dwellyngin England a kynnesman of mine
named Harman / the which is a man of great might, and mine especyall friend. He
shewyth me by this letter, that an husbandeman or a vyleyne badde or required
his lord unto his house to dinner / and under the color thereof he slew his
said lord. And for the said Harman thinks the law of that land to
favorable for such an heinous deed / hetherfore writes to me to have mine
advise in this matter. wherefore sens ye be all present / I pray you show to me
your opynyons in this matter. which with one voice said yt the murderer was
worthy to suffer the most shameful and cruel death, and to be hanged and
strangled in a rope. But for ye king would be certaynely enfourmed of the
consentes of them all / he began at the hygest, and so pursued them till he
came to Hebert earl of Uerme^doys / the which allowed the sentence as the other
had done.

Then the king made a token to ye walshemen between him and them before
appointed / so ye anon they were present. and set sure hold upon the said
Hebert. To whom the king said, Hebert thou art the husbondman or vilayne yt I
have spoken of / which slew his lord under color of bidding or gestynge him
in his house. For traytoursly thou dydeste require my lord and father under
thine house or castle of Peron^ / and there not remembrynge the kyndnes to the
by him before days showed, nor thine allegyauntes and truth that toward him
thou should have borne / kept him like a prisoner and lastely murderyd him,
to the great danger again god, and to the world shame. wherefore according
to thy desert, and after thine own sentence and judgment / take now thy reward
and guardon.

After which sentence thus given by the king / the said Hebert was by the
executers ladde unto an hylle without the city of Laon^ / and there most
shamefully hanged. which hill for that cause was named Hebertes hill long time
after.

About this time the second duke of Normandy named wyllyam longa Spata, ye son
of Rollo or Robert first duke of Normandy / was slain by treason of one
Arnolde earl of Flau^dres / for encheson that the said wyllyam aided a noble
man of Pycardy named Herloyn^, again the said Arnolde.

This wyllyam left after him a son named Richard / which at the time of his
fathers death was not of suffycient age to rule so great a dukedom. wherefore
Lewys king of France desirous of that prouynce, which of late days belonged
to his antecessours and progenitors / sought besyly the ways and means, to
have this child Richard under his tuycyon and gydynge. And this to bring to
effect spedde him unto Roan^ / calling there before him the lords and rulers
of the country / having unto them many plesaunt and fair words, in
promysyng to them aid and assystence to revenge the death of their lord and
duke / and in the conclusyon desired of them yt he might have the noryshynge
and bryngyng up of the child, till he came to his lawful age.

which thing thus by the king desired / the lords anon coniectured in their
minds, yt he desired the keeping of their young lord, to ye end yt he might
ye more easily obtain the possession of that dukedom. For the which, the
lords and other of the city were in great rumor and grudge again the king.
whereof he being monyshed, to appeace the multitude / the king took the child
in his arms, and so bare him into the place of the assemble of the people /
and there showed unto them with affyrmaunce of great oaths, that his intent
was only for ye well of the child and for defense of his country, and not to
claim any right or title of the duchy / except only the homage thereof,
which belongs to him by just title.

By mean of which fair speech, the king obtained his purpose, and carried
the child with him into France, not forgetynge the unkind dealing of the
Normans.

when Arnolde earl of Flau^dres understood that to the king of France the
guydynge of ye young child was committed, ferynge yt he with power of the
Normans would run upon him reuengynge of the chyldes fathers death / sent
unto the king x. pound weyghte of gold, whereof every pound co^teyneth.xii.
ounces, and every ounce in value of fine gold xl. s / so that after this rate
his present should be in value to ye sum of.ii. hundred and.xl. pound. All
be yt master Gagwyne says he sent unto him but.xl. mark / besechyng him to
be his good and gracyous lord, and not to give to hasty credence to his
accusours. For he in such wise would declare him self, and deliver unto the
king the murderers of duke wyllyam / he mean whereof he should certainly know,
that he was innoce^te of the said dukes death. And over this he made a friend
about the king, which spoke good words for him, and put in the kings mind
the great hurtes and iniuryes that he and his progenytours had sustained of
the Danys or Normans. By mean whereof this murdour was forgoten / and more and
more the king malygned again the Normans / and to the child he bare not so
good mind as some men thought that he would do.

Upon a day when the king was returned from his dysporte of hunting / a
light co^playnt was brouht to him of the child Richard, of an offense that he
had committed. For the which he rebuked him otherwise then was syttyng to his
honor, and called him opprobryously, and thretened him grievously / and after
that caused him to be kept more straytly, then he before had used to be.

To this child Richard was assygned a master or teacher named Osmunde /
which Osmunde had a famylyer named Iuon^. These two apperceyuynge the kings
indygnacyon that he bare toward the child / studied for his enlargynge, and
lastly cou^saylyd him that he should feign him self syke. The which was done, in
such wise that all such as awayted upon him, supposed him to be very syke,
by reason whereof his kepers took the less cure of him.

whereof Osmunde being ware, and also being sure of the king / made a great
trusse of herbs or grass, wherein he wrapped the child, and so conveyed him
out of the city of Laon^ / and there received him an horse ready for the
journey / and so sped him unto Cosuy, and delyueryd the child to the captain
of that town. And from the^s he rode all night till he came unto Senlys / and
there showed all his doing unto ye earl of that country named Bernard, which
was nere kynnesman unto ye young duke.

THE.CLXXXVII. CHAPTER.
BErnarde having knowledge of the escape of his kynnesma^ Richard / sent in
all haste unto Hugh le graunde earl of Paris, for to have his aid and
assystence. The which without taryeng assembled his knights, and conveyed the
child from Cousy to Senlys or Saynlys to his neuewe Bernarde / where he was
received with much joy and honor.

when Lewys was ascertayned of the escape of Richard, and how he was in the
guydynge of Hughe the great or graunde / anon he sent unto him, gyuynge him in
commandment that he should restore the child to him. The which excused him,
and said that the child was in the keeping of earl Bernarde and not in his.

The king seeing how he was deluded / sent for Arnolde or Arnulfe earl of
Flaundres / which at his commandment counsayled the king to win Hugh le
grau^de with rich behestes or gifts. After whose counsayll worchynge / king
Lewys wylled the said Hugh to mete with him at the cross of Compeyn^, where
the said Hugh shortly after met with the king. To whom the king promised
great part of the duchy of Normandy / with that that he would refuse the
party of the Normans, and take his part again them. By mean of which
promises this earl Hugh was ouercome^ / and agreed with the king to war
upon one part of the country, while he warred upon that other. And forthwyth
receyuyd an army of the king, and spedde him to Bayon^, and made cruel war
upon that country. And king Lewys entryd upon the prouynce of Caux / and
wasted and spoiled that Cost in all that he might.

when Barnarde the Dane, and also Barnarde earl of Senlys, conceived ye
untruth of Hugh le grant, and also the great hosts that they were beset
with / by their counsayles and other they sent unto the king certain
messengers, gyuynge them in commandment to say, that in vain the king
had entered that country with his army / for the city of Roan and all the
province was at his commandment. Besechynge him not to waste nor spoil the
country but to aid and help defend it again their enemies.

Of this message the king was right feign / and forthwith sped him till he
came to Roan, where he was according to his honor received. For the which
cause he sent in all have unto Arnulfe earl of Flanders / monassynge him that
he sease of his wars in Bayon, till he received farther knowledge.

The king thus restyng in Roan, devised his matters at his pleasure / so that
the Normayns obeyed them to all his requests. And for ye good aberynge that
Barnarde the Dane was of again the king / he granted to him the gydynge of
the young duke. And when he should depart / he ordained as his deputye one
named Raoull or Rauf. The which after the kings departure, behaved him so
cruelly to the Normans / that they were very irke of him. And over this the
foresaid Barnard ferynge the kings return, and other more grievous
punysshement than they before had sustained / sent his messengers unto Grolle
king of Denmark than being at Chyerbourk / wyllyng him to assemble his
people / and to make of them two hosts. whereof to send ye one by land, and
that other by water / and so to enter the country of Normandy in wastyng and
spoylynge it / by reason whereof he might bring the king to some
co^munycacyon. which all was done as the said Barnarde had devised.

when the king had wyttyng of the Danys, that with so great a multitude were
entered the prouynce of Normandy / he assembled his host and sped him
thytherwarde / and in process of time came unto the city of Roane. where by
his counsel it was condyscended, that a metynge and friendly communycacyon
should be had between the king and the said Grolle, at a place called in
French Herlycum. where at the day appointed both princes met, with both
hosts standing or having a little dystau^ce of. And while the two princes
were there in communycacyon of the death and murder of duke willm^ / a Dane
markynge Herloyne (For whose causes, as before is showed duke willm^ was
slain) with a spear wounded him so grievously that he dyed forthwyth, which
deed his brother called Lambert with other of ye Frenchmen entendynge to
revenge, with their wepons fylle upon the Danys / which them received with
great vyolence. So that of that a fraye ensued a skyrmysshe / and after the
skyrmysshe a sore battle. For both hosts joined on both sides / and faught
cruelly either with other a long while. But in the end the Frenchmen had the
worse, and were compelled to flee. And the king to save his life fled also /
which by reason of his untrusty horse was taken and kept secret a certain
of time by his taker. But lastly he was discovered and brougth to the city of
Roane as a prisoner.

The king thus being in hold under the keeping of the Danys / Engeberge his
wife making for him great dole and sorrow / took her journey to the king of
Germany, whose daughter she was / besechyng him to provide for the delyuerye of
her lord and husband. But of him had she no socour / but rather dysco^fort /
showing to her that the trowble that her husband sustained he had well
deserved, for his unsteadfastness that he again wyllyam the duke and Richard
his son had used.

wherefore the queen being thus answered of her father / rode unto Hugh le
graunde, besechyng him of help in this great need. The which at the request
of the queen sent unto Barnard earl of Senlys / requiryng to move some ways to
the Danys for the enlargynge of the king. By whose labor and meanys lastely a
counsel was kept at saint Clear upon the river of Ept. where after many
arguments and reasons made / finally it was agreed that the king should be
enlarged till an other day of co^munycacyon / layenge for pledges his son and
heir named Lothayr, the bishop of Senlys, and ye bishop of Beauuayze. which
done the king was set at large, and forth with rode unto the city of Laon.
where he abode the other day of co^munycacyon / which after was holden at ye
foresaid river of Ept. And concluded a peace, which lasted but a short while
after.

This peace thus confermed / Grollo the king of Danys with great gifts was
returned from whens he was desired. And Richard the young duke took upon him
the rule of his own Signory / and grew and increased forthwardly. whereof Hugh
the graunde taking head / and beholdynge his wise demeanure and conuersacyon /
made such labor and means unto Barnarde earl of Senlis, yt he married to him
his daughter named Emmacet. whereof being enfourmed the French king / cast in
his mind this great alyaunce between the young duke and two great perys of
his land / and thought yt these.iii. kn^t in amyte and alyaunce should
dysturbe him when them lyked. whereof he called to him Arnold earl of Flaunders
/ by whose counsel he sent the said Arnolde unto Ottho king of Germany /
requyrynge him of aid to war upon ye Normayns, and to break this affynyte of
this young duke, and of Hugh le graunde, and of Barnarde earl of Senlys / and
for his labor he should have to him and to his heirs the prouynce or lordshyp
of Lorayne.

Ottho with this covetous promise deceived, assembled his knights / and at
the day and place appointed met with the king / and with their people sped
them to Roan, and laid siege unto ye city. And while the kings were occupied
in wasting and brennynge the vylages nere unto the city / to put the Normans
in the more fere, Ottho sent his neuewe with a certain of his people in
secret wise to the gates of the city. But when he was comen to the gate that
opened toward the river of Sayn^, and thought there to win his enterprise /
ye cytesyns issued out upon him suddenly, and gave to him battle / and slew
him and many of his company, and the remenaunt they chased from the walls of
the city.

when Ottho had wyttyng of the overthrow of his men and death of his neuew,
whom he entyrely loved / he made inward heaviness, and cast in his mind how
he might revenge the death of his neuewe. But when he approached the city, and
beheld the strength thereof, with also the fyersnesse of the Norma^des / he
repented him of enterprysyng of that journey / and turned all his hatered unto
Arnolde earl of Flaunders, by whose sterynge and counsel that vyage was
first begone / in so much that he sought the means to bring ye said Arnolde
into the hands of the Normans.

whereof Arnolde being warned / trussed his stuff and harneys secretly, and in
the night stale away / and so returned into Flaunders with his retynew. The
which thing known to the two kings / in as secret wise as they might
departed also from ye siege. But yet thereof their enmyes being ware / pursued
them and slew many of their company. And or the year that this was done in,
had ro^ne his full compass, Lewys the king dyed and was buried in the temple of
the holy bishop saint Remygius within the city of Raynys / when he had
reigned in great trouble.xxi. years / leuynge for his heir a son named
Lothayr.

Anglia. THE.CLXXXVIII. CHAPTER.
EDmunde ye brother of Ethelstan^ and son of Edward the elder, and of
Ethelwyda the third wife of the said Edward / began his reygne over England,
in the year of our lord.ix. hundred and.xl / and the.vii. year of the.v. Lewys
tha^ king of France.

In the first year of his reygne, the Danys of Northumberland rebelled again
him. And for to make their party the stronger / they sent for a prince of Danys
named Aulaffe than being in Irlande. The which brought with him an other
prince or ruler of Danys named Reygnald with a great host of Danys and other
strange nacyons / and entered the foresaid country, and warred upon the next
borders, in wasting and spoylynge the inhabytau^tes of the same.

whereof when king Edmund was warned / anon he assembled his people and sped
him toward ye country / and lastly faught with the two said princes of the
Danys, or at the leest chaced them from town to town till he forsyd them with
all their company of strange nacyons to forsake utterly that prouynce / and
bet down that country of Cumberlande yt had much favored and aided the said
enmyes again him / and took therein great prays, and divided them among his
knights. And ye done / other for the good service that Malcolyn^ king of
Scotland had in this vyage done unto the king, or for the trowth and
allegyaunce that he in time following should bear unto him, or for both / the
king gave there to the said Malcolyn^ the country of Cumberlande, and seized
all ye resydue of the kingdom or lordshyp of Northumberlande, and joined it
unto his own kingdom.

But yet ye Danys returned again in the time of Edredus the next king as
after shall be showed / so that as yet the fine or end of this kingdom is not
accounted.

In this Edmundus days the author of Polycronyca says, that when Edmunde
had ended his journey, and set that country in an order / he took with him
the bones of the holy abbot Colfrydus, and of that holy abbess Hylda, and
brought them unto Glastenbury, and there shryned them. This Colfryde was
abbot of Bedas abbey, or of the abbey of Gyrwye / and Hilda was abbess of
Stenshalt or whytby. And as affermeth ye said author, both places ben in ye
North parties of England.

This king Edward had a noble woman to wife named Elgina / of whom he
received two sons named Edwyne and Edgar.

And as testyfyeth Henry archedeke^ of Huntyngdon / this Edward had often war
with the Danes / the which as he affermeth held than many good towns in
myddle England, as Lyncoln^, Nothinghm^, Derby, Stafforde, and Laycetour / ye
which by his knyghtly manhood he wanne from them. And by the help of holy
Dunstan / he amended many things within his realm yt had be^ long time
misordered by mean of ye Danys.

Of the end or fine of this Edmunde diverse opynyons there be. For Marianus the
Scot says, that while this king Edmunde endeuered him self to save his sewer
from the danger of his enemy, that would have slain him at Pulkerchyrche /
the king in ryddynge of the fraye was wounded to the death, and dyed shortly
after.

But wyllyam de regibus says, that the king being at a feast at ye foresaid
town or place, upon the day of saint Augustyne / espied a felon syttyng in
ye halle named Leof, which he before time for his felony had exyled / and
lept over the table and plucked that thief by the here of the hedde to the
ground. In which doing the said felon with a knyfe wounded the king to the
death / and also with the same knyfe wounded many other of the kings servants
/ and at length was all to hewn and dyed forthwyth. If this be true / it
should seem that kings at those days used not the honor that they now have
and exercise. But which of these two means was used in the kings death / by
agreement of all writers this king dyed, when he had reigned.vi. years and
more / and was buried at Glastenbury the which before he had sumptuously
repaired / and lafte after him two young sons, as before is remembered, Edwyne
and Edgar. But for they were to young to rule the land / therefore ye rule
thereof was committed to Edredus their uncle and brother to their fader.

THE.CLXXXIX. CHAPTER.
EDredus ye brother of Edmu^de and son of Edward the elder, and of
Ethylswyda his third wife / began his reygne over the realm of England, in
the year of our lord.ix. hundred and.lxvii / and the xiii. year of the fyfte
Lewys tha^ king of France. The which as before is towched was admytted king by
authoryte of his barony. For so myche as the two forenamed chylderne of
Edmunde, Edwyn and Edgar, were thought to young and insuffycyent to take upon
them so great a charge. The which Edrede was enoynted king of Oddo archbishop
of Canterbury in ye town of Kyngestowne. And soon after he warred upon the
Danys, that then were reentred into Northumberland / or after some writers,
there dwelling under trybute of the king, subdued before of Edmunde his
brother / and bette them down, and caused them to hold and obey unto their
former couenauntes. And the Scotts than began to varye which he also brought
unto due obedyence.

After a certain term / ye Danys of Northumberlande, which ever continued
full of gyle and dowblenesse, not being content to hold the couenau^tes before
made and promises unto Edredus the king / called unto them their old
accessaryes and helpers, and bereuyd from the kings subjects the city of
york and other strong towns and castelles, to the great hurt of the
country, and utter dyspleasure of the king. wherefore he being thereof
aduertysed / in goodly and conuenyent haste assembled his people, and spedde
him thither, and destroyed myche of the land. And in that fury brent the abbey
of Rypon, which the Danys kept for a fortress and strength / and wan from
them myche of the strengthes that they to fore had wo^ne / and brought them
again under his subieccyon.

when this king Edrede had thus spedde his journey, and was retournynge into
England, nothing suspectynge the said Danys / a company of them by the
excytyng of Hyrcus a king or prince of the Danys, the^ folowyd the kings
host, and on this half york fill upon the kings rerewarde, and destroyed
and slew many a man. For the which doing the king was sore amoued / and
turned his people again, entendynge to have destroyed ye country utterly.

whereof the Danys being ware / so lowely meked them unto him, and gave to him
such gifts, that the king refrayned him of the great ire that he had purposed
to them. But among other articles yt he bound them unto / one was that they
should banyshe and utterly refuse their fore said duke or king called Hyrcus.
which thing with diverse and many other granted and fermely bound to keep,
as well by hostages taken as other suertye / the king returned into England
ioynyng this kyngedome to his other. So that here is rekened the end of this
kingdom / which should endure as before is showed in the.C.ix. chapyter of
this work, by the term of four hundred and.ix. years.

In the same year that the king had thus subdued the danys, a strong
sykenesse took him / wherefore he sent for holy bishop Dunstane to come unto
him. The which Dunstane in going toward the king / hard a voice say unto
him, now restyth king Edredus in peace. At time of which voice thus saying /
the horse of that holy bishop fill to the ground and dyed, without hurtynge of
his master.

Then this holy man continued his journey, and fande the king deed at his
coming / whom he buried with great reverence, in the monastery or cathedral
church of the city of wynchester, in the.xxviii. year of his age, and the.x.
year of his reygne, as testyfyeth Guydo and other.

THE.CXC. CHAPTER.
LOtharius the eldest son of the v. Lewys / began his reygne over the
Frenchemen, in the year of our lords incarnacy on.ix. hundred and lv / and
ye.viii. year of Edredus then king of England. This Lothayr by means of
Thebaude or Theobalde earl of Chartres, took party again Richard duke of
Normandye. And for to have again him some grou^dely cause, he sent unto ye duke,
monyshynge him to have in mind, the faith and allegyaunce that the dukes of
Normandye ought to bear unto the kings of France. And for maynteynynge of the
same, and for other matters that he had to speak with him of / he wylled him
to come to a place appointed, where all such matters might have farther
expedicion. All which commandment or request was granted of the duke.

when the king had received this answer from the duke, whereof he demyd before
the contrary / he sent for Arnolde earl of Flaundres, Godfrey earl of Angewe,
and Theobalde before named. By whose counsaylles after many arguments made /
the king agreed to call the duke unto the river of Isayr, and there to betraye
him. At which day and place appointed / ye duke with a co^uenyent company came
unto the said ryuersyde, there abydyng the coming of Lothayr upon ye other
side / which lastly came thither with a great people. whereof when the duke was
ware he fered treason / for the which cause he sent espyes to know of the
kings intent. And they as wise me^ espied all the purpose of the host / and
shortly returned, and showed to the duke that he was in great danger. The
which shortly after apperyd / for the Frenchemen began to pass the river in
great number.

Then duke Rychard consyderyng that he was of so litell might to with stand
the great power of the French host / sent a part of his men to defend the
passage, and with the remenaunt returned unto the city of Roan^. whereof the
king being ware that the duke was him escaped / called again his people, and
with great dyspleasure returned unto Laon.

It was not long after yt the king assembled a great host of Burgonyons and
Frenchemen / and entered into Normandye, and beseged the city of Bayon, and
lastly wanne it by the treason of one Gylberde a smyth belonging unto ye earl
Theobald above named. when the king had thus wo^ne ye city of Bayon / he
betoke the keeping thereof unto the said earl. The which putting therein a
strength of knights / yode unto a castle called Harmauyle, and besegyd yt
with a certain of knights. In which season the king for needs of his realm
/ returned into France.

when duke Richard was ware of the kings departure / he with his people
passed the water of Sayn^ / and costed the country, and fill sodaynely upon
earl Theobalde lyenge at the foresaid syege / and slew of his men vi. hundred
and.xl. persons / and put the earl in such a fere, that he escaped with great
danger, and fled with small company, till he came to his own city of
Charters.

Then duke Richard consyderyng the great malice of his foon and strength of
them / sent unto the king of Denmark then named Erarde, requyryng him of aid
or help for to withstand the malice of his enymyes.

The which Erarde received gladly that message, and promised to them all their
request / and shortly after sent to the said duke a great army of Danys, which
sped the^ by ye see till they came to to the place where the water of Sayn^
falls into the sea. whereof the duke being aduertysed, in short space drew
unto them with his people / and so with them entered the country of ye earl of
Chartris, in wastyng and destroynge it without mercy / and after entered the
lands of France, in pyllynge, robbynge, brennynge, and wasting yt, and slew
ye people with out mercy and pytye.

For this mysery and tyranny thus exercysed by the Danys / ye king being
therwyth confused, sent for the bysshoppes of his land, to have their aduyce.
Among the which the bishop of Chartris being present, was by the hole
counsayll admitted to go to the duke, and know the cause why that he being a
christian man, made such destruccyon of the christian people, and occupied the
land of christian men with so manyfolde harms and seathes / and to conclude the
true or trewce for a certain of time. The said bishop accomplyssynge the
kings pleasure, was answered of the duke / that this vexacyon that he put the
land of France to, was for the iniurye yt the king had before time done
unto him / and yet co^tynued the same in holding from him his city of Bayon,
the which he had given to his great enymy the earl of Chartris. So that in
conclusyon a restraynte of war was granted, upon condycyon that by a day
assygned, the king would apoynte a day of communycacyon / and in the mean time
restore unto him his city of Bayon.

when the king had received ye answer from the duke / he made such means
that ye duke received his city of Bayon, with all dyspeasure forgyuen again ye
forenamed Theobald. which was done by medyacyon of a relygyous munke, as
affermeth the French book. And after the day of metynge was appointed at a
place called Gyndolfoss. where the duke made ordinance for receyuynge of ye
king / and commanded the paynyms and Danis to behave them reverently again
the king and his people / the which was obeyed in all due manner. And ye king
there received with myche honor, had unto the duke many goodly words,
requyrynge him to forget all his former unkindness, trusting to show unto
him such pleasures in time to come, that should recompense all the former
displeasures and unkindness by him before committed. with which fair speech
the duke taking yt without dyssymulacyon, was well satysfyed and content / so
that after assurance of amytye and peace between them stablysshed, either
gyuynge unto other great and rich gifts, they departed as friends. The which
peace continued during their lives.

THE.CXCI. CHAPTER.
LOthayre thus being in love and amytye with the Normans / cast in his mind
how he might win from his neuewe Otthon king of Germany, ye prouynce of
Austracy or Lorayn, yt in time passed was belonging to his progeny tours. And
this to bring to effect / he gaderyd in right secret wise a chosen host of
Frenchemen, and with them passed the country, in such wise that he was entered
the city of Aquisgrani, or any great fame or noise were thereof made. wherewith
Ottho being dysmade / fled for that season, and suffered the said Lothayr for
that time to execute his pleasure / so yt the said Lothayre spoiled the kings
paleys and other places, to the great enrychinge of him and his host. And when
he had tarried there a certain of time, he returned without battle with
great pomp into France.

It is showed before in the beginning of the story of Ethelstane king of
England / that Henry duke of Saxony, the which is meant for Germany, sent unto
the said Ethilstane to have his suster Alunda to mary unto his son Ottho or
Otthon.

ye shall understand this Henry is of some writers admytted for emperor. But
his son Ottho forenamed, was emperor in deed / whose son this Ottho was
abouenamed, and called the second of that name, and emperor after his father,
and son of the forenamed Alunda suster to Ethilstane.

Then this second Ottho emperor and king of Germany, being thus as ye have
hard surprised of his neuew Lothayre king of west France / gaderyd a strong
host and entered the realm of France. And as wytnessyth Gerardus writer of
hystoryes, destroyed the country of Soysons / and lastly came unto Paris, and
brent ye suburbs of that city, and had a great part of his will of the
said Lothayre. But the french cronycle varyeth from this saying / and says
that Lothayr (by the help of the duke of burgoyne and of Hugh Capet earl of
Paris, after ye said Ottho^ had fyred the suburbs of the city of Paris)
issued out of the town and faught with the emperor, and compelled him to
give back and fle. whom the king pursued till he came to the river of Isayr
or Sue / where either host encou^tred with other and faught cruelly. But at
length the emperor was forced to forsake ye feld / and much of his people
slain and droned with in the said river. And so great a number as affermeth the
french storye / that the course of the water was stopped, and ouerflowed the
feldes nere unto the said river.

But this victory not wythsta^dyng as wytnessyth master Gagwyn / the king
contrary the mind of the duke of Burgoyne, and also of Hugh Capet / releasyd
unto the emperor the title and right of Lorayne. The which was cause of
coveting of the realm by the said Hugh, and usurping of the same, as
affermeth the said authoure. which agreement between the two princes
stablisshed and ended, either returned into his own country. After the which
season no notable deed is put in memory of the said Lothayre / so that he
finally sykened and dyed, in the year of our lord.ix hundred.lxxx. and vi,
when he had ruled his pryncypat vygurously by the full term of.xxx. winter /
and was buried in the mynster of saint Remigius in the city of Raynes,
leuynge after him a son named Lewys.

Anglia. THE.CXCII. CHAPTER.
Edredus or Edwyne the eldeste son of Edmund brother of Ethil stane / began his
reygne over England, in the year of our lord.ix. hundred and.lvi / and the
second year of Lothayre then king of France. This Edwyne was crowned king at
Kyngistone or Kyngestowne beside London, of the archbyshoppe of Caunterbury.
The which self day of his professyon or coronacion / broke suddenly from his
lords, and entered a secret chamber, and there occupied him self synfully
with a another man's wife. whereof saint Du^stane having knowledge, rebuked and
blamed him grievously / and caused the woman to be voyded from his bed and
company. whose husband as one author testyfyeth he slew, for to have ye
unlawful use of her beauty / not co^sideryng ye allyau^ce of affynyte of kynred
between them, affermeth ye said author.

Guydo writer of stories says, that Edwyn contrary ye laws of ye church, held
a woman as his co^cubyne. wherefore holy Du^stane accused him unto Oddo
archbishop of Canterbury, by whose power the king was caused to refuse and
forsake the company of that woman. For the which deed Edwyn bare great malice
unto the holy man Dunstane / and at length by his extorte power, banyshed him
his land, and forced him for a season to hold him in Flaunders. And for the
malice ye he bare toward him, he did myche dyspleasure to all black munkes of
England / in so myche that at Malmysbury he put out the monks and set in
seculer prestes in their stead.

It is rad of him that he also took from the church what he might / and
specially from the black monks. In so myche that such precyouse iewellys as
Ethylstane had before received from Othon^ the emperor, given unto
wynchester and Malmysbury / he took them thens and gave them unto alyauntes
and strangers. And thus was not only unkind to god / but also he vsyd such
tyranny, and other unlawful means to his subjects, that lastely they rebelled
again him / and specially the inhabytau^tes of the country of Mercia or myddell
England, and also of Northumbers / and put him clearly from all kyngely honor
and dygnytye, when he had reigned after most writers the full term of.iiii.
years / and was buried after in ye cathedral church of wynchester, leuynge
none heir of his body / wherefore the rule of the land fill unto Edgar his
younger brother.

Antoninus archebyshop of Florence in this work often before minded, among
many miracles and virtues acts, which he in ye.vi. chapter of ye.xvi. title
of his book called Sm^ Antonini / reherseth of this holy man Dunstan^, and
says that when he had understanding of the death of this Edwyn^ by reuelacyon
or otherwise, he made his special prayer to god to know what state the soul
of Edwyn^ was in. To whom after this prayer made / apperyd to the said
Du^stane a great company of fe^des, turmentynge the soul of the said Edwyn,
and ledynge yt unto the places of pain. The which when this holy man had
seen, he fell to great weeping and sorrow / besechynge god with most devotion
to have pytye and compassyon of that soul. And while he was occupied in his
prayer, the said company of fendes returned with yellynge and cryenge /
showing to him that thorough his prayer, the angels of god had byrafte from
them the soul of Edwyn.

THE.CXCIII. CHAPTER.
EDgar the second son of Edmunde and brother of Edwyn last king / began
his reygne over the realm of England, in the year of our lord.ix. hundred
and.lx / and the.v. year of Lotharius then king of France. The which of
diverse writers is wytnessed to be of the age of.xvi. year, when he was admytted
for king / and that he was not crowned king till he had reigned the full
term of.xii. years. which term ended and expyred / he was enoynted and
crowned king in the city of Bathe, upon a whytsondaye / falling then upon
the.xv. day in May, of Dunstane and Oswolde bishops, that one of
Caunterburye, and that other of york.

In the beginning of his reygn he called home holy Dunstane / that before was
exyled of king Edwyne / which Dunstane hard aungellys sing, peace be to the
land of Englyshemen.

Then he made Du^stane that was abbot of Glastenburye, bishop of worceter /
and united and knyt into one, the prouynce and lorshyppes of England, and made
of them one monarchye and kyngedome.

In many places he put away clerks and prestes that lived vycyously / and
set there for them munkes. And as wytnessyth Guydo, Policronica, and other /
he builded and repaired to the number of.xl. houses of relygyon / whereof
Abyndon, Peterburgh, Thorney, Ramesey, and wylton^ were parcel of them.

And at wynchester in the new abbay he put in munkes / where before days
were seculer prestes. The cause whereof was, for so myche as the prestes fled or
neglygently slowthed the dyuyne service of god, and set vykers in their
places, while they lived at their pleasure in other places, and spente the
patrymonye of that church after their sensual will.

Then king Edgar gave to the vykers the land that before belonged to the
prebendaryes / trusting thereby that they would do their duetyes. But yt was
not long to, or the said vycares were as neglygent as the other. wherefore
finally, the king by authoryte of pope John^ the.xiii. of that name, voyded
clearly the prestes and ordained there monks / though some of his prelates
where not therwyth contented.

This Edgar kept such justice, and did so sharp execucyon / that never
before his days was vsyd less felony or robberyes. And for he would have the
ravenous bestes destroyed thorough his land / he caused Ludwallus prince or
king of walys, to yield to him yearly by way of trybute three hundred woluys.
By mean whereof within the space of.iiii. years after, in England and walys
might scantely be founden one wolf a live.

It is wytnessyd of diverse authors that Kynadus king of Scotland dispysed
Edgar, for that that he was little of stature. whereof Edgar being warned /
desired the said Kynadus to dinner, and made to him good countenance. After
which dinner ended / he took the said Kynadus by ye arm, and so with him held
company till they came into ye feldes. where being dysseuered from both their
servants / Edgar drew from under his garment two swords, and desired Kynadus
to take the chose of them, and said to him: now thou have good laysure to a
say thy strength with mine, that before time thou haste so myche despised. And
let us now prove which is more worthy to be subject to other. It is not
sitting for a knight to make great boste at the board, and to do little in
field. when the Scottyshe king hard the king thus challenge him / he knew well
his words before spoken were disclosyd to ye king / whereof he was not a little
abashed. But for apeace ye king / he behaved him so lowely, and gave to him
such plesaunte words, that the king forgave the trespace.

This Edgar among other of his polytyke deeds / used in the somer time to
scowre the sea with certain ships of war. And again ye winter he provided
to lay the said ships in sure havens / and had ready in his own service, and
in his lords houses, a certain number of so^dyours that were always ready when
the king had need of them. And his ship masters were in wages with him
thorough the year / that ever atte^dyd upon the ships, to se that nothing
failed that unto them was necessary. By mean whereof he kept his land in
great quyete fro outward enmyes. And in the winter he used to ride over the
land, and to se how his officers entreated the people. And if any were accused
of extorcyon or other crimes, and again them suffycyently proved / he did
upon all such sharp correccyon.

And for so much as in his days great multitude of Danys dwelled in diverse
places of England, which used many vices / and specially great drinking,
whereof ensued dronkenesse and many other vices, to the evil examples and hurt
of his commons and subjects: he therefore ordained certain cups with pynnes
or nails set in them / and ordained and made a law, that what person drank
past that mark at one drought, should for fayte a certain penny. whereof the one
half should fall to the accusour, and that other half to the ruler of ye brough
or town that the offense was done in.

It is told of this Edgar by diverse authors, yt he upon a season being at
Chester, entered ye river of Dee / and there sitting in a boat, took the rule
of the helm, and caused.viii. kings, which of Guydo are called regul^,
which is to mean small or little kings or under kings, ye which he
commanded to row him up and down the river unto saint Iohn^s church, and
from thens to his own paleys / in token yt he was lord and king of so many
prouynces.

This noble Edgar had two wives. By the first yt was called Egelfleda the
white / he had a son that was named Edward. He was after king, and slain
by reason of his stepmoder Alfrita, called in the english cronycle Estrylde.
And upon his second wife Alfrida or Estrylde he gat a son named Egelredus, or
after the english book Eldrede / which was king after Edward the martyr, as
after shall be showed. And of saint wylfryth, which of some writers is
accounted for a me^chon, he had a daughter named saint Edyth in process of
ryme. But this was of bast and not in wedloke. For as Guydo and Policronicon
testyfyen / this virgyne wylfryth knowing that the king cast to her unlawful
love, put upon her the habyte of a nu^ne, thynkyng thereby to wythdrawe the
kings love. But that not wythstandynge, she was at length brought to the
kings bed. For which deed he was greatly blamed of the holy bishop Dunstane
/ and did therefore vii. year penance, by the heste or bidding of the said
Dunstane. And the forenamed wylfrith after ye child borne lived so relygyousely
/ yt she is now co^pted for a saint in heaven. Of her daughter Edyth yt is
radde, that at lawefull age she was at wylton^ shorn a nun / where she vsyd
more gayer apparel then was thought co^uenyent to her religyon. For ye which
she being blamed of the holy bishop Ethelwolde answered. Gods dome that
may not fail is pleasyd only with conscience. wherefore I trust that under
these clothes may be as clean a soul, as under other ye ben of less
showing. Many virtues ben rehearsed of this holy virgyn Edyth, in the.ix.
chapyter of the.vi. book of Policronycon. The which I pass over for length of
the matter.

THE.CXCIII. CHAPTER.
EDgar thus rulynge the land after the death of his first wife Egelfleda /
word was brought to him of ye beauty of Alfrida or Estrild daughter of
Orgarus earl of Deuenshire. wherefore he sent a knight of his court named
Ethelwold, to espy whether the maid were of such beautye as she was reported
of or not / chargynge him if she were so beautyous, that then he should ask
her to wife for the king.

But this knight having sight of this maiden, was so wounded with the darte of
the blind god Cupyde, that he forgate his troth and allegiaunce, yt he should
owe to his master and sovereign / and returned, showing to the king, that
she was nothing of the beauty that she was reported of, but of mean
fayrenesse as other women were. wherefore he besought the king consyderyng she
was her fathers heir and a good marriage / that he would be so good lord to him
as to write unto her fader, yt he might have her to wife. The why the grace he
obtained, and at length was married unto her.

In process of time the fame of the beauty of this woman sprange so wide, that
lastly yt came to the erys of Edgar. wherwyth the king in mind being sore
dyscontentyd with Ethilwolde, which him had dysceyued / yet kept good
countenance, and made semblaunte, as though he had nothing forced yt matter.
And upon a time as yt were in game / warned this Ethilwolde, yt then was an
earl by reason of his wife or otherwise, that he would lodge one night in his
house / and appointed the day when yt should be. with this monyssyon the earl
being nothing contented / ran home nygh deed for fere, and prayed his wife
of help in that time of need, and yt she would in all that she might make her
self as foul and as unseemly as she could / and showed to her all the resydue
of ye matter. Then ye woman cast in her mind the great dyspleasure yt might
ensue toward her again god, to make that foul, which he had made goodly and
fair / and also to her lord and husband again the king, thynkyng that he
should cause her thus to do, to the end to mock and dysceyue him. wherefore in
consyderacyon of the premysses, she enourned her in most costly and showing
aparayll. And over yt if dame nature had had any thing forgoten or
mysprinted in her / she left not that by womans help might be amended or
reformed / and at the kings coming received him with all joy and gladness.
By which means this young amorous king was soon caught in the dyuylles snare
/ so that he set reason a part, and followed his own sensualyte. And for to
bring his purpose the better about, he kept forth a countenance as he had been
well contentyd with all thing, and desired the earl, that he would with him
ride on huntyng into the wood of welwerley that now is called hoar wood / where
he awaytynge his season and time, struck the earl thorough the body with his
shafte / so that he dyed soon after. And then he married this Elfryda or
Estrylde shortly, and had by her Egelredus as before I have showed. For the
which deed says Ranulf, this Elfrida builded an house of nuns at warwell.
But other authors say, yt was for the slayeng of her stepson Edward.

Also the english cronycle shows that this Ethilwolde was slain by an other
mean and not by the king.

About this time dyed Oddo archbyshoppe af Caunterbury, that was of the nacyon
of Danys. Of him is told a long process in the.x. chapyter of the.vi. book
of Polycronycon. And after him Bryglinus, that then was bishop of wynchester,
was made his successor. But for he was not suffycyent for so great a charge /
he went again to wynchester. And holy Dunstane bishop of London and of
worceter, was sacryd archbysshoppe of Caunterbury / and went to Rome and
received the palle of pope John^ the.xiii. of that name. This Dunstane was
first abbot of Glastynbury, and bishop of London and worceter, and lastely
archbyshoppe of Caunterbury. In his days the order of munkes was religyous and
Full of virtues. For it had relygyous rulers, clear of science and of clergy
/ so that then men were lad as much with other deeds and good examples of
virtuous living as by their famous and virtuous prechyng.

Than Edgare as before is said was crowned king at the city of Bathe, of
Dunstane archbysshop of Caunterbury, and Oswolde archbysshop of york, when he
had ruled this land.xii. years. The cause why it was so long or this Edgar
were enoynted / was as testyfyeth Guydo for his unlawful Lechery, and specially
for the offense done with wylfryde. For the which deed he was of Dunstane
joined to.vii. years penance. The which penance during, he was kept from
the said enoyntement as affermeth the said Guydo. But for what cause so ever
it was / by agreement of diverse writers, he was not crowned till he had
reigned.xii. years.

It is also told of this Edgare, that he being upon a season at the town of
And^uyr / he was enamoured upon a noble man's daughter which was of passing
beautye / and made such means by force or other wise, that the parents were
agreed that the king should have his pleasure. But the mother subtle of wit
bethoughte her of a while / and sent a servant of hers, which was both comely
and fair to the kings bed. In the morning when the day began to wax clear
/ the woman began to stir, and would have departed from the king. But the
king refrayned her and asked the cause of her so hasty departing. For I must
be at my work with my fellows said the woman, at mine hour to keep my task.
And when the king had questyoned with her further, he learned that she was a
bond woman / and asked of the king fredome for y^ nyghtis service. The king
at this had good game / and cherysshed that damsel so after, that he made her
lady of Lords. For these insolent and wanton deeds / it is said that by the
counsel of the holy Dunstane, he builded and repaired so many abbeys and
houses of relygyon as above is rehearsed.

Thus this noble Edgare passing his time in virtue meddled with vice lastly had
wyttynge of the rebellyon of ye Brytaynes or walshmen, wherefore he assembled
his knights, and entered the land, and did them great harm and waste. And
among other prays, spoiled the country of Glamorgan^ / and also took or
spoiled the country of Ono / and took the bell of saint Eltutus, which served
for his church, that was taken by vyolence with other stuff, and hanged it
about an horse neck. In putting it to te^porall service to the dyspleasure of
that saint. But for the vyolent taking thereof, as Ranulf expresses / in an
vndertyde when king Edgar was laid to take his rest, the said Eltutus apered
and smote the king upon the breast with a spear. So yt the king awoke with
that stroke / and charged that the belle should be restored to the church of
Saint Eltutus, and all other things that were taken with the same. But the
king dyed within.x. days after / when he had reigned after most writers the
full term of.xvi. years. And was buried at Glastenbury / leuynge after him two
sons, Edward the martyr and Egelredus, by.ii. sundry wives.

Henricus the hystographer made of him these verses following.

Ayder of the poor, and punyssher of trespass,
The gyuer of worship, king Edgar is now gone
To the kingdom of heaven / which like to praise was
As Solomon, that for wisdom above all shone
A fader in peace, a lyone to his foone
Founder of temples, of monks strong patron,
Oppresser of all wrong, and of justice guardone.
WIllelmus de regibus testifyeth, that in the year of our lord.M.lii, which
was after the death of this noble king Edgar.lxxvi. years / an abbot of
Glastenbury named Aylewarde, dygged the grave of this noble man irreverently.
At which time the body was fou^den hole and so full of flesh, that the body
would not enter into a new cheste without pressynge. By reason whereof fresshe
drops of blood issued out of the same body. Than the abbot foresaid fill
suddenly mad, and went out of the church, and brake his neck, and so dyed.
Than the body was put in a shryne that he before time had given to the place,
and set upon ye auter / with the head of saint Apolinare and other relyques of
saint Uyncent, the which ye king Edgare before days had brought thither and
given to ye house. wherefore it may well appear to all that read this story,
that what living this man was demed of, yt he purged him in such wise by
penance, that he made a seth and amends to gods pleasure.

THE.CXCV. CHAPTER.
IN ye story of this noble prince Edgare, I find written a story, the which is
alleged by the author, yt it should be done by a king of Syrye named Cambyses,
in the time of the reygne of this Edgare. But in that saying he varyeth from
other authors and writers very far / as Uincencius hystorialis, Antoninus,
Ranulphus and other. For all be it the said act was done by ye said Cambyse,
as the forenamed authoure affermeth / yet it was by the said Cambyses executed,
long before the incarnacyon of Christ. For this Cambyses was the son of
Cirus king of Parsys and of Medis, which reigned over those prouynces about
the year of the world.iiii. thousand.lxx, before the coming of Christ
following the account of this work.xi. hundred years and.xxix. But it might
be, yt the white monk that was authoure or writer of this act to the story of
Edgare / was moved for the great justice that he radde in the story of this
Edgare, thynkyng to enhaunce it by the reason hereof / where he says that in
the time of this Ca^byses, a judge was to him accused and conuycte upon the
same accusacyon, that he had given a wrong sentence by mean of taking of
mede. wherefore this Cambyses to the terror and fere of other / commanded the
said judge to be flayne quycke, and the skin to be spread over the place or
stole of judgment / and that done, made the sone of the foresaid judge to
sytte as judge in the place, where his fader before sat / with these verses
written upon the face of the said place of judgment as follows. Sede sedens
ista, iudex inflexibilis sta,
A manibus reuoces munus, ab aure preces
Sit tibi sucerna, sex, sux, pessisque paterna
Qua recedes natus, pro patre sponte datus.


which verses may be englysshed in manner and form as follows. Thou that
syttest in this iudycyall place,
Sytte up right, and hold thine hands from mede,
Thine erys from prayer, and favor from the chase /
Let law be thy gyde, keep justice in thy read.
Thy faders skin, which does thy chayer sprede,
Have in thy mind, fall not to like offense
Lest for thy fault thou make like recompense.


AS I have before showed this act was put in execucyon ye xi.C. year and odd
before the coming of Christ. And syns the said coming or incarnacyon have
expyred.xv. hundred years and more / which all makes over two thousand.vi.
hundred years. In all which time I have not radde in any cronycle of this
land nor other where, that any judge has been put to like sentence. wherefore
it is to presuppose, that in the laws both spyrytuall and temporal / all
judges have well borne these verses in mind, and exercysed them in mynystrynge
of dew justice, as perfytely as their cusshons had been fresshely lyned with
the foresaid skin / and empri^ted so narowly these verses in the book of
their conscience, that they in all their judgments set aside all parcyalyte
and favor / and hold their hands from all medes and rewards / so that now
it is thus with more, or else thus it should be.

THE.CXCVI. CHAPTER.
Edward the son of Edgare and of his first wife named Egelfleda / began
his reygn over this realm of England, in the year of our lord.ix. hundred
and.lxxvii / and the.xii. year of Lothayre than king of France.

ye shall understand that after the death of Edgare / strife arose among the
lords for admyssyon of their king. For Elfryda or Estrylde with Alphrede duke
of Mercia / made diverse friends to have her son Egelredus promoted to that
dygnite, a child of.vii. years of age, that she and he might have the rule of
the land. But holy Dunstane with aid of other bysshoppes, and of the earl of
eest England or Essex / wythstode so that doing, that he crowned this Edward
king at ye town of Kyngestowne / to the grievous dyspleasure of his said mother
Elfryda and other of her affynyte.

In the time of this Edward appeared stella cometa, a blasing sterre / wherafter
ensued many inconuenyences as well to men as to bestes, as sykenesse, hunger,
moreyne, and other like myseryes. But none of this fill in the days of this
Edward, but after his death. The forenamed Alpherus duke of Mercia, which in
all things favored much the deeds of the queen / put out ye monks at
wynchester, that king Edgare as before is showed had there set in / and brought
in for them wanton clerks / or as Ranulphe says clerks with concubynes. But
Dunstane and the earl of Essex wythsayde that doing / and held again the duke
and such as favored his party. For the which arose great strife between the
prestes and the monks of England. For ye clerks that were before time put
out by Edgare / said that it were a wretched and cursed deed, that a new common
company unknown should put out old landysmen from their place / nor it should
not be pleasyng to god yt had granted ye place to the old wo^ner / nor no
good man ought to allow such doing, for the ensample that thereof might
ensewe. The monks said yetCryste allowed another the old dweller, nor yet the
person. But who so would take the cross of penance upon him, and follow
Christ in virtuous living / he should be his dyscyple. For this was holden a
general counsel of bysshoppes and all the clergy of the land at wynchester /
where holy Du^stane held with the virtuous. And while they were there in
great argument for this matter, as diverse writers testyfye^ / a rode there
being or standing in the wall spoke myraculously, and said that Dunstanes
ways was good and true. But for all this the strife seized not. In so much
that a new assemble of the clergy and other was appointed after at a place
called the street of Calue / where the counsel was kept in an upper lofte. In
this counsel Du^stane was grievously despised and rebuked of some unskillful
me^. But yet he kept his opinion grounded upon justice and virtue. And while
they were there in this great dyuysyon and argument, which way should be
admytted and allowed / suddenly the ioystes of the lofte failed, and the people
fell down, so yt many were slain and grievously hurt. But holy Dunstane
escaped, with few other that took his party unhurt. This wonder with the
other, caused silence among them that ente^ded to maynteyne this foresaid
quarrel / so that Dunstane had all his will.

Thus passing the time of the reygne of Edward the king / he came upon a
season from huntyng in the forest or wood after some writers, nere to the
castle of Corfe in ye west country. where he losing his company and
servants, resorted unto the castle before said / where at that time his
mother with her son Egelredus kept her household. when the queen was warned of
his coming / anon she called to a servant of hers which she much trusted,
and told to him all her counsel / showing to him forther how he should
behave him in accomplysshynge of her will and mind. And that done / she went
toward the king, and received him with all outward gladness / and desired
him to tarry with her that night. But he in curteyse manner excused him self /
and for speed desired to drink upon his horse syttyng, ye which was shortly
brought.

And while the cup was at his mouth / the servant before of the queen
enfourmed, struck him to the heart with a sword or a long dagger sharp on
both sides. After which stroke by the king received / he took the horse with
the spores and ran toward the place that he was comen fro, or else such
way as he supposed to mete of his company. But he bled so sore that for
fayntnes he fill from his horse, his one foot being fast in the styrroppe. By
reason whereof he was drawn of ye horse over ways and feldes, till he came to
a place named than Corysgate, where he was founden deed. And for ye manner of
his death was unknown* and also he for king not known / he was buried
unworthily at the town of warehm^, and there rested by the term of.iii. years
after. In which time and season god showed for him diverse miracles / as syghte
to the blind, health to the syke, and herynge to ye defe, with diverse other
which I over pass.

whereof herynge his stepmoder, began to take repentance, and intended to
vysyte him by way of pilgrimage. But how or for what cause she intended
inwardly I can not say / but the horse or be yt she rode upon, might not
nyghe ye place / by a certain space, for betynge or any other thing that to
him might be done by man. But after this by her means he was translated from
the^s to Septon^, that now is called Shaftesbury / and there buried with great
honor. But syn that time part of his body was translated to the abbaye of
Leof beside Hereforde in the edge of walys / and some part thereof to Abyndon^.
And yt is reported that at Shaftesbury remain his lunges / and ben showed in
the place that is called Edwardysstowe.

For the murder of this blessed man / yt is said as before is showed in the
story of Edgar, that his stepmother founded two monasteryes of women / ye one
at Ambrisbury, and that other at warwell. In the which place of warwell in her
latter days, she refusing the pomp of the world, held there a solytary and
strayte life / and ended her life with great penance and repentance, and was
there buried when she dyed.

Thus as ye have hard was this virtuous young king Edward martyred, when he
had reigned after most writers.iiii. years, leuyng none issue / wherefore the
rule of the land fill to Egelredus his brother.

THE.CXCVII. CHAPTER.
EGelredus the son of Edgar and Alfrida or Estryld his last wife / began
his reygne over England, in the year of our lord.ix hundred and.lxxxi / and
the.xxvi. year of Lothayre then king of France.

This is named of some writers Etheldredus, and in the english cronycle
Eldrede. In whose beginning the ground waxed bareyne / and all myseryes before
bodyd by the apperynge of the blasynge star, in the days of Edward the
martyr, now began to take place and encreace upon the earth. This as the
other of his progenytours, was crowned king at Kyngestone, of the holy
archbysshoppe Dunstane, and of Oswalde archebyshop of york. To whom as yt is
read in the life of saint Dunstane among his prophecyes / that in the day of
his coronacyon, he said unto the king: for thou come to this kingdom by the
death of thy brother, in whose death Englyshemen co^spyred with thy wykked mother
/ they shall not be without blood shedynge and sword, till there come people
of unknown tunge, and bring them into thraldom. And this trespace shall not
be clensyd without long vengeance.

Of this Egelredus writers agreen, that he was goodly of shappe and of vysage /
but that was mynged with lechery and cruelty. It is also read that when holy
Dunstane should christian him / as he held him over the font, he felyd the holy
lyker with ye fruit of his womb. wherefore holy Dunstane swear by god and by
his mother / this shall be unkind to god and his church. which failed not in
his forth going / for he was ungracious in his beginning, wretched in ye
myddell of his life, and hateful to men in the end thereof.

In the second year of his reygn / a cloud was seen in England, the which
appeared half like blood, and the other half like fire / and changed after
into sundry colors, and dysaperyd at the last. In the third year of his
reygn, ye Danys aryued in sundry places of his land / as in the isle of Thanet
beside Kente, in Cornewayll, and Sussex, and did in those costs myche harm.
And after some of them came to London / but there they were put of. How be yt
they destroyed a great part of Chestershyre.

And in the end of the same year, a great part of the city of London was
wasted with fire. But how it began mine author myndeth not. But ye shall
understand, that at this day the city of London had most housynge and
building from Ludgate toward westmester / and little or none where ye chief
or heart of the city is now / except in diverse places was housing, but they
stood with out order. So that many towns and cytyes, as Caunterbury, york,
and other diverse in England / passed London in building at those days, as I
have seen or known by an old book sometime in the Guyldehal of London named
Domys day. But after the conquest yt encreaced and shortly after passed and
excelled all ye other.

About the.viii. year of this kings reygne / the king married earl Egbertus
daughter named Ethelgina or Elgina. Of the which in process of time he
received a son named Edmunde, which after was surnamed Ironsyde / and.ii.
other sons named Edwyn and Ethylstane, and a daughter named Edgina.

In this pastyme dyed saint Ethilwalde bishop of wynchester. He was borne in
wynchester, and noryshed under holy Dunstane at Glastenbury, and there shorn
monk / and after was chosen abbot of Abyndon, in the time of the reygne of
king Edredus. And in the time of Edgar he was sacryd bishop of wynchester /
where he made an abbay of nuns, and translated saint Swythynes body out of
the earth.

After which said Ethelwalde, holy Alphegus abbot then of Bathe was sacred
bishop of wynchester / the which after was archebishoppe of Caunterbury, and
martyred hastily of the cruel Danys, as after shall be showed.

About the.ix. year of Egelredus / for strife yt was between the bishop of
Rochester and him, he with his knights beseged the said city. whereof holy
Du^stane sent to ye king, amonyssynge him that he should refrain him of that
cruelty, and suffer ye bishop and his city in peace, oneles that he offended
saint Andrewe patron of that city. But this message mylded nothing ye kings
courage. Then this blessed man sent to him a hundred pound in gold, wyllyng
him to refrain of that outrage / the which he received and brake the syege.
Then blessed Dunstane sent this message to the king: For thou haste preferred
gold before god, and silver before the apostle, and couetyse before me / right
so evil happes shall come unto the, but not while I am in life. But the king
took little regard to those words, but continued in his insolent and cursed
deeds.

About the.xi. year of his reygne, dyed that blessed archbyshoppe saint
Dunstane. Of whom Ranulff in the xiii. chapyter of his.vi. book of
Policronycon, makes rehersall of diverse of his virtues and miracles / the
which I pass over, and the rather because his lege^de or life is manifest.
Siricus was archbishop after him, and after him wulricus. And after wulricus,
blessed Elphegus was archbishop of that see.

It was not long after the death of holy Dunstane, but that the Danys perced
England in many and sundry places of the land / in such wise that the king
was to seek, to which cost he should go first to wythstande his enymyes. And in
conclusyon in avoiding of more harm / he was compellyd to appeace them with
great sums of money. But when ye money was spent / they fill to new robbynge
of the people. Then the king granted more money. But for all that the Danys
robbed and spoiled ye country of Northu^berla^d, and besyeged London at the
last. And for augmentacyon of the kings sorrow / Elfricus that then was
master or admyrall of the kings navy, fled as a false traitor. And after
that reco^cyled and fled the second time to the Danys. wherefore ye king in
wreche of the father / commanded the eyes of his son Algarus, to be plucked
or done out of his hedde.

But while this persecucion thus continued / by means of the holy bishop of
wynchester Elphegus, a peace was concluded for a time between the king and the
Danys. And the prince or chief captain of them named Aulaff, was so exorted by
the said holy bishop / yt he became a criste^ man, to whom the king was
godfather / so that after the said Aulaff returned to his own, without doing
of more harm / so that for a while the war of Danys seized.

But while that rested / the blody flyx with a brennynge fever vexed the people
thorough the land, that myche folk thereof dyed.

Contynuynge which mysery / the Danys again assailed the land, and did in
diverse places great harm / so that for lack of a good head or governor, many
things in the land peryshed. For the lords were at such dyssencyon that one
with that other / that when they were assembled to speak or treat of peace
between that one lord and that other, and if any good thing were dyuysed for
the hurt of their enymyes / anon the Danys were warned thereof by some of the
same counsayll. whereof were suspected Elfricus and Edricus. And to this sorrow
was joined hunger and penury among the commons, that eueryche of them was
constrained to pluck and stele from other / so that what by the pyllage of the
Danys, and inward theuys and brybours, this land was brought in great mysery
and myschefe.

THE.CXCVIII. CHAPTER.
EGelredus then wrapped in misery / left not to gader of his subjects what he
might, as well by unlawful means as otherwise. For as says Ranulfe mine
author / he would for feigned or small causes, dysheryte me^ of their
possessyo^s / and after cause men to redeem their own for great sums of
money. And over that he walowed in lechery, gyuyng him to all vycyous and
incontinent life of his body. By which ungracious means, he brought this land
in such ruin, that what he might not help by strength, he warred with money.
So yt from the first enter of the Danys as testyfyeth Policronica in the.xviii.
chapyter of his.vi. book, and also Guydo with other authors / that from the
first trybute of.x. thou sand pound, he brought yt at the last in process
of.v. or.vi. years to xl. thousand pound. The which yearly during his life
and after, to the coming of saint Edward, was leuyed of his subjects / and
named for the contynuance thereof Dane gelt. which is or was to mean money
paid to the Danys, or shortly, Dane money.

In this time as yt were about the xv. year of his reygne, dyed saint Oswalde
the archbyshoppe of Caunterbury. And soon after dyed Ethelgina the queen. And
the body of saint Cuthbert was translated from holy ylande to Durham / in the
which isle he held anankers life, as yt is before showed in the storye of
Cadwalader.

Thus contynuynge this land under the grievous tribute of the Danys, and also
by susteynynge of many villanyes and iniuryes by the English men of the said
Danys, as after somdele shall appear / this Egelredus by counsayll of his
famylyers about the.xxi. year of his reygn / married Emma ye daughter of Rychard
duke of Normandy, before minded in the storye of Lewys the.v. and Lothayre his
son kings of France. The which Richard was the third duke of Normandy,
and the first that name / and also was surnamed Richard without fere or the
hardy / as more of him shall be showed in the storye of the.vi. Lewis king of
France.

By reason of maryenge of this Emma, which in ye French cronycle is named the
flower of Normandye / this Egelredus was greatly enhau^ced in his own mind.
By presumpcyon whereof he sent into all good burghes, cytyes, and towns of his
land, secret and strayte commyssyons / chargynge the rulers that upon a
certain day, that is to say upon the day of saint Bryce at an hour
assygned in every place of his land, the Danys should be suddenly slain. And
so yt was done.

And as the common fame tells, yt this murder began at a little town in
Hertefordeshyre, within xxiiii. miles of London called welewyn^ or welwyn^. For
the which dedeyt took first that name / as who would wene, that the well of
the country was there first won. But who that well co^sydereth the sequel
of this storye / shall find little winning or weal ensuyenge of this deed.

But or I proceed further / here I will touch somewhat of the pride and
abusyo^ of ye Danis, that they exercysed in England, in some part thereof, as
I have seen in an old cronycle, whereof the authoure is unknown. There it is
showed, that the Danys by strength caused husband men to ere and sow the
land, and do all other vile labor that belonged to husbandrye / and the Dane
held his wife at his pleasure, with daughter and servant. And when the
husbandeman came home / he should scantly have of his own as servants had,
so that the Dane had all his commandment, and ete and drank his fill of the
best / when the owner had scantely his fill of the worste. And over that the
common people were so of them oppressyd / that for fere and dread, they called
them in every such house as they had rule of, Lord Dane.

But in process of time, after the Danys were voyded the land / this word
Lord Dane, was in derysyon and despyte of the Danys, turned by the Englyshemen
into a name of opprobrye and called Lurdayne / which to our days is not
forgotten. But when one Englyshema^ woll rebuke an other / he woll for the more
rebuke call him Lurdayn.

Then to return to our first matter. Treuthe yt is that when the Danys were
thus murdered thorugh England / tidings thereof sprange into Denmark. which
kyndeled in them such a fury / that the king thereof named Swanus, assembled
shortly a great host and nauye of Danys, and in short process after landed
in Cornewayll. And by treason of a Norman named Hugh, which by favor of the
queen Emma was made earl of Deuenshyre / the said Swanus took Exetour, and
after bette down the wallys.

Then he entered further into the land. In which season the king sent unto
Edricus / chargyng him to assemble the weste Saxons, and to wythstande the
further enter of the Danys. The which according to his commyssyon assembled
the weste Saxons / and made good contenau^ce to wythstand the said enymyes. But
when the hosts should join / were it for fere or for treason, he feigned him
syke and fled from his people. The which for lack of an head were fayn to give
back / to their hurt, and to their enimyes great advantage and comfort.

wherefore the Danys resorted then to wylton^ and Shyrborn^ / and anon spoiled
both those towns, and there refresshed them. But for Swanus had wittynge that
the king was coming toward him with the power of his land / he therefore
departed thens and returned with great pyllage to his ships / and sailed
about the land, and lastely landed in Norfolk. where he wasting and
spoylynge the country / came in process unto the city of Norwyche and robbed
and spoiled yt / and after yode to Thetforde, and did likewise to that town,
and fyred yt and destroyed ye country nere there about.

But soon after a noble man of that country called duke Uskatell met with
the host of Danys, and gave unto them an hard and sharp battle / and slew
many of the enymyes and put them back. For this, and for hunger that then
assailed this land / Swanus returned often unto his ships, and departed
again into Denmark, and tarried there all ye winter following. In which
season he made great prouysyon to reenter the land of England.

THE.CXCIX. CHAPTER.
ABout the.xxvi. year of the reygne of Egelredus the forenamed Swanus with a
strong army, landed at Sandwyche / and spoiled all the country nere unto the sea side, and rested him there till he hard of an army coming again him.
And when he was ware thereof, he returned to his ships again / and herynge
the king was far westward, he landed in Sussex, and spoiled yt wonder sore.
And when he there was warned of the coming of a battle of Englyshemen, anon
he took shyppynge again. So that when the englyshemen wend to have met with
them in one cost / then would they suddenly land in a another. And when ye
king provided to mete with the^ upon the sea / other they would feign to flee,
or else they should with gifts blind the admyrall of the kings navy.

By which subtylytye and crafty means, they weryed and tired the host of
Englyshme^. And where ever they went / they slew, brent, and robbed without
compassyon and pytye. The king then being at Shrewesbury, and herynge of the
great sleyght and cruelty of the Danys / called his counsayll to read what were
best to be done for ye defense of his enmyes. where it was concluded, that ye
king to have peace with the Danys, should pay unto them.xxx. thousand pound.
But while this was in doing, the Danys destroyed a great part of Baroke or
Barkshyre.

when this peace was thus made / Swanus with his company returned into
Denmark. And ye year following / the king made Edricus forenamed duke of
Mercia. This Edricus was of low birth, rich, of tunge false, and subtle of
wit, soft and eloque^t of speech, untrusty and false of thought and promise /
as of him somdeale before is showed, and after more shall appear.

In the.xxvii. year of Egelredus / a prince of Danys named Turkyllus landed in
Kent. The which so grievously warred in that country / that the Kentyshemen
were fayn to make their peace, and so departed.

And yet the persecucyon of Danys seized not. For in one country of England or
other / they ever in whylys robbed and pilled the Englishmen. So yt all the
country a long the cost, from the North part of England unto the isle of
wyghte / was by them destroyed or hugely set a back. And when the king
intended to make prouysyon for to wythstande them / ever Edricus would
counsayll him to the contrary / showing him that he should spend his
treasour and travail his people in vain. By mean whereof the Danys entered.l.
miles within the land / and brent and robbed by diverse times many vylages and
towns. So that they increased and waxed passing rich / and the Enlyshemen
nedy, bare, and poor. Thus contynuynge this mysery / Swanus or after the
english Swayne then being in Denmark, and heryng of the encreace of his
people within England / repented him of his former couenauntes, and thought yt
the hole domynyon of England should belong to him of right. For the which he
prepared his army and navy in most defensyble wise / and sped him into
England, and to the river of Humber, and landed in Northumberlande.

where the earl or ruler of that country with all the rulers of the same,
swear feaute unto the said Swanus, and promised to keep that country unto his
use. And when he had done his will in that cost / he entered again the water,
and by the river of Trent he passed to Gaynysburghe, and so by North
watlyngstrete / and subdued the inhabytauntes of that country, and forced
them to give unto him pledges. which pledges, with also his navy / he betoke
unto Canutus his son, while, he went farther into the land. And that done,
he with his* people kept on his journey till he* came into Mercia, killing and
slayeng the men of that prouynce / And reserved the women to unclean living,
as well the relygyous as other / and took by strength wynchester and Oxenford,
and did in them what he lyked.

And after he had thus passed the land / he drew the next way toward
London. But in passing the river of Thames he lost some part of his people /
other for lack of a bridge or for ieopardynge their passage vnauysely. And so
in process he came unto London / where at that time king Egelredus was.
wherefore Swanus left the city, and drew into Kente, and so toward
Caunterbury without let, weldynge the country at his will / and lastely
beseged that city. The which manfully defended their enymyes by the space
of.xx. days. which syege began upon the day of saint Mathewe in the month
of September, and endured as is above said / and then taken by the treason of
a deken named Almaricus / the which beforetyme blessed Elphegus then
archebyshop of that see, had preserved from death.

Then the Danys fyred the city when they before had spoiled it / and took the
archebyshop and put him in strayte prison. And the monks of saint Augustynes
abbey they tythed that is to mean they slew.ix. by cruel torment, and the
tenth they kept a live / the which after was sold and set to all seruyle
labor. And as wytnessyth Antoninus or Uyncent hystoryall / they slew and
brought in seruage over the sum of.ix. hundred persons of relygyon / they
slew of men, women, and children, beyond the number of.viii. thousand. As with
myche more cruelty yt is showed, in the.vii. chapyter of the.xvi. title of the
work of the said Antoninus. And finally for this blessed man Elphegus would
not condescende to give unto them as says Policronica.iii. thousand pound /
after they had kept him in hard prison by the space of.vii. months, upon an
Ester eue^ they after many vylanyes to him done at Grenewyche within three miles
of London, they stoned him to death. where he lay in the feld unburied a
certain of time / and after carried to London, and buried reuere^tly in the
church of saint Paul. But afterward in time of Canutus, he was taken up again
and carried to his own church. Of this blyssed Elphegus Antoninus and also
Policronicon shown many virtues and miracles / the which I pass over for
lengthynge of the time.

THE.CC. CHAPTER.
IN this pastyme, king Egelredus ferynge the end of this persecucyon / sent
Emma the queen with her two sons Alphrede and Edward, unto Richard the
second of ye name, then fourth duke of Normandy, which was brother unto the
said Emma / with whom also he sent the bishop of London.

About the.xxxiiii. year of the reygne of Egelredus / the Danis when they had
won a great part of the country of westsaxon, returned again toward London.
whereof herynge the Londoners sent unto them certain gifts and pledges.

In all this season mine authoure makes no mind, that ever the king gave unto
the Denis any notable battle / but kept him in holds or places, for his own
sauegarde, and little fruit or profit to his land. At the last he was
chaced unto the isle of wyghte / where with a secret company, he held a great
part of the winter / and finally without catall or comfort, sailed over to
his wife into Normandy / and there held him a certain of time.

when Swanus was ascertayned of the departing of Egelredus out of the land,
he was enflamed with exceeding pride / so that he arrered exceeding imposycyons
of the people, and grieved them wonderfully. And among other of his tyra^nyes
he asked a great sum of money of saint Edmundes lands. which the rulers
denayed / for so myche as they claymed to be free of all kings trybute. For
this he entered the terytory of saint Edmunde, and wasted and spoiled the
country / and over that despised that holy martyr, with manassyng of the place
of his sepulture. wherefore the men of that country ferynge this tyrant, gave
them to fasting and prayer / so that shortly after he was stycked in an
evening among his knights, with ye sword of saint Edmunde in the town of
Shetforde as says Guydo / but after Policronicon and other in the town of
Gaynesborugh. where he dyed with yellynge and cryenge the third day after.

In fere whereof, Canutus his son after that he was king, closed in ye land of
that holy martyr with a deep dyche / and granted to the inhabytauntes thereof
great fredam, and quyt them of all kyngly task or trybute. And after builded a
church over the place of his sepulture / and ordained there an house of munkes,
and endued them with fair possessions. And after yt was used that kings of
England when they were crowned, sent for an offering their crowns unto saint
Edmundes shryne / and redeemed them aftewardes with a condygne price.

when Egelredus had writing of the death of Swanus / by procurement of his
friends / he made means to return to his own. By whose means he was sent
for, with condycyon that he should refourme his old condycyons. Ad for
perfourmau^ce of the same, he sent his son Edward into England before him.
And in the lent following the king came him self, and with his people sped him
toward Lyndesey. where Canutus was at that time resseau^t, not provided of the
kings so hasty coming.

wherefore he being not purueyed to wythstande the king, fled into
Sandewyche in Kente. And for he there proved such persons as before time his
fader and he had taken pledges of, and fande them not perseueraunt in their
promises / he made to be cut of all the noses and hands of the said
English people, and sailed into Denmark when he had do / and returned the
next year with a great navy, and sailed about ye land, and took prays in the
South country. whereof the kings eldest son named Edmunde, made prouysyon
with ye aid of Edricus to go again him. But when he should have met with
Edricus at a place assigned and his host, he was of him dysceyued / wherefore he
was compelled to give place to his enymyes. And as yt was after known, the
said Edricus had promised his favor and aid unto the said Canutus.

By reason whereof Canutus entered the country of west Saxon / and forsed them to
swear to him feauty, and to give unto him pledges / and other countries
adioynyng did the same.

In this seasan Egelredus being at London, was taken with a grievous sykenes and
dyed / and was there buried in the church of saint Paul, where at this day in
ye North isle behind the quere, apperyth in the wall a token of his sepulture /
which reigned, or as say Policronicon and other, beseged England, by the
term of xxxvi. years full / leuynge after him a son named Edmunde Iron side
over Alphrede and Edward sons of Emma.

Francia. THE.CCI. CHAPTER.
LEwys the.vi. of that name and son of Lothayre / began his reygne over
France, in the year of our lords incarnacyon ix. hundred and lxxxvi / and
the.v. year of Egelredus than king of England. Of y^ which other for his youth
or for the shortness of his reygne, little of his deeds is laft in memory /
except that ye French book wytnessyth, that for he had none issue, and Hugh
Capet before in the story of Lothayre minded, was his famylyer and chyefe
cou^sayler / he should therefore ordeyne and admytte the said Hugh for his heir.
But more verily as before is touched in the above named story, and in the end
thereof, this Hugh was strong and mighty, and in the later days of Lothayre
coueted the rule of the land. wherefore after the death of this Lewys, for so
much as he laft no child after him / he than having ye chyefe rule of France,
by strength and power made him self king.

But for I promised in the story of Egelredus, somewhat to show of Richard the
first of that name and third duke of Normandye / I shall somdele length this
story with the story of the said Richard. This Richard as afferme all
writers, was named Rychard without fere. And for this cause that follows, as
testyfyeth the French book. He used much to bid his bedys for all cryste^
souls. And upon a night when he had long watched / he entered a church, where
stood a corpse unburied and no man watchynge it. And while he said his orysons
for that soul and other / he laid his gloves upon a deske by him. And when
he had ended his deuocyons, he went out of ye church for getting his gloves
behind. But shortly after he remembered him of them / and returned toward the
church for to fetch his said glouys. when he came at the church door / he
found ye corpse there standing, with his arms spradde abroad, and making
great noise and cry. wherefore the duke made ye sign of ye cross in his
forehed, and coniured the corpse that he should rest, but all was in vain.
whereof the duke drew his sword and stroke at the corpse, and to his thynkyng
parted him in two pieces. And that done entered the church, fet his glouys, and
so departed. And for this chance he ordained after thorough his realm that a
corpse should be watched the first night or longer, as men had devotion.
which gyse was sometime used in England, and begone of the Normans as men may
conjecture, after they had first conquered this land.

Polycronycon shows in the.vii. chapyter of his.vi. book, that this duke
Richard dremed on a night that a monk of the house of saint Audoenus in
Roan, as he went toward his lemman by night / fill beside a bridge and was
drowned. whose soul after was in strife between an angel and a fend. The
which after a long strife / condescended to put the judgment in duke
Richard. Than the duke gave sentence, that the soul should be restored again
to the body / and then ye body to be set upon ye bridge that before he was
fallen fro. And if he than went to his lemman he should be the fendes / and if
not, he should than be saved. And when this sentence was put in execucyon, the
monk fled unto the church thereby. Upon the morn when the duke awoke, and
called this vysyon to his memory / to know the certaynte thereof, he went unto
the said church, and fande the monk there his clothes yet wete / and after
went to the abbot of that place, and told to him all this deed, aduertysynge
him to take better ouersyght of his flock.

To these narracyons the herers may give credence as them lyketh. For they be
another in the pystle nor yet in the gospel. All be it Antoninus archbysshop of
Florence, when he reherseth any like narracyons, which he thinks somewhat
doutefull / he joins these words and says, piu^est credere. The third
narracyon is told of this duke / which by all presumpcyon was regestred of
some women scrybe. This duke with Gunnore his wife, lived long while a
dyshonest life, and contrary to the laws of the church. whereof his people
murmured sore / so that at length by the wholesome doctrine of some of his
clerks or spyrytuall men, he married her to his lawful wife. The first night
after ye wedding / were it in game or otherwise, the duchess turned her
buttocke in ye dukes lap as she before time had never done. when the duke
frayned the cause of her so doing / for now (said she) may I do what me lyketh
/ where before I might do but what you lyked. Upon this Gunnore he gate beside
other chylder, Emma that was the wife of Egelredus as before ye have hard /
and dyed when he had ruled Normandy by the term of.lii. years.

Than to return to the.vi. Lewys king of France, from whom we have made a
long dygressyon / as witnesses master Gagwyne he dyed in the year of our
lord.ix. hundred.lxxxix, when he had reigned. iii. years / and was buried at
Co^payne.

ye shall understand that this Lewys was the last king of the blood of Pepyn.
And for I promised before to show the dyscent of the said Pepyn, to the end
that ye may the better know this story / and also to know the kings of
France from the kings of Germany, which both descended of this Pepyn:
hereafter I shall more clearly set it out in branches. But first I woll
express the kings of France as they reigned lynially / and join to either
of them the term that he reigned, that there by it may appear how long this
blood continued in ye house of France, or it were empeched by Hugh Capet, as
after appears.

The years.
Pepyn. xviii. Charlys. xlvii. Lewys the first. xxvi. Charlys the Ballyd.
xxxvii. Lewys balbus. ii. Lewys and Charlys. v. Lewys the fourth. viii. Eudo.
ix. Charlys the simple. xvii. Radulphus. xii. Lewys vnus. xxi. Lotharius. xxx.
Lewys the syxte. iii.
OF the which kings.ii. were not of that blood, as Eudo and Radulphus / but
admytted of the barony of France to rule the land, till two of that progeny /
that is to mean Charlys the simple, and Lewys the.v, were comen to their
lawful age. So that from the first year of Pepyn, which began his reygne in
the year of grace.vii. hundred and.l. to the first year of Hugh Capet that
began his reygne in the year of our lord god.ix. hundred and lxxxix / expyred
or passed.ii. hundred and.xxxix. years.

Pypyn the fader of Charlys the great. Charlys the great emperor. Lowys the
first, emperor The kings of Germany.
Lothayre emperor / and the son of Lewys the first. Lowys emperor the son
of Lothayre. Lothayre the second the son of Lothayre. Charlys the.iii. and
son of Lothayre.


Lewys king of Germany and brother unto the said Lothayre. Lewys the son of
Lewys / which was brother unto Charlys grossu^ emperor. Lewys the son of Lewys
/ which of some is compted emperor. Arnusphus the son of Lewys emperor.
Lewys the son of Arnulph, last emperor of France.




The kings of France.
Charlys the ballyd the son of Lewys the first of his.ii. wife emperor Lewys
Balbus the son of Charlys the Ballyd Lewys and Charlys sons of Lewys Balbus.
Lewys the.iiii. and son of the foresaid Charlys. Charlys the simple the son
of Lewys the forth. Lewys the.v. and the son of Charlys the simple. Lothayre
the son of the foresaid Lewys. Lewys the son of Lothayr / and the last
king of that flock.










THE.CCII. CHAPTER.
HUgh the son of Robert the tyrant, descended of Hugh legraunde / began to
take the rule, or to usurp the crown of France, in the year of our lord.ix.
hundred and.lxxxix / and the.viii. year of Egelredus than king of England.

This as wytnessyth the French Cronycle was earl of Paris, and marshall of
France. And as says Antoninus, he married one of the daughters of Edward the
elder. This also was named Capet, for so myche as in his youth / he used in
game to lay aside his fellows hodes. In whose beginning / Charlys that was the
brother to Lothayre, and uncle unto Lewys the.vi. last king, herynge of the
death of his neuewe Lewys without issue / as next heir, with aid of some
lords of France, and also of Loreyn, the which than he was lord of, gadered
an army and entered France / and than came to the city of Laone. within which
city / he with his wife and people, by the treason of the bishop of the
same city, was taken and delivered with his wife and chylder into the hands
of his enemies / the which sent them to Orleaunce there sauely to be kept.

Than this Hugh was crowned in the city of Rayns / and welded the land with
more suerty. How be it the earl of Flaunders named Arnulphus or Arnolde before
spoken of, would not be under his obedyence. wherefore this Hugh assembled his
kynghtes / and by his strength took from him the coutre of Artoys, with many
strong holds and castles / and lastly forced the said Arnolde to fle into
Normandy, to ask aid of Richard the first of that name, before spoken of in
the story of the.vi. Lewys. By whose means after some writers / wyllyam Longa
Spata fader to ye said duke Richard was slain. But that not wythstandynge, by
frendshyp of the said duke Richard, this Arnolde was reconcyled unto the
king, and continued after as his subject.

In the city of Rayns was arch bishop at this day a noble prelate named
Arnolde, son of baste of Lothayre, and neuewe to Charlys than prisoner, as
before is touched. The which for malice that the king bare unto him, for
cause of the forenamed Charlys / called a counsel of the clergy of his land,
and laid again him such obieccyons, that he by their assent was put from
that benefyce, and sent him to Orlyaunce there also to be kept in prison. And
set in his place one Gylberte, or after the French book Gerbres, a conning
man in philosophy / which had before time ben tutor or master to Robert son
of the said Hugh. But after.iii. years / pope John^ the.xvi. of that name sent
down his maundement unto Guyan archebysshop of Sens / chargynge him that he
should remove ye said Gerbers, and restore the said Arnolde to his proper
see. which was done shortly after / and ye said Gerbers was after this
preferred by one of the Othons emperor unto ye church of Rauenne, and
continued there till the death of the.xvii. John^. After whose death he was
elect pope of Rome / and was named the second Siluester, and lived as
pope.iiii. years

Than it follows in the story / when this Hugh had reigned full viii. years
and more, he dyed in the year of our lord.ix. hundred.xciii. and was buried at
saint Denis leuynge after him a son named Robert.

THE.CCIII. CHAPTER.
RObert the son of Hugh Capet, began his reygn, in the year of our lord.ix.
hundred and.xcviii / and the.xvii. year of Egelredus then king of England.

This was co^nynge in many scyences, and a man of good manner and virtue. He
made diverse hymns, sequences, and respondes / as O Judah et Hierusulem, O
co^stantia martyrum, As sit nobis scti spu^s gratia, or more co^gruely, Sancti
spiritus assit nobis gratia, with diverse other.

In ye beginning of his reygn / while Bowcharde earl of Meleon^ was at the
kings court, Galtyer or walter a knight and servant of the said Bowcharde,
to whom the said Bowcharde had delivered his castle of Meleon^ to keep in
his absence / for great gifts the said walter had delivered the said
castle unto Eudo earl of Carnotens. wherefore the king at the request of the
said Bowcharde, sent streyghte commandment unto the said Eudo / chargyng him
in all goodly wise to restore the said castle unto Bowcharde. The which
commandment he utterly refused to obey. For ye which y^e king being so amoued
/ sent for Richard the second of that name, then.iiii. duke of Normandy / and
with their both armies besyeged the castle upon every part, and at length
wan yt and took the said walter within the same / whom the king for his
untruth commanded soon after to be hanged upon a gybet, and the castle to
be restored unto ye forenamed Bowcharde / and after returned every man to his
own.

In the time of the reygne of this Robert / did Henry then duke of Burgoyne.
The which for lack of issue of his body, bequethed his dukedom unto king
Robert. But the Burgonyons wythstode that legacy / and drew to them for an
head and captain Lawdry earl of Neuers / and with him held by strength or for
a strength the city of Anxerre. whereof herynge king Robert / sent for the
foresaid duke of Normandye, and so spedde them toward Burgoyne and besyeged
the foresaid city. But at length ye city was yolden / and Lawdry put at the
kings grace. And that done, the king with his host besyeged a another strong
city called Aualon^ / and not without great danger wanne yt also at length /
and after received the country with dew obeysaunce, and ordered yt at his own
pleasure, and so returned into France.

Arnolde earl of Sens used great tyranny among the bishops and mynysters of
the church. wherefore Leophricus bishop of that see, thorough the aid and
counsayll of Regnalde bishop of Paris / put out the said Arnolde, and
delivered the city unto king Robert. But the brother of the said Arnolde
with a certain of his knights, fled to the castle and yt held with
strength. wherefore the king laid syege to the said castle, and at length wan
yt / and took the brother of Arnolde named Fromo^de and sent him to Orleau^ce
there to be prisoned, where he dyed shortly after

This Robert as says the french book builded first ye castle of Mount fort.
He founded also diverse monasteryes and temples / and at Orleau^ce the temple of
saint Anyan^ / at Stamps a church of our lady / and diverse other in diverse
places of his realm. And he endowed the church of saint Denis with many
great lyberties / and had especyall devotion to saint ypolyte over all other
saints.

It is radde of this king Robert, that upon a season when he had long
While lain at the syege of a castle nere unto Orleaunce, and saw yt was
defuse to win be strength / he upon ye day of saint Anyan yode unto
Orleaunce, and there in the quere bare a cope, and did help to sing the
dyuyne service. And after when he was in his deuocyo^s in the mass while /
when the priest was at the co^secracion and said thryse Agnus dei, the walls
of the castle fill without stroke of gunne or other engyne, and his enemies
submytted them to his grace. Many virtues might I show more of this virtuous
price / y^ which I pass over for length of the time / and conclude thus, that
when he had reigned after most accord of writers, and ruled his land
nobly.xxx. years, he dyed, and was buried in the house of saint Denis /
leuynge after him of his first wife Constau^ce a son named Henry, and one
other named Robert / and of his second wife.ii. sons named Symonde and
Almaryche. But yt should seem by the sequel of the next storye, that
Constaunce should be last wife, and the other the first / and deuorced from
him for some cause, so that her chyldern should not be legyttymat / all be yt
the authoure of this makes no mencyon.

Anglia. THE.CCIIII. CHAPTER.
EDmunde Ironsyde the son of Egelredus, and also Canutus ye son of Swanus
king of De^marke / began to rule the Englyshemen, in the year of our lord a
thousand and.xvi / and the.xix. year of Robert then king of France. For ye
Londoners with assyste^ce of some of ye lords of England favored Edmu^de. But
the more party of the lords favored Canutus / and specylly the spiritualtye,
ye before time had sworn feauty to his father. And he then being at
Southampton^ / swore to them to be unto them a good and true justice, and to
entreat the people soberly and right wisely. Then Edmunde being of the
archbishop of york crowned at London, and the solemnyte fynyshed and ended /
he sped him into westsaxon, and subdued yt country. In which time Canutus,
which in ye english storye is called Knough / drew with his people to London,
and would there have entered. But that was him forboden of the Londoners. For the
which he laid his ordinance about the city, en tendynge to have entered
perforce. But it was not long or he was feign to break his syege and to depart
thens.

when Canutus was put of from London / he drew westwarde, and met in
process with Edmunde in Dorsetshyre beside Gyllyngham / where between them
was foughten a strong and cruel battle. But in the end Canutus was
ouercomen and compelled to forsake the field. After this they met again in
worceter shyre / where they fought a more stronger battle. For this was so
strongly bydden by, ye men could not judge which part had the better, or which
the worse. But as wytnessyth Policronica either of them departed from other,
either for werynesse of fight or for lak of the day.

But upon the morn following both hosts joined again, and fought egerly.
Contynuynge which fight Edricus espyenge Edmunde to be at advantage of winning
of the feld, suddenly pyght a deed mannys head upon a spear head, and cried to
the host of Englyssmen, fle fle ye Englyshemen and save your self / loo here
is the hedde of Edmu^de your king. But Edmunde thereof being warned / spedde
him toward that part of the field, and behaved him so comfortably among his
men, that by his knyghtely courage his people recoueryd that they before had
lost / and co^tynued the battle till night, in such wise that he had
rather the better then the worse / and caused Canutus to refuse that country,
and to return toward London again. Then Edmunde being aduertysed that
Canutus was returned toward London / he followed him and passed the river of
Thamys, and delyueryd the city from danger of the Danys / and afterward
encountered the Danys at a place called Brentforde, where with them he had a
cruel fight / and scom fyted them at length.

In this pass time Emma ye wife of Egelredus, ferynge the fortune of the war
/ sent her two sons Alphrede and Edward, unto her brother Richard the
second of that name and fourth duke of Normandy.

But Edricus then, which as before is said, was ever subtyle of wit,
considering the good fortune of Edmunde and his knyghtely courage / thought
that at length he should overcome the Danys. wherefore to save his land, and
also to bring about his malycyouse treason / he sought the ways and means
how he might stand in his grace and favor. And at length obtained his
entente / and swore to him to be his true subject.

when king Edmunde had a season soiorned at London / he then made toward the
Danys that then were in Kent, and met with the^ at a place called Okefforde or
Otforde, and there scomfyted them, and chasyd Canutus to the isle of Shepey. And
there Canutus took shypyng / and sailed about the land, and entered lastely in
ye country of Mercia and spoiled a part thereof.

Then the two hosts met soon after at a place called Asshedown, where after
long fight Edricus with his retynew fled to the comfort of the Danys. By
mean whereof king Edmunde was put to the worse / for many noble men were slain
upon his party. Among the which the bishop of Lyncoln^ and the abbot of
Ramysey were two / that thither were come to treat a peace between both
princes. But when this was laid to ye charge of Edricus / he by his untrue
means so excused him, that no man might charge him with any defaut.

Thus contynuynge this mortal war betwyxte these two marcyall princes, to
the great desolacyo^ and mortalyte of the people / one of the knights of the
party of Edmunde gatte him to an high place, where he might be somewhat hard
of ye host / and spoke in this wise: Daily we dye, and no man has the
vyctorye. For Edmunde may not be overcome for his great strength / and Canutus
may not be overcome for favor of Fortune. what shall then be ye fruit of
this co^tynuall strife? None other but when the knights ben all slain on
either parties / then the dukes compelled by need shall accord, or else they
shall fight alone without knights. Then syn this shall be the end / why do
they not one of these two? If they accord / why is not this kyngedome
suffycynt for twain, yt sometime suffysed for.vii. If their couetyse of
lordshyppes be so great, y^ either has indygnacyon to take and have part with
other, or else that one to be under that other / then let them fight alone,
that woll be the lords alone left. If all me^ fight, all men be slain / by
mean whereof no men shall be left to be under their lordshyp or ledyng of
dukes, nor yet to defend the king again strong enymyes or nacyons.

These words thus spoken / were right well allowed of both hosts. For as
affermeth mine author / at this time a trewce was made between both princes far
a certain time. After which peace ended / were yt by occasyon of these words
or otherwise, the said two dukes Edmunde and Canutus agreed to try their
quarelles between them two only. And for this was assygned by their both
agrementes, a little isle called then Olney nere unto Glouceter, or after some
writers named Olenege, bycleped with the water of Seuerne. In which place at
the day appointed, the two cha^pyons met without company or assistence within
ye said isle / the hosts of both parties standing without the isle, and there
abiding the fortune of this battle. There either proved other first with
sharp speres, and after with kene and cuttynge swords. what shall I of this
make longer process / when either had other well proved and assayed, by
receyuynge of hard and sore strokes / by the first mocyon of Canutus, as
most writers testyfyen, they lastely accorded and kyssed to gyther as lovers,
to the great comfort of both hosts. And shortly after by the aduyce of
both their counsaylles, condescended upon partycyon of the land / which
immedyately was done to both their agrementes, and loved after as two
brethren during their natural lives. But the serpent Idre of envy and false
conspyracye, which ever burnyd in the heart of Edricus was kyndeled so sore,
that of pure force yt must break out upon a light flambe / so what he might
not accomplish by his own person, he fulfilled by his son, as testyfyen
diverse authors. For as affermeth Guydo / this son of Edricus away tynge his
time, espied when ye king was at the wyddraught to purge nature / and with a
spear struck him into the foundement and so into the body, whereof king
Edmunde dyed shortly after at Oxen. The king thus being slain / anon Edricus
thinking thereby to be greatly exalted, spedde him in all haste unto Canutus,
and saluted him as king / and showed him of this treason only for his love
done. when Canutus had well understanding of ye confession of Edricus, he
like a dyscrete and ryghtous prince said unto him in this wise. For thou haste
Edricus for the love thou berest unto me, slain thine natural lord, which I
most loved / I shall exalte thine head above all the lords of England. And
forthwyth commanded him to be taken, and his hedde to be stryken of, and pyght
on a spear hedde, and after set upon the higest gate of London. But Marianus
the Scot tells, that Edmunde dyed at London by natural sickness, about the
feste of saint Andrewe. And the english cronycle affermeth the forenamed
treason / but by a another manner of doing. But how so ever this noble prince
dyed / troth yt is after agreement of most writers, yt he ended his life, when
he had reigned one year and more, as myche as from the month of June unto
the end of November / and was buried at Glastenbury by his graundfather
Edgare. Policronica shows in the.xviii. chapyter of his.vi. book, that
Canutus after the death of Edmunde gave unto Edricus the lordeshyppe of Mercia /
and by his counsayll exyled the brother of Edmunde called the king of chorles
/ and thorough his con^sayle executed many cruel deeds. Of this Edmu^de
remained two sons, that is to wit Edmunde and Edward.

THE.CCV. CHAPTER.
CAnutus or Knougth after the English cronycle, son of Swanus as before is
touched, and younger brother as appears by ye story following / began his
domynyon alone over England, in the year of our lord a thousand and.xix /
and the xxi. year of Robert then king of France. The which anon after the
death of Edmunde assembled a counsayll at London / where among other things in
that cou^sayll debated, a questyon was put, whether in the composicyon made
between Edmunde and Canutus, any special remembrance was made for the
children or brethern of Edmunde, for any partycyon of any part of the land.

whereunto yt was answered of the lords nay. Affermyng farthermore with oath
for the kings pleasure, that they to the vttermoste of their powers would put
of that blood of Edmunde in all that they might By reason of which answer and
promise / they thought many of them to have standen in the great grace and
favor of the king / but yt turned all otherwise.

For many of them, or the more party, such as Canutus apperceyued and knew,
that they beforetyme were sworn to Edmunde and his heirs, and also were
natyue English men / he mystrusted and disdaned ever after. In so myche that
some he exyled, and some were slain, and some by gods punyshement dyed
suddenly.

But among all Edricus with his sugared words continued in the kings favor
as says Marianus before minded. By whose counsayll and other / he shortly
after outlawed the foresaid brother of Edmunde surnamed king Charlis, as
before is touched. But he afterward was reconcyled to the kings favor, and
lastely slain of his own servants.

Canutus also by the said counsayll, sent the.ii. sons of Edmu^de, named as
before is said Edmunde and Edward, unto his brother Swanus then king of
Denmark, to be slain after the oppynyon of some writers. But he abhorrynge
that deed / sent them to Solomon then king of Hungarye as wytnessyth Guydo
and other. where in process of time Edmunde dyed / and his brother Edward in
tracte of time married Agatha the daughter of the.iiii. Henry then emperor of
Almayne. Of the which Edward and Agatha procedyd Margarete that after was
queen of Scotland / and Crystyane that was a menchon, and a son named Edgar
and surnamed Ethelynge.

This Edward of the chronicles of England is named Edward the outlawe / for so
myche as he never returned into England as says the said english cronycle,
after his first exyle.

Then to return unto Canus / the which after some things orderyd in his
land, divided his said land in four parts. That is to mean the first
princypall which at those days was westsaxon, he held under his own gydyng.
Eestenglande, which contained Norff. and Suff. he betoke to the rule of ye
earl, Turkyllus a Dane / of whom somewhat is in the.iii. chapyter of ye story
of Egelredus. Mercia he betoke to the subtell earl Edricus. And the.iiii.
Northumberlande, unto a Dane named Hircius. But like as the man of Inde at no
time changed his color / so this Edricus changed never his false manners. But
not wythstandynge the great benefytes that he daily received of his princes /
there as he to other had been false and dysceyuable in days past, even so
now he demeaned him again Canutus.

wherefore he being accused and proved with defaute / was commanded of the
king to have judgment. The which was done immediately / and his hedde for
diverse causes smyten of / and yt with the body for spyte cast into a foul
and fylthy place. But Ranulf says that he was slain by the kings agreement
within his paleys at London / and his body with the head thrown after into the
town dyche. Thus with shame he ended, that in falshode and dyssymulacyo^ had
continued myche of his life.

About the.ix. year of his reygne, Canutus called a parliament at Oxenford /
where among other things yt was enacted, that Englyshmen and Danys should
hold the laws of Edgar lately king.

In this pastyme dyed Swanus brother to Canutus king of Denmark without issue
/ wherefore that land fill to Canutus. For the which cause he with a strong
army sailed thither to take the possessyon, and to set the country in an order
/ or after some writers to apeas and wythstande the wandelys, yt then had
perced that land and done therein myche harm. where Goodwyn^ the earl, whose
daughter Edward the confessor after married / with a certain number of
Englyshmen fill upon ye wandalys by night, and dystressed them in such wise,
that Canutus had of them his pleasure. For this deed the king had earl Goodwyn^
ever after in good favor, and loved Englyshmen more specially. And when he
was returned into England / he shortly after or before, married Emma the wife
lately of Egelredus. Of the which he received in process of time a son and
named him Hardicunitus, or after some Hardykynitus / and after the English
book Hardyknough.

And about this time fill void y^ see of Lyndesser or Durham, to the which
by dyuyne inspyracyon and knowledge received by a voice from the tumbe of saint
Cuthbert / blessed Edmu^de after three year of vacacyon was elect to that see.
But ye shall understand that this was not saint Edmunde of Ponteney. For he
was archbyshoppe of Caunterbury in the days of Henry the third.

THE.CXCVI. CHAPTER.
CAnutus about the.vii. year of his reygne / by exhortacyon of Egelnothus then
archbishop of Canterbury, translated the body of saint Elphegus late
archbyshoppe of the said see, martyred by the Danys, as before is showed in the
second chapter of the storye of Egelredus / and shryued him in his own
church of Caunterbury foresaid.

In the time also of this Canutus / about the.xvi. year of his reygne, the
Scotts rebelled again him. wherefore he with a great army entered Scotland /
and at length overcame the king of that land named then Malcolyne, and
brought them again to his subieccyon, as is recorded in the books of Marianus
the Scot. By reason of which vyctory Canutus was then king of.iiii. kyngdoms /
of England, of Scotland of Denmark, and Norwaye. Then as wytnessyth diverse
authors after he had betaken this land of England to the gydynge of
Leofricus Egelnothus, and other / he then returned into Denmark. And from
the^s he yode to Rome in the.xv. year of his reygn, and made there great
offerynges to saint Peter and Poule / and redeemed the scole of Saxons fre of
all former trybute granted, as before in the stories of Iue and Offa and other
kings of Saxons is some deal more touched. which redempcyon of tribute as
says Guydo, was called Rome Scot. But it shall seem in that saying some
douteth / for so myche as at this day in diverse places of England, as in
Northamptonshyre and other, the peter pens are yet gaderyd. Canutus also after
he had in Rome accomplyshed his purpose / he in his return toward England
executed wonderful deeds of alms, in releuynge of the poor and other goftly
works / and paid great good for raunsom of christian prisoners / among other
of his deeds, It is wytnessyd that he should agree with the pope that was
called Benet the.viii. of that name, and pay to him certain sums of money,
that his archbyshoppes after yt day might have the pall without payenge of
money therefore.

And when he was comen in the city of Papia in Italy, in his way home ward,
he there brought the arm of saint Augustyne the doctor for a hundred pound
of silver and a talent of gold. And here is to be noted that there be three
manners of tale^tes. The first and grettest is of y^ weight of.vi. score pound
weyghte / the second of the weight of.lxxii pound / and the third and leest
of.l. pound weight. Then if we reken this talent with the leest / in a pound
of gold after troy weight, is.xii. vuces, and in.l. pound is.vi. hundred
ounces, and every ounce of fine gold is worth xl. s. By which reason this
talent should be in value to the sum of xii. hundred pound. This precious
relyque ye king gave unto his trusty friend Leofricus / ye which he myche loved
and trusted / and remained at Couentre many years after.

while Canutus was occupied in this journey / co^playnt was brought unto him of
some mysse demeanurs and rule, that were occupied and exercysed in his absence
within this realm. wherefore he wrote home letters to the lords / chargynge
them straytely, that all such defautes were redressed again his coming home.

This king as wythnesseth Guydo was of great magnyfycence / and used such
justice and temperaunce, that in his days in the weste parts of the world,
was no prince of renown as was Canutus. And over that he was greatly beloved
and dradde of his subjects.

In the time of this Canutus, as tessyfyeth Guillelmus de pontificibus / a
munke of Glaste^bury named Bryghtwolde, which was after bishop of wylton,
being in his contemplacyon and prayer, bethoughte him on the lynage of
English kings. And in that thought fill into a slumber / in which time of
his sleep he saw saint Peter the apostle standing by him, and holding in
his hand Edward the son of Egelredus which then was in Normandy / the
which to his thinking, he saw saint Peter saker ye said Edward as king of
England. And showed to him farther how holy this Edward should be in his
living, and how he should reygne as king.xxiii. years. Then this monk frayned
saint Peter of the ofsprynge of this Edward, and who should be king after
him. To the which questyon was answered by Peter, the kyngedome of Englyshemen
is the kyngedome of god / wherefore the kings thereof shall stand at gods
puruyaunce. And also a another doctor called Henry of Huntyngdon / showed that
an holy man warned English men, y^ a lord which they thought nothing upon,
should come out of France and bring them right low.

In the time also of this Canutus by agreement of many writers fill one thing
worthy mind and memory. In a town of Saxony named Calbis, in ye dyocesys of
Magburgh and parysshe of saint Magii / xviii. men and.xv. women upon the even
of the Natyuyte of our lord began a dance about the church yard of saint
Magu before said / the person or other prestes being than at mass within ye
same church. which being troubled with the noise of the mynstrellys, and also
the dynne of the said men and women / sent unto them in monysshynge them to
seace of that doing. But all was in vain / for they would not seace of their
dysport for any commandment yt to the^ was given. wherwyth the priest being
dyscontented, that they none other wise reverenced ye sacrament, noryed that
solemn season / besought god and saint Magii that they should continue their
dance by the space of an hole year. The which prayer was hard / in such
wise that they continued the same song and dance till that day twelve
months, and never eat nor drank nor rested the^ in all ye season. And
moreover dew nor rain fill upon them in all that year / nor garment nor no
thing that was about them was impaired shoo nor other. At the years end /
Horobertus archbysshop of that dyocesys came unto ye said place and lowsed
them of that bond which the priest had bound them in / and before the awlter
of the church them reconsyled. Of the which a prestes daughter and two other
dyed forth with / and the remenaunt yode to rest and slepte by the space
of.iii. days and iii. nyghtes following. where after some of them dyed / and
such as lived fell lame of their lymmes. And one of the same.xviii. men being
named Ubertus or Hupertus, wrote this wonder with his own hand for a more
record of the trowth.

Then let us return to Canutus / of whom it is read that after his coming
from Rome, he began somdele to presume in pride, and set more by him self
than good wisdom would. In time of which exaltacyo^ of his mind / he went
unto the Tamys side, and beheld how the water swelled or flowed. And so
standing nere the water / the water touched his fete. Than he charged the
water that he should flow no higher and that in no wise he should to wche his
lords clothes. But the water kept his course and wette at length the kings
thyes. wherewyth ye king abashed sterte back and said, all erthly kings may
know that their powers be vain / and that none is worthy to have the name of a
king but he that has all things subject to his hestes, as here is showed by
worchynge of his treature by this water. And for this as witnesses
Polycronycon and other / he offered his crown to ye rode of wynchester, and
never bare it upon his head after.

It is also wytnessed of the said author / that Canutus married his daughter
had by his last wife, unto Henry son of Conradus the emperor, the second
of that name / as also it is testyfyed of the author of Cronica cronicarum.

And he repaired many monasteryes / and specially such as before time were
hurt or thrown down in the time of his fathers persecucyon. And began and
ended the monastery of saint Edmundes Bury / and endowed it with rich
possessions as before is towched. And dyed finally at Shaftesbury, and was
buried at wynchester, when he had reigned.xix. years / leuyng after him two
sons of his wives / the eldest was named Harolde and the younger Hardykynytus
/ the which living his fader was made king of Denmark.

Francia. THE.CCVII. CHAPTER.
HEnry the son of Robert / began his domynyon over the French men, in the
year of our lord. M.xxix / and the.x. year of Canutus than king of England.
To the which Henry / Co^stantyne the mother was so unkind, that she by her
means would have preferred her younger son Roberte duke of Burgoyne, to the
rule of the land before this Henry / so that by her means, both cytyes and
castles were with holden from him, and was by her and such other as took her
part so over lad, that he was forced to resort to Robert than duke of
Normandy, for to ask help of him to wythstande his enemies.

ye shall understand that this Robert was the.vi. duke of Normandy, and son
of Richard the second / and also father unto wyllya^ bastard that conquered
England.

This Roberte was lyberall and noble of condycyon / but defamed of ye death of
his elder brother Rychard the third. For the which murder as wytnessyth
diverse authors / the vii. year of his dowchery he went to Iherusalem, and did
in that pylgre mage many honorable and liberal acts / the which in good
order ben remembered in the.xix. chapyter of the vi. book of Polycronicon.

This Robert received king Henry with all honor, and gave unto him great and
rich gifts, and sent for his friends and knights / so ye the king had by
his aid a great and mighty host. And returned again into France / and in
short while after recovered from his said mother both cytyes, towns, and
castelles, that she and her fautours from him wythhelde. And finally agreed so
with her / that he and she continued friends their life times enduryng. After
which accord / about the.v. year of his reygne he made war upon Eudo earl
of Champayne, and upon Baldewine earl of Flanders / and in process of time
wan from them certain cytyes and castelles, the which Constance his mother
had before times given to them in time of dyscencyon.

In this war was slain Eudo earl of Champayne. wherefore his.ii. sons
Stephen and Thybaud maynteyned the war again the king / but to their both
harms in ye end. For Stephen lost thereby the cytyes of Chartres and towers,
and Thybaude ye cytyes of Troyes and Maulx with other.

when Henry had ended this war and set his land in some quietness / he
tha^ builded a monastery of saint Martyne called Des Cha^ps beside Paris, and
set therein seculer prestes.

In this passetyme Robert duke of Normandy moved in conscience to vysyte the
holy sepulture of our lord, called before him his lords of his land /
willing and co^maundynge them to owe their true allegaunce unto his younger
son wyllyam, and to take him for their lord and duke if he return not
again. And to this / he caused to swear Robert than archbysshop of Roan, with
the other of his lords / and after departed upon the said journey, and dyed
in the city of Bethenia as he was coming homewarde. whereof ye lords of
Normandy being assertayned, accepted the foresaid wyllyam to their lord and
sovereign.

Of this wyllyams procreacyon / yt is wytnessed of Uyncent hystory all and
other, that his father passing by the city or town of Faloys in Normandy, he
saw a company of maidens daunsynge by the street. Among the which was one of
passing beautye called Arlet, and daughter to a skynner. To ye which duke
Robert cast unlawful love / in such wise yt he caused her to be brought to
his bed the night following, and held her to his concubyne a certain of time
after / and begat on her this wyllyam. when his mother was with him conceived /
she dremed that her bowel lys were sprad over all Normandye and England. And
when he was borne of his moders womb / he fill to the ground, and closed his
hands with powder of the flore or pauement. Therefore the mydwyfe made and
exclamacyon, and said this child shall be a king.

Then yt follows / when this wyllyam was thus admitted duke, some of his
lords by the mean of ye king of France, began to wythdraw them from him. In
so myche ye earl Gylbert to whom duke Robert had betaken his ponge son to
gyde was slain, and other that were especyall friends to the child. There was
fyghtyng and manslaughter and the country foul faren with, by reason of the
opynyons that were among them self / whereof Guy a Burgoyn was one of the
chief causers. For he with his adherentes said always; that they would have
no bastard to be ruler of them.

This Guy as says the french book was nere kynnesman unto ye young duke,
descendyd of the daughter of the second Richard / and intended to have been
duke him self. For the which he ensensed ye king of France again him in all
that he might / but at length duke wyllyam took him and put him to death.

Thus the French king forgetting ye kyndnesse showed to him by duke Robert
his father, took party again him to the vttermoste / and ordained him.ii.
hosts. whereof one he delyueryd to his brother Almaryk / and warned him to
eutre ye country of Cause / and he him self ladde that other, and entered with
it the country of Eurour.

But wyllyam not ferynge the kings great power / being grown well toward
man's stature, like a lust young knight made toward the kings brother / and
gave to him battle, and him overcame, and chased the Frenchemen to their great
bylany. whereof heryng the French king with his people spedde him toward
wyllyam to revenge the shame done to his men. But in co^clusyon he wan there no
honor. Then peace was made between the king and ye duke / and the French
prisoners were delyueryd.

But this peace enduryed not long / for the French king calling to
remembrance the loss of his men at Mort mere or deed see, with other
dysauauntages by him sustained of the said duke wyllyam / called to his aid
Geoffrey earl of Aungiers. And when his host was assembled / they entered ye
prouynce of Normandy, and co^tynued their journey till they came to an arm of
the sea, where the host should pass over.

Of this new war duke wyllya^ being warned / in all haste assembled his
Normans and sped him ye next way to mete the Frenchemen. In this mean while
the French king had passed the water with certain of his host, trustyng
that the remenauau^t should have followed. But soon after the water flowed so
fast that his people might not pass. And in this while came the duke and set
upon the kings host, and bet them down cruelly / so that at length the
king was compelled to flee, and lost a great number of his knights, to
consider them ye were slain with the other that were taken prisoners.

when king Henry had well dysgested in his mind, the wrongful trouble that
he by enuyous persons had put the duke unto, and remembered the ill expedycyon
that he had in that war / he reco^syled him self, and made means that the
duke and he might be agreed and accorded. The which by dyscrete solycytours
was shortly after brought to good effect / so that they continued as fre^des
during their lives after.

Than Henry abstayned him from all war / and used the rest of his life in
peace and quietness. This Henry had two wives / and of the last which was
daughter to the king of Russy, he had.iii. sons / that is to say Phylyp, y^
which he made king of France by his life, Robert that was after duke of
Burgoyne, and Hughe that was after named Hugh le graunde, and was fader to
Raufe earl of Uermendoyse.

And in this kings days / Burgoyne that had been under ye French kings
obeysaunce over a hundred and.xxx. years, refused the French king, aparte of
them, and turned unto Conradus the second of that name than emperor. So that
that part which stretched to Champayne belonged to France / and that other
part which stretched toward Basaynz belonged to the Almayns.

And that year that the king had admytted his son Phylyp to the gydynge of
the realm / he dyed, and was buried at saint Denis / leuyng after him the
issue forenamed, when he had reigned after most writers.xxxi. years.

Anglia. THE.CCVIII. CHAPTER.
HArold the son of Canutus, and of Elgma ye erlys daughter of Hampton / began
his reygne over England, in ye year of our lords incarnacyon. M. xxxix / and
the x. year of Henry tha^ king of France. This for his delyuernesse and
swyftenesse, was surnamed Harefote. In whose beginning strife was among the
lords, for so myche as of his birth should be doughte, whyther he were the
kings son or not / and specially earl Goodwyne, that did the vttermoste of his
power to set him by, and put Hardykynitus his brother to that honor. But Leo
frycus that Canutus so much loved and trusted, with the aid of the Danes /
wythstode so myghtely Goodwyne and his sons, that they failed of their
purpose.

Anon as this Harold was crowned king / he banysshed his stepmoder Emma, and
took from her such goods and iewelles as she had. The which Emma sailed than
into Flanders, and there of Bawdewyne the earl was reverently received, and
there abode during the life of this Harolde. The which continued his life to
little fruit or profit of the land, nor yet of the subjects / so that of
him, other for ye vice that clerks list not to put in memory, other for the
rudeness, which is worthy no memory, nothing of him is put in remembrance /
but that he dyed at London, or after some at Oxenford, and was buried at
westmynster, when he had reigned as most writers agreen.iii. years and odd
months / leuynge after him none heir. wherefore his brother king of Denmark
was next king after him.

THE.CCIX. CHAPTER.
HArdikynytus the son of Canutus and of Emma / was made king of England, in
the year of our lords incarnacyon. M.xli / and the xii. year of Henry than
king of France. This of some writers is named Hardykynytus and Hardyknough /
and was anon after the death of his brother sent for into Denmark, and
received ioyously, and crowned at London of Ethelnotus than archybysshop of
Caunterbury. But this was of such cruelty, that he sent Alfrycus archbysshoppe
of york and earl Goodwyne unto westmynster / commaundynge them for the injury
by his brother Harolde before done unto his mother Emma, that they should draw
the corpse out of ye place where it was buried, and to be thrown into the river
of Thamys / which was done according to his will. which corpse after as
testyfyeth Guydo and other, was founden by a fyssher / and buried irreverently
within the chyrcheyarde of saint Clement standing without the Temple bar of
London. And as Polycronycon says / for a more curelty he caused first the head
of his said brother to be smyten from the body, and than thrown in to the said
river. Let the herers to this give credence as them like / for to me it
seems though the king had been of such cruelty, that the bishop forenamed
would not have been the executour of so foul a deed.

This king also leuyed the forenamed trybute named Dane gelt, and spent it to
the little comfort of the realm / but gave unto shypmen and maryners, and
other lewd persons, great and unsitting fees and wages / and was of such
prodegalyte, that his bourdes and tabelles of his court were spread.iiii. times
in the day / and the people served of great excess both of mete and also of
drink.

with leuyeng of the foresaid try bute the commons greatly grudged / so that in
worceter two of his servants, which were assygned to gader that money were
there slain. For the which deed the king was so sore dyspleased, yt he brent
a great part of that town.

This Hardykynutus after some authors, married his sister named Gunylda unto
the third Henry emperor. The which was of passing beauty / and was the
daughter also of Emma last wife of Canutus. But in process of time this
Gunylda was falsely accused of spowsebrech / for trial whereof she was put to
her champyon. wherefore she being in great agony / lastely trustyng to god,
and knowing her self without gylte of that offense, put a child that she
with her had brought out of England instead of the champyon. The which
fought with a man of geauntes stature / and finally him slew, and brought unto
confusyon.

when Gunylda by dyuyne power had thus clered her self / she utterly refused
the emperors company, and ended her life in the service of him the only god,
that so had defended her right.

But yt should appear by Polycronycon, and also by Antoninus / that this maiden
was married to ye said Henry by the life of her father Canutus, and also
during the life of the said Henryes father named Conradus the second, as
before is touched in the storye of the said Canutus / and not by this
Hardykinytus her brother.

It is rad that the king betoke all the rule of the land unto his mother and
earl Goodwyn / the which had married as wytnessyth the english cronycle, the
daughter of Canutus gotten upon his first wife Elgina. By whom many things
were mysse orderyd / and specially by the subtylyte of this earl Goodwyn. This
earl had many sons, as witnesses Polycrony con in the.xxv. chapyter of
his.vi. book. By his first wife that was king Canutus sister, and not his
daughter as is above said / he had one son. The which by indiscreet
strykynge of an horse, was thrown into the Thamys and drowned. And the mother
was lastely smytte^ with lyghtenyng and so dyed. Of whom yt is there
remembered, that she was so ungracious and of so vile condycyon / that she set
young women to horedome, for to gader by that unlawful mean riches. After the
which wife so dyed, he married the second / of whom he received.vi. sons.
That is to wit Swanus, Harolde, Tostius, wylnotus, Sirthe or Surthe, and
Leoffricus / and a daughter named Goditha, which after was married to Edward
the confessor.

The two sons of Egelredus Alphredus and Edward, which as ye before have
hard were sent into Normandy by Emma their mother / came in ye time of the
reygne of this king into England, for to vysyte and se their mother / and
brought with them a great number of Normans. Then this Goodwyne ymagyned in his
mind how he might prefer his daughter Godyth to one of these brethren /
and thought in his mind yt the eldest would dysdayne that marriage. And for he
thought to join her unto the younger, and to make him king and her queen / he
compassed the death of ye elder. And by this mean Goodwyn warned the lords of
England / and said yt was a great ieoperdye for the land, to suffer so many
strangers to enter the land without license / wherefore yt were necessary that
they were punyshed to the example of other. By which means he gat authoryte to
order that matter as to him seemed best or of his own power, because he was of
most might next the king. wherefore he yode and met with the said Normans
/ and slew of them the most number. For upon Guylde down he slew
always.ix. and saved the.x. And yet for he thought to many by that mean left
a live / he eft again tythed again the said tithe, and slew every tenth
knight of them and that by cruel death / as wyndynge their guts out of their
bodies, as says Polycronycon / and among other put out the eyes of the elder
brother Alphredus, and sent him to Ely, where he dyed in short time after / all
be it ye english book says yt he was slain by the forenamed tormente. And
Edward was conveyed and by some other way brought to his mother. But she
ferynge the treason of Good wine, sent him soon over the sea again. How be
yt the ynglyshe cronycle tells all otherwise. when Goodwyne was after accused
for this cruel deed / he swear depely yt he was forced of the king so for to
do. But in one cronicle, I find that this deed was executed by Goodwyne in the
time of Harolde Harefote being king.

Then yt follows in the story / this king Hardykynytus being at a feste at
Lambehyth beside London, merry and iocande / while he stood drinking he fill
down suddenly, and dyed / or waxed dumb, and lay till the.viii. day after,
the which was the.viii. day of the month of June / and then dyed, when he
had reigned after most writers two years / leuynge after him none issue of
his body lawful, and was buried by his father at wynchester.

Thus here ends the line or ofsprynge of Swanus and all other Danys / so that
after this king, the blood of Danys was clearly extyncte and put out from
all kyngly dygnyte within this realm of England. And also the persecution of
the^ seized clearly after this kings death. The which had continued, to reke^
from their first landynge in time of Brightricus king of west Saxon, and
the.ix. year of his reygne, as in ye storye before is rehearsed / by ye term
of.CC.lv. years.

THE.CCX. CHAPTER.
EDward the son of Egelredus and of Emma his last wife / began his reygne over
England, in the year of our lord M.xliii / and the xiiii. year of Henry then
king of France. The which after the death of Hardykinitus was sent for into
Normandye / and pledges laid for him, that he without fraud should be made
king. And then he came with a few straunges. But as says Marianus / some of
the lords had sent for Edward the outlaw son of Edmunde Ironsyde, for to be
their king. But after the affyrmaunce of the said author / when he knew that
Edward his neuewe was in possessyon of the land, he would meddle him no
farther.

Then this Edward by the great advise of Goodwyn^ earl of west Saxon, and of
Leofricus earl of Chester / was crowned king at westmynster, of Edsius then
archbishop of Caunterbury / and wedded in process of time after, Goditha the
daughter of earl Goodwyne, which of Guydo is called Editha. The which he
entreatyd in such wise / yt he put her not from his bed, nor yet delte with
her fleshely. whyther yt were for hate of her kynne, or forloue of chastity, ye
troth is not showed. But all writers agreen that he co^tynued his life with
outen offense with women.

This king discharged Engleshmen of ye great tribute called Dane gelt, yt which
before is sundry time spoken of / so yt after ye day yt was no more gaderyd.
And also he subdued ye Brytons or walshmen that made war within the bonds of
ye land. But after yt their duke or leder called Gryffyn or Gryffyth, with aid
of ye Irysh men entered the river of Seuerne, and took many prays, and departed
again without fight.

In the time of the reygne of this Edward / Emma his mother was accused to be
familyer with ye bishop of winchester. Upon which accusacio^, by cou^sayll of
earl Goodwyn^ he took from her many of her iewellys, and caused her to be
keptsomdele more straightly in the abbay of warwell / and the bishop he committed
to the examynacyon and correccyon of the clergy. But his mother more sorowynge
the defame of Alwyn^ the bishop then her own estate / wrote unto diverse
bishops, and besought them of justice / affermynge yt she was ready to abide
all leful and most sharpest trial.

Then diverse of ye bishops made labor to the king for her and for the
bishop. But Robert then archebyshop of Caunterbury / being with their labor
dyscontended, said to them in this manner. My brethern bisshoppes said he, how
dare ye defend her that is a wyld best and not a woman? she has defamed her
own son the king, and nempned her lecherours lemman gods own priest. But be
yt so that the woman would purge the priest / who shall then purge the woman,
that is accused to be consenting to the death of her son Alphred, and
procured venym to the poysonyng of her son Edward. But how so yt be that she
be gylty or gyltlesse / if she woll go barefoted for her self.iiii. steps
and for the bishop.v, contynually upon.ix. plough sharys brennynge and fire
hot / then if she escape harmless, he shall be assoyled of this challenge and
she also.

This was of her granted, and the day of purgacyon assygned. At which day ye
king and great part of his lords were present / but this Robert failed, were
yt for pity or otherwise. This Robert was a monk of an house in Normandy, and
came over by the sonde of the king / and was first made bishop of London,
and after archbysshopppe of Caunterbury. Then the night before Emma should make
her purgacyon / she went unto the shryne of saint Swythune at wynchester / and
there kneled all that night in prayer and received dyuyne comfort. Upon the
morn she was blyndefelde / and ladde unto the place between.ii. men, where the
iron lay glowynge hot / and passed the.ix. sharys unhurt. Then at last she
said. Good lord when shall I come to the place of my purgacyon. when they
opened her eyes, and she saw that she was paste the pain / she kneled down
and thanked God and saint Swythune. Then the king repented him / and restored
to her that he before had taken from her, and asked of her forgyuenesse. But
the archebyshoppe of Caunterburye fled into Normandye. And this Emma gave
then unto the monastery of that holy confessor saint Swythune.ix. manners / and
the bishop other.ix. as affermeth Polycronica and other.

It was not long after, that king Edward gaderyd a strong nauye at
Southampton^, or more verily in the haven of Sandwyche / for so myche as he was
warned that Swanus king of Denmark intended to make war upon him. But
Polycronycon says that he gadederyd this navy to wythstande Harolde Harfagar
then king of North ganys, that intended to have entered England. But he was
let by ye forenamed Swanus, yt shortly after made war upon ye said Harold

An other cronycle shewyth, that the Danys and Norgayns, which is to mean men
of Norway / were agreed to come jointly into England. And while the king was
shyppyng of his mne / one brought forth a bole full of mede or meth to drink
upon bon vyage. And after that came bole after bole / so that after drink came
dronkenes, and after iangelyng / and iangelynge turned into strife, and strife
turned into fighting / where thorough many were slain / and the other turned
to their own, so that that journey was left of. But the lege^de of his life
in the church tells / that he being at mass in the church of westmynster
upon a whytsondaye, in the time of the leuacyon of the sacrament he laughed.
whereof the lords being about him meruayled greatly / and after frayned of
him the cause. wheru^to he answered and said, that the Danys with the Norwayes
of one assente were purposed to have comen into this land, and here have taken
prays. But as the king of Danys should have entered his ship, he fill into the sea and was drowned / so that I trust in my days they shall not, nor none
other strangers make any war in this land.

THE.CCXI. CHAPTER.
IN the time of this Edward fill passing great snow, the which began in the
beginning of January, and so continued till the xvii. day of March or saint
Patrykes day / whereof the great quantyte fill in the weste countries of
England. And after that ensued great death of men, and moreyne of beftes / and
by lyghtnynge the corn upon the ground that year was wonderful brent and
wasted.

About the.x. year of Edward as moves Policronyca, and in the month of
September / Eustace earl of Bolongn^ came a land at Dover / which earl had
wedded after the saying of the said author, king Edwardes sister. This was
parted from his company in so secret wise, that his knights were feign to
search for him / wenynge to them that he had been slain by some of the
dwellers of the town. In the which search they demeaned them so
vndyscretely, that they slew a cytezyne of Dover. By mean whereof the people
arose / and in the questyonynge of this man's death, ran at length upon the
earls company, and slew.xx. of his men, and wounded many mo. Hastily the earl
apperyd and took his mennys part. But in conclusyon he was feign to wythdrawe
him self with a few persons, and rode unto the king then being at Glouceter /
and made unto him a grievous complaynte of the men of Dover.

Then earl Goodwyne, for so much as to him was committed the rule of Kente /
was charged to ride thither, and to take wreche of the inhabytau^tes of that
town. But he with said that commandment / and counsayled the king to send
for the wardeyns of the castle of Dover and rulers of the town, for to
answer to such matters as were laid again them, and if they were gylty to
punyshe them, and else not.

This answer of Goodwyn^ pleased nothing the king, nor such as were about
him / wherefore many mo lords were sent for. Among the which Leofricus earl of
Chester, and Sewarde earl of Northumberland of mine author ben named. After
which assemble of ye lords earl Goodwyne had such monycyon of some of ye
counsayll, yt he wythdrewe him from the court, and gadered to him strength of
knights out of diverse shyres, as west Saxon and Kent / and houed at Beuerston^
till his sons came unto him with more people Soon after came unto him his
eldest son named Swanus, and brought with him a fair company that he had
arreyred in Oxenfordeshyre and Gloucetershyre / and Harolde his other son,
with a feleshyppe that he had assembled in eest England, and Huntyngdon^shyre
/ so that of these people was made a great host.

Then Goodwyn^ to the king was accused, for gaderynge of so great an host. But
he excused him, and said, yt was done to wythstand the walyshmen. The which
contrary proved / he was commanded to send away the people, and to come with
a certain number unto the court. But that he refused. Then the king with his
counsayll being at London / Goodwyn and Harold was eft sent for, and charged
to come to the court with.xii. persons without mo / and to render into the
kings hands all knights fees that he and Harolde his son had within
England. To this by them was answered, that they might not come to the
counsayll of treachours and gylefull men / and that also with so few men in
number, they mygthe not without parell or shame pass by the country.

In this while a part of Goodwyns knights wythdrewe them, and his power
began to mynyshe and the king in this while had gaderyd a strong host.
Then proclamacyons were made, that Goodwyne should come to the court as before
is said / or avoid the land with in five days. wherefore Goodwyne consyderyng
the ieopardy yt he was in / took with him.iii. of his sons, that is to mean
Swanus, Tosty, and Gurthe / and sailed into Flaundres* where he was received of
the earl Baldwyn after some writers / whose daughter Swanus his son had
before spoused and was named Iudeth And Harolde and Leofricus two of his other
sons with a few ships sailed out from Brystow into Irland.

when the king was ascertayned that earl Goodwyne with his five sons was in
this manner departed out of his land / he shortly after called a parlyament /
and by authoryte of the same, outlowed Goodwyne and his.iii. sons that were
gone with him. And that done he put his own wife and daughter of Goodwyn^ into
the abbaye of warwell with one maiden, as says Marianus. And so Goodwyn^ and
his said sons continued two years outlawed. In the which season he or his
retynue took diverse times prays in ye marches of England / and in the end
drew to him such strength, that he was purposed to have entered the land with
force, and to have warred upon the king. But by medyatours that favored earl
Goodwyn, a peace was made between ye king and him / so that in process he was
received to grace with his sons / and his daughter restored to her first and
former honor. And for this peace to be continued / for Goodwyns part was
delyueryd for pledkes a son of his called wylnotus, and a son of Swanus
named Hacum or Hacun. The which.ii. pledges king Edward sent unto wyllyam
duke of Normandy to be kept. And Algarus the son of Leofricus earl of
Chester, to whbme the king had given the erledome of Harold, and ruled yt
dyscretely in time of his absence / at his return delivered yt to him again,
gladly and without grudge

THE.CCXII. CHAPTER.
During the time of this out lauwry of Goodwyne / wyllyam bastard duke of
Normandye came with a goodly company into this land, and was honorably received
/ to whom the king made great chere. And after he had tarried here a certain
of time to his agreement and pleasure / he returned to his own with great
gifts and pleasures. And Emma the kings mother dyed shortly after, and was
buried a wynchester. And Swanus the eldest son of Goodwyne went to
Jerusalem, and from thens toward Lycia / and dyed by the way of cold, that
he had taken of going barefote. Then the Normans that had given to the king
evil counsaylles again Englyshemen / were by Goodwyne and his friends exyled.
Among the which Robert archebyshop af Caunterbury that had spoken sore
again them was one / which after went to Rome to complayn to the pope then
Leon^ the.ix. or Uyctour the second. And when he had received letters of ye
pope directed to ye king / he returned to his abbay of Gemeticum in Normandye,
where he sometime had been munke and abbot / and there dyed. After him Stigandus
was made his successoure / the which as says Policronicon, had before time
left the byshopryche of Shyrborne, and took the sea of wynchester by strength.
He also used fayres of holy church things / and was a lewd or unlettered man,
as the more part of the bysshoppes of England at those days were. And over
that he passed other in riches and dyssymulacyon. But yet he never had ye palle
from Rome, though there be great sale that makes many maystryes.

Then was openly spoken that he was not worthy a byshopryche, that could use ye
brag or pomp of the world, the use of voluptuosyte, of glotony and Lechery,
the shynynge array of clothing, the countenance of knights, and the
gaderynge of horsemen, and thinks full little on the profit of souls. And
if men said to them that a bishop should be chosen for holiness of living,
and for his good clergy, and not for couetyse of money / they would answer as
follows, Nunc aliud tempus, alii pro te^pore mores. The which verse may be
englyshed in this manner. As time requires, so men done them use.
In winter warm clothes, in somer light and less.
In time of sadness men done gamys refuse.
And in myrthe time, men myrthes them dress.
So in time passed, was used great sadness
In the church. But now men light be.
wherefore the manners must with men agree.


SO that by such light answer they planed or excused ye sharpness of their
mysse living.

About this time, which should by Ranulff be about the.xii. year of ye reygne
of Edward / Marianus the Scot that before I have often named, that wrote myche
of ye deeds of ye kings of England / at the age of.xxv. years forsook the
world, and went on pilgrimage / and was after shorn munke at Coleyne in
Almayne in the abbay of Scotts. which Marianus after some writers was in
great favor with Malcolyne king of Scotts.

In the.xiii. year of king Edward the Scotts rebelled again ye king. wherefore
Sewarde earl of Northumberlande, by the kings commandment gadered a great
host and entered that land / and behaved him so manfully, that in process he
subdued the Scotts, and chased ye king out of his country / so that after
king Edward gave that kyngedome unto Malcolyn^ son of the king of Cumbrys,
to beholden of him and his heirs kings, as chief lords of Scotland.

Upon Ester mondaye about the said year Goodwyn^ sitting at the kings
bourde with other lords in ye castle of wyndsore / yt happed one of the
kings cup berers to stumble and to recover again, so that he shed none of
the drink. whereat Goodwyn^ lough, and said, now that one brother has
sustained that other. whereby he meant that the one foot or leg has sustained
ye other from falling. with which words the king marked him and said, Right
so my brother Alfrede should have holden me, ne had Goodwyn ben. The earl then
conceived that the king suspected him of his brothers death / and said unto
the king in defending his untruth: sir as I perceive well it is told to the,
yt I should be ye cause of thy brothers death. So might I sauely swalowe this
mor fell of bread yt I here hold in my hand, as I am giltlesse of the deed. But
as soon as he had received the bread / forthwyth he was choked. Then the king
commanded him to be drawn from the table / and so was conveyed to wynchester,
and there buried. Marianus says that as earl Goodwyn^ sat at the kings table
at wynchester / he was suddenly taken with a palsye or some other sykenes upon
the Ester mondaye, and dyed ye third day after. And his lordshyppes were given
unto Harold his eldest son then living / and Haroldes erledome was given to
Algarus the son of Leofricus, which was the erledome of Oxenford after some
writers. It was not long after ye king Edward sent unto the.iiii. Henry than
emperor of Almayne, Aldredus bishop of worceter, with other noble men /
prayenge him that he would send unto England his cosyn Edward son of
Edmu^de Ironsyde / for so myche as he intended to make him his heir. The
which request was fulfilled, so that he came into England soon after / the
which as ye have hard before, was named Edward the outlawe.

But as witnessyth Guydo and other the year after that he came into England,
he dyed at London, and was buried at westmynster.

This year following king Edward thorough ill counsayll exiled without gylte
Algarus the son of Leofricus. The which assocyat him with Gryffyne king or
duke of walys / and destroyed ye country of Harforde, and did much harm to ye
town, and set the mynster on fire, and slew vii. chanons thereof. Then the king
sent Harolde again him / the which chased the walshmen into their own bounds,
and recoueryd the said town by appoyntement holden by the said Algarus, and
amended all hurtes before done by the walshme^ / and lastely recouncyled the
said Algarus and his company unto the kings grace.

THE.CCXIII. CHAPTER.
About the.xv. year of king Edward / dyed ye noble duke Sewarde ruler of
Northumberland of the flux, of whom Guydo reherseth diverse notable acts
which I pass over. Of whom yt is radde that when he saw well he should dye,
he caused his armor to be put upon him / and so armed and sitting in a
cheyre, having all the ryghtes of the church said, that so yt became a knight
and man of honor to dye, and not lyenge as an other mean man / and so dyed,
and was buried at york. And his erledome was after given to Tosty or Costy son
of Goodwyn^.

In the year following or.xvi. year of king Edward, dyed also ye good earl
Leofricus earl of Mercia and of Chester / and was buried in the abbay of
Couentre, the which before he had builded. This man purchased many great
pryuyleges for ye town of Couentre / and made it free of all manner of toll,
except only of horse. For the which to have also free / the comen fame
tells, that after long request made unto him by his wife named Godina, he
granted her to have yt thereof freed / with that that she would ride naked
thorough the town / by mean whereof yt was freed. Then Algarus his son was
earl after him.

Harolde then the eldeste son of Goodwyn^ / was in great authoryte, and ruled
myche of the kings army.

The year following Algarus was accused by malice / and exylded the land.
wherefore he fled again to Gryffyne duke of walis as he before had done, of
whom he was ioyously receyuyd and maynteyned. The king thereof being infourmed,
sent Harolde into walys to make war upon Gryffyne. The which quytte him in
so knyghtely wise / that he chased the walshmen, brent the said Gryffyns
paleys at a place called Rutlan^, and his navy, and then returned into England
about mydlent. But about rogacyon days next following, the said Harolde with
his brother Tosty was sent thither again, with a strong army. At which
season they destroyed a great part of walys, and in conclusion brought the
walshmen unto dew subieccyon, and forced the^ to give pledges for the
contynuance of the same. And that done pursued so sore upon the said
Gryffyne, that in the end his own people for purchase of their own lives,
slew the said Gryffyne, and sent his head unto Harolde in the month of
Auguste / so that after the death of this Griffyne by the commandment of the
king, the country of walys was committed to the gydynge of the.ii. brethren
of Gryffyne / the which had favored more the kings party in time of the
foresaid war then their brother. And this war in walys thus brought to end
/ Harold by his polycy recouncyled again Algarus earl of Mercia to ye kings
grace, so that he continued in his favor during his life after.

About this time a woman of Bakley in Barkshyre used ill crafts of sorcery.
The which as she was sitting upon a day at a feste or great dinner / a crow
that she had lykyngly fed and brought up, kreked louder then he was
accustomed to do* when the woman hard that noise her knyfe fill out of her
hand, and she waxed suddenly pale. And with yt she began to syghe and sorrow
/ and said alas, this day is my soul comen to the last sorrow. And so after
that she had spoken those words / a messanger came to her, and said that her
son and all her mayny was deed suddenly. Then she was conveyed to her own and
was full syke. wherefore in haste she sent for an other son of hers that was a
monk, and a daughter yt was a nun / at whose coming she said to them in
this wise. I am the woman that have used ill craft and enyll living / and in
vain I hoped to have been saved by your bedes and prayers. But now I pray you
that ye woll releue my tourmentes and pains / for of my soul the judgment is
given. wherefore in case that ye may keep my body from tourment, sewe it in an
hearts skyn, and lay it in a troughe of stone and hill it with led close and
just / and after do bind it with bars of iron in most strongest and sure
wise, and cause ye.xl. persons to sing psalms by night, and upon the morn
as many masses. And if I lie so stylle iii. nyghtes, than burye my body on
the.iiii. day. But all this was for naught. For the first night while the
psalms were in saying / ye strong bands were suddenly to broken / and one
with a gresely look was seen upon an horse back all black, and cast this
woman behind him, and so rode forth with so great cry and noise, that it was
hard as says Polycronycon.iiii. miles thens.

This would I not have showed, but that I find it written and recorded of
diverse authors.

Than to return to our fourmer story / as wytnessyth mine authoure Ranulfe,
about ye.xx. year of ye reygne of king Edward / Harolde sailed toward
Normandye to vysyte his brother wylnotus and Hacun his neuewe / the which as ye
before have hard were laid there for pledges for the peace to beholden upon
earl Goodwyns side again the king. But he in his course of saylyng was weder
driven by tempeste into the country or prouynce of Pontyfe, or more verily into
the puynce of Pou^tyth / where he was taken as a prisoner, and sent unto duke
wyllyam of Normandy. The which forced him to swear, that he in time following
should marye his daughter / and that after the death of king Edward he should
keep the land of England to his behofe, according to the will and mind of
Edward after some writers. And after the opinion of a another cronycle written
in latin / the said Harolde for to be in the more favor of duke wyllya^,
showed to him that king Edward in presence of his barony, had admytted the
said wyllyam for his heir / and couenau^ted with him, that if he ouerlyued
the king, he would in save wise keep the land to his use. For the which
tidings and promise wyllyam granted to him his daughter to wife, yt than was
within lawful years of marriage with great dower. And for to cause Harolde to
be the more stabler in his promise keeping / he delivered to him Hacun his
neuew and son of his brother Swanus, which he myche desired, and kept still
wylnotus the brother of ye said Harolde. After which couenauntes suffycyentely
stablysshed and enacted / Harold departed from duke wyllyam with great and
rich gifts, and in process of time landed in England. And at his coming to
the kings presence / he showed to him all that he had done in the foresaid
matters / where with the king was well contented, as affermeth the said latyne
cronycle.

THE.CCXIIII. CHAPTER.
IN the.xxii. year of king Edward as testyfyeth Ranulfe / Tostius the brother
of Harolde was for cause not showed disconted in the kings court, and went
unto Harforde in the march of walys / where at that time the servants of
Harold by commandment of their master were besyed to make prouysyon for to
receive the king. But when this Tostius was thither comen / he cruelly slew
the said servants of his brother, and hacked them in small pecys, and cast
them after in meresowce or salt. And that done sent word unto the king, yt
if he would come unto his feast, he should lack no powdered mete, what so ever
he had beside.

This cruel deed sprange wide, so that for it he was hated of all me^ / in so
much that his own tenauntes the men of Northumberland, of which prouynce he
than was lord of, arose again him and took from him that he had / and
lastely chaced him into Flaunders with a few persons than a waiting upon
him. But ye virtuous king Edward not being contented with the commons doing,
considering it to be done without his aduyce and commandment / sent thither
Harolde to do correccyon upon the heddes or capytayns of the Northumbers.
whereof they being acerteyned co^tynued their strength and met with Harolde
and his people / and sent him to understand that they were freely borne, and
freely nourysshed, and that they might not suffer no cruelnesse of dukes. Also
they had learned of their elders and soueraynes to meyntayn fredom or to suffer
death and to live in quietness under an easy duke. when Harolde had received
this message, and aduertysed ye strength of the Northu^bers / he perceived well
that without great effusyon of blood he might not correct the mysse doers.
wherefore it seemed to him better to favor the country, than to take heed of
the synguler profit of his brother / so that he returned to the king with
this answer, and purchased their pardon of him / and also procured so ye king,
ye he assygned to them an other duke or earl that was named Malcarus. And
Tostius his brother with his wife and chyldern remained in Flaunders, during
the kings life.

King Edward in the.xxii. year of his reygne, syttyng at mete upon Eester day
in his paleys of westmynster, suddenly lowghe, when other did talk and eat.
when this blessed man had dyned, and was entered into his chamber / his
famylyers asked of him ye cause of his lawghyng To whom he answered / for ye
same self time said he.vii. slepers, that in the mount Seleon besides Ephesym
in Asya the less, had slepte two hundred years or there about upon the right
side / the self same time they turned them, and shall sleep again upon that
other side.lxxiiii. years. Though this be told of Ranulphe and other / sith in
this saying appears some dyscordaunce with other writers / and also with the
former saying of the said Ranulphe in the.xxii. chapyter of his.iiii. book of
Polycronyco^, where he says that the said.vii. slepers were closed in ye cave
/ the first year of Decius, and so sleped contynuyngly to the last time or
years of Theodocius the youger than emperor / by which reason they should
sleep about ye season or space of.ii. hundred year as above is said / and than
arose and showed them to that said Theodocius emperor and many other / and
dyed soon after, as wytnessyth Uincencius hystorialis, Antoninus, Iacobus
Philippus, and other: wherefore it can not stand with reason, yt they should
sleep upon ye other side after ye tournyng.lxxiiii. years, as is above said /
nor that they should sterue in ye time of this holy king and confessoure. For
his time of reygne was after ye time of Theodocius aforesaid, more than.vi.
hundred years. But if it be meant by some other. For there are vii. other
slepers spoken of in ye.xxvi. chapyter of the first book of Polycronycon, that
has slepte in a another cave many years. wherefore I remytte this unto other,
and follow the order of the story. wherein it is found, that when this blessed
king Edward had received by dyuyne monycyon, that he should change this
transitory and bryckell life for the life everlasting / he sykened in the
Crystmasse weke. In time of which sykenesse was showed to him a vysyon, that he
after showed unto such as were about him / and said two men of relygion came
to me that I sometime was famylyer with in Normandye / and showed that they were
sent from god unto me, to give unto me warynynge of such things as follows.
And first they said that for the dukes, bysshoppes, and abbotes of England,
be not gods servants, but the deuyllys / god has taken this kingdom into
the hands of enemies for a time / and fendes shall walk and destroble the
people. Than I besought god that the people might have warning, and do
penance and be delivered, as the people were of the city of Ninyue. Nay said
they / for these men be so indurate of heart, ye they should do no worthy
penance, nor to them god shall show his mercy nor forgyuenesse. Than I asked
of them / wha^ might be hope of mercy and pardon. They answered / when a grene
tree is hewn down, and a part thereof cut from the stock, and laid.iii.
fourlonge from the stock / and without man's help or hand shall return to
his stock or rote, and take again his shappe, and than flouryshe and bring
forth fruit. when this is done / than may be hope of comfort and of remedy.

In the time that this blessed man showed thus this vysyon / was present there
with other, Stygandus archebysshoppe of Caunterbury. The which said unto the
other, that the king raued or else doted for age and sykenesse, as old men
done / and accounted these words for folly and vanyte. But not long after
England felt and conceived this prophecye / when it was in subieccyon of
strangers and alyauntes as after shall be showed.

Than who that is desirous to know the exposycion of the prophecye of the
grene tree / let him read in the end of the life of this glorious king and
confessoure, translated by wyllyam Caxton, in the book called the Legende of
saints / and there he shall find it. All be it that in other places I have
seen it otherwise interpreted / the which I remytte to them that have
experyence in such facultye. And to conclude this storye / troth it is that
this blessed king dyed the.iiii. day of January, when he had reigned.xxiii.
years, vii. months, and odd days / and was buried in the monastery of
westmynster, y^ which he before had greatly augme^ted and repaired / but not in
that manner and form that it is now in. For the church that now there
stands, was so reedyfyed and builded new of Henry the third and son of
king John^. The which also after some writers / translated this blessed king
Edward from the lower part of ye church, and shryned him there he now lies.
And this king Edward laft after him no child / for he was accounted for a
vyrgyn when he dyed.

Francia. THE.CCXV. CHAPTER.
PHylyp the first of that name and son of Henry / began his dominion over the
Frenchemen, in the year of our lord.M.lviii / and the.xvi. year of Edward the
confessor than king of England. And of this Phylyp it is radde, that he
married a wife named Berta the daughter of Baldewyne earl of Holland and of
Fryce. Of the which Berta this Philyp received a son and named him Lewis /
and a daughter ye was called Cunstau^ce. But in process of time he haunted so
myche the company of a woman named Bertande, that he hated his laufull wife /
and at length held her in prison, and kept that other in her stead / and gatte
upon the said Bertrande two sons named Phylyp and Florys, and a daughter
which mine author names not. For this aduoutry, he was often monysshed of ye
pope, that he should leave the company of that ill woman, and take to him his
lawful wife yt he so long had holden in prison within his castle of
Monsfruell. And for he would not be obedyent unto the popes cou^sayll / he was
finally accused of pope Urbane the second of that name. By mean whereof he was
reconcyled and restored again to his wife, and refused his concubyne.

And in the time of this Phylyp / Godfrey de Bollio^ with many other christian
princes, at the exortacyon of Peter the heremyte, sailed into the holy land /
and wanne the city of Jerusalem out of the Sarasyns hands. which princes
lastly crowned the said Godfrey king of the said city. And after it so
continued in possessyon of christian men, by ye term of four score and ten
years, under ix. christian kings / and longer might have endured, had not
discencyon fallen among them self. And so by Antoninus, Peter Disrey, and
other it is manyfestely showed. This vyage after most accord of writers,
began in the year of grace.M.lxxxvi. and the.xxvii. year of this Phylyp. And
the said Godfrey was crowned king of the said city of Jerusalem after the
affyrmaunce of ye said writers, in the year of grace a thousand and four
score and.xix.

Of this Phylyp little worthy memory is left in writing. For like as his
fader Henry made him king by his life, and suffered him to have the rule of the
land / right so this Phylyp after a certain of time, committed the rule of
the land unto Lewys his son. And he set his mind to hunting and other
dysportes / and so ladde his life in all slowthe and idelnesse.

Than Lewys taking upon him the charge of the realm / subdued the earl of
Mount Merusy and other / that labored to take from the church of saint Denis
certain preuyleges / and also constrained them to restore and satysfye all
hurtes and harms to the said church by them done.

This Lewys as affermeth the French cronycle, married the daughter of Guy earl
of Cotcheforde / the which after for nerenesse of kynne was deforced from the
said Lewys, to the great dyspleasour of the said earl Guy. wherefore he moved
war again the said Lewys, and took from him certain holds and castelles /
of the which the castle of Gurney was one. But at length Lewys had ye better
of that war, and recoueryd diverse of the said holds. And among other
prisoners by him and his knights taken / he took a mighty and strong captayn
of the said earl Guy named Hombolde, the which he sent to the castle of
Stampes, there sauely to be kept. During which war, Philyppe the king
sykened / and dyed the year of grace.M. a hundred and.vi, when he had rygned
full.xlviii. year / and was buried at saint Benet sur Loyt.

THE.CCXVI. CHAPTER.
HArolde ye second son of earl Goodwyne, and last king of Saxons / began to
rule the realm of England ye v. day of January, and the year of our lord.M.
and.lxvi / and the.viii. year of Phylyp the first then king of France. This
as most mighty, for so myche as the blessed king Edward dyed without issue,
not myndyng the promysse of him before made unto wyllyam duke of Normandy as
before I have showed / took upon him as king, and was crowned of Aldredus then
bishop of york. All be yt as affermeth Guydo and other, some of the lords
intended to have made Edgare Adelynge king / which Edgare as affermeth ye
said authors, was son to Edward that was the son of Edmund Ironsyde, and
named of some Edward the outlawe. But for this Edgare was young, and specially
for Harolde was strong of knights and richesse / he wanne the reygne. How be
yt Marianus says that king Edward ordained before his death, that Harolde
should be king after him. By reason whereof, the lords crowned him therupppon at
westmynster.

Anon as he was crowned / he began to fordoo evil laws and customs before
used, and stablysshed the good laws, and specially such as were for the
defense of holy chirch and punyshed the evil doers, to the fere and example of
other.

In short time after that Harolde was thus made kings / Tosty or Costy his
brother, which as before is said, was of the Northumbers chased into
Flaundres, made him a navy of.lx. small sails, and sailed about the i will of
wight, and took prays within the said isle and other places of Kent. And from
thens he sailed in to Lynsey, and did there myche harm both with fire and
sword. But soon after he was chased thens by Edwyn^ and Malcharus earls of
Mercia and of Northumberlande. And then he sailed into Scotland, and tarried
there till the somer after.

when Tostius was thus with his robbers chased / then Harolde Harfagar king of
Northganys or Norways, with a great navy of.iii. hundred ships or mo, entered
ye mouth of the river of Tyne. This Harolde Harfagar as says Guide, was the
son of Canutus, and king of Denmark and of Norway. The which heryng of the
death of holy Edward / purueyed ye said great army to win England, as his
ryghtfull enherytaunce. when Harolde was warned of this great flote of Danys /
he sent unto the forenamed earls or dukes of Mercia and of Northumberland /
commaundyng them to wythstande their landrynge, while he gadered his strength.
Then the foresaid dukes spedde them toward the Danys, and gave unto them a
sharp and strong fight. But in conclusyon the Englyshemen were put to the
worse, and were feign to give back / so yt the enymyes entered farther into the
land. The king herynge of the sco^fyture of his people, made the more haste
toward his enymyes / so that the.vi. day after he came to Stemysforde bridge.
In this while was Tostius before named come out of Scotland, and gone to the
party of the Danys again his own brother. In this foresaid place both
hosts joined / and faught then there a sharp cruel battle. wherein fill many
a sturdy knight upon the english party, but mo upon the Danys side / so
that in the end Harolde their king was slain, and that of the hand of
Harolde king of Enlande as says Guydo / and Tostius was also slain in the
same fight. Olanus broter to the says Harolde Harfagar, with Paulus duke of
the yles of Orkeys / were there taken prisoners. The which the king caused to
him to be sworn, to keep such promises as they to him there made, and took
good pledges for performaunce of the same, and after suffered them to return
from thens they were comen.

It is also specially remembered of the said author / that one knight stood
upon the foresaid bridge, and with his axe defended the passage maugre the
hole host of ye Englyshemen, and slew.xl. Englyshmen or mo with his axe / and
might not be ouercomen, till an Englysheman went under the bridge and stycked
him upward with his spear thorough an hole of the bridge.

For this vyctory Harolde was suppressed with pride, and also with couetouse /
so that he dyuyded not the prays of his enymyes among his knights, but kept
them to him self / or gave part unto such ^nyghtes as he favored, and
spared to them that had well deserved / by reason whereof he lost the favor of
many of his knights.

In this passetyme / the daughter of duke wyllyam, the which Harold should have
married, dyed within age. wherefore Harold thought hi^ ye more discharged of his
promise before made to her fader. But duke willyam warned Harolde of
couenauntes broken, and meddled menasses with prayers by sundry times. whereunto
Harolde answered, that a nyce folyshe couenaunte ought not to be holden / and
namely ye behest of other mennys right and kingdom, without the hole assent of
the senators of ye same land. And farthermore a lewd oath might and ought to
be broken / and specially when yt is compelled to be sworn for need or for
dread.

Upon these answers received by duke wyllyam from Harolde / in the while that
messangers went and came, duke wyllyam gadered his knights, and prepared his
navy and all other things necessary to the war, and had assent of the lords
of his land to aid and assyste him in his journey. And over that he in such
wise informed the pope, then being named Alexander the second / yt he
co^formed him in taking of that vyage / and sent unto him a banner, the which
he willed him to bear in the ship that he him self should sail in. And so
being purueyed of all things concerning his journey, he sped him to the sea
side, and took shyppynge in the haven of faint Ualery / where he tarried a long
time or he might have a couenable wind. For ye which his soldyours murmured
and grudged / and said it was a woodnesse and great dyspleasynge to god, to
desire an other mann^s kingdom by strength / and namely when god wythsayde yt
by the workynge of his element.

At the last when duke wyllyam had long bydden and houed for the wind / he
commanded to bring forth ye body of saint Ualery, and to be set upon the sea stronde. The which done / the wind shortly after came about and filled
the sails. Then wyllyam thanked god and saint Ualery / and took shortly after
shyppynge, and held his course to ward England / upon this ground and
title following.

The first and pryncypall was to challenge his right / and to have the
domynyon of the land that to him was given (as he affermed) of king Edward
the confessoure and his neuewe.

The second was, to take wreche of his death and cruel murdour of his neuew
Alfrede, and brother of ye blessed king Edward / that was slain of earl
Goodwyne and his adherentes, as before ye have hard in the storye of
Hardykinitus / the which deed he ascrybed chefely unto Harolde And the third
was, for to avenge the wrong done unto Robert archebyshop of Caunterburye /
which as he was informed / was exiled by the means and labor of Harolde, in
the time of Edward the confessor, as before is showed.

THE.CCXVII. CHAPTER.
DUke wyllyam kepynpe his course / landed in process of time at Hastynge in
Sussex, in a place called Peuenessey. And in his going out of his ship, and
taking the land / his one foot slode, and that other stacke fast in the sand.
The which espyenge one of his knights yt was nere unto him / cried alowde and
said, now sir duke thou hold England, and thou shalt soon be turned from
a duke to a king. The duke of this made game, and entered further into the
land / and made his proclamacyons and cries, that no man should take any
prays, or do any force to the people. For he said that yt was reasonable that
he should spare that thing that should be his own.

Harolde in this while was in the North parts of England, and had wittynge of
the landynge of the Normayns / and sped him toward them in all that he might,
and gathered his strength by the countries as he came. But the duke made so
good speed, that he came to London before the king. where he was holden out,
till he had made good suertye, that he and his people should pass thorough the
city without taryenge. The which was obseruyd. And so he passing the city /
passed the bridge, and went over into Sussex.

King Harolde entendynge to know the strength of his enmyes, sent espyes into
the dukes host / the which made report unto the king, that all duke
wyllyams soldyours were prestes. For they had their over lyppes and chekes
shaven / and the Englyshmen at these days used the here of their over lyppes
shadde and not shaven. But Harold to that answered and said, they be no
prestes, but are stalworth and sturdye knights.

Then Gurth or Surth one of the yongeste brethren of Harolde / counsayled him
that he should stand a part, and suffer him with other of his lords to fight
with ye Norma^s, for so myche as he was sworn to the duke and they were not /
aledgynge furthermore, that if they were overthrown, yt yet he might defend
his quarrel and fight for the country.

In this mean time wyllyam sent a monk unto Harold, and proferred to him three
manner of ways / and to chose one of the three.

The first, that according to his oath he should render the land, or deliver
yt unto the possessions of wyllyam. And ye done / to take yt again of him, and
hold yt of him as in fee / and so to reygne under him for term of his life /
and after his death to return yt to the said wyllyam, or to such one of his
sons as he would assign it unto. Or secondly, leave the kyngedome without
more strife. Or thyrdely in exchewynge of shedynge of the more plenty of
Christian me^nes blood / that he would defend his quarrel in his own person
again the duke / and they two only to try the matter by dynte of sword. But
Harolde refused these offers / and said he would try his quarrel by dynt of
swordis, and not by one sword / and that he and his knights would defend
their country again all strange nacyons, prayenge to god to deem the right
between them twain.

when duke wyllyam had received this answer from Harolde, and same well that
there was no mean but fortune in battle: he charged his people yt might
watch, to occupye them in prayer / and specylly the prestes and the religious
people, where the Englyshemen gave them all to drink and song.

Then upon the morrow being saterdaye, and the.xiiii. day of Occtober, and
the day of saint Calyxte the pope / both hosts assailed other, in that
place where as now stands the abbay of Battle in Sussex. In the begynnyge
of this battle / a banner or a banneret called Thylfer a Norman splayed before
the host of Normans / and slew an Englysheman or knight that came again him
/ and after that one other, and so the third, and was slain at the last.

Then the seltrons smote to gyther with a great noise and cry, and faughte
sore a long season. And the Englyshmen defended them manfully / and the better
for that that they kept them hole to gyther without scaterynge or spryngynge
a broad. The which when wyllyam apperceyued / he gave a sign unto his
knights, that they should give back, and make countenance as they did flee.
Then the Normans imbatelled the footmen, and set horse men for wings on
every side. By the which wyle the Englyshemen were descueryd, and soon out
of array / and the Normans turned again upon ye Englyshemen, and slew them
down on every side.

This battle was sore foughten of the Englyshemen / that duke wyllyam was
thryse felled that day by reason that three horse were that day slain under
him. Lastely Harolde was wounded in the eye with an arowe, and fill to the
ground and was slain, and his people scatered / so that well was him that
might save him self by fleing Then duke wyllyam buried his men that there
were slain / and fuffred his enymyes to do the same.

Of the death of this Harolde is dyuersly written. For Geraldus Crambrens. in his
book called Itinerarius says, yt after Harolde had received many wounds, and
lost his left eye / he fled from that field to the country of Chester, and
lived long after an holy life as an ancre, in the selle of saint Iamys fast
by saint Iohn^s church, and made there an holy end.

when ye death of Harold was known to the earls of Mercia and of
Northumberlande / the which for streytnesse of way might not bring their
people to that field / or else for that that they wylfully wythdrew them
self from Harolde, because he none otherwise departed ye prays among them
and their knights at the former feld of Norgaynes: then they drew the next
way to London, and take Agatha Haroldes wife and sent her to Chester. And they
and Aldredus bishop of york with the Londoners / agreed and promised either
unto other, that they would make Edgare Athelynge king, and defend his right
to the vttermoste of their powers.

But that promise not wythstandynge, when they hard of the great strength that
daily fell to duke wyllyam and of his prouysyons / they were feign to break
that appoyntement. And the said earls submytted them, and gave unto him
pledges, and became to him his lyege men by homage and feautye.

And thus when Harolde had ruled the land from the.v. day of January to
the.xiiii. day of October / he was slain, when he had reigned ix. months
and odd days / and was buried at the monasterye of the holy cross of
waltham, which he before had founded, and set therein chanons, and gave unto
them fair possessions.

And here ends for a time y^ blood of Saxons / the which continued to reken
from Hengestus first reygne, by the space or time of.v. hundred and.lxxxxi.
years. And if yt be rekened from the beginning of the west Saxons / then yt
endures by ye term of.v. hundred.lxv. years. which co^tynued as rulers and
kings of this land all the said time / only except y^ that passed between the
first years Canutus, and the last year of Hardekynitus. In the which season
passed or flowed upon.xxiiii. years. All be yt yt the persecucyon of the Danys
lasted much longer, as to fore I have showed in ye story of ye forenamed
Kynitus.

THE.CCXVIII. CHAPTER.
THen for as myche that god of his unknown judgments to man, and by his high
and hyd counsayll, would suffer this duke to conquer so noble a land, and to
be lord and sovereign over so many noble enherytours, as were and now be with
in the same: I think yt co^uenyent to show here the dyscent of the said duke
/ and how nere of blood he was unto the blessed king Edward the confessor.

wherefore as before to you I have showed in the storye of Charlys the Simple
sometime king of France / a myscreaunt or a pagan named Rollo persecuted sore
the realm of France- and lastely wan by strength the city of Roan the head or
chief city of Normandy. And in conclusyon for a fynall peace between the said
king and Rollo to be had / the said Rollo was crystened and named Robert, and
married Silla the daughter of ye said Charlys. To whom ye king gave in way of
Dower, ye hole duchy of Normandy. The which Robert after he was crystened /
ruled that dukedom as a good christian man, by the term of.xiiii. years / and
received of ye said Silla a son, and named him wyllyam / the which after was
surnamed Longa spata, as who would say wyllyam with a long sword.

This wyllyam was duke after his fader.xxv. years / and left after him a son
named Richard, which as before is showed in the storye of Lew es ye.vi. was
named Richard ye hardy.

Then Richard the hardy was the third duke, and reigned.lii. years / and had
by his wife a son named Richard the good, and Emma that was wife to Egelredus
and mother to saint Edward the confessoure. After him the Good Richard was
duke, and reigned.xxviii. years / and left after him two sons, that is to
say Richard and Robert. The first after two years was slain by treason of
his brother Robert / so that Robert was then duke and reigned.ix. years. The
which Robert, as yt is before showed in the storye of Henry king of France /
was father unto this duke wyllyam. And this wyllyam was the.vii. duke of
Normandye / and ruled yt or he conquered England after most writers.xxx.
years.

whereby yt appears, that Emma was aunte to duke Robert, father of wyllyam
Conqueror. And saint Edward and this duke wyllyam were by ye fathers side
cosyn ^armay nes removed as shows by this draught following.

Th first duke Rollo or Robert the first duke. The second duke. Wyllyam
longa ^pata son of Robert and the second duke. The third duke. Richard the
hardy the son of Wyllyam and.iii. duke Richard the ^ood and son of Rychard
the first Emma mother of Edward confess sour and daughter of the said Richard
The.iiii. duke Richard the.ii surnamed ye good a son of Rychard the first
and.iiii. duke. The fyft duke Rychard ye third son of Richard.ii. and.v. duke
Brethern. The syxte duke Robertus the son of Richard ii. and Brother of
Richard.iii. and vi. duke. Brethern. Wyllyam the son of Robert / and
the.vii. duke and noble conqueror.

ANd thus here an end of the.vi. part of this work / for so myche as the
land was here conquered, and put under the rule of an other nacyon.

wherefore as before I have used and done, to give thanks unto that most
blessed vyrgyn our lady saint Mary, as furtherer and conductryce of this work
/ so here again I salute and hayle her with the.vi. joy of the fornamed vii.
joys, thus beginning, Gaude virgo matter Christi, tu quae sola etc. All hayle
and be glad most noble and mother dear
Of Jesus Christ, vyrgyne most pure and clean.
Deseruynge only by grace and living most clear,
To be of that dygnyte, thou celestyall queen,
To perce the heuens that beeth so serene.
And next to the trone of the high Trynyte,
Thou art admytted for to hold thy see.


This.vi. part to be accounted from the first year of Iue, unto the last
day of the reygne of Harolde, or beginning of wyllyam Conqueroure / includes
of years.iii. hundred and.lxxx. years and one.

ANd so this land was conquered after the first coming of Brute, to follow
thacco^pte of this work / by the force of this duke wyllyam and his Normans,
ii. thousand.ii. hundred and two years.

Thus ends the syxt part.
THE.VII. PART.
NOw shakes my hand, my pen waxes dulle,
Forweried and tired, seeing this work so long /
The authors so raw, and so far to culle,
Dymme and derke, and strange to understand,
And far out of tune to make true song,
The stories and years to make accordaunte,
That yt to the reder might show true and plesaunt.
But under correccyon all thing may be borne,
And so I remytte yt to such as ben expert /
Prayenge to them, as I have done beforne,
To favor and correct / so that under couerte
Of their proteccyon, this may show a part,
Wholesome and plain, fruytefull and profitable,
And to the reders and herers, joyous and delectable.
For were not that / I dueste not farther wade,
The streme is so deep, and thereto so dangerous.
But one thing there is, that somewhat does me glade,
The great danger and stories doughtous,
Ben over passed / so that more bounteous,
The authors ben / and more manyfestly
The stories following they done certyfye.
wherefore as before to you I did promise /
This.vii. part now I would take in hand.
Besechynge always in most humble wise,
The well of bountye, that flower most adorande,
By whose humylyte man first comfort fande,
And was redeemed from his captyuyte /
This part to fynyshe, she will mine helper be.
And bring to end this work that I have take
On hand to write, only of intent,
To bring to light, and for yt should not shake,
The old honor that to England was meant
Of famous writers, which have their duytes sent,
Unto their folowers, all vices to subdue,
Honor to maynteyne, and to exalte virtue.
Here after folowyth the storye of duke wyllyam Conqueroure.

THE.CCXIX. CHAPTER.
WIllya^ duke of Normandye surnamed Conqueror, baste son of Robert ye vi.
duke of that said dukedom, and neuew unto Edward the confessor, as before is
showed / began his domynyon over this realm of England, the.xv. day of
October, in the year of our lords incarnacyon a thousand and.lxvii / and ye
ix. year of the first Phylyppe then king of France / and was crowned king of
the same upon Crystmas day next following, of Aldredus archbyshoppe of
york, for so myche as at that time Stigandus archbysshoppe of Caunterbury was
then absent, or durst not come in the p^sence of the king / to whom he ought
no great favor, as in the sequel shall appear.

when wyllyam had set in quiet a great part of this land, he betoke the
gydyng thereof to his brother the bishop of Bayon / and in lent following sailed
into Normandye / and led with him the chief rulers of England, for doubt of
sturryng in time of his absence. Among the which, the two earls Marcarus and
Edwyne rulers of Northumberlande and Mercia were two / with also Stigandus and
Edgare Ethelynge. To the why the Stigandus wyllyam showed great reverence and
countenance of favor. But all proved to great dissymulacyon after / as was
showed by the depryuynge of the said Stigandus, and prysonment of him in
wynchester town, by a long term and season.

In the next winter, when wyllyam had sped his business in Normandy / he
returned into England with great pomp, and set a grievous trybute upon the
Englyshmen By reason whereof some parties of the land rebelled again him, and
specially the city of Excetour, the which defended him for a certain of
time. But lastly by force he wanne the said city, and punysshed the cytesyns
grievously.

For this and other stern deeds of wyllyam / Marcharus earl of
Northumberlande, with Edgare Athelynge and diverse other, as his mother and two
systers Margarete and Crystyan, sailed into Scotland. But another cronycle
tells, yt Edgare entendynge with Agatha his mother and his two systers, to
have sailed into Almayne where he was borne / was by tempest of the sea driven
into Scotland. where of Malcolyne than king of Scotts they were ioyously
received. And in process of time the said Malcolyne cast such love unto the
said Margaret / that he took her to wife / as before is touched in the first
chapyter of the story of Canutus. Of the which Margaret the said Malcolyne
received.ii. daughters and.vi. sons. whereof three named Edgare, Alexau^der,
and Dauyd, were kings of Scotland next following their fader. And Molde one
of ye foresaid daughters was after married unto the first Henry king of
England. And the other daughter Mary / was married to Eustace earl of Bolongii.
Of Molde the first daughter / Henry received.ii. sons named wyllyam and
Rychard, the which both dyed before their fader / as after in ye story of the
said Henry shall appear. And he received also two daughters named Molde and
Mary / which Molde or Mawde was married to ye fyfte Henry emperor of Almayne.
After whose death she was again married to Godfrey of Geoffrey Pla^tagenet earl
of Aungeowe. Of whom descended Henry surnamed short mantell, and king of
England, called Henry the second. And the other daughter Mary was married unto
the earl of Blaynes / of who^ descended Molde or Mawde, that was wife unto
king Stephen.

Than it follows, that this wyllyam after this foresaid trybute so leuyed of
the Englysshemen, and knowing of the depertynge of the lords foresaid, kept
the other the streyter. But it was not long after that Marcharus was
reconsyled to the kings grace / and failed again as following shall be showed.
For this and other causes which were tedyous to show / wyllyam exalted the
Normans, and gave unto them the chyefe possessions of the land / so that they
daily increased in great honor and wealth, and the Englysh men as fast
decayed. King wyllya^ also made.iiii. strong castles / where of two be set
at york, the third at Lyndetyngham or Notynghm, and manned them with Normans,
and the.iiii. at Lyncolne.

About the third year of his reygne Harolde and Canutus sons of Swanus king
of Denmark, came on land in the North of Humber with a strong navy / and in
all haste drew them toward york. Than the Normans which had the rule of
the town and castelles, feryng that the Englysshemen would aid the Danys, and
with the houses of the suburbs of the town have filled the town dyches /
set the suburbs on fire. whereof ye flame was so bygge, and with the wind so
strong / that it took into the city, and brent a part thereof, with the
mynster of saint Peter. In time whereof the Danys by favor of some of the
citesyns entered the city / and slew more than three thousand of the Normans.

But it was not long or king wyllyam chased the Danys to their ships / and
took so great dyspleasure with the inhabytauntes of that prouynce, that he
destroyed the land lyenge between york and Durham in such wise, that.ix.
years after or there about, the land lay vnlabored and untilled / only out
taken saint Iohn^s land of Beuerley, the which was for borne by reason of a
wreche done by dyuyne power, upon one of king wyllyams knights. The which as
he was besyed in wastyng and spoylynge of the said country, fill suddenly with
his horse / so that his horse brake his neck, and the knights face was turned
to his back.

And of the famyne that the people of that country sustained / wonders are
reported, that they should eat all manner of vermyn, as cattes, rattes, dogs,
and other / so hard they were kept by the war of the king. And in that year
also Molde or Mawde the wife of king wyllya^ / was crowned queen of England,
of Aldredus archebysshop of york.

In the.iiii. year of the reygne of this king the Scotts with Malcolyne their
king entered Northumberlande / and wasted and destroyed sore that country, and
slew there in myche people / and many they took prisoners, and held the^ as
bond men.

But in the.vi. year of his kingdom, wyllyam made such war upon the Scotts
/ that he lastely forced the said Malcolyne to swear to him both homage and
feauty / as it is wytnessed of wyllyam of Malmesbery and other writers.

THE.CCXX. CHAPTER.
King willyam by counsel of the earl of Hortford and other, caused the
abbeyes of England to be serched. And what money in them at that season was
found / he caused it to be brought to his treasour. For the which deed after
the exposycyo^ of some authors / the said earl was punysshed, as after shall
be showed.

Soon upon this in the time by twene Easter and wytsontyde / was holden a
solemn counsel at wynchester of the clergy of England. At the which
counsel were present two cardynalles, sent from ye second Alexaunder than
pope. In this counsel, Stygandus archebysshop of Canterbury was depryued
from his dygnytye / and that for three skylles. The first was / for that he had
holden wrongfully that bysshopryche, while Robert the archebysshop was living.
The second cause was / for that he had received the Paul of pope Benet
the.v. of that name. And the third cause was / for that he occupied the said
Paul without license and lefull authoryte of ye court of Rome.

Than Stigandus proved that benyuolence of king wyllyam. For where before he
made to him loving and friendly countenance, and did unto him great reverence
/ than he changed all his myldenesse into sternesse, and exceuted him by ye
popes authoryte / so that in the end Stigandus was depryued of his dygnytye,
and kept in wynchester as a prisoner ye term of his life.

It is recorded of him that he was so covetous and sparyng, yt he would take
nothing of his own / and used to swear by Alhalowes, that he had not one
penny. But that oath was proved untrue after his death, by a little keye that
was found fastened about his neck. For by that keye was founden great
treasour under the earth in mo places than one.

In this counsel also were put down diverse other bysshoppes, abbotes, and
pryours, by the means of king wyllyam / and all to the intent that he might
prefer Normans to the rule of the church, as he had preferred his knights
to the rule of the te^peraltye, that he might stand in the more suerty of the
land.

In this counsel saint wolstan^ that than was bishop of worceter / axed
besely of the king certain possessions fallen into his hands, by the death of
Aldredus last archbishop of york, that were with holden by ye said Aldredus.
But the king might not here than of any such matters, for hurtyng of the
lyberty of the church of york.

Than upon wytsonday after / the king gave the said archebysshopryche of york
unto Thomas a chanon of Bayon / and sent for Lamfrank an other Norman than
abbot of Cadomonency, and gave unto him the archebysshopryche of Caunterbury.
This Lamfranke was an Italyan borne / and was perfytely learned in ye science of
theologye or holy writ, and right apt in gouernynge of things both
spyrytuall and temporal. Upon our lady day the Assumpcyo^ the king made him
archebysshop of Canterbury. Than Thomas that was chosen archebysshop of york
/ came unto Lamfranke for to be sacred as the usage would. Of whom Lamfranke
axed an oath, and his professyon in writing concerning his obedyence. Thomas
answered and said that he would never do that / but if he might thereof here
suffycyent authoryte and skylfull reasons and byndynge, by the which it might
be known that he should so do with out any preiudyce of his church. Than
Lamfranke showed and proved skylfully, that his asking was reasonable and
ryghtfull. But yet Thomas would not assent / but with said it and went for
that time from Lamfrank vnsacred / and showed unto the king, that Lamfranke
intended to do wrong to him and to his church of york. Than the king calling
Lamfrank before him said, than he trusted more in his cunnyng than he did in
good faith or reason. But he answered so reasonably unto ye king that in the
end Thomas by the commandment of the king was feign to come again to
Lamfranke to be sacred / and wrote his professyo^ with his own hand of his
obedyence and radde it / in the which was contained that he should be obedyent
in all that belongs to the worship of god and all cryste^ faith* which done,
he was sacred and so deperted. And shortly after Lamfranke axed and took
professyo^ of all ye bishops of England.

THE.CCXXI. CHAPTER.
IN the.v. year of wyllyam the conquerours reygne / Edwyn and Marcharus earl of
Mercia and of Northumberlande, being in fere of danger, voyded ye kings
court secretly, and were rebels some what of time. But at length it turned to
both their harms. For Edwyne was slain as he went toward Scotland / and earl
Marcharus with ye bishop of Dorcham named Egelwynus, took the i will of Ely for
their sauegarde. But the king held them so short, that in process they were
feign to yield them to the kings grace and mercy. Than he sent the bishop to
the abbey of Abyndon to be kept there as a prisoner / where he was so dayntely
fed, that he dyed for hunger. But some writers testyfye that he was so high
herted, that after he knew he should remain there as prisoner / he would never
ete mete after. And earl Marcharus was had to the tower of London.

In the.vi. year of his reygne / king wyllyam, as before is touched went with a
great army into Scotland / and subdued Malco^yne their king, as before I have
showed in the precedynge chapyter.

In the.vii. year of king wyllyam / Thomas archebysshop of york not being
content to be under the rule and obedyence of Lamfranke, appealed to the court
of Rome / so that the said two archbysshoppes appeared both in proper person
before the pope Alexaunder before named. In whose presence Lamfranke was so well
favored, that where Thomas above named and Remigius bishop of Dorchester, were
for skylfull causes depryued of their croyses and rings / he by his favor and
means restored them to their former dygnytees. The cause of Thomas was, for
that he had helped duke wyllyam to ward his journey into England. For the
which the said duke promised him a bysshopryche if he opteyned vyctory. And ye
other was deprived, for yt he was proved a prestes son. Than Thomas moved the
cause of the prymacy of Caunterbury, and of subieccyon that to him should
belong / and said that these two sees were far asonder, that is to mean
Caunterbury and york / and that another of them by the constytucyons of Gregory
should be subject unto other / but that the one is more worthy than the other,
for so myche as he is of elder time. To this answered Lamfranke and said / that
ye constytucyons of Gregory made no mencyo^ of Canterbury, but of york and
London. Than the pope remytted this matter to be determined before ye king and
the bishops of England / and gave ye palle unto Lamfranke.

But for this term or word palle, is to many one unknown / I shall therefore
here show unto you what thing it is. This palle is an indument y^ every
archbishop must have / and is not in full authoryte of an archbyshoppe, till he
have received his palle of the pope / and is a thing of white like to ye
breded of a stole. But it is of a another fassyon. For where ye stole is made in
length, and is worn about the prestes neck / this is joined together above, so
that it lies a part thereof upon the shulders. And that one end hangs
straight down to the ground before, and that other behind, garnysshed in
diverse places, thereof with crosses. And where the stole is worn next unto the
albe when the priest is reuested to mass / this palle is worn upon this
vestymente ouermoste of all, when an archebysshoppe syngeth his mass.

when Lamfranke had thus sped his nedys at Rome / he with ye other two
bysshoppes returned into England / where this matter hangyng in varyaunce
between the said two archebysshoppes, was had in co^munycacion. For trial
whereof Bedaes story was brought forth* where in it appeared, that from the
first Augu / styns time to Bedaes last days, upon the season of a hundred
and.xxxix. years / the archbysshop of Caunterbury had prymacy of all the
bysshoppes of England tha^ called Brytayn, and of Irlande also / and that the
archbyshoppes of Caunterbury had kept cou^sayles nere unto york, and cleped
thereunto the bysshoppes of york / and made some bishops, and depryued diverse
from their dygnytyes / and to this were adjoined certain pryuyleges, that were
granted for this manner of doing.

when Thomas had hard all the allegacyons, he denied all / and laid for him
the pystle, in the which pope Gregorye demed that the church of york and of
London should be even perys / and neither of them subject to other.

To this was answered by Lamfrank, that he was not bishop of London, nor this
questyon was not moved for the church of London.

But Thomas said that Gregory had granted to Augustyne, power to have under
him all ye bishops of England / and that London at ye day was the pryncypall
see of all England. All be yt yt the popes mind was, that between London and
york should be no dyuersyte of honor, because they were archeflamynes / and
that by their unity all other might ly^e under dew obedyence. And though
Augustyne changed ye see from London to Caunterbury / yet Gregory would not
that Augustyne successors should be above the bysshoppes of york. For he would
then have set in his epistle these words following: I grant to the Augustyne
and to thy successors. But for he would yt no such power should stretche to his
successors / therefore he made no me^cyon of his successors.

Lamfranke to this answered and said, If that authoryte were granted to
Augustyne alone and not to his successors / yt was a simple gift yt the pope
gave unto Augustyne, that was so famylyer with him / and namely while Augustine
ordained nor sacred no bishop of york while he lived. For ye see was full
during his life / by reason whereof he put not his authoryte in execucyon. But
pryuyleges of popes confermeth this dignyte to Augustynes successors of
Caunterbury / and demeth that yt is skyll and good reason, that all the
chyrches of England should take lore and light of that place. For of that
well or place proceeded first the doctrine of Cristes faith. And where thou
say Thomas, that Gregory might if he had would, have confyrmed all thing
vndowtably with this word successors / that is soth. But yet the lacking of
this word, does no preiudyce to the church of Caunterbury. For when that
Christ said to Peter, I shall give to the the kayes of the kingdom of heaven /
he might have also said if he would, I grant the same power to thy successors.
And though he said not so / yet he meant the successors of Peter, nothing of
reverence nor yet of authoryte / but the dyspensacyon of holy church and
office of the same, was and is holy in them, which only spryngeth by virtue
of Christ into Peter, and from Peter into his successors. And if thou can
dyscerne between false and soth / look what has strength in all, has strength
in the part / and what has strength in the more, has also strength in ye
less. The church of Rome is as yt were all of all chyrches / and other
chyrches ben as members thereof: like as one man is the kind of all synguler
men, and every synguler man is the kind of all mankind: so in some manner of
wife the church and the sea of Rome is as yt were the kind, and conteyneth
all, in comparyson to other chyrches / and yet in every church remains the
full holenes of Crystes faith. And also the church of Rome is greattest of all
chirches / and what has strength in that church, shall have strength in less
chyrches / so that the power that is first given to every church, shall
spring into the successors of the same / but if yt be by some special thing
excepted and out taken. Therefore I conclude as Christ said to Peter, so he
said to all the bishops of Rome / and so consequently was said to
Augustynes successors of Gregorye, as was said unto Augustyne. wherefore yt
must appear, that like as Caunterbury is subject to Rome, so must york be
subject to Caunterbury / which sent to york prechours, to teach and preach
unto them the right faith. And where thou sayeste that Gregory would that
Augustyne should have his see at London, yt may not stand with reason. For who
would trow that so noble a discyple as Augustyn was / would wythstande or do
again his masters will, or again holy decrees. And if yt were so as thou
haste alleged / what is that to me, that am not bishop of London as often before
I have said. Therefore if this matter may thus sease without more strife / so be
yt ended. And if thou desyrest contynuaunce of plee / I shall not fail the,
but defend my right and office gladly.

By these reasons and other at length Thomas was ouercomen / and granted
gladly that the farther brynke of Humber should be the beginning of his dioces.
And over yt yt was there demed, that in all things concerning the worship
of god and the faith of holy church / the archbishop of york should be subject
to the archbyshoppe of Caunterburye. So that if the archebyshoppe of
Caunterburye would call a cou^sayll in any part of England / the
archebyshoppe of york should be thereat, with all the bishops of his prouynce
/ and be also obedient unto the lawful hestes. And at all seasons when the
archbysshop of Caunterbury should be sacred the archebyshoppe of york, with the
bishops of ye church, should come to Canterbury and saker him there. And if
the archebyshoppe of york should be stalled or sacred / the^ shall he come to
Caunterburye, and else where in all England, where the archebyshop of
Caunterburye woll him assygne, and there to be sacred of him / and he shall
make to him an oath with professyon and obedyence.

when Lamfranke hard this judgment given thus / he reioysed inwardely. And
for yt should remain of record that his successors should not newely plede
for that cause / he caused yt to be regestred in most substancyall wise. And
over that sent a pystle for that cause to Alexander forenamed pope of all this
doenge, with the professyon of Thomas the archbishop foresaid. Of this Lamfrank
is many notable things written of diverse writers. And after some he is admytted
for a saint.

THE.CCXXII. CHAPTER.
About the.x. year of king wyllyams reygne / Roger earl of Hereforde, by
whose counsayl the king as before is said had serched all the abbayes of
England, which earl had wedded his sister unto Rauf earl of eest Angles /
that is to say, of Norf. and Suff, again the kings mind / he with the said
Raufe made conspyracy again the king / and caused an other earl by their
subtyle means to be agreeable unto their untruth, which earl had to name
walref. But at length when this earl walref had known the fine of their
intent / he went unto Lamfranke, and showed to him the hole matter. By whose
counsayll he shortly after sailed unto the king then being in Normandye / and
dysclosed the matter to him, and put him holy in his grace and mercy.

when the king had hard of these tidings / he made good semblaunt unto this
earl walref, and sped him the faster into England. But how so yt was, the
forenamed two earls were warned of dysclosynge of this matter / in such wise yt
they gaderyd to them such strength, that ye king could not have them at his
pleasure, but as he was feign by strong hand to chase and outlawe them. And
for he failed of his purpose of them, he emprysoned earl walref at wynchester /
and lastely caused him to be hedded, more of tyranny, then of justice, as
affermeth mine authoure / whose corpse was buried at the abbay of Crowlande.

In the.xi. year was holden a great counsayll or synod of the clergy of the
land in saint Paul's church of London / where among many things ordained
for the rule of ye church of England, diverse bishops sees were transported
from one place to another / as Selwey to Chychester, Kyrton^ to Exeter, wells
to Bathe, Shyrbourne to Salysbury, Dorchester to Lyncolne, and the sea of
Lychefelde to Chester. which things thus ordered, with many other for the
church / the said counsayll was dyssolued.

In the.xiii. year of his reygne / after the death of Herman bishop of
Salysbury, succeeded Osmu^de ye kings chaunceller. The which builded there a
new church / and brought thither clerks that were garnyshed with virtue and
conning. And he him self wrote and bound books that were occupied in the
dyuyne service of the church, as the ordynall or consuetudynary, the which at
this day is occupied in the more party of England, with walys, and Irlande,
and is now named Salysbury use, or the ordynary after Salysbury use.

In the.xv. year of his reygne Robert the eldest son of king wyllyam, the
which was surnamed Curthose or Shorthose and short bote also / for he might
not have the duchy of Normandy, which his father had sometime assygned and
given unto him, and after for his wyldenesse had again resumed yt / he with
favor and aid of ye French king Phylyppe and of Lewys his son, took prays
in that duchy, and put his father to myche trouble / in so myche that at length
the father and the son met in plain field with.ii. great hosts / and either
with other faught a cruel battle.

It is radde that during this battle wyllyam was throwe^ from his horse, and
in great ieopardy of his life. whereof his son Robert being ware / was so
moved with pytye, yt he rescowed his father, and delivered him free from all
danger of his enymyes. But how so yt betyde of the king / troth yt is that
many of his men were slain, and his second son wyllyam the read sore hurt, so
that in the end king wylliam was fayn to refuse the field, and gatte at that
time none advantage of his said son. For the which deed and rebellyon thus
made by the son / ye fader accursed him after the opinion of some writers.

while king wyllyam was thus occupied in Normandy / the Northumbers waxte
stern and rebel, and slew in their rage walkerus the bishop of Durham / but
for what cause mine author expressyth not.

About this time, warynge earl of Shrewesbury made two abbayes in the worship
of god and saint Mylborgh / whereof one was set in the suburbs of Shrewesbury,
and ye other at wenioke.

In the.xvii. year of king wyllyam / a cursed strife was arered between
Thurstone abbot of Glastenbury a Norman, and his munkes. whereof a part of the
cause was, that the abbot despised, and would have set a part such song and
offices, as by pope Gregory and Augustyn his dyscyple, of old time to them was
assygned / and would have compelled them to have followed the use of one wyllya^
of Fescamp^. And over that this Thurstone wasted and spe^ded the goods of ye
place inordynatly, in lechery and by other insolent means / and wythdrew from
the munkes their old accustomed diet. For the which causes first began
great words with chydyng, and after strokes and fyghtes / so yt the abbot gat
unto him armed men, and fill upon his munkes, and slew two of them at ye high
alter, and wounded of them.xviii. And the munkes with fourmes and
candelstyckes defended them, in such wise that they hurt many of the armed
men. Then the complaynte was brought before the king / by whose judgment
Thurstone was again returned unto Cadony from whe^s he was brought and the
mu^kes were spredde abroad into diverse houses thorough England. But yt is
said that in the time of wyllya^ the Read / this Thurston^ obtained the rule
of that abbay again for the price of.v. hundred pound.

In the.xix. year of his reygne, king willyam then raised a new manner of
trybute. For he caused to be gadered thorough England of every hyde of
land.vi. s^. An hyde of land conteyneth.v. yerdes / and every yerde
conteyneth four acres. And so an hyde of land conteyneth.xx. acres, an acre
conteyneth.xl. perches in length and.iiii. in bread / and.iiii. acres make a
yerde / and.v. yerdes make an hyde / and.viii. hydes make a knights fee. By
the which reason a knights fee should welde a hundred and.lx. acres / and that
is demed for a plough till a year.

And not long after he caused to be serchyd how myche land each of his
barons held / how many knights fees / how many towns / and what nombre of
men and of bestes were with in this land / whereof he commanded a book to be
made, which all was done. For the which deed, this land was after grieved
with many sundry plages as after shall appear. In the.xx. year of the reygne of
king wyllyam / Canutus king of Denmark with help of the Flemmynges, to
whom he was called with a great army came toward England. But by the
prouysyon of the king they were so fered, that they were let of their journey.
Then king wyllyam gave unto.iii. of his champyons.iii. byshopryches. To Moryce
he gave London, to willyam he gave Thetforde, and to Robert he gave Chester /
which Robert was after removed to Couentre. Of this Robert reports Ranulfe,
that he scraped from one beme of his chirch in Couentre.v. hundred mark, to
fill with ye hand of king wyllyam. For earl Leofricus yt was duke of Mercia in
the time of Edward the co^f^ssour / had adourned that church with great riches
of gold, silver, and other precious iewelles.

In this year Edgare Ethelynge, which was reconcyled unto the kings favor /
by license of the king sailed into Apulia.

Then began the forsayde plages to spring. For great morayne fell upon the
brute bestes, and brennyng feuours among the people, and also great hunger
and barreynes of ye earth. Also in this year great hurt was done in many places
of ye land by fire, and specially in the city of London / where upon the.vii.
day of the month of Iulii sudden fire began, the which brent a great part
of the church of saint Paul, with also a great part of the city.

Then king wyllyam being in Normandye was syke, and kept his ^hamber at Roan^
a long time. wherefore Phylyppe the French king in his game said that
wyllyam lay in chyldbedde^, and noryshed his fat womb. The which words
when they were blown to king wyllya^s cries, he was grievously dyscontent and
said, when I am chyrched I shall offer to him a thousand candellys light,
with the which he shall hold him smally contented. The which promise he
after performed. For in the month of July when Corn, fruit, and grapes were
most florishynge / he entered France with a great army / and set on fire
many cytyes and towns in the west side of France / and lastely came to the
city of Meaus, and fyred yt and brent a part thereof with the church of our
lady / wherein he brent a woman being closed in the wall of the said church as
a recluse.

But of this thing speaks not the cronycle of France / Nor yet for the more
part of any thing that sounds to their dishonor done unto them by
Englyshemen.

In this hete, or as some writers have by ye lepyng of an horse / king wyllyam
took such a disease or sykenes, that yt was the cause of his death. And when he
felt him thus grieved / he called his sons before him, and exhorted them in
his best manner, that they should charitably love and favor every of them the
other, and hold to gyder as loving brethren / and after made his testament,
and therein ordained wyllyam Ruffus or wyllyam the read to be king of England.
And Normandye he beset unto Rober Curthose. And to Henry his youngest son he
bequethed his treasour and mouable goods. And that done he enfourmed his two
eldest sons of the dysposycyon of both peoples / and warned wyllyam to be
loving and lyberall to his subjects, and Robert to be stern and sturdy unto
his. Then he was moved with myldenes and delyueryd from prison his own brother
the bishop of Bayon, Marcharus earl of Northu^berlande. wylnotus the son of
Harolde, or after some the son of Goodwyne, that was sent to wyllya^ by
Edward the confessor to remain for a pledge for his said fader Goodwyn. And
shortly after these things with other done / he dyed in Normandye, and was
buried in ye city of Caan^ / when he had reigned as king of England.xxi.
years and upon.x. months, in the month of July, and the year of his duchery
the.lii.

when wyllyam was deed / men spoke of him as they do of other princes / and
said that he was wise and gylefull, rich and covetous, and loved well to be
magnifyed and praised / a fair speker and a greatr dyssymuler, a man of
skylfull stature but somdeale fat in the belly, stern of face and strong in
armies, and therwyth bold / and had therwyth great pleasure in huntyng and in
making of great festes. But he passed al other in leuyenge of taskes. which
condycyon his subjects construed.iii. manner of ways / and saydeyt was to the
entente that he would excel all other in richesse, or else for to withsta^de
and defend his enymyes, or else to staunche the appetyte of his couetyse
mind. He builded.ii. abbayes in England / one at batayl in Sussex where he
wanne the field again Harolde, and is at this day called the abbay of Batail
/ and ye other he set beside London upon the south side of Thamys, and named
yt Barmoundesay. And in Normandye he builded two also.

This man made the new forest in the country of Southampton / the which to
bring about he cast down diverse chyrches by the space of.xxx. miles, and
replenyshed yt with wild bestes / and made hard and sharp laws for the
encreasyng of them, as losyng of eyes and other. And he held Englyshemen so
low, that in his days was almost no English man that bare any office of
honor or rule. But yet somedeale he favored the city of London, and
granted to the cytezens the first charter that ever they had / the which is
written in Saxon tunge, and sealed with grene wax, and expressed in.viii.
or.ix. lines.

THE.CCXXIII. CHAPTER.
Wyllyam Rufus or wyllyam the erede, the second son of wyllyam Conqueror /
began his reygne over England, in the month of Iulye, and the year of our
lord a thousand and.lxxxix / and the xxxi. year of the first Phylyppe then
king of France.

Ranulfe monk of Chester shows in his book of Polycronycon, yt Robert
Curthose eldest son of wyllyam Conqueror, was at the time of his fathers
death absent. The which heryng that his father had preferred his younger
brother to ye kingdom of England, was therwyth greatly amoued / in so myche
that he laid his dukedom to pledge to his brother Henry / and with that good
gathered to him a strong army, and so landed at Hampton^.

whereof wyllyam his brother being warned, in all haste sent unto him
messangers / to whom he gave co^myssyon to say in manner as follows. Thy
brother wyllyam prays yt to take no grefe with yt he has done, for he
clepeth him self not king, but as under king to reygne under the, and by
help of the that art gretter then he and better, and rather borne. And if
thou consider yt well, he has nothing mysused him again the. For he has
taken upon him for a time because of thine absence. But for he is now in
authoryte by thy sufferaunce / he prays yt he may under the so contyue,
payeng to the yearly.iii. thousand mark, with co^dycyon that who so over
lives may enjoy the kingdom. when Robert had hard that message to the end,
he wagged his hedde, as he that conceived some doubleness in this report. But
for he was lyberall and allowed more the honor then he did his profit, as in
other things following of his deeds yt shall appear / therefore he lyghtely
assented to all that was desired, and returned shortly after into Normandye
with pleasant words without profit.

This wyllyam was crowned the xxvii. day of September, upon the day of
saint Cosma and Damyan, and was well aided of Lamfra^k while he lived. He was
diverse and unstable of manners / so yt between him and his lords was often
dyssencyo^. In ye spryngyng of somer following his coronacyon / Odo bishop of
Bayo^, which as before ye have hard was delivered out of prison by wylliam
Co^querour, came into England. whom the king ioyously received / and gave unto
him shortly after the erledome of Kent. But he took upon him in process of
time to rule, in such wise as the king grudged with his doing. And for this
the king and his said uncle fill at unkindness / so yt he withdrew him from
the king, and alyed him with the bishop of Durham, the earls of Northumberland
and Shrewesbury, with other. Confederacy.
The which confederyd to gyder / took party again the king, and did things
to his dyspleasure and hurt. And among other damages by them done, Roger de
Mount Gomoryk earl of Shrewesbury, destroyed the country and ends of England
unto worceter town with aid of the walshemen. But in the end thorough the
prayer of the holy bishop wolstane / the walshemen were so weked and febled,
that a few knights scomfyted of them a great host.

when king wyllyam conceived, ye well nere all the Normans took party again
him / he then forced of necessyte drew to him the Englyshemen. And favored
them by gifts and easy laws / so that by their strength he lastely recovered
the earl of Shrewesburye, and chased some other of his enymyes / and shortly
after occupied the castle and strong holds in Kent belonging to bishop Odo
his forsayde uncle / and in the end compelled him to forswere England. And yt
done he besyeged ye city of Rochester, wherein the bishop of Durham, the earl
of Northumberland, and other noble men were gadered / and wan yt at length by
appoyntement, so that his enymyes were unto him reconcyled.

In the third year of his reygne dyed Lamfrank / when he had been archbishop
of Caunterburye.xviii. years. By whose means the monks of England were
brought to the use of their holy relygyon / the which before his coming lived
more like to seculer prestes the^ religious men / and exercysed them in
hunting and hawkynge for to avoid idelnesse, and dysynge and cardynge in the
winter nyghtes, that they might be ready to keep their hours and nyghtly
service. And in their apparel they were like unto consules and not unto mu^kes,
with many other deformytyes. The which in ye beginning of Lamfrank / he of
policye suffered for a season, lest he had brought all in his top atones, and
thereby might have caused some scysme or varyau^ce to have risen in the church.
In avoiding whereof with other inconuenyences / he little and little refrayned
them of their outrage / and in process of time caused and constrained them to
live after the constitucyons and rules of their relygyon.

About this time, Robert Curthose duke of Normandy, ente^dynge to take his
vyage into the holy land / laid his dukedom to wedde to his brother wyllyam
for.x. thousand pound. For leuyenge whereof king wyllyam set a task upon his
commons and subjects, and raised a far excidynge some under color of the
same / so that bishops melted their vessel, and lords spoiled their
tenauntes.

The king of Scotts also brake the peace before made with wyllyam Conqueror,
and wasted and took prays ut the country of Northumberlande. Then the king
provided a navy and sailed thither in the winter time. But by ye tempest of the sea, half his navy or a great part of yt was drowned / and many of his
knights were lost for cold and hunger. But yet in the end after diverse
conflyctes and bykerynges, by mediacyon of friends a peace and unity was
concluded / so that Malcolyn then king of Scotts should be obedyent to king
wyllyam, under the same oath that he was before time sworn unto his father /
and king willyam should yearly give unto him in ye way of a fee.xii. marks of
gold.

In the fourth year of his reygne, and the fyft day of October / passing great
tempest of wederyng fell in soudry places of England, and specially in ye
town of wynchecome. For there by tempeste of thu^der and lyghtenyng, a part
of ye steple of the church was thrown down / and the crycyfyx with the image
of our lady also standing upon the roode lofte, was in likewise overthrown
and broke and shatered. And after followed a contagye and a foul stenche / ye
which endured till the munkes had gone in processyon about the church, and all
the houses adioynyng to that abbay and other places.

Also this year at London was great harm done by force of the wind / which
blewe with such violence yt yt ouerturned or ryued as wytnessyth Polycronycon,
over the number of.vi. hundred houses. And ye rofe of saint Mary Bow in chepe
was also ryued wherewith two men were slain. And also at Salesburye was hurt
done with ye same wind or ye like thereof.

In the.v. year of wyllya^s reygne / he went into Northumberlande, and repaired
such holds and castelles as the Scotts by their warrys had blemyshed and
apayred / and caused a new castle to be made at Caercol ye city or town,
which the Danys of two hundred years passed had destroyed. Then ye king
returned unto Gloucester / where he was grievously veryd with sykenesse, so that
he wend he should have dyed. In time whereof he took great repentance, and
promised if he might escape, he would never sell mo benefices / and over that he
would amend his living and become a new man. But after he was restored to
health, that promise was shortly forgoten. And in that year he gave unto
Anselme the archbyshopryche of york. But he might take of yt but as the
kings pleasure was, till such time as the king had taken his trybute
thereof. And more over he avouched, that the sea of Lyncoln^ be longed to the sea of york / till the bisshoppe of Lyncolne had pleased him with a great
sum of money, as.v. thousand mark after the writing of Ranulfe.

In the.vi. year of his reygne were exceeding floodes, whereof the like in many
years passed had not ben seen. And after that ensued wonderful frost^ /
which frose the great stremes in such wise, ye horse and carte passed over ye
great ryuers. And in the end when the yse melted and brake / the payse thereof
brake many a strong bridge, both of timber and of stone.

THE.CCXXIIII. CHAPTER.
ABout this time the welshemen with their king or duke named Rees, brake out
upon the Englyshmen in the Bordour, where stands the castle of Brekenocke /
and there made masteryes for a while. But in the end his people were chaced
and slain / and he wounded to death, so that he dyed the.iii. day following.
This Rees is accounted of writers, to be the last king of walys. For after
this day they were so dau^ted / that kings of England had them in such
rule, that they were under more steadfast obedyence than they were before time.
How be it they rebellyd full often as after shall appear.

And the year following king wyllyam to have ye country in the more quiet /
hew down much of ye wood, and builded in sundry places strong castles and
pyles / by mean whereof more and more they were plucked to obedience. But not
shortly after / but specially in the days of Edward ye first and Edward
the third.

Malcolyn king of Scotland came unto Glowcester to common with the king of
diverse matters, and to take a fynall agreement. But for king wyllyam would have
demyd him in his court / therefore Malcoline departed from the king in great
dyspleasur. For the which and other causes, the war between England and
Scotland was reuyued / so that upon saint Bricius day following, Malcolyne
with his retynewe fought with an earl named Robert and tha^ earl of
Northumberlande / and there was slain with his eldest son Edward. For
sorrow whereof Margaret queen of Scotland and sister unto Edgare Ethelynge, as
in the first chapyter of the story of wyllya^ Conqueroure is showed, dyed
soon after. Than the Scotts made Dunwalde brother of Malcolyne their king,
and put by his sons. But by the aid of king wyllyam / Edgare which of some
writers is named Dunkam, was made king, as eldest son of Malcolyne.

In the.vii. year of the reygne of king wyllyam / Auncelyne or Anselme that
was archbishop of york, was removed to Caunterbury as affermeth one cronycle.
But Polycronycon and Guydo sayen, that Hugh earl of Chester being sick and
diseased / in the.vi. year of wyllyam Rufus, sent into Normandy for Anselme
than abbot of Barry for three causes. The first to vysyte and se him, and to be
reconcyled of him, as the man that he most trusted. The second cause was,
that he should releue some abbays of England, that the king vexed with grievous
trybutes. And the third cause was, yt he should found an abbay at Chester /
which place he after builded, and made one Richard his chapleyne first abbot
of ye place / and sone after he was made archbysshop of Caunterbury. where by
it appears that the said see was void over the term of three years.

This said.vii. year / England and Normandye were grieved with trybute and
moreyne of men, so sharply that tyllynge of the earth was spared or put of for
that year / and there after ensued great hunger. This year also ye Scotts
slew their king Edgar, and restored again to the rule of the land the
forenamed Dunwalde. And many grysly and uncouth syghtes were this year seen in
England / as hosts of men fightyng in ye sky, and fire lemys and other. And
the holy bishop wolstone of worceter dyed soon after / of whom it is showed
yt he sundry times warned and rebuked Englyshmen for their mysseliuyng / and
said for their offenses they were so punysshed of the Normans. But the
Englyshmen excused them self, and said that the Normans were worse in living
than they. where unto the bishop answered and said / that god used the
wickedness of the^ in Englyshmen. For by the Wicked punysshement.
wicked he punysshed ye wicked. And so does god suffer the devil to punysshe
sinners in hell / and he him self is punysshed with them.

Of this wolstone it is radde, that king wyllyam would have put him from his
see, to the entente that he might put another into his see. whereof this holy
man being warned / yode unto the king and said to him: I am enfourmed that
thou will take from me, the which a better man tha^ thou art gave unto me.
wherefore of whom that I received so noble a gift, to him will I give it again
/ and than take it from him if thou may. And when he had so said to the
king, he yode to the sepulture of Edward the confessoure / and after yt he had
made his prayers there, he pytched his cross in ye marble stone that lay
upon the grave. But no man might pluck out the staff, till wolston came
thither him self and pulled it out at the kings commandment. wherefore the
king seeing that maruayle / suffered him to enjoy his benefyce still.

In the.x. year of willyam Rufus / strife and dyscencyon fell between him and
Anselme bishop of Caunterbury / for Anselme might not call his synodys nor
correct the bishops, but as the king would. The king also challenged the
inuestiture of bysshoppes, and pylled the spyrytualtye and temporaltye with
unreasonable taskes and trybutes / the which he spent upon the tower of London,
and the making of westmynster hall. And over that the kings servants,
grieved and pylled englysshmen. unreasonably. And to this mysery was joined the
vnsaceable covetous of Ranulphe that was sometime chapelayne unto wyllyam
conqueror / the which was at this day the kings procuratour, and gadered his
taskes over all. He was so covetous and so evil dysposed, that he would
leuye.iii. taskys for two. He pylled the rich, and bare down the poor, and
caused many men to lose their lands for small causes / and therefore the king
had him in his synguler favor. And by his means byshoprykes were boughte and
sold as plainly as other marchaundyses. For that time, clerks used busshed
and brayded heddys, long tayled and blasynge clothes, shynynge golden gyrdels
/ and rode with gylte spurs, with using of diverse other enormities. All
which vices Anselme would have corrected / but he lacked assystence of his
brethren ye bysshoppes. For the which cause and other he departed the land.
wherewyth the king being mysse contented / sent after him such persons as
robbed and spoiled him, and entreted him in most cruel manner. For the which
deed Raufe bishop of Chychester blamed the king / and also rebuked all such
bysshoppes as had refused the party of Anselme, and had favored the king in
causes concerning the foresaid varyaunce. And forthermore he wythstode the
king and his officers in taking of fynes of prestes for crime of fornicacyon.
For which causes the king with the said Raufe was sore amoued and dyscontented
/ and opteyned such favor, that he suspe^ded many chyrches of his dyoses. But
in the end, Raufe demeaned him in such wise that he had his own will / and
his chyrches enlarged and freed that before were stopped with thorns. And the
king gave unto him ye fynes of prestes within his dyosis / and endued ye see
of Chychester with many great gifts.

And upon a time king wyllyam was riding toward his dysporte of hunting /
and suddenly a messenger came unto him and said, that the city of Cenemonia
in Normandye was beseyged. wherefore he without long taryenge or aduysement,
took the straight way to these side / and sent to his lords, chargynge them to
follow. when the said lords came to his presence / they aduysed him to tarry
till his people were assembled. But he would nothing do after their counsel
/ but said, such as him loved, he shortly wyste well would follow him, and so
yode to ship, setting aparte all parels. The master of the ship was afraid,
he saw the weder so dark and so clowdy / and counceyled the king to tarry
till the wind would blow more favorably. But he commanded him to make all
the speed that he cowde upon his life / saying that he never hard that ever
any king was drowned. And so he passed the sea and landed in Normandy / and
gathered to him there his knights. when the capytayne of the syege, whose name
was Helyas, knew of the kings landyng / he fered, and anon began to break
the syege. But by treason he was taken and brought to the kings presence. To
whom the king showed such pytye, that he suffered him to be at his lybertye.
which after the opinion of wyllyam de regibus, was done more of pride than of
compassyon.

THE.CCXXV. CHAPTER.
IN the.xi. year of the reygne of this wyllyam the read / at a town called
Fynchanster in the country of Bark shyre, a well cast out blood as before
it had done water. And after by the space of.xv. days, great flames of fire
were seen in the eleme^t in sundry places and times. This year also ye two
earls of Shrewesbury and of Chester either named Hugh / by the kings
commandment entered with their knights the i will of Man or Anglesaye, and slew
therein many welshemen, and gelded many moo. Among the which a priest named
Kynredus was drawn out of a church and served of ye same wise / and also cut
his tunge out of his head, and put out his one eye. But this priest was of such
virtue, that by miracle he was restored to health within.iii. days ensuynge.

In the which season and time, the king of Northganys or Norwaye wan the isles
called than Orcades and now Orkeys / and after came with his strength into the
foresaid i will of Man, where at the same season were the said two earls. Than
between them was mortal fight / in ye which Hugh earl of Shrewesbury was
stryken with an arowe in ye eye, and dyed within.viii. days after. But as
says Guydo, the Danys were chased, and the Englysshemen had the vyctory.

King wylliam was much in Normandye / for so myche as Robert his brother was
all this season in the holy land / of whose acts shall some deal be towched
in ye story of Henry the first. And wyllyam had myche pain to rule the
Normans / for they rebelled often again him.

In the.xii. year of his reygne / he came out of Normandye, and when he saw the
hall of westmynster yt he had caused to be builded / he was therwyth
dyscontented, that it was so little. wherefore as it is rehearsed of some writers
/ he intended if he had lived to have made a larger, and yt to have served for
a chaumber.

Robert Losaunge, that sometime had been abbot of Ramsey, and than bishop of
Thetforde by gift of a thousand pound to the king / repented him after, and
bewept that unskillful deed / and took his way to Rome, and did for it his
enjoined penance / and after returned into England, and turned his see from
Thetforde to Norwyche / and founded there a fair monastery of his own goods,
and not of the patrimony of crystes church. But therein is a dowt to consider.
For he was first an abbot and after a bishop.

About this time, by the means of one Stephen Hardynge a munke of Sherbourne /
an Englyshman of ye order of Sisteaux or white mu^kes had his beginning in the
wilderness of Cystery within the prouynce of Burgoyne, as witnesses Ranulf
munke of Chester. But other writers, as Jacobus Phylyppus, and the author of
Cronica cronicaru^, Matheolus, with other / sayen that this Stephen was the
second abbot of ye place / and yt it was first founded by the means of one
Robert abbot of Molyne^se, in the year of grace.M.xcviii. which to follow their
saying, should be in the.ix. year of the reygne of this king. This order was
after brought into England by one called walter Espeke, that founded the
first abbay of that relygyon at Ryuall, about ye year of grace.xi.C.xxxi. The
which should be about the.xxxi. year of the first Henry than king of England.
Somewhat of their relygyon is towched in the.x. chapyter of the.viii. book of
Polycronycon.

After that king wyllyam, as before is said, was returned out of Normandy /
many wonderful prodygyes and tokyns were showed in England / as the swellyng
or rysyng of ye water of Thamys, in such wise that it drowned diverse towns,
and did much harm by out passing his boundys in diverse places about London and
else where. Also the devil was seen walk in man's likeness with diverse
other things which I ouerpasse. The king was warned of this, and told by his
famylyers yt god was not content with his living. But he set all at naught, and
made of it a scoff or a iape.

In the.xiii. year of his reygne and beginning thereof, as the third day of
Auguste after the saying of Ranulfe / this king wyllyam being at his dysporte
of hunting within the new forest, by glaunsynge of an arowe shot of a knight
named walter Tyrell, was wounded to the death in the.xliiii. year of his age.
After which deed the said walter escaped and saved him self, for few there
were that him pursued. And so the king thus wounded, was laid upon an horse
lytter, and so conveyed to wynchester / where shortly after he dyed and was
buried.

Of this man might be made a myche longer story, if all his deeds should be
towched. The which took upon him great things / and much gretter ente^ded if
he might have lived. The day before he was slain one axed of him where he
would keep his Crystmasse. At Poytiers said the king / for the earl entendeth
to go toward Jerusalem / and I woll assaye to have his erledome in morgage /
for well I know he must cheuyche for money to perform that journey. The day
that wyllya^ dyed / he held in his hands the.iii. bysshopryches / of
Canterbury, of winchester and of Salysbury / and diverse abbayes, of the which
he let some to term. Also he refrayned y^ money y^ of old time was paid to
Rome called Rome scotte. Roma scotte.
Of this wyllya^ reportyth Henry of Hu^tyngdo^ / and says yt though this man
were light of some things, yet he was steadfast and stable of his promise / so
yt what he promised good or evil should be performed. And though he were named
covetous / yet it should seem yt he was liberal, as shows by this narracyo^
following.

Upon a season when the abbot of a place in England was deed / two munkes of
the same place, the which before had gathered money, made their friends to
king willyam / and offered large offers either of them to be promoted to that
dygnyte. There was also a third munke, the which of meekness and of humylyte
followed the other two / to the intent that upon him that the king had
admytted for abbot, he would have given attendaunce, and as his chapelayn to
have with him returned. The king called before him the.ii. munkys severally,
and either out proffered other. And as he cast his eye aside / he espied the
third, the which he demed had comen also for the same cause. Then the king
called him / and asked if he would give any more then his brethren had offered,
to be abbot. But he answered to the king and said, that he would another offer
nor yet give for yt one penny / nor would have so great a charge by any mean
wrongefull. when the king had well understood this third munkes answer /
he said that he was best worthy to be abbot, and to have the rule of so holy a
charge / and so he gave unto him that benefyce, without taking any penny. This
king wyllyam used always lemmans / wherefore he dyed without issue legyttymat,
when he had reyned as before is said fully.xii. years and odd days.

THE.CCXXVI. CHAPTER.
HEnry the.iii. son of wyllyam Co^querour and first of yt name, which for his
conning was surnamed beuclerk began his reygne and domynyon as king of
England, the.v. day of August, in the year of our lord.xi. hundred and one /
and the.xliii. year of the first Phylyppe then king of France / and was
crowned at westmynster right shortly after, of Thomas archebyshoppe of york,
and Morys bishop of London.

This Henry in his youth plied him to such study, that he was instruct in
the.vii. arts lyberall. Anon he made holy church free / and used saint
Edwardes laws, with the amendeme^t of them. He put out of his court nyce and
wa^ton men / and closed Ranulphe bishop of Durham in the tower of London, ye
which as ye before have hard was so great with wyllyam his brother / and sent
for Anselme archebyshoppe of Caunterburye, which before was fled fro the
tyranny of wyllyam Rufus.

Justice and co^tynence.
This Henry chastysed the old untrue mesure, and made a yerde of ye length of
his own arm / with diverse other things reformyng, that long before his days
had been mysse used / and abhorred excess of metys and drynkes / and used to
fight more with cou^sayll then with sword.

In the second year of his reygne / Robert his brother, that by all this
season had been occupied in wars upon Cristes enymyes, having word of the
death of his brother wyllyam, and how his brother Henry had taken upon him as
king / returned into Normandy, and there made preparacyon for to come into
England.

In this season also was broken out of prison Ranulfe bishop of Durham, and
comen to the said Robert into Normandy. The which excyted duke Robert in all
that he might to war upon his brother Henry / so that he assembled a strong
army of knights, and took shyppynge, and landed in process of time at
Portysmouth. But by medyacyon a peace was made / and that in such condycion,
that he should have.iii. thousand marks yearly, as before was promised unto him
by willyam Rufus his brother with other condycyons of succession and other
things, the which I ouerpasse for length of time. Thus Robert being
contented contrary to the minds of his lords, after he a season had
dysported him in England returned into Normandy / where of his lords he was
for this and other deeds before done as after is showed, little or less and
less setby. For all be yt that by his fathers life he had vyctorye, and
utterly dyspleased him as some deal before is touched / yet by his manhood and
manfull deeds, he fell into the favor of the people, and did many and great
notable acts / and specially at the wynnyng of the city of Acon upon the
myscreauntes and turks. For the which deeds yt apperyth by the sequel of the
storye that he was also in the favor of god. For when the eleccyon should be
made for the king of Jerusalem, and certain princes and princes peers by
ordinance made, stood with their tapers abiding the dyuyne purueyaunce, that
whose taper were first with heavenly fire lyghtened should be admytted for king
/ the taper of this duke Robert was first only. wherefore by dyuyne
purueyaunce he was then chosen king of Jerusalem. The which he refused, for
the pain and travail that he should have with all / and also for the couetyse
of the crown of England. For as soon as he had knowledge of the death of his
brother willyam / anon he parted the country and sped him homewarde in all
that he might. For the which deed as affermeth mine author, he spedde the
worse in all his deeds after.

This Robert was wise in counsayll, strong in battle, and also right lyberall
/ and in his return from Jerusalem, married the daughter of wyllyam de
Auersana lord of Apulia, with whom he received great so^mes of money for her
dower, the which by mean of his liberalyte he spent shortly after. Then
fortune began to frown upon duke Robert / and set his own lords so
again him, that they sent unto king Henry his brother / willing him to come
into Normandye, and they would deliver the country unto him, and hold him for
their chief lord and ruler. whereunto, as says the english cronycle, king
Henry soon consented. But or ever this war between the said duke Robert and
king Henry began / this Henry married Mawde or Molde the daughter of Malcolyne
king of Scotland, and of Margarete his wife daughter of Edward the outlawe,
as in the beginning of wyllyam Conqueroure is thouched. Of the which Molde
this Henry receyuyd after some writers two sons and.ii. daughters / yt is to
say wyllyam and Richard, Mawde and Mary. And also the said author with other
say / that Robert duke of Normandye came into England in the fourth year of
the reygne of king Henry, and had good chere of his brother and sister. For
the which he at the request of his said sister, released to his brother ye
forenamed trybute of.iii. thousand marks. But by ill tale tellers and covetous
of signory, this broderly love was after dissolved / in such wise that the
king with a strong army sailed into Normandy / and held his brother Robert with
so sharp war, that he chased him from one country to another / and wanne
from him Roan, Caan, Faloys, and all the good towns of Normandye / and lastely
constrained him to ask help of Phylyppe king of France, and after of the
earl of Flau^dres / but he failed help of them both. Then with such power as
he could make, he gave battle unto his brother king Henry. In the which he
was taken, and sent over into England, and put into the castle of Cardyffe in
walys / where he remained as prisoner while he lived. And when he was deed he
was buried at Glowcester.

In this time and season, as it were in ye.iii. year of king Henry / ye church
of saint Barthelmew in Smythfeld of London was begone to be founded, of a
mynstrell of this king Henry named Rayer / and after performed and ended by
good and well disposed cytezens of the city of London. This place of
Smythfelde was at ye day a lay stowe of al ordure or fylth, and the place where
felons and other transgressors of the kings laws were put to execucyon.

THE.CCXXVII. CHAPTER.
SO as king Henry had fynyshed his war in Normandye, and was returned into
England / Robert de Bolesyn, which was the eldest son of Roger de mount
Gomeryk earl of Shrewesburye / arose again the king, and manned his castellys
of Shrewesbury, of Brugg^ of Arundell, and of Tekynhyll, and incoraged the
walshmen again the king. But the king pursued so cruelly the said Robert, yt
within.xl. days he wan all thoses castellis and slew many of his men, and gat
the favor of the walshmen by gifts and plesau^t words / and also compelled
the said Robert to forsake England, The which then sailed into a corner of
Norma^dye and kept him there secretly, till such time as to him was thither
comen willya^ earl of Cornwall / which wyllyam was also earl of Nortom in
Normandye. when these two earls were assocyat / they gaderyd to them a great
strength of Normans, and did great harm within the prouynce. wherefore the
king sailed thither and made sharp war upon them. In the which he lost
many of his men. But in ye end he put from them their strength, and took them
both prisoners, and so held them ye term of their lives. And that done, he
set that country in good rest and peace, and after returned into England.
After which return / king Henry made sharp laws again thieves and other
that used unlawful means. In which laws was contained losing of life, of
eyes, of stones, and other members of man as the gylte required.

And soon after Anselme archbysshoppe of Caunterbury, assembled a great
cou^sayll at London of the clergy of England. By authoryte of the which
cou^sayll / diverse abbotes and other were put from their dygnytie, for that
they had taken before time their abbayes by unlawful means. Prestes wives
And among all other decrees one was, ye prestes should forgo their wives.
Then strife fell between ye king and Anselme / for that that he would not sacre
the prestes that had taken inuestyture of lewd mennys hands, which before
was forboden upon pain of cursynge. But Gyralde archebyshoppe of york / for
the pleasure of the king sacred such bysshoppes. wherefore Anselme being
dysco^tent / departed ye land and yode to Rome, to show this with other
things to the pope, which at that day by most accord of writers should be
Pascall the second.

In the.vi. of the king, the country of Flau^dres was sore blemyshed and
hurt by mean of the sea, so that the Flemynges yode about to have socoure of
dwelling, and required of the king to have license that they might inhabyt
them in the eest part of the river of Twede, the which to them was granted.
But after a certain of years they were removed ito westwalys, where they
remained a long while / but after they sprad all England over.

In the.vii. year of this king / upon a frydaye at night in the first weke
of clean lent, was seen an uncouth star between ye south and the weste, the
which nyghtely appeared at one hour, and co^tynued so by the space of.xxv.
days. And fore against that out of the eest part / appeared a great leuyn or
beme of bryghtnes, which stretched toward the said star.

And upon shere thursdaye next ensuynge, were seen two monys / that one in
the eest, and that other in the weste.

And in this year / Anselme by the kings agreement, returned again from Rome /
and shortly after called a conuocacyon at London. In the which by the popes
authoryte yt was newely conformed and enacted, that no temporal man after that
day should make inuesture with cross or with ring.

In the.viii. year of the reygne of king Henry / the fourth Henry emperor of
Almayne, the which had married Molde the eldeste daughter of king Henry, when
she was of the age of.v. years / prysoned pope Pascall and diverse of the
cardynallys. This Henry also warred again his father Henry the.iii / and
lastely cast him in strong prison. For the which deed as assermeth Ranulphe
/ he wylfully when he had ruled the empire.xx. year / resygned his dygnyte into
the hands of Calixtus ye second of that name then pope / and after came
secretly into England, and unto Chester, vnwyttynge his wife or any of his
friends / where he lived long after a strayte life, and was buried there at
last. But to this saying dysagreeth the writers of the stories of emperors.
For of them yt is wytnessed / that this Henry the emperor after he had ruled
the empire as before is said.xx. winter, he dyed at a place in Almayn called
Spyre / and there was buried, with this scripture upon his toumbe. Filius hic,
pater hic, auus hic, preauus iacet hic.

which is to mean in our vulgar tunge as follows. The son here lies, with
also ye fader
The belsyre, for and ye great grau^fader.


when Henry the emperor was thus deed as after yt shall be showed, when
conuenyency of time requires / what became of his wife it shall there be
declared.

In the.ix. year of ye reygne of king Henry / the archebyshoppe Anselme
professed Gerarde archbyshoppe of york to the yoke of his obedyence, as he was
before taught by the lore of Lamfranke his predecessor. And the.x. day of
Auguste following, he sacred.v. bishops at one time / as of wynchester; of
Salysbury, of Exeter, of Herforde, and of Glamurgan. And king Henry ordained a
bishops see at Ely / and ordained there Henry that had been bishop of
Bangor / and besette Cambrydge^shyre to the sea of Ely. And to the bisshoppes
see of Lyncolne, he gave his own town of Spaldynge, for he had mynyshed
that see by the preferment of Ely.

In the.x. year dyed Anselme archbishop of Caunterbury. After whose death that
see was void.v. years / and the goods of the church spent to the kings use.
And when he was prayed to help ye church, that was without an hedde and a
pastor / he used to answer that his fader and also his brother had accustomed,
to set there the best proved men yt they might find. And to the entente that
he might do the same / he took the more time and laysure. with such mylde
answers he so put of the time, that be filled his cofers with the great sommes
of ye benefyce. And who that is desirous to know of the great virtue of this
bishop Anselme / let him read in the.xiiii. chapyter of the.vii. book of
Polycronycon; and there he shall find a part thereof.

About this time as witnesses the french cronycle / a co^trauersy began
between the king and Lewys king of France son to Phylyp the first. This Lewys
was surnamed Lewis the great, other for his bygnesse of person, or else for
greatness of his deeds. This Lewys sent unto king Henry being in Normandy /
and gave unto him monycyon of homage for the duchy of Normandy / and also that
he should restore unto him or beat down to the ground, the castle of Gysours
/ and also to recompense and restore for hurtes and harms that his Normans
had done in those parts. But all this of king Henry was denied / and
shortly after skyrmysshes and cock fyghtes began between the said two
princes, king Henry lyenge at the said castle of Gysours, and Lewys at a
place called mount Calue. But this increased in such wise, that after either
prince sought more rome places, whose knights sundry times met. But of any
notable battle I find no remembrance / all be yt that the said war
continued by the term of two years. In the end of which two years wyllyam the
eldest son of king Henry, being a child and within age / contented so well
the mind of Lewys, that he refrayned of his war for that time.

In the.xiii. year, at Shrewesburye was a great earth quake, and at Nothyngham
from the morn to the vndertyde. The river of Trent was so fordryed in the
month of June, as says Guydo, that men went over dry. And the star called
stella cometa or the blasynge sterre aperyde soon after. Theruppon followed an
hard winter, great death of the people, and scarcete of vitayll by the great
moreyn of bestes. In this year also the king founded the abbay of Hyde
without the wallys of wynchester, that of old time was within the wallys.

THE.CCXXVIII. CHAPTER.
IN the.xv. year of his reygne / ye king ente^dyd to have ^moted Faricus abbot
of Abyndon, unto the sea of Caunterburye. But by a counsayll kept at wyndesoure
of bysshoppes, ye kings mind was changed / and to that see was then admytted
Raufe that was bishop of Rochester. And the same year one Thurstone was
chosen archebyshoppe of york / the which wythsayde his professyon of
obedience that he should owe to the sea of Caunterbury / wherefore at length he
was depryuyd of his dygnyte. But after by labor that he made to Pascall the
pope before named / the said pope wrote unto the king that he should restore
Thurstone again to the sea of york. By which mean he was again restoryd /
but yet he disdayned to do his lawefull obedyence unto Raufe archebyshope of
Caunterbury. Then the strife was renewed, which Lamfranke before as ye have
hard in the third chapyter of wyllyam Conqueror, did appeace / and was
brought in argument before the pope. The which at the kings request, promised
yt he would nothing do nor ordeyne, that should be derogacion to the archbishop
of Caunterbury, or to the dygnyte of his church. But in conclusion the pope
gave such a defuse sentence in this matter, that he left the strife
vndetermyned and vnassoyled. And when ye kings procuratours with also the
archbishop of Caunterbury were absent / were yt for need or for favor, the
pope was so bowed, that he forsook ye old rule used before his days, and
sacred the said Thurstone, and gave unto him the pawle. For this deed ye king
was sore dyscontented with Thurstone, and warned him the enter of his land.
wherefore the pope wrote after shortly to the king / wyllyng him to suffer
Thurstone to occupye his see peaseably, or he should be accused and suspended
by the dygnyte of the office of Caunterbury / and so Thurstone enjoyed his see.

In the year of our lord.xi. hundred and.xviii. as says the french cronicle,
which was the.xvii. year of this king Henry the first / the war was again
quyckened between king Henry and Lewys king of France. whereof was the
occasyon, as says the said french cronycle, Thybaude earl of Chartres. which
Thybaude was greuyd by the French king, and for necessyte required king
Henry of aid and help, to whom the king as to his kynnesman sent aid and
socoure. And afterward the king sailed over with a strong army / and sent
a nobleman named Stephan into the lordshyppe of Brye, to defendeyt again the
French king. when Lewys vnsterstode that king Henry was landed in Normandye
with so great power / he in all haste assembled a strong power, and drew him
toward the king. But there were so strong holds mannyd with Normans, and
also such deep and great ryuers / that the French king might not win unto
king Henry. Then lastely by a feate of war which were long to rehearse, he
wan a town named Lyngues in Cause / in the which town was a bridge to pass
the river of Thee, and so into Normandye.

when a certain of the knights of Jews had thus won the foresaid town /
the said Jews with his people spedde him shortly after, and rescued his
foresaid knights / and then spoiled and robbed the town the which was
rich, for so myche as yt had been in quiet and rest many years before. He
also slew and took prisoners all ye Normans there dwelling, and put in their
stead Frenchmen. And that done he sped him toward king Henry, the which was
at a castle called Male assyse / and there made purueyaunce for the defense of
the Frenchmen. And when he had garnyshed yt to his pleasure he departed
thens. But not long after the French king came thither with his hole host
of Frenchmen / and after many sore and cruel assautys, wan the said castle /
and bette yt down even with the ground. After which season as says the said
cronicle, fell to the French king many and diverse mysfortunes. For shortly
after among other myssechaunces / a noble captayn of his named Angueran de
Chanmount, the which had done myche harm in Normandye to king Henry, and
won there some castelles and other strong holds, dyed suddenly. And in
short time after / Baldewyne earl of Flau^dres a man of great strength and
puyssaunce, as he beseaged a castle was wounded in the face, and dyed with
in.vi. days after. Then Fauques earl of Aungeos, in whom also this Lewys
affyed much and trusted / married his daughter unto willyam the eldest son of
king Henry / and refused the king of France part, and aided and assysted
king Henry in all that he might / so that daily the power of king Henry
increased, and the French kings mynyshed. Lastely these two princes met with
their both hosts in plain feld, and fought a dedely and cruel battle.
where in the end the French king was ouercomen, and lost myche of his
people / and was compelled to flee unto a place called Audely for his
sauegarde. But this overthrow of Frenchemen is excused in the most fairest
manner / so yt they excuse them self, and say that king Henry set upon king
Lewys, when he was not ware, but his knights all out of array and order, and
also king Henry had far exceeding number of men over that their king had /
with other words of boste of them self, and slander of Englyshemen, the
which as to me appears is an augmentacyon of their own shame. But Ranulfe
the munke says shortly, that king Henry overcame the French king royally in
battle.

Then yt follows in ye story / finally these said princes were agreed / and
wyllyam the son of king Henry did homage unto ye French king for the lands
of Normandye, by the agreement of his fader. For the king thought him self to
good to be under the obeysau^ce of ye French king Then king Henry caused his
free men of England and of Normandy, to do homage unto his son wyllyam.

And soon after Fouques before named left his erledome of Angeer or Angiers,
in guydyng of king Henry, and yode him self into the holy land / and wylled
in his testament, that if he returned not again, that the said erledome
should remain unto his son in law wyllyam, son of king Henry, which had
married his daughter.

About the.xx. year of the reygne of king Henry / queen Molde or Mawde his wife
dyed in Normandy / the which in her youth was set by her father king of
Scotts into a nunry, and there ware and used the veil and habyte of a nun.
For the which cause when king Henry was agreeable to take her unto wife, this
matter fell in great despucyon / and Anselme then archebyshop of Caunterbury was
sore again that marriage a season of time. But at length yt was suffycye^tly
proved that she was there as a figure, a woman worynge that habyte without
professyon of order. And this was thus ordered by her father, to the end to
put by unworthy wowers. This of writers was reputed for a blessed and holy
woman, after the living of a worldly woman.

when king Henry had continued in Normandy upon the season and term of.iii.
years / he took shyppyng at Haterflete in Normandy, and sailed happily into
England the same day, that is to mean ye.xxiiii. day of November as says
some writers. And shortly after willya^ duke of Normandy, with Richard his
brother, Notha the countess of Persye, Richard earl of Chester, with his wife
the kings nyce, and the archdekyn of Herforde and other, to the number of a
hundred and.lx. persons / took shyppynge at the said port, and were all
drowned, a bocher only except. which mysfortune fell by the ouersyght of the
master and other, which fell at a dyssencyon in the night among them self /
by reason whereof they ran upon a rock as showed the foresaid bocher. From
this danger wyllyam duke of Normandy was escaped, and was in the ship bote
nere unto the land. But when he hard the lamentable cry of the Countess
Notha / he commanded the rowers to return and save the said Countess. which
done by what mysfortune I can not say, after she was received into the boat,
were it by tempeste or over chargynge of the boat or otherwise / they were all
swalowid of the sea, so that none of them was after found but perte of their
goods. Of this duke wyllya^ some desclaunderous words are left in memory,
both in the english cronycle and also of other writers / the which I
ouerpasse.

THE.CCXXIX. CHAPTER.
IN the.xxi. year of his reygne / king Henry made ye park of wodestoke be
side Oxenforde, with other plesures to the same. And Fouques earl of Angiers
returned out of the holy land, and married the sister of her that before he had
married unto wyllam duke of Normandye, unto the son of Robert Curthose / and
gave with her the erledome of Conomanna. And strife began to kyndell between
king Henry and the said Fouques, for the wytholdyng of the dowre or ioynture
of his first daughter, married wnto wyllyam the kings son.

In the.xxiii. year of king Henry, dyed Raufe archbyshoppe of Caunterbury /
and one named wyllya^ was set in ye see after him. And the king in this year
began the foundacyon of ye abbay of Redyng. And John^ a cardynall of Rome was
sent from Calyxte the second of that name the^ being pope, for certain
matters concerning the pope. In the time of which his so being here, the
cardynall made sharp process again prestes that norysshed Christian moyles /
and rebuked them by open publyshement and otherwise, so that he wan him here
but small and little favor. But this dyssymuled doctor took so great feruence
in the correccyon of the judgment of prestes of England, that he forgate the
lore and cou^sayll of his famous pope Caton / which in the book of his
counsayll or of wisdom thus says: Quae cuspare soses, ea tu ne feceris ipse.
Turpe est doctori, cum cuspa redarguit ipsum.
The which two verses may be englyshed as follows, Auyse ye well, let reason
be thy guide
when other folk thou art about to blame /
That such defaute in the be not espied.
For if there be / then shall thou have the shame.
A man's honor such things woll reclayme.
It is full foul when that a man woll chese
If that his deed again his words preche.


This cou^sayll was not remembered of the said Cardynall. For in the evening
after he had lewdely blown his horn, and said it was a detestable sin to
arise from the side of a strumpet and sacre the body of Christ / he was taken
with a strumpet to his open shame and rebuke.

In the.xxv. year of king Henry was called a counsayll at London / where the
spyrytualty condescended that the kings officers should punyshe prestes that
cheryshed the foresaid mulys. But the said officers took money, and suffered
the prestes to spur their mulys at their pleasure. which office at this day
is so clearly renou^ced of al spyritual men / yt neither king nor bishop takes
for yt any synes, nor yet correccyon necessary to be done for the same.

In the.xxvii. year of his reygne as reports an old Cronycle / the gray
freres by procuryng of ye king came first into England, and had their first
house builded at Caunterbury. And about this time by most accord of writers,
dyed Henry the.iiii. emperor of that name / which as before is touched married
Molde the daughter of king Henry. After whose death the said empress came unto
her father into Normandye. when king Henry was ascertaynted of the death of
Henry the emperor / for so myche as he had none heir male, he caused soon
after the more party of his lords of England as well spirytuall as temporal,
to swear in his presence, that they should keep ye land of England to the use
of Mawde ye empress, if he dyed without issue male, and she then suruyued

In the.xxviii. year of king. Henry / Geffrey Pla^tagenet earl of Angeou married
Molde the empress. Of the which two descended Henry the second, that after
Stephan was king of England. In this year also the king had diverse monycyons
and vysyons. For among other ferefull dremys / he saw a great company of
clerkys with diverse wepons, which manassed him for debt that he should owe
unto them. And when they were passed / he thought yt he was manassed to death of
his own knights. And lastely apperyd to him a great company of bishops /
which thretened him, and would have smytten him with their crosses. By this
monicyon he took remorce in his conscience, and did great deeds of charity in
Normandye where he had seen these visyons. And after his coming then into
England / in satysfaccyon of wrongs done to the church as affermeth Guydo,
he then founded the abbay of Redynge before spoken of. And over that he
releasyd unto English men the Dane gelt, that was by his father and his
brother renewed.

In the.xxx. year of this king Henry, dyed the earl of Flaundres / and king
Henry as says Ranulfe, was by agreement of Lewys the French king made earl, as
next heyr and enherytour to the said erledome. But it is not there expressed
by what manner of title or succession.

In the.xxxii. year of the king, dyed Robert Curthose the kings brother the
which he had kept as prisoner in the castle of Cardyfe from the iiii. year
of his reygn or there about / whose corpse as before is showed, was buried at
Glouceter before the high alter. And about this time was founded the pryorye
of Norton in the prouynce of Chester, by one wyllyam the son of Nychelle. And
the abbay of Combremer in the same prouynce, was also founded about the same
time.

In the.xxxv. year of king Henry / was borne of Molde the empress, Henry
short mantell or Henry the second. The which as after shall be showed was
consenting to the martyrdom of saint Thomas of Caunterburye.

King Henry being in Normandy after some writers, fell from or with his horse
/ whereof he cought his death. But Ranulphe says he took a surfeit by etynge of
a lamprey and there of diet, when he had reigned full xxxv. years and odd
months. Then ye kings bowellys were drawn out of his body, and then salted
with myche salt. And for to avoid the stenche which had infected many men /
the body was lastely closed in a bulls skin, and yet yt was not all stynted.
He that cleansed the head, dyed of the stenche of the brayn. Then lastely the
body was brought into England, and buried in the abbay of Redynge that he had
before founded. Then ye fame of him was blown abroad as yt is blown of other
princes / and said yt he passed other men in.iii. things. In wit, in
eloquence, and fortune of battle. And other said he was ouercomen with iii.
vices / with couetyse, with cruelty, and with lust of lechery.

One other made these verys of him as folowen.

King Henry is deed, bewte of the world, for whom great dole
Gods now maken for their kind brother. For he is sole,
Mercurius in speech, Marce in battle, heart strong Appollo,
Jupiter in hest, egall with Saturn and enymye to Cupido.
King he was of right, and man of most might, and glorious in raynyng.
And when he left his crown, the^ fell honor down, for mysse of such a
king.
Normandy than began lowre, for loss of their flower, and sange well away.
England made moan, and Scotland did groan, for to se that day.
Francia. THE.CCXXX. CHAPTER.
LEwys the son of the first Phylyp began his reygne over the Frenchemen,
in the year of our lord.xi. hundred and.vii. to reken his beginning from the
death of his father / and the.vi. year of the first Henry then king of England.
This Lewys as before is touched, was admytted to the rule of the land certain
years or his father dyed, and was surnamed Jews the great for grossness of
his body.

Anon as this Lewys had fynyshed the obsequy of the funerallys of his father /
he without taryenge called a counsayll of his lords spyrytuall and temporal
at the city of Orleaunce / where of the bishop of the same see with other
adioynynge, he was solemnly anointed and crowned. But not without grudge of the
archbyshoppe of Raynes / for so much as of custom the French kings used
there to be crowned.

Soon after the coronacyon of Lewys / Guy le Rous, and Guy de Cressy his
son, which before time had been at debate and war with Lewys, and Lewys
had from them taken ye castle of Gurnaye / this Guy le Rous with his son
seeing they might not prevail again the king, awayted their time and season,
and espied when Endo his own brother and earl of Corbueyll went forth on
hunting, and took him, and as a prisoner kept him in the castle of Bawdum.
whereof the cause was, for so myche as the said Endo would not assyste nor
aid ye said Guyle Rous his brother again the king. when this was known,
anon the friends and tenauntes of the said earl showed this matter unto the
king / besechynge him that he would aid and assyste them to recover their
natural lord. whereunto the king gran^ted / and forth with sent a knight or
captayn of his named Auncelyne, accompanied with.xl. horsemen before / for so
myche as yt was showed unto the king, yt such as had ye rule of the castle
would receive such persons as were sent from him, and deliver the castle
with the prisoner unto them. Upon which appoynteme^t this Ancelyne as before
is said was sent to enter this castle. But all contrary to the former promise
made / this Auncelyne was betrayed and taken, and many of his men slain, and
him self set in prison, where the said earl of Corbuayll was. whereof when the
king was enfourmed / he was passing grievously dyscontent. wherefore in all
haste he sped him thither, and compassed ye castle with a strong syege / and
those that were within defended them manfully. In the time of the which syege
another Guy the fader, nor Guy his son, were with in the said castle of
Baudum.

But Guy ye son as a lusty and iuperdous knight / put him self in adventure
diverse ways and times to have entered the said castle for comfort of his men
/ but all was in vayn. Finally the king made so sore and cruel assautes, that
he wan the first ward with great dyffycultye, and after the hole / and
delyueryd the earl and Auncelyn his steward, ye which were in great doubt of
their lives. And such as he took prisoners of the soldyours / some he put to
death, and some he prisoned to their lives end, to the terror and fere of
other.

In process of time after at a place called the Roche of Guy, which one Guy of
old time had builded / dwell lyd at this day one of that stock named also
Guy, the which had to wife a fair and good woman, the daughter of one
wyllya^ a Norman. which wyllyam entendynge to dysheryte the said Guy, and to
be lord of that strong place / upon a time when the said Guy was in ye
church or chapel to here his dyuyne service entered the church with a certain
of harnessed knights under their man tellys, and fell upon him and all to
hew him. whereof herynge the wife / ran as a mad woman, and fell upon her
husband, to the intent to save him from the strokes. But the tyrauntes were so
cruel, yt they forbear nothing of their cruel tie / but wounded her with her
husband, so that both were slain / and that done entered the castle, and slew
all such as they found therein. when this willyam fader to ye wife of Guy, or
brother to her as affermeth master Robert Gagwyne, was possessed of ye castle
of Guyon / he thought thereby to rule all the country enuyron. But the
gentylles and commons he ring of this shameful murder / assembled the^ to
gither / and of one mind while some of them yode to the king to enfurme him of
that cruel deed, the other prepared abyllementes of war, and laid syege to
the said castle. The king Lewys herynge of this shamfull deed, and the
winning of so strong an hold, ferynge the rescue of Englishmen and Normans,
lest that castle by that mean might fall in their hands / sent his
commyssyon unto the rulers of that country, chargynge them with all dylygence
to assaute that place. And if they might win yt / to put the executours of
that murder unto most shameful death. which commandment received from the
king / strong assaute and cruel was made, and manfully yt was defended. But
the loss ran to them of the castle / so that in process of time when this
willyam conceived well that he might not continue the defense thereof, he began
to treat and agreed, that if he might have free issue for him and his, and
assurance that he with his knights might go quyetly unto a place that he would
chose / he would then deliver the castle with all that was therein. The which
request of diverse of the hedde captains was granted and sworn. But so
soon as the castle was delivered, and the Frenchemen entered / the multitude
not wythstandynge the former promise and oath, fell upon the said wyllyam and
his soudyours, and them put unto death by many cruel torments / and finally
cast all their careyns into the river of Said, upon the brynke whereof the
said roche and castle was standing.

And shortly after this, ensued the war between this Lewys and king Henry
of England, as yt is before showed in ye.x. year of ye said Henry. And after
the war ended between these two princes / Hugh Puyssake a man of great might
at those days in France, rebelled again ye king / and warred grievously upon
or again the countess of Chartres / and robbed and pylled the chyrches of ye
country, as well as other places / so that the said countess with her young
son Thybaude, were feign to seek socoure of the king. wherefore the king
called a counsayll at his city of Meleyne / where again the said Hugh many
grievous complayntes were put. But for so myche as ye said Hugh at that time was
not present, to make answer unto such things as then was laid to his charge
/ the king commanded that the castle of Terry or of Thoree in all haste
should be manned and vytayled, to the end that by the comfort and strength of
that castle, the king if need required might lay syege to the castle of
Puyssake, for so much as that one was nere adioynynge unto ye other. In which
pass time the said Hugh was somoned to appear before the king and his
counsayll / but he refused to appear.

when the king was enfourmed of the garnyshyng of ye castle of Thorre, and of
the disobedyence of Hugh / he assembled a strong host, and compassed the
castle of Puyssake with a syege / and set Thybaude son of the countess upon
that side that stood toward the prouynce of Chartres, so that strong assautes
and cruel war was made on every part. what should I make long process /
to tell of the ferefull shot of the gonnys upon both parties, or of the
sharp shot of Arowes, the casting of stonys, or scalynge of the wallys, or
fyllynge of the dyches, the fyryng of the gates, or yet the mortal and cruel
fight on both parts / nor of ye manyfold deed bodies and maimed, by reason of
ye said assautes / or yet ye manasses or mockes, or great bosus or crakes used
of the souldyours during this syege. But finally after the king had lain
before the said castle a certain of time, he wanne yt by pure force, and took
the said Hughe with his accessaryes. The which he commanded to be kept as
prisoners in the castle of Thorre for a season. Then the king cast down the
said castle of Puyssake to the ground, except a little tower made of timber,
the which he reseruyd for a lodging. And that done some of the foresaid
prisoners he put to death, and some he dysherityd after the grefe of their
offense. And so this foresaid countess of Charters with her son Thybaude was
in quyete of their country and castle of Puyssake belonging to the said
erledome. But how yt was / in process of time following this Thybaude
intended to have reedyfyed there a new castle / whereby as the king was
informed, he would have encroched things appertaynynge to the crown of France
/ wherefore the king wythstode yt. For this / a grudge fell between the king
and earl Thybaude / so that in process dedely war was made between the^. The
which continued in such wise to their both damages / that finally the war
was again reuyued between king Lewys and king Henry, as in the.xvii. year of
the reygne of the said Henry is declared, by mean of this war between the
king and this earl Thybaude. whereof the cyrcumstaunce would axe a long leisure
to rehearse, as yt is showed in the french storye. But finally this earl
Thybaude lost none honor / all be yt that the french cronycle wonderfully
favors ye party of the French king, that the reader may well apperceyue,
Quis pin xit leonem.

THE.CCXXXI. CHAPTER.
THis Lewys also had great war with Henry the fourth of that name emperor
/ the which married Molde the daughter of Henry the first king of England, as
before is showed. whefore the occasyon was as says the French cronycle / for
so myche as the said Henry the emperor had before time ben accursed of
Gelasius the second of that name then pope, at Raynes a city in France. For
the which cause as there is surmytted / the said emperor assembled an huge
host of Almaynes and Italyens, and entered the land of France, and did therein
myche harm. But in the end when he knew of the great prouisyon ye Lewis made
to mete him, and of his great power / he then as affermeth ye french cronycle,
wythdrewe him / and so avoided the land of France without stroke strykyng.
But of this speaks nothing the author that wrote the story of this Henry the
emperor.

After this the earl of Flaundres named Charlys, the systers son of king
Lewys next duke after Baldewyn, which dyed as before is said in the third
chapyter of the story of king Henry, of a wound in his face / this foresaid
Charlys was sore hated of the prouoste of Brudgys. The which to bring his
malice to some effect / counsayled with his adherentes how he might slay the
said Charlys. By whose counsel a mean was found to bring the earl to
Brudgys a town of Flaundres, for the well of the said town. After whose
coming upon a day he being in a church and herynge his dyuyne service,
was slain of ye said prouoste and his complycys. whereof herynge king Lewys /
anon with a great army entered Flaundres, and besyeged the town of Brudges, and
lastely took the said prouoste. The which first was bounden to a post, and
then his eyes with a reed stryken out of his head / And then shot with arowes /
and lastely set upon a whele, where he remained till he dyed. And a fellow of
his named Bartopus, ye which was consentyng to the same murder / was hanged
upon a galos by the waste and armies / and by him amastyfe or great curre
dog, the which as soon ever he was smytten bote upon the said Bartopus /
so that in process he all to rent him, and did to him so great pain, that
lastely he endyd his life in great mysery.

In the time of ye reygn of this Lewys / the bishop of Clermo^de was voyded his
see by the cruelnes of the earl of Auerne, wherefore the king assembled his
knights / and by strength, set the bishop in his place again maugry his
enymyes. And again the second time when he was eft put out by the said earl /
the king restoryd him / and took such pledges of the earl, that he remained
after in good quiet. In ye later days of this Lewys / his eldest son named
Phylyppe with a conuenyent company, upon a day for his dysporte rode about
certain stretys of the city of Paris / and as he rode, an hog suddenly
starte among the horse fete of the child / wherwyth the horse being frayde
lepte suddenly, and cast the child to the ground, with so great vyolence that
he dyed ye night following. For this myssehappe the king took great heaviness
/ so that he waxed daily more feeble. And for he was vnweldly by reason of over
ladynge of flesh, and might not well trauayll / he therefore by the aduyce of
his lords, admytted his second son named Lewys to the rule of the realm,
and him he crowned by his life time / and also married him unto Elynoure the
daughter of the duke of Guyan, by which he was inherytoure unto her father. And
shortly after the king sykened / and to his great pain in an horse lytter
was brought unto saint Denis. where he lyenge a season syke, and knew that the
owre of death was nere / commanded such as were about him that they should
spredde a tapytte upon the ground, and then lay him upon the said tappette,
and upon him to be made a cross of ashes / which all was done according to
his commandment. And there he so lay till he dyed, in the year of his reygne
to reken from the death of his father to his own ending day.xxx. years / so
that he reigned.xxix years full and odd months / and was buried in the
monastery of saint Denis with great pomp, with this scripture following upon
his tomb. Illustris genitor Lodouict rex Lodouicus,
Vir clemens, Christi seruorum semper amicus:
Institui fecit pastorem canonicorum,
In sella veteri trans flumen Parisiorum.
Hane vir magnanimus asmi victoris amore,
Auro reliquijs ornauit rebus honor.
Sancti Dionysi, qui seruas corpus humatum,
Martyr and antisles, Lodouici solue reatum.


which versys may be expowned in our vulgar as follows: The noble father of
Lewys, Lewys the king.
To Crystes servants right meke and loving /
Caused to be made of chanons an house,
In a selle of Paris where the streme flows /
which this man mighty for love of saint Victor,
with gold an relyquys enorued with great honor.
wherefore saint Denis, which kepest his body graued,
Martyr and bishop / pray that his soul be saved.


Angsia. THE.CCXXXII. CHAPTER.
STephan earl of Boloyn, and son of the earl of Blesence, and of the wives
sister of Henry the first named Mary / began his reygne over the realm of
England, in the year of our lord.xi.C.xxxvi / and the first year of Jews
ye.viii. of yt name then king of France. This was a noble man and hardy. But
contrary his oath, after the affyrmaunce of some writers that he made to Molde
the empress / he took upon him ye crown / and was crowned upon saint
Stephans day in the Crystemasse weke at westmynster, of the archbisshoppe of
Caunterbury, the which in likewise had made like oath unto the said empress,
in presence of her fader as before is touched. In punishment whereof as men
denied / the said archbyshoppe dyed shortly after. And many other lords
which did according like / went not quyte without punyshement. A great causer
of this periurye as rehersyth one author, was this / one Hugh Bygot steward
sometime with Henry the first / immedyatly after the deceace of the said
Henry, came unto England / and before the said archbysshop and other lords of
the land, took wyllfully an oath / and swear that he was present a little
before the kings death, when king Henry admytted and chase for his heir to be
king after him Stephan his neuewe / for so myche as Molde his daughter had
dyscontented him. where unto the archbyshoppe with the other lords gave to
hasty credence. But this Hugh escaped not unpunished / for he dyed myserably in
a short time after.

when king Stephan was crowned he swear before the lords at Oxynforde, that he
would not hold in his hand the benefyces that voyded / and that he would
forgive the Dane gelt as king Henry before him had done with other things
which I pass over. And for this Stephan drad the coming of the empress /
he therefore gave license unto his lords, yt every of them might build a
castle or strong fortres upon his own ground. And soon after he agreed with
Dauyd king of Scotts, and received of him homage, after he had from him won
some towns and holds.

The town of Exetoure rebellyd again the king in the second year of his
reygne. But he in the end he subdued them. And wyllyam archbyshoppe of
Caunterburye dyed the same year / whose benefyce was after given to Thibaude
abbot of Becco in Normandye.

About the fourth year of his reygne / Dauyd king of Scottys repenting him of
his former agreement made with the king, entered of new the bounds of
Northumberlande about the river of Theyse toward the prouynce of york, and
brent and slew the people in most cruel wise / not sparynge man, woman, nor
child. Again whom Thurstone by the kings commandment was sent. The which
with his power quytte him so knyghtly, that he over threw the host of
Scotts, and slew of them a great number, and compellyd them to wythdrawe
again into Scotland. In the which passetyme ye king laid syege to the
castle of Bedforde and wanne yt. And that done / he then made a vyage into
Scotland, where he did little to his pleasure or profit. Then in his return
homewarde he took Alexaunder bishop of Lyncolne / and held him in duresse
till he had yielded or given unto him the castle of Newerke. And then he
chased Nygellus bishop of Ely.

Also in this furye he took such displeasure with his loving friend Roger
bishop of Salysburye / that he cast him in bonds till the said Roger had
rendered unto him the two castellys of Uyes and Shyrburne. For the which this
Roger in remembrynge the great ingratytude of the king / took such thought
that he dyed shortly after / and left in ready coin.xl. thousand mark,
which after his death came to the kings cofers.

One cronycle says that king Stephan obtained these foresaid castellys, to
the intent he might fortyfye them with his knights to wythstande the
empress, whose cu^mynge he ever fered. And ye year following he wa^ne with
strength the castellys of Glowceter, of Herford, of webley, of Brystowe, of
Dudley, and of Shrewesburye / for the which cause Robert earl of Glouceter
began to wythdrawe his allegeaunce from king Stephan. This Robert was the son
of Henry the first by reason of baste / and for this dyspleasure sent letters
unto Molde the empress his sister, promising to her great aid to win her
right.

In the mean while that the empress made prouysyon for her journey / king
Stephan concluded a marriage between Eustace his son and Constaunce the kings
sister of France, daughter of Lewys the great / the which continued the amyte
between England and France.

Then in the month of July and vi. year of Stephan / Molde the empress as
testyfyeth Henry the chanon in his.ix. book, entered this land by the port of
Portesmouthe / and so kept on her journey till she came to Brystowe, and did
great harm by the mean of her passage through the country. In which time of
her said landynge, king Stephan lay at the syege of walyngforde castle. But
as soon as he hard of the landynge of the empress / he anon sent out
commyssyons for more strength, and so drew toward his enymyes. But in this
time and season Robert earl of Glowceter, and Ranulfe earl of Chester, went
unto the empress with all the power that they might make. The empress herynge
the great power coming with the king / drew to the city of Nycoll now
called Lyncolne, and there held her a long season for all that the king might
do. But lastely the empress with her people escaped / and the king was
possessyd of the city, and there bode till Candelmas. After which season /
earl Robert and Ranulfe before named, with a great power of walshmen, and ye
power of the empress, came again the king. where as when both hosts were
nere ioynyng / the earl Ranulfe of Chester spoke to his knights and said: I
require you that I that am cause of your parell, may be the first that shall
enter into the parell. Then answered earl Robert and said / yt is not unworthy
to the yt axeste the first stroke and dignyte of this fight. For to the yt is
sitting, for noblesse of blood and virtue of strength, in the which thou
passest other men. But the kings false oath moves men to war and to fight /
where we must now win the mastry or be ouercome^. And he yt has none other
socour, is constrained to defend him by knyghtly and strong deeds of arms
and of manhood. And so shall we now again them that by entryked with gyle and
wickedness / as Robert earl of Mellent, the earl also of Albemarll, and Simon
of Hampton, the which is a man of great boste and of small might.

Then king Stephan prepayred to set forward his people / and earl Baudewyne
had words of comfort to the kings people, Three things requysyte to fight
and said: Men yt shall fight / to them is behouefull three things. The
first is right of ye cause, lest men fall in parell of soul. The second is
quantyte of men of armies, lest men be oppreste with exceeding number. And the
third is the effect courage of strength of knights, yt the quarrel should not
fail for lack of hardy and assured fighting. As touching which three
points I trust we be well sped. But and ye take heed farthermore what enymyes
we have / first we have again us Robert earl of Glouceter, which uses great
manasses, and executes little or small dedys. In mouth he is a lion / but in
heart he is a sheep. He is pompous in speech, and dark in understanding. There
is also Ranulfe earl of Chester / a man without reason and full of
folehardynesse / ready and priest to all conspyracy and unsteadfastness of manner
and deeds, hasty and furyouse of heart, and unware of parellys. He assayeth often
to acheue great deeds / but he brings none to effect. And what he fyrsly and
fresshely begins / he cowardely and fayntly forsakes, as unhappy and
ungracious in all his dedys / and is ouercomen in every place. For he holds
with him banyshed men and scullers. And the mo of them that be in a company,
the sooner they be ouercome^ / and weke they be in fyghtyng, for either of them
puts trust in his fellow while him self is overthrown.

But or he might have finyshed his words to most mennys audyence / the cry
of the enymyes, with noise of trumpettes and gruntyng of horsys approached and
smote to gyther / and forth go the arowes, and gresely and cruel fight was
continued upon both sides for the while yt yt enduryd. where through the
grene feld was turned into a perfyte read / so that many a pale and wan vysage
was there seen yeldynge the gooste, with armies and legs disseueryd and
departed. A long while this fight stood in questyon, whyther party should
obtain vyctorye. But in the end king Stephans party gave back and fled /
and he full knyghtly abode on field with a few of his knights, and was taken,
and so was brought unto the empress / the which commanded him to be conveyed
under sure keeping unto Brystowe, where he was kept as a prisoner from the
said time of Candelmasse unto holy Roode day next ensuynge.

About this time was founded the Abbay of Stratforth Langthorne within.iiii.
miles of London, by a knight called sir wyllyam de Mou^tfychet.

THE.CCXXXIII. CHAPTER.
WHen the empress had won this vyctorye, and had committed the king to
ward, as before ye have hard / she was not therewith a little exalted / but
thought in her mind that she was in a suerty of the possessyon of the hole
realm. But she was disceyued / for Kent took party with king Stephan. But
yet after this victory thus obtained, the empress came unto wynchester, and
after to wyltone, to Oxenforde, to Redynge, and to saint Albonys / into the
which cytyes and towns she was received with all honor. And finally she
came to London, for to enter the state of the land. At her which there being
/ the queen made assyduat labor for the delyuerye of the king her husband /
promising that he should surrender the land into her possessyon, and he to be
come a religyous man, other else a pilgrim to his lives end. But all was in
vain / for she might purchase no grace as then upon no manner of condycyons.
The cytezens of London also made great labor, that they might use the lawys
of Edward the confessoure, as they were granted by wyllyam Conqueroure / and
not the lawys of her father, which were of more straytnesse. whereof in no wise
they of her cou^sayll might have any grant. For this the cytezens were
dyscontentyd / and knowing that the country of Kent would strength their
party, ordained to have taken her. But she being thereof warned / departed in
haste, and left behind her her store of household, and so fled unto
Oxynforde / where she abode her people, the which was divided and scateryd.
And in this while she sent unto Dauyd king of Scotts and her uncle for to
aid her, the which in all haste came unto her / and so yode to wynchester,
where she laid syege to the bishops tower, the which the kings brother at
that time held with strength.

Then the queen with aid of her friends, of Kentyshemen and other / made a
strong host / whereof was capytayne a knight named Guyllyam de Pre. when the
empress hard of ye great strength of the queen, and saw that her own
mynyshed rather then encreasyd / she fled secretly and escaped unto Glouceter.
And earl Robert her brother was taken soon after, and put in prison. Then
Dauyd king of Scotts herynge of this / returned into Scotland. Then means
was made upon either side, for delivery and exchange of the prisoners / so
that finally yt was agreed that the king should be delyueryd for earl Robert.
But or this agreement were concluded myche sorrow was wroughte within this
realm. For the empress pylled and spoiled on her party / and the queen by
promyses and manaces borrowed and took upon ye other side / and the soudyours
stale and extorcyoned upon both parties / so that rich men were made nedy, and
the poor were oppressed.

In this mean while the empress returned again to Oxynforde and vytayled
and manned yt in her best manner.

Then lastely the king was delivered upon holy Roode day in harvest, and soon
after he becleped Oxynford with a strong syege, from the time of Mychelmasse
unto the season of Crystemas / at which time and season the empress used a
new gyle for constraynte and necessyte of vytayle.

In that time was great plente of snow fallen upon the ground / and the frost
was therwyth so great, that Thamys with other great ryuers were then frosen
over / so that man and horse might pass ye water upon the yse. The empress
then constrained of need as before is said, apparayled her and her company in
white clothing, which a far of apered like the snow / and so upon a plumpe
going to gyther as nere as they might escaped the danger of their fone / and
so came to walyngforde. And thens in process of time she with a small company
departed, and returned finally into Normandye unto her husband.

So soon as the empress was thus departed from Oxenforde, the town was yelden
unto ye king / where the king had mich of the empress stu^^e as well harnes as
other stuff of household. The^ he entendyd to have pursued her. But tydyngus
were brought unto him, yt Ranulfe earl of Chester with an host of walshmen was
coming toward him. But by medyacyon of friends this Ranulfe in the end to
the king was reconcyled, and was with him agreed.

About this time and season as yt is testyfyed of diverse authors / the Jews
upon Ester even crucyfyed a child named wyllyam, in the city of Norwyche. And
in the time of Henry the second, about ye.vi. year of his reygn as says
Policronicon, they crucified an other at Glouceter.

In the.xxii. year of his reygn / king Stephan was again crowned at Lyncolne.
And soon after he took from Ranulphe earl of Chester the castle of Lyncolne.

Robert earl of Glouceter made also new war upon the king / and had the
better of the king at wyltone, so that the king was like to have fallen in
Robertys danger. But yet the king escaped with myche pain. And there was
taken a baron of the kings named sir willyam Martel, for whose delyuery the
king gave after to the said earl the castle of Shyrbourne. And that done yt
said earl Robert began to found a strong castle at Faryngdone. whereof the
king being enfourmed, assembled his knights and sped him thytherwarde / by
mean whereof the work was for that time empeached and let.

In the.xv. year of the reygne of king Stephan / the river of Thamys was so
strongely ouerfrosen, that horse and carte passed over upon the yse.

In the.xvi. year / Ranulphe earl of Chester dyed, that was surnamed Gercyous,
and was the.iiii. earl after the conqueste / and his son Hughe was earl after
him, which was a man of great strength and virtue. And in the same year, as
wytnessyth Guydo and other / dyed Geffrey Plantagenet husband of Molde the
empress. After whose death, Henry short mantell that was the son of the said
Geffrey and Molde / was made duke of Angeous and Normandye. The which in few
years after married Elyanour the daughter of the earl of Poytow / the which
Elyanour was before married unto Lewys king of France, and from him deuorced
for nerenes of blood, when he had received of her.ii. daughters named Mary
and Alys, as wytnessyth the french cronycle. And so this Henry was earl of
Angeous by his fader, duke of Normandy by his mother, and earl of Poytowse by
his wife.

It was not long after, that Eustace the son of king Stephan with aid of
the French king, warred upon Henry duke of Normandye / the which after some
writers was ymagyned by Stephan his father, to the intent to let or stop him yt
he should not come into England to claim his enherytaunce. But duke Henry
defended him so knyghtly, yt the said Eustace wanne thereby little honor or
profit.

An old cronycle shows, that king Stephan intended to have crowned the said
Eustace his son king of England by his days / but the bysshoppes of
England refused ye deed by commandment of the pope.

In the.xxvii. year / the king laid syege unto the castelles of Newebery, of
walyngforde, and of warwyke or warwell / the which had been kept by the
empress friends from the time of her departing unto that day, and hoped of
rescous by Henry duke of Normandy. But ye king then wan the castellys of
Newebery and of warwell / and walyngforde defended the holders till the coming
of Henry the duke. The which in the end of ye said year with a great army
entered England / and first wanne the castle of Malmysburye. And thens he
yode to London / and wanne the tower, as myche by Polycy and by fair promise
as by strength. And such stuff of vytayle and armoure as he fande therein / he
sent to walyngforde. And that done he went to the town of walyngforde / and
wan such holds as were there about.

Then king Stepan with his power drew toward the duke / and finally by mean
of medyatours, as Thybaude archbyshoppe of Canterbury and other / both princes
to common of peace, met nere unto ye water of Uryn or Urn. But as fast as some
labored to have peace, so fast other labored to have war / so that at that
communacacyon the peace was not concluded.

After the king and the duke were departed / the king yode toward Epyswyche
in Suff. And the duke took the way to Srewesbury / where he wan the castle of
the said town. From thens the duke went to Nothyngham and wan the town.
wherefore the soldyours that held the castle, seeing that the town took
pertye with the duke / brake out upon the night, and fyred the town and brent
a great part thereof.

In this while dyed and was drowned Eustace the son of king Stephan / and
was buried at Feuersham in Kent in the abbay that his father before had builded.

Thybaude archbishop of Caunterbury left not to labor and conclude ye peace
between ye king and the duke / and endeavored him self therein so dylygently,
with the assystence of other, that in the year following the peace was
concluded upon dyurese condycyons. whereof one was, that ye king should
continue as king during his life / and immedyatly after ye conclusion of this
peace, the said Henry should be proclaimed in all the chief cytyes and towns of
England for heyr apparent, and be king after the death of the said Stephan /
and that the king should take him for his son of adopcyon and ryghtefull heyr
unto the crown. To the which couenau^tes justly to be holden / ye king was
first sworn, and after his lords spyrytuall and temporal / and so yode
both to London, where they were royally received. And when ye king had fested
the duke, and given to him rich gifts / he took leave of the king, and so
returned into Normandye, as affyrmeth the said author the Flower of
historyes. How be yt the cronycle of England says, that the accord was made
upon dyuysyon of the land between them / that is to mean that both should
reygne to gyther, and either of them to enjoy half the land. But how that
dyuysyon was made, or which part of the land eueryche of them should hold /
no mention thereof is made. And the former accord should be as abue is said,
concluded.viii. days following the Epyphanye of our lord in the town of
Oxenford. And ye king dyed in the month of October following, when he had
reigned.xviii. years full and odd months / and was enterred in theforsayde
abbay of Feuyrsham.

Of diverse authors as Ranulfe and other / yt is recorded that this Stephan
lived in great vexacyon and trouble all the term of his reygne. It is said
also that this Stephan married Molde or Mawde the daughter of Mary / the which
was the daughter of Henry the first, and countess of Boloyne / by whom he
claymed the title to be crowned, as by the younger daughter of Henry the first /
and Henry short mantell claymed by the elder. But after most certenty of
writers / this Stephan was son of Eustace earl of Boloyne, and of Mary sister
unto Molde that was married unto Henry the first / which Molde and Mary were
daughters of Margarete wife of Malcolyn king of Scotts / which Margaret was
sister to Edgare Ethelynge, and daughter of Edward the outlawe, that was the
son of Edmunde Ironsyde. Then the eldest sister Molde, bare Molde the
empress by Henry the first. And Molde ye empress daughter of Henry the first
/ had by her second husband Geffrey Plantagenet Henry the second. And so by
Henry short mantell or Henry the second, returns the blood of the Saxons
to the crown of England, and so it did by Stephan / but most conuenyently by
Henry the first, as by the dyssent of his mother. By which reason yt follows,
that the blood of willyam conqueror continued but.lxx. years / if it be
accounted from ye first year of wyllyam Conqueror, unto the last year of
Henry the first.

This king Stephan at the request of Molde his wife / builded in the year of
grace.xi. hundred.xl, ye abbey of Coggeshale in Essex, and set therein white
mu^kes. Also about the same time he founded the abbay of Feuersham in Kent /
where he now corporally rests. And the third he founded in Furneys in
Lancashyre / and all he garnyshed with munkys of Cysteaux order / and dyed as
before is said without issue of his body.

Francia. THE.CCXXXIIII. CHAPTER.
LEwys the.viii. of that name, and son of Lewys ye great began his reygn over
the French men, in ye year of our lord.xi. hundred and.xxxvi / and ye first
year of Stephan then king of England. This also is called the younger Lewys /
in whose beginning Johannes de te^poribus dyed. This John^ was sometime a
squire in the house of Charlys the conqueror / the which lived over.iii.
hundred years, for which cause he was named John^ of time, as he yt might
remember things done of long time passed. This Lewys at ye time of his
fathers death, was in the country of Guyan, for to receive the dower of his
wife Elyanour, as before in the storye and second chapyter of king Stephan is
touched. But when he hard of ye death of his father / he sped him into France.
where after the necessaryes for the weal of his realm ordained / he married
his wives sister named Alys, unto Arnolde earl of Uermendoze. After which
marriage solempnysed / tidings were brought unto him, that the christian people
being in the holy land as warryours upon the Turks and Sarasyns, were
dystressed and overthrown / and diverse strong holds from them taken and
won. wherefore by the exhortacyon of that holy mu^ke Bernarde, which at this
day is called saint Bernard / ye said Lewys, with also Conradus the.iii. of
that name then emperor of Almayne, with Alphon then king of Spain, with
diverse other nobles of France and other prouynces / took upon them the
cross, and provided for the expedycyon of that journey, in the.iiii. year of
his reygne after some writers. But of the taking of his journey diverse writers
hold diverse oppinyons / so that the doubt rests between the year of our
lord.xi. hundred and.xl, and the year of.xi. hundred and.l.

when all things were ready for that journey / the king, the queen, with the
flower of the chyualry of France set forthwarde upon that journey / and came
in process of time unto Constantyn the noble / where he met with Conradus the
emperor, and Alphons king of Spain. whom the prince Emanuell then emperor
of Constantyne the noble received ioyusly / and made to them by his outward
contenaunce loving and frendely chere / and promised unto them aid in that
journey both of vitayll and also for guydes for the next and surest way. But
he contrary to his promise did dysapoynte them, and nothing aided them. For
he delyueryd unto them meal myngeled with lyme, whereof grew myche harm to
the christian host after. And also he assygned unto them such guydes, as
brought them into places and countries of sterylyte and other danger / so that
hastily the French king with great dyffyculte and loss of his men, came unto
the city of Danas, and becleped yt with a strong syege / the which he
assauted and enpayred very sore, and was lykely to have won yt, if he had
assauted ye place still where he began. But by counsayll of some false christian
men, the which as witnesses Peter Dysroye and other had taken mede of the
Turks / the king by their counsayll removed the ordinance from the weker
place unto ye stronger. where after diverse assautes made / the king conceived
well yt he was dysceyued. A cause of this treason as says ye foresaid Peter
was this. The earl of Flau^dres, which by diverse experyme^tes saw that the
city was like to be gotten / made supplycacyon to the king and the lords,
that he might have the rule of the city at such time as yt were won / the
which to him was granted. whereof being aduertysed diverse Suryons of ye
country borne, dysdayned that a stranger should be lord of their enherytaunce
/ and for that condesce^ded and agreed to that treason, by mean whereof the
christian princes lost their travel.

Then the christian princes seeing yt they were thus deluded / took their aduyce
how they might contynewe their pylgrimage unto the holy city of Jerusalem.
But in this counsayl sourded and quykened so many opynyons / that each was
contraryous unto other. By mean whereof the emperor was so dyscontented / that
he took leave of the French king and other, and so returned into his own
country. But the French king tarried there in that costs a year after / and
did there but little worthy any memory. All be yt of this vyage the french
book makes a great and long process, touching the wynnyng of the city of
Anteoche / with his being and counsayllys keeping within Jerusalem, and other
things there rehearsed. But for I se the matter dysagreable to other writers,
and also think that myche thereof is feigned / I therefore pass yt over, how be
yt that to some persons such fablys ben full pleasant to here. wherefore all
such I remytte unto the said french cronicle / and somewhat I shall follow the
author Gyraldus, yt which with other testyfyen, that Lewys in his return
toward France waxed syke for ye long forberyng of his wife. wherefore by
thaduyce of phisycyons and also of bishops / he was cou^sayled to take a wenche
because his wife was so far from him. But ye king wythstode that counseyll /
and said that him had been lever to be syke and dye of gods hand / then
to live in spouse brekynge, A kings chas^y^e,
and offend his laws. And so the king put himself to the mercy of god and
received health shortly after. Also it is told of him that he used to fast
every frydaye bread and water / and by his famylyers he was counsayled that he
should leave that fast for wekynge of him self / and feed a hundred of poor
men every frydaye, the which unto god should be myche more acceptable. To this
he answered and said, we would gladly feed so many poor men or mo / but our
fasting woll we not break. For without the profit that yt does unto the
soul, yt profyteth also right myche to the body. For the purgacyon and rest
of one day, helps myche to put of the superfluyte of the other / and also yt
makes the sharper apetyte.

when Lewys was returned into France / for what hap yt is of the french
cronycle made doutefull, he was from Elyanour his wife deuorced, of the which
he had received before.ii. daughters as before is touched / the which in
process of time following, was married unto Henry duke of Normandy. which
marriage was a new occasyon of the war between England and France. For the
lands of Poytowe, with Gascoyne and Guyan, Lewys claymed by his former
possessyon, and Henry by reason of the maryag of ye said Elyanour, as heyr to
the said lands. Of the which war shall be showed in the story of ye said
Henry following. After which deuorce thus made / king Lewys married the
yongeste daughter of the king of Spain that was named Cu^staunce / and she
dyed of her first child. Then for so myche as king Lewys had none heyr male
/ by cou^sayll of his barony he married the third wife, the which was the
yongeste daughter of Thybaude earl of Bloys, and was named Alys. This said
earl dyed / and left after him.iiii. sons and.v. daughters. The eldest son
named Henry was earl of Troys / the second named Thybaude was earl of Bloys /
the third named Stephan was earl of Sancorum or Sauncorer / and ye fourth named
wyllyam was archbysshoppe of Raynes. The eldeste of the daughters was duches of
Burgoyne / the second was countess of Bar / the third was married first to
the duke of Puell, and after to a knight named sir william de Goer, the fourth
was countess of Perch / and the fyfte as before is said queen of France,
which was a woman garnyshed with many virtues as the storye declares.

THE.CCXXXV. CHAPTER.
IN process of time after the solemnisacyon of this marriage / complaynte was
brought before the king of the earls of Cleremou^t and Puy or Puyll, son of
the duke before rehersyd, and of the earl of Plomet / that they should spoil
and wast the chyrches and lands to the said chyrches belonging. For the
which dedys the king commanded the said.iii. erlys to ward / but not with
out war and shedynge of blood.

And after the subduynge of ye said three erlys / a knight or great man of might
called wyllyam ye earl of Chalon, with a company of tyrauntes assembled for to
rob and spoil the church of saint Peter of Cluny in Burgoyne. whereof
herynge the prestes and mynysters of the church / to the intent to mytygate
and to appeace the cruelty of the said tyrau^tes, did upon them the ornaments
of ye said church / and yode again them with processyon, with a great
company them following of the people of the town and the country there
about, in peseable and charytable wise. But when the said tyrauntes approached
unto the said company / with out compassyon and pyty, as turks ran upon
christian men, or with less Pytye / so ran they upon the prestes and other,
and spoiled them of all the said orname^tes / and slew of that company to the
number of.v. hundred or mo / and after spoiled the said church, of such
stuff as was therein left. It was not long after or king Lewys had wyttynge
of this cruel deed. wherefore in auengynge the church / he gathered a
conuenyent power and spedde him thither. But the said wyllyam earl of Chalon
herynge of the kings coming, fled ye country / so yt the king might have no
certain knowledge where he became. wherefore the king entered and seized his
lands, and gave the moyty thereof to ye duke of Burgoyn as chief lord of that
soil / and that other half he gave unto the earl of Neuers, to whose auncetry
in time passed the said moyty apperteyned. And that done he commanded inquyry
to be made of his accessaryes / the prebensons or prebendars of the which he
punyshed by diverse manner of torments and dethes, to the great contentacyon of
the country.

when the king had thus fynished this vyage and was returned into France /
soon after was knowledge brought unto him, that the Burgonyons and men of the
town of Uerdeley, rebelled again the head church or abbay of that town / and
ente^dyd to have done some vylany to the abbot and munkes of the same /
wherefore the king spedde him thither in all haste. But for their sauergarde
the munkes were compelled to fortyfye the church, and to defend them by force
of armies / so that between them and the Burgonions many an arbalaster and stone
was shot and cast. And for the king might not so hastly furnyshe him of his
soldyours / he therefore sent unto the earl of Neuers by whose mean as to the
king was showed this riot began / commaundynge him that he should se this riot
appeased, and that the church of Uerdeley were restored of such harmys as to
them was done by the inhabytauntes of the town. But of this commandment the
earl set but little / so that the burgeses perseuered in their error. wherefore
the abbot sent again to the king / besechyng him of his most gracious aid
and socoure. Then the king herynge of the earls dysobedyence, was therwyth
greatly dyspleasyd / and suspected ye earl to be party in the cause, and sped
him ye faster thetherwarde. But when the earl was enfourmed of the kings
coming he somdeale feryd / and met with the king at a place called Moret,
and there demeaned him in such wise, that the king forgave his offense. Then
he promised that the kings pleasure should be fullfylled in all thing as he
had before commanded, with more as yt lyked him to dyuyse. Upon which
promise so made / he commanded that the Burgonyons should first refrain
them of that rebellyon again the church / and that they should newly be sworn
to be obedient unto the abbot and unto his successors as their p^decessours
had been / and over that for the hurtes and harmys yt they had done to the place
at that season, they should pay to the said abbot and coue^t.lx. thousand
sous. A sous is in value after sterlyng money i. d. ob / so that.lx. thousand
sous amounts in sterlyng money.iii. hundred and lxxv. pound. After which
end thus made / the king returned into France.

It was not long after, that ye king received of queen Alys his wife a son,
and named yt Phylyppe. But for ye king Lewys had made many pylgrymages, and
used many ways of charity, in gyuynge of alms and otherwise; for to have a
son to be his heir / therefore he surnamed this child A dieu done, a child
given of god. Then this Lewys for the intolerable deeds of the Jews which in
these days had great inhabytynge with in the land of France, and used vsery
and sleynge of Christian children / he ponyshed many by death, and many he
banyshed his land / but yet many remained.

Of this Lewys deeds is little more cronacled / except when his son Philyppe
was of the age of.xiii. years, his fader caused him to be crowned, and resygned
to him all the rule of the land / and dyed the year following at Paris in the
month of October, in the year of grace.xi. hundred and.lxxix. By which reason
he reigned, to reken from his faders death to his own, upon.xliii. years / and
was rychely enterred by ye mean of his last wife at the monastery of Barbell /
the which he founded in his young days. After whose death ye said queen Alys
adorned his sepulture in the most rychest manner, with gold, silver, and
precious gemmys / upon whose tomb was graven these two versis following, as a
counsayll left unto his son Phylyppe. (...) superos tu, qui super es
successor honoris
Degener es, si degeneris a laud prioris.


which versys are to be understood as after follows. Now take good head,
thou that do over live,
Him that in honor and virtue did excelle.
Se thou alter not, nor thy self depryue /
But follow him, which was of honor the well.
For if thou do not / men shall of the tell,
Thou art degenerate and grown out of kind /
Thy progenytours laud having nothing in mind.


Anglia. THE.CCXXXVI. CHAPTER.
HEnry the second of that named, and son of Geffrey Pla^tagenet earl of
Angeou, and of Molde ye empress daughter of Henry ye first, began his reygn
over the realm of England, in the month of October, the year of our lord
god.xi. hundred and.lv / and. ye xix. year of Lewys the viii. then king of
France. This Henry was somdeale read of face, and broad of breast, short of
body, and therwyth fat / the which to aswage he took the less of metes and
drynkes, and exercysed myche hunting. He was reasonable of speech and well
lettered and orped, and also noble in knyghthode, wise in counsayll, and dred
to myche distenyes. He was also free and lyberall to strangers, and hard and
holding from his famylyers and servants. And whom he loved enterely or
hated / hard it was to turn him to the contrary. He was slow of answer,
unsteadfast of promise, gylefull of deed, open spouse breker, hamour of holy
church, and always unkind to god. He also loved rest and peace, to the end
he might the more follow his delectacyon and pleasure / with mo vices rehearsed
by Gyralde, the which for length I pass over. This Henry yet, as wytnessyth
Ranulfe, was not all bareyn of virtues. For he was of so great courageousnes,
that he would often say that all the world suffysyth not to a coragyous heart.
And he encreasyd his heritage so myghtyly, that he wanne Irlande by strength /
and took wyllyam king of Scotts, and joined that kingdom to his own. From
the suthe Occean to the north ylandes of Orkeys / he closed all the lands as
yt were under one pryncypate / and spradde so largely his empire, that men read
not of none of his progenytours that had so many prouynces and countries
under their domynyon and rule. For beside the realm of England / he had in
his rule Normandy, Gascoyn, and Guyan, Angeou and Chynon. And he made subject
to him Aluerne and other lands. And by his wife, he obtained as her right the
mountes and hyllys of Spain called montes Pyrany. Of the which wife Elynoure
by name, deuorced, as before is said, from the viii. Lewys king of France /
he received.vi. sons and three daughters. Of the sons five were named
wyllyam, Henry, Richard, Godfrey, and John^. The eldeste of the maidens hight
Molde or Maude, and was married to the duke of Saxon / the second Elyanoure to
the king of Spain / and the third named Jane, to wyllyam king of Scycyle.

This Henry was prosperouse in his beginning, and unfortunate in his end, and
specially in the last five years of his reygne. For in the first of those five
years, his strength began to mynyshe / the second year he lost a vyage in
Irlande / the third he lost Aluerne again the king of France / the fourth
year he lost Butyrycan / and the fyfte year he lost the city of Cenomenea
and Turon, with many holds to them belonging.

This Henry the second ascertayned of the death of Stephan / spedde him into
England / and was crowned the sunday before Crystemasse day of Theobalde
archbyshoppe of Caunterbury in westmynster church.

The first year of his reygne he subdued Irlande. And soon after Thomas
Beketh, which after was bishop of Caunterbury, was made chaunceller of
England. This king cast down diverse castellys, that before in time of king
Stephan were builded / other for dyspleasure of the owners, or else for the
fere they should be strengthed again him. And also he banyshed many of the
lords and gentylmen, that king Stephan had in his favor.

About the third year of his reygne in the month of October, were seen in
the fyrmament two sunnys / and in the moon was seen a red cross. But of this
wonder shows the authoure of Cronica cronicaru^ / and says that about this
time in Italy in the month of November, appeared three sunnys by the space of
three owres in the weste / and the year following appeared three monys, whereof
the myddle moan had a red cross ouerthwarte the face. which there is
noted for a prodygy or a token of the scysme, that after fell among the
cardinallys for eleccyon of the pope Alexander the third / which scysme by
mean of the first Frederyke then emperor, endured almost.xx. years.

Also about this time Adryan the fourth of that name was pope, an Englysheman
borne in the town of saint Albon of whom is more declared in the beginning
of the.xxii. chapyter of the.vii. book of Polycronycon.

Also in this year the king went with a strong army into walys / and after
he had set that country in an order and quiet, he buyldyd a strong
castle at Rutlande, and founded the abbaye of Basyngewerke.

In the.vi year of his reygne / this Henry married his second son Henry, unto
the kings daughter of France, that is to mean Lewys the viii / which the
said Lewys received of his second wife named Constaunce, the daughter of the
king of Spain, as before ye have hard in the second chapyter of ye story of
the said Lewys. This maiden was named Margaret. By reason of which marriage, was
appeased the war that was begone between France and England for the lands
of Poy^owe and other, the which king Henry held by reason of his wife. In ye
which war much harm was done / and more would have ensued, if yt had not
by this mean have been agreed.

In the.vii. year of his reygn, Theobalde archbyshoppe of Caunterbury dyed /
and Thomas Beket chaunceller of England was archebysshoppe* after him, of
whom more shall follow.

In the same year king Henry with a strong host yode to Scotland / and made
so cruel war upon willyam king of that land, that lastely he was taken /
and did to the said Henry recompensacyon, in yeldynge unto him the city of
Carlell, the castle of Bamburghe, the new castle upon Tyne, with diverse
other holds / and a great part of Northumberlande, the which he had won
from the borderers. And after fewtye and homage done by the said wyllyam unto
the king, and a certain sum of money by him promised within.ix. months
following / the king suffered him to go at large. But an other author says,
that the king of Scottys was not taken / but strongely besyeged in a town or
castle, so that finally he was forced to agree to the foresaid couenauntes.

In the.viii. year, the city of Cau^terburye was fyred by negligence, and a
great part thereof burnt. And in that season, the archbyshoppe Thomas began
to replye again ye kings mind, for things that the king did exercise again
the liberties of the church.

THE.CCXXXVII. CHAPTER.
IN the.ix. year of his reygne / the king for diverse causes concerning ye
needs of his realm, called a parliament at his town of Northampton. During
which parlyament / dyssencyon fell between the king and Thomas archbishop of
Caunterburye, for diverse acts and ordinances that the king there procured,
to pass again the lybertyes of holy church / the which Thomas gaynstode and
denied. wherefore the king took a great dyspleasure with Thomas / in so myche
that shortly after he was feign to flee the land / and in process of time
spedde him to Rome, where he complained him to Alexaunder the.iii. of that name
then pope / and there continued, and in France, and in other places, in poor
estate by term of.vi. years and more. when king Henry had certain
understanding, that Thomas was thus departed out of his land / he seized his
manners and temporal lands into his hand / so that his mouable goods were
spoiled and rauenyd among the kings officers.

In the.xiiii. year of his reygne / the king crowned Henry his eldest son
then living king of England at westmynster. which was done to the
derogacyon or harm of the archbyshoppe Thomas, as yt is wytnessyd in his
legende / and for that doing Roger archbyshoppe of york which crowned him
was accursed. But an other author says that the king crowned Henry his
son, to the end he might have full power and authoryte to rule this land and
the people of the same, while his father was occupied in Normandye and other
countries, where his lands lay.

In myche of this season that this blessed man Thomas was thus banyshed the
land / the king sent over bishops and proctours, to complain upon him to
the pope / for well nere all the bishops of England were again him. And if
any took his part, they durst not speak for the displeasure of their
temporal lord / so that this blessed man defended the quarrel of the church
alone.

In the.xvi. year of ye reygne of king Henry / Lewys the king of France,
agreed king Henry and the archbysshoppe, the king then being in Normandye.
Upon which agreement this blessed man came to his own church of Caunterbury
/ and there so resting him, sent for such persons as had spoiled and taken
perforce the goods of the church / aduertysynge them by fair means to
restore the said goods, and to be reconcyled to the church as true christian
men should. But when he saw that he might not reconcyle them by fair means
/ he then used compulsaryes, and denounced them accursed but if they restored
the goods of the church by a certain day. wherewyth the parties being
agreued / sailed over to the king into Normandye / and showed unto him grievous
complayntes, and more greuouse then the cause or matter required. For the which,
the king which had not yet quenched the bronde of malice in his heart the
which he bare again this holy man, gave light credence unto those
complayntes, and was sore and ferue^tly amoued again the holy man Thomas / in
so myche that upon a day herynge the complayntes of this blessed man's
adversaries, he said in oppe^ audyence of his knights, that if he had any good
knights about him, he had been adue^ged of that traitor long or that time. At
the time of which words vtterynge / was present sir wyllyam Bryton, sir Hugh
Moruyle, sir wyllyam Tracy, and sir Regnolde fytz Urle. which four knights,
thynkyng that they should to their master do a synguler pleasure if they slew
this blessed man / hastily taking advise each of them of other, of one will
and mind took shyppyng and sailed to Dover / and in all haste spedde them
unto Caunterburye / where the.v. day of Cristmasse they executed their
tyranny, and martyred that blessed archebysshoppe at that altar of said
Benet within his own church, in the year of our lords incarnacyon a
thousand, a hundred, and.lxx, as yt is wytnessyd by these versys following Anno
milleno, centeno, septuageno,
Anglorum primas, corruit ense Thomas.


The which is to understand in our vulgar / as thus. The year, to reken from
Crystes incarnacyon,
A thousand an hundred and seuentye thereunto /
The prymate of England with great abomynacyon,
was slain with sword, Thomas that would not do
The kings hest, which erred the right fro
Of the church and lybertyes of the same.
whereby of honor he wanne perpetual fame.


After this cruel deed thus by the four knights done, wherwyth the king
after some writers was not contented / the kings fortune began to decreace
and fall / so that he had after this many aduersyteys, where before he knew
not of like trouble.

In the.xvii. year of his reygne, the king made a journey into Irland / where
with great travail he subdued the Iryshe. And after with help of the prymate
and bishop of Arnache, he reformed the manner of the dwellers and people of
that country, and that in three things specially. First in rulynge and
ordering of the church by the curates, and how they should order their die /
uyne service, and mynyster the sacrament of matrymonye as yt was in England
and other christian regyons. The second was, how that the lay people should
behave them to their curates, and what wise they should pay and offer to god
their tithes. The third was for making of their testamentes. This was ordained
that every man should make his last will in p^sence of his neighbors / or at least cause yt to be read in their presence. And first he should reken what he
ought / and to set so myche of his goods. And if he had a wife and children,
then the resydue of his goods his dettys being paid to be divided in three
parts / one to the wife, the second for the children, and the third to be
spente for the weal of the soul. And if he had no children / then the half
to his soul, and that other half to his wife. And if he had no wife nor
children / then to dyspose his goods at his pleasure.

In the return of the king out of Irlande / was a wonder thing showed unto
him upon whytesondaye, which in the calender is called dominica in Albys.
when the king should take his horse / suddenly appeared unto him a man of pale
and wanne color barefote, and in a white kyrtell / the which bodily spoke
unto the king in the langage of duche / and said sir king, Criste greetyth
the well, and his mylde mother mary, with also John^ Baptyst and Peter / and
command the streyghtly that no Markettes, nor seruyle works be holden upon
the sunday in the lands of thy lordeshyppe, out take that longs to
dressynge of mete. And if thou do after this bidding / I assure the that all
thing that thou begynnest to good intent or of good purpose, thou shall bring
yt to good end. The king lyked nothing this speech / and said to the knight
that held his brydell, Ask of this chorle whether he have dremed all this
that he tells. whereunto this man answered, whyther I have met this tale in
my dreme or not / take thou head well of my saying. For and thou do not as I
have aduertysed the, and amend thy life / thou shalt shortly here such
things that thou shalt be heavy fore to thy lives end. The king took all in
game / and the man vanyshed suddenly, that the king and his knights wonderyd
of his departing. whereof when the king was warned, both of his first
suddenly apperynge, and of his departing / the king set yt nere his mind,
and entendyd to do some things after that mannys counsayll. But how yt was yt
had no forward.

After that the blessed man Thomas was martyred / the munkes by assent of the
king, chase Richard pryour of Dover / the which was a man of evil living,
and wasted the goods of ye church inordynatly.

THE.CCXXXVIII. CHAPTER.
About the.xx. year of the kings reygne / he purchased a dyspensacyon for the
vyage that before he had solempnely auowed before.ii. cardynallys, to go into
the holy land, and to ieoperde his proper person against Crystes enymyes. The
which dyspensacyon was grauntyd upon one condycyon, that he should build
three abbays in England. In fulfyllynge whereof the king put out of the house
of waltham seculer chanons / and set there in their stead chanons reguler. And
for the second he avoided the munkes out of the house of Aumbrysbury / and
set there menchons that he had brought from beyond the sea. And for the
third he renewed coursely the charter house of wytham beside Salysburye. By
which three deeds he thought him self excused of his former promise.

Then began his sons to make war upon him, the which were aided by the
Scottyshe king and the two earls of Chester and of Lyncolne. The cause of
which war was after the declaracyon of some writers, for so myche as the
king had emprysoned Elyanoure his wife, and kept that wenche Rosamounde
again all good order. But other say yt was for certain lands in Normandye /
which by aid of the French king, Richard the.iii. son of birth and
second then living, would have taken from his father. Of this war speaks
nothing the french cronycle.

Then as testyfyeth Ranulfe / this innaturall war endured by the term of two
years, to the great dysturbaunce of the king and of his realm / till the
king with great devotion vysyted the grave of the holy martyr saint Thomas.
After which pilgrimage was by him fynysshed / in short process after wyllyam
king of Scotts, and the two forenamed erlys of Chester and Lyncolne, were
taken at the castle of Anwyke. But yet he left not the company of the
forenamed Rosamunde / to the which wenche he had made an house of wonder
workyng, so that no creature man or woman might win to her but if he were
instruct by the king or such as were right secret with him touching that
matter. This house after some writers was named Labyrinthus or Dedalus work or
house, which is to mean after most exposytours, an house wroughte like unto
a knot in a garden called a mase. But the common fame tells, that lastely the
queen wan to her by a clew of threde or sylke / and delte with her in such
manner, that she lived not long after. Of the manner of her death spekyth
nothing mine authoure / but when she was deed she was buried at the house or
monasterye of Goddestow beside Oxenforde, with these versys upon her toumbe.
Hic iacet in tu^ba Rosa mu^di, sed no^ rosa mu^da.
Non redolet sed olet, quae redolere solet.


The whythe versys, to our understanding may thus as folowyth be englyshed and
expowned. The Rose of the world, but not the clean flower.
Is here now graven / to whom bewtye was lent.
In this grave full dark now is her bower,
That by her life was sweet and redolent.
But now yt she is from this lyfeblente /
Though she were sweet, now fowly does she stynke /
A myrrour good for all that on her think.


Long time after the death of the said Rosamounde, in the said abbaye was
showed a cofer of the said wenches of the length of two foot / in which apperyd
fighting geau^tes, stertlynge of bestes, swymmynge of fyshes, and flyenge of
fowlys.

In the forsayde.xx. year after the opinion of Guydo / the king had the
second monicyon of mendynge of his life, by an Iryshe man yt told unto him
many secret tokens, which the king supposyd no man had known but him self.
But yet the king took little head thereunto.

In the.xxii. year of his reygne, after the forsayde taking of ye Scottyshe
king and.ii. erlys / the.xi. day before September, wyllyam king of Scottys by
assent of the lords spyrytuall and temporal, did homage to king Henry at his
city of york. where the said wyllyam granted by his letters patentys, that
he and his successors kings of Scotland, should make their homage and fydelyte
unto the kings of England as often as they shall be necessaryly required. And
in sign and token of that subieccyon / the king of Scotts offered his hatte
and his sadell upon the altar of saint Peter in ye church of york. which for
a remembrance of that deed / the said hat and sadell were there kept many
years after. And over yt the lords of Scotland swore, that if their king at
any time would wythdrawe him from allegeaunce / they would all arise again him,
and be to him as enymyes, till he were returned to his faith and keeping of his
promise. And for the more strength of the said co^posycyon, the king of
Scottis came after to ye king Henry's parlyament holden at Northa^pton, and a
another season into Normandye.

Ranulfe munke of Chester says, that Lewys the.viii. of that name king of
France / delyueryd unto king Henry a daughter of his to have in guydynge, and
to have been married unto Richard his son / the which after the death of
Rosamou^de he defloured of her vyrgynyte. After which deed, as affermyth the
said authoure, the king was in will to have wedded that damoysell. For
expedicyon whereof he made great means ta Hugu^cia a cardynall then being in
his land, that he would make a dyuorce between him and Elyanoure the queen. And
this he did, to the end to have the more favor of the Frenchemen, that by
their aid he might the better dysheryte his sons. But he failed of his
purpose and also yt turned to his own harm. For by this means, he caused the
said Richard his son to show all his demeanor unto the French king / so
that by his informacyon unkindness kyndled between them two / and thereof
ensued mortal war, as says the english cronycle, and also Polycronycon.
But of this war speaks nothing the french cronycle / nor of none other
during the life of the said Lewys after this day, which dyed in the.xxiiii.
year of this Henry. But the war that was between the two kings of England and
of France / was between this Henry and Phylyppe son of this Lewys, as after
shall be showed.

About the.xxiiii. year of this king as wytnessen diverse writers / fell
wonderful wederynge and tempest of thunder in myddewynter time in Hampshyre
and other places / by violence whereof a priest among other was slain. And in
the somer following about Mary Magdalene tide, fell hayle of such bygnesse, yt
yt slew both men and bestes. And about this time were the bonys of king Arture
and his wife Gueynour found in the vale of Aualon / whose here of the head of
the said Gweynour was then hole and of fresh color / but so soon as yt was
touched, yt fell in powder. which bonys were translated and buried within the
church of Glastenburye / and were founden by a synger of gestis under an holow
oak.xv. foot within the ground. which finding and translatynge is an obiecte
to ye fantastycall saying of the walshemen, that afferme his coming again to
reygne as he before did.

Then had king Henry the second monycyon by a knight called sir wyllyam
Chesterby or Lyndesey / the which warned him specially for the reformacyon
of.vii. artycles. The first was, that he should set better dylygence to the
defense of holy church / and maynteynynge of the same. The second, that he
should se his laws executed, with better justice then at those days was used.
The third was, that he should surmyse no matter again rich men / and by that
mean pluck from them their lands and goods. The fourth that he should
restore all such lands and goods gotten by such unlawful means or by any
other. The fyfte, that he should for no medetarye ryghtfull sentence / but
suffer the right to have his process. The vi, that he should se to the payment
of his subjects for such stuff as was daily taken to his use / and also to
the payment of his servants and souldyours wages, which daily fell to
robbynge for defaute. The.vii. and the last was, that he should in all haste
void the Iewys of his land, which daily wrought great sorrow to his commons
/ and to leave them somewhat to spend in their journey. But as he took the
other monycyons, so he took this / and co^tynued his life as he before had
done.

THE.CCXXXIX. CHAPTER.
IN the.xxviii. year of his reygn after most writers, dyed Henry his eldeste
son then living / ye which as before is said was crowned to the derogacyon
of the martyr saint Thomas. And in this year / which should be the.iiii. year
of Phylyppe the second, or of Phylyppe surnamed Given of god / the war
began between king Henry and him. whereof was occasyon as testyfyeth the said
French cronycle, the denyenge of the deferring of homage, that should be done
to the said Phylyppe of Richard then eldest son of king Henry / for the
lands of Poytow. An other cause also was / that where certain couenauntes
were stablyshed and enrolled between king Henry and Lewys father of this
Phylyp, at the marriage of Henry his son and Margarete sister of Phylyppe, for
certain holds and castellys whereof ye castle of Gysours was one / which were
delyueryd in dower with the said Margarete, upon condycyon that if the said
Henry had issue by ye said Margarete, then the said castellys to remain to
the said heirs / and if the said young Henry dyed without issue of ye said
Margarete, that then the said castellys and holds to be reuerted unto the
crown of France: and for that king Henry denied or deferred these two
points, and would not answer when he was called / the French king therefore
entered the land of Barry with great strength; and wasted the country of Guyan
without mercy. whereof king Henry being warned / in all haste assembled his
people then being in Normandye, and d^ew him toward the French king /
which then had laid syege unto the castle called in french Raoull, or the
castle of Roaull.

when both hosts were nere and lykely to have joined / medyatours were sent
upon both parties to treat a peace. By mean whereof in process a trewce was
taken for a certain term / so that either host departed without strykynge
of stroke at that season.

About this time dyed Richard archebyshoppe of Caunterbury. Of him yt is read
that a voice or vysyon was showed to him, saying to him in the mouth of
Christ: For thou haste wasted the goods of my church, I shall rote the out of
ye earth. with which words he was so frayd, that he dyed shortly after. Then
was Baldewyn bishop of worceter admytted to that see, though the munkys of
Caunterburye wythsayde yt with all their power.

In the.xxx. year of the king / Heraclius patryarke of Jerusalem came in to
England, to have aid again the Sarazyns that had won great part of the
lands that Christian men had in the holy land / and for to defend the holy
city, which by Saladyne prince of Surey was won shortly after. For by the
report of Peter Dysroy, which made a book in french of the winning and
losing of the said city / yt appears that yt was wo^ne by Godfrey de
Bulyon, in the year of Crystes incarnacyon a thousand.lxxx. and.xix / and so
co^tynued under the rule of.ix. christian kings, till the last king named
Guide Lesyngham or Lesynguam lost yt with the holy cross, in the year of our
lord.xi. hundred lxxx. and.ix. which makes the year of the reygn of this king
Henry the xxxiiii. Then yt follows in the story / this Heraclius made besy
request unto the king for aid, and proffered to him the keys of the city and
of our lords grave / and letters of Lucius ye third of yt name then pope,
chargyng him that he should take upon him ye journey, and to have mind of the
oath yt he before time had made. The king deferred this answer and Baldwyne
the archbishop preached and exhorted men to take ye cross / by whose means
many there were ye auowed that journey. Lastely the king gave answer, and
said that he might not leave his land without keeping / nor yet leave yt to
the pray and robbory of Frenchemen. But he would give largely of his own, to
such as would take upon them that vyage. with this answer the patryarke was
dyscontent / and said we seek a man and not money. welnere every christian
regyon sendyth unto us money / but no land sendyth to us a prince. Therefore we
ask a prince that needs money / and not money that needs a prince. But the
king laid for him such excuses, that the patryarke departed from him
dyscontentyd and comfortelesse. whereof the king being aduertysed / entendynge
somewhat to recomforte him with pleasant words, followed him unto the sea
side. But the more the king thought to satysfye him with his fair speech, the
more the patryarke was dyscontented / in so myche that at the last he said
unto him. Hitherto thou haste reigned gloryously. But here after thou shall be
forsaken of him yt thou at this time forsakeste. Think on him what he has
given to the / and what thou haste yelden to him again. How first thou were
false unto the king of France / and after slew that holy man Thomas of
Caunterburye / and lastely thou forsakeste the proteccyon of Crystes faith. The
king was amoued with these words, and said unto the patriarch. Though all the
men of my land were one body, and spoke with one mouth / they durst not
speak to me such wordys. No wonder said the patryarke, for they love thine and
not the. That is to mean, they love thy goods temporal, and fere the for
loss of promocyon / but they love not thy soul. And when he had so said /
he offeryd his hedde to the king saying, Do by me, right as thou dyddest by
that blessed man Thomas of Caunterburye. For I had lever to be slain of the,
then of ye Sarasyns. For thou art worse then any Sarasyn / and thy people
folowyth pray and not a man. But the king kept his pacyence, and said I
may not wend out of my land / for mine own sons will arryse again me
when I were absent. A pacye^t man
No wonder said the patryarke. For of the devil they come, and to the devil
they shall / and so departed from the king in great ire. After the patryarke
was thus departed / the king sent John^ his second son into Irlande. In
the which vyage he spente the king great goodys, and did little profit or
none.

In the.xxxi. year of king Henry / the Jews crucyfyed a child in the town
of Burye in Suff. named Robert / for whom god showed after many miracles.

And the.xxxii. year, the king made a vyage into Irlande to redress things
there out of order. But fortune was to him so contrary that he lost his
travail, like as the year before his son John^ had done.

In the.xxxiii. year of this king Henry / at Dunstable in the air was seen a
crucyfyxe, and Christ nailed thereon / which apperyd vysybly to many a mannys
syghte. And in this year the king lost the country of Aluerne / when he
had spente great goods about the defense of the same. How be yt of this
war speaks nothing the french cronycle.

THE.CCXI. CHAPTER.
IN the.xxxiiii. year of the king / Richard the earl of Poytowe arrered war
again king Henry his father, and took party with the French king. By mean of
the which war / all such summys of money as were before gathered by dymys
and otherwise, for the helping of the croysye to be made into the holy land,
by the said Richard and by many other nobles of the land, were spente in the
same innaturall war / wherefore the king sailed into Normandy with a strong
army. But or the king were there landed / the said Richard by help of the
Frenchemen had won the cytyes of Towers, of Meaus, and also the castellys
of Raoull and Gysours with other. At the last the French king Phylyppe the
second, with the said Richard came unto the city of Cenomanna / entendyng to
lay syege unto the same. whereof king Henry being warned / set the suburbs
on fire, because his enmyes should in the^ have no socour. But the flame of the
fire was by the wind driven into the city so sharply, that the king was
compelled to forsake yt. wherwyth ye king was so amoued / that in his
departing from the city he said these words. For thou haste taken from me
this day the city that I most loved in the world, I shall acquyte the / for
after this time I shall bynome the that thing, yt should most have pleased the
in me, which is mine heart.

After this he lost more daily / so that his enymyes prevailed strongely
again him.

It is read of him / that he should be at so great an after deal in this war
/ that hastily he should put him in the king of Fraunces mercy, his honor and
his crown reserved. But this is doutefull of crede^ce. For sure I am, if the
French king had such advantage of him / yt should not have fallen through
the book, but have been regystred in the most auauntynge manner / where as in
the french cronycle is touched no word of like matter. But trowth yt is that
fortune was to him contrary, in such wise that with or for anger and
impacyence, he fell into a fever. whereof he lastely dyed in the castle of
Conomeus or of Chynon in Normandye, in the month of July, when he had
reigned.xxxiiii. years and.viii. months with odds days / and was buried at
Fount Ebrade, with this epytaphy upon his tomb. Sufficit hic tumulus, cui non
sufficerat orbis.
Res breuis est ampla, cui fuit ampla breuis.
Rex Henricus eram: mihi plurima regna subegi.
Multiplicique modo, duxque comesque sui.
Cui satis ad votum non essent omnia terrae
Climita, terrae modo sufficit octo pedun^
Qui legis haec, pensa discrimina mortis: and in me
Humanae speculum conditionis habe.
Quod petis instante operare bonum, quia mundus
Transit, and inca^tos mors inopina rapit.


The which versys are thus myche to mean in sentence. Suffysyth now this
grave, to whom all erthly thing
Syffysyd not / my mind so high was set.
Time that was short, my name wide did spring /
which fame by death is into shortenesse fette.
King Henry was I called, no man I thought my bette.
whose mind sometime all earth not suffysed /
viii. foot of ground now has my body comprysed.
Thou that this redest / the parell of death, and in me
Thou may behold the course of every wight
That erthely is. wherefore provide and se,
That thou well may do, shortly do yt, and tyght.
Defer not the time / for I ascertayne the right,
The world is transytory / and unawarely men takes
Cruel death, from whom non estate escapes.


Gerardus Cambrens^, which in his book of dystynccyons set out the life of
this Henry / says dredefull yt is to allege again him that may put a man
out of land, and to descrybe him with many words, that may exyle a man with
one word. wherefore yt were a notable deed to tell the sothe of a princes
dedys, and offend the prince in no mean. But yet when the prince is passed
and gone / then men will talk without fere, that before time they spared for
fere.

Then to follow the sooth, this king Henry noryshed strife among his chyldern
with all dylyge^ce / hopyng thereby to live him self in the more rest. when
men would ask of him when he would leave his great deeds / he used to answer
that the world should fail, or a courageouse heart should sease of great
deeds. He was pereles in chyualry, in war, and in lecherye. He wedded
Elyanoure wife of Lewys king of France / contrary to the commandment of his
father. For he had showed to him that he had lain by her, when he was the
said kings steward.

He reigned.xxvi. years somdeale to his wordely bliss, and four years somewhat
to his pain / but the last five years to his great troweble and sorrow.
Farthermore the said Gerarde descryueth the progenye of this Henry / which I
over pass because yt is so common.

Richard his son would often tell that wonder / and used to say, no
marvel though they grieved the people that were common of such kind. For of ye
devil they came, and to the dyuyll they shall.

It is also read of this Henry, that in a chaumber at wyndesore he caused to
be painted an egle with four birds / whereof three of them all rased the body
of the old egle, and the fourth was cratchynge at the old eglys eyes. when
the questyon was asked of him what thing that pycture should sygnyfye / yt was
answered by him: this old egle (said he) is my self / and these.iiii. eglys
betoken my four sons, the which sease not to pursue my death. And specially
my yongeste son John^, which now I love most / shall most specially awayte
and imagen my death.

Francia. THE.CCXLI. CHAPTER.
PHylyp the second of that name, surnamed Dyeu done or given of god, and son
unto ye viii. Lewys / began to reygne over the realm of France, in the year
of our lord.xi. hundred and.lxxix / and the.xxiii. year of Henry the second
than king of England. which said Phylyppe reigned somewhat of time by the
life of his father / which time is accounted unto the reygne of his father.

This in the first year of his reygne, for the great enormytyes that the Jews
used within the realm of France / as crucyfyenge of children, and exercysynge
of their detestable vsery: he after due proof made put the malefactors to
death / and the other in avoiding more danger / he exyled and put clear out
of his realm.

This Phylyp also as before in the story of Henry the second is towched,
excyted the sons of the said Henry to make war upon their father / by
which mean this Phylyppe gate many holds and towns from the said Henry
within his duchy of Guyon. But after the death of Henry / this Phylyppe gave
over all the said holds and towns, unto Richard the eldeste son of the
said Henry / and received of him homage for the same. And as wytnessyth the
French cronycle / the said Rychard in token of obedyence, was present at the
coronacion of the said Phylyppe. But ye shall understand that than he was not
king of England.x. years after. But if yt so were that he were present at the
said coronacyon / yet was he duke of Guyon only.

About the third year of his reygne / Eraclius patryarke of Jerusalem came
into France, and required aid of this king Phylyppe to wythstande the furye
and persecucyon, which Saladyne prince of Turks had excuted and daily
continued in the country of Palestina again the Christian to the great
destruccyon of them and undoing of the country, and great ieoperdye of the
losing of the holy city of Jerusalem. For this the king assembled a great
counsayll at his city of Paris / where the said Eraclius made request to the
king as before he had done to Henry the second. For he was in France in
the year of our lord.xi. hundred.lxxx. and two / and in England he was in the
year of grace.xi. hundred.lxxx. and.vii. After which counsayll there so holden
/ yt was agreed that the king with aid of the bishops and other of the
spyrytualtye, should aid the said patryarke / the which where set forth
in all possible haste. But after the report of Peter Dysroye, which made a
recule or little book of the winning and losyng of Jerusalem / they with mo
christian princes were driven by tempeste of the sea unto the port of Damas /
where under color of a feigned trewce, they were taken and cast the most
part of them in prison.

And when king Phylyppe had thus delivered the patryarke / he then gathered
his knights and made an army again Hugh duke of Burgoyne / the which at
that season and time had beclypped the castle of Uergye with a strong syege
/ and had promised not to depart thens, till such time as he had won that
hold by appoytement or otherwise.

And for the defense of rescouse that might be made for the same / he had
ma^ned four castellys or towers there unto adioynaunte, with great strength of
men of armies. But after the king was thither comen with his host, the said
towrs were sone ouertourned / and ye king with a certain of his people, of
Guy capytayne of the said castle of Uergy was ioyously into the same received
/ and rendered to him the castle, and became his lege man. where with the said
Hugh being ^ore amoued and dyscontented, seeing there he was dyspoynted of his
purpose / departed thens with his ordinance and people, and robbed and spoiled
the country there about / sparynge another church nor house of relygyo^ / in
so cruel and grievous manner, that the bysshoppes and abbottes of that party of
Burgoyne made pyteous request unto the said Phylyp, that he of his special
grace would aid and socoure them and their chyrches again the tyranny of the
said duke Hugh. The king being moved with this pyteous request / made
sharp war upon the said Hugh / and at length wan from him a strong
castle named Chastelone. where with all the duke was put to such a studyall
and fere that he was forsed to seche means of treaty and of peace. whereof the
co^clusyon was, that he should pay unto the chyrches before by him hurted and
harmed.xxx. thousand pownd. which conclusyon taken and surely set for the
same / the king returned unto Paris. where the king so resting him a certain
of time, and having experyence of the intolerable and foul stenches that
daily grew by the fylthe of the earth and mire in the streets / made prouysyon
dylygently with aid and help of the cytesens, which as than had land
within the city, that the streets were shortly paued after. And at this time
when the city was thus paued, as affermen many authors / the name of it was
changed from Lutesse or Lewcesse unto Parysse.

THE.CCXLII. CHAPTER.
IN the.vii. year of this king Phylyp, as says the French book / Margarete
sister unto this Phylyp, late wife unto Henry late deceased, and eldeste son
of Henry the second king at this day of England, was married unto Belas king
of Hungry.

In the.x. year of this king Phylyp / the city of Jerusalem was taken of
Saladyne prince of Egypt / and Guy de Lesyngnan last christian king of that
city, with the holy cross was taken in the field / which after that day came
never into christian men's possessyon. Of this sorrow and heaviness word was
brought unto king Phylyp, with request of aid to reskue certain cytyes, as
yet rested under the domynyon of the christian / as Tire, Tryple, and Antioch,
with other small holds. For sauegarde whereof many nobles of France took upon
them the cross / as the duke of Burgoyn, the earl of Flaunders, Theobalde earl
of Bloyes, the earl of Rochfo^d, the earl of Champayne, with many other noble
knights / which for length I pass over, and also the report of their
dedys, for so myche as it co^cernyth nothing the matter that I have promised to
speak of.

In this journey also king Phylyppe ente^ded to have gone / and for the same
great taskes and dymys were leuyed through out his realm, the which to this
day are called Saladynes dymes. But the let of this journey as says the
french cronycle was Richard duke of Guyan / and after his father Henry the
second, that made war upon the French king, as before is touched in the
storye of the said Henry. During which war the said Henry dyed, in the.xi
year of this said Phylyppe.

About this season and time / the Jews which by mean of great gifts, had
again purchased their dwelling within the country of France, whereof a wedowe
was lady and mastresse called Branous / in absence of the king took a Christian
man, and surmysed again him felonye and murder. For the which by favor of
the said lady / the said Jews set a crown of thorn upon the said christian
mannys hedde, and after scourged him, and lastely in derysyon of Crystes
relygyon and despyte of the same, crucyfyed the same person. whereof when the
king was enfourmed / in all haste he sent into the said country or castle of
Brayon, and surprysed the said Iewys so suddenly that none escaped / and brent
there of them to the number of.lxxx. for their malycyouse and abhomynable deed.

In the.xi year of the reygne of this Phylyppe, dyed Isabell the queen of
France his wife / a woman of good fame and of great virtue.

In the.xii. year of his reygne as says the french book / this Phylyp took
upon him the cross, having promise of king Rychard then newly crowned king
of England, to keep company with him in that journey. But he kept not promise.
wherewith this Phylyppe being dysconte^ted / sailed before and laid syege unto
the city of Acon or Acre. From this saying varyeth Policronica, and also
Peter Desroy. For Polycronycon says, that after the kings of England and of
France, had made suerty between them for performau^ce of this journey / they
both to gyther tarried at Turon in France, for to abide the somer tide. And at
spryngynge of the year / they of one will and purpose, took their vyage toward
the holy land / that is to wit that one by water and that other by land /
and met again in Cecilia. where the French king deperted from him / and so
sailed to the said city of Acone or Acre, and laid his syege there unto. In
which pastyme king Richard warred upon the king of Sypres, and him with his
land subdued / and after came unto Acon^, where the French king had long lain
at syege without getting of any great advantage of his enymyes / saying unto
king Richard that he had spared the winning of the town till his
coming, to the end that he at his coming might be parteyner as well of the
honor as of the winning. But how it was, such unkindness fell between
them there, after they had woonne the said town, as after in story of
king Richard shall be showed, that this king Phylyppe returned into France
shortly after. In the which return the said Phylyppe sykened, and the duke
of Burgoyne dyed. And when king Phylyppe a season had soiourned in France / he
married Iugebert the daughter of the king of Denmark. The which marriage, as
says Ranulfe, was desired of the French king, to have with her granted the
title which the Danes had unto the crown of England, with also.x. thousand
marks of silver, for to win with ye said right and title. But yt was not
long or she were from him deuorced, for cause of alyau^ce of gossypred or
otherwise. How be yt in process of time after / the said Iugebert was to him
again joined by the authoryte of Pope Innocent the third of that name, in the
year of grace.xii. hundred and.ix. and year of reygne of this Philyppe.xxx / so
that the said Iugebert was deuorced from her lord by the term of.xvii.
years or theruppon.

In which time and season the said Phylyppe had married the daughter of Phylyppe
duke of Sweuy, that then was returned unto her father.

THE.CCXLIII. CHAPTER.
King Phylyp for dyspleasure which he bare toward king Richard / made sharp
and cruel war upon the Normans, and wan therein diverse holds and towns /
and finally laid syege unto the city of Roan. whereof herynge John^ earl of
Huntyngeton, or after some earl of Oxenforde brother to king Richard, whom
the French book names John^ without land / with the earl of Arundell and
other noble men, spedde him into Normandye / and so aided the cytezens and the
soldyours of Roan, that as testyfyeth the french cronycle, the French king was
so moved with the war and defense of the same town, that in a passing fury
consyderyng the winter season drew upon, and that he might not carye away
his gunnes and other great ordynaunces / he set all upon a fire / and so with
great agony departed. And within three months after he laid syege unto the
castle of Uernyel / where when he had lain.iii. wekes or more, a messynger
came unto him and said, that the city Euroux was taken of the Normans / and
the people thereof taken prisoners. wherefore in all haste he departed, and
rescued the said city and prisoners / and that done returned to the foresaid
syege / and assyeged yt so stro^gely, that lastely he had yt delyueryd by
appoyntement.

By this season was king Richard delyueryd out of the hands of the duke of
Ostryge. And then began the war to be more cruel / which here I pass
over, for so much as I entende to show the effect thereof in the storye of
king Richard following.

About the.xviii. year of the reygn of this Phylyppe / fell such plenty of
water, that the ground was therewith so bucked and drowned, that corn and
other fruits by reason thereof greatly decayed and scanted, in such wise that
whete was shortly after at.xx. s a quarter after sterlynge money.

In the.xx. year of the reygn of this Phylyppe / dyed Richard king of England
/ to whom was heir John^ before named his brother. The which concluded a
trewce with this Philyppe for certain years, as after in the storye of this
John^ shall more clearly appear.

And soon there after means were made to king Phylyp, that he should receive
again unto his company Iugebert his wife / and to renounce Mary daughter of
the duke of Sweuy, or after some authors, the daughter of the duke of Bohemy.
But the king with this mocyon was nothing contentyd / nor yet agreeable to
follow any such mocion or request. wherefore the prelasy of the land assemled
them in counsayll / and by a full and hole authoryte, seeing they might not
induce the king to no conformyte or agreement to resume his lawful wife, and
to refuse that other / they denounsed him and his realm accursed. wherewith the
king was so amoued and vexed / that he depryued certain bysshoppes from their
sees / and also took in his possessyon the spyrytuall goods / and prysoned
many prestes and other relygyous men / and over that closed the said Iugebert
within the castle of Sampys / and forthermore grieved his commons with grievous
exaccyons and taxys. Than within a short term after John^ de saint Poule
cardynall, and Atha^ or Othemon bishop of Osty and legate of the pope of
Rome, with the archebysshoppe of Bordeaux and other / by the commandment of
the pope than Innocent the third, kept a great counceyle in the city of
Sorsore. where the king was monysshed to apere / for so much as before he
had granted to be reconcyled unto his first wife. where this matter hynge in
argument before the spyrytuall judges by ye space of.xv. days, without
sentence gyuynge. wherefore the king being with the delays dyscontented /
suddenly with his wife departed, without taking of them any congye or leave /
sendynge them understanding that as yet he would be aduysed or he were
dysseuered from his wife. whereof when the said John^ cardynall and the other
bysshoppes had wyttynge / accomptynge their labor lost, they returned
shortly after unto Rome, and showed unto the pope all as they had done.

And soon there after king John^ was honorably received of this king
Phylyppe, as in the story of the said John^ shall be more plainly showed.

And in the year following, which should be in the beginning of the xxiii.
year of this Phylyppe, dyed Mary his wife / which he wrongfully had holden
contrary to the law of the church by the term of ten years or there upon.
Of the which Mary he had received a man child and a daughter / the which
after were made legyttymate by Innocent the third, though some noble men of
France there again grudged.

THE.CCXLIIII. CHAPTER.
IT was not long after, that ye king assembled great people and entendyd to
have entered the landys of the earl Rossell, and o^ Roger de Rose / of the
which he had brought before him many grievous complayntes, of great
extorcyons and exaccyo^s that the said earl and Roger had executed and done
upon the chyrches nere to the valey of Soysons / and would not refrain for
all the kings commandment. wherefore he rygged his army and drew toward
them. But as soon as they were aduertysed of the kings coming / anon they
submytted them to the kings grace / oblygynge them self to make restytucyon
according to the kings pleasure, to all such places and persons as they
had offended. And this act thus fynysshed / king Phylyppe returned unto a
place between Uerdon, and the i will Audely / in the which place the king had
appointed a great counsel or parlyament. where among other matters yt was
concluded, that John^ king of England should be somoned to appear as the
French kings lyege man, at the same parlyament to be holden at paris within
xv. days of Ester / to answer suffycyently to the king upon such questyons
as there should be purposed unto him, for the duchy of Normandye, for the
country of Aungeou and of Poytyers. But for yt king John^ came not at that
day appointed, nor none for him according to the monyshement to him given,
therefore this king Philypppe not withstanding the amytye and trewce before
confermed, assembled his host and entered the duchye of Normandye, and made
therein sharp and cruel war / and wanne a castle therein named Bonte or
Bowte, and bruised or crased the castellys of Gentylyne and Gurney / and seized
all ye lands which Hugh de Gurney held, and give them unto the duke of
Brytayne. And also he gave unto him the erledome of Aungeou, and two hundred
knights prysones of Normans and English with a great sum of money.

It was not long after that the duke of Brytayne was departed from the king /
but that he with such power as he might make entered the country of Aungeou,
to take thereof possessyon. where in short space he was encountered of king
John^, and fought to geder a cruel batell. In the which in the end the duke
was put to the worse / for the more part of his people were slain, and him
self with Hugh le Bruns, Godfrey de Lesygnan, and many other nobles of France
and also of Brytayne, were taken prisoners. with which tidings the French
king was grievously dyscontentyd. And where as at that time he had becleped ye
castle of Arches with a strong syege / he removed from thens and and yode to
the city of Towers and brent a part thereof. But as testifyeth the french
cronycle he tarried not the coming of king John^. But for that winter was
coming toward / he ceasyd of his warrys for that year, and so drew him into
France

In the year following, which was the year of this Phylyp.xxiiii, and of king
John^ the.iiii. year / ye war newely began, which I over pass, for as much
as yt shall be showed in the storye of king John^.

In the.xxvi. year this Phylyppe Almaricus a studyent of Paris held certain
opynyons of heresye. Of the which when he was abiured / he took such thought
that he dyed shortly after. It was not long after but that other clerkys and
studyauntys held an other erronyous opinion concerning ye union of the
trynyte. Of the which number Peter bishop of Paris, and one Garyne a man of
great conning were two / the which were degraded, and after co^sumyd with
fire / and the body of the forenamed Almaricus was again taken out of the
earth, and after brent.

Nere about the.xxx. year of the reygne of this Phylyppe / for consyderacyon as
says the french book, that John^ king of England had exylyd diverse of his
bishops, and taken from them their possessions and goods / the which to
this king Phylyp were comen for aid and socour: he therefore mouyd with pytye,
assembled a great host, and entendyd to have sailed into England to have
reformed these matters. with the which host he passed till he came to
Grauenynge by land, where he appointed his nauey to mete with him. And to the
same place also Ferrande then earl of Flaundres had affermely promised to come,
with the aid of his Flemynges / where the king for him tarried a certain of
time. But shortly after the king was ascertayned that the said earl was
alyed with king John^ his enymye / and purposed to aid his party in all that
he might. whereof the occasyon was as affermeth the said French cronycle, for
so myche as Lewys eldest son of king Phylyppe held from the said Farrande
two castellys or towns named saint Omer and Are.

when king Phylyppe apperceyued that he was thus of the earl dyspoynted / he
by cou^sayll of his Baronye put by his journey into England, and assailed
the country of Flaundres / and so yode unto Cassyle a little from Grauelynge,
and with sharp assaute wanne the said town / and so from thens to Brugys /
and commanded his navy to be brought unto the haue^ of Sluse, which is within
short way of Brugys. And when he had executed his pleasure at Brugys,
leuyng a certain of his people for to strength his Navy / he yode unto Gaunte,
and there rested him and his people. In which season Regnolde earl of Boleyne,
Guyllyam long Espe, or Guyllyam with the long sword, with a crewe of
English men aryued in Flaundres / to whom shortly drew Ferraunde the earl
with a great power of Flemynges. The which shypped them in small caruyles and
barks and other shyppys of aduau^tage / and with a fyerse courage set upon
the French kings nauey lyenge at Sluse as before is showed / where was
foughten a strong and cruel battle. But in the end the Flemynges had the
vyctorye, and had the rule of all the french flote, the which in number as
testyfyeth the said french cronycle, were a thousand and ten sail. The
which for number and greatness might not all lie within the hauyn / but
spradde a great part of the river beside. which so lyenge without the haven,
the Flemynges conveyed thens / and after laid ordinance to the town of
Sluse, and assyeged yt.

King Phylyppe herynge of the loss of his nauye, and of the assautynge of the
town of Sluse, in all haste spedde him thither / and there in such wise
resysted his enymyes, that he slew of them upon two thousand / and took of
them diverse prisoners, and rescued the town. But for he saw he might not
recover his ships being within the hauyn / he caused them to be dyscharged
of vytell and other necessaryes, and after set them on fire and the town also
/ and that done, took certain hostages of Brugis of Gaunte and of Ipre, and so
returned into France.

THE.CCXLV. CHAPTER.
WHen king Phylippe was returned into France / yt was not long after, that
by the means of some well dysposyd persons, he was reconcyled and took to him
his lawful wife Ingeberta or Ingebert, daughter of the king of Denmark /
which was great comfort to all his people. And this yt now apperyth that the
said Ingebert was from her lord or husband by the term of.xvi. years and
more, as before yt is touched in the second chapyter of this storye.

In the year of grace.xii. hundred.xiiii. as says the french book, which
makes the year of the reygne of this Philyppe.xxxv / Otho the.iiii. of that
name and duke of Saxony, which of some of the electours was chosen for
emperor / in the quarrel of king John^ intred ye province of Henaude, and
there being accompanied with Reygnolde earl of Boleyne, Farraunde earl of
Flaundres, and diverse other nobles, as well of England, Saxonye, and other
places / made prouysyon to fight with king Phylyppe, which then warred in
Flau^dres / so that the French king was at the castle of Peron, and Otho was
at the castle of Ualensyens or Ualenseus.

About Mary Madgdaleyns tide, the French king in wastyng ye country of
Flau^dres came unto the town of Turney / and Otho returned from the foresaid
castle, and came unto the castle or town named Mortenge, the which was
but.vi. mile from Turney. whereof herynge the king, entendyd to have set in
short time upon his enymyes. But by the advise of his barons he was let /
for so myche as the ways and places were streyghte and narowe toward his
enymyes. For the which consyderacyon by counsayll of his said barons he was
let, and returned toward Henawde for to have more larger playnes. So that
after saint Iamys day he returned / purposynge that night to have lain and
also his host at the castle called Lylly. But he was let of his purpose.
For Otho which was warned of his remouynge, demed him to have fled and pursued
after the vaungarde of the king / of the which were captains the vycounte of
Mylyon, and one named Friar Garnye / the which was a a friar and relygyous
man, a man of great counsayll and hardynesse. These being accompanied with
iiii. thounsande men / rode till they came to an hill or little Mountain, where
they espied the advantage of Otho and his host. wherefore friar Garny returned
to give the king knowledge / and the vycounte remained in the place, and houed
with his company.

when the king had knowledge of the coming of his enymyes / he in good
manner kept on his journey. In which season Otho, with his people came unto ye
river which was somdeale dangerous to pass / how be yt in process he passed
yt. And when he and his host were over / he made way toward Turney / in so
myche that the Uycounte and his company demed them to have returned to Turney.
But so soon as Friar Garny was returned unto the said mount, anon he demed
the cou^trary / and said precysely that other they must give battle to their
enimyes, or else they must fle with shame. In this while the kings people
came unto a bridge where they should pass over. And the cautele of his enymyes
was, that when the king with the more part of his people had been passed
that bridge / they would have set upon the rerewarde, and have dystressyd
them / and so have kept that bridge that the king should not have socoured
his people. But or the king were passed the fight was begone / in so myche
that hydeous cry came to the kings cries, at armies at armies, to harneys to
harnes, our enymyes be come.

Nere unto the king was a chapel hallowed in the honor and worship of saint
Peter / whereunto the king yode and made there his devout prayers / and that
done armed him, and lepte to horse ioyously cryenge / as barons at armies. Then
the Oryflambe which was passed ye bridge, was countermaunded. And then began
the trumpettys and tabours to blow / which reuyued the palled hearts, and
caused them to forgete the dread of death. But for the kings people might not
so hastily return and pass the bridge / the king as a valiant knight took
his horse with his spurrys, and set forward to encourage the other of his
knights / so that his enymyes herynge of his coming, were somdeale
dyscoraged and gave place unto the kings host. Then Otho herynge of the
kings return, enbatayled his people. But so yt was that he took the north
part of the field / by reason whereof the son was in his face to his
afterdeale / for that was exceeding hot over the other. Then was the batell
begone in diverse parties of the field so cruelly that many a man was there
overthrown. The which endured be a long space, in such wise that hard yt
was to dyscerne which party had the better of that other. Either prince
enforcyd so straytely that other / that either of them were unhorsed and in
great ieoperdye. If here I should rehearse the vyctoryouse dedys of the French
king and his knights in order, after the expressement of the french book / I
should thereof make a long storye. But troth yt is that in the end / Otho was
compelled to forsake the field, to the great loss of his people / and Feraunte
the earl of Flaunders was taken with many other, as Reygnolde earl of Boleyn,
and.xxviii. other of name.

And one thing hardely me seems to be credence given unto, rehersyd by the
french cronycle, which says that of all the french host myssed but one
syngle man / the which after was found among the deed Almaynes sore wounded,
and after cured and helyd again. which may be told for a great wonder /
considering the said fight lasted over four hours, as testyfyeth the said
cronycle. But sure the authoure or the writer ouerseeth him self in that
report / for he shewyth before in the dyuysynge of the fight of this batell,
that when king Phylyppe was felled from his horse, two of his knights were
slain right before him / that one named Guyllyam de long Champe, and that
other Gerarde le Tirne. But master Robert Gagwyne expressyth this more clearly
/ saying that after the field was done and the emperor was fled, leuynge
his banner of splayed Egle behind him / a bysshement of the number of.vii.
hundred men recoueryd that standarde, and so kept them to gyther. whereof when
the king was enfourmed / he sent again them one of his knights called sir
Thomas Ualary, acco^panyed with.l. fotemen and two thousand horse men. The
which dystressyd ye said company, without loss of one man as before is said.
And more over the said author says / yt upon the party of the said Otho of
knights and gylte harness were slain a thousand and five hundred / and of
other horse men and footmen a hundred and fyfty thousand. But of ye French
men which should be sureste of reckoning / he makes no mencyon. But troth it
is, that in all the cronycle thoroughe the French book rehearsed / all thing
touching their honor is declared and showed to the vttermoste. And that
which concerns their dyshonoure or loss, yt is over subtely excused / or so
darkely or mystly written, that the reader thereof shall hardely come to the
knowledge of the truth. And that is well apparent in the stories of Phylyppe
de Ualoys and of king John^ his son, in expressement of their faytes done
and exercysed again the third Edward king of England and prince Edward his
son.

Than it follows in ye story / when Phylyp had obtained this great vyctory
of his enemies, and ordered other things concerning his people, as
countermau^dynge them the next way unto their countrees / he with his
prisoners spedde him to Paris / and there of his great bounte granted to the
said erlys of Boleyne and Flaunders their lives, but not of prysonement. For
the earl of Boleyne was sent unto the castle of Peron / and Feraunt earl of
Flaunders was committed to the castle or tower of Louour without the wallys of
the city of Paris tha^ newly made. But within less than xv. months after /
by labor of his wife, he with other of his lyege men was delivered / payenge
their fynaunces, and perfourmyng of other straight condycyons.

THE.CCXLVI. CHAPTER.
IT was not long after that king Phylyppe reassembled his knights, and
spedde him toward the country of Poytow. whereof being warned the earl of
Thoners that than was chief ruler of that country under king John^, seeing the
feblenesse of the commons that daily were vexed with war, and also the loss
of king John^s friends, not wythstandyng the said John^ was than within twenty
miles / yet he made such means to king Phylyppe by the labor of Peter than
duke or earl of Brytayn, that the said king accepted the same earl to his
grace / and granted to him and his a trewce for.iiii. years. But that not
wythstandyng / the king kept on his journey toward king John^. whereof king
John^ being enfourmed / and also of the peace between the earl of Thoners and
the French king: he by means of one Roberte a legate of Rome sought means
of treaty and of peace / so that in process by dylygence of the said Robert
and other, a peace was concluded for.v. years. which peace concluded and
assured either king returned into their own prouynces.

within short while after ye French king was returned into France / he called
to mind the great vyctory had of the Almayns / with also one other which Lewys
his son about ye same time had again or of king John^ in the country of
Aungeou, at the castle of Moyne or Main. For the which.ii. vyctoryes, the
king edyfyed a monastery beside the cyty of Sayntles, in the honor of saint
Uyctor / and endowed it with fair and rich possessions, and named it the
abbey of saint Uyctor.

In the.xxxvi. year of the reygne of this Phylyppe / Lewys his son by
procuring and sturrynge of the lords of England, sailed into the said
prouynces / as more plainly shall be showed in the.xvi. year of the reygne of
king John^.

Many mo stories and acts might I bring in and set in this story of this
king Phylyppe, if I should follow the French book. For he makes there a
rehersayll that conteyneth.xxxix. great leuys of parchemyne. Of the which I
have taken out such as to me seems most conuenyent / and have over passed
the other for length of the time.

Than it follows / this Phylyp after these days drew him to more quiet and
rest / so that after this peace or trewce concluded with king John^ of
England, the author speaks not or myndeth of any noble deed by him done. So
that in the year of our lord.xii. hundred and.xxii, which should be the year
of his reygne.xliii / the said author begins, and says that in that
foresaid year apered a great eclypce of the son, whereof the like had not ben
seen in many years passed.

And in the year following dyed this Phylyppe in the month of Iunii, when he
had reigned upon xliiii. years. Before whose death apered a great comete or
blasyng star / the which the French men, with also the foresaid eclypce /
they adjudged for pronostiquys and tokens of the kings death / the which was
buried with excellent pomp in the monastery of saint Denis, in the year of our
lord a thousand two hundred and.xxiii. and of his age.lviii / leuynge after
him the fore named Lewys / which was enoynted king after him.

This Phylyppe among other notable things ordained in his testament / be
set to the aydynge and winning of the holy city of Jerusalem three hundred
thousand pownde of Paris money / to the hospytall in Mount forte a hundred
thousand pownde / and to be dystrybuted among the poor commons of his land
he gave twenty thousand pownde.

But here is to be noted, there is a great dyuersyte between a pownd of Paris
money and a pownde of sterlynge money. For a pownde of Paris money is but two
shyllynges and.vi. pence sterlynge, or nere there about. And so it follows
that a thousand pownde of Paris, is but a hundred five and twenty pownde
sterlynge. By which account it follows that this king gave to the aid of
the holy land.xxxvii. thousand and five hundred pownde sterlynge / to the
hospytall xii. thousand and five hundred pownde sterlynge / and to the poor
people two thousand and five hundred pownde.

And thus here I make an end of this volume, for cause and co^syderacyon, as
after is showed in the beginning of the next volume, more manyfestely.
Lenuoye.
PRece forth rude volume / and reco^mende me,
To my derest friend expert in all science.
Pray him at leysour the to ouerse.
And where in meter or prose he fyndeth offense,
Or congrewe english, or of perfyte sentence /
Humbly him pray that he woll the correct,
which in all his faytes is so cyrcumspecte.
And show to him forther his meryt to encreace,
The second volume is ready to him dyght.
Pray him he woll not therefore with the sursease,
Till that thy fellow, he have by his insyght
And by his science brought in so good plyght,
That to all readers it may be delectable,
And to the herers fruitful and profitable.
And not to dysdayne my malapert rudeness /
That to his pain I should thus boldly send.
Or him to will to such great business,
So rude a work to correct and amend.
But show him sothely that all that I entende,
Is for to enhaunce his praise and grea^e laud /
As he shall know I trust without frawde.
The second volume of Fabyans cronycle Conteynyng the chronicles of England
and of France, from the beginning of the reygne of king Rycharch the first,
until the beginning of the reyne of our most redoubted sovereign lord king
Henry the.viii.

Prentyd at London By wyllyam Rastell. 1533

CVM PRIVILEGIO.



THE TABLE.
THere begins the table of the second volume, which denounces and shows
all the acts done in every kings days contained in the said volume / and
that every act folowes by letter and by the nou^ber of ye lefe, as in this
said table is expressed / and begins at the wards of London and at king
Richard the first / whose acts more at length in this said volume shall be
showed, with other kings ensuyng by letter in this said table / as first.
A.B.C. and so forth.

ACrys a strong city in the holy la^d was won by the christian as appears.
fo. iiii Acts of the great Cane of Tartaris folio xxiii Abbotte of waltham was
accorded with the citesyns of London. fo. xxviii Accord made between king
Henry the.iii. and his barons. fo. xxxviii Acts done in Hethenes / by Lowys
the French king. fo. xlviii Acris or Acon abouenamed city wo^ne again by y^
Turks. fo. lxix Accord or agreement was made between England and Scotland. fo.
xc Acts were made for weryng of sylk. folio xci Acts in France done by the
duke of Lancastre. fo. ciii Acts made by Fre^chme^ for the occupyeng of ye
admissio^ of ye enherytour of France. folio cxxxvii Accord made between the
dukes of Orleaunce and of Burgoyne. fo. clx Accusacyo^s by the duke of Burgoyn
again the duke of Orleaunce. fo. clxi Accord made between the said dukes.
folio clxi Act made for gyuynge of lyuereys. folio clxv Acts made again
strangers / se in folio. clxxc Acts made for halowynge of the sunday within
the city of London. folio cxci^i Abbay of Bury was spoiled. fo. cxiii Adyme
was granted to king Henry the fyft. fo. clxxvii A quyndecyme was granted to
king Henry the.iii. fo. xxi A letter devised by the barons and sent to king
Henry the.iii. fo. xxxvii A letter was sent by Rychard king of Romans to the
barons. fo. xxxvii A quarter of where was sold for. ii. s. folio xc A fraye
was made in Fletestrete upon a bakers servant. fo. cxlv A fray made in
Fletestrete by one Her bottell. fo. cxcii Andrewe Trollop dysceyued the lords.
folio cciii A letter sent by Edward the.iii. unto the king of France. fo.
xciiii Agreement was made with the Scotts. folio. lxiii Answer made by the
French king to king Edwardes letter. fo. xcv Answer made by the French king
to king Henry. fo. clxxi Ambassade sent by the French king into England. fo.
lxxxix Ambassade sent again by the said king. folio lxxxix Ambassade sent
into France. fo. lxxxix Ambassade sent from the pope. fo. ccviii A part of
London bridge fylle into Thamys. fo. lxxxix Aid granted by king Johan. folio
cxxiii Aid was granted by the inhabytauntes of the country of Languedok.
folio cxxiiii. Archebysshoppe of Orleaunce was slain. fo. lxx. Archbysshop of
Caunterbury was slain. folio cxlii. Archebysshop of Caunterbury makes a
collacyon. folio cliiii. Archebysshop of york with other was taken in battle.
fo. clxvii Artycles of treason laid again sir Roger Mortymer. fo. lxxxviii
Artycles of peace ratyfyed between king Edward and king John^. folio cvi.
Artycles of dyspleasure showed in writing by the duke of Gloucester again the
bishop of wynchester. folio clxxx. Archebysshop of york ouerturneth the
Scotts. folio xcix. Artycles of peace concluded bytwen the earl of Flaunders
and his subjects. folio cxxxix. Assembles made by lords. fo. cxliiii.
Annyuersary honorable was fou^den in Poulys church. fo. cxi. Auoutry was
espied. fo. ccxiii.
BArons war began to grow in the.xli. year of king Henry the third. folio.
xxx. Barons war received and of new kyndeled in the.xliiii. year of Henry
the third. folio xxxiii. Barons assembled their companyes in the marches of
wales in the.xlvi year of the said king. fo. xxxiiii. Barons entered the city
of London folio xxxv. Barons dyscorded among them self. folio xxxviii. Barons
were chasyd the.xiiii. year of Edward the second. fo. lxxix. Battle of Lewys
between king Henry the.iii. and the barons. fo. xxxvii Battle called the
white battle, look in the.xi. year of Edward the second. folio. lxxvii.
Battle of Burbrydge bytwen king Edward the second and the barons in
his.xiiii. year. fo. lxxix. Battle very cruel against the Scotte called
Halydon. fo. lxxxix. Battle of Swyn or Sluice upon the sea / between the
Frenchmen and Edward the third, in the.xv. year of his reygne. fo. xciii.
Battle of Cressey in the.xxi. year of Edward the third. fo. xcviii. Battle
of Potyers between king Edward the third and the French king. folio ciii.
Battle between king Phylyp of France and the town of Cassile in Flaunders.
fo. cxvii. Battle of Shrowysbery / in the.iii. year of Henry the fourth. fo.
clxvii. Battle at Blak pole / in the.vi. year of Henry the.iiii. fo. clxvii.
Battle of Agyncourt / in the third year of Henry the.v. fo. clxxii. Battle
of saint Albons first the xxxiii. year of Henry the.vi. fo. cc. Blore heth
field apperys in ye.xxxvii year of king Henry the.vi. fo. cciii. Battle of
Ludlowe / as it does appear in folio cciii. Battle of Northamton / as appears
in folio cciiii. Battle of wakefelde apperys and the battle of sayn Albons.
fo. ccv. Battle of york or Towton or Shyrborne. fo. ccvi. Barnet field. fo.
ccxix. Battle of Tewkesbury. fo. ccxx. Bartra^ de Cleyco^ warred in Spayn and
chasyd the king. fo. cix. Blasynge sterre apperys in folio.xc. and fo. cxviii.
and fo. clix Blanke charters uses in Eng. fo. cli. Brekyng of peace bytwen
England and France / look in the.xliii. year of king Edward the.iii. fo.
cxi. Breast a strong town of Brytayne besyeged. fo. cxiii. Benyuolence was
first founded and granted in Edward the.iiii. days folio ccxxv. Bishop
Groostehede and of his acts apperyth in ye.xxxiii. year of king Henry the
third. folio xxvi. Bishop of Exceter was beheded apperyth in the.xviii. year
of Edward the second. folio lxxxii. Bishop of Norwyche made war in Spain
by the popes commandment in the.vi. year of Richard the second. folio
cxliii. Bishop of London has a memory of the cytesyns of London. fo. cxlvii.
Bishop of wynchester lent to king Henry the fyfte.xx. thousand pound. folio
clxxvii. Bishop of wynchester foresaid created cardynall. folio. clxxx Bishop
of Salysbury was slain in the end of.xxviii. of Henry the.vi. as more plainly
is showed fo. cxcviii. Bishop of Chychester called Reynolde Pecok was abiured
of heresye folio ccii. Book of prophecy was founden by a Jew in Spain. folio
xxiiii Blood of Christ was brought into westmynster by king Henry the.iii.
folio xxv. Bonifacius pope of his co^dycyons. folio. lxxi. Bull of the pope
manyfested at Poulys cross. folio xxxiii Busshe, Baggot and Grene and of their
acts. folio cli. Bryto^s resyst ye Frenchmen. fo. xxxix.
CHarles the.v. of that name and surnamed the fair, and brother to Phylyp
surnamed the long, son of the.iiii. Phylyp, began his reygne over the realm
of France, in the year of grace.M.iii. hundredth and.xxii / and the.xv. year of
the second Edward king of England, and reigned years.vi. folio. lxxxiiii.
Cardynalles that were sent into England from the pope were robbed / appears
in the.ix. year of Edward the second. folio lxxvi. Caen a strong town in
Normandye besyeged by king Edward the third and won it. folio xcviii. Calys
besyeged and gotten by king Edward the third. folio xcix. Cardynall sent from
the pope / labored for peace. folio ciii. Castle of Pount was yolden up by
appoyntement. folio cxxv. Careckes.iii. were taken by the duke of Clarence and
the earl of Kente. folio. clxvii. Charity of king Lewys. folio i. Charles de
Ualoys brother to Phylyppe le Beawe and uncle unto Charles the.v. foresaid
dyed. folio. lxxxvi. Charles de Bloys was slain in the battle between sir
John^ Mountforte and the said Charlys. fo. cix. Charles the.vi. of that name
and son of John^, be^ganne to rule the French men, in the year of our
lord.M.iii.C.lxiiii / and.xxxviii. year of the third Edward king of
England / and reigned years.xvi. folio xxxvi. Charles the.vii. of ye name a
young child and son of the.vi. Charlys, began his reygne over France, in
the month of september and year of our lord a thousand.iii. hundredth and lxxx
/ and the third year of the second Richard then king of England / and
reigned years.xlii. folio clv. Charles the.viii. of that name, and son unto
Charles the.vi. as sayen the French authors / but the English writers
shows the contrary, as in the story of this Charles shall appear / this began
to reygne over ye Frenchmen, in the year of our lord thousand.iii. hundredth
and.xxii / and the last year of Henry the.v. then king of England / and
reigned years xxxvi. folio ccvii. Chauntryes founded in Poulys church in
London. fo. cxi Cerymonyes for the coronacyon of king Henry the.iiii / as
appears. folio clxiii Creacyo^ of dukes by king Rychard the.ii. fo. cxliii
Clement pope dyspleased, for that he might give no bysshopryches within the
realm of England / in the.xviii year of king Edward the.iii. as apereth. fo.
xcvi Cytezyns of London / are toll free. folio xx Cytezyns of Londn were
arrested. folio. xxx Clerks of Orleaunces wythstande the king of Fraunces
commandment. fo. cxix Church or monastery of westmynster was ended of
buyldyng / as apereth. fo. lviii Condycions made by the borough-maysters of the
town of Burgys against their earl. fo. lxxxvi Constable of France was murdered
by the advise of Charles king of Nauerne. fo. cxxii Constable of the tower of
London was drowned whose name was called sir Thomas Ramston^ / as appears.
folio clxviii Constantynoble was won by the Turkys / as it is showed in.
folio cxcix Colacyon made by the archebysshop of Caunterbury to the lords for
the deposycyon of king Richard the.ii. folio cliiii Conclusyon of marriage by
king Henry the.vi. fo. cxcii Condycyons of king Lowys / as is showed. fo.
ccxxii Coming of the emperor into France and of his honorable receyte.
folio cxxxvii Composycyon was made between king Henry the syxte and the duke
of york / as appears. folio ccv Copy of a letter sent from Edward the.iii.
unto the French king / and answer to the same made / look in. folio. xcv
Copy of an instrument made for deposyng of king Richard / as is showed. folio
cliii Copye of a byll put into the parlyament house for the temporaltees / as
is showed. fo. clxix Copy of a letter sent by the bysshope of wynchester unto
the duke of Bedforde. folio clxxxi Copy of a pardon made by the king unto the
cytezyns of London / as apereth. fo xli Correccyon of aduoutry / as is showed.
folio lxxiii Coronacion of queen Katheryne / as appears. fo clxxvi. Courses of
service for the feast of the said coronacyon. fo. clxxvi Corpse of king Henry
the.v. was with great solempnite brought unto the monastery of westminster / as
apereth. fo. clxxi Countess of Henawde labored to make a peace between king
Edward the third and king Phylyp of France folio xcv Couenauntes between the
regente and the king of Nauerne are expressed and showed. folio. cxxxi
Couenauntes of marriage between king Henry the.v. and the French king behold
in. fo. clxxv Crossed treers came first into England / in the.iii. year of
king Edward the.ii. folio lxxv Crucyfix of gold belongyng to sait Denis church
in France was axed by the king of the monks for aid folio. cxx
DAme Blaunche was aided / by Phylip the French king as appears. folio. lii
Dame Elynour Cobham was arrested of treason / as it is showed in. folio cxci
Dauyd brother of Lewyn prince of walys wrought treason / as it is showed in.
fo. lvii Dauyd aforesaid was taken. folio lviii Daunsynge wonderful behold.
folio lix Derthe of corn. folio lx Deed knight apered to one master Morres in
walys. fo. xiii Derknesse intolerable fylle in Paulys church the bishop
being at mass. folio xxi Deuorce between Charlys ye French king and Blau^che
/ as it is showed. folio lxxxiiii Deed corpsys what noumbre in one year were
buried in London. fo. c Deep a town in Normandy was strongly assailed by the
lord Talbot. folio cxcii Denham esquyer took the lord Ryuers at Sand wyche.
folio cciiii Dyscencyon among the lords of England. fo. xxxii Dyscencion
fill among the lords in Normandy. fo. cxix Dyscencion grew between ye
French king and the king of Nauerne. folio cxxii Dyscencyon fylle among the
French men for cessynge of an aid. folio cxxiii Dyscencyon grew among the
three astates of the realm of France. folio cxxvi Diverse inconuenyences fill
in England and in France / as is showed. folio c Diverse vysyons and
meruayles were seen in the air / as it is showed. folio cviii Duke of Ostryche
dyed / and the hostages of king Richard were free delivered. folio ix Duke of
Lancasters acts. folio ciii Duke John^ of Lancaster made war in France.
folio cxi Duke of Lancastre passed thorugh France without fight. folio cxiii
Duke of Burgoyn complayneth upon sir John^ Chalous knight. folio cxviii Duke
of Normandy makes his oracion to the cytesyns of Paris. folio cxxviii Duke
foresaid was proclaimed regente of France / as it is showed. folio cxxx Duke
of Lancastre reentred France. folio cxxxvi Duke of Lancaster warred in Spayn^
folio cxlv Duke of Glouceter spoke sharp words to king Richard the second.
folio cxlix Duke of Glouceter was arested and murdered. folio cxlix Dukes of
Herforde and of Northfolke fill at dyscencyon for cause showed. folio cl Duke
of Lancastre claymed the crown. folio cliii Duke of Orleaunce labored against
the university of Paris. folio clx Duke of Orleaunce was slain. folio clx
Dukes of Orleaunce and of Burgoyn makes new war. fo. clx Duke of Burgoyne
was slain. folio clxiii Dukes and barons were put to death for treason. folio
clxv Duke of Clarence was slain. folio clxxvii Duke of Glouceter was made
protector of England / in the first year of the reygne of king Henry the
syxte and the duke of Bedforde, regente of France / as it is showed in. fo.
c.lxxix Duke of Bedforde wynneth holds in France / se in. fo. clxxx Duchess
of Hola^d was taken prisoner / look in. fo. clxxxi Duke of Alenson was
delivered for his raunsom. fo. clxxxii Duke of Northfolke was in great
ieopardy of drownyng. fo. clxxxiii Duke of Burgoyne turned from the English
party to ye French party as is showed in. fo. clxxxviii Duke of Burgoyn laid
syege to Calays. fo. clxxxix Dukes and earls were created / as apereth in. fo.
cxciii Duke of Suffolk was arrested. folio. cxcv Duke of Somerset was arrested
as shows in. fo. c.xcviii Duke of york gathered people / as apereth in. fo.
cxcviii Duke of york dyscharge of his protectourshyp. fo. cci Duke of york
and oath were attaynted as apereth in. fo. cciiii Duke of Bukkyngham and many
other were slain. fo. cciiii Duke of york takes the kings royal see. fo.
ccv Duke of york with other was slain folio. ccv Duke of Burgoyne assisteth ye
French kings son against his father / as is showed in. fo. ccix Duke of
Brytayn and other conspyred again their king. fo. ccix Duke of Somerset with
other put to death. fo. ccxv Duke of Clarence with other la^ded at Dartmouh. fo.
ccxviii Duke of Exceter was found deed in the sea. folio. ccxxi Duke Clarence
was drowned in wine. fo. ccxxii Duke of Glouceter was made protector. fo.
ccxxiiii Duke of Bukkyngham shows the title of king Rychard. fo. ccxxv Duke
of Glouceter takes possessyo^ at westmynster / as appears. folio. ccxxv Duke
of Bukkyngham co^spyreth against king Rychard / and was taken and beheded at
Salysbury. fo. ccxxv Duke of Orleau^ce was taken in battle as is showed. fo.
ccxxviii Duke of Brytayne dyed whereby great war follows / as it is showed.
fo. ccxxviii
Edward the first of that name and son of Henry ye third, surnamed Edward
Long shanke / began his reygne over England the xvii. day of Nouembre the
morrow after saint Edmond the archbisshop in the year of our lord.M.CC lxxii /
and the.ii. year of the.iii. Phylype than king of France / and reigned nobly
years.xxxiiii. fo. lv Elyanoure mother to king Richard was enlarged. fo. iiii
Edmounde Crouchbak was married to the daughter of ye earl of Amnarle as apereth
in. fo. xliiii Edmou^d wodstocke wroughte treason. fo. lxxxviii Edward the
son of Henry foresaid distressed the barons / as it is showed folio. xxxix
Edward foresaid dystressed the Barons the second time / as is showed folio.
xxxix Edward the holy king and confessor was translated / as it showed in
folio. xliiii Edward was crossed into the holy land / and of his feats there
done. folio. xlv Edward of Carnaruan / as apereth folio. lviii Edward the
second called Edward Carnaruan, the son of the first Edward / began his
domynyon over England in the month of July and year of our lord god.M.iii.C.
and vii / and the.xxi. year of the.iiii. Phylyppe or Philip the fair than
king of France / and reigned years full xix. fo. lxxiiii. Edward the first
married to his.ii. wife the French kings sister. folio. lxv. Edward the.iii.
of that name, and son^ of Edward the second and of dame Isabell the daughter
of Philippe le Beawe, or the.iiii. Phylyp late king of France / which Edward
about the age of.xv. years began his reygn over the realm of England the.xxv.
day of January, in the year of grace M.iii.C. and.xxvi / and the.iiii. year of
Charles the fair tha^ king of France the which reigned years.li. folio.
lxxxvi. Edward Carnaruan / was myserably slain as is showed. fo. lxxxvii.
Edward Bayloll was made king of Scotts. fo. lxxxviii. Edward the.iii.
sailed into Braban with his wife look in. fo. xci. Edward the.iii. chale^ged ye
hole kingdom of France. fo. xciii. Edward the eldest son^ of the duke of
york was elect for king of England look in. fo. cc.vi. Edward the.iiii. of
that name and eldest sone of Rychard duke of york which was proclaimed heir
para^t to the crown, began his domynyon over the realm of England, in the
iiii. day of March in ye year of grace M.iiii.C.lx / and the.ii. year of
the.xi. Lowys than king of France / and reigned at that time.viii. months
and years viii. fo. cc.xiiii. Edward the.iiii. beforenamed wan the field of
Barnet upon Ester day again king Henry the.vi. in the year of
grace.M.iiii.C.lxxi. and year of Lowys the French king aforesaid / and reigned
after that day.x. months / and years.xii. So that first and last he reigned
over.vii. months assygned to Henry the.vi. days.xxxvi. months and
years.xxi. or with the said months of Henry the.vi. set to Edwardes reygne
make.xxii. years and odd days. fo. cc.xx. Edward the.v. of that name and
son of Edward the.iiii. of the age of.xiiii. years and less, began to reygne
as king of England the.x. day of Apryll and year of our lord.M.iiii.lxxxiii.
and the xxxv. year of the.xi. Lowys tha^ king of France / and reigned till
the.xx. day of July next following / in which season passed days.lxxii. folio.
cc.xxiiii. Elizabeth the holy woman daughter of the king of Hungery. fo. xxi.
Eleanoure queen and of her progenye / look in. fo. lxi. Emperor of Almayne
came into England. fo. c.lxvii Emperor foresaid came again into this land. fo.
c.lxxii Envy of Frenchmen. fo. v Enguerram was put to death. folio. lxxxiii.
Epytaphye of Rychard the first / as apereth in. fo. x Epytaphye of Frederyke
the emperor. fo. xxv Epytaphye of Edward the first / look in. fo. lxviii.
Epytaphye of Edward the.iii. folio. cxvi Epytaphye of king Richard the.ii.
look in. fo. clxvi Erthquake fell in England. fo. xxv Earl of Penbroke was
ouerset with Frenchmen and other. fo. cxiii Expresseme^t of the grudges atwene
king Rychard the first and the French king. fo. iiii Eugeny pope and of his
acts. folio. clxxxvii
FAlse Christ was crucyfyed / as is showed in. fo. xix False clerk of Oxenforde
which feigned him self mad, came to wodstocke ente^dyng to have slain king
Henry the.iii. fo. xxii Faytes or acts of war done at Do^stable. fo. xcvi
Fysshes wonderful taken in the.xxxv year of king Henry the.vi. fo. cci Floren^
of gold was made by king Edward the.iii. fo. xcvii Friars mynors came first
into England / look in. fo. xix Friars Augustynes in the.xxxv. year of king
Henry the.iii. builded their house, in a place in walys called wodhous as is
showed. fo. xxvi Friars were put to death look in. folio. clix French king sent
for his daughter that was king Rychardes wife. folio. clix French navy
dysco^fyted. fo. clxxiiii. Froste excedyng / look in. fo. clxviii
GAscoynes make war against Frenchmen borderers in king Charles the.v. days
as is showed in folio. lxxxvi Gabell or tax raised upon salt in France /
look in. fo. cxix Guynes castle was yolde^ to Englishmen / look in. fo. ci
Grudge between Baldwyn and his monks. fo. vii Grudge arose between king John^
and his lords. fo. xvi. Grudge and dyspleasure between ye bishop of
wynchester and the duke of Glouceter / it is showed in. folio. clxxxi Grudge
and murmr took place among the nobles of France / as appears. fo.
cc.xxviii
Harm done by thonder / as appears in. fo. cvii Haw^e without reverence of
the sacrament was slain in the church. folio. cxli Hastynges lord
Chamberleyne was suddenly put to death. fo. ccxxiiii Henry the third of that
name and sonn^ of king John^, a child of.x. years / began to reygne over
England, in the month of Octobre, and year of our lord.M.CC. and.xvii / and
the.xxxvii. year of Phylype tha^ king of France / and reigned years.lvi fo.
xviii Henry Bolyng broke ye.iiii. of ye name and son and heir of John^ of
Gaunt duke of Lancaster / the which John^ was second son of Edward the.iii.
living after their father, or the.iii. son to rekyn prince Edward / this
Henry after the deposicio^ of Rychard in the end of the month of Septe^bre,
began to reygne over England, in the year of our lord.M.iii.C.lxxx. and xix /
and the.xix. year of Charles ye.vii than king of France / and reigned
years.xiii. fo. clxiii Henry the.vi. of that name and sonn^ of Henry the.v. of
ye name and son of Henry the.iiii. began his reygne over the realm of
England, upon the morn after saint Cuthbertys day or ye.^xi. day of March,
in the end of ye year of grace.M.iiii.C. and.xiii / and ye.^xxii year of
Charles the.vii. than king of France / and reigned years.ix. fo.clxx Henry
the.v. and dame Kateryne daughter of Charles the.vi. or.vii. a child of half
year of age / began his reygne over England and France, in the end of the
month of July, and year of our lord.M.iiii.C. and.xxii / and ye first year of
Charles the.vii. or viii. ye tha^ne among the Frencheme^ was allowed for king
/ and reigned years.xxxix. folio. clxxix Henry of Derby with other landed at
Raue^spore / as is showed. fo. cli Henry the fyfte foresaid sailed into France
/ look in. fo. clxxii Henry Derby forenamed and of his issue is showed. fo.
cxliiii Henry the.iiii. aforesaid married the duchess of Brytayne. fo. clxvi
Heresye of John^ wyclyf apereth. folio. cxlvii Heretykes taken in saint Gyles
feld and after brent. fo. clxxi Homage done by lords of Almayne, to Richard
earl of Cornewayll brother to king Henry the third. folio xxxviii Homage done
by the king of Scotts to king.E. the.iii. fo. lxxxix Hughe holy bishop of
Lyncolne dyed. fo. xi
John^ brother to Richard the first was ordained king of England, in the
month of Apryll and year of our lord.M.C.xcix / and the.xx. year of the second
Phylyp than king of France / and reigned year.xvii. The interdiccion of this
land, began in the.vi. year of this king, and endured till the.xiii. year.
Henry the son of Alwyn, in the.x. year of this king was admytted for the
first mayre of London. And in the said.x. year of king John^, London bridge
was begone to be made of stone. fo. x John^ the first in France of that name
and son of Phylyp de Ualoys, began his reygne over the land of France, in
the month of August and year of our lord.M.iii.C. and.l / and the xxxiiii.
year of ye third Edward king of England / and reigned years. xiiii. This king
was taken prisoner of Edward, the prince of England at the battle of
Poytyers in France folio. cxxiii Iaphet was gotten by king Rychard. fo. v
Iakys de Artyuyle favored the English party. fo. xciii Jack Straw and
will waw made an insurreccyon. fo. cxlii Jack Sharp was taken and putt to
death. folio. clxxxv Jack Cade and his fellows. folio. cxcvi Jack Cade
wroughte much of his will in London / and after robbed and so slain. fo.
cxcvii Jews were banysshed this land. folio. lx Jews were spoiled and
slain. fo. clv. John^ brother of king Rychard was proud. fo. iii John^
reconcyled to his brother apereth in. fo. viii John^ duke of Lancaster dyed /
as is showed. fo. c.l. John^ duke of Bedforde dyed. folio. clxxxviii
Inquysycyons were made upon the rulers of London / as is showed in. folio. xxix
Jordan of the i will of Gascoyne grew out of kind. fo. lxxxv Inglysshe lords
wanne first upon Frenchmen. fo. xcviii Inglysshe soudyours slain under safe
conduyt. fo. cxxii Itenerarii plees were holden in South work. fo. xxxi I Will of
Ely holds banysshed men. folio. xlii I Will of Rodes first won. fo. lxxv
Isabell late wife unto king Richard / was married to the eldest son^ of the
duke of Orleaunce. fo. clx Issue and dyssent of sir Roger Mortymer. fo. cxliiii
Justices or iuges punysshed. fo. lx Iustes holden in Smythfelde. folio. cxliiii
King John^ and his land was enterdyted. fo. x King John^ was reconcyled to
the church. fo. xvi King Henry the.iii. sailed into Normandy. fo. xxiiii King
Henry the.iii. in proper person sat in judgment. fo. xxix King Iohn^s fury
search in. fo xiiii King John^ of France was taken prisoner. folio ciii King
John^ was delivered. fo. cvii King John^ dyed in England. folio cviii King
Rychard sought many prouysyons. folio iiii King Richard sailed into ye holy
land. folio iiii King Rychard was taken prisoner. folio vi King Rychard was
delivered. folio. vii Hynge Richard sailed into Normandy. folio ix King
Richard assailed the castle of Gysors. folio x King Richard was slain. fo.
x King Henry the third frayneth cou^sayll of the mayre. folio. xxxiiii King
Henry sailed into France to be present at the French kings parlyament.
folio. xxxv King Henry was taken of his barons. folio xxxvii King Henry laid
his syege to London as it is showed. folio xliii King Henry chosed shyrefes.
folio xliii King Lowys took upon him the cross. folio xlviii King Edward
the first build castelles in walys. folio lviii King Edward sailed into
France. folio lix King Edward the.ii. was taken / and also resygned the
crown. fo. lxxxii King Edward the.iii. came secretly to London. folio xcvi
King Edward warred sharply in France. folio xcvii King Edward chased the
Spanyardes from the sea. fo. ci King Edward yode into Scotland. fo. cii
King of Scotts was delivered. folio ciiii King Edward spedde him toward
Paris. fo. cv King of Nauerne was suddenly taken / as it is showed. fo. cxxiii
King of Nauerne was set at large. folio cxxvii King Edward warred newly in
France. fo. cxxxv King Johan was received into France. fo. cxxxv King of
Nauerne became feodory unto the French king. fo. cxxxvi King of Ermonye asked
aid of king Richard the.ii. fo. cxliii King Rychard aided the Ianuayes folio
cxlv King Rychard married the French kings daughter. fo. cxlvii King Richard
sailed into Irelande. folio cli King Richard was myserably put to death. fo.
clxv King Henry the.iiii. married the duchess of Brytayne. fo. clx King Henry
the.v. sailed into Normandy. fo. clxxiii King Henry married the French kings
daughter. fo. clxxv King Henry was received into London. fo. clxxvi King Henry
and his wife sat crowned in Paris. fo. clxxvii King Henry the.vi. showed his
virtue behold. fo. clxxix King Henry was dubbed knight. folio clxxxii King
Henry was crowned. fo. clxxxiii King Henry was crowned at Paris. fo. clxxxv
King of Scotts was murdered. folio cxc King Henry the.vi. was taken. fo. ccv
King Edward the.iiii. was received into London. fo. ccvii King Edward aided
the duke of Burgoyne. fo. ccxiii King Edward spoused dame Elizabeth Graye. fo.
ccxvi King Edward fled this land. folio ccxviii King Henry was taken out
of the tower. fo. ccxviii King Edward was proclaimed usurper. fo. ccxix King
Edward landed at Rauynspore. fo. ccxix King Edward repossessed / as apereth.
folio. ccxx King Henry the.vi. dyed in the tower of London. fo. ccxx King
Edwardes children were taken out of seyntwary. fo. ccxxiiii
LAzars of Languedok were brent. fo. lxxxiiii Letter sent by the barons to
king Henry. fo. xxxvii Lewelyn prince of walys rebelled. folio lvi Lewelyn was
slain / as appears. folio lvii Letter takked upon the cross in chepe folio.
lxxxi Lords assemble at Arundell / as apereth. folio cxlix Lords put to death.
fo. clxxii Lords fled from Lodlowe feelde. folio. cciii Lords proclaimed
traitors / as is showed. folio cciiii Lords came to London. fo. cciiii Lords
of France war upon their king. fo. ccx Lords continue their malice / as is
showed. fo. ccxi Lords dyscorde within them self. folio ccxii Lord Morley
appeled the earl of Salysbury / as it is showed in. folio. clxv Lord Strange
/ and sir Iohanne Trussell fight in the church for cause showed in. folio
clxxiiii Lord Talbot was slain / as appears. fo. cc Lord Egremonde was
committed to Newgate / as is showed. fo. ccii Lord wellys conspyred again the
king. folio ccxviii Lord chamberlayne beheded / as is showed. fo. ccxx Loss
of Normandy / as is showed. folio cxcviii Lowys son unto the French king
warred in England. fo. xvii Lowys returned into France / as appears. fo.
xviii Lowys sailed into the holy land. folio xxv Lowys gave sentence again
the barons. fo. xxxvi Lowys the.ix. of that name and son^ of Phylyp the
second, began his reygne over the Frenchemen, in the year of our
lord.M.CC. and.xxiii / and the.vi. year of the third king Henry than king of
England / and reigned years.iii. By this king returned the blood of Charles
into ye possessyon of the crown of France. folio xlvi Lowys the.x. of that
name a child of.xii. years, and son of the abouenamed the.ix. Lowys which
is named saint Lowys / began his reygne over France, in the year of our lord
M.CC. and.xxvi / and the.ix. year of the iii. Henry than king of England / and
reigned years.xliii / as appears folio. xlvii Lowys the.xi. by account and
son of Phylyp the.iiii, began to reygn over France, in the year of our
lord M.CCC. and.xv / and the.viii. year of the second Edward than king of
England, and reigned years.ii. folio lxxxiii Lowys the.xii. of ye name afte
the account of this book, and.x. after the french account, whereof ye cause is
before showed, son^ of the last Charles / began to rule ye Frenchmen, in ye
year of our lord M.iiii.C. and.lviii / and.xxxvi. year of Henry the.vi. tha^
king of England, and reigned years.xxvi. fo. ccix Lowys refused lords company
and counsayll. fo. ccix Lowys rescueth Paris. fo. ccx Loss of towns and
castelles in Normandy. folio cxxxvii
MAruayles seen in the fyrmament. folio xii Mayre of London presenment / look
in. folio xxvii Mayr and his brethren found gylty in hurtyng the commons. fo.
xxix Mayre and cytezeyns agreed to the lords. fo. xxxi Macys of silver were
first granted to officers of London. fo. xci Men of Norwyche enraged. fo. xlv
Manhood of Matthew de Roya. foli. liiii Marchaunte strangers encroched upon the
cytezyns of London and were punysshed. fo. lix Maddocke a walshman rebelled /
as it is showed. fo. lxi Marriage of the.ii. Edward. fo. lxxiiii Malice sprange
among the lords of Flaunders. fo. lxxxv marvelous heyle fylle. fo. lx
Mychaell Tony mayre of London adiuged / look in. fo. lvi mortmayne was first
enacted. fo. lvi Mortymer was howgely auaunced. folio lxxxvii Mortymer was put
to death / as it is showed. fo. lxxxviii money borrowed of the city of London.
folio xcii Martyn Pysdo Parycyen / was put to cruel death. fo. cxxxv manner of
cysme in the church of Rome / look in. fo. cxxxviii Manner of the metyng of the
kings of England and of France. fo. cxlvii many knights of the bathe made.
folio clxiii Maruayles of Thamys. fo. clxx masses ordained by king Henry the
fyfte / as it is showed in. folio. clxxviii Manner of treaty between the lands
of England and of France / look in folio clxxxviii marriage was dyspoynted.
fo. cxcii Marriage concluded. fo. cxciii manhood of chalons. fo. cxcv Maximilian
and the French king dyscorden. fo. ccxxviii Margaret sister unto Edward the
iiii. departed from London toward the sea. fo. ccxvii monycyon dyuyne was
given to the French king. fo. clviii Mountague a noble man was slain folio
clx mummyng made for treason / as is showed. fo. clxv Murder was punysshed. fo.
clxvii
NOumbre of wards in ye city of London. fo. ii Names of twelfe perys of
England. folio xxx New toll was brought up. fo. xliiii Nycholas Brembre with
other was put to death. fo. cxliiii Nauye of Frenchemen dystressed / as is
showed. fo. lv New coin of silver was stryken. folio. lvii New dyspleasure
king Richard took again ye city of London. fo. cl New coin of gold
smitten / as appears in. fo. clxx
OCtoboon the popes legate was pursued of the clergy of England for causes
showed in. fo. xxii Occasyon of the fraye in Fletestrete. folio. cxlv Occasyon
of dyspleasure between king Richard and the duke of Glouceter. fo. cxlix Of
the chere and curious receyuyng of king Henry by the Fre^nche king. folio xxxii
Officers charged and dyscharged / as it is showed. folio. xxxiii Of king Iohn^s
pledges. fo. cviii Order of seruytoures in the time of queen Katherins
coronacio^. fo. clxxvi Orleaunce that city was besyeged folio. clxxxii Oaths
sworn by the kings of England and of France for peace kefolio. cvii Olyuer
Da^man and Danyell sometime chyef counsayllours of Lowys the French king were
hanged / as appears. fo. ccxxviii
PReface of this work / as apereth. fo. I Peace was taken between the kings
of England and of France. folio xi Phylyp king of France warred upon king
John^. fo. xi Phylyp brake the peace. fo. xii Pope Innocente sent unto king
John^. fo. xiii Parlyamente holden at London. folio. xix Pyers of Pountfret for
his virtue put to death. fo. xvii Parlyament holden at Mertone. folio xxii
Periurye was punysshed / as appears. fo. xxv Parlyament holden at Oxenforde.
as apereth. fo. xxx Parlyament holden at westmynster. folio xxxi Parlyament
holden at Oxenforde. as is showed. fo. xxxvi Parlyament holden at westmynster.
folio xxxviii Parlyament holden at westmynster. folio xlv Peace was made
between the king and Gylbert de Clare / as is showed. folio xliii.
Punysshement of Londoners / as is showed. fo. xl Phylyp the third of that name
and son of saint Lowys, was made king of France, in the year of our
lord.M.CC.lxx / and the.liii. year of the third Henry than king of England
/ and reigned years.xv. fo. li Phylyp the.iiii. of that name and son^ of
the.iii. Phylyp la beawe or fair / began to reygne over France, in ye year of
our lord a.M.CC.lxxxvi / and the.xiiii. year of the first Edward than king
of England / and reigned years.xxxix. fo. lxviii Phylyp the.v. of that name and
surnamed the long, son of the fourth Philyppe and brother to Lowys the xi.
by account / began his reygne over France, in the year of grace a.M.iii C.
and.xvii / and the.x. year of Edward the.ii. than king of England / and
reigned years.v. fo. lxxxiii Phylyppe de Ualoys, earl of Ualoys, and the son
of Charlys de Ualoys brother to the fourth Philippe / was not without some
strife chosen and ordained for protectoure of the land of France, and after
king of the same, the.ii. day of February, in the year of our lord.M.iii.C.
and.xxviii / and the.ii. year of Edward the.iii. than king of England / and
reigned in great trouble years.xxii. fo. cxvi Phylyppes acts in Italye / as
appears. folio. liiii Parlyament holden at westmynster. folio lvi Plees
removed from London / as is showed. fo. lvi Punysshement for murdre / as
appears. folio. lviii Parlyament holden at westmynster folio. lix Parlyament
holden at London / as apereth. folio lxxv Peace concluded between France and
Flaundres. fo. lxxiii Parlyament holden at London / as apereth. fo. lxxxviii
Parlyament holden at westmynster as is showed in. fo. xci Parlyament holden at
Northampto^ as is showed. folio xli Parlyament holde^ at york. fo. lxxix
Parlyament holden at Northampton / as appears in. fo. lxxxvii Parlyament
holden at Salysbury / as appears in. folio lxxxvii Parlyament holden at Burye
/ as is showed. folio. cxciiii Parlyament holden at Couentre behold in. folio
cciiii Parlyament holden at Leyceter / as is showed. folio clxxi Parlyament
holden at Leyceter called Battys / as is showed. fo. clxxxii Paulys steple
set on fire. fo. cxciii Pagentes and other ordenaunces made by Lo^doners for
the receyuyng of the king. fo. clxxxv Paris was lost by treason / as it is
showed. fo. clxii Peace concluded between the regent and the king of Nauerne.
fo. cxxxv Peter king of Castyle was beheded / as is showed in. fo. cxi Peryn
was drawn out of the church / and hanged / as is showed. fo. cxxix Plees put
in exercise for the country of Arthoys. folio cxvii Plees removed from London
to york / as is showed in. fo. cxlvi Pride of the French king / as it is
showed in. fo. lxxiii Prince Edward married the earl of Henawdes daughter. fo.
lxxxi
Queen hythe was first let to ferme to the cytesyns of London / as appears.
fo. xxvi Quest passed between the abbot of westmynster and the city of London
as is showed in. fo. xxxv Queen of England sailed into France for cause. fo.
lxxxi Queen of England was proclaimed enemy. fo. lxxxi Queen foresaid landed
in England by strength. fo. lxxxi Queen Anne was special good lady to the
city of London. fo. cxlvi Queen Anne dyed. fo. cxlvii Queen Margarete was
received of the Londoners. fo. cxciii Queen Margarete made a voyage into
England. fo. ccxv Queen Margaret was taken / as is showed in. fo. ccxx
Richard the first of that name and son of Henry the second, began to reygne
in England, in the year of our lord.M.C.xci / and the.xi. year of the second
Phylyp / and reigned years with odd months.x. In the first year of this
king the city of London was committed to the rule of two baylyfes / which so
co^tynued till the.x. year of king John^, as it is showed in. fo. iii Richard
the.ii. of that name, and sonn^ of prince Edward sonn^ of Edward the.iii /
began his reygne over England, the.xii. day of Iuny, in ye year of our
lord.M.iii.C.lxxvii / and the.xiii year of the.v. Charles than king of France
/ and reigned years.xxii. folio cxlii Richard the.iii. of that name and
brother unto Edward the.iiii. being duke of Glouceter and protector of
England, began to usurp the.xxvi. day of Iuny / in the year of our lord
M.iiii.C.lxxxiii. and year of Lowis tha^ king of France / and so continued
years.ii. full / and as much as from the xx. day of Iuny to the.xxii. day of
August / by days.lvii. fo. ccxxv Ranulphe earl of Chester and of his
daughters. fo. xxi Rain excedyng. fo. lxxvii Resygnacyon of the duchye of
Normandy. folio xxxii Resygnacyon of king Richard. folio clii Resygnacyon
showed in the parlyament. folio cliii Robert Knollys knight and of his feats.
folio ciiii Robert Knollys took saint Omiers / and other holds. fo. cxi
SAuoye a place of honor in London was brent by the commons. folio. cxlii
Saint mary Oueryes in Southwerke was first bylded. fo. xv Saint Stephyns
chapel of westmynster begone. fo. cix Syege laid to saint Omyers folio
xciiii Syege laid to Amya^s. fo cxxxiiii Scottysshe king did homage to king
John^. fo. xi Scotts brekyng their oath. fo. lxiii Scotts were subdued. fo.
lxiii Scotts had peace to their advantage. fo. lxxxvii Scotts were again
ouerturned. folio lxxxviii Scotisshe king taken prisoner. folio cii Spensers
were banysshed. fo. lxxviii Spensers both the father and the some were put to
death. fo. lxxxii Son was turned to the color of blood. folio lxxx
TAnner a vyllayne surmysed him heir to the crown of England. fo. lxxvi
Table of silver was given to king Rychard. fo. cxlvii Templers knights of
religyo^ were dystroyed. fo. lxx^ii The sentence again king Johan was
denounced. fo. xiii The wardys of London were cessed folio xcii Three fyftenes
were granted at one time. folio cxi Title or right which the king of
England has unto Scotla^de / se in folio lxii Title of Edward the third
which he had to the crown of France. folio cxvi Title of the duke of
Glouceter had to the crown was showed at Paul's cross. fo. ccxxiiii
Wards and churches within London. fo. ii Uaryaunce began between the pope and
king John^. fo. xii Uaryaunce between London and North ampton fo. xxxiii war
between the king of England and of France. fo. xiii war was concluded
between the said lands. fo. cxxxiiii war between king John^ and his lords.
fo. xvii war was made in Normandy / as appears. fo. lxii war made in Guyan
with fortune thereof. fo. lxxx war between the French king and the king of
Nauerne. fo. cxxiii ward and marriage of heirs was granted to the king. fo.
xx wyllyam walworthe slew Jack Straw. folio cxlii Usurers were punysshed /
as it appears. folio cxxi
Here ends the second Table.
THE PROLOGE.
NOw for as much as we be comen to the time, that officers were chosen and
chargyd with the rule of the city of London / yt is necessary that here we do
show what officers they were, and of the name that to them was admitted ad
given. Then ye shall understand that at the coming of wyllyam co^querour into
this land, as euydently apperyth by the charter of him to the cytezens of
London granted / that before those days and then, the rulers of the said
cytezens were named Port greuys / which word is diriuate or made of.ii. saxon
words, as port and grieve. Port is to mean a town, and grieve is meant for a
gardyen or ruler / as who would mean, gardeyn, ruler, or keeper of the town.
These of old time, with the laws and customys then vsyd within this city /
were regystred in a book called the Domysday in Saxon tunge then used. But in
later days when the said laws and customs alteryd and changed, and for
consyderacyon also that the said book was of small hand and sore defacyd, yt
was the less set by, so that yt was enbefelyd or lost / so that the
remembrance of such rulers as were before the days of this Richard the
first, whose story shall next ensue, are lost and forgoten.

wherefore now I shall begin at the first year of the said first Richard,
the which of some writers is surnamed Cure de Lion / and so contynew the names
of all officers, as well baylyuys, mayres, and shryues, till the last years of
Richard the third king in deed and not of right. which baylyues I shall
appoint the rule of, from Mychelmas to Mychelmas / and the mayres from such
time and season as now is accustomyd and used, that is to say from the day
of Simon and Jude unto the same feste next ensuynge / upon which day the
new mayre takes his charge at the Guylde hall, and the old mayre is there
and then dyscharged of the said office of mayraltye.

Now would I feign
In words plain
Some honor said
And bring to mind
Of that ancient city
That so goodly is to se
And full true ever has be
And also full kind.
To prince and king
That has borne just rulynge
Syn the first winning
Of this Island by Brute
So that in great honor
By passing of many a shower
It has ever borne the flower
And laudable brute.
Of every city and town
To seche the world rowne
Never yet cast down
As other many have be
As Rome and Carthage
Jerusalem the sage
with many other of age
In storye as ye may se
This so oldely founded
Is so surely groundyd
That no man may confound yt
It is so sure a stone
That yt is upon set
For though some have yt thrette
with manasses grym and great
yet hurt had yt none
Christ is the very stone
That the city is set upon
which from all his foon
Has ever preseruyd yt
By mean of dyuyne service
That in contynuall wise
Is kept in devout guyse
within the mure of yt
As houses of relygyon
In diverse places of this town
which in great devotion
Ben ever occupied
when one has done another begin
So that of prayer they never blyn
Such order is these houses within
with all virtue allied.
The paryshe chyrches to reken
Of which number as I shall speken
wherein speak many priest and deken
And Christ daily they serve
By mean of which sacryfyce
I trust that he in all wise
This city for her service
Does ever more preserve.
This city I mean is Troynouau^t
where honor and worship does hau^te
with virtue and riches accordau^te
No city to yt like
To speak of every commodytye
Flesh and fyshe and all dentye
Cloth and sylke with wine plentye
That is for hole and syke.
Bread and ale with spycys fine
with houses fair to soupe and dyne
Nothing lackynke that is co^dygne
For man that is on molde
with ryuers fresh and holsom air
with women that be good and fair
And to this city done repair
Of strangers many fold.
The vytayle that herein is spente
In three housholdes daily tente
Between Rome and rich Kent
Are none may them compare
As of the mayre and shriues twain
what might I of the justice said
Kept within this city plain
It were long to declare.
For though I should all day tell
Or that with my ryme dogerell
Might I not yet half do spell
This towns great honor
Therefore shortly as I began
Pray for yt both child and man
That yt may continue and
To bear of all the flower
And so to dwell in rest and peace
Good lord grant that yt not sease
But ever to have more encreace
If yt be thy will
And to continue the old fame
The kings chau^ber yt ye right name
London to keep without blame
As yt has hither till.
who so him lyketh these vsys to read
with favor I pray he will the^ spell.
Let not the rudeness of them him led,
For to despraue this ryme dogerell.
Some perte of ye honor it does you tell
Of this old city Troynouaunt.
But not thereof the half dell /
Co^nynge in the maker is so adaunt
But though he had the eloquence
Of Tully, and the moralytye
Of Seneck, and the influence
Of the swyte sugared Armonye,
Of that fair lady Caliope:
yet had he not co^nynge perfyght,
This city to praise in each degree /
As yt should duly ask of right.
HEre after I shall declare the wards of this foresaid city / with also ye
parysh chyrches yt stand within the said wards. And after I shall show to you
ye housys of religyo^ standing in the cyrcuyte of the same city.

The ward of the tower wherein are three paryshe chyrches..i.
Saint Olaue Alhalown at Barkynge. Saint Dunstane.
Byllyngysgate..ii.
Saint Botulphe Saint George in podynge lane Saint Andrewe in Estchepe Saint
Margarete called Patens. Saint Mary hill.
Land bridge ward..iii.
Saint Benet at Grace church Saint Leonarde in Estchepe Saint Margarete in
Brydgstret Saint Magne in Brydgestrete.
Dowgate ward.iiii.
Saint Laurence Pountenay Alhalown the more Alhalown the less.
walbroke ward..v.
Saint John^ in walbroke Saint Mary Bothawe Saint Swythyne in Candelwyke
street. Saint Stephan in walbroke Saint Mary wolchyrch in ye pultry Saint Sith
in Boclerysbury.
Candelwyke street ward.vi.
Saint Martyne Orgor Saint Clement Saint Mychaell in Crockyd lane Saint Mary
Apchyrche.
Langbourne ward.vii.
Alhalown Stanis in Lumbarstrete Saint Gabryell Saint Denis in Fanchyrche
street Saint Edmund Saint Nycolas Acon Saint Mary wolnoth in Lumbarde street.
Algate ward..viii.
Saint Andrewe undershaft Saint Kateryns by Crystes church Saint Kateryne
Colman.
Port Sowkyn ward..ix.
Saint Botulphe without Algate.
Lyme street ward..x.
Saint Mary Naxe.
Bishops gate ward..xi.
Saint Botholphe at the gate Saint Alborgth. Alhalowns within saint Helyns.
Cornehyll ward.xii.
Saint Mychaell Saint Petyr
Bradstrete ward..xiii.
Saint Martyne Owtewyche Saint Benet Fynke Saint Barthelmew the little Saint
Crystofer. Saint Petyr the poor Alhalowns in the wall.
Colmanstrete ward.xiiii.
Saint Stephan. Saint Olaff in the Jury. Saint Margaret in Lothbery.
Chepe ward..xv.
Saint Laurence in the Jury Saint Mary Bow Alhalowns in Honey lane Saint Mary
of Colchyrche Saint Myldredys in the Pultry Saint Benet shorhogge Saint
Martyne Ponyers Saint Martyn in Iremongerlane Saint Mary.
Cordwayner street ward.xvi.
Saint Mary or Aldermary Saint Ancelyne Saint Pancras.
Queen hyth ward.xvii.
Saint Mychaell. Saint Mary somerset Saint Mary Mouthawe Saint Nycholas Olaffe
Saint Nycholas cold abbey Saint Petyr.
Bredstrete ward.xviii.
Alhalows in Bred street. Saint Myldrede Saint Mathye Saint John^ euangelyst
Saint Augustyne at Poules gate Saint Margarete moses Saint Botolphe. Saint
Margarete in Friday street.
Uyntry ward.xix.
Saint Martyne Saint Mychell colege Saint Thomas apostle Saint Iamys Garlyke
hyth Trynyte in knyghtryder street.
Baynarde castle ward..xx.
Saint Andrew Saint Benet Saint George Saint Mary Magdaleyne in old Fyshe
street.
Faryngedon ward with in.xxi.
Saint yeuan Saint Nicholas in ye Fleshesha^blis Saint Faythys in Powlys
church Saint Martyne within Ludgate Taynt Mychaell at Querne Saint Fauster in
fauster lane Saint Petyr at the cross of Chepe Saint Gregory in Ponlys
chyrchyarde. Saint Genyn within saint Martyne the grant.
Faryngdon ward without.xxii.
Saint Dunston Saint Bryde Saint Andrew in Holborne Saint Sepulcre without
Newgate
Aldrysgate ward.xxiii.
Saint Botolphe without the gate Saint Anne Saint John^ zachary Saint Leonarde
in Fauster lane Saint Mary stanynge Saint Matthew in silver street.
Bassynges have ward.xxiiii.
Saint Mychaell there.
Crepelgate ward xxv.
Saint Mary magdaleyn in milk street. Saint Mary in Aldermanbury Saint
Mychaell in Hogynlane Saint Albons in woodstrete Saint Alphy by Crepulgate
Saint Olaff in Silver street Saint Gylys without the gate.
The sum of the paryshe chyrches within London.C.xiii.

HEre after ensue the howsys of relygyon, monasteryes, colleges, chapellys, and
other being no paryshe chyrches within the city.

The cathedral church of saint Poule in the end of Chepe. The pryory of
saint Barthelmewe in Smythfelde. The hospytall or spytyll a cell of the said
pryory. The charter house standing within the ward of Crepulgate. Elsynge
spytall within the said ward. The chapel of our Lady of Bedlem in Bishops
gate ward. The house of saint Elyne in ye same ward of nunnys, The pryory of
Crystes church with in Algate. Saint Anne abbaye within Portsokyn ward of
white munkys. The house of ye Meneressys of close nunnys within the same ward.
The chapel of our lady of Barkyng in the tower ward. An house of crossed
frerys in the same ward. A colege of saint Antony in ye ward of Bredstrete. A
colege of saint Thomas called Acrys standing in Chepe. An house of friar
Augustynes in Broad street ward. An house of gray frerys standing in the ward
Faryngedon within. An house of black freres standing by Ludgate within ye
foresaid ward An house of white freres standing in Fleet street. A church or
college called the Temple standing at Temple bar. A chapel standing in
pardon church yard within Poulys. A chapel standing in ye chirch yard at
Poulys over the charnell house. A chapel standing within Crepell gate saint
Iamys in the wall. A chapel called Pappey sta^dyng beside Bishops gate
founded by the prestes of that fraternity. A chapel of corpus Cristi in ye
Pultry. A chapel of saint Thomas of Canterbury sta^dyng upon Lo^donbridge. A
chapel standing in yield Hall yard of our Lady. A colege of prestes
standing by Poulys called saint Martyne le graunde.
The sum of housys of relygyon, chapellys, and other.xxvii.

westmynster.
The abbbaye of westmynster The kings new chapel Saint Stephans chapel
Saint Margaretes church. A chapel at Totehyll A chapel of saint Anne in
Totehyll street. Saint Iamys in the field. A chapel at Rauncyuale. A paryshe
church thereby of saint Martyne. A chapel of our lady of Pewe.
Chyrches, monasteryes, chapellys and other housys wherein god is daily served /
standing in the cyrcuyte of the city without the wallys and first.

without Algate.
A paryshe church of our lady standing without the barrys called white
chapel. A colege of saint Katheryne standing on the eest end of the tower
of London. A paryshe church or chapel within the said tower, of saint Peter.
Southwarke.
The monastery of Bermundsey A paryshe church of Mary Magdaleyne standing
fast by. A paryshe church of saint George. A paryshe church of saint Magaret-
An hospital or college of saint Thomas. A paryshe church of saint Olas. A
monastery of chano^s called saint. Mary Ouereys / and with a paryshe church of
saint Mary Magdaleyn standing fast thereby.
without the Temple bar.
A paryshe church of saint Clement. A chapel of saint Spyryte. Saint Ursula
at strande.
without Smythfelde.
The pryorye of saint John^ in Jerusalem. A house of nu^nys named Clerke^wel
A a chapel in pardon church yard
without Bishops gate.
Shordyche paryshe church. Saint Mary spytell. A house of nunnys called
Halywell.
And of the dyuyne houses without the city.xxviii.

The sum of all the dyuyne houses within the city and without is a hundred
and.lxviii.

Richard the first of that name, and second son of Henry the second /
began his reygne over England in the month of July, and year of our lord.x.
hundred.lxxx. and.x / and the.xi. year of the second Phylyppe then king of
France.

This Richard provided besely to set good rule in Normandy, when he had
hard of his fathers death, and after spedde him into England / where he was
ioyously received / and in the month of September following and third day,
he was crowned at westmynster of Baldwyn archbyshoppe of Caunterburye. Upon
the which day the Iewys of England, and specially such as dwelled within
London and nere about / assembled of them a certain number, and presumyd
farther then required for their authoryte. For which presumpcyon they were
first rebuked, and after one of the^ stryke^. which thing seen of the common
people, supposyd that to be done by the kings commandment. wherefore in a
fury as those that they hated as the devil for their usury and other unhappy
condycyons, they fell upon them, and chased them to their houses, and them
robbed and spoiled without pytye, and brent some of their housis / where of the
rumor ran to westmynster to ye kings audye^ce. wherefore in all haste he
sent down / gyuyng strayte commandment that they should cease of that riot.
But the people were in such ire and wodenesse, that they refrayned not for all
the kings sonde, till they had executed the fine of their malice. And all be
yt that this riot was after grievously showed again the commons of the city /
yet yt passed unpunished, for the great number of the transgressors.

And the said day of coronacyon / all prisoners that lay in any prison about
London at the kings suit, or for other small or feigned accyons, were freely
delyueryd.

Soon after the king gave many dygnytyes / and to his brother John^ he gave
the prouynces of Notyngham, Deuonshyre, and Cornwall / and created him earl of
Lancaster. And then the king ordained the city of London to be ruled by two
baylyues whose names were as follows.

Anno domini.M.C.xc. Anno domini.M.C.xci. Henry of Cornehyll Balliui Anno
primo. Richard fyz River.
IT was not long after that ye the king had thus exalted his brother John^
as before is shewwyd / but that he also preferryd him to the marriage of the
earl of Glouceters daughter / by reason whereof he was lord of that erledome.
These great auau^cementis made him after unkind to his brother / and by pride
thereof to coueyt afterward the hole kingdom.

This year king Richard was assoyled of the offense that he had vsyd in
rebellyon again his father. In recompe^sacyon whereof as testyfyeth the author
Guydo / he voluntaryly took upon him and promised to war upon Crystes
enymyes. All be yt that other writers show, that yt was for that that his
father had so wylled him by his life. But for what cause, so yt was,
preparacyon and prouysyon for that journey was made from that day forthwarde.

This year also the king enlarged Elyanoure his mother / which long before at
the commandment of his father her husband, was as a prisoner kept in
secret keeping. After which enlargyng, ye land was much guydyd by her
counsayll. And this year, as says Ranulfe / king Richard gave over the
castellis of Barwyke and Rochysburghe to ye Scottyshe king, for the sum of.x.
thousand pound, for the exployte of his voyage. And farther more he sold to
the old bishop of Durham his own prouynce for a great sum of money, and
created him earl of the same. wherefore the king said after in game, I am a
wonders crafty man / for I have made a new earl of an old bishop. By such
means the king emptyed many bishops and rich prestys bags and filled his
cofers. And over that he granted out annuytyes and fees out of the crown,
as though he roughte nothing of his retournynge. For this deed some of his
famylyers as they durst blamed him. But he said to the^ yt in time of need,
it was good polycy for a man to aid him with his own. And more over he joined
there to, that if London were his / at that time of need he would sell yt, if he
might get a conuenyent merchant that for yt were able to pay.

An other way he had also to gather money / for he had license of pope
Innocent the third of that name, to dyspence with such as him lyked within his
realm for taking upon them the cross.

Anno domini.M.C.xci. Anno domini.M.C.xcii. John^ Herlyon. Balliui Anno secundo
Roger duke.
IN the second year in the month of October / king Richard betoke the
guydynge of the land unto the bishop of Ely then chaunceller of England,
and sailed into Normandye / where setting the country under sad guydyng,
shortly after met with the French king Phylyp the second / the which jointly
yode to Turon, and there over passyd the shortness of winter. In which pass
time making either with other assurance for contynuaunce of so great a
journey / at the spring of ye year these two princes took their voyage toward
the holy land / that is to mean king Richard by ye see, and knnge Phylyppe
by the land / and appointed to mete again in the land of Scicilia or Scycyll.
In this mean time, in England the Jews in diverse places of ye realm, as
Lyncolne, Staunforde, and Lynne were robbed and spoiled / and at york, to the
number of four hundred and mo, cut their master veins and bled to death.

The two kings according to their appoynteme^t met in Scycyll / where grudge
began to kyndle between them for correccyon of their souldyours. Then the
French king departed again from king Richard / the which there made
certain ordynaunces for war, as a tower or castle of timber which he named
Mategryffons / and also provided for vytayll for both hosts.

In this time also the king of Cyprys had taken two ships of king
Richard, and denied the delyuery of them. wherefore the said Richard entryd
the land of Cypris making therein sharp war / and chasyd so the king from
city to city, that lastely he yielded him unto king Richard, upon condicyon
that he should not be thrown in bonds of iron / whereof king Richard in
keeping of his promise cast him in bonds of silver.

when king Richard had dwelled there upon two months, and had taken
his pleasure of that country, and taken amends at his own will for his
ships / then he departed from the said isle of Cypris, and sailed toward
Acon or Acris. In which course so keeping toward Acris / he encountered a
great ship of the Soudans of Sury, fraughte with great riches, and took yt /
and so came at length to ye city of Acris, where at that time lay before ye
said town the French king with his host / and had lost a little before two
thousand of his men, which were partyd from his host to have done an
enterprise upon the Turks / but they were laid for and dystressed.

Then as testyfyeth Peter Dysroy, king Richard was ioyously received of the
French king. After whose coming yt was not long that the said city was
given up by appoyntement as follows, and as affermeth the said Peter, and
also the cronycle of France. First that the Sarasyns should depart out of
the city / leuynge behind them horse, harneys, vytayll, and all other thing
belonging to war. Also they should cause to be restoryd all such prisoners
of cryste^ men as they had under their keeping, with other couenauntes which I
pass over. And thus was the city of Acris yelden into the christian men's
hands, in the month of Auguste, and the year of our lord.xi. hundred.lxxx.
and, xii. But when yt came to the partyng of the pray of the city / there
began malice to kyndle his bronde, which was not lightly after quenchyd.

Of this varyance between these two kings of England and of France diverse
manners are showed. For Polycronica says that yt began by reason that king
Richard denied unto king Phylyp half his wynnynges in Cypris, according to
the couenauntis between them assured at Turon. But king Rychard said that the
co^uencyon there made / stretched no forther then to such goods as was won
within the lymytes or bounds of the holy land. Another grudge was, by reason
that the French king aided not ye earl of Champeyne being in dystresse of
need. wherefore the said earl being discontent said to the French king. Sir
hitherto I have done according to my duty / but hereafter I shall do as I am
compellyd be need. For your grace has hitherto cherysshed me but for mine / but
now I shall go to him yt is more ready to give the^ to take / and so departed to
king Richard, of the which he had all his pleasure. The third cause was as
says Ranulph, for as much as king Richard at his beginning in Scycyll married
the sister of the king of Nauerne / where before he had promised to mary the
sister of the said king Phylyppe. But of these artycles speaks nothing the
french cronycle / all be it he lays great defaute unto king Richard /
saying in sedycyous and vile wordys, that king Richard falsely brake his
appoyntmentes, and kept no promise that by him was made. Moreover the said
cronycle says that he sold the i will of Cyprys unto the Templers for.xxx.
thousand mark / and after took it again from them by strength, and delivered
it unto Guy de Lesygnan that was the last crystened king of Jerusalem. And
over this the said french cronycle says, that he took from a knight of the
duke of Ostrych the said dukes banner / and in despyte of the said duke trade
it underfoot, and did unto it all the despyte he might. And over all this,
where as Conradus Marks of Tire was traytorously slain by two of his own
servants / that king Richard should lay the charge thereof unto the french
king.

For these grudges and sykenesse, with also fere of treason to be wrought
between Saladyne the Souda^, and king Richard as affermeth or allegeth the
foresaid authoure / king Phylyppe with a small company of ships departed
from Aco^ or Acris, and sailed to Puyll or Poyll / and there resting him a
season, co^tynued his journey unto Rome, and so lastely into his own prouynce
of France.

Anno domini.M.C.xcii. Anno domini.M.C.xciii. wyllyam Hauershall. Balliui
Anno.iii. John^ Buknot.
IN the third year and month of November, when the French king was thus
departed / king Rychard with the duke of Burgoyn whom the French king had
left behind him to have the rule of the French host lafte and remaynyng in
Acre and the country there about, called before him diverse persons or pledges
of Turks, for the perfourmaunce of certain appoyntementes taken with them at
ye winning or gyuynge up of the said city of Acris. whereof one especial
covenant was, that by a certain day than expyred, they should cause ye holy
cross to be restored unto the christian princes. The which for he saw well that
they would not or might not perform / he therefore put in execucyon of Turks
over the noumber of.v. thousand as testyfyeth the French cronycle. But that
agreed not all of the best with the former saying / co^syderynge the city was
delivered by appoyntement, there should not so many Turks remain there. But
Peter Dysroye says, that for brekynge of this appoyntement, king Richard put
to death all such Turks as were than within the city of Acris / which may
be meant by the hostages or pledges.

It was not long after that tidings were brought unto king Richard, that the
city of Jerusalem was without any great strength of Soldyours, and that it
might be won with easy labor. wherefore king Rychard assembled the lords to
have their cou^sayll / where it was concluded that every capyteyne should
prepare him to go thither. Upon which agreement, the christian host sped them
in such wise, yt they were within.v. miles of ye said city of Jerusalem /
where they took a new cou^sayll how they should order them and their people to
lay their syege about the city. In which cou^sayll it was concluded, yt king
Richard with his English men should have the vawewarde / and the duke of
Burgoyne the rere ward. After which conclusyon taken / the king spedde him
upon his way toward the city. But by what myshappe or mysfortune I can not
say / so soon as the king was departed, the duke called the lords of
France before him / and said, yt is euydent unto you, that all be yt our
hedde and sovereign lord is absent, the flower of the chyualry of France is
present. And if any thing be done to the honor of the Christian, and reproach of
infydels / yt is most lykely to be done by us, consyderyng yt insuffycyencye of
Englyshemen and other. yet nevertheless, what someuer honor grow by our
dedis to ye christian host / yt shall be accounted unto king Richard because of
his presence / so yt we shall have all the pain and trauayll, and Englyshemen
shall have the honor. wherefore if ye will do by my counsayll / we will return
unto Acrys, and there tarry till we se farther. Some agreed to this counsayll
and the more in number / and the other spedde them in all haste after king
Richard, and showed to him of the dukes return / whereof he being so
enfourmed returned also unto Acris.

It was not long after that the said duke was taken with grievous sykenesse and
dyed. And about that time also dyed Baldewyn archbysshoppe of Caunterburye /
which among other lords of England, accompanied the king in that journey.

Anno domini.M.C.xciii. Anno domini.M.C.xciiii. Nycholas Duke. Balliui Anno
quarto. Petyr Nowlay.
ABout the season of Mychelmasse, in ye.iiii. year of the reygne of this said
Richard / tidings were brought to him yt the town or castle of Iapheth was
besyeged of Sala^dyne / and lykely to be soon won, without the christian were
the sooner aided. wherefore king Richard, which Peter Dysroy calls the good
king Richard / sped him thither with his army by water, and sent a another
host of Fre^chemen and other by land. But so yt was or the christian might
win thither / y^ said town and castle were won / and the prisoners therein
taken, were sent by water toward such prysones as Salandyne had appointed
them unto. with the which of good fortune king Richard met, and them
rescowyd. And that done, with the Turks which them conveyed he put in sure
hold / and held on his journey to Iapheth / and there by strength rescuyd the
town and castle, and restoryd the christian to their former possessyon, and
left with them more strength of knights. And for to be the more feryd of the
myscreau^tes / king Richard caused his prisoners to him belonging to be
slain, where other sold them to their great auau^tage / by mean where of he
was had in wonderful fere of the Turks.

Then king Richard after this victory had at Iapheth / won.ii. strong
holds called Daron and Gadres, and strengthyd them with christian knights. And
with such goods as he there wa^ne of the Turks, he repaired the castle of
Ascalon and other, that greatly was impaired by the war of the Turks.

In this season and time ye king Richard was thus occupied in the holy land /
the bishop of Ely as before is said having the rule of England, did many
cruel dedys / and oppressyd the clergy and also the lay fee. He would commonly
ride with a thousand horse / and grieved abbeys by mean of his gestys or
lodging with them. Also he held in his hands the sea of york for long
season. And after ye death of Balwyne deed as before is showed in the holy land
/ he also took the sea of Caunterbury under his rule. Then he pryued Geffrey
that was chosen to the ^ee of york of his mouables / and cast him as prisoner
in ye tower of London. And soon after called a counsayll at westmynster as the
kings procuratour, and as legate of the pope then Innocent the.iii. At this
counsayll Hughe Nouaunt then bishop of Chester, and great famylyer of the
said bishop of Ely / put forth a complaynt again ye munkes of Couentre,
that they had shed the said Hughys blood before the high altar of their
church. For which cause the bishop of Ely demyd, that the said munkys
should be put from their said abbey, and clerks should be set there for the^
/ so that by might the munkes were put thens and dysperbled about in sundry
placis, and clerks with prebendys set in their stallys. For this deed says
Guydo and other, that this Hugh bishop of Chester had thus caused the
munkes of Couentre to lose their land and house / he took therefore so great
repentance, that upon his death bed he axed of god that for a due and
conuenyent penance, he might redeem that offense by the lyeng in the fire of
purgatory from ye day of his death unto the general day of dome.

Also the forenamed bishop of Ely called in proper name wyllyam de long
shampe / contynuynge his tyrannyes, pryuyd Hugh bishop of Durham of all manner
worship / and grieved the bishop of wynchester, and wretched nygh all the
land. But so fast as this innaturall or evil dysposyd man besyed him to vex
and grieve the christian men in England / so fast besyed this good king Richard
to vex and dear the infydels of Sury. So yt daily he wanne of them / or at
the least put them from the winning of such towns and holds, as they by
their great strength entendyd to have won.

Anno domini.M.C.xciiii. Anno domini.M.C.xcv. Roger Duke. Balliui Anno quinto
Richard fyz Aleyn.
IN the end of September and beginning of the fyfte year of king Richard /
Guy de Lesyngeman last christian king of Jerusalem dyed / and Choras a noble
Christian man captain of a town called Sur, was shortly after slain by the
Turks, whose wife for as much as she was ryghtfull enherytour of the crown of
Jerusalem / the king gave her in marriage unto ye earl of Champayne. And for
king Richard perceived well y^e christian host mynyshed daily, as well by
infyrmytyes as lack of vytayll and otherwise / he sought means of a peace or
trewce for a time, and had yt granted for three years. The which peace
stablyshed and proclaimed in the host and country nere about / king Richard
betoke the rule and guydyng of the Christian unto the earl of Champayne /
promising him or ye trewce were endyd to come with a stronger host, and with
gods might to set him in possessyon of the city of Jerusalem as the right
of his wife.

Then Hubert bishop of Salysbury yode forth him self from ye king to the holy
city / and offeryd there an host, and returned again to the king. After
whose return, ye king taking leave of the earl of Champayne and other / took
his shyppyng at Acrys or Acon, which is named Tholomayda also / and so
returned to the isle of Cypre or Cyprys.

Thens the king sent the queen his wife and her sister with ye more part of
his people unto Scycyll / and he with a small company for he might not endure
the softness of the sea, took his shyppynge in the month of September, and
sailed with a strong wind toward a country called Histria. But he was
driven by force of wederynge between Uenyse and Aquinilia or Aquilegia, and
houyd there a season, and costed hither and thither / so that lastely he was
espied and taken of the duke of Ostrychys men.

Anno domini.M.C.xcv. Anno domini.M.C.xcvi. wyllyam fyz Isabell. Balliui Anno
sexto. wyllyam fyz Arnolde.
ABout the month of October and.vi. year of his reygne / this good king
Richard was taken in form following. As he lay thus as before is said,
between Uenyce and Aquilegia a prouynce of the duke of Ostrych / one Meynart of
Gorezeyn ruler of that country under the foresaid duke, made out certain
souldyours for to have taken him. But he by his prouydence and manhood escapyd
ye said Maynarde or Maynart / how be yt that some of his knights were there
takyn. Then king Richard passed ye country secretly, till he came to a town
named Frysake. In this town was then prouoste or ruler a knight called
Frederyk de saint Soom / ye which also did his devour to take the king, and
took.vi. of his knights prisoners / but him self with the remenaunt of his
company escaped. Then the king seeing that he was in danger of his enymyes /
drew more into the way toward Almayn. But this was soon known of his
enymyes / so that by the means of one called Duke of Lymple and cosyn to the
emperor / all the ways were closyd in such wise, that in the end king
Richard was taken by the servants of the said duke, nere unto a city or
town called Men or Meune, within the land or terrytory of the emperor /
and after brought unto the said duke Lymple, or after some to the duke of
Ostriche / ye which spoiled him of all yt he had, and after cast him in
prison, and there streyghtely kept him by the space of a month / and at the
months end sent him unto Henry the.vi. of that name, or after some writers
the.v. son of the first Frederyke then emperor of Almayne / the which held
him in more vile prison from that time till lent after and couenauntyd with the
duke of Ostryche to have the third part of the profit that came of king
Richard. About the sunday of Palmys the emperor brought forth the king
before the lords of Almayne, there to give answer unto such things as should
be laid unto him. where he came forth with so good a countenance, and also
answered so dyscretely and dyrectely to all matters laid unto his charge / that
the emperor was not alonely bend to show to him mercy, but also he did to
him honor and worship / and held him at more liberty after that day.

It is read of this Richard, that during the time of his imprysonement he
should sle a lion, and tere the heart out of his body, where thorough he
should deserve the name of Richard Cure de Lion / and yt he should with a
stroke of his fyst sle the emperors son, and also deflorysh the emperors
daughter. But these are fablys ymagined by englysh tale tellers, to auaunce
their king Richard / as the Brytons by their feigned talys auaunced their
king Arture. In this passetyme wyllyam Longeshamp bishop of Ely, contynuynge
his crudelyte and tyranny within England / was lastely by strength of the
lords put out of the land. Then he came to the king being prisoner, and
showed for him self the best he could. But when he saw he might not begyle the
king with his sugryd words, he had small trust of the kings favor / and
returned into France, to tarry there the kings coming.

This year John^ the kings brother by excityng of the French king, when he
hard of the taking and imprisonynge of his brother / began to make war
within ye land / and took by strength ye castelles of wyndesour and of
Notyngham and other. And the french king upon his party made strong war in
Normandy, as it is before showed in the story of the second Phylyppe than king
of France.

Anno domini.M.Cxcvi. Anno domini.M.C.xcvii. Robert Besaunt. Balliui Anno.vii.
Iokell Iosne.
IN the.vii. year of king Richard / Hubert bishop of Salysbury, the which
had accompanied the king in that voyage, and was sent with the queen into
Scycyll, returned or came to the king where he was prisoner. whom the king
sent soon after into England, to have the guydynge thereof, and also to
treat with the lords and commons of his realm, how he might be set at
lybertye.

It was not long after the coming home of this Hubert, but the mu^kes of the
house of Cristes church of Cau^terburye chase him to the archebysshoppes see /
and had the palle, and was stallyd soon after. This was easy to the mu^kes /
how well ye sharpnes of Baldwyne had somdeale grieved them. And though this
Baldwyne were a good man and holy in his living / yet one thing he did to the
derogacyon of the munkes of Caunterburye / for he purposyd to put the
prerogative of the eleccyon of the archbishop from the munkes. And because
thereof, he began to build great houses nere unto the munkes church, by
favor of the king Henry the second (but not without shedynge of blood) and
there entendyd to have set in secular chanons with prebendys and suffraganes of
bysshoppes for to treat with the said chanons of the foresaid eleccyon, and
to put by the mu^kes clearly. But the munkes when they saw they might no
longer resyst Baldwyn, they then appealed to the pope Innocent the third / by
whose commandment that work ceasyd, and so stood vnfynysshed till the said
Baldwyne was deed. After whose death the munkes made that work plain with the
ground. Treuisa translatoure of Policronycon, says yt was wonder that Baldwyn
would in that manner deal with the munkes / consyderyng he was first
archdeacon, and then white munke, and then abbot, and after bishop of worceter,
and last archbysshoppe / and to bring men of more imperfyte life, into ye
place of men more perfyte, and to change religyous men for seculer men. But
yet the said Treuisa allowyth Baldwynes deed or intent for good. For he says
that Criste was the hedde of holy church, and callid and made his apostles
bysshoppes / but none of them was munke or yet friar. wherefore Baldwyne did
better to prefer the relygyon which Christ made, then the relygyon which
was instytuted and ordained by man.

Anno domini.M.C.xcvii. Anno domini.M.C.xcviii. Gerarde de Antiloche. Balliui
Anno.viii. Robert Duraunt.
IN in the month of January, and.viii. year of the reygne of king Richard,
when the said Richard had suffered hard prysonement upon the term of a
year and three months / he was delivered out of Prison for the sum of an
hundred thousand pound of sterlynge money.

For pledge whereof he left in the keeping of the emperor the bysshoppes of
Roan and of Bathe. But not for all / for a great part was paid or the king
were delyueryd. Orname^tes of the church fold.
For payment of which raunsom all the wolle of white munkes and chanons was
taken and sold, and rings and crosses of prelates, with vessels and chalyces
of all chyrches thorough ye land / and over that.xxvii. shrynes were scraped or
spoylyd of ye gold and silver that upon them before time was laid / for no
pryuylege of holy church nor other person at that season was spared. Then
king Richard came unto Swyne in Flau^dres, and tarried there two months /
other to abide the wind, or else to make prouysyon for things which he
neded. There the emperors men had almost taken him again. So the emperor
forthought ye delivery of king Rychard, as Pharao forthought the delyuery of
the children of Israel.

Then the king took shippyng, and la^ded in ye end of March at Sandwyche /
and from thens came streyghte unto London, where he was received with all joy
and honor. And when he had a season rested him there / he with a certain
number of knights rode to Nothyngam, and wan ye castle and after the castle
of Tykhyll by force of arms, and set the wardeyns of them in ward. And that
done he called a counsayll of his lords at wynchester / where by authoryte of
the said cou^sayll, he depryued John^ his brother then being in France of all
honor / and took from him al such lands as he before had given to him / and
crowned him soon after again king of England in the said city of wynchester.
After the which coronacyon he called a parlyament / by virtue whereof he resumyd
all pare^tes and annuytees, fees and other grauntes before his voyage by him
sold and granted / and caused the parties to be contentyd with such reuenous
and profytes as they had received of the said offices or lands in time of his
absence / and spared not any person for any sufficience of writing yt to him
before was made.

when king Richard had by these foresaid means gaderyd some money / he
then in the month of July sailed into France, and besegyd a castle called
Arques, and spedde there as wytnessyth Polycronyca dyuersly. which word
dyuersly may well here be spoken. For who so redyth the french cronycle / he
shall find that the French king was vyctor. But and he read the english
book / than shall he find king Richard vyctour. wherefore me thinks
Ranulphe said well / when he said they spedde dyuersely. For yt is so diverse
by the report of writers, that the certayntie to whom the honor should be
given is hard to be known. All be yt that in the country of Bloys, as
wytnessyth ye said french cronycle / king Richard scaryd the French host,
and took the kings somer horse, with part of his treasour. But in short
while after / a trewce was concludyd between these two kings for a year.

Then John^ which had turned to the French king again his own brother,
seeing that the fame and honor of his brother, and feblenesse of his own
power, made means to Elyanoure his mother / by whose medyacyon he was
reco^cyled to his brother the king, and after became his true knight.

when the king and his brother John^ were thus agreed / they rode over the
land to vysyte ye countries and se how they were guyded by the officers of
the king. Among other two there were, which showed that they would do many
things to the kings profit, the one was abbot of Cadonence within Normandye
/ and that other was named wyllyam with the long berde. The abbot warned the
king of the fraud of his officers / whereby he thought by the ponyshement of
his officers, he should win great favor of the people. Then this abbot gate
a warrant of the king / and at London called diverse officers before him, for
to yield to him their account. But he dyed shortly / so that his purpose came
to small effect. And wyllyam with the long berde showed to the king the
outrage of the rich men / which as he said spared their own and pyllyd the
poor people.

It is said that this willyam was borne in London / and purchasyd that name by
use of his berde. He was sharp of wit and somedeale lettred, a bold man of
speech and sad of countenance, and took upon him greatter deeds then he
could welde / and some he vsyd cruelly, as apperyth in appechynge of his own
brother of treason the which was a Burges of London, and to him had showed
great kyndnesse in his youth.

This willyam styred and excyted the common people to desire and love fredom^
and lybertye / and blamed the excess and outrage of rich men. By such meanys
he drew to him many great companyes / and with all his power defended the poor
mennys cause again the rich / and accused diverse to the king, showing that
by their meanys the king lost many forfaytes and escheatys. For this,
gentylmen and men of honor malygned again him. But he had such comfort of the
king, that he kept on his purpose. Then the king being warned of the
congregacyons that this wyllyam made / commanded him to cease of such doings,
yt the people might exercise their arts and occupacyo^s / by reason whereof it
was left for a while. But it was not long or the people followed him as they
before that time had done. Then he made unto them colacyons or exhortacyons /
and took for his anteteme, Haurietis aquas in gaudio de fontibus saluatoris.
That is to mean, ye shall draw in joy waters of the wellis of our savior.
And to this he added, I am said he the savior of poor men: ye be poor, and
have assayed ye hard hands of rich men. Now draw ye therefore holefull water
of lore of my wellys, and that with joy / for the time of your vysytacyon is
comen. I shall (said he) depart waters from waters / by waters I understand
the people. Then shall I depart the people whychis good and meke, from the
people that is wicked and proud / and I shall dysseuyr the good and the ylle,
as the light is departed from ye darkness. when this came to the knowledge of
the archebyshoppe of Caunterbury / he by counsayll of the lords of the
spyrytualty sent unto this wyllyam / commaundynge him to appear before the
lords of the kings counsayll, to answer unto such matters as there should be
laid unto him. At which day this wyllyam appeared, having with him a
multitude of people, in so myche that the lords were of him adrad. For the
which cause they remyttyd him with plesaunt words for ye time / and
commaundyd certain persons in secret manner to espy when he were void of
his company, and then to take him, and to put him in sure keeping. The which
according to the commandment at time conuenyent as they thought set upon
him and to have taken him. But he with an axe resysted them and slew one of
them / and after fled to saint Mary Bow church of Chepe, and took that for
his sauegarde / defending him by strength and not by the suffrages of the
church, for to him drew shortley great multitude of people. But in short
process by mean of the heddys and rulers of the city the people mynyshed /
so yt in short time he was left with few personys, and after by fire
co^pellyd to forsake the church and so was taken, but not without shedynge of
blood. After which taking he was areygned before the judges / and there
with.ix. of his adhere^tes cast and judged to dye, and was hanged and they
with him the day following. But yet the rumor seized not / for ye common people
raised a great crime upon the archbishop of Caunterbury and other / and said yt
by their means willyam, which was an innocent of such crimes as were obiecte
and put again him, and was a defendor of the poor people again extorcyoners
and wrong doers, was by them put wrongfully to death / approuyng him an holy
man and martyr by this tale following / saying yt a man being syke of the
fevers, was cured by virtue of a cheyn which this wyllyam was bound within
time of his dures of imprysonement / which by a priest of the allye of the
said wyllyam was openly declared and preached. whereby he brought the people in
such an error, that they gave credence to his words / and secretly in the
night conveyed away the iebet that he was hanged upon, and scraped away ye
blood that was shed of him when he was taken or else when he was hedded and
quarteryd, so yt they made there an holow place by fetchyng away of that earth /
and said yt syke men and women were cured of diverse sykenesse by virtue of
that blood and earth. By these means and blowynge of fame / ye place was the
more vysyted by women and indiscreet persons, of the which some watched there
the hole night in prayer / so that the longer this co^tynued, the more
dysclaunder was anotyd to the justices, and to such as put him to death. Not
wythstandyng in process of time, when his acts were publysshed, as the
sleynge of a man with his own hand, and using of his concubyne within saint
Mary church in time of his there being, as he openly confessed in the hour
of his death, with other detestable crimes: somewhat keled the great flame of
the hasty pilgrymage. But not clearly / till the archebyshoppe of Canterbury
accursed ye priest yt brought up the first fable / and also caused that place
to be watched, that such idolatry should there no more be used

Anno domini.M.C.xcviii. Anno domini.M.C.xcix. Roger Blount. Balliui Anno.ix.
Nycholas Duke.
IN the month of Apryll and ix. year of king Richard, when he had provided
to send forth xx. thousand pound to the emperor, for full payment of his
ransom / the pledges which had lain for the same, came suddenly into England
/ and showed unto the king that after his departing, the emperor sent them
unto the duke of Ostrych, to remain with him till the money were paid. And
forther there they showed that the said duke was accursed of ye pope yt then
was Innocent ye third, by reason of his wrong done to the king / and that
his prouynce was greuyd with many myscheues. And as the duke rode forth on a
day in his disport being saint Stephans day, he hurt his foot in such wise
with a thorn or other venym / which rancled and grew so sore, ye lastly he
should dye or cut yt of. But in hope of recovery he continued till in the end
he was warned that he should dye. Then he sent for his bishops, and axyd to
be assoyled of the sentence of the church which he stood in. The which was
denied him / except he would swear to stand and abide the ordinance and dome
of holy church, touching the wrong that he had done to king Richard. The
duke swear, and was assoyled / and shortly after the two bishops pledgys for
ye money were delivered at their lybertye. Then king Richard calling to mind
that the uttermost day of the trewes taken between him and the French king
approached / made him ready and sailed into Normandye, where before his coming
the French king by occasyon of the Normannis as says the french book, was
entered the country of Burgys / toward whom king Richard sped him with all
possible speed / so that both hosts lay partyd with a river called Osson or
Ossyne.

Then to follow the saying of the french book, for so myche as the english
cronycle spekyth little or nothing of this act / let wise men that here this
cronycle, constrew yt after their dyscrecyons. For all be yt the Frencheman
wrote yt to the honor of Frenchmen / yet to other that shall read or here yt,
because yt soundyth so nere untruth, yt shall rather redounde unto their
dishonor. For the French cronicle says, that these two hosts thus as above
is said lyenge to gyther without skyrmshe or assaute / king Richard contrary
the opinyon and mind of his lords, with a few accompanied and vnharnaysed,
should come to ye French kings tente / and there in presence of his lords
should do homage to the French king for the duchye of Normandye and cou^teys
of Angeou and of Poytyers, and there swore to the king to keep peace during
his life / and after.viii. days met again and fynyshed the said peace, with
assuryd oath upon either party / and after departed as friends either
resortyng into their own country. But yt seemed a feynte peace. For within
four months or less following / king Richard with his host entered the
prouynce of Berry / and laid syege to the castle of wyersoune, and gate yt by
strength / and after yode to the castle of Noryncourte / the which was
delyueryd to him by appoyntement.

when king Phylyppe hard of the winning and overthrow of the castle of
wyersoun / he in damagynge of king Rychard laid syege to the castle of
Aubeuyle, and yt assailed egerly. Buy yt was so strong and so well defendyd by
the Normannys, that the French king was holden of. when king Richard had
garnyshed and fortifyed the castle of Noryncourte with all thing necessary
to the war / he drew him toward Aubeuyle to remove king Phylyppe from that
syege, and fell upon the French men unawarely. But the Frenchemen quyt them
so knyghtly, that they chased king Richard and his people / and took a Norman
knight named Guy de Thonars a man of great hardynes. And then king Phylyppe
returned to the castle and town of Aubeuyle / and assauted it more sharply,
so that in the end ye souldyours of the town yeldyd yt with the castle for a
certain sum of money. And when he had possessyon of the town / he threw
down the castle plain with the ground, and after strengthed the town with
French men / and then yode to the castle of Gysours / and from the^s resorted
to the forenamed castle of Noryncourte, and assailed yt in so cruel manner,
that shortly he wanne yt / and took therein.xv. knights and.xxiiii. yemen,
with plente of vytayll and armor. In this time and season king Richard
gadered new strength, and allied him with Baldwyn earl of Flau^dres and with
Renolde earl of Dampmartyn and of Boleyne. By whose means as wytnessyth the
french book, king Rychard wasted sore the country of France / and brent
therein some towns and vyllages, and took therein many rich prays.

Anno domini.M.C.xcix. Anno domini.M.CC. Constantyne fyz Arnolde. Balliui
Anno.x. Robert le Beawe.
ABout the beginning of the month of October, and.x. year of Richard / the
said Richard entryd the country of Unequecyne with a strong host / and
made therein cruel war, in destroyenge of the country / and assauted the
castle of Gysours / and threw to ground a strong hold called Courcellys,
and brent there about many vyllages. wherwyth king Phylyppe was so greuousely
amouyd / yt with a small noumber of knights he percyd the host of
Englyshemen, and entryd the castle or town of Gysours. But of his men were
taken a certain number / as Alayne de Russy, Mathewe de Melly, Guyllyam de
Mello, and many other. with the which prisoners and many rich prays, king
Richard then departed, leuynge the French king within Gysours.

It was not long after that king Richard was thus departed / but that king
Phylyp calling to mind the great loss and dishonor that he had received by
that war of king Richard, assembled a great army, and entered the duchy of
Normandy / and wasted the country from Nuesbourth to Beawmo^t le Rogyer. And
that done he returned into France / and lyce^cyd his knights to go each man
into his own country.

when king Phylyppe had thus fynyshed his war in Normandye / king
Richard then with his army entered the forenamed country of Unequecyn, and
also Beawuoysyn / and took within them as he before had done rich and many
prays / and with them departed. whom the bishop of Beawuays being a good
knight and hardy of his hands, with a company of knights, and other /
folowyd to have rescowyd the prisoners that king Richard had taken. But they
were taken / and a certain of his company slain.

Then the earl of Flaundres by the aid of the English men, took the town of
saint Omer from ye French men.

In this season Innocent the Pope before named, sent a legate into France
named Peter de Capys, to refourme the war between the two princes. The which
at that time was in such dysioynte that he could not bring yt to any frame /
and specially as says the French book, because king Richard would not
deliver hostages and gagys as ye French king would.

Then king Richard after Cristmas besyeged a castle nere unto Lymogys. This
castle in ye French cronycle is called Chalons / and in the english book yt
is named Gayllarde. The cause of this syege as says most writers, was for
certain rich treasour founden within the lordshyppe or sygnyory of king
Richard / the which one wydomer vycounte of Lemonke had founden and with
held from king Richard / and for his sauegarde fled unto the forenamed
castle / and defendyd yt manfully from the first weke of lent, till the.vi.
day of Apryll. Upon the which day king Richard walking unwisely about
the castle to espy the feebleness thereof / one named Betra^de Guedon markyd the
king and wounded him in the hedde, or after some writers, in ye arm with a
venomous quarrel. After which wound received by the king, he commanded
sharp assaute to be made / in the which assaute the castle was won. Then he
made enquery who yt was that so had wounded him / the which was brought unto
the kings presence, and named him self as above is said, or after some
writers Peter Basyle. Then the king demanded of him why he should so lie in a
wait to hurt him, rather then any of his felowys. For thou slew my father and
my brethren said he / wherefore I entendyd to avenge their death, what someuer
became of me. Then ye king forgave him his offense and suffered him to go at
lyberte. And the other of ye soudyours taken in that castle, the king
commanded to be hanged. But Polycronycon says, that after king Richard was
deed / the duke of Braban which then was present, caused the said Bartrande to
be taken and flayne quycke and after hanged. Then king Richard dyed the.iii.
day after, that is to say, the ix. day of Apryll / and was buried at Fount
Eborard at the fete of his father. How be yt some writers say that his heart
was buried at Roan, his body as before is said, and his bowellys at Carleyll
in England / when he had reigned.ix. years.ix. months and odd days,
leuynge after him none issue. Of this Richard a metrycyan made these versys
following. Christ, tui calicis praedo fit praeda caducis
and re breui reiecis, qui tollit era crucis.
Viscera Carleolum, corpus fons seruat Ebardi.
Et cor Rothamagu^ magne Richard tuum
In terra diuiditur, vnus quia plus fuit vno.
Non superest vno gratia tanta viro.


The which versys may be englysshyd as follows. Christ, of the these which on
the right hand was,
And axyd mercy, to us thou made a pray /
That we like wise should for our trespass,
Axe of the mercy and show no delay,
Nor for erthly things cast our self away.
For who of thy cross accompteth little store /
The merit of thy passion he losyth evermore.
This manfull knight this prince vyctoryouse,
which took thy cross on him with great pain /
He followed the thief and axyd mercy thus.
For his offense he warred thy foes again /
And shadde their blood on hill and eke on plain.
And all for love good lord he had to the.
wherefore swyte Jesus on him thou have pytye.
Of whom the bowellys at Carleyll / and the trunk
At fount Ebrarde full rychely is dyght.
The heart at Roan into the earth is sunk
Of the worthy Richard. And so in three is twyght,
That more than one whylom was in might.
In earth is separate that living more then one
was, and of grace found like to him none.


John^ brother of ye above named Richard, and yongeste son of Henry the
second / was ordained or proclaimed king of England, the tenth day of Apryll in
the beginning of the year of our lord.xi. hundred.lxxx. and.xix / and the.xx.
year of the second Phylyppe then king of France. This John^ at the day of
his brothers death was in Normandy / where at Chynon as soon as his brother
Richard was dyseasyd, he possessyd him of his brothers treasour / and sent
Hubert archbyshoppe of Caunterbury into England, to make prouisyon for his
coronacyon. And upon Ester day following he was gyrde with the sword of the
duchy of Brytayne / and sailed soon after into England. where he was crowned
king at westmynster upon holy thursday next following of the forenamed
Hubert. After which solemnitye done / he ordained the same Hubert chaunceller
of England.

In this while the French king held a counsayll at Cenomannia in Turon /
where to the derogacyon of king John^, Arture the son of Geffrey Plantagenet
and neuewe to the said John^, was made duke of Brytayne. which incontynently
after with a great army entryd the country of Angeou, and took possessyon
thereof. And king Phylyppe with his people entryd the duchy of Normandy, and
laid syege to the city of Euroux / and wanne yt, with all the strong holds
there about / and stuffyd them with vytayll, and strengthed them with his own
knights / and that done wasted and spoiled the the country till he came to
the city of Meaus. where met with him the forenamed Arture / and did to him
homage for the country of Angiers.

In the month of May, Elyanour sometime wife of Henry the second, and mother
to king Richard, came into France / and so to the king to Meaus foresaid,
and made to him homage for the country of Poytiers, as her enherytaunce. And
soon after the king returned into France / and the duke of Britayne with
him which as yet was within age.

King John^ heryng of this war in Normandy, and loss of the countries above
named / assembled a cou^sayll and axid aid of his lords and commons, to win
again ye foresaid lands / and had it granted after some writers.iii. s. of
every plough land thorough England, beside ye subsydy of ye spyrytuall lands.
And when he had made ready for that belonged to his voyage / he about heruest
sailed into Normandy / where he tarried till Octobre following, spending the
time to his loss and dyshonoure.

Anno domini.M.CC. Anno domini.M.CCi. Arnolde fyz Arnolde. Balliui Anno primo
Richard fyz Darty.
AFter Mychelmas in the month of October, and first year of the reygne of
king John^ / a trewce or peace was concluded between the two kings of
England and of France, from that day till mydsomer next following / and in
like wise between the French king, and Baldwyne earl of Flaundres. And this
year was made a deuorce between king. John^ and his wife the earl of Glocetyrs
daughter, because of nerenesse of blood. And after was he married unto Isabell
the daughter of the earl of Engolesym in France, and had by her two sonnys
Henry and Rychard, and.iii. daughters Isabell, Elyanoure, and Jane.

This year dyed at London blessed Hugh bishop of Lyncoln^ / and was conveyed to
his own church and there enterryd. For whom god has showed many miracles, so
that at this day he is authorysed by the church for a saint. At mydlent
after, king John^ sailed again into Normandy. And after Ester he met with
king Phylyppe between Uernon and the isle Audeley / where the peace between
both realms was stablyshed and co^fermed for term of their two lives / and
the lands divided between the two kings, as either of them should hold them
contentyd for their lives after. And in short time after, Lewys the eldest son
of king Phylyppe, married dame Blanch daughter to Alphons king of Castylle,
and neuewe to king John^. To the which Lewys / king John^ for love of that
woman showed to him great bountye / and gave unto her many rich gifts.

In the month of July following king John^ rode into France, where he was
received of the French king with myche honor / and so conveyed into saint
Denis, where he was received with processyon. And upon the morrow the French
king accompanied him unto Paris / where he was received of the cytezens with
great reverence / and presentyd by the prouoste of the town in name of the
hole city with rich presentis. And there king Phylyppe festyd him in his
own paleys / and gave unto him and his lords and servants many rich gifts
/ and after conveyed him forth of that city, and took leave of him in most
loving wise. And when king John^ had spedde his matters in Normandy / he
then returned into England.

Anno domini.M.CCi. Anno domini.M.CCii. Roger Desert. Balliui Anno secun. Iamys
fyz Barth.
IN ye month of december and second year of king John^ / Ranulphe earl of
Chestre by the example before showed by king John^, left his own wife named
Constau^ce and countess of Brytayne, which before he had married by counsayll
of king Henry the second / and wedded one Clemens. One cronycle says he did
so, because he would have issue. But the said author says that after his
opinion, he dyspleased god so greatly that god would suffer him to have none
issue / but the rather for that deed dyed without.

About this time after opinion of most writers / the people or nacyon called
Tartares began their domynyon. These men dwelled under the hyllys of Inde, yt
belonged to prester John^ / and chase of them self a capitayn of low birth
called David / and so with wives and children passed the next countries with
robbynge and spoylyng, and grew shortly in great strength / and after subdued
the parts and many other vycyne countries / and grew lastely unto great
domynyon and lordshyppe in the eest parts of the world / so that lately their
prince or sovereign is called the great Cahan.

In this year as wytnessyth Polycronycon, the king of Scottys did homage to
king John^ at Lyncoln^, and swear upon the cross of Hubert archbishop of
Caunterbury, in the presence of a legate of Rome, and.xiii. bishops, to be
true lyege man to him and to his heirs kings.

And in this year one Estate called abbot of Flay, came into England / and
among other miracles by him showed, he blessed a well beside the town of wye
in kent / so ye men and women drynkyng of that water were curyd of diverse
maladyes. But lastly he dyspleasyd so the bishops of England, yt he was glade
to leave the land, and after sailed into Normandy

Anno domini.M.CC.ii. Anno domini.M.CC.iii. Arnolde. Balliui Anno.iii. Richard
About the month of December, in ye third year of Iohn^s reygn in the prouynce
of york, were seen.v. moonys. One in the Eest, the second in the weste, the
third in the North, ye fourth in the South, and the fyfte as it were set in the
mids of the other / and yode.vi. times in compassynge the other, as yt were
by the space of an hour / and vanyshed away soon after. This year in the
month of February / king Phylyp called a parliament at Uerdon / where yt was
among other matters concluded, that king John^ as his lyege man should appear
at his parlyame^t holde^ at Paris within.xv. days of Eester next following.
But for so myche as king John^ nor none for him apperyd to show some lawful
impedyme^t / the French king therefore entryd the duchy of Normandy, and took
the castellys of Bounte, of Gentelyne, and Gurnay / and seized into his hands
all such lands as Hugh de Gurnay held, and gave them unto Arture foresaid
duke of Brytayne. And more over he gave to the said Arture ye cou^tye of
Angeou, with two hundred prisoners, and a certain of money to defend the
said country again king John^.

when king John^ had understanding of all the cruel dealing of king
Phylyppe / he called a counsayll and there asked aid, and was granted a new
aid to wythstande the French kings malice. And about Lammasse after, the
king with a fair company sailed into Normandye / and so spedde him into the
country of Angeou, for so myche as he was enfourmed that Arture his neuew and
duke of Brytayne warryd within the same / and took him prisoner with certain
other knights, as sir Hugh le Bruns, sir Godfrey de Losyngham, with diverse
other. At which time king Phylyppe lay at the syege of the castle of Arques /
and herynge of this dyscomfyture, brake up his syege to the intent to have
rescowyd the said duke. But when he was warned that he should come to short /
he then changed his purpose and went unto the city of Towrys, and wanne yt by
strength. And after for that winter drew nere, he returned into France. In
which season also king John^ returned with his prisoners into England.

In this year by counsay^l of the burgeysys of the city of London / were
chosen.xxxv. of the most substancyall and wyseste mine / which after some were
called the counsayll of the city. Of the which yearly the bailyuys were chosen
/ and after the mayre and shryues were taken of the same number.

Anno domini.M.CC.iii. Anno domini.M.CC.iiii. Balliui Normand Blondell
Anno.iiii. John^ of Ely.
IN this fourth year of king John^, were seen many wonderful tokens. For
over the winter, the which passyd in length and hardenesse many years before
gone / wonderful wederynge, as of exceeding lyghtenynges, thunders, and other
storms of wind and rain appetyd / and therwyth hayle of the bygnesse of
hens eggs, the which perished fruit and corn / besides other hurtes and
harms done upon houses and young catell going a broad. Also spyrites were
seen in the air in likeness of foulys, berynge fire in their bylles / the
which set on fire diverse houses. And soon there after dyed Hubert
archbishop of Caunterbury. In whose place was chosen contrary to the mind of
ye king, by the more party of the covent of Cau^terburye, master Stephan
Langton. All be yt some there were that according to the kings pleasure,
named the bishop of Norwyche, and some other. For this eleccyon the king was
greuousely amouyd again the munkes / and would in no wise allow or admyt their
eleccyon. wherefore they sent their eleccyon unto pope Innocynt the third / ye
which admytted the said master Stephan and refused the other, and sacryd him
at Uyterb a city of Italy / and sent him after with letters of comendacyon
unto king John^ to take the possessyon and fruits of his benefyce. King John^
with this was sore amouyd / in so myche yt he warned him his land and diverse
of the munkes of Caunterbury that favored his cause.

About Ester king John^ sailed into Normandye / for the French king had
recommencyd his war in the countye of Guyan, and wanne therein daily diverse
strong holds and castellys / and alleyd with him the earl of Alenson / and
had great aid of the Portuyns and Brytons. And when he had brought that
country under his subieccyon / he then returned by Normandye and wanne
Conket, the vale of Ruell, and the isle of Audeley. In this season the forenamed
pope sent the abbot of Casmer into France, to refourme these two princes.
with whom was also accompanied the abbot of Cressons / the which endeavored
them so, that they were nere agreed of a peace. But for they would that the
French king should repair and amend such houses of relygyon, as he had
hurt and overthrown in Guyan and other places belonging to the crown of
England / therefore he forsook the peace / not withstandyng that king John^ in
like wise should have repaired all like houses apperteynynge unto ye crown of
France.

Then the French king in the end of Auguste laid syege to the castle of
Raydepount / and assauted yt by the term of.xv. days contynually. But the
soundyours within defendyd yt so manfully, that they slew many of their
enymyes / so ye king Phylyppe was feign to give back, till he had devised
new engynes after the war fassyon. By reason whereof he lastely wanne the
said castle / and took there.xx. knights, and an hundred and.vii. yomen and
other, and.xxi. arblasters. And when he had fortefyed that castle with
French men / he then yode to the castle of Gaylarde, and laid his ordinance
to that, as he had done to that other. But he lay there a month or he
might do to yt any hurt or harm. In all which season king John^ warryd upon
the Borderers of France / but of his vyctoryes I find little written.

Anno domini.M.CC.iiii. Anno domini.M.CC.v. water Brown. Balliui. Anno.v.
wyllyam Chaumberleyn.
IN this year, that is to say the.v. year of king John^ / by reason of the
unreasonable wederynge, that in the last year fell / whete was sold for.xv. s.
a quarter.

King John^ in the somer following married his bastard daughter unto Lewelin
prince of walys / and gave with her the castle and lorshippe of Elyngesmere,
being in the marches of South walys.

In Morgans land in walys soon after a knight apered after his death to one
callid master Moris / to whom by his lives time he had been special lover and
friend. The which knight by his days was well letteryd / and vsyd for his
recreacyon to make versys with this master Morys, so that the one should
begin the metyr and the other should end yt. At which time of his
apperau^ce the knight said to master Moris, master Morys I woll yt thou end
this verse, Destruet he regnum rex regum. Nay said master Moris, end thou yt
/ for thou haste all most made the hole thy self. Then said the knight for
that I se now thou art old and slow, I will end yt my sefe. Destruct hoc
regnum, rex regum dupliciplage.


The which verse may be englysshed as follows. The king of kings that
lord that rules all,
And in whose power all things is contained /
This realm for sin he destroy shall
with dowble plage, be thereof ascertayned /
Except the people here after be refrayned
From sin, and them to virtuous life alye,
And vice before vsyd utterly renye.


This year the pope sent letters of recommendacyon unto king Johan / showing
that he had fauorablye hard his proctours for all such matters as they had
laid again the archebyshoppe of Caunterburye and some of his munkys, that he
should not of right be admyttyd to that see.

But for the said matters of obieccyon were by him and his court thought
insuffycyent / he therefore exorted and wyllyd him to accept the said
archebyshopppe to his grace, and suffer him to enjoy the fruits of his
benefyce / and the munkes by him exyled, to return unto their proper abbay.

But the more his lords and friends aduysed him to follow the popes mind, the
more was he mouyd to the contrary / in such manner that the popes messengers
returned without speed of their message.

yet have ye hard before, how the French king lay about the castle of
Gayllarde / and might not win yt by the space of a month. wherefore he after
sent for new ordinance, and assailed yt so fyersly, that within.xx. days
after he wanne the said castle, to the great loss of men on parties / and
took prisoners there within.xxxvi. knights, beside the other number of yomen
and arblasters / and that done seasyd the country there about, and strengthed
the said castle with his own men / and then with great pride returned into
France.

Anno domini.M.CC.v. Anno domini.M.CC.vi. Thomas Haueryll. Balliui. Anno.vi.
Hamonde Bronde.
ABout that season after Mychelmas, in the vi. year of the reygn of king John^
/ came down a straight commandment from the pope, that except the king
would peasybly suffer the archbyshoppe of Caunterbury to occupy his see, and
the munkes their abbay, they ye land should be enterdyted / chargynge these
four bishops following, that is to say wyllyam then bishop of London,
Eustace bishop of Ely, walter bishop of wynchester, and Gylys bishop of
Herforde, to denounce the king and his land accursyd, if he ye cumaundement
dysobeyed. Then these four bishops with other to the^ assocyate / made
instaunte labor to the king, for the observing of the popes commandment,
and to exchewe the sensours of the church. But all was in vain. wherefore
the.iiii. said bysshoppes according to the popes writing to them sent / the
morrow following our lady day annu^cyacyon, or the.xxvi. day of March,
denouncyd king John^ with his realm of England accursyd / and shyt fast the
doors of the chyrches and other places where dyuyne service before was vsyd,
first in London, and after in all placys as they went thorough the land. The
king for this deed was so amouyd with the said four bishops, that he seized
all the temporalties to them belongyng into his hands / and put them in such
fere, that they forsook this land, and sailed to the archbishop of Cau^terburye.

In this year at Oxe^forde in Suff. was taken a fyshe in ye see of form like
to a man / and was kept.vi. months after upon land with raw flesh and
fyshe / and after for they could have no speech of yt, they cast yt into the sea again.

Anno domini.M.CC.vi. Anno domini.M.CC.vii. John^ walgraue. Balliui. Anno.vii.
Richard of wynchester.
IN the month of noue^ber and vii. year of the king / one named Hugh Oysell
for treason at Lon was drawn and hanged. And this year in ye month of May,
the French king entryd into Normandy with a strong power / and wanne there
the castellys of Faloys, and Dafyount or Danffrount and after seasyd all the
lands to the said castle belonging, and so till he came to a place called
saint Mychaell in the parell of the sea.

when the Normannes saw that king Phylyppe thus subdued the strong holds of
Normandye, and that king John^ to the countrarye made no defense / ye
capytayns of Co^staunce, of Bayoux or Bayon, of Lyseux, of Anreuches, and
Enroux yielded them all to the French king, and became his lyege men / so that
he was in possessyon of the substance of the duchye of Normandye, except Roan
and other few castellys.

Then king Phylyppe seeing these strong holds thus yeldyd unto him / laid
his syege to the cyty of Roan. where after he had lain a season / the
capytayne of the town desired a respyte of.xxx. days, gyuynge pledges and
hostages, that if the city were not by king John^ or his assygnes rescwyd
with in the foresaid term, they would yield the city unto the French king.
And in like wise was appoyntement taken for the castellys named Arquys and
Uermeyll. In which time for that no socoure came / both city and castellys
were delyueryd into the French kings hands. And thus had this second
Phylyppe the possessyon of Normandye / which no French king had sen the
time of Charlys the simple, which gave the same duchye to Rollo leder of the
Normannys, with Gylla his daughter in maryge / sin the which time had
passed over iii. hundred years.

when the French king had thus brought into his subiccyon ye duchye of
Normandye / he then about saint Laurence tide yode into the countye of Guyan,
and wanne there the city of Poytyers, with all the castellys and towns to the
said city belonging. and when he had set that country in an order and
rule / he spedde him into France with great pomp and glory.

It is affermed of some authors, that the French king made this war upon
king John^ by excytynge of the pope, for his contumacye agane the church.

In this year also was a communycacyon of a peace to be had between king
John^ and the archebyshope of Caunterbury / and was driven to a nere point of
accord, except restitucyon that king John^ should have made to the
archebysshop and other bishops, the which his officers had taken in the
time of their absence. To the which restytucyon king John^ in no wise would be
agreeable / wherefore the said communycacyon took none affecte. After this
communycacyon / king John^ was so frette with malice, that in a fury he let
proclayme in sundry placys of his realm, that all such personys as had
lands and possessions within England spyrytuall or temporal, that they
should return into England by Mychelmas next following / or else to be
clearly excludyd from all such lands. And over that straight commandment
was given to eueryche officer in his country, to make besye search, if any
wrytynges were brought from the court of Rome, to any prelate of this realm
/ and if any such were founden, to bring him and his wrytynges to the kings
presence. And more over that they should sease to the kings use, all such
lands as to any person were given by the said archbyshoppe or by the pryour
of Caunterbury, syn the time of eleccyon of the said archebyshoppe / and the
woods of the same to be fellyd and sold in all haste.

Anno domini.M.CC.vii. Anno domini.M.CC.viii Roger wynchester. Balliui.
Anno.viii. Edmunde hardell.
Upon the first day of the month of October, and.viii. year of ye reygne of
the king / his first son Henry by name was borne of dame Isabell his second
wife in the city of wynchester. And this year rebellyd the Irysheme^, and did
myche harm in that country. which rebellyon after some writers was, for so
myche as the king would have leuyed of the^ grievous taskys to have made war
with upon the French king. But at length they greuyd or dyspleasyd the king
in such wise, that he was feign to set a task thorough his land to oppress
their malice. And over that he asked of the white munkes of England.vi.
thousand mark. But they excused them by their general hedde / so that the
king took with them great dyspleasure. By reason whereof after his return
out of Irlande, he vexyd them sore / and gathered of them more then before
he had desired / and caused some abbottys to forsake their houses.

Then he with a puyssaunte army went into Irelande, and shortly subdued
them / and after he had set the country in a rule, he returned into
England.

Anno domini.M.CC.viii. Anno domini.M.CC.ix. Serle the mercer. Balliui.
Anno.ix. Hugh of saint Albon.
IN this.ix. year the king considering the great loss which he had sustained
by the French king in Normandy, and also in Angeou and Poyteau / made
prouysyon of all things belonging to the war / and after about mydsomer
sailed over the sea, and landed at Rochell in Poyteau with a mighty host. At
which season the French king was at Thymon and fortyfyed yt / with also the
castellys of London and Myrable, and ye town of Poytyers which little before he
had won / and after without taryenge returned into France. Then king John^
herynge of the French kings departing / sped him to Angiers and wanne that
town with little pain, and destroyed ye said town. Thither came to him the
vycou^t of Thonars, which before was for dread become the French kings man /
and by his aid king John^ then recoueryd some part of that country.

In this mean while king Phylyppe gathered a new host / and herynge of the
unsteadfastness of the vycou^t of Thonars, entryd ye lands of the said
vycounte, and wasted and spoiled the country without pyty. Then king John^
spedde him toward the French king / so that in short process of time the
two hostys were within little dystaunce. But by what mean of fortune I can not
say (for the mean thereof is not expressyd) the two kings there took peace
for two years following / and after either of them returned into his own
country.

In this year the pope being ascerteyned of ye cruelnesse of king John^
executed again the white munkes of his land / and also of his obstynacye that
he perseuered in again holy church: sent done a new commyssyon / by virtue
whereof the curse of enterdytynge was newly denou^cyd and manyfestyd in sundry
places of England. And over that the pope by authoryte of the said bulle,
assoyled or acquyted all the lords of England as well spyrytuall as temporal,
of all homage and feauty that they of right owyd to the king / to the intent
that they should arise again him, and depryue him of all kyngly honor. But
all this might not move the king from his error.

ABout the feast of saint Medard, in the month of Iuny and later end of this
foresaid.ix. year / the forenamed bayllyues were admytted to ye office / and
the old, that is to mean Roger wynchester and Edmunde Hardell were
dischargyd, for so myche as they wythstode the kings purueyour of whete, and
would not suffer him to convey certain mesures of whete out of the city till
the city were storyd. For this the king took such dyspleasure, that he sent
down straight commandment unto the.xxxv. heddes or rulers of the city, that
they should dyscharge the said two bayllyuys, and to put them in prison till
they knew the kings further pleasure. wherefore the said.xxv. persons took
advise / and appointed a certain of them self with other, and rode to the
king then being at Langley, to empeter grace for the said bayllyues /
showing forther that at that season such dystresse of where was in ye cyty,
that the common people were like to have made an insurreccyon for the same. By
which means and frendeshyppe which they had in the court, the king was so
satysfyed that he releasyd them from prison. And in short time after, the
cytesyns of London made such suit to the king, that they had granted to them
by ye kings letters patentes, First mayred ^^yryffe^
that they should yearly chose to them self a mayre and two shryues. After
which grant to them confermyd / they among them self ordained, that the
two shryues should be chosen yearly upon saint Mathewes day.ix. days before
Mychelmas, and upon Michelmas day to take their charge / and the mayre to be
chosen upon the same day, and chargyd with the other upon the said day of
Mychelmas / all be yt that now yt is otherwise orderyd.

Anno domini.M.CC.ix. Anno domini.M.CC.x. Primus mayor. Peter Duke. Henry fyz
Alwyn. Anno.x. Thomas Neell.
IN the day of saint Mychael the archau^gell, and.x. year of king John^ /
Henry the son of Alwyne was sworn and charged as first mayre of London / and
Peter duke, with Thomas Neell sworn for shryues / and the name of bayllyues was
after this day clearly avoided with in the said city from that day
forewarde. Also where before this time the bridge over Thamys at London, was
made of timber, and was ruled guydyd, or repaired by a fraternity or college of
prestes. This year by the great aid of the cytesyns of London and other
passing that way, the said bridge was begone to be edyfyed of stone. And in
this year ye monastery of saint Mary Ouereys in South warke, was begone of to
be builded. And in this year the pope sent two legates, or after some writers
one legate named Pandulphus / the which in the popys name had many sore words
of monycyon of obedience to king John^ / and charged him to suffer the
archebyshoppe of Caunterburye with the pryour and munkes of the same, to enjoy
their ryghtes and possessions within England / and tarried here a certain of
time to bring his purpose about. But all was in vain / for he yode again to
Rome without releasynge of the enterdytynge.

Of ye manner of this enterdyccyon of this land, have I seen diverse opynyons.
As some there be ye say, that the land was enterdyted thorouly / and the
chyrches, and housys of relygyon closyd, that no where was used mass nor
dyuyne service. By which reason none of the.vii. sacraments in all this term
should be minystred or occupied, nor child crystenyd, nor man confessyd, nor
married. But yt was not so streyghte / for there were diverse places in England
which were occupied with dyuyne service all that season, by license purchasyd
then or before. Also children were crystyned thorough all the land, and men
houselyd and anelyd / except such persons as were excepted by name in the
bull, or known for mayteyners of the kings ill intent.

Anno domini.M.CC.x. Anno domini.M.CC.xi Peter young Henry fyz Alwyn. Anno.xii.
wyllyam Elande.
IN this year which was the.xi. year of king John^ after mydsomer, or the
term of the trewce were fylly run / king Phylyppe with a strong host
entryd the countye of Guyan, and made new war upon the vycounte of Thonars /
and took his castle called Parteny, with diverse other strong holds to ye
said vycounte belonging, and mannyd them with French men / and ordained one
Guyllyam de Roches marshall of France chief ruler of that country / and after
returned into France. But yt was not long after the king was departed / but
that the said vycount of Thonars made sharp war upon the Frenchemen, with
such power as he might make / and recoueryd a part of his land. But one day
when he had won a little hold, and taken therein a certain of prisoners /
in his return toward his hold where he lodged, he was supprysed with the
forenamed Guyllyam de Roches and a great multitude of Frenchemen / of ye which
after long fight he was finally taken, with sir Hyugh Thonars his brother, sir
Aymery de Lesyngnam son of the earl of Poytyers, and to the number of.l.
persons of his company / ye which were all as prisoners, then sent unto ye
French king.

Anno domini.M.CC.xi. Anno domini.M.CC.xii. Adam whetley. Henry fyz Alwyne.
Anno.xii. Stephan le Graas.
IN this.xii. year of king John^ the pope sent again Pandulphe his legate /
and monyshed the king in sharp manner that he should receive master Stephan
Langton to his benefyce of the sea of Caunterbury, and the pryour with his
munkes unto their abbay. Then ye king calling to mind the dangers which he
was wrappyd in, both within his own realm and also in Normandy, and the
hurtes which daily grew to him by the same / made a promise by oath that he
would be obedyent unto the court of Rome, and stand and obey all thing, that
the same court woll adiudge him. Upon which promise so made / the legate sent
knowledge unto the pope, and had commandment from him that he should bind the
king to these artycles following. First that he should peasybly suffer ye
forenamed master Stephan Langton to enter his land and to enjoy the
archebyshopryche of Caunterburye, with all profytes and fruits belonging to
the same. Secondaryly, that he should in like manner and form receive the
pryour of Caunterburye and his munkys, with all other before time exyled for
the archbyshoppes cause / and not at any time here after vex or punyshe any of
the said persons spyrytuall or temporal, for any of those causes. Thyrdely
that he should restore unto the said archbishop and to all ye other, all such
goods as were before time taken from any of them by his officers, syn the time
of this varyance growing. And fourthly y^ he should yield up into the hands
of the pope, all his right and title that he had unto the crown of England,
with all reueneus, honors, and profytes belongyng to the same, as well
temporal as spyrytuall / and to hold yt ever after both he and his heirs of
the pope and his successors as feodaryes of the pope. And when these artycles
were granted, and the lords of the land sworn to the mayntenaunce of the
same / the king knelyng upon his knees took the crown from his hedde, and
said these words following to the legate delyuerynge him the crown. Here I
resygne up the crown of the realm of England and Irlande into the popes
hands Innocent the third / and put me holy in his mercy and ordinance. After
rehersall of which words, Pamdulphe took the crown of the king, and kept
the possessyon thereof.v. days after, in token of possessyon of the said
realm of England. And when ye said.v. days were expyred / the king resumyd ye
crown of Pandulphe, by virtue of a band or instrument made unto the pope, ye
which at length is set out in the cronycle of England and other places.
whereof the effect is, yt the said king John^ and his heirs, should ever
after be feodaryes unto the forenamyd pope Innocent and to his lawful
successors popys of Rome / and to pay yearly to the church of Rome a
thousand mark of silver that is to say for England.vii. h^ndred mark, and
for Irlande.iii. hundred mark. And if he or his heyr failed or brake that
payment / that then they should fail of their right of the crown. But
Polycronycon says vii. hundred mark for England and two hundred mark for
Irlande. For the which sums after the affyrmaunce of that author Guydo, the
money called Peter pen^.
Peter pens are at this day gathered in sundry places of England.

Anno domini.M.CC.xii. Anno domini.M.CC.xiii. Iosne fyz Pet. Henry fyz Aleyn.
Anno.xiii. John^ Garlonde.
IN this.xiii. year of king Ihon^ and month of February / master Stephan
Langton archebyshop of Caunterbury, with the other exylys landed in England /
and after in process of time met with the king at wynchester. where the king
receyuyd him with a ioyouse cou^tenau^ce, and after there was assoyled of the
said archebyshop. But yet was not the interdiccyon of the land releasyd / for
so myche as the king at that day had not made restitucyon unto the
archbyshope and other, according to the third article before rehersyd. For
the which as testyfyeth the English book, he paid unto the archbyshoppe three
thousand mark / and to the other by partyculers.xv. thousand mark. After
which things performed and done / the interdyccyon was adnullyd and fordone,
in the month of July, and year of our lord xii hundred and.xii / when yt had
standen in force full.vi. years, and as much as from the.xxvi. day unto the
month of July, which is upon.iii. months and odd days.

Anno domini.M.CC.xiii. Anno domini.M.CC.xiiii. Raufe Eylande Henry fyz Alwyn.
Anno.xiiii. Constantyne le Iosne.
IN this.xiiii. year of the king / for that he would not hold the laws of
saint Edward, and also for displeasure that he bare to diverse of them, for
they would not favor him again the pope / and for other causes which here
be not manyfestyd / the king fell at dyssencyon with his lords, in so much
that great people were reysyd on either parties. But for the kings party was
the stronger / the earl of Chester with the other lords took the city of
London, and held them therein a certain of time. The which cronycle of Caxton
with other, sayen that a great part of this varyau^ce between king John^ and
his barons was, for because the king would without skylfull dome have exyled
the said earl of Chester / which to him had no cause, but for so myche as
before seasons he had often times aduysed the king to leave his cruelnesse
and his accustomed auowtry, the which he exercysyd with his brothers wife and
other. But by the means of the archebyshoppe of Caunterbury and other prelatys
/ a peace was taken for a while.

In this year upon the day of the translacyon of saint Benet, or ye.xi. day
of July / a great part of the Borough of Southwarke was brent And in the
month of Auguste next following, was great and myche harm done in London by
fire.

Soon after to stablyshe the peace between the king and his lords, an
assemble was made on Berham down / where the king and the lords met with
great strenght upon either side. where a charter or writing was dyuysed and
made, and there sealyd by the king / so that the baronye was with yt
contentyd, and departed in peasyble wise eueryche man into his country.

Anno domini.M.CC.xiiii. Anno domini.M.CC.xv. Martyne fyz Alys. Roger fyz
Aleyn. Anno.xv. Peter Batte.
IN this.xv. year of the king / the peace which in the last year was between
king John^ and his baronyes agreed, was by the king vyolate and broken.
wherefore the lords assembled to them great powers and made sharp and cruel
war upon the king / in so myche that he was constrained to send into
Normandye for aid and socoure, and into other places. Then shortly after came
into England a Norman knight, which brought with him a company of
Normannes, Flemmynges, and Pycardes. This knight or capitayn was named Foukes
de Brent / ye which with his company was so cruel, that he destroyed as well
relygyous houses as other, and wrought much harm to the land, and put the
lords to the worse. Then the king made Foukes and other of his company
wardeyns of castellys and stru^ge holds in England. The lords seeing the king
persevere in his wrong, and would in no wise be enduced to hold his own
grauntes / but to execute all thing after pleasure, and nothing after law or
justice: cast in their minds how they might bring the land in a better
rule or state / and by one advise and consent wrote unto Phylyp king of
France, that he would send some noble man into England / and they would
render ye land unto him. In this while king John^ causid to be drawn and
hangyd at London one Pyers of Pomfrette / for the said Peter had monyshed
diverse mysse happes that should come to him for his vycyous life / and also for
he had often warned king John^ that he should reygn but.xiiii. years / the
which he meant without payenge of trybute. For after he was become feodary to
the pope / he thought the pope reigned as pryncypall lord of the land and not
he. For the which and for other malice he put that virtuous man to death. Of
whom in ye.xxxiii. chapter of the.vii. book of Policronycon are many virtues
showed / the which I over pass for lengthynge of the time.

Anno domini.M.CC.xv. Anno domini.M.CC.xvi. Solomon Basynge. Roger fyz Aleyn.
Anno.xvi. Hugh Basynge.
Upon saint Andrews even or the.xxix. day of November, in the.xvi. year of
his reygne / king John^ after he had lain a certain of time with his
ordinance about the castle of Rouchester in Kent, he wanne the said
castle, and took therein certain gentylmen that had conspyred again him,
the which he sent to diverse prysons. And the barons held them to gyther at
London, abiding the coming of Lewys son to the French king, the which
nere about ascencyon tide landed in England with a strong army / and so came
to Rochester, and laid syege to the castle, and wa^ne yt with little pain, for
so much as yt was greatly febled with the assaurys lately made by king John^,
and syn that time not suffycyently repaired. And when he had won the said
castle, he caused all the strangers therein taken, to be hanged / and after
came to London, where certain allyaunces and couenauntes were stablished
between the lords and him, and received of them homage as affermeth
Policronicon. And after their matters between them there fynyshed / he with the
lords departed from London, and gatte the castellys of Rygat, of Gylforde, and
and of Frenham / and from thens to wynchester, where the city was yelden unto
them, with all the holds and castellys there about, as wolnesey, Odyham, and
Beawmere. And about saint Margaretes day, he with the lords came again to
London / at whose coming the tower of London was given up to them by
appoyntement. And where Roger fyz Aleyn had till that time ruled the city of
London as mayre / he for so myche as he was accusyd to the lords to be
favorable to the kings party, was then dyscarged of that office / and one
called Serle Mercer was chosen in his place, and so co^tynued till Mychelmas
following.

In this pass time king John^ being thus over set with his lords, sent
messengers to ye pope / showing to him the rebellyon of his lords, and how
they laboryd his destruccyon. wherefore the pope in all haste sent a legate into
England named Gualo or Swalo / the which after his coming, commanded Lewys
to return into France / and laboryd to the uttermost of his power, to appease
the king and his baronye. But all his labor was in vain.

Anno domini.M.CC.xvi. Anno domini.M.CC.vxii. John^ Trauers. wyllyam Hardell.
Anno.xvii. Andrewe Newlande.
IN this.xvii. year of king Johan / the war between him and his lords still
contynuynge, he dyed of the flyxe, as testyfyeth Polylycronycon, at the town
of Newerke, upon the day of saint Calyxte the pope, or the.xiiii. day of
October. How be yt the English book or cronycle says, that he dyed at
Sebynyshede an abbay about Lyncoln^, by the impoysonynge of a munke of the
same house, the day after saint Luke or the.xviii. day of October / and was
buried at the city of wynchester. But the author of Policronycon says he was
bowelled at Crongthon abbaye / and buried at worceter in the myddle of the
quyer of munkes, when he had reigned xvi. years.vi. monethis and.iiii. days
/ leuynge after him two sons, Henry and Richard, with sundry daughters.

Of this John^ yt is read, that he founded the abbay of Belewe in the new
forest / in recompensacyon of the pa^ysh chyrches which he there over turnyd to
enlarge that forest / and an abbay of black munkes in the city of wynchester,
where after ye saying of the english cronycle he should be buried.

This king John^ also after some writers, married one of his daughters unto
Otto the fourth of ye name emperor of Almayne and duke of Saxony / the which
held war again king Phylyppe of France, as in the.v. chapyter of the
storye of the said Phylyp before is declared. which Otto for his rapyne and
extorcyon done to the church of Rome, was accursyd / and the said Phylyp and
also king John^ for their dysobedyence to the church were also accursyd / the
which warred either with other / so that either of the^ greuyd and vexid
other, to the great hynderau^cis of them and either of them. For the which
consyderacyon a metrycyan made these balades of them as follows. O quam
mirabilia, good lord thy works been
In punyshement of sinners by thy might wondersly /
As by old stories yt is plainly seen.
One sinner the other has correct utterly.
As Alexander, with Julius, Pompey, and Tholomy,
And many other which as thy scourgys were,
To punyshe sinners and them self also dear.
In like wise now reader, if thou list take hyde,
And well reuolue in mind this hystorye
Of these three princes, and look well on their deed /
Thou shalt conceive that they did wyckydly.
I mean king John^, Phylyppe, and Ottony /
which unto sin made them self so thrall,
That of pope Innocent they were accursyd all.
wherefore god suffered that one the other to grieve,
And war and chase with dedely hate and strife.
Glad that one the other to mischeue /
Manassynge each other with spear, sword, and knyfe /
with cruel battle during their sinful life.
wherefore I may conclude, in factis horum,
That multa sunt flagella peccatoru^.


HEnry the third of ye name, and eldest son of king John^, a child of the age
of.ix. years / began his reygne over the realm of England, the.xx. day of
the month of October in the year of our lord.M. two hundred and.xvi / and
the.xxxvi. year of the second Phylyp yet king of France.

ye have before hard of the cruel war, which Lewys son unto the French
king with the aid of the baronys of England, maynteynyd again king John^.
The which after the death of the said John^ continued / for as much as then
some of the lords that before had maynteyned the quarrel of Lewis now
forsook him, and took part with this Henry as their natural and sovereign
lord. whereof the chief were the earls of Penbroke and of Chester / the which
with their retynewe held sharp war with the said Lewys and his affynyte,
the which ente^dyd to have been king of England, by reason of couenau^tes made
with certain lords of the land, when he was first sent for by them.
wherefore the foresaid earls with the other of their party, to make their party
the stronger / proclaimed the said Henry king of England, upon the
foresaid.xx. day of Octobre thorough the city of London / and in all
possible haste after made prouysyon for his coronacyon / so that upon the day
of Symonde and Jude next ensuynge, he was crowned at Glouceter, of Peter then
bishop of wynchester / Lewys the French kings son being then at Lyncolne.
In which year stood still as gouernoure of the city of London till Mychelmas
next following.

Anno domini.M.CC.xvii. Anno domini.M.CC.xviii. John^ Trauers. wyllyam Hardell.
Anno.i. Andrewe Newlande.
SO soon as the king was crowned / co^myssyons where sent over in his name
into all places of England, to gather strength of men to wythstand the
forenamed Lewys / and to put him with his French men and other allyaunces out
of the land, which then had under their rule and custodye the castellys of
Berkhamsted, of Hertford, and diverse other. And for this Lewys would not sease
of his war and return into France / therefore the foresaid Gwalo or Swalo
the popys legate, accursyd him first by name, and after all such as him
maynteyned or favored in this war again king Henry. Then the forenamed
erlys accompanied with wyllyam earl Marshall of England, wyllyam le Bruyz earl
of Ferrys, with many other yode to Lyncolne / and wanne that town upon the
strangers. where was slain a French man called earl of Perches with many
other souldyours. And there was taken of Englyshme^ Serle earl of wynchester,
and Hu^^ryde Bohum earl of Herforde, with diverse other of name. And in this
while Lewelyn prince of walis, for that he aided the party of Lewys was
accursyd, and his land enterdyted.

After the town of Lyncolne was thus wo^ne from the Frenchmen, Lewys with
other part of his souldyours drew toward London / for so myche as word was
brought to him that his fader had sent to him a new company of souldyours, the
which should land in England shortly. Troth yt was that such an aid of
souldyours was made by the French king, and co^myttyd to a capytayn which in
the cronycle is named Eustace the mu^ke / the which was encou^tryd upon the sea
with a capytayn or master of the.v. portis called Hubert at Burgh, and gave to
him battle, and scomfyght him at length / and sent the head of ye said Eustace
unto ye king. when Lewys hard of these tydyuges, and considered how daily
his strength mynyshed / he was more inclynable unto peace / so ye in conclusion
he took money as says Policronica and yielded up his castellis and strengthis
which he held / and after was assoyled, and so returned into France. But of
this money ye Lewis received, ben diverse opinyons / for the english book
namyth yt a thousand mark, and the french book says.xv.M. mark.

Anno domini.M.CC.xviii. Anno domini.M.CC.xix. Thomas Bokerell. Robert Serle.
Anno.ii. Rafe Gylande.
IN this second year of king Henry, when the land was voyded of the
stran^gers / then inquysycyons were made to know what persons had favored
the party of Lewys again the king / of the which the king pardonyd many of
the lay fee. But ye spyrytuall were put to such fynes, ye they were compellyd
to lay that they might to pledge to please the king / and over that to sue
to Rome to be assoylyd. And this year Ranulphe earl of Chester, for
consyderacyons him mouynge / took his journey into the holy land. But one
cronycle says he took that journey upon him, for so myche as had contrary
his allegeaunce, made homage unto Lewis above named / and for malice which he
bare toward king John^, entendyd at the time of that homage doing to have
made the said Lewys king of England.

Anno domini.M.CC.xix. Anno domini.M.CC.xx. Benetle Ceytur. Robert Serle.
Anno.iii. wyllyam Blounde.
IN this third year of king Henry, a parlyament was holden at London / by
virtue whereof was granted to the king.ii. s. of every plough land thorough
England / which was for ye charge that he before had with Lewys war. Also
this year saint Thomas of Caunterbury was translated in the.vii. day of this
month of July / the which was done with so great a charge unto master
Stephan Langton then archibishop of Caunterbury, that the charge thereof was not
contented many years after ye death of the said Stephan. And this year as
wytnessyth Polycronycon, king Henry began the new work of the church of
westmynster / which after that saying should be in the.xii. year of his age.

Anno domini.M.CC.xx. Anno domini.M.CC.xxi. John^ wayle. Robert Serle.
Anno.iiii. Iosnele Spycer.
IN this year Alexander king of Scotts, married dame Jane or Johan the sister
of king Henry. And this year was great harm done in England by vyolence of a
whyrlewynde / and fyry dragons, and spyrytys were seen fleing in the air. And
this year were proclamacyons made in London and thorough out England, ye all
strangers should avoid the land by Mychelmasse next following / except such as
came with marchau^dyse, and to make sale of them under the kings saufe
co^duyt. which was chefely made to avoid Foukes de Brent and his complycys,
which kept the castle of Bedforde again the kings will and pleasure. And
in this year was king Henry secondaryly crowned at westmynster the.xvii. day
of May. And this year the city called Damas in the holy land, was by christian
men gotten from the Turkys. And this year came out of the holy land into
England Ranulphe earl of Chester, and began to buyld the castellys of
Charteley and of Bestone / and after he builded the abbay of Delartesse of ye
white o^der. For charge and cost of which said castellys and abbay / he took
toll thorough all his lordshyp, of all such as passyd ye way with any chafire
or marchaundyse.

Anno domini.M.CC.xii. Anno domini.M.CC.xxii. Richard wymbeday. Robert Serle.
Anno.v. John^ wayell.
IN this.v. year of king Henry / at Oxenforde was holden a general cou^sayll
of the bishops and clergy of this land. In time of which counsel a man
was taken, the which showed him self to be Christ, and preached many things
of error, which the clerks at those days vsyd. And to approve that he was
Jesus the son of god, and that he was comen to refourme those errors and
other / he showed the carectys and tokens of wounds in his body, hands, and
fete, like to Jesus that was nailed on the cross. Then he was apposyd and
approuyd a false dyssymuler. wherefore by dome of ye counsayll he was iudgyd ^o
be nailed to the cross, and so delyueryd to the executours / the which at a
place called Alburburye nailed him to a cross till he was deed.

Also this year the king laid syege unto the castle of Bedforde that Fowkys
de Brent had so long holden by strength. This syege began upon the even
of the Assencyon of our lord / and so continued till our Lady day assumpcyon.
In which passetyme many strong assautys were made, to the great loss of men
on both parties. But finally about this foresaid day of assumpcyon, yt was
taken by fyerse assaute. wherein was taken the forenamed Fowkys de Brent, and
upon the number of.lxxx. souldyours, whereof the more part were put to death:
and the said Fowkys after he had lain a certain of time in prison, was for
his fynaunce delyueryd and flemyd the land. And in this year came the friar
Mynors first into England. These are graye freres of the order of saint
Fraunces / which if that be true, they should come in to England upon.vi
years before the death of saint Fraunces. For after affyrmaunce of the authoure
of Cronica cronicarum, Iacobus Philippus and other / saint Fraunces dyed in
the year of grace.xii. hundred and.xxvii. And that order was first confyrmed of
Honorius the third of that name pope of Rome, in the year of grace.xii.
hundred and.xxiiii. This order first began under a few number of frerys at
the city of Caunterbury / and after came unto London, and restyd them there
till they had an house there foundyd by Isabell wife of Edward the second,
as after shall be showed in the storye of the said Edward / all be yt the
said house was begone of Margarete the wife of Edward the first.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxii. Anno domini.M.CC.xxiii. Richard Renger. Robert Serle.
Anno.vi. Ioseus le Iosne.
IN this.vi. year of the reygne of king Henry, a conspyracy was made by one
Constantyne the son of Arnulphe within the city of London / for the which
he was drawn and hanged the morrow following our Lady day Assumpcyon. This
conspyracy was dysclosed by a cytezyn named walter Bokerell / and was so
heinous and grievous to ye king that he was in mind and purpose to have thrown
down ye wallys of the city. But when he had well conceived that the persons
which ente^ded this co^spiracy were but of the rascallys of the city, and that
none of ye heddys or rulers of the same were thereunto consenting / he aswagyd
his ire and greuouse dyspleasure, which he entendyd toward the city.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxiii. Anno domini.M.CC.xxiiii. Richard Iyoner. Robert
Serle. Anno.vii. Thomas Lamberde.
IN this seventh year / Johan king of Jerusalem came into England, and
required aid of king Henry to win again that holy city / but he returned
with small comfort. And about this time John^ the son of David earl of
Angwyshe in Scotland, and nere kynnesman unto Ranulphe of Chester, married the
daughter of Lewelyn prince of walys / as yt were for a fynall accord between
the said Lewelyne and Ranulphe ever after to be continued.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxiiii. Anno domini.M.CC.xxv. wyllyam Ioynour. Richard
Reynger. Anno.viii. Thomas Lamberte.
IN this.viii. year of king Henry / a parlyament was holden at where among
other things / the lords and baronye of the land granted unto the king and
to his heirs kings, The grant of ward and marriage
the ward and marriage of their heirs / which deed was after of learned men
called Initium maloru^, that is to mean the beginning of yllys or of harms.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxv. Anno domini.M.CC.xxvi. John^ Trauers. Richard Renger
Anno.ix. Andrew Bokerell.
IN this.ix. year of king Henry / Frederyke the second of that name, and
emperor of Almayne, for his contumacy again the church of Rome was accursyd of
the.ix. Gregory then pope. wherefore soon after he took two cardynallys and
diverse prelatys as they were going to a general counsel kept by the said
pope, at a place called Spolete a city of Italye.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxvi. Anno domini.M.CC.xxvii. Roger Duke. Richard Renger.
Anno.x. Martyne fyz wyllyam.
IN this.x. year of the reygne of king Henry / the plees of the crown were
pletyd in the tower of London. In this year also as wytnessyth the French
cronycle, diverse souldyours, which as to this day kept certain castellys
in the countye of Poytiers, as the castle of Monstruell the castle of Nyort,
and the towns of Angely and of Rochel were by the French king so assautyd,
that they were constrained to give them over to the French king then being
Lewis the nynthe of that name / or after some writers the.viii, and son of
Phylyppe the second.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxvii. Anno domini.M.CC.xxviii. Stephan Bokerell. Roger Duke.
Anno.xi. Henry Cobham.
IN this.xi. year of this king Henry / the shyrywyke of London and of Mydd.
were lettyne to ferme for the sum of.iii. hundred pound, by year to the
shryues of London. And the.xviii. day of February the same year, was granted
by the king that all werys in Thamys should by plucked up and destroyed for
ever. And the.xvi. day of March following, the king granted by his charter
ensealyd, that the cytyzens of London should pass toll free thorough all
England. And if any cytezyns were constrained in any city, borough or town
in England to pay any toll / yt then the shryues of London to attache any man
coming to London of the said city borough or town where such toll was
paid / and him and his goodys to wythholde and keep, till the cytesyners of
London be restoryd of all such money paid for the said toll, with all
costs and damagys sustained for the same. And the xviii. day of Auguste
following, the king granted to ye said cytesyns of London wareyn / that is to
mean that the cytesyns have free lybertye of hunting certain cyrcuyte about
London. And in this year the town of Lymosyn with diverse holds in Pyerregot
and Aluerne in the countye of Guyan, were given up to the forenamed Lewys the
French king. wherefore the king sent over his brother Richard earl of
Cornewayll shortly after / which landed at Bordeaux with.iii. hundred saylles.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxviii. Anno domini.M.CC.xxix. Stephan Bokerell. Roger Duke.
Anno.xii. Henry Cobham.
IN the begynnyge of this.xii. year of king Henry / master Stephan Langton
archbyshoppe of Caunterburye dyed / and the great deane of Paulys master
Richard wethyrshed was his successor. And in this time the fraunchyse and
lybertyes of the city were by the king confyrmyd / and to eueryche of ye
sheryues was granted to have.ii. clerks and.ii. officers without mo. And to
the citesyns of London was also granted this year, that they should have and
use a common seal. And in this year Richard earl of Cornewayll besyeged the
town of saint Machayre in Guyan. And when he had won yt by strength / he
then laid his syege to ye town of Rochell, till yt was restoryd by the
marshall of France.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxix. Anno domini.M.CC.xxx. walter wynchester. Roger Duke.
Anno.xiii. Robert fyz John^.
In this xiii. year of king Henry / upon Trynyte sunday, or after an other
author upon whyt sunday, while the bishop of London was at the high mass
in saint Paulys church of London, fell suddenly such thyckenesse of
darkness of clouds, and therwyth such stenche and tempeste of thunder and
lightening, that the people there assemblyd voyded the church / and the
vycaryes and chanons forsook their deskys, that the bishop remained in great
fere alone / except a few of his menyall seruauntys and such as attendyd
upon him at the altar.

Also in this year the fame of that blessed woman Elyzabeth daughter of the
king of Hungarye began to spredde. The which before and after the death of
her husband Langraue duke of Thorynge in Almayne, shamyd not for Crystes sake
to weshe the sorys and bylys of lazars and of other poor men, beside other
manyfolde deeds of charity. By virtue of which blessed and virtuous life /
she by her life thoroughe the power of god showed many and diverse miracles.
Among the which by her prayer.xvi. men were from death to life arreryd / and a
man borne blind, to sight restoryd. wherefore by Gregorye the.ix. of that name
and pope of Rome / she was among the college of the blessed number of saints
ascrybyd and allowed / and commanded her feast to be hallowed the.xiii. kalendas
of December.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxx. Anno domini.M.CC.xxxi. Richard fyz wyllyam. Roger Duke.
Anno.xiiii. John^ wodbourne.
IN this.xiiii. year of the king was ordained by the mayre, and rulers of the
city of London, that no shryue of that city should co^tynew longer in office
then one year. whereof the cause was, that diverse of them by contynuaunce of
their office did diverse extorcyons, and took brybys of vytellers with other
defautys / which were found and prouyd preiudycyall and hurtefull to the
common weal of the said city.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxxi. Anno domini.M.CC.xxxii. Mychaell of saint Elene. Roger
Duke. Anno.v. walter Denfelde.
IN this.xv. year, the king had granted till him a quindecim or fyftene of
the temporaltye / and a dyme and an half of the spyrytualty, to recover his
lands lost in Normandy, Guyan, and Poyteau. And in this year Huberte of
Burgth, yt at this day was chief justice of England, had greuyd or
dyspleased the king in such wise, that he was compellyd to fle the kings
sight. But he was so strayghtly pursued, yt he was taken in a chapel of
Brentwood in Essex / and so cast in prison at the kings commandment. But
after by labor of the blessed bishop Edmunde of Pountenay, he was reco^cylyd
to the kings favor / when he had been prysoned upon.iiii. months, and
exyled upon.xiii. monethis. And this year was done great harm in London by
fire / the which began in an house of a widow named dame Jane Lambert.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxxii. Anno domini.M.CC.xxxiii. Henry Eldementon. Andrew
Bukerell. Anno.xvi. Gerarde Batte.
IN this.xvi. year / king Henry upon complaynt brought before him, by the
friends of Lewelyn prince of walys, ye willyam le Bruce or Brunze should
co^spyre again the king / or after some, for he kept unlawfully the wife of
the forenamyd Hauylyn: he was after long prysonement hanged. And this year
dyed Ranulphe earl of Chester, Lyncolne, and Hu^tyngedon. And his systers son
named John^, son unto the earl of Angwyshe as before in ye.vii. year of this
king is declared was his heir, and held that lordshyp after him. This John^
of most writers is called John^ Scot / for so myche as his father was a
Scotte. This foresaid Ranulphe had no child, all be yt he had.iiii.
systers. The eldeste hight Molde or Mawde / and was married to David earl of
Angwyshe, and was mother to ye foresaid John^ Scot. The second was named
Hawys, and was married unto the earl of Arundell, The third Agnes, was joined to
the earl of Derbye. And the fourth named Mabely, was married unto the earl of
wynchester called Robert Quynacye. This Ranulphe dyed at walyngforde / and was
buried in the chapter house of the munkys at Chester / and ordained the
forenamed John^ Scotte to be his heir, for that he would not have so noble a
lordshyppe run among or to be dyuyded between so many dystanys. And this
year dyed master Richard wethyrshed archbyshoppe of Caunterburye / whose
successor was blessed Edmunde of Pountenay.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxxiii. Anno domini.M.CC.xxxiiii. Symonde fyz Mar. Andrew
Bukerell. Anno.xvii. Roger Blounte.
IN this.xvii. year of the reygne of king Henry / the forenamed Edmunde of
Pountenay or of Abyndon, was sacred archebyshop of Cau^terburye. He was named
of Pountenay, for so myche as he was buried at Pountnay in Burgoyne. And he was
named Edmunde of Abyndon by reason he was borne i^ Albyndon. This blessed man
as before in the xv. year is showed / reconcylyd Hubert of Burgth to the kings
grace, and caused him to be restored to his former office, as chief justice of
this land. In this year also the king began the foundacyon of the hospytayll
of saint John^ without the Eestgate of Oxenforde. In which year also fill
wonderful wether, as thunder and lightening unlike unto other. An erthquake.
And theruppon followed an erthquake, to the great fere of the inhabytauntys of
Huntyngdon, and nere there about.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxxiiii. Anno domini.M.CC.xxxv. Rafe Aschewy. Andrew
Bukerell. Anno.xviii. John^ Norman.
IN this.xviii. year of king Henry / the Iewys dwelling at Norwyche were
brought to fore the king at westmynster, to answer to a complaynte made
again them by one called John^ Toly of the said town of Norwyche, that they
should stele a child, and yt cyrcumcysyd of the age of a year, and after kept
the same child secret to the intent to crucyfye yt, in despyte of Crystes
relygyon. But how the matter was followed, or how so the Iewys acquytyd them
self by their answer / truth yt is that they returned unpunished. And in
this year Frederyke the second of that name, and emperor of Almayne / married
the sister of king Henry named Isabell, as testyfyeth Policronica.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxxv. Anno domini.M.CC.xxxvi. Gerarde Batte. Andrew Bukerell.
Anno.xix. Robert Ardell.
IN this.xix year. the morrow after saint Hyllary, or the.xiiii. day of
January / Edmunde archbysshoppe of Caunterburye spowsyd the king and Eleanoure
the daughter of the earl of Prouynce in his city of Caunterburye. And in the
vtas of the said Hyllary / she was crowned at westmynster as queen of
England. where in the field by westmynster lyenge at the weste end of the
church, was kept royal solempnite and goodly iustes, by the space of.viii.
days. And the same year the statute of Merton was enacted / which is to mean
certain acts made by act of parlyament, holden by the king and his lords
and commons at ye town of Merton. Statute of Merton.
where among other actys was ordeynyd a remedy for wydowes that were defrauded
of their dowers / and also how heirs with in age should be entreated / and
remedies for such as were stolen or with holde^ contrary ye gardeyns willis.
But more certainly yt was ordained at a perlyame^t at Merton foresaid, which
was holde^ the.xxx. year of this king, in ye morrow following the day of saint
Martyn, or the.xii. day of Noue^ber.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxxvi. Anno domini.M.CC.xxxvii. Henry Cobham. Andrew
Bukerell. Anno.xx. Iurden Couentre.
IN this.xx. year of king Henry / John^ Scot before named earl of Chester,
dyed without issue male. whefore the king co^syderyng the great prerogatyues
belonging to that erledome, gave unto his daughters other possessions, and
took the erledome into his own hand. This John^ dyed at Dorondale / and was
buried among his antecessours at Chester, as affyrmeth Policronycon. And also
he says that he dyed without any child / and that the foresaid exchange was
made with the forenamed systers of Ranulphe, before expressyd in ye.xvi. year
of this king.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxxvii. Anno domini.M.CC.xxxviii. John^ Thesalan. Andrew
Bukerell. Anno.xxi. Gerarde Cordwaner.
IN this.xxi. year, Octoboon a legate of the.ix. Gregory and pope, came into
England / and ordained many good ordynauncys for the church. But not all to
the pleasure of the young clergy of England. wherefore as he one day passed
thorough Oxenford, the scolars sought occasyon again his servants and fought
with them, and slew one of the same / and put the legate in such fere, that he
for his sauegarde took ye belfray of Osney / and there held him till the
kings mynysters coming from Abyndon with strength, medelyd with fair words
deliueryd him and conveyed him after with a competente company unto
walyngford. where he accursyd the misdoers, and punyshed them in such wise,
that the regentes and masters of that university were lastely compellyd to go
barefote thorough Chepe to Paulys at London, and there to ask of him forgyues,
and had that trespace with great dyffyculte forgyuen.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxxviii. Anno domini.M.CC.xxxix. John^ whylhale. Richard
Renger Anno.xxii. John^ Goundresse.
IN this.xxii. year / a false clerk of the foresaid university of Oxenforde,
which feyned him self mad, and beforetyme had espied the secret places of
the kings court / came by a wyndowe toward the kings chamber at his manner of
woodstoke, entendynge to have slain the king. But he was espied by a woman
and taken / and so conveyed to Couentre, and there arreygnyd of that deed.
where after lawful prouys of his malycyous intent made, he for the same was
there drawn and hanged. And in this year upon the even of saint Botolphe /
or the xxvi. day of Iuny, was borne at westmynster Edward that after was
surnamed Longeshanke. This after his father was king.

Anno domini.M.CC.xxxix. Anno domini.M.CC.xl. Remonde Bengly. wyllyam Ioynour.
Anno.xxiii. Rafe Aschewy.
IN this.xxiii. year of king Henry / before the time of the eleccyon of the
shryues of London, one Symo^de fyz Mary, which before in the.xvii year of the
king had been in that office, had purchased a commandment of the king
dyrected to the mayre and rulers of the city, yt they should cause him to be
elect to that office for that year following. But the mayre with the heddes of
the city, considering that commandment to be a derogacyon unto the
lybertyes of ye city, wythstode yt / and chase the forenamed Rafe Ashwy, and
put the said Symonde by / for the which he complained him to the king. Then
the king sent for the mayre and the rulers of the city / and had unto them
many words of dyspleasure, for the dysobeyenge of his commandment / and
fardermore discharged willyam Ioynour which that year was again chosen newely
to be mayre for the year following / and chargyd the cytesyns to proceed to a
new eleccyon for their mayre. which then to satysfye the kings pleasure,
chase Gerarde Batte. By whose meanys and good polycye the said mayr with the
cytesyns demeaned them so well to the king, that they obtained his gracious
favor, and caused the forsayde Symonde to fail of his purpose / and was not
after admyttyd to that office, till he had submyttyd him to the rule of the
mayre and rulers of the same city. The which Symonde behaved him so well
after, that he was admyttyd for an alderman. But in short process after he
demeanyd him so ill, and so contraryously unto the weal and good order of the
city / that he was dyscharged of his aldermanshyp, and dyschargyd from all
rule and counsayll of the city, as in the.xxxiiii. year of this king
following is touched.

Anno domini.M.CC.xl. Anno domini.M.CC.xli. John^ Gysors. Gerarde Batte.
Anno.xxiiii. Mychaell Tony.
IN this.xxiiii. year of king Henry / saint Paulys church of London was
newely halowyd. And the great Chaan of Tartarys before in the second year of
king John^ myndyd or touched of their beginning, in this year after he had
from the Turkys won myche of the Eest lands, he sent an host into the land
of Hu^gary / the which held the people of that country so short, that as
witnessyth the author of Policronica and other, they were constrained of
necessyte to ete their own children and other unlawful metys. But the authoure
of Cronica cronicarum says, that this mysery fell to the people of Hungary, in
the year of our lord.xii. hundred and.xxi. which after that saying should be
in the fyfte year of this king.

Anno domini.M.CC.xli. Anno domini.M.CC.xlii. John^ Uyoll. Remonde Bengley.
Anno.xxv. Thomas Duresyne.
IN this.xxv. year of king Henry / Gerarde Batte was again chosen mayre for
this present year. And after whose eleccyon, he was by the worshipful of the
city conveyed unto woodstoke, and presentyd after the custom unto the king.
But the king enfourmed of his last years dealing, by such as ought to him
no good will / said that he would not admytte him to that office, till such
time as he came to westmynster with which answer the said Gerarde with his
company returned unto London. It was not long after or the king came to
westmynster / where according to their duty the cytesyns of London again
awayted upon the king to know his pleasure. The (...) presence
where the king called before him the said mayre / and after certain
questyons to him put, he caused him to be sworn in his presence. After which
oath to him given / the king charged him by virtue of the same, that he should
not take of the bakers and bruers and other vytellars of the city.xl. pound,
which other of his predecessors, and also he that last year had taken. And
also that he incontynently after his coming to London, should restore unto the
said vytellars and other cytesyns, all such money as he had with wrong in
that precedyng year taken of the comynaltye of the city. But for the said
Gerarde allegyd for him certain consideracyons, be sechynge the king to
pardon him of that restytucyon / the king in dyspleasure swore a great oath,
that he should not that year be mayre, nor at any time there after. And so the
commons certyfyed of the kings pleasure, chase in his place or stead / Reyner
de Bungaye. And this year the king yode into walys. whereof herynge David then
prince of walys, met with the king at Ruthlande / and submyttyd him to the
kings grace. Also this year the blessed Edmunde archebyshoppe of Caunterbury,
being at Pountnay in the prouynce of Burgoyne dyed / and there was buried /
and was after translatyd into ye same place within.x. years after his death, by
commandment of Innocent the fourth then pope of Rome / because of his
manyfolde miracles which god showed for him after his death. All be yt in his
legende yt is showed that he dyed twentye mile from Pountnay called Soly / and
was after buried and translated at Pou^tnay. Of this blessed man Polycronycon
shewyth many vertuyes in the.xxxv. chapter of his.vii. book, which here I
over pass for lengthynge of the time. And this year one wyllyam of the Marshe,
was at London for treason drawn and hanged. First older men of London.
This year also were alder men first chosen within the city of London /
which then had the rule of the city and of the wards of the same / and
were then yearly chau^gyd, as now the shryues be changed.

Anno domini.M.CC.xlii. Anno domini.M.CC.xliii. John^ fyz John^. Remonde
Bongley. Anno.xxvi. Rafe Ashewy.
IN this.xxvi. year of king Henry / Bonyface was sacryd archbyshoppe of
Caunterbury. And this year the king with a fair company saylyd into Normandy.
which vyage as says ye french cronycle was made by the styrynge of a French
man named earl of the March / for so myche as ye said earl refusyd to do
homage unto Alphons brother unto Lewys the.x. of that name, and surnamed saint
Lewys then king of France. This Lewys the year before had married his said
brother unto the daughter of the earl of Toulouse / and had given to his
said brother the erledome of Poyteau, with all the lands of Aluerne.

By reason whereof he would have caused the said earl of March, to have done
homage unto the said Alpho^s for such lands as the said earl held of the
said erledome of Poytyers. But for ye said earl of March knew well that the
right of Guyan belongyd to the king of England / he therefore, and for other
allyaunces made bewene king Henry and him, refusyd the doing of that homage /
and after came to king Henry, and excytyd him to make war upon the French
king. By reason whereof the king made prouysyon, and so landed with a strong
power at Bordeaux. After the affyrmaunce of the french book, this earl of the
Marchis had married the mother of king Henry.

Then it folowyth in this while the French king warryd upon ye lands of the
earl of March / and had wo^ne.ii. castellys of his named Fou^teneys and
Uyllers, with diverse other which I pass over. And when he had beten down
some of them, and some storyd with new soudyours / he then went unto a castle
named Maucoune, and brake a bridge after him, for so myche as he was warned
that the king of England was nere unto him. At the said bridge was a little
skyrmyshe / but little harm was there done. Then the French king took the way
over the river of Tharent toward Taylbourgh, wastyng and destroyenge the
country as he went / and so forth toward the town called Saynces. And king
Henry with his host made toward him in all that he might. In keeping this
course / the vawarde of the king encountryd with the earl of Boleyne, which
was upon the French kyngys party. That season the earl of Saynces bare the
banner of ye earl Marches, being in ye vaward of the king. Between these two
earls was sore fight / so that many a man upon both parties was slain / among
the which the said earl of Saynces was slain. Then came on both strengthes
upon either side, so that both kings fought in that battle / and great
slaughter of men was upon both sides. But in the end the French men were
vyctours, and took prisoners.xxii. men of name, as knights and of higher
degree, and.iii. clerks of great fame and riches, beside other to the number
of.v. hundred of mean people as wytnessyth the french book. But of these men
of name, nor yet of the rich clerks, none is named, nor yet showed what good
they paid for their rao^some. wherefore me list to write no farther of this
great victory / all be it yt the said book says farther, that king Henry for
fere turned back unto Bordeaux / and there made means to the king of
France for a peace. But of all this find I no word in the english chronicles.

Then the earl of Marches by mean of his son, was reconcyled unto the
French king, amd restoryd to his lands / except three castellys, which were
named Mespyne, Cretaye, and Estardye / the which the French king retained in
his own possessyon. And soon after came unto the French king the lords of
the castellys of Myrabell, and of Mortaynge / submyttynge them also unto the
kings grace / besechyng him of pardon, that they had so to his high
dyspleasure favored his enymy the king of England. And after came in diverse
other lords and capytaynes / so that he was in possessyon of all the country
of Guyan and Poyteau, unto ye river of Gyrou^de.

I have rehersyd the more of this cronycle of France / to the entente that the
reders may well apperceyue the pride and boste of the Frenchmen. For in all
their writing, when they come to any matter that sou^dyth any thing to their
honor / yt is written in the lengest and most showing manner to their honor and
worship. But as I have said before in the v. capyter of the storye of
the.ii. Phylyppe king of France / if yt sound any thing to their dishonor,
then shall yt be abreuyatyd or hyd, that the troth shall not be known. And
that appears well here by their own writing. For in ye.vii. year of king
John^, yt is showed how Phylyppe the second then king of France had won
all Normandy and Guyan. And yet at this day this king Lewys warryd again in
the same country / so that they ever tell of the wynnyng, but they touch
nothing of the again losing.

Then yt folowyth in the storye / when king Henry had as before is said,
concludyd the foresaid peace, of the which by mine author is no term set /
the king returned into England.

Anno domini.M.CC.xliii. Anno domini.M.CC.xliiii. Hugh Blount. Rafe Ashewy.
Anno.xxvii. Adam Basynge.
IN this.xxvii. year, the king returned from Bordeaux into England. And this
year the plees of the crown were kept in the tower of London. And this year
Gryffyth, which was son of Lewelyn lately prince of walys, entendyng to have
broken prison / fell over the wall of the inner ward of the tower of London
and brake his neck.

Anno domini.M.CC.xliiii. Anno domini.M.CC.xlv. Rafe Spycer. Mychael Tony.
Anno.xxviii. Nycholas Batte.
IN this.xxviii. year of king Henry as testyfyeth Polycronycon / a Jew dygged
the ground in a place in Spayn called Tholeet, to the intent to make him a
more larger vineyard. where in time of his dyggynge he fande a stone closyd
on all parties. But for he perceived yt to be holowe he brake the stone / and
found therein a book as bygge as a sawter, with leuys all of tree. This book
was write in nthre diverse languagys, in greek, in ebrewe, and in latyne / and
the matter thereof was of three worlds that should come. Of the which he poyntyd
the coming of Christ to the beginning of the third world, which was
expressyd in this manner of wise. In the beginning of the third world, gods
son shall be borne of a maid. when the Jew had well beholden the contentys of
the book, and saw that yt contained so long time as from Adam to Anticriste,
and showed many prophecyes that were fulfyllyd and paste / he anon renouncyd
his iudaisme or Moysen law, and was crystyned, and lived after as a christian
man.

Anno domini.M.CC.xlv. Anno domini.M.CC.xlvi Robert Cornehyll. John^ Gysors.
Anno.xxix. Adam Bewly.
IN this.xxix. year / Nycholas Batte contrary the ordinance before in
the.xiiii. year of this king made, was again chosen shryue of London. For the
which he was conuycte of periurye / and so dyscharged and punyshed. And for yt
Mychaell Tony, which for this year also was chosen mayre, was by deposycyon of
the Aldermen found gyltye in the said crime of periurye: therefore he was
deposyd from his office and punisshed. And for him was chosen mayre Johan
Gysours / and for Nicholas Batte was chosen shryue Robert of Cornhyll. In this
year also as testyfyeth Ieffrey of Monmouth / Robert Grosehed the^ bishop of
Lyncolne, with other prelatys of ye land, complained them unto the king of
the waste of the goods and patry monye of the church, which daily was wasted
and mysspent by the alyaunt bishops and clerks of this land. Of the which
strangers one named master Martyne, and nere kynnysman of Innocent the third
late pope was one. The which the king by help of the English bysshoppes
avoided, with other like offenders out this realm. Also in this year the
patryarke of Jerusalem, sent unto the king a neume of blood / which was
kept at saint Thomas of Acris in London till the year following.

Anno domini.M.CC.xlvi. Anno domini.M.CC.xlvii. Symonde fyz Mary. John^ Gysors.
Anno.xxx. Lawrence Frowyke.
IN this year theneume of blood sent before to the king / was with most
solemn processyon, the king with great noumber of his lords being present,
conveyed from saint Thomas fore said unto westmynster, in right solemn wise
with processyon and other acccordyng obseruaunces to such a relyke
apperteynynge. And in this year dyed Frederike the emperor of Almayn / which
as before is touchyd in the xviii. year of this king, married Isabell sister
unto the king. The which for his rebellyon again ye church of Rome, was
accursyd first of the ix. Gregory / and lastely of Innocent the.iiii. he was
again cursyd and depryued of his imperyall dygnyte / gyuynge commyssyon and
lyce^ce to the electours of the emperor, to chose a new. The which were of
so many minds in their eleccyon, that some chase the duke of Thoryng, some the
earl of Holande, and some chase the kings brother Richard earl of Cornewayll,
which caused strife that enduryd long after / so that the only emperor of
Almayne was not of all men alowyd, till Radulphus duke or earl of Habspurghe in
Almayne, was chosen by one assente to that dygnyte / and thereunto admittyd by
Gregory the.ix. of that name, in the year of our lord.xii. hundred and.lxxiii.
And so that varyaunce enduryd upon.xxvii. years, to ye great impoueryshyng of
Italy, and the lands of the empire. Then as before is said this Frederyk dyed
vnassoyled, and was buried in a city called Ferenciola, with this
superscrypcyon upon his toumbe. Si probitas, sensus, virtutis gratia, census,
Nobilitas orti, possent refistere morte:
Non foret extinctus, Fredericus qui iacet intus.


which versys are thus myche to mean in English. If excellent of wit, or
grace of good virtue,
Or nobylnesse of birth might unto death resyste /
Then should this Frederyke mortal fate exchewe,
which him has closyd here now in his chyste.
But none of these may erthly man assyste
To strive with death / but all must pay him debt,
Noble and innoble there nothing may let.
An other versyfyoure made these.ii. versys following, of the interpretacyon of
this name Frederyke. Frefremit in mundo, de deprimit alua profundo.
Re res rimatur, cus cuspide cuncta minatur.


The which may in this manner of wise be englyshed. Fre fretyth this world /
and de confoundyth all,
High things of honor, into depenesse dark.
R^sercheth besyly ye goods general
Of this world both of the lay and clerk.
Making no questyon in his most cruel work,
And cus with sword all thing does manace.
And this is Frederyke all deuoyde of grace.


Anno domini.M.CC.xlvii. Anno domini.M.CC.xlviii. John^ Uoyle. Pyers Aleyne.
Anno.xxxi. Nycholas Batte.
IN this.xxxi. year of the reygn of king Henry / Lewys which is surnamed saint
Lewis then king of France, with a conuenyent host sailed into the holy land
/ and there warred upon Crystes enymyes, and wanne the city of Damas at his
first landynge / and after tarried there from ye beginning of ye month of
Iuny, to the.xxii. day of November / and after departed thens toward Babylon,
entendynge to have laid syege to the city. But fortune was to him so
contrary, that by sykenesse and other casueltyes he lost myche of his people
/ and in the end was him self taken prisoner of the Turkis, as more plainly
shall be showed in the story of the said Lewys following.

And in this year was a mighty erthquake in England, that the like to yt was
not seen many years before.

Also this year the king seasyd the fraunchyse of the city of London upon
the even of saint Bartholomew, for a judgment that was given by the mayre and
aldermen again a wedowe named Margaret Uyell / and commyttyd the rule of the
city to wyllyam Haueryll and Edward of westmynster, till our lady day next
following. At which season the mayre and shryues were again to their offices
admyttyd.

Anno domini.M.CC.xlviii. Anno domini.M.CC.xlix. Nycholas Joy. Mychaell Tony.
Anno.xxxii. Geffrey wynton.
IN this.xxxii. year of the king the wharfe of London called queen hythe, was
taken to ferme by the comynaltye of the city, to pay yearly therefore.l.
pound. The which was then committed to the shryues charge / and so has
contynuyd ever sen that time to this day. whereof the profytys and tollys are
so sore mynyshed, that at this day yt is little worth over.xx. mark or xv.
pound one year with a another. And this year fell great dystemperaunce of
wether, in such wise that the ground was bareyne upon the same / and other
myshappys folowyd anon theurppon. And this year when the matter aforenamed of
Margarete Uyell wydow was well examyned / the judgment thereof was founden good
and true. wherefore the cytezens enjoyed the lybertyes without interrupcyon /
all be yt the king was with them some what agreuyd, for so myche as they at
his request would not exchange with the abbot of westmynster, such lybertyes
as they had in Myddelsex of the kings grant, for other to be had in
other places.

Anno domini.M.CC.xlix. Anno domini.M.CC.l. Rafe hardell. Roger fyz Roger.
Anno.xxxiii. John^ Tosalane.
IN the.xxxiii. year of king Henry in the month of October dyed Robert
Grosthede bishop of Lyncolne. He was the maker of the book called Pety Caton
and many other.

This Robert for so mich as ye.iiii. Innocent pope, greuyd ye church of
England with taskis and payme^tes again reason / he therefore sent unto him a
sharp pystle. This pope than gave unto a child a neuew of his, a chanonry
which fell void in the church of Lyncolne / and sent the child unto the
bishop, chargynge him to admytte the said child, and to set him in his
place. But this bishop boldly denied the resceyt of the child / and wrote
unto the pope yt he would not nor should receive such to ye cure of soul, yt
could not rule the self. Therefore this Robert was somoned to apere before ye
pope, An appele from the pope.
and thereupon accursyd. The^ he appealyd from Innoce^tis court unto Crystes
own trone. Then after the death of this Robert as the pope lay in his bed at
his rest / one aperyd to him in clothyng of a bishop, and said to him arise
wretch and come to thy dome / and after smote him wych his cross upon the
left side. Upon the morn after, the pope was fou^den deed, and his bed all
blody. But of this is nothing in the cronycle or storye of Innocent.

After that saying of Polycronycon, this bishop Grostehede should dye in
the.xxxvii. year of this king Henry / the which saying agrees better with
the storye, except that the said pope lived after the death of the said
bishop.vi. year.

Anno domini.M.CC.l. Anno domini.M.CC.li. Humfrey Basse. John^ Norman.
Anno.xxxiiii. wyllyam fyz Richard.
IN this.xxxiiii. year was an exceeding wind, the which in sundry places of
England did great harm / which was in the beginning of this year upon the
day of Simon and Jude. About this time in the duchy of Burgoyne as testyfyeth
Fasciculus temporu^ and other an hill removed from his proper place, and glode
by many a mile / and lastely joined him unto other hyllys. In the which
glydynge or ronnynge, the said hill oppressyd or slew v. thousand people.
And this year Simon fyz mary alderman of London / for his dysobedyence and
evil counsel that he gave unto Margarete Uyell, before in the xxxi. year of
this king touchyd, with other secret labors and matters entendyd by him to the
hurt of the city, was dyschargyd of his aldermanshyppe, and put out of the
counsayll of the city.

Anno domini.M.CC.li. Anno domini.M.CC.lii. Laurence Frowyke. Adam Basynge.
Anno.xxxv. Nycholas Batte.
IN this.xxxv. year of king Henry, began the friar Augustynes to build or
inhabyte them in walys, in a place called woodhouse.

And in this year married king Henry his daughter Mary, or after some writers
Margarete, unto Alexander king of Scottys at the city of york / and did
receive homage of the said Alexander for the kyngedome of Scotts, or for the
prouynce of Scotland, in like manner as many of his progenytours had done
diverse and many times before / as in this work both before this time and also
after is showed.

Anno domini.M.CC.li. Anno domini.M.CC.lii. wyllyam Durham. John^ Toleson.
Anno.xxxvi. Thomas wymborne.
IN this.xxxvi. year, the king granted unto the shryues of London, that they
should yearly be alowyed of.vii. pound, for certain pryuyleges or ground
belonging to saint Paul's church / the which at this day is allowyd by the
Barons of the kings excheker, to euerey shryue when they make their account
in the office of the pype. Also this year was granted by the king for the
citesens more ease / that where before time they vsyd yearly to present their
mayre to ye kings presence, in any such place as he then were in England,
that now from this time forthwarde they should for lack of the kings
presence being at westmynster, present their mayre so chosen unto the barons
of his Excheker / and there to be sworn and admyttyd as he before times was
before the king.

Anno domini.M.CC.lii. Anno domini.M.CC.liii. John^ Northampton. Nycholas
Batte. Anno.xxxvii. Richard Pycarde.
IN this.xxxvii. year / the water of the sea about the day of saint Paulyn
in the month of January rose of such heyghte, that yt drowned many vyllagys
and housys nere unto yt in diverse places of England. And this year the king,
the queen, and sir Edward his son, with Bonyface archebyshoppe of
Caunterburye, and diverse other nobles of the realm / sailed into Normandye
and tarried at Bordeaux a certain of time. But of their dedys or cause of their
saylynge thither, is no mencyon made in the cronycle of England. How be yt in
the French book yt is showed, yt the cause was to join Edward the kings
son unto the sister of ye king of Spain by marriage.

This year also the water of Thamys sprange so high, that yt drowned many
housys about the waters side / by mean whereof myche ma^chaundyse was peryshed
and lost. And this year the cytezyns had granted of the king, that no
cytesyns should pay scauage or toll for any bestes by them brought, as they
before times had vsyd.

Anno domini.M.CC.liii. Anno domini.M.CC.liiii. Robert Belyngton. Richard
Hardell. Anno.xxxviii. Ranfe Aschewye.
IN this.xxxviii. year, by procurement of sir Richard earl of Cornewayll, for
dyspleasure which he bare toward ye city for exchau^ge of certain ground
to the same belonging / the king under color that the mayre had not done
due execucyon upon the bakers for lacking of their syzys, seized the
lybertyes of the city. That is to be understood, that where the mayre and
comynaltye of the city, had by the kings grant the city to ferme with
diverse customys and offices, for astynted and ascertayned sum of money / now
the king set in officers at his pleasure, the which were accomptable unto
him for all revenues and profytes that grew within the said city. But within
four days following the feste of saint Edmunde the bishop, or by the.xix.
day of November / the cytesyns agreed with the said earl for.vi. hundred
mark. After which agreement with him concluded, they soon after were restoryd
unto their lybertyes.

This year sir Edward the kings son and heir was married unto Eleanour ye
kings sister of Spayn. And in the Cristmas weke, the king landed at Dover, and
ye queen with him, with many other lords. when the king was comen to London,
he was lodgyd in the tower / where he sent for to come unto him the mayre and
the shryues, with whom he resoued grievously for the escape of one called John^
Gate. This John^ had murderyd a pryour allied unto the king. The mayre laid
the charge of this matter from him unto ye shryues, for so myche as to them
belonged the keeping of all prysons with in the city / so that the mayre
returnyd home, and the shriues remained there as prisoners by ye space of a
month after or more. And in their places and for them were chosen Steven
Oystergate and Henry walmoode. But how the old shryues passyd out of the kings
danger I find not.

Anno domini.M.CC.liiii. Anno domini.M.CC.lv. Stephan Oystergate. Richard
Hader. Anno.xxxix. Henry walmoode
IN this.xxxix. year in the feast of saint Etheldrede / dame Eleanour wife
unto the kings son sir Edward, came unto London / where she was honorably
receued of the cytesyns, and the city rychely curteyned and garnyshed with
diverse rich clothes / where the king was present at her coming. And she
was honorably conveyed through the city to saint Iohn^s without Smythfelde,
and there lodgyd for a while. But after she was removed unto Sauoy.

It was not long after yt the king seasyd the lybertyes of the city, for
certain money which ye queen claymed for her right of the cytesyns / so that
about saint Martyns tide in Noue^ber, they gave unto his grace iiii. hundred
mark, and then were restoryd to their said lybertyes / and the kings under
treasourer dischat ^yd, the which for ye time was made custos or keeper of the
city. In the feast of saint Scycyle, or the.xxii. day of november ensuynge,
were brought unto westmynster.lxxx. and xxii. Jews from Lyncoln^ / the which
were also accusyd of the crucyfyenge of a child at Lyncolne in the despyte of
Crystes relygyon / which Jews were after sent unto ye tower of London. Of the
which in process of time after, xviii. were conuycte and hangyd / and the
the other remained long after in prison. In the vygyll of saint Andrew sir Edward
the kings son came to London from beyond the sea. And the king of Scottys
with the queen his wife came in the somer season unto the king to his manner of
woodstoke / where he dysportyd him a season, and after returned into Scotland
/ leuynge his wife with her mother till she were lyghted of child. And upon
ye day of the decollacyon of saint John^ / the king, the queen, and the queen
of Scotts came to London / where they were honorably received, and so conveyed
unto westmynster.

Anno domini.M.CC.lv. Anno domini.M.CC.lvi. Matthew Bokerell. Richard Hardell.
Anno.xl. John^ Mynoure.
IN this.xl. year, entryd ye land diverse lords of Almayne / the which in
Crystmas weke upon the day of ye Innocents, made homage unto sir Rychard earl
of Cornewayl and brother to the king / the which as then stood king of
Almayne and of Romans. And the thursdaye next following he departed from the
kings court, and spedde him with his wife and sir Henry his son unto the sea side / and after took shyppyng in Iarnesay the.xxvii. day of Apryll, and
landed at Dordreth in Holande the first day of May next ensuynge. And upon
assencyon day after, he was crowned king of Romans in the city of
Aquisgranum.

This year upon the first day of Auguste / the king took his journey
toward walys, for to subdue Lewelyn the son of Gryffyth the which with his
welshemen rebellyd again the king, for so much as sir Edward his son to whom
he had little before given the erledome of Chester, would have changed some
of their skyttyshe condycyons. And for to bring his purpose the better about /
he sent for an army of soldiers into Irlande, and tarried for their coming
at his castle of Genocke. But the year passed far on or his people were
gathered / so that by the advise of his lords he strengthyd there a certain
castellys and returned for that year into England.

And about the feast of the Natyuyte of our lady / a concord and a peace
was concluded between ye Londyners and the abbot of the holy cross of waltham
/ the which had been in suyte many years before, for certain dystresses taken
by the abbottis officers of the Lo^doners, when they came with their
mercymonyes unto the fair of waltham / where as now yt is agreed that all
such dystressys should be restoryd / and if any were peryshed or lost for
long keeping, that then the abbot to content and pay to the parties the value
in money, of such distressys so peryshed or lost / and that the cytesyns
should enjoy the lybertyes of that fair ever after, without payenge of any
tollage or toll.

Anno domini.M.CC.lvi. Anno domini.M.CC.lvii. Richard Ewell. Richard Hardell.
Anno.xii. wyllyam Ashewy.
IN this.xli. year and beginning of the same, was founden in the kings
warderobe at wyndesore a byll or roll closyd in grene wax, and not known
from whens yt should come / in the which roll was contained diverse articles
again ye mayre and rulers of the city of London, and that by them the
comynaltye of the city was grievously tasked and wrongyd. which byll was
presentyd at length to the king. wheruppon he anon sent John^ Mancell one of
his iustycys unto London / and there in the feast of the conuersyon of saint
Paul by the kings authoryte, called at Paulys cross a Folkmot / being there
present sir Richard de Clare earl of Glouceter, and diverse other of the
kings counsayll. where the said John^ Mancell caused the said roll to be
read before the comynaltye of the city / and after showed to the people that
ye kings pleasure and mind was, that they should be ruled with justice / and
that the lybertyes of the city should be maynteyned in every point. And if the
king might know those persons that so had wrongyd the cominaltye of the
city / they should be grievously punyshed to the example of other. And that
done, the said John^ Mansell chargyd the mayre, that every Alderman in his
ward should upon the morrow following assemble his wardemote / and that all
those wardemotys should assemble in one place, and choose of them self without
any counsayll or advise of any of their alderme^.xxxvi. persons, and them to
present before the lords and him, at the same hour of ye next day in the
bishops paleys at Paulys. Then upon the morrow all thing was done according
to his commandment. And when ye said xxxvi. persons were presentyd before
the said John^ Mansell, Henry Baa iustycys and other / the said John^ said
unto them, that they upon their oath should certyfye all such persons as they
knew gylty in the artycles before unto the comynaltye showed. whereunto the
said.xxxvi. cytesyns answered, yt yt was contrary their lybertyes to be sworn
so many, for any matter of trespass between the king and any of his cytezyns /
wherefore they required a sparynge. with which answer the said John^ Mansell
being dyscontentyd / warnyd them to appear before the kings cou^sayll at ye
Guyldehall upon the morrow following / where they kept their day. And
thither came the said iustycys John^ Mansell, and Henry Baa, sir Henry wengham
chaunceller of England, Phylyppe Louell vndertreasorer, and diverse other of
the kings counsayll.

Then the said John^ Mansell exortyd the said personys to be sworn by many
meanys, as he the other day had done. But all was in vain / for they
excusyd them always that yt was contrary their oath and lybertye of their
city. wherefore the kings counsayll departed from the hall in party
dyscontentyd, and showed unto the king the demeanor of the said cytesyns.

Upon the even of ye Purificacyon of our lady, yt mayre being warned yt the
king should come to westmynster / he with the more part of the Aldermen rode
unto Knyghtbrydge, and houyd there to salute the king, and to know his
forther pleasure. But when the king came nere that place and hard of their
being there / he sent unto them a squyre of household and chargyd them that
they should not presume to come in his sight. with which message they being
greatly dysco^fortyd, returned home to the city. Afterward in the Octauys of
the puryfycacyon of our Lady, returned from the court Mychaell Tony and Adam
Basynge / the which before were sent by the mayre to such friends as they had
in the court, to know the cause of the kings high dyspleasure. The which
brought word that the king was well minded unto the city / but he was in full
purpose to have such persons chastised that had oppressyd the comynaltye of
the same. Upon the morrow following, came unto ye Guyldhall John^ Mansell with
other of the kings counsayll / the which to the people there assembled, showed
many fair and plesaunt words. Among the which he declared that the kings
mind and will was, to correct all such persons as had oppressyd the
comynaltye of that his deryste beloved city / and asked of the commons whyther
they would be agreeable unto the same. The which incontynently many such as
knew little what the matter meant, cried with out dyscrecyon, ye, ye, ye,
nothing regarding the lybertye of the city. And after ye grant thus had of
the commons / the said John^ Mansell dyschargyd the mayre, shryues, and
chamberleyn of their offices / and delyueryd the custodye thereof unto the
constable of the tower / and put in the rome of the shryues Mychaell Tony and
John^ Audryan. And over that, all rollys of tollys and tallages before made,
were delyueryd unto the said John^ Ma^sell / the which he there sealyd and
redeliueryd them unto the chamberleyne. when the commons had beholden all
this business, they returned unto their housys all confused.

This matter thus orderyd / the said John^ Mansell with diverse of the kings
counsayll kept their courts daily the sondayes except, till the first
sunday of lent, the which that year was the.xxv. day of February / calling
before him.xii. wards, of ye city. Of the which.xii. wards of eueryche of
them was taken three men, so* that of those.xii. wards.xxxvi. me^ were
impanellyd and sworn, for to inquire of the foresaid artycles, and what
personys of the city had offendyd in them. This court thus kept and holden at
Guyldehall / no man was called to answer, nor no questyon put unto any person
by the said enquest or by any other. Upon the said sunday of lent, the mayre,
aldermen, and shryues, with the said enqueste, and four men of every ward,
were chargyd to appear at westmynster before the king / at which apperaunce
they were cou^termau^dyd till upon the next morrow. At which season they
coming into the kings exchekyr / fond syttyng there the earls of Glouceter,
and of warwyke, John^ Mansell, Henry Baa iusticys, the constable of the tower,
the custos of the city, and diverse other of the kings counsayll. Then was
called by name Rafe hardell that year may ^e, Nycholas Batte, Nycholas fyz
Iosne, Matthew Bokerel, John^ Tolesham, and John^ le Mynoure aldermen. Then
said John^ Mansell, yt the king by his laws and inquysycyon of the cytesyns
of the city, had founden them culpable, that they had wronged and hurt the
comynaltye of his city by diverse means, as by the said inquysycyons apperyd
/ and forthwyth caused yt to be read before them. And when the more part
thereof was read, he said unto them: thus may you se that the comynaltye of
the said city has been by you grievously oppressyd / and by your meanys and
counsayll the common weal of the same dystroyed, as by altering of the tollys
and other good ancient customys, turnynge them to your synguler advantage and
lucre. All which matters the said Rafe and his company denied / and that the
commons was not by any such meanys by them nor none of them greuyd or hurt /
and that they offryd to be iustyfyed and judged by the law and customys of the
city. Then Henry Baa justice, asked of them whyther they would bide the
adventure of the enquery that they had hard read before / or else stand
upon the saying of the other wards, that yet had not ben sworn, but they
kept them to their first answer. Then John^ Mansell frayned of ye mayre
what was their law and custom. The mayre answered and said, that for
trespace of a cytesyn done again ye king, he should defend him by.xii. of
the said cytesyns / and for murder or sleynge of a man by.xxx. cytesyns / and
for trespace again a stranger by the oath of.vi. and him self. Then after
many reasons made by the said John^ Mansell, and also by the mayre and his
aldermen / day was given to them to appear upon the morrow before the king
and his counsel.

Upon the day following ye king with many of his lords sitting in the said
exchekyr, the foresaid inquysycyon was read. And that done the mayre and
aldermen were called in by name / and two aldermen more which before were not
called / that is to say Arnolde Thedmare and Henry walmode. when Rafe Hardell
had hard the king speak in the matter / he took such fere that he and
Nycholas Batte without farther answer, put them in the kings grace / sauyd to
them their lybertyes and fraunchyses of the city. But the other.vi. besought
the king of his right wysenes that they might then be demyd after the laws
and customys of the city. Then was laid unto their charge that over many
wrongs by them done to the king and the comynaltye of the city, they had
alteryd ye kings beam, and orderyd it to the advantage of them self and
other rich men of the city. wherun to the parties answered, and said that
the alteracion of the beam was not done by them only / but by ye aduyce and
consent of.v. hundred of the best of the city. For where before time the
weyer vsyd the lene his draught toward the marchaundyse so that the byar had
by that mean x. or xii. pound in a draught to his advantage, and the seller
so myche dysauauntage / now for indyfferencye and egalytye of both personys or
marchau^tys, was ordained that the beam should stand vpryght, ye cle^^e thereof
enclynynge to neither party / as yt does in weyenge of gold and silver / and
the byer to have allowed of the seller for all things.iiii. pound only in
every draught.

After these reasons and other by them made / the king commanded that upon
the morning following, a folkmoot should be called at Paulys cross / and so
that court was dyssoluyd, and the mayre and the other returned to London.
Upon the morrow the folkmoot being at Pawles cross assemblyd / these.vi.
aldermen heryng the murmuracion of the common people, and knowing that the
aldermen nor the worshypfull of the city should have little or no saying in this
matter, ferynge their cause yode into a chanons house of Powlys / where at that
time the said Johan Mansel and other sent from the king tarried the
assemblynge of the people / and showed unto them that they entedyd not any
longer to plede with the king, but were contentyd to put them fully in the
kings grace and mercy / saving always to them and all other cytesyns their
lybertye and fraunchyse of the cite. After which agreement the said. Johan
Mansell with the other came unto the court of Folkmoot / where unto the people
was rehersyd a fair and a pleasant tale, promysyng to them that their
lybertyes should be holy and inuyolatly preseruyd by ye king, with many other
things to ye great comfort of the common people. And lastely was axyd of them
wheter the law and custom were such as above is rehersyd or no. whereunto like
vndyscret and unlearned people they answered and cried rabbyshely nay, nay, nay
/ not wythsta^dynge that the said law and custom had before times ben used
time out of mind. But to this was another mayre nor aldermen nor other of the
great of the city that might impugn or make any reason, for the vpholdynge
of their ancient lawys or customys.

And no wonder though the king were thus hedy or greuouse to the city / for
by such evil dysposyd and malycyouse people as he had about him, the land
was ill ruled, and much myschefe was vsyd. whereof ensuyd myche sorrow after, as
ye shall here in the sequel of the storye. Then John^ Mansell called the mayre
and aldermen before him / and chargyd them to be at westmynster the morrow
following, to give attendaunce upon the kings grace. Upon the morrow the
mayre and aldermen taryenge the kings coming in the great hall at
westmynster / lastely the king came into saint Stephaus chapel. where a
season he held a cou^sayll with his lords / and after yode into the chekyr
chamber, and there sat him down and his lords about him. Anon after the
mayre and aldermen were called into the said chamber, and soon there after
called by name, and commaundyd to stand nere to the bar. Then Henry Baa
justice said unto the mayre and the vii. aldermen, that for so myche as by
form of the kings laws, they were found culpable in certain articles
touching tra^sgressyon again the king / therefore the court awardyd that they
should make fine and ransom after the dyscrecyon of the said court. But for
they had put them in the kings grace and mercy / the king has commaundyd
the fine to be put in respyte, that ye be not payned so grievously as ye have
deseruyd. After which judgment given, they kneled down / and then the mayre
with weeping terys, thanked the king of his bountye and goodness, and
besought him to be good and gracyous lord unto the city, and unto them as his
faithful subiectys. whereunto the king made none answer, but rose straight
up and so yode his way leuynge them there. Anon as the king was departed,
they were all arestyd and kept there, till they had founden suerty / and
eueryche alderman of them dyscharged of his ward and office yt they had
within the city. But shortly after they put in suertyes, and so returnyd
heuely to London And shortly after was wyllyam fyz Richard by the kings
commandment made mayre, and Thomas fyz Thomas and wyllyam Grappysgate
shryues. After this, day by day the chamberlayn was called to acco^pte before
the said John^ Mansell, of all such tollys as were gadered in time of the
mayraltie of John^ Tolesham and of Rafe Hardell / being present to here the
said account diverse of the comynaltie of the city, but none of the heddys.
By the which account no defaute might be arrectyd unto any of the forenamed
persons conuycte before the king. By reason whereof diverse of them were
admyttyd to the kings favor shortly after, and restored to their offices
again / but not without payeng of money, where of the certaynte is not known.
And in this year whete was so sca^te, yt was sold at London for.xxiiii. s. a
quarter. And scanter should have been, if plenty had not come out of Almayne /
for in France and Normandye yt failed in likewise. By mean of this derth and
scarcytie, much poor people dyed for hunger / and many of diverse countries of
England came unto the city, and nere there about for comfort of vytayll /
for yt then was better chepe in London then in many shyres of England there
about. And soon after was the forenamed John^ Mansell made knight and chief
justice of England.

IN this.xli. year also / ye king about the feast of saint Barna be in the
month of Iuny, kept his high court of parlyament at his town of Oxenforde.
This of some writers is named insane parliamentum) that is to mean the wood
or mad parlyament. For at this counsayll were made many actys again the
kings prerogatyue and pleasure, for the reformacion of the state of the land
/ which after prouyd to the co^fusyon and hurt of the land, and death and
destruccyon of many noble men / so that by occasyon thereof began the famous
strife called at this day the Barons war. whereof ensued much myschefe as
hereafter shall be showed and declared more at large.

Then as above is said, to avoid the enormytes and to refourme the evil rule
then vsyd in the land, by such personys as daily were about the king / many
and diverse ordynaunces were made, whereof the tenoure is set out in the end
of this book. whereunto the king somdeale again his will, with sir Edward his
son and other agreed. And for these actys should be holden ferme and stable /
at this parlyament was chosyn.xii. Perys, which were named Douze Peris / to
who^ authorite was given by strength of this parliament. to correct all such
as offendyd in brekynge of these ordinances and other, by the said twelve
Perys after to be devised and orderyd, touching and concerning ye same matter
and purpose. Of which.xii. Perys the names ensue. First the archebyshop of
Caunterburye, the bishop of worceter, sir Roger Bygotte then earl of Norffolk
and marshall of England, sir Symonde de Mou^tforde earl of Leyceter, sir
Rychard Clare earl of Glouceter, sir Humfrey Bothum-erle of Herforde, of
warwyke, and of Arundell, sir John^ Mansell chief justice of England, sir
Roger Mortymer, sir Hugh Bygraue, sir Petyr de Sauoy, sir Iamys Audeley, and
sir Peter de Mountforde. And for the kings brother upon the moders side, that
is to say sir Eym earl of wynchester, sir wyllyam de Ualau^ce, sir Godfrey de
Lindesey, and sir Guide Lyndesey, would not assente unto the foresaid
ordynaunces / they wythdrew them toward the sea side with such stuff as they
had, and would have departed ye land if they might then have had shyppynge /
for lack whereof they were feign to return, and so yode unto wynchester. But
yt was not long after that they were lycensyd to depart the land with a
certain company, and a certain sum of money to pay for their costys / and
their day set by Bartylmew tide to avoid upon pain of prysonement, which
day by them was kept.

It was not long after the fynysshynge of this parlyament, but that strife and
varyau^ce began to kyndle between the king and the erlys of Leyceter and of
Glouceter, by mean of such officers as the said earls had removed and put
other in their romys. Among the which Johan Ma^sell was dyscarged of his
office. and sir Hugh Bygotte then admytted for him. And for the foresaid Pyers
hard of the murmr in the court, ferynge that the king should be aduertysed
shortly to alter from his promise / therefore they ente^dyng to make their
party the stronger, upon the morrow following Marye Magdaleyns day / the
king being at westmynster, the earl Marshall, the earl of Leyceter, with
diverse other came unto the Guyldehall of London, where the mayre, aldermen,
and comynaltye of the city were assembled / where the said lords showed an
instrument or writing, at the which hynge many labellys with sealys, as the
kings seal, sir Edward his sons seal, with many other of the nobles of
the land, the which was the content of the artycles which were ordained and
made at Oxenforde / willing the mayre and aldermen (cu^syderynge the said
actys were made to the honor of god, fydelyte unto the king, and profit of
the realm) that they would also in vpholdynge of the same, set their common
seal of the city. After which request thus to the mayre and the cytesyns
made, after advise and counsayll among them self taken / they desired a
sparyng of the lords, till they might speak with ye king and know his pleasure
in that behafe. But finally no sparynge at that time might be granted / so
that in the end by the labor that the lords made, with help of such
solycytoures as they had within the city, the common seal was put to, and
the mayre and diverse of the city sworn to maynteyne the same / their
allegeaunce sauyd to the king with preseruacyon of the lybertyes and
fraunchyses / and so departed.

Then day by day after the said douze Perys assemblyd at the new temple in
where they kept their counsaylys and courts for the reformacyon of the old
greuys / and removed from the king diverse of his menyall of houselde, and
set in their places and offycys such as lyked them.

And upon the.ix. day of August / proclamacyon was made in diverse accustomyd
places of the said city, that none of the kings takers should take any
thing within the city without the will of the owner, except two tun of
wine, which the king accustomably had of every ship coming from
Bordeaux, payenge but.xl. s. for a tun. By mean of which proclamacyon
nothing was taken by the kings officers, but yt were straight paid fore
within the city and lybertye of the same / which vsaunce continued but a
while.

Anno domini.M.CC.lvii. Anno domini.M.CC.lviii. Draper. Thomas fyz Richard.
Richard Hardell. Anno.xlii. Robert Catelyon.
IN this.xlii. year / the king held one parlyame^t at westmynster and a another,
or else prorogyd the same to wynchester. And in this year, sir Hugh Bygotte
justice, with Roger Turkelay and other kept his court at saint Saviors / and
held there the plees called Itinerii, The wyche is to mean the trauaylynge or
the way plees. For ye shall understand that at those days they were kept in
diverse places of England, which now ben holden at westmynster / and iudgys
ordained to keep a cyrcuyte, as now they keep the syzys in time of vacacyo^. At
this said court these judges ponyshed sore baylyes and other o^ycers, that
before them were conuycte for diverse trespassys / and specially for taking of
merceamentes otherwise then the law them commaundyd. For the which the said
chief justice prysoned them / and after sessyd them at grievous fynys. Also he
somonyd the cytesyns of London to come unto the said court, for tollys that
they had taken upon the farther side of the water. But yt was answered that
the tollys that they there took were taken lawfully, as they were ready to prove
in places and court co^uenyent to the same, which was within the precyncte of
their lybertye. But not wythstandynge that answer, the said sir Hughe chargyd
upon queste.xii. knights of Surey, to inquire of that matter and other / the
which acquyted the said cytesyns, and showed that the said toll belongyd to
them of right.

In process of time after, the said sir Hugh with other came to Guyld hall,
and kept his court and plees there, without all order of law, and contrary
to the lybertyes of the city / and there punyshed the bakers for lack of syze
by the Tumberell, where before times they were punysshed by the pyllory / and
orderyd many things at his will, more then by any good order of law.

This year upon Candelmasse even came unto London from beyond the sea
Richard king of Almayne and earl of Cornewayll, with his wife and children /
which had been there and taken possessyon of that kyngedome as before is
showed. Again whose coming the city of London was rychely hanged with
clothes of sylke and aras / and ioyously he was receyuyd of the cytesyns.

Anno domini.M.CC.lviii. Anno domini.M.CC.lix. Peperer. John^ Adryan. John^
Gysours. Anno.xliii. Robert Cornehyll.
IN this.xliii. year, the frydaye following the feast of Symonde and Jude, in
the parlyament holden at westmynster / were radde in presence of all the lords
and comynaltye at sundry times, all the actys and ordynau^ces before made in ye
parliament holden at Oxenforde, with certain other artycles by ye fore said
xii. Peers there unto added. After redyng of which articles, there being
reuested the archebyshoppe of Caunterbury, with diverse other to the number
of.ix. bishops, beside abbotes and other / denouncyd all them accursyd that
attemptyd in word or deed to break the said acts or any of them. Scutage
In this parilame^t also was granted unto the king a task called the Scutage
/ that is to mean xl. s. of every knights fee thorough England / the which
extendyd to a great sum of money. For after diverse writers, there be in
England in possessyon of the spyrytualtye and of the temporaltye, or at that
days were, over and beyond.lx M. kynghtes fees. which after y^ rate should
exte^de unto.vi. score.M. li. and more. And if it should be gadered of ye
temporal me^ only / than yt should not amounte over the sum of.lxiiii.
thousand pound. The king upon the day of saint Leonarde, or the.vi. day
of November came unto Pawlys, where by his commandment was assembled the
court of Folkmoot / where the king according to the former ordynaunces made,
axyd license of the comynaltye of the city for to pass the sea / and promised
there in the presence of a great multitude of people, that he would be good and
gracyous lord unto the city, by the mouth of sir Hugh Bygotte his chief
justice, and to maynteyne their lybertyes unhurt. For yt which the people for
joy made an exceeding showte.

Upon the.viii. day of November the king rode thoroughe the city toward the sea side. And upon the day of saint Bryce or the.xiii. day of November he
took his ship, and so sailed unto Bordeaux. where when he had tarried a
season, he rode unto the French king then being holy Lewys or the tenth Lewys
unto Paris. Of whom he was honorably received, and lodged him in his own paleys
by ye space of an hole weke making to him great feast, and gyuynge to him and
his rich and many gifts. And from thens king Henry rode unto saint Denis /
where of the abbot and convent he was received with processyon, and tarried
there by the space of a month. In which season a marriage was concludyd
between John^ duke of Brytayne and one of his daughters. And at his departing
he gave to the abbot a cup of gold, and a basyn with an ewer of silver. And
for his more consolacyon / king Lewys assygned unto him a certain lords and
other noble men of France to give attendaunce upon him, and to convey him,
and to show him a part of France, with all dysporte and hunting and
haukynge and other many pleasures of the country. In which pass time the
French king assembled his parlyament at Paris / where he showed unto his
lords that his conscience was grudgyd, with ye withholdyng of all such lands
as Phylyppe the second wan from king John^ in Normandye / upon ye which he
desired their faithful and fruitful counsayll. where after many reasons and
arguments made, yt was concludyd for a fynall concord to be had between
king Henry and him, that if king Henry with the agremente of his lords would
resygne into the French kings hands, all such title and right as he had
in the hole duchye of Normandye, of Angeou, poyteau, and Main, for him and for
his heirs for ever / that then the French king of his great bountye and
grace, should give unto the king of England and to his heirs kings, the
lordshyppe of Guyan, Angeou, and Main / and byryghtfull title called ever
after duke of Guyan / and over that he should be admyttyd for a Pere of
France. to all which condycyons as affyrmyth and wytnessyth the French
cronycle, king Henry at his return from his dysporte was agreeable / and with
consent of his baronye, and in their presence, with also the baronye of
France, did his homage unto the said Lewys for the duchye of Guyan, and after
made his oath according to the same. And after great gifts received on either
side / king Henry returned unto Bordeaux.

Of this peace and concord speaks a cronyculer named Guydo or Guy / and says
that king Henry sailed into France, and asked restytucyon of the forenamed
French king, of all such lands as his ayle Phylyppe the second had with
extorte power taken from king John^ his father. But for he fande the French
king strange in his answer, and also had little trust in his lords for to
have their aid / he fell to agreement with the French king, and sold to him
all his title that he had in Normandye, Gascoyn, and Guyan / y^ which extendyd
to the yearly value of.xx. thousand pound / taking for the same title.iii.
hundred thousand pound of small Turon money, whereof a pound is in value after
sterlynge money but.ii. s.iii.^. or there about / so that he should after that
rate have for his said title after the value of sterlynge money.xxxiii.
thousand seven hundred and.l. pound.

In the season and time that king Henry was thus occupied in France /
dyssencyon fell in England between sir Edward the kings son, and sir
Richard earl of Glouceter. For appeasyng whereof a parleame^t, which is to
mean a counsayll of his lords was called at westmynster / which continued by
the space of.iii. wekes and more. To the which counsayll the lords came with
great companyes / and specially the said sir Edward, and the earl of
Glouceter, the which entendyd to have lodged within the city. wherefore the
mayre yode unto the bishop of worceter, and sir Hugh Bygotte, and sir Phylyppe
Basset, to whom the king with the archbyshoppe of Caunterburye had taken the
rule of the land in his absence / the which all went unto the king of
Almayne to have his advise in that matter. where it was concludyd, that another
the said Edward nor the earl should come within the city then there to be
lodgyd, nor none that held upon either of that parties. And forther yt was
provided, that all such within the city as were of the age of.xv. years and
above, should be in harnes to watch and keep the city both day and night /
and that the gates should be kept shyt upon the day, and a certain men in
harneys to keep every gate of the city. And soon after for the sauegarde of
the city, and sure keeping of the peace within the same / the king of
Romans with the said sir Hughe and sir Phylyppe, came into the city and
there were lodged with their companyes / and such other as they would assygne
to strength the city if need required.

Then about the feast of saint Mark the king came to London from beyond
the sea, and was lodgyd at the bishop of Londons paleys. After whose coming
by his assygnement, the earl of Glouceter was then lodged within the city, and
sir Edward his son was lodgyd in his own palace at westmynster. And soon
after the king commanded him to be lodgyd at saint Iohn^s / and all the other
lords were lodgyd in other places without the city. And the king of Romans
removed again to westmynster. In which time a direccyon was taken between the
said pertyes, and a new assemble and parlyament assygned to be kept at
westmynster in the quindena of saint John^ Baptyst. And for that then all
thing might not be set in an order, yt was prorogyd unto the feast of saint
Edward / at the which season all thing was put at rest for a while. In this
year also fell that hap of the Jew of Tewkysbury / which fell into a gonge
upon the saterdaye, and would not for reverence of his sabbot day be plucked
out whereof heryng the earl of Glouceter, that the Jew did so great reverence
to his sabbot day / thought he would do as myche to his holy day which was
sunday / and so kept him there till monday, at which season he was founden
deed.

Anno domini.M.CC.lix. Anno domini.M.CC.lx. Adam Brownynge. wyllyam fyz
Richard. Anno.xliiii. Richard Couentre.
IN this.xliiii. year, soon after the feast of Symonde and Jude, the king
kept a royal feast at westmynster, where he made diverse knights. Among the
which John^ duke of Brytayne, which had married one of the kings daughters was
there made knight. And soon after was sir Hughe spencer made chief justice.

After ye feast of Ca^delmasse, ye king commau^dyd a folkmoot to be called at
Paulys cross / where he in proper person, with the king of Almayn, the
archebyshoppe of Caunterbury, and many other nobles came. where the king
commaundyd unto the mayre, that every strypelynge of the age of.xii. years and
above, should be before his alderma^ be sworn the day following, to be true to
the king and to his heirs kings of England / and that the gates of the city
were kept with armyd men as before by the king of Romans was dyuysyd. This
year also at a fair kept at Northampton, varyaunce fell between the Lo^doners
and men of the town / so that between the cytesyns and them continued long
suit and plee, for a man of Northampton that then was slain, to the great
vexacyon and trouble of both parties. But in the end the city had the better.

This year also about Eester, the Barons of the land, with the consent of
the Perys / dyschargyd sir Hugh le spencer, and admyttyd for him sir Phylyp
Basset in his rome of chief justice unwitting the king. For which cause and
other, grudge and dyspleasure began of new to kyndle between the king and
his lords, which encreasyd more and more. But by polycy of the king of
Almayne and some prelatys of the land, yt was set in quiet for a while, hardely
to the end of that year.

Anno domini.M.CC.lx. Anno domini.M.CC.lxi. John^ Northampton. wyllyam fyz
Richard. Anno.xlv. Richard Pycarde.
IN this.xlv. year, shortly after Alhalowyn day, the Barons admyttyd and made
shryues of diverse shyres of England, and dyschargyd such as the king before
had admyttyd / and named them Gardayns and kepers of the countyes and shyres.
And over that the Barons would not suffer the justice that the king had
admyttyd, to keep the plees and laws called Itinerarii / but such as were of
their admyssyon. wherewith the king was grievously dyscontented / in so much ye
after that season he labored that he might do dysanull the former ordynaunces
and statutes, and to cause them to be broken / in so myche that upon the
second sunday of lent following, the king commaundyd to be read at Paul's
cross, a bull of the grant of pope Urban the.iiii. of that name, as a
confyrmacyo^ of an other bull before purchased of his predecessoure Alexander
the.iiii, for to assoyle the king and all other that before had sworn to the
mayntenaunce of the foresaid artycles made at Oxenforde / and after caused the
said absolucyon to be showed thorough the realm of England, walys, and
Irlande / gyuynge streyghte charge to all his subiectys, that none be so hardy
to wythsta^de nor dysobey the said absolucyon. And if any were fou^den
dysobedyent to his commandment, that he were straight put in prison, and not
to be raunsomyd nor delyueryd till ye kings pleasure were forther known.

About the feast of saint Albon, in the month of Iuny / the king of Almayne
took shyppyng and sailed into Almayne. And the king at a folkmoot holden upon
the sunday after saint Peter's day in ye month of July, had license to sail
into France. And the morrow after he departed from London toward the sees
side, with the queen and other lords / his two sons sir Edward and sir
Edmunde being at that season in Guyan. when the king had been a season in
France, he returnyd unto Bordeaux, where he fell syke / by occasyon whereof he
tarried in those parties till saint Nycholas tide next following. And in this
year dyed Richard Clare earl of Glowceter / and sir Gylbert de Clare his son
was earl after him. To whom the father gave great charge that he should uphold
the forenamed ordynaunces.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxi. Anno domini.M.CC.lxii. Phylyppe walbroke. Thomas fyz
Thomas Anno.xlvi. Richard Tayloure.
IN this.xlvi. year in the feast of saint Martyne, or the.xi. day of Noue^ber
/ a Jew fell at varyaunce with a christian man in Colchyrch in the ward of Chepe
/ and wou^dyd the christian man within the same church, wherefore the people of
the city in a fury pursued the said Jew to his house, and there slew him / and
after fell upon the other Jews, and robbyd and slew many of them.

And the even of saint Thomas the apostle following, the king landed in
England at Dover / and came to London the wednysdaye before.xii. day. This
year ye froste began about saint Nycholas day / and so continued by ye space
of a month and more, so fervently that Thamys was over froren, that men passed
over on horsbacke. And in the same winter ye kings little halle at
westmynster, with other houses adioynyng to the same were peryshed with fire,
by the negligence of a servant of the kings.

In this year also unkindness began to grow between the Londoners and the
Constable of the tower / for that he contrary the lybertye of the city took
certain ships passing by the tower with whete and other vytayll, and took yt
into the said tower, making the price at his pleasure. wherefore great harm
had ensued, had not ben the polycy of wise men. which was showed unto the
kings counsayll / by whose dyreccy on the matter was co^mytyd unto sir
Phyllyppe Basset then chief justice and other, to set an order and rule between
the said parties. Then before him were brought all euyde^ces and pryuyleges
for the advantage of both parties / where finally after long plee and
argument, yt was fyrmely demyd and adiudgyd, that if the constable or any other
offycer of the tower would at any time take any whete or other vytayll to the
use of the king or of ye tower, that he should come unto the market holden with
in the city, and there to have yt.ii. d in a quarter within ye mayres price /
and other vitayll after the same rate. And if he or any of his officers would do
contrary to that ordinance / that then the shryues should make report unto
the kings counsayll, and to wythsta^de him in all that he might / so that the
kings peace were kept.

In this year also many murmures and grudgis were told in many places of the
land / supposing ye war should in short process have ensued between the
king and his lords, for the bull of dyspensacyon before in that other year
showed. But by help and mediacyon of good and wise men / these murmures and
grudges were so appeasyd, that the king agreed again to the mayntenau^ce of
the said statutes / and sent his wryttes, wherein the said artycles were
comprysed, into all shyres of England / gyuynge straight commandment to all
men to observe and keep the same, and such other as were to them joined by
the dyscrecyon of the earl marshall the earl of Leyceter, sir Phylyp Basset,
sir Hugh Bygot, and other / the which shortly after was revoked and denied.
wheruppon the archbysshoppe of Caunterbury, feryng that after might ensue, made
him an errande to Rome / and so by license of the king and of the lords
departed the land, and so kept him out till the trouble was appeased and
seized Then upon mydlent sunday, the mayre and the commons being present, at
a folkemote holden at Paulys cross before sir Philyppe Basset and other of the
kings counsayll / the mayre was sworn to be true to the king and to his
heirs kings. And upon the morrow at Guylde hall, every alderman in presence
of the mayre took the same oath. And upon the sunday following, every
strypelynge of the age of.xii. years and above, before his alderman in his
ward was newly charged with the same oath. Then the dyspleasure between the
king and his Barons began to appear and dysclose, which long while had been
kept secret / in so myche that diverse of them assembled in the marches of
walis, and gathered unto them strong power / and sent a letter unto the king
under the seal of sir Rogyer Clyfford, besechynge him to have in remembrance
the oath and manyfolde promise that he had made, for the observing of the
statutes made at his town of Oxenforde, with other ordinances made to the
honor of god, for faith and allegeau^ce to his person, and weal and profit
of all his realm / wyllyng him farther to with stand and defye all such
persons, as will be again the said acts, saving the queen and her chyldern.

After the which letter thus sent, and receyuynge of yt none answer / the
said Barons with banner dysplayed went again such as they knew yt held again
the said actys. And first at Herforde they took the bishop of that see, and
as many of his chano^s as were allyau^tes born / and took such treasour, and
catell as they there fande, and bare yt with them. And after yode and sent
unto such manners as the said bishop and chanons had, and them spoiled and
robbed / and some of them threw to the ground and consumed with fire / and
put the said bishop and chanons in sure keeping, and set other in their places
/ and after went unto the other costs where they supposyd to find of their
enymyes / keeping their course toward London, berynge before them a banner of
the kings armies / and so holding their journey, myche people drew unto them.
In the which progress ever as they fande any that they knew to be again the
mayntenau^ce of ye said acts / they imprisoned the^ and spoiled their places,
were they spyrytuall or temporal men. And in diverse of the kings castellys
they set in such persons as to them lyked, and put out such as there were set
in by ye king / and gave unto them an oath that they should be true and
faithful to the king, and keep those castelles to his use and weal of the
realm.

About mydsomer when they drew nere to London / they sent a letter unto the
mayre and alderme^, under the seal of sir Symonde Mountforde / willing to
know of them whyther they would observe the actys and statutes made in the
parlyament of Oxenforde or not, or else they would aid and assyste such
persons as entendyd the breche of the same / and sent unto them a copye of the
said acts with a prouiso, that if any that there were specyfyed were to the
hurt of the realm or common weal of the same, that they then by dyscrete
persons of the land, should be alteryd and amendyd. The which copye the mayre
bare unto the king then being at the tower, accompanied with the queen and the
king of Almayne which lately was returned from beyond the sea, and sir
Edward his son, with other of his counsayll.

Then the king entendynge to know the mind of the city, axyd the mayre what
he thought of those ordynaunces and acts / knowing well that before his
coming thither, he had counsayled with the aldermen and some commons of the
city. The mayre then abashed with that questyon / besought the king yt he
might common with his brethren the aldermen / and he should show unto him his
and their opinyons. But the king said he would here his advise without more
counsayll. Then the mayre boldly said, that before times he with his
brethren and comynaltye of the city, by his commandment were sworn to
maynteyne all actys made to the honor of god, to the faith of the king and
profit of the realm / which oath by his license and most gracyous favor
they intended to observe and keep. And more over to avoid all occasion that
might grow of grudge or varyaunce between his grace and his Barons within the
city / they would avoid all allyauntes and strangers out thereof, if his
grace were so contentyd. which answer the king showed as he were therwyth
pleasyd so that the mayre with his favor departed, and sent answer to the
barons to the same according / their lybertyes always vpholden and saved.

Then shortly after, for so myche as diverse noble men of the land which
held again those statutes, were ryden toward Dover, and there ente^dyd to
have taken shyppyng forfere of the barons / the king sent after them diverse
persons of his household, and of the cytesyns of London, to refourme and
enduce them to return, and to tarry with the king.

And in that season all allyauntes, the which were taken suspecte of any favor
owing to that one part or to that other, were avoided the city. But yt was
not long after that sir Edward the kings son, set them or many of them
in offices with in the castle of wyndesore. Than watch was kept daily within
the city / and in the nyghtes a certain were assigned to ride about ye town,
with a certain fotemen assygned to them, to search all the town over. But of
that insued harm. For while the rydyng watch was in one place of the city /
some evil dysposyd persons under color of watch men, and to seche for
strangers, robbed and spoiled many houses within the city. For remedy whereof
a standing watch was ordained in every ward. And the king herynge of the
Barons nere coming unto the city / departed thens shortly after.

Then the Barons entryd the city the sunday before saint Margarets day. And
shortly after the king returned to westmyster, with the queen and other of
his counsayll. And soon after by the consent of the king and the Barons / sir
Hughe le Spenser was made chief justice and keeper of the tower.

Upon the morrow following Mary Magdaleyne day, a wryt was directed unto ye
mayre and aldermen / chargynge them yt the kings peace were fermely kept
within the city. For in the same wryt yt was also expressyd, that the king
and his Barons were louyngly agreed. Farther more was by the said wryt
co^maundyd, that if within the precyncte of their frau^ches, were any person
or persons known, that would wythstande the foresaid ordynaunces and
statutes / that all such should be attached and put in prison, and their goods
attached for the king till they knew his forther pleasure.

ye shall understand that while ye lords lay thus within the city / diverse
conuenticulis and gaderyngis were made of the citesyns and other, that robbed
in diverse places of the city, and did myche harm. The which was smally
corrected / they were so borne out and maynteyned by their masters. And the
commo^s of the city were far out of rule by insensyng of ryotouse persons /
that in assembles and courts that the^ were kept at Guyldhall or other
places, simple and vndyscret persons should have the voice, and the worshypfull
me^ little or nothing regarded / whereof ensuyd daily myche unhappiness and
sorrow, as after shall appear.

The Barons then to obtain the more favor of ye city / wyllyd them to show
if they had any of their libertyes wythdrawe^, that they might again to
them be restored / and also to dyuyse some new to their weal and profit, and
they would labor to the king that they might have them granted. For the
which comfort of the lords, the mayre called the commons to the Guyldhall,
and showed to them the beneuole^ce of the said lords / and willed them that
every of^ycer for his office, to deuyse such things as might be benefycyall
for the city. wheruppon they counsaylled to gyther, and made a note in paper
of diverse statutes, prouysyons, and ordynaunces to be granted / which might
more properly be named abhomynacyons. Singla^ profit.
For they were devised to their synguler profit, and to ye great hurt of all
other merchants coming to the city, and to all other fayres and markettes
of England / and also preiudycyall to the universal weal of the realm. The
which when they were ouersene by the heddes of the city / yt was showed unto
the said commons, that their ordynaunces were not lefull nor charytable
orderyd, and therefore they knew well they should not be admytted / wyllyng
the^ to deuyse other. But all was in vain. By mean whereof both those and
other that were right necessary for the common weal of the city, were
rejected and put of.

Then ye Barons upon the morrow following saint Iamys day, departed from
London toward wyndesore, to se the gydynge of the castle. where at their
coming they put out the foresaid allyauntes before set in by sir Edward
the kings son / the which assocyat with other yode unto Fulham, where the
king then lay / and showed to him that the Barons had spoiled them of such
goods as they had, and that without cause. But the king put them of for
that season, and warned them to sue to him again about Mychelmasse when more
of his cou^sayll was with him / and then they should have justice.

Upon the second day following the feast of saint Matthew, or the xxiii. day
of september / the king, the queen, with his sons and other nobles of this
land / took shyppyng and sailed into France, to be present at the French
kings parlyaament then holden at Bonony. And the morrow after the octabis of
saint Mychaell, he landed again at Dover. And the frydaye following he came
unto London.

And upon the tuesday following, passed a queste of.xii. knights of Mydd
sworn upon a jury, between the abbot of westmynster and the city / for
certain pryuyleges that the cytesyns of London claymed within westmynster.
where by the said iurye it was founden before Gylbert of Prestone then chief
Baron of the kings excheker, that the s^ryues of London at those days might
lawfully enter into the town of westmynster, and all other teneme^tes that the
abbot then had within Myddelsex, and unto the gate of the said abbay and
there to make summons and dystrayne for lack of apparaunce, all and eueryche
tenaunte of the said abbot.

About the quindena of saint Mychaell / the fourmer complaynt of the allyauntes
and other, which as above ye have hard, was showed before the king and ye
lords in the parlyament holden at westmynster. where lastely yt was sentencyd,
that the Barons should restore all such goods as they and their company
had taken from all such persons before that day, as well to allyauntes as
other both spyrytuall and temporal / and also that such menyall servants as
should be daily in the kings house and about his person, should be such as
the king would chose and admyt him self / the which ii. artycles the Barons
utterly denied. wherefore the old rancoure took place / and dyssencyon kyndled
his fire of malice again, between the king and his lords fervently.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxii. Anno domini.M.CC.lxiii. Robert Moumplere. Thomas fyz
Thomas Anno.xlvii. Robert de Suff.
IN this.xlvii. year, by procurement and styrynge of the Barons, the commons of
the city of London, chase unto their mayre for that year Thomas fyz Thomas,
and without counsayll of the aldermen swear at Guyldehall upon the day of
Simon and Jude / and made no presentement of him upon the morrow following,
another to the king nor yet to the Barons of the kings excheker, as they of
right ought to have done. For the which presumpcyon the king was grievously
dyscontentyd again the city. Soon after the king aduertysynge well yt the
city would take the Barons party / and caused sir Edward his son to take the
castle of wyndesore by a train. whereof when he knew that he was in
possessyon / the king erly in a morning a little to fore Crystemas departed
from westmynster, and rode unto the said castle / whyther shortly after came
also many of the lords that were upon the kings party. And as fast the
lords and knights which held with the earl of Leyceter, drew them toward
Lonlon / so yt on either party was much people assembled. In the which pass
time some well dysposyd, laboryd a concord between the king and his lords.
By whose means finally yt was agreed by both parties, that all matters
concerning the fore said artycles of statutes and ordynau^ces made at
Oxenford, and after by the.xii. Perys / that the French king should deem and
judge, which should be holden and which not. And as he demyd / both parties
promised assuredly to abide. Upon which agreement copyes were made of the said
statutes / and with letters showing the effect of the fourmer agreement sent
unto the said king of France / then being saint Lewys. And in the Crystmas
weke following / the king took shyppynge with sir Edward his son and other of
his counsayll / and sailed into France, for the foresaid cause. And for the
party of the said Barons, was sent over sir Peter de Mountforde and other.
Then before Lewys king of France those statutes were sore argued upon both
parties. How be yt in the end, the French king calling before him both
parties upon the day before ye conuersyon of saint Paul, or the.xxiiii. day
of January / sitting in judgment gave express sentence that all and eueryche
of the said statutes and ordynaunces, should be from ye day foreward utterly
foredone and set at naught / and all such bands and promyses that the king
or any other had made for the mayntenaunce of the same, should be adnulled and
cancellyd / and the king and all other, for any matter concerning those
statutes set at lybertye. After which sentence thus given the king returned
into England / so that he came to London the.xv. day of Februarye. But the
Barons being sore amoued with this sentence, and notynge great parcyaltye
unto the French king / departed from London westwarde, and so into the
marchys of walys, where they drew to them great power, and warred upon the
lands and castellys of sir Roger Mortymer, and threw some of them unto the
ground, and spoiled of his what they might find / and over that brent of his
manours and houses. In whose aid sir Edward the kings son coming, his
people were dystressyd and he almost taken. For redress of which matters, a
new parlyame^t was appointed to be holde^ at Oxenforde in the quindena of
Eester next following, which came never to effect. All be yt an other
cronicle says that from this parlyament then holden at Oxenforde, the king
and his lords parted all dyscorded. Then the barons drew toward London / and
the king remained at woodstok. And then new assurance by writing endentyd
was made between the comynaltye of the city and the Barons, without consent
of many of the rulers of the said city. wherefore the commons as men enraged
made of them self two capytaynes, which they named constables of the city /
yt is to say Thomas de Pyweldon and Stephan Bukerel. At whose commandment by
tollynge of the great belle of Paul's, all the city should be ready shortly in
harnes, to give attendaunce upon their said capytaynes.

About the beginning of lent / the constable of the tower, sir Hughe le
Spenser, came with a fair company of men of armies before him into the city,
and desired assystence of the forenamed constables. The which commanded the
said belle to be ^olled. By mean whereof the people shyt their shoppes, and
came out in harneys in great multitude. The which after proclamacyon made,
that they should ^olowe their capytaynes, without knowledge what to do or
whyther to go, followed their said capytaynes / and so yode unto Thystelworth
upon two miles beyond westmynster, and there spoiled the manor of the king
of Romans, and set yt after upon a fire. And that done, his water mylles
and other commodities that he there had put them to utter ruin. And after
with great noise and cry, returned unto London.

This deed as says mine author was cause of the mortal war following. For
where before time the said king of Romans had been for allyaunce that was
between him and the earl of Glouceter, a treatye of peace to be had between
the king and his Barons / after that deed done he was enymy unto them to the
vttermoste of his power.

The king herynge of this ry^^gaderyd unto him great power. And for he hard
that sir Peter de Mount forde was at Northampton, gatherynge of people to
strength the Barons party / he spedde him thither, and wanne the town upon
him by force, and slew many of his men / and finally took him and sir Simon
the son of the earl of Leyceter, with diverse other on live / the which with
many burgeyses of that town that had take their parties, the king sent unto
diverse prysons / and some he closyd within the castle of ye same town.

In this pass time on Palmesondaye weke all the Jews in London were spoiled
and robbed / and the number of.v. hundred of them were slain, and diverse of
their mansyons brent and destroyed / and such as of them were saved, were
conveyed for great mede unto the tower / and there kept from the fury of the
commons. whereof the occasyon was, for so myche as a Jew would have forced a
christian man to have given to him more then ii. d. for the usure of.xx. s. for a
weke. For ye shall understand that at those days, by license granted unto the
Jews of the king. they might take by usury of every man yt of them would
borowe money.ii. d. of a pound for a weke lendyng / and so of greter and of
smaller sums after that rate. And soon after the Jews were thus punyshed /
many houses of relygyon within ye city and nere there about, were serched for
goods of alliau^tis / and myche found. whereof a part was brought unto the
lordis / but the more part was stolen and brybed, In which season the king
passed by diverse countries / and lastely came into Southsex with a strong
power. whereof herynge the lords made preparacyon to go toward him. In all
which time the wardeyns of the v. ports kept the sea with ships, that no
strangers should enter the land to aid the king again the Barons.

Then in the end of Apryll the Barons with a multitude of the city, which
they put in vawarde / departed from London, taking their journey toward the
king. And when they were well onwarde upon their way / word was brought unto
them that the king with an huge power was at Lewys.

wherefore they by an hole assent dyuysed a letter / and sent yt in ye name of
all the Barons unto the king, whose names here under follow but not all.

Sir Symonde de Mounforde earl of Leyceter, and high steward of England. Sir
Gylbert de Clare, earl of Glouceter. Sir Robert Ferres, earl of Derby. Sir Hugh
le Spenser chief justice / and sir Henry de Mountford son and heir to the earl
of Leyceter. Sir Richard Gray. Sir Henry Hastynges. Sir John^ fyz John^. Sir
Robert de Uenpount. Sir John^ Gyuyle. Sir Robert Roos. Sir wyllyam Marmyon.
Baldwyne wake. Sir Gylbert Gyfforde. Sir Nycholas de Megraue. Sir Godfrey de
Lucy. Sir John^ de Ueysy. Sir wyllyam de Mounthdesey.
which letter sealed with the seals of the said earl of Leycester, and of
Glouceter contained as follows

TO the most excellent lord the king, A ^e^ter sent by the (...) to the king
Henry by the grace of god king of England, lord of Irlande, and duke of
Gwyan / the Barons and other faithful your servants, their fydelyte and oath
to god and to you coueytynge to keep, sendyng to you due salutyng with all
reverence and honor, under due obeysaunce. Lyketh yt your hyghnes to
understand, that many being about you have before times showed unto your
lordshyppe of us many evil and untrue reports / and have found suggestyons
not alonely of us, but also of your self to bring this your realm unto
subuersyon. Know your excellency, that we entende nothing but health and suerty
to your person, to the vttermoste of our powers / and not only to our enmyes,
but also to yours and of all this your realm, we entende utter greuaunce and
correccyon. Besechynge your grace her after to give unto them little crede^ce
/ for ye shall find us your true and faithful subjects to the utter most of
our powers. And we earl of Leyceter, and earl of Glouceter, at the request of
other and for our self, have put to our seals / the.x. day of the month of
May.


The answer unto this foresaid letter.
HEnry by ye grace of god, king of England, lord of Irland and duke of Guyan
/ to Symonde de Mountforde, and Gylbert de Clare, and their co^plyces. where as
by war and general perturbau^ce in this our realm by you begone and
continued, with also brennynges, and other hurtes and enormytyes that euydently
apperyth that your fydelyte to us due, ye have not kept, nor ye suerty of our
person ye have little regarded / for so much as our lords and other our trusty
friends which daily bide with us ye veryn and grieve, and them pursue to the
uttermost of your powers / and yet daily ente^de, as ye by the report of your
letters have us ascertayned: we the grieve of them admyt and take for our own,
specially when they for their fydelyte which they to us daily impende, stand
and abide by us to oppress your ifidelyte and untruth. wherefore of your
favor or assurance we set little store / but you as our enymyes we
utterly defye, witness our self at our town of Lewys, the.xii. day of this
month of May.


And over this the king of Romans, sir Edward the kings son, and the
other lords being the^ with the king / sent unto them a another letter,
whereof the tenor ensuyth.

Richard by the grace of god king of Romans always Augustus, and Edward
the noble first begotten son of the king of England, all other Barons fermely
standing and abiding with our sovereign lord the king, to Symonde be
Mou^tford, Gylbert de Clare, and all other their false fellows. By the letters
which ye sent unto the king our most sovereign lord; we under stand that we
are defied of you. Nevertheless this word of dyffyaunce apperyd unto us
suffycyently before, by the depredacyon and brennyng of our manours, and
carienge away of our goods. wherefore we will that ye understand, that we
defye you as our mortal and publyke enmyes. And when so ever we may come to
reue^gement of the iniuryes yt ye to us have done / we shall acquit it to ye
uttermost of our powers. And where ye put upon us, that another true nor good
counsayll to our sovereign lord the king we give / ye therein say falsely and
untruely. And if ye saying ye sir Symonde de Mountforde and sir Gylbert de
Clare will iustifye in the court of our sovereign lord / we are ready to
purchase to you suerty and safe coming, that there we may prove our true and
faithful innocencye, and your false and traytorouse lyenge. wytnessyd with ye
seals of Rychard king of Romans, and sir Edward forenamed. Given at Lewys
the.xii. day of May.


WHen the Baronys had received these letters from the king and his lords /
they perceived well that there was none other mean, but defend their cause by
dynt of sword. wherefore they puttyng their trust in god / spedde them forth
toward the king. And upon a wednysday being then the.xxiiii. day of May,
erly in the morning both hosts met. where after the Lo^doners had given the
first assaute, they were betyn back / so that they began to draw from the
sharp shot and strokes, to the discomforte of the Barons host. But ye Barons
encoraged and comforted their men in such wise, that not alonely the fresh
and lusty knights fought egerly, but also such as before were scomfyted,
recoueryd their virtue and strength, and fought without fere, in so myche that
the kings vaward lost their places. Cruel and detestable Battle.
Then was the field coueryd with deed bodies / and gaspynge and gronyng was
hard on every side. For either was desirous for to bring the other out of life.
And the fader spared not the son, nor the son yt fader. Allyau^ce at ye time
was turned unto dyffyaunce / and christian blood that day was shad without
pytie. Thus during the cruel fight by the more part of ye day, lastely the
victory fill to the Barons / so yt there was taken the king, and the king of
Romans, sir Edward the kings son, with many other noble men to the number
of.xxv. Barons and Banerettes / and people slain a great multitude over.xx.
thousand as says mine authors.

when the Barons had thus obtained vyctorye, prouysyon was made for ye saufe
keeping of the prisoners / so that all were sent unto diverse castellys and
prysons, except the king, his brother the king of Almayne, and sir Edward his
son / the which the Barons held with them till they came to London.

Then a new grant was made by the king, that the foresaid statutes should
stand in strength. And if any were thought unreasonable / they to be corrected
and amendyd by four noble men of the realm / that is to mean.ii. of the
spyrytualtye, and.ii. of the temporaltye. And if those.iiii. might not agree /
that then the earl of Angeou and duke of Burgoyn to be judges of that matter.
And this to be fermely holden and obeyed by the king and his brother / the
kings granted that their sons and heirs should remain with the Barons as
prisoners, till all thing were fynysshed according to the former agreement.
And upon this was a parlyament appointed, to be holden at London at
Penthecoste following / but that came never to purpose. The^ the tuesday before
the Assencyon day peace was proclaimed in London between the king and his
Barons. And upon the day following, the king and the Barons came unto London
/ with the king of Romans, and sir Edward the king son. Then sir Edward
as pledge for the king, and sir Henry son unto the king of Almayn were sent
unto the toure, and there lodged / and from the^s unto Dover castle. And the
king was lodged in the bishops palace by Paul's / and the king of Almayne
with diverse other within the tower. Then yt was agreed by the king, that for
his more suertye, and for the weal of the land / that the earl of Leyceter
should be ressyau^t in the kings court. Upon the which agreement and other,
many of the prisoners were set at large.

In this pass time before the field of Lewys / ye queen and the king of
Romans had sent over ye see for souldy ours, to aid the king again the
Barons / which now were comen in great number unto Dover, and there houed in ye
see to have la^ded. whereof herynge the Barons sent the king of Romans to the
castle of Berkham stead as prisoner, till the said allyauntes were returned
/ and caused king Henry with a great power to ride thither, and force the said
host of strangers to return into their own countries.

And when the king had returned the said strangers / he shortly after with
agreement of the barons sailed over into France, and returned again within
short term.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxiii. Anno domini.M.CC.lxiiii. Osbert winter. Thomas fyz
Thomas. Anno.xlviii. Phylyppe Taylour.
IN this.xlviii. year / the lords of the marches about the feast of
Crystmasse, assembled them in those costs, and did myche harm upon the
lordeshyppes and manours of the erlys of Leyceter and of Glouceter standing in
the marches of walys. wherefore the king rode shortly after to Glouceter, and
called there a counsayl of his lords. By authoryte of which counsayll yt was
enacted, that as many of ye said lords as came not in by the octauis of saint
Hyllary next following, and yielded them unto the kings grace, should be
exyled. And by the said cou^sayll was also agreed, that in ye said octaues
should a parlyament be holdyn at westmynster. At which day the king with his
lords spyrytuall and temporal and commons of his land, began his forsayde
parlyament. During the which yt was there showed the king being present,
that he nor sir Edward his son nor none of them, should after that day grieve
or cause to be greuyd, the earls of Leyceter and of Glouceter, ye Barons,
Banerettes or knights, the citesyns of London and Barons of the.v. ports /
nor none other persons or persons of high or low degree, that was upon the
party of the said earls, for any matter of dyspleasure done again the king
and the said sir Edward his son, at any time before that day. And that to
uphold / the king before his lords was sworn. And after that was showed and
rad a charter of pardon concerning the said cause / and a confyrmacyon of the
statutes of the foreste, with many other acts and statutes before granted of
the king. Then in the feast of saint Gregory following, or the.xii. day of
March / sir Edward the kings son, yt beforne was also sworn to perform such
promyses as the king had made before in the parliament, was delyueryd at
lyberte / and also sir Henry the kings son of Almayne, the which had been kept
as pledge as ye before have hard upon the term of.ix. months and odd
days / upon assurau^ce made, that ye said sir Edward should dwell and abide in
the kings court, and not to depart from thens without license of the king
and of a certain of the Barons. After this many instruments and bands were
made by the king and sir Edward his son, for the performaunce of couenaunts
and paccyons made between the king and the Barons, which shortly after came
to small effect.

In the season between Easter and Penthecoste, for ordering of the aforesaid
statutes made at Oxenford, fell deffencyon between the earls of Leyceter and of
Glouceter / so that words of dyspleasure was vtteryd between them, the king
and they also being then at Glouceter. Then the king and his Barons had
labor to set them at unity and rest.

And upon the sea the Barons of the.v. ports robbed and spoiled all men that
they might take / sparynge another English merchants nor other. Of which
prays as ye common fame then went, some of the Barons of the land had good
part.

In the whytson weke following, ye king with the earl of Leyceter, and sir
Edward his son, with many other lords being at Herforde in ye edge of
walys / the said sir Edward secretly and without license departed from the
court, and yode unto Chester / where he acco^panyed to him the earl of
Glouceter and ye lords of the Marches, the earl of ware^ne, sir Roger Mortymer
and other / and from thens went unto Glouceter, breking the brydges as he went,
to the intent that he were not followed till he had assembled his power.

when knowledge of this came unto the earl of Leyceter / he in all have sent unto
sir Symo^de his son, yt he should gather his knights unto him. The which
according to ye commandment assembled unto him myche people, and with them
drew toward wynchester / so that he came before the city upon the even of the
translacyon of saint Swythyn, or the.xiiii. day of the month of Iulye. where
he was shyt out, for so much as the cytesyns knew not whyther he came as the
kings friend or not. And also little before they had received a letter from
sir Edward, willing them to hold them out of the city. For these causes
the citesyns closed their gates again the said sir Symonde and his company.
But yt was not long or the city was yelden. Then they spoiled the town / and
slew the more party of the Jews that dwelled within the same. And that done,
laid syege unto the castle and assauted it. But for tidings were feigned of
the coming of sir Edward with his power / they departed shortly thens, and
so yode unto Kenelworth.

Upon the last day of July / sir Edward with his host came unto Kenelworth
foresaid, and fill suddenly upon the host of the forenamed sir Symonde, and
with shedynge of little blood, took there prisoners the earl of Oxenforde,
wyllyam de mount Canyse, Adam de Newmarket, sir Balwyne wake, and Hughe Neuyle,
with diverse other / and sir Symonde fled into the castle and so escaped.
Then these forenamed prisoners were all sent unto Glouceter / and there put
in suer keeping.

In this mean while sir Symonde earl of Leyceter, took leave of the king /
which then from Herforde passed the river of Seuerne, and so yode unto
worceter. And ye earl with great pain passed the brydges before by sir Edward
broken, and passed the countries in gaderynge of people as he went / so yt in
process he had with him strong power. whereof herynge sir Edward, costed
toward him / and the.vi. day of August met with him at Euysham in worceter
shyre / where between them was foughten a cruel fight. In yt which at length
was slain the said sir Symonde, and sir Henry his son and heir, sir Hughele
Spenser, sir Peter de Mountforde, and many other noble men that held upon the
Barons party.

After which scomfyture, some malycyous dysposed persons, in despyte of the
earl cut of his hode and his dimyssaryes, and fastyned them upon either side
of his nose / and after made a present thereof unto the wife of sir Roger
Mortymer. His fete also and his hands were cut from the body, and sent to
sundry places / and the trunk of his body buried within the church of
Euysham. Of this earl speaks Ranulphe mu^ke of Chester in his book of
Policronycon, and calls him Simon the right wise / sayynge that god wrought
for him miracles after his death, the which forfere of the king and sir
Edward his son were kept close and secret, so that no man durst speak of
them. Soon after this victory thus obtained by sir Edward, ye king and he met
/ by whose authorytyes all prisoners the^ which were in hold in diverse places,
by y^ commandment of ye said sir Edward, were set at liberty / and many
other daily accused and set in for them. And about the natyuyte of our lady, a
parliament was holde^ at winchester where by authoryte of ye same, all statutes
and ordinances before made by ye Barons at Oxenforde in the.xli. year of ye
king, were utterly fordone and set at naught / and all bonds and wrytynges
made by the king or any other for the observing of the same, were cancellyd
and broken. Also at this cou^sayll was ordained, that all such as had favored
the Barons, were they in prison or at large / should be disherited. And then ye
king resumed into his hand, all grauntes before made and given to any person.
And for sir Symounde de Mountforde might not agree with the king at the
parlyament / he was restored to the castle of Kenelworth, as he before was
assured / the which he with sir Henry de Hastynges and other kept long after.

when the parlyament was ended / the king came unto wyndesore with a great
power, entendynge as the fame then went to destroy the city of London, for
the great ire and dyspleasure that he had unto yt. whereof heryng the mayre
and aldermen, were stricken in a wonderful fere / all be yt many of the rabbysh
and wild co^moners, were in full purpose to have defended the city again the
king. And thus among them were diverse and many opinyons. And no wonder / for
at those days the city was inhabyted with many manner of nacyons, which then
were admytted for cytesyns.

LAstely by grace and sad counsayll of the best of the city / they
condescended to make a supplycacyon to ye king, and send yt by some religyous
person. Of the which they made diverse, and sent them by sundry persons / but
all auayled right naught. For the king was so grievously encensyd by some of
his counsayll again the cytesyns, yt he would not look upon none of their
supplycacyons. And if any man spoke / for them / he soon would make such
countenance, that men which were in his favor feryd to speak for them. Then
the cytesyns were counsayled by their fre^des, yt they should make a writing,
and seal yt with their common seal / by virtue whereof they should offer
them self to put them holly in the kings grace and mercy touching their
lives and goods. According to the which counsayll they devised a writing,
and sealed yt with their common seal / and that done chose.viii. persons of
the city such as had fre^des in the court, and sent them toward wyndesore
the.vi. day of October. Upon which day they encountered beyond Colbroke a
knight of the kings called sir Roger Leyborne, the which turned the
said.viii. persons unto the city / and he also rode with them till he came
nere unto the city, and there departed from them, and rode upon the back
side of the town unto the toure. But at his departing he will led them to
warn the mayre with a certain of the city, to mete with him upon the morrow
at Berkynge church, which stands nere unto the tower. Upon the morrow when
the mayre and the said sir Roger were met / he after a long process made,
showed to them of the kings grievous displeasure which he bare toward the
city / and the means that had be used by their friends and lovers, to
obtain grace for the city. Lastely he expressed yt no grace for them might be
had / except they would by their common seal bind them self fully and
holly to stand at ye kings grace, and to put in his mercy their lives and
goods. whereunto in the end the cytesyns granted, and delyueryd the forsayde
writing unto the foresaid Roger / prayenge him to be good mean for them to ye
king. The which departed toward ye king upon the morrow, and returned again
the.vi. day after / and wylled the mayre and aldermen to mete with him again
at the foresaid chirch. where he showed to them that the king by great
instaunce of their friends had received their wyrtynge / and would first for
the beginning of co^tentacion of his mind, that all the chains / which stood
in every street and lanes end within the city, should be lousyd from their
posts, and the post also drawn out of the earth, and all to be brought unto
the tower / and that done, that the mayre with a certain of ye cytesyns to the
number of.xl. persons, should the day following be at wyndesore to comferme
the grant of their writing. And yt they should go and come in safe and suer
wise / he delivered to them the kings letter and seal for ye term of four
days. which all was done according to their former deuyse / and the mayre
with the foresaid persons was ready at wyndesore upon the morrow being sunday
by one of the clock / and there tarried till.iiii. of the same day. At which
season the king coming from his dysporte, entered the castle without
contenaunce or castyng his eyes upon the Londoners. And when the king and his
peole was entered the castle / the Londoners would have followed. But they were
warned to abide with out. Then short time after the king caused a proclamacyon
to be made, that no man of high or low degree, to the Londoners should make any
sayynges of dyspleasure, or make to the^ any quarrel. And in the evening came
unto them the foresaid sir Roger and sir Robert waleys knights, and brought
them into the castle / and said the kings pleasure was not to speak with
them that night. And after the said knights delyueryd them unto the constable
of ye castle / which closyd them all in a large toure, where that night they
had small chere and worse lodging.

Then upon the morrow being mondaye toward night / they were taken out of
that toure, and delyueryd unto ye baylly of the said castle, and lodged by his
assygnement / except.v. persons, that is to mean Thomas fyz Thomas then mayre,
Mychaell Tony, Stephan Bukkerell, Thomas Pywellyson, and John^ de Flete. The
which.v. persons the king had given to sir Edward his son / at whose
commandment they remained still in the said toure long after, not
wythstandynge the kings save conduyte to them as before is showed, made. when
tidings hereof came unto the cite of London / all be yt that for fere many
before were avoided, then there avoided many mo / and conveyed their goods in
secret wise, into diverse countries of England, so that many of them never
returned after.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxiiii. Anno domini.M.CC.lxv. Thomas de la Fourdeous. Thomas
fyz Thomas. Anno.xlix. Gregory Rokkylse.
IN this.xlix. year, upon the day of saint Leonarde or the vi. day of
November / ye king came unto westmynster. And shortly after he gave unto diverse
of his household servants, upon three score houses and housholdes within the
city / so yt the owners were compellyd to agree and redeem their houses and
household with all goods as in them were, or else to avoid, and suffer such
persons to enter as ye said houses were given unto / and not alonely that, but
also all such lands and tenementes, goods and catalles, as the said
cytezeyns had in any other places of England. And than he made custos or
gardeyn of the city, sir Othon constable of the toure / which sir Othon chase
to be bayllyues under him, and to be to him accomptable to the use of the king,
John^ Adrian, and walter Heruy cytezeyns of the same city. And after this the
king took pledges of the best me^nes sons of the city, that his peace should
be surely kept within the same. The which were put in the toure of London,
and there kept at the cost of their parents. And shortly after by great
labor and suyte made / all the foresaid persons which were in the keeping of
ye bailey of the castle of wyndesore iiii. only except, that is to say
Richard Bonauenture, Symo^ de Hadisstok, wyllyam de Kent, and wyllyam de
Grouceter / all the other Lo^doners xxxiili s^ number, were delivered and came
to erondon the Thursday following the feast of saint Luke, in ye xxi. day of
November / and the other.ix. were kept still in the toure of wyndesore.

Then daily suyte and labor was made unto ye king to have his gracyous
favor / and to know his pleasure what fine he would have of the city, for
their transgressyons and displeasure by them to him done. For the which the
king asked.xl.M.li and fermely held him at.l.M. mark. But the city laid
for them that the poor commons of the city, whereof many were avoided were
the trespassours / and over that the best men of the city by these ryotous
persons, were spoiled and robbed / and by the rouers also of the sea, as the
wardeynes of yt.v. ports and other, in this troublous season they had lost a
great part of their substance. For the which co^syderacyons and many other
which were tedyous to wryt the cytezeyns besought the king of his most
gracious favor and pity, and to take of them as they might bear.

This matter thus hangyng / the king upon saint Nycholas even departed from
westmynster toward Northampton. And little before his departing / ordained
sir John^ lynd knight and master John^ waldren clerk, to be gardeynes of the
city and toure / the which were named in the kings writtynge Senesshalles or
stewardes of the city. Upon the day following that the king was ryden /
these.ii. forenamed stewardes sent for.xxiiii. of the most notable men of the
city, and warned them to apere the day following before ye kings counsel
at westmynster / where at their apparaunce was showed unto them by sir Roger
Leyborne, that the kings mind was, that they should have the rule of the
city in his absens under the foresaid Senesshalles and for to se good rule
kept within ye city / they should be sworn there before his counsel.

The which there were then sworn and countermaunded unto the city. And always
labor was made unto the king for the fine of the city / so that in the
Crystmas weke an end was made with the king, by labor of such friends as the
city had about him, for the sum of.xx.M. mark, for all transgressyons and
offenses by them before done / certain persons excepted which the king had
given to sir Edward his son, being as before is said in the tour of
wynsore. For the payment of which sum at days by agreement set / sir Roger
Leyborne and master Roberte wareyn clerk, were assigned to take the suertyes
for ye same. After which suertye by them received, and sent unto the king to
Northampto^ / the king sent immedyatly after unto ye cytezeyns, a charter
under his broad seal, whereof the effect ensues.

HEnry by the grace of god, king of England, lord of Irlande and duke of Guyan
/ to al men health. Know ye that for the fine of.xx.M. mark, the which our
cytezeyns of London to us made, for the redempcyon of the transgressions and
trespaces to us, to our queen, to our noble brother Richard king of Almayne,
and to Edward our first begote^ son done / we remytte and pardone for us and
for our heirs to the said cytezeyns and their heirs, as much as in us is /
so that they have and enjoy all their former grauntes and lybertees, rentes
and profittes, from the feste of Crystmas last paste / and also that the said
cytezeyns have to them all forfaytes of all malefactors of ye city, which in
the parturbau^ce before made were endyted, or for the same be yet for to be
endyted / Except the goods and catalles of them, of the which we have given
the bodies unto our foresaid son Edward / and except the rentes and
teneme^tes of all those cytezeyns, which now be and shall be our eschete by
reason of the forsayde transgressyons. And that all prisoners which now in our
prysons remain, be freely delivered / except those persons whose bodies we
have given to Edward our son. And yt the said cytezeyns be as fre as they
before the said transgressyons were, in all parts and costs of this our
lands. In wytnes whereof we have made these letters patentes / witnesses my
self at Northampton, the.x. day of Ianuarii, the year of our reygne.xlix.

After which pardone by the cytezeyns received / all pledges for them being in
the toure of London, And also.iiii. of them that were in the toure of
wyndesore, that is to say Rychard Bonauenture, Symo^ de Hadistoke, wyllyam of
Kente, and wyllyam of Glouceter, were delivered. Thanne also was dyscharged the
forenamed stewardes sir John^ Lynde and master John^ waldre^ / and the
cytezeyns of them self chose for mayre wyllya^ Fyz Rychard, and for shyreffes
Thomas de la fourde, and Gregory de Rokkysley. Than for leuyng of this fine
were set as well servants covenant men, as householders / and many refuced the
lyberties of the city for to be quyt of that charge.

while the king lay thus at Northampton / sir Symo^ de Mountford put him upon
the dome of the Popes legate Octobonus, yt before was come into this land to
refourme things in the church of England, and also to set unity and rest
between the king and his lords. To whose do me, and also of the king of
romans, the forsayde sir Symond had bounden him to stand. Upon which promise
and band, he was lybertied to be at large in the kings court, and so
continued a season. But in ye end when the king was comme^ into London, he
departed suddenly out of the court and rode unto wynchelsee, where he
accompanied him with the rouers of the sea / and after some pryses taken,
departed from them and so sailed into France, and put him in service with
holy Lowis than king of that prouynce.

This year also upon the even of saint John^ baptyst / the king began his
syege about the castle of Kenelworth with a mighty power. But sir Henry
Hastynges, with such as were within it, defended it so strongly, that the
king and all his power might not win the said castle of a long time, as
after in the next year shall appear.

It is before showed, how ye queen by her purueiau^s had caused an host of
strangers to prepare them to come into England, for to aid her lord the
king again the barons: She had also purchased a curse of ye Pope, to acurse
all the said barons and all their ayders and helpers / and had commyssio^s
dyrected to certain bysshoppes of England, to execute the same / as of London,
and of wynchester, and of Chychester / the which for fere of the barons than
denied and deferred the execucyon and sentence of the said curse. wherefore the
queen made new labor to the pope than Urban the.iiii. and had it granted,
that the said Bysshoppes for their dysobedyence should be corrected. And for
this, Octobon the foresaid legate, this year at a counsayl holden by him and
the clergy of England at Paul's church in London suspended the said
Bysshoppes, and them sent unto Rome to be assoyled of the pope, being at
this day Clement the.iiii.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxv. Anno domini.M.CC.lxvi. Edward Blont. Thomas fiz Thomas.
Anno..l. Peter Aunger.
IN this.l. year upon the even of saint Thomas the apostle before Crystmas,
was yelden by appoyntement the castle of Kenelworth At the which the king
with his power had lain as before is said, from mydsomer till that day / and
tha^ given over by sir Henry Hastynges and his complyeys, upon condycyon yt he
and all the other should have life and lym, and horse and harneys, with all
things within the castle to the^ belonging / and a certain time of leyser
to carry a way the same. And in this year in the time of Lent / were ye wardeyns
of the.v. ports reco^cyled to ye king, by favor of sir Edward the kings
son. And natwithstandynge the great harmys they had done by rouyng upon the sea, as well to English merchants as to other / they had to them confermed
all their fourmer pryuyleges. And over that to them was granted, yt if any
man English or other would sewe for restitucyon of good by the^ before taken,
or for the death of any of their friends before slain / that all such
complayntes should be sued and showed in their courts / and there to have their
matters determined and not else where. But what the cause was of this end thus
made atwene ye king and the^ it is not showed. But ye common fame at yt day ran
yt the said wardeins of ye v. ports had at this day ye dominion of the sea.
wherefore ye king was fayn to follow their pleasures.

About the feast of Philip and Jacob ye king held his parlyame^t at Nort
ha^pton. At yt which were co^fermed ye old fraunchyses and lybertyes, by the
kings progenytours before granted unto the city of London, with a new grant
for ye shyre of Middelsex. And at this parlyament were dysheryted many noble
men of the land, yt before time had taken the barons party. For which cause
they accompanied them together, and robbed and reuyd in diverse coostes of the
land / and took the town of Lyncoln^ and spoiled it, and after raunsomed many
of the rich burgeyses of the town / and took the i will of Ely, and stre^gthed
it in such wise that they held it long after.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxvi. Anno dn^i. M.CC.lxvii. John^ Adryan. willm^ Fiz
Richard. Anno.li Luke Badecot.
IN this.li. year / at the chosyng of the mayre, certain contrauersies fill
attwene the rulers and the commons of the city of London. wherefore by advice
of the mayre and aldermen / sir Roger Leydorne with other came unto ye
Guylhalle, being harnesed under their gowns and upon the friday following
Alhalowyn called the commons to the eleccion of the new mayre / where the best
of the city gave ye nominacyo^ unto Alei sowch / and diverse of ye other cried
upon Thomas fyz Thomas, which at that time was prisoner in wyndesore castle /
wherefore the said Roger with ye assystence of the mayre and other, took the
said Rascal and evil disposed persons, and sent the^ unto diverse prysons.
This year also the gentylmen that held the I Will of Ely brake out sundry times
and did much harm in Northfolke, and in Suffolk, and Cambrydgeshyre / and
took the city of Norwyche / and after the spoylynge thereof, carried away with
them many of the cytezeyns being rich, and fynaunced them at great sums
of money / and lived therein that I Will like unto out laws. By this and other,
many hurtes in diverse places of the land was done, by theuys and other ill
dysposed people / whereof the charge was ever laid unto the fore name
gentilmen. The^ the legate labored unto the king, that the said disheryted
gentylmen might purchase their lands of him by fine and ransom. By whose
labor the king lastly agreed, that the said gentylme^ should have their
lands again by fynes of.v. year value of their land. As he that might
dyspende.xx. li. by year, should pay an. C. li. and so other after that rate,
except sir Robert ferers Earl of Derby, sir John^ de la war and him that
struck of ye fyste of the kings purseuau^t. And some other persons which
were of small hauoure, should be fined by discrecyon of the kings counsayll /
but this took no conclusyon.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxvii. Anno dn^i. M.CC.lxviii. Thomas Basynge. Aleyn South.
Anno.lii. Robert de Cornehylf.
IN this.lii. year, for what hap is not expressed, sir Gylbert de Clare earl of
Gloceter refused ye king and in the march of walys gadered unto hi^ a strong
power. To whom also drew sir John^ Eyuile and other of the company
disherited. And after the feast of Crystmasse, with a great host came nere
unto London / that time the Popes legate Octobonus being lodged at the toure
of London.

when the mayre and aldermen of the city were ware of the earls coming, with
so strong a power, not knowing whether he were the kings friend or not /
shytte the gates again his fore ryders. And for the king nor none of his
cou^sayll was than nere unto the city / the mayre and aldermen went unto the
legate, and required his counsayl, whether they should suffer the earl to enter
i^to the city or not / whereunto the legate answered that he thought not the
contrary / for he knew well that he was the kings true subyect and friend.
It was not long after that a messanger came from the earl unto the mayre,
willing to have license to pass thorugh the city into Southwerke, where he
entendyd to lodge him and his people / which was granted / and so the earl
passed thorough the city, and was lodged in South work. To who^ came shortly
after by Southerey, side sir John^ Eyuile with a great company.

Than the mayre kept the gate of ye bridge shyt, and watched it daily with a
certain of armyd men, and every night caused the draw bridge to be drawn, and
the waters side daily and nyghtly to be watched with many armyd men. In little
process of time after / the legate and the earl agreed in such wise, that the
earl by his aduyce was suffered with a certain of his people to be lodged
within ye city. By reason whereof he daily drew more and more of his people
into the city / so that finally many things were ordered by him, and many of
the commons took his party again the mayre and aldermen.

Then in the Easter weke he took ye keys of the bridge and of the gates from
the officers of the city, and delivered them to such as pleased him and
received into the city many of the dysherited persons, and gave to them fre
lybertye to pass the bridge by all hours of the day and ye night. The mayre
of all this sent word unto the king, which than was gaderyng of his power in
Northfolke, and made hasty speed toward London. In which mean time the earl
with his company made bulwerkes and barbycanys atwene the toure and the city,
and cast dykes and trenches in some places of ye city, and fortyfyed it
wonderously.

Then many of ye cytezeyns feryng a new insurreccyon, voyded the city as
secretly as they might / whose goods the earl seized to his own use: or
suffered his men to spoil the^ at their pleasure. Than the commo^s of the city
forgot their late punysshment / and as men without dread of god or of their
king, took certain of the aldermen and cast them in prysone, and sequestered
their goods, and dyspoyled much thereof. And thervppon ran to the
Guyldhalle, and there chose for their mayre or for custos or ruler of the city
sir Rychard de Culworth knight, and for baylyues Roberte de Lynton and Roger
Marshall / and dyscharged the old mayre and sheryffes. And that done, all
such prisoners as were in Newgate, Ludgate, and Crepylgate, or in any other
prysons within the city for because of the barons war before passed / they
were delivered and set at lybertye.

when the legate beheld all this rebellion and dyscorde / he repented him of
his fourmer counsayll given unto the mayre. And for he saw he might not
refourme the earl of his error / he thretened him with the censurs of the
church, and to accurse him as the dysheryted were. And upon this he commanded
the deuyne service to be said without note, and the church doors to be shytte
in time of the service doing, and that no belle were ronge unto the said
service / and all to the intent yt the disheryted, which stood accursed should
not enter ye churches to here the deuyne service of god.

Then upon.iii. wekes after Easter / the king came to Ham^.iii. miles from
London, and was lodged him self in the abbaye of white monks of Stratforde.
whyther came unto him the legate soon after, and was lodgid also in the same
abbay / where for streyghtnes of lodgyng his horse and mules were set within
the closter of the said abbay. Then the kings host made daily assautes upon
the city / and gunnes and other ordynaunces was shot into the city, which
little or nothing hurt the town, yt was so strongly fortyfyed.

In this season ye legate upon his party, and the king of Romans upon the
other party, for allyau^ce that was between him and the earl of Glouceter /
labored so to the king that a reformacyon of peace was spoken of. During
which treaty the souldyours lyenge in Southwerke, made many robboryes in
Southery and other places / and rowed over to westmynster, and spoiled there
the kings paleys, and devoured his wine, and brake ye glass of the wyndowes /
and all other necessaryes to that paleys they destroyed and wasted / and
somtymes came in like wise into London and robbyd there also. Of which there
was taken.iiii. yt bare the Conysaunce of the earl of Derby / the which the
earl caused their hands and legs to be bounden, and then put into a sack,
and so cast into the Thamys.

About the feast of saint Barnabe / the peace between the king and the earl of
Glouceter was concludyd.

After the which conclusyon taken / the earl removed out of the city, and was
lodged again in South work. And the king entryd the city the sunday before
mydsomer day. And forth with the kings proclamacyons were made through the
city, of the peace between the king and the earl. And after was given liberte
to ye dysheryted persons yt they should have.xi. days respyte to shyft for them
self / that is to mean other to avoid to such places where they might be in
some suertye, or else to agree to the former composycyon made by the legate,
and to pay the.v. part of the slynte of their lands / certain persons to
be exceptyd, as before is rehersyd. And as touching to the earl and such other
as before were not dysheryted, with also the cytesyns of London, to be clearly
forgyuen and pardoned.

And then was restoryd to their offices Aleyn Sowch for mayre, and Thomas
Basynge and Robert de Cornehyll for shyreffes. And the aldermen which before
were deposyd, were again restored to their wards and offices.

Upon the wednysday following, the legate interdyted all the city. which
endured from.vi. of the clock in the morning, till.iii. of the clock the next
day at after none / and then yt dyschargyd, upon the oath of.ii. commons
sworn in the name of all the city, that the city should stand to the
ordinance and judgment of holy church. But an other cronycle says, that
this interdyccyon should have continued longer, ne had been the sterenesse of
the Londoners / which held the legate so straight, that they enforced him to
wythdraw that sentence upon the foresaid condycyon. Then after this, all the
bulwerkes and barbycans made by the earl in the city were plucked clean up /
and the dyches fyllyd, that no part of them was seen. when the cytesyns
should have their new pardon granted / an obstacle was made, for so myche as
they as yet had not recompensyd the king of Romans for the subuersyon of
his manor of Thystylworth. For the which was axed.vi. thousand mark / so
that finally with great labor and frendshyppe, thy agreed to give unto him
for amends a thousand mark, to be paid in two years.

It was long after the king acceptyd to his grace sir John^ Eyuyle, sir
Nycholas de Segraue, sir willyam Marmeryn or Mermyon, sir Richard Gray, sir
John^ fyz John^, and sir Gylbert de Lucy, with other. And accord was also made
between sir Edward the kings son, and the forenamed earl of Glouceter. And
then was all fortresses and other defenses which before time were made in
Southwerke and in other places ioynynge to the same, pulled up and destroyed /
and the earl and all other souldyours clean voyded. And after all things set
in order and rest, except such as yet kept the isle of Ely / the king rode to
Shrowysburye, where he tarried a season, for to common of matters between him and
Lewelyn prince of walys.

The king thus being at Shrowysbury / a writ was dyrectyd to sir Aleyn Souch
mayre of London, viii. days before Mychelmas from the king / chargynge him
that the cytesyns should not proceed to eleccyon of new shyreffes till his
coming to London, but to suffer the old to abide still in office.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxviii. Anno dn^i. M.CC.lxix. wyllyam de Durham. Aleyn Souch.
Anno.liii walter Henry.
IN this.liii. year in the month of November, fill a varyau^ce between the
felyshyppes of goldsmythes and tayllours of London. which grew to making of
parties / so that with the goldsmythes took party the felyshyp or craft of /
and with the tayllours held ye craft of stayners. D^rf taking.
By mean of this myche people nyghtly gaderyd in the streets in harneys. And
at length as yt were provided, ye third night, of the said parties met upon
the number of.v. hundred men on both sides, and ran to gyther with such
violence, yt some were slain and many wounded, Then outcrie was made / so yt
the shy reffes with strength of other commons came to the ryddynge of them,
and of them took certain persons / and sent them unto diverse prysons / and
upon the morrow such search was made, that the most of the chief causers of
that fray were taken and put in ward.

Then upon the freday following saint Katheryns day, sessyons were kept at
Newgate by the mayre and Laure^ce de Broke justice and other / where.xxx. of
the said persons were arregned of felony, and.xiii. of them cast and hanged.
And for one Godfrey de Beuerlay help to arm one of the said persons, he was
also cast among the other. In lent following the king being at westmynster
commanded the mayre of London to present unto him.vi. persons such as were
able to be shyriffes. Of the which.vi. so presented, ye king chase.ii. for to
be shyreffes / that is to say wyllyam de Durham and walter Henry / and then
caused them to be sworn, that they should gader the profytes of the city,
and to give a true account before the Barons of the excheker.

And the morrow after saint Iamis day, or the.xxvi. day of July / the king
dyscharged sir Aleyn Souch mayre, and made Stepha^ Edworth constable of the
toure, and custos of the city of London. Of these rulers of the city after
the year that Thomas fyz Thomas was mayre are diverse oppynyons. For after some
writers, from that year, which as the xlviii. year of king Henry till the
lviii. year, of his reygne, in the which year Johan Adryan draper was mayre /
were all custodyes and gardeyns and no mayres / and who to ye was then
constable of the tower of London, was also custos of the city.

About this time also by medyacy on and means of sir Edward / all such
dysheryted persons as kept the isle of Ely, were reconcyled unto the king /
and all fortresses and defenses therein by them made, plucked away and
destroyed.

And in this month of July, Octobonus the legate after he had made many good
rules in the church, not without great charge of dymes leuyed of the same /
took his leave of the king, and rode toward the sea side with great treasour,
and so returned in process of time to Rome. where after Innocent the fyft,
about the year of our lord.xii. hundred and.lxxvi. he was chosen and created
pope, and then named Adryan yt.v. of yt name, and dyed within.l. days of his
ele^yon. This year also, for so myche as many of the cytesyns of London for the
great imposycyon and charge that they were set at, toward the fine of.xx.
thousand mark forenamed with other charges, void the city with their
housholdes and goods, and enhabited them in dyues places of the land,
thinking thereby to be acquitted of the said sessyng or charge / the other of
the city which remained, made instant labor to ye king and had yt granted,
that all such as for the said cause had voyded their goods out of the
city, should be distrayned by the shyryff of ye shyre where they then dwelled,
and forcyd to pay all such sums as they before were assessyd at.

And in the month of September, the forenamed.v. cytesyns which remained
prisoners in the tower of wyndefore, that is to say Thomas fyz Thomas,
Mychaell Tony, Stephan Buckerell, Thomas Pywelysdon and John^ de la Flete, as
before in the end of the.xlviii. year is expressyd / made at this season their
end with sir Edward the kings son for great sums of money, and were
delyueryd.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxix. Anno domini.M.CC.lxx. wyllyam Haddystoke. Thomas fiz
Thomas. Anno.liiii. Anketyll de Aluerne.
IN this.liiii. year, began an hard froste about the feast of saint Andrew,
and enduryd till yt was nere unto Candelmasse. The which was so fervent, that
Thamys above the bridge between London and westmynster was so hard frosyn, ye
men and bestes passed over on foot from Lambhyth to westmynste / and so upward
in diverse places to Kyngstone / and marchaundyse was carried from Sandwych and
other havens of the sea unto London by land, for that ships at ye season
might not enter into the river of Thamys.

And about the feast of saint Uedast fill such plent of water, ye Thamys
flowed and rose so high, y^ the like thereof was not seen by men then living
whereof ensued much harm about London / for the selers by the water side were
all drowned, and in them great plente of marchaundyse peryshed and lost.

In this year in the beginning of lent / ye king gave unto sir Edward his son
the rule of the city of London, with all revenues and profytes to yt
belonging. After which gift ye said sir Edward made sir Hugh the son of
Othon constable of ye tower and custos of the city.

And upon the.ix. day of Apryll ensuynge / sir Edmunde the kings other son
surnamed Crouch bake, married at westminster the daughter of the earl of
Aumarle. For solempnyte whereof, the king kept there in ye great hall a great
honorable feast the sunday following.

And upon the day of saint Erkenwalde, or the last day of Apryll next
ensuynge / sir Edward ye kings son commanded the citesyns of London to
present unto him.vi. persons able to be shyreffes of London. Of the which he
admytted to that office wyllyam de Hadestoke and Anketyll de Aluerne / and
swear them to be accomptauntes as their predecessors were. And the.vi. day of
May following p^sentyd at ye Guyld hall, and there chargyd of new.

At these days a new custom or toll was used to be paid by the cytysyns of
London unto the king / which toll sir Edward then had letten so ferme to a
merchant stranger for.xx. mark by year. wherefore the cytesysn not willing
to be under the rule of a stranger, made great suyte unto the said sir
Edward / and lastely agreed with him to bye the said toll free, for the
sum of two hundred mark.

And in the end of this year, that is to mean the.xiii. day of October / the
king let translate with great solemnytye, the holy body of saint Edward
king and confessor, that before lay in the side of the quere where the
monks now sing, into the chapel at the back of the high altar of
westmynster abbay / and there laid yt in a rich shryne. And in this year the
king had granted unto him toward his vyage purposyd by him into the holy
land, the xx. penny of every man's substance mouable thorough out his land
of the lay fee / and of the spyrytualty by assent of ye.x. Gregorye then
pope.iii. dysmes, to be leuyed in three years.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxx. Anno domini.M.CC.lxxi. walter Porter. John^ Adryan
Uyntyner. Anno.lv. John^ Taylour.
IN this.lv. year, the king of Romans co^cludid a covenant between ye king
and sir Gylbert de Clare earl of Glouceter, for a vyage to be taken into the
holy land by the said earl for the king. For the which vyage the said earl
should have toward his charge.viii thousand mark, and at the taking of his
shyppyng other iiii. thousand mark, and to be ready by the first day of May
next following / and if the earl were not ready at the sea side at that day with
his company to take his shyppynge, he should then forfayte to ye king.ii.M.
mark. For suertie whereof ye said earl should deliver into the kings
possessyon his castle of Henleger standing upon ye march of walis. But this
came after to no purpose, wherefore ye cause is not showed. But ye journey was
performed by sir Edward the kings son, as after shall be to you declared.
In this pass time the cytesyns of London contentyd so well sir Edwardes mind,
that he labored so for them to the kings grace, that they had then their
chartour so co^fermyd, that they should after their ancient lybertyes chose of
them self a mayre and two shryues / and ye said shryues to have the offices
thereunto belonging to ferme, as they to fore had / except that wheretofore
they paid for the fee ferme.iii. hundred and l. punde, now they should
pay.iiii. hundred and.l. pound. After which confyrmacyon thus granted and
passed by ye kings broad seal / the cytesyns upon the.xiiii. day of July
assembled at the Guyldhall, and chase for their mayre John^ Adryan draper / and
for shyreffes walter Porter and John^ Tayller. And upon ye xvi. day following
sir Edward being present, presented them unto ye king at westminster / where
they were admitted and sworn. And then was sir Hugh of Othon dyschargyd of
that rule of the city.

Then the citesyns of their fre will gave unto the king an.C. mark / and to
sir Edward.v. hundred mark / which gift the king well accepted. And soon
after they received their chartour of confyrmacyon, berynge date the.xxi. day
of July, and year of the kings reygne.lv.

And for the former conuencyon between the king and the earl of Glouceter was
not holden / sir Edward took upon him the kings cross. To whom the king
gave all such money as was granted of ye lay fee as before is showed, and
then took his leave of the king / and after took shyppynge at Dover the.xx. day
of August, and so sailed to Burbeaux with his wife and other noble company. And
for that holy Lewys then king of France was gone, he tarried at Bordeaux a
certain season / and after sped him with his foresaid company toward ye city
of Thunys, where ye French king was. But or he came thither saint Lewys was
deed. And ye peace concluded between Phylyppe his son and the king of Thunys.
wherefore sir Edward entendynge to grieve gods enmyes, with some knygtes of
France which ente^ded the same / took leave of the French king and of sir
Charl^s his uncle then king of Scycyle / and sailed further into the holy
land, and arrived at a port of Acris or Acon. For at ye day in the holy
land was no mo cytyes in the possessyon of christian men, but that and the city
of Tire / with certain castellys, whereunto the christian fled often for socoure
again the Sarazyns.

when sir Edward was come^ to ye city of Acon / ye christian knights received
him with great honor and gladness, and lodged him in their best manner. where
he tarried by the space of a year after, as aftermeth ye french cronycle. For yt
was not long after his coming thither, but that the Soudane of Sury (the
which had won all the countries there about) came thither with a great power
of Sarazyns, and assauted the town vygurously. But sir Edward with the aid
of christian men bare him so knyghtly, that he defended the city and the
castellys to the same belonging, and terrytores of the same / that the Soudane
for all his great multitude and power gate there lyteil honor /
notwytstandynge that he had in his host, as affyrmeth the french cronycle,
over an hundred thousand Sarazyns. And more affyrmeth the said cronycle, that
sir Edward in his polycyes and manfull acts so honorably behauyd him that he
never did such act in all his life following / all be it that after he did
many of great honor. But none that was like unto the acts that he there
accomplyshed and brought unto end. By reason whereof his name among infidelys
was had in memory many years after.

Of the honor of this marcyall knight I have showed the longer rehersall, for
so myche as I find yt testyfyed of the French men / the which I know well by
their other chronicles that they make of Englysh princes must be of great
authoryte, or else by them yt should not so specially have been noted. And more
over I am assured, that if a French prince had deseruyd such a general price
/ yt should have been set out and artyculed every act thereof, that yt should
have contained a large work, and the specyaltyes thereof declared to their
most laud and honor. Then this noble prince being thus in Acon, and daily
putting the Suryens to shame and great damages / they seeing they might not
prevail again him by strength of vatayll, cast how they might destroy him by
treason / and sent unto him a Sarazyne in name of a messanger, the which in
telling of his feigned message, wounded him with a knyfe enuenomyd / of the
which wound he lay long or he were thereof cured. But after confession made
by the Sarazyn of all his compassed treason, he was put unto cruel death.

In this year also fill down the steple of saint Mary Bow in Chepe of London,
and slew women and children.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxxi. Anno dn^i. M.CC.lxxii. Gregory Rokkysle. John^ Adryan
wyntener Anno.lvi. Henry waleys.
IN this.lvi. year, in the month of November at the parliament holden at
westmynster / the merchants of London and other places of England,
complained them to ye king that the countess of Flaundres had taken from them
certain gooddes amountynge to a great sum. Upon which complaynt the king
sent to her to make restytucyon. But for no^e was had / the king commanded
that all men born in ye parties in England should be arrested, and they and
their goods to be under suer keeping. By the which mean in conclusyon she
sent over ambassadors, and besought the king that his merchants might use
their intercourse into Flau^dres as they before times had done, and such lossis
as before was by them sustained, should be recompensyd. And so soon after, an
amytye between the king and her was concluded.

De^^ and (...) of Rychard king of ^smayne.
In this year about ye end of March dyed Rychard king of Almayn and earl of
Cornewayle brother to the king / and was buried at Haylys an abbaye of white
monks by him before times builded, after he had been king of Almayne by the
term of.xv. years. But after the rehersall made before in the.xxx. year of
this king Henry, he should reygne xvi. years.

In the month of Iuny, ye monastery of ye Trinite in ye city of Norwiche was
consumed with fire / by reason of a fraye made between servants of the abbaye
and some of the cytezeyns of the city / which grew to a great skyrmysshe.
For the pryour of the same and other of the monks purueyed sowdyours, and
held ye belfray and the church by force of armies / and threw out stones and
darts and shot many arrows, by reason whereof many of ye town were both
wounded and slain, which brought the commons and young men in such a furye
and madness, that they fyrid the gates / and after forced the fire with read
and dry wood, that the church with the books and all other ornaments of
the same, and all houses of office belonging to the same abbey, were clean
brent and thrown down / so that nothing was preserved / except a little
Chapel. wha^ tidings of this riot came to ye kings knowledge / he was
therewith grievously dyspleased, so that he rode thither soon after / and there
commanded questes to be charged of knights and esquyres that dwelled in the
country about / and to endyte all such persons as were occasyoners and
executours of that deed. By reason of which enquery, finally were cast and
iuged upon the nombre. of.xxx. young men of the town / the which were after
drawn to the place of execucyon and there hanged and brent to the great
dyscomfyture and sorrow of the cytezeyns. For they thought ye pryour of the
place was the occasyoner of all that myschyef / which was borne out and
defended by the bishop of Norwyche than being named Roger. And this year were
diverse prodygies and strange tokens seen in diverse places of England among /
ye which at Grenewyche beside London a la^be was yenyd, A mo^ster
having.ii. perfyte bodies with all members, and but one heed.

Anno domini.M.C.lxxii. Anno domini.M.CC.lxxiii. Richard Paris. Sir walter
Henry. Anno.lvii. John^ Bedyll.
IN this.lvii. year of king Henry and beginning of the same, the king
sykened / so that he was forcyd to keep his bed at westminster, where he called
before him sir Gylberte de Clare earl of Glouceter and caused him to be newly
sworn to keep the peace of the land, to the behofe of Edward his son / and
than dyed upon the day of saint Edmunde the bishop, or the.xvi. day of
Nouembre / and was buried upon the southesyde of saint Edward in
westmynster, whenne he had reigned.lvi. years and.xxviii. days leuynge after
him sir Edward beforenamed for his heir, and Edmu^de Crowchbak. In a table
ha^gyng upon the tomb of the said Henry are written these verses following.
Tercius Henricus iacet hic, pietatis amicus
Ecclesiam strauit istam, quam post renouauit
Reddat ei munus, qui regnat trinus and vnus.


The which may be Englysshed as follows. The friend of pity and of alms
deed
Henry the third whylome of England king.
who this church brake, and after his mede
Again renewed into this fair building
Now rests in here, which did so great a thing
He yield his mede, that lord in deyite
That as one god reygneth in persons three.


Francia.
LOwys the.ix. of ye name and son unto the second Phylyp, began his reygne
over the realm of France in the year of our lord.xii.C.xxiii. and the.vii.
year of the third Henry then king of England. This Lowys was crowned at
Raynes upon the day of saint Sixtus the pope or the.vi. day of August. By the
mean of this Lowys as testifies the fre^she cronycle, returned the blood of
Pepyn to the enherytaunce of the crown of France, whose name was Isabell
daughter of Bawdewyn earl of Henaut / which Bawdewyn was discendyd of
Ermengaunte, sometime countess of Namoure, which was daughter to Charles duke
of Lorayne / the which Charles was lynyally dyscended of Charles the
Co^querour that was son of Charles Martellus the son of Pepyn.

when this Lowys had passed the solempnytye of his coronacyon / he made a vyage
into ye country of Poytiers, and there wanne from the English men certain
castelles and towns, as before in the.x. year of Henry the third is touched.
The which vyage by him fynysshed / he at ye contemplacyon and prayer of king
Johan king of Jerusalem, took upon him the cross to war upon the Turks /
and after all things for that vyage made ready, passed with his host by Burgys
and Neuers, and so to Lion / and from Lion to Auygnd the which for
dysobedyence to the church of Rome had stand accursed upon the term of.vii.
years. But where as king Lowys supposed he should have passed with his people
as he had passed the other cytyes / ye cytezeyns closed the gates again him,
and would not suffer him nor his to come within the city.

wherefore the king commanded assaute to be made / and so continued there his
siege till the myddell of August, the which was begone about the end of
Noue^bre / and lost there many of his men / among the which Guy earl of
saint Paul a man of great fame was one, with ye bishop of Lemeryk and other,
to the no^bre of.ii.M. or theraboute. wherewith this Lowys was so amoued, that
he made a solemn oath, that he would not depart thens till he had won the
town.

when that the rulers of the town had knowledge of the kings a^owe and
promise that he had made / they took aduysemente / and shortly after sent unto
the king.ii. noble men of the city to entreat and common of peace. But peace
was to them utterly denied / except they would submytte them holy to the
correccyon of the pope. For the offense done to god and his church of Rome /
and after to stand to the kings dome, for dyspleasure done again him. In the
end though this condycyon were greatly again their mind / it was lastly
agreed unto, and the king with his people was received into the city. And
after he had restyd him there a season, that the cytezens had agreed them with
the popes legate, and received of him absolucio^ / with a new bishop named
Peter Corbio of the popes eleccyon than Gregory the.ix. with other things done
according to the said popes commandment: Then king Lowys commanded first
the dyches of the town to be filled plain with the ground. And that done, he
caused to be cast unto the earth.iii.C. of ye fairest houses of the city. And
after certain su^mes of money by him received toward his charge / he departed
thens toward Tholowse / and there by aduyce of his barony, for so much as
winter was toward he returned into France / and so sped him on his journey,
that upon the even of all Saints he came to a place called Mou^te Pauncer in
the prouynce of Aluerne where he was taken with strong sykenesse, and dyed
within.iiii. days after, whose corpse with great honor was conveyed unto saint
Denis, and there buried by his father / when he had reigned.iii. years /
leuynge after him a son, the which is now named saint Lowys, and was than of
ye age of.xii. years or nere thereaboute.

LOwys the.x. of that name surnamed saint Lowys, and son of the.ix. Lowys last
king / began his reygne over the land of France in the month of November,
and year of grace.xii.C. and.xxvi. and ye.x. year of Henry the.iii. then king
of England. The which for his tenderness of youth, was thought insufficyent
to take so great a charge / and specially of ye duke of Brytayne tha^ named
Peter Mancler, the which encensed and styred many noble men again the said
Lowys. But at length by prouysyon of queen Blanch his mother and other lords,
he subdued his enemies / and at Raynes was crowned in the month of Dece^ber
following, of the bishop of Soy sons, for so much as at that time ye see of
Raynes was void.

The.iiii. year of his reygne and of his age.xvii. he builded the house of
relygyon called Royan mount / and settherin monks of Cysteauxe order white
monks, and endewed them with rich possessions.

It was not long after that great varyaunce fill between the vnyuersytye or
studientes of Paris and the cytezeyns of the same / in such wise that the
studyentes were in purpose to have lafte ye city, and to have kept their
study else where. Of ye which strife the french book expresses not the cause
/ but says that the king made good speed to agree them, for so much as
king Henry of England had made labor to the said studyentes to come into
his country, and to enhabyte them there with many great pryueleges. But in
conclusion ye french king so entreated the^, that they agreed to rest there
still. And that of a congrue^ce / for they might dwell in no land, where they
should more surely be defended. The ^^ome de Lyce.
For ye king of France bears the flower de Lyce for one of that causes, that
is to say for to defend the clergy. And the faith of Christ betokens the
myddle leef. And the third betokens Chyualry. So that by the chyualry the
clergy is defended, which may^teyne the faith of the holy church. About this
season king Lowys married to his fere Margarete the daughter of the earl of
Prouynce. Soon after ye matrymony was solepnysed / Frederyk the second before
in ye story of Henry the.iii. minded Emperor of Almayne, set unto Lowis
requyrynge hi ye he would mete him at a place called Ualcolour, to ye end that
he might common with him: which request king Lowys accepted / and with a
goodly company kept there his day of metynge. But when the Emperor was ware
that he was commen thither with such a company / he feigned him syke, and broke
his appoyntement. wherefore the frenshmen construyed, that if the king had
comen thither with a small or weke company / he would have conveyed him into
high Almayn, and there to have kept him till he had of him his pleasure,
concerning the war between king Henry and him, or in other things. But
when king Lowys espied the delucyon of the Emperor / he then returned into
France. It was not long after that ye king was enfourmed of the obstynacy of
the Albygensis / the which of long time had be^ effected with diverse points
of herysy, and many times reco^cyled by the kings of France and other / and
yet fallen again to the said error / wherefore the king sent unto sir Johan
Beawmount the which joined unto them / chargynge him to enuade that country,
and to waste and distroy it, till he had forced them to restore to the church
such goods as they before had taken from it / and over that to cause them
to make amends to the good christen people, which they had harmed by means
of their rapynes and exorcyo^s. Upon which commandment thus from ye king
received / the said Johan with a competent nombre of knights entered the said
country, and laid syege to a strong castle named Mount Royal. And after many
forte assautes wanne the said castle and manned it with Frenchemen. And than
yode to an other strong hold than named Saygos / and there likewise ordered
the same. And after wastyng the country, wan^e from them many towns and
holds / so that in the end he forced the chyefrules of that prouynce to obey
them to all his hestes / and delivered to him suertyes or hostagys for the
perfourmaunce of the same. So yt he returned into France with great pomp and
honor / and received of the king at his home coming great thank, with many
rich gifts. About the.xv. year of king Lowys / the war was quyckened
between this Lowys and Henry the.iii. than king of England, for causes before
showed in the.xxvi. year of the said Henry. And after that war as there is
showed ended / the king, which was toward the city of Lion to have vysyted
the pope Innocent the.iiii. which thither was fled for fere of Frederik the
fore named Emperor / was taken with a sykenesse named dyssenterya of the flux.
wherewith he was so grievously vexed, that he lay long at a town called
Poyntoyse / and was in great ieopardy of life / where lastly after many
pylgrymages for him done, with prayers and other obseruaunces long to account
/ lastly it came to his mind, that if it pleased god to restore him to his
health, he would make a vyage into the holy land, and there war upon Christ's
enemies After which promise solemply auowed / he mended daily, and was sone
after restored unto his health. when the king was recovered and returned unto
Paris / he called a cou^sayll of spyrytuall and temporal, and there showed
unto them of the promise which he had made / requyryng the^ of their
assystence and aid / wherein he fond his lords were agreeable.

And in the time and season yt prouysyon was made for that journey / the king
with a goodly company rode unto the abbey of Cluny, to vysyte the foresaid pope
/ and he tarried with him.xv. days. And after his matter with him sped, with
plain remyssyon to him granted, and all other that kept with him that vyage
he returned into France. And upon wytsondaye following / he kept a great
court of his lands at Meleo^ where in presence of them, he called before him
Beatryce daughter unto the earl of Province and sister to the queen his wife /
and there gave her in marriage unto Charles his brother, and made him there
knight, with many other for his love. And ye day following he gave unto the
said Charles the erledome of Amo^ with ye lordshyp of Mayn. And soon after he
rode to Paris, where he assembled many of his lords to hold with him his
journey.

THe friday following ye feast of Penthecoste, in the year of our lord.xii.C.
and.xliiii. and the.xxii. year of the reigned of ye said Lowys he with many of
his lords departed from Paris upon his iournay toward the holy land. In
which was croysed also ye archbyshops of Bourges, and of Raynes, the bysshoppes
of Laon, of Orleaunce, and of Beauuais, ye earls of Artoys, of saint Paul, of
Bloy, of Bar, of March, and of Mou^tfort, with many other noble men which
were long to reherce. with the which company the king passed thorugh Burgoyn^
/ and so to Lyo^ the uttermost border of France where the king fond at ye
time the forenamed pope, which there tarried for fere of the Emperor Frederyke.

when the king a season had there tarried with the pope / he sent forth ye bawe
ward of his host toward the place called Aque Mort. And shortly after followed
him self with the rest of his people. But certain of his vawarde passing by a
castle called ye Roche of Clin / were spoiled and robbed, and some slain.
whereof ye king being informed, charged his knights to assaute the said
castle. The which was done / and the Souldyours hanged, and the castle made
plain with the ground. And after he held on his way till he came to the
foresaid port of Aque Mort or ye deed see / where he took shyppynge, and so
sailed forth upon Bartylmewe even or the.xxiiii. day of August / and la^ded
after in the prouynce of Cipre / where he tarried all the winter following, for
some part of his host that as yet was behind. whereof ye king he was ioyously
received / and at his departing thens, kept company with him in the same
journey. But there fortune began to frown upon king Lowys. For in the time of
his there taryenge much of his people sykened and dyed. Among the which,
passed to god these men of name following / the bishop of Bauuais, the earls
of Mountforde, of Bar, and of Uendosme, with diverse other to ye nombre
of.ii.C.xl. when king Lowys not all without troubles, as dyscencions among
his people, and danger of taking of the sea, had passed the winter and a
part of the beginning of the year / lastly about Trynyte sunday he took
shyppynge at the port of Cypre then named Dommeton or Do^meson, and landed
nere unto the city of Damasse or Damyet the frydaye after. when the christian
host were common nere unto the port of Damasse / the king caused them to be
shypped in small vessels and so in order to sail or row toward the city.
But the Sarazeyns being ware of their coming, issued out of the city, and
defended the port vygorously / so that many a christian man was slain at that
recounter. But in the end the dyscomfyture turned upon the Saraseyns. For the
chyefe capytayne of the town with.ii. Admyralles were there slain, and many
of their knights. Then they gave back unto ye town, and suffered the christian
to land. The king then pyghte his pauylyons, and strengthed his field for
sudden brekynge out of the Turks / and so rested him and his people the
sunday and mo^day following. As fast as the christian made prouysyon to order for
their suer lyenge in the field, so fast the Turks within the town made
purueyaunce to conueye such goods as they might out of the city / and
lastly set the houses on fire, and voyded unknowing to the christian host.
Anon as the flambe of the fire appeared / the christian men without resystence
entered ye city and quenched the fire, and after possessed the city. Here I
pass over certain legacio^s and messages sent fro a prince of the Orye^t unto
king Lowys / wherein appears more fame of words than of things of troth
Then the temples and synagoges of the city were hallowed and occupied to
christian men's use. And there the king with his host rested him till the
month of Noue^ber following / in the which season came unto him the earl of
Poytyers with a fair company. Then king Lowys with his people departed from
Damasse ye.xx. day of Nouembre, by the river of Nilus, passing with small
vessels toward a strong hold called Maffour / whyther at length they came
with great danger. How be it they might not come nere unto the town to lay
their syege thereunto, because of a river there ru^nyng named Thanoys or
Thanoes. wherefore ye king pyght his Pauylyons between the said river and the
river of Nylus.

In this while ye the christian host was thus lodged / word was brought to the
king that the Sowdan of Babylon was deed, the which before his death had
provided a great host to be sent into Egypt to wythsta^de the christian host /
and had committed the rule thereof unto an hardy and valiau^t Turk named
Saphardyn. The which with a great people came down to this town of Maffour
or Macour, and there daily made assautes upon the christian host / so yt between
them were had many bykerynges and skyrmysshes to both damages. Lastly the
king aduerty sing in his mind that he might nothing dear the Sarazeyns,
with out he might pass ye river of Thanoys / concluded by aduyce of his
maryners to make a bridge of ships so that finally he cheyned and fastened
his ships together, in such wise that a passage was made for his knights.

when the Turks espied this ordenau^ce / and apperceyued well that if the
cryste^ host had passed that river, it should be to their great dysauau^tage,
anon with all ordenau^ce and shot that they might make, they did the vttermest
of their powers to let the perfytyng of this bridge and passage of the christian
host. And to this fill an other contraryte to the christian. For the water of
that river which was broad and deep was so troublous of wawe, that the bridge
therewith was all to shaken / and dangerous to stand on.

But these Turks entendynge to damage the christian / left a certain to defend
the passage, while the other by a forde or passage unknown to ye christian men,
came over the river / and assauted the Frenchmen egerly / so ye there was
between them foughten a cruel battle. How be it thorugh dyuyne power of
god, the Turks were ouerset, and many of the^ slain and taken. The which
battle was foughten upon the day of saint Fabyan and Sebastyan, or the.xx.
day of Ianuarii. But yet might not the cryste^ wyn over the river. For daily
the strength of the cou^tres there nere came down and fortefyed the host of
the Sarazyns more and more.

The day following the Puryfycacyon of our Lady, blewe such a tempest of
wind, y^ it did much harm both to the ships, and also to the tents and
pauylyons of the christian host. And with that scarcite of vitayle began to
appear / so yt the king determined to return again unto Damasse.

WHen the Turks espied the return of the Frenchemen / they ordained.iiii.
barges or such like vessayles / and stuffed them with pytche, rosyn, greece,
and other lyquet and bre^nyng stuff / and in the night suddenly brought the^ a
board where the christian flote lay / and then cast on them Grekysh fire, ye
which anon set them in a light fire. By reason whereof the christian flote was
in great ieopardy, and with great labor preserved from bre^nyng. For this
despyte that the Sarazyns had done to the christian / the king was so therwyth
amoued, that he said and promised that he would not depart thens till he had
done to the Turks some dyspleasure. And upon enquysycyo^ made / he was
enfourmed of a passage or foorde, that was within.iii. miles of his pauylion*
whereupon he called a counsayll of his lords, and showed to them his purpose /
gyuyng unto the earl of Artoyes the ledynge of his forewarde / and charged him
yt when he were passed the foorde, that he should tarry there till ye other deal
of the host were over passed. when al things was ordered to the kings mind /
the said earl with his company set forthwarde, and passed the said foorde
without danger / and there forgetting what* to him was before commanded of
the king, set forth incontyne^tly toward the Turks, which he weal knew
kept ye place where the bridge was before made. And there faughte with them
which were al unpurveyed, and unknowing of his sodeyne coming. wherefore he
slew many of them / and after chased the other, which for socoure fled
unto the city of Mafsour foresaid / whom he followed so egerly, that in ye
entryng of the city he entered with them, and there was slain with a certain
of his knights. By reason whereof ye Soldyours of the town were so encoraged,
that they issued out upon the christian and drove them back till they saw the
kings power come / and then returned to the city and shytte with strength
their gates. Tha^ king Lowis being ascertayned of the said earls death, made
for him great dole. And after prouysyon made for the lodging of his people /
he the^ made diverse brydges and passages over ye river of Thanoyes. And for the
christian host should be assured from the sudden and unware assautes and
reprochys of ye infydelies / therefore he closed them within a strength of a
dyche and pale, that their enemies might no way have way into them / and
named that strength a park. In the which the christian host there lodged all
the season of Lent.

In ye which time ye yo^ge Sowda^ came down with a great host of people. And
for he might not lodge his people within the town / therefore he made an other
like park unto the christian men, and there closed his people / so that between
the christian and them was many conflyctes and assautes / sometime to the loss of
that one, and eft to the loss of that other. But the Sowdane made all the
means he might to keep vytayll from the christian host / and stopped all the
passages between Damasse and them, that from the^s they might have no socour.
By mean whereof dysseases and sykenesse fill among the christian, so that they
dyed hougely.

when king Lowys was ware of these miseries on every side, he sent to the
Sowdane to have a truce for a certain time. But in conclusion none would be to
him granted. wherefore of necessyte he was forced to break his field, and with
as good polycy as he might drew him to the river of Nylus / and so by ship
passed down by the said river toward Damasse. But he passed not far or yt
he was assauted on every side / so yt the fight continued still without
ceasing, to the great loss of the christian host.

Then lastly came the Sowdane with a fresshe company / and beset ye king so
about, that in the end he was taken, with his.ii. brethren Charles and
Robert, the earl of Poytyers, ye earl of Angeou, the earl of Flaunders, the
duke of Brytayne, the earl of Soyso^s. And in ye fight was slain / y^
bysshoppes of Langrees, and of Soysons with many other of whom ye names be not
put in wryttynge.

when king Lowys was thus taken he was syke. wherefore with all dylygence the
Sowdan commanded him to be conveyed unto Massoure / and after caused all the
other of his men to be slain as many as were wounded or syke, except they
were men of great fame, by whom great advantage might rise by reason of
their ransom. And thus was the christian host taken and spoiled of the Sarazyns
the thursday next following the feast of Easter, in the year of our
lord.M.ii.C.l. and the.xxiiii. year of ye reygne of this king Lowys. The
which after with the other of the nobles of France were sent unto Babylon or
Cayer / and there kept in so^dry pryso^s.

IN process of time it was agreed, that king Lowis should be delivered fro
prison and conveyed saufly into the hands of cryste^dome upon condycyon that
he should first render and give up into the Sowdans power the city of Damasse,
with all such prisoners as he had of Turks and Sarazyns at that day in his
power / and over that he should yield by a certain day a certain sum of
besauntes, which after the french book should be.viii.M. Besauntes Sarazyn.
But Peter Dysroy says.iii.C.M. Besauntes.

Of these Besauntes I have learned there should be.ii. That one is called a
Bezaunde Imperyall, and the other a Bezaunte Ducall. The Bezaunde Imperyall is
worth.l. ducates, and the Ducal Bezaunde is worth xx. ducates. A ducate which
is named a ducat de camera, is worth.iiii. s.viii. d. A ducat Papal and
Uenyzia^ be of less value, as.iii. d. or.iiii. d in a piece. Then if his
ransom be estemyd after ye imperyail Bezaunde, he paid after the rate
of.iiii.s.vi. d. the ducate / and after the sum of.viii.M. Bezaundes in
sterlynge money lxxxx.M. li. And for this the Sowdane promised to deliver all
such prisoners as he had in his prysons of cryste^ men. But in yt he brake
promise / for of.xii. thousand he delivered scarsly.iii. In this time of
taking of the French king / a company of young men assembled them together
in France / and under their capytayne, which took upon him like a bishop,
passed by Paris and Orleaunce and other good towns of France, saying that
they would restore the king to his lybertye. But lastely when they drew nere
to the port of the deed see, where they should have taken shyppynge / there
they fill to all theft and auoutry. wherefore the people of that country set
upon them, and slew their capytayne and the more part of their company
where thorugh that simple feleshyp which named them self Shepherdes, was
dysseuered and sparkelyd. when this blessed king Lowys was delivered from the
danger of his enemies, and was brought out of Egypt into Syrye / he there
executed many deeds of charity and of mekenes, and repaired the city of Ioppen
and other standing upon the sea side / and from thens went on pilgrimage unto
Nazareth, and to the mount of Thabor. And when he was returned unto Ioppen /
he received there tidings of the death of dame Bla^ch his mother. where after
diverse obseruan^ces and prayers done for the soul of his mother / he took
there shyppynge and sailed toward France. And not without travail and
trouble of the sea, at the end of xii. wekes he landed in the Haven of Marcyll
or Martyll / and so sped his iournay that he came to Paris, in ye year of our
lord.xii.C. and.liiii. and the.vi year after that he took upon him the voyage
/ where of the cytezeyns he was received with most honor and gladness. And
there calling a cou^sayl / he reformed many things for the weal of his
realm, and made one law which is specially remembered / that is that no man
being in auctorytye of any high office, as Provost, Pretour, or any like
office, should bye any lands or re^tes within that lordshype yt he had rule of.
And for that cause that he should not extort or wrong, or bye such lands ye
better chepe by reason of his might or power.

At this day the Prouosty or chyef rule or office was in the hands of ye
cytezeyns of Paris, by reason of a seal thereof made to them by the kings
progenytours. By mean whereof many iniuryes and wrongs were done unto the
common people, and many theuys and other transgressors by favor and money
passed unpunished. whereof this blessed king Lowys being enfourmed upon
suffycyent proof made, dyscharged the cytezeyns thereof / and assygned a man
named Stephan Boil in that office / assygnynge to him yearly a certain
stipend for executyng of that office / and ordained that ever after, the
Provost of Paris should be named by the king and his heirs kings.

He also made ordenaunces to avoid strumpettes out of the city, and
punysshement for all accustomable great swerers / with many other good
ordenaunces and laws, the which I pass over for lengthynge of the time.

In this time and season were abiding in France in a place called saint
Nicholas de Boys.iii. children borne in Flaundres / the which were sent thither
to lern ye manner of france and also to teache ye children of a knight named
sir Guyllm^ de Brunz to shot. These children upon a season passed the bounds
of the abbey ground and entered the warrayn of a lord of France called
Enguerran lord of Coucy, and there chased and shote at Conyes for their
disport. The which were there taken of the servants of the said Enguerran,
and presented to their lord / ye which of hasty cruelnesse caused the iii.
children with out pity to be hanged. whereof heryng ye Abbot of saint Nycholas,
co^playned him with the assyste^ce of ye fornamed sir Guillm^ unto the king.
The which inco^tyne^tly sent to the said Enguerra^, charging him to apere
before his barony, to answer to such matters as there should be laid unto his
charge. where in ye end after many reasons for him laid / he by great insta^ce
of his friends was pardoned of yt grievous offense with condition following /
that is to mean first he should pay unto the king.x.M. li. of Paris money,
which is to mean.xii.C. and.l. li. sterling. And over that he should war upon
gods enemies in Syria by the space of.iii. years contynually, upon his own
cost and charge. And thyrdely he should build a chapel wherein two priests
should sing for ever, for the souls of the said infauntes. Or after master
Gagwyne, with the foresaid.x.M. li. and other aid of the king / the hospytall
in Paris named ye house of god in Pontoyse, with the frayter of the freer
minors or gray freers in Paris were made and repaired.

Than after many deeds of charity done by this virtuous prince / as making of
diverse houses of relygyon seruyng of the poor people with his own hands,
with fastinges and other infynyte deeds of pytye: he lastly in the.xxxiii. year
of his reygne honorably received Henry the.iii. tha^ king of England / and
stablyshed with him a peace as before in the.xliiii. year of the reygne of the
said Henry is declared.

And that done / he in the.xxxvi. year of his reygne, married his eldest son
Phylyp unto Isabell the daughter of Iamys king of Aragon. By reason of which
marriage / the frenshe king gave over to the said Iamys, all such right as he
had in the lordshyppes of Besac, Dampierre, Rousselion, and Barsellon. And the
said Iamys acquyted and gave over to Lowys, all such right and title as he
had in the lordshypes of Carcasson, of Bygorre, and of Anilly.

And soon after he sent Charles his brother at the request of the.iiii.
Alexaundre than pope, into Cicilia with a great power, to withstand ye
vyolence of Manfrede son of Frederyke the second than Emperor / the which
again right withhelde that kingdom from the church of Rome. whom Charles
after long fight, at a place named Boneuente slew in battle / and after was
made king of the said country by auctorytye of the said pope Alexaunder /
payenge yearly unto the church of Rome.xl.M. ducates, which is much like after
the rate of sterlyng money viii.M.vi.C.lxvi. li.xiii. s.iiii. d. every ducat
accounted at.iiii. s.iiii. d.

IT fill so after, that in the.xlii. year of king Lowys / Pope Clement
the.iiii. of that name, sent a legate unto Lowys, requyryng him to aid the
christian which in Siria were grievously warred with ye Turks and Sarazyns. At
whose request the king called a counsayll / wherein it was agreed yt socour
should be made wherefore the king with his.iii. sons, Phylyp, John, and Peter,
took on them the cross. And in the first day of May, the year of his
reygne.xliii / he with his said sons and many other lords of France as
well spirytuall as temporal, departed from Paris / and from thens rode unto
Cluny, where he rested him.iiii. days And from the^s sped his journey till he
came to the forenamed port of yt deed see. where met with him a cardynall
and legate of Rome, with diverse other bysshoppes of France, the king of
Nauarne, the dukes son of Brytayn, Alpho^s earl of Poytiers the earls of Artoys
and of Flau^dres, with many other.

And while the king with his host lay at the said port taryeng a
conuenable wind / a dyssencyon fill between the Catholeynes and the men of
Prouynce / so that among them was foughten such a skyrmysshe, that between
them was slain upon a hondreth men / and many mo wounded or the strife might
be all seized.

Soon after the king with his lords took shyppynge / and sailed with great
danger of tempest, till lastly he came to the i will of Sardynes where the
christian host rested them a season / and after kept their course til they came
to the port of Thunys or Cartage, the.xviii. day of the month of Iulii /
where they rested in their ships that night. Upon the morn when they should
land / all the port was beset with Turks and infydeles, which shot darts
and kast stones, to the greuaunce of the christian host / so that they wanne
land with great dyffyculte and pain.

when the king was landed, he lodged his people / and after sent to search for
fresshe water to refresshe with his hooste. In which mean while the Admyrall
of the kings navy came unto the king / requyryng hi^ to have a certain of
knights assygned unto him / trusting in god to win shortly the town. And so
sped him, and assauted the town. But anon as the capytayne of the town was
ware of their coming / he with a great company issued out of the town, and
forced the christian host to give back. wherefore king Lowys sent the Marshal
of his host with a certain nombre of knights to socoure the said Admyrall /
and in time of the fight gatte between the Sarazyns and the town / so that
while some faught with the Turks the other wanne the town / whereof the Turks
being ware fled soon after / but not without great slaughter of the^. For
after that fight, many of them which escaped from the battle, were after
slain in cauernys and holes where they hyd them in the ground. when the
town of Cartage or Thunis was by ye criste^ thus won / anon the king
commanded the deed bodies to be cast out, and the town to be cle^syd of all
ordours and fylthes. And when all was done as the king had commanded / he
then entered the town, and lodged within as many as the town would hold. And
ye other he fortyfyed with dyches and other strengthes, to preserve them from
their enemies / and so tarried there the coming of Charles his brother and king
of Cycilia. It was not long after that the city or town was won, but yt
the king of Thunys with a great host of Turks came nere to the town, and made
showys and offers / but they abode not thereby. One day the earl of Artoys in
one company, and a knight called sir Peter Cabellane in an other company /
gatte between the sea and the Turks that they were compelled to fight / so
that between them was a cruel fight, and many slain upon both sides. But
in the end the Turks were scomfyted and chaced to their ships. In this
fight were slain ii. christian knights, named le Chastelayn and sir John^ de
Ronssoylyers. After this battle or fight / the Sarazyns made no great
assautes. But the^ by reason of the unholsomnes of that country, sykenes fill
among ye christian host / so that the people dyed fast. And shortly after the
king was taken with such a flixe, and therewith an agu that he kept his bed.
And after the ryghtes of the chryche taken, and certain monycyons given to his
son Phylyp how he should behave him in gydynge of the realm of France /
knowing the hour of death approached, charged such as were about him that
they should lay him upon a bed of ashes and powdre. where he so lyeng a season
in prayer expyred, the day following saint Bartholomeus tholomeus day, or
the.xxv. day of August, when he had reigned.xliiii. years lacking.ii. months
/ leuynge after him the.iii. forenamed sons Phylyp, John^, and Peter. The^
the Bowellys were buried in Cecilia / and the body enbawmed with rich
oyntementes, was recaryed unto saint Denis of France, and therewith great
reverence entered. The which after for his miracles, of ye.vii. Bonyface was
set among the nombre of saints.

PHylyp the third of that name, and son of saint Lowys / began his reygne
over the realm of France the.xxvi. day of yt month of September, in the
year of our lord.xii.C.lxx. and the.liiii. year of Henry the.iii. than king of
England / and began than as before is showed in Africa, at the town or city
of Thunys or Cartage / acco^panyed with Charles his uncle king of Cycyll, the
which came to ye port of Thunys the same day that king Lowys dyed / and after
tarried there and had many conflictes with the Turks / and bare him so
manfully, that in the end he forced ye king of Thunys to seche to him for a
peace. The which was concluded for.x. years with certain condycyo^s of payeng
of certain money for ye king of Frau^ces costs, and certain trowages of old
time due unto the king of Cycyll ye rely to be paid / with many other artycles
concerning the same peace which I pass over.

After whyce peace concluded and assured / the kings of France and Cycyll took
shyppynge at the said port of Thunys, and sailed toward their countrees with
great danger of tempest of the sea / and in process of time landed in Cycyll,
where Philip with great reverence and obseruau^ce in mount Royal buried ye
bowelles of his father. And yt done he took his journey toward France
thorughe Italy. In which journey dyed Isabell his wife, and ye king of Nauerne
and Mary his wife, with many other to the nombre of.iii.M. and mo.

Lastly the king came unto the cyty of Uiterbe / where the cardynalles and
other spyrytuall men were in counsayll for the chosyng of a new pope. For at
ye time the sea was void by the death of Clement the.iiii. But that eleccion
was so diverse, that.ii. years expyred or they might agree upon a new pastor.
And tha^ they agreed upon Theobalde archidiacon of Lande^sse named after the.x.
Gregory.

From Uiterbe the king rode to the mount of Flaston^, and so over to the
country of Tuscayne, and so to the mount of Bergue, and then to ye city of
Florence and from thens to Boloyng le Greysse and from thens to Cremoygu^,
where ye kings officers were not all well entreated. In reco^pensement whereof
/ ye mayre and burgeyses of that town presented the king with.vii. stedes
trapped in cloth of sylke and other prese^tes which the king with curteys and
tha^kfull words refused. Then from thens the king departed to Milan, and from
Milan to Annergeaux, and so to Susane a city of Sauoy / and after passed the
mou^taygnes, and so into the valys of Moryen / and from thens turned toward
the city of Lyo^s upon Rosne, and so to the city of Masto^ in Burgoyn^ / and
passed ye country till they came to the abbey of Cluny, and from thens into the
country of Cha^payn and so to the city of Trois / and from the^s passed the
countrees, till he came to the lordshype of Paris, and so into the city of
Paris.

Here I pass over the great prouysyon made by the cytesyns of Paris for the
receyuynge of their pryncys / yt is to mean, the corpse of Lewys, and their
natural prince Phylyppe his son / and of the obseruaunces done, and great
assembles of the lords spirytuall and temporal to welcome their prince, and
doing of their duties every man according to honor. But after al these
ceremonies in due order fynyshed / prouysyon was made for the coronacyon of the
king. The which was crowned at the city of Raynes, upon the day of the
assumpcyon of our lady, in the year of grace.xii. hundred.lxxi.

Shortly after that the solempnyte of this coronacyon was passed, king
Phylyppe for his recreacyon rode into the country of Uermendoyse. where after
he had derestyd him a season / Robert earl of Artoys required him to vysyte his
country. where he was receyuyd of the burgeysys of Artoys with great honor
and gladness / and there was feastyd with all disport and gladness by a certain
of time after. The which expyryd, he returned into France

About the thryde year of his reygne / the earl of Foys contrary ye kings
pleasure, took party again Getarde a knight and lord of the castle of
Casseboun or Tasseboun / ye which before had slain ye brother of the earl of
Armenac special fre^d of the said earl of Foyz. which said two earls to
revenge the death of their said brother, pursued the said Gerarde so narrowly,
that for his sauegarde he refused his own castle, and fled unto a castle of
the kings / and there held him with his wife, children, and substance. But
when the two earls were ware thereof / they sped them thither with their powers.
and laid syege to the castle / and in the end threw it down to the ground,
and slew all the souldyours that they there found, as well the kings
servants as other, hoping to have found their enymye Gerarde, the which
was escapyd thens secretly.

when the rumor of this deed came unto the king / he dysdayned sore that
deed, and took yt right grevously. In so myche that he called his lords, and
by their counsayll assembled his knights, and entered with force the province
of the earl of Foyz. The which herynge of the kings great dyspleasure /
fortyfyed his castle and there held him. The which was so besette with rokkes
of stone, that the king might not win to yt with ease. wherefore the king
commanded the rokkes to be cut with masons and other work men / and made a
solemn oath, that he would not depart thens or he had the earl and his
castle at his pleasure.

when the earl had beholden the great power of his enymyes, and the prouysyon
of the king to win his castle, with other ieopardyes / he made means to the
king for grace and finally put him and his into his mercy. Then the king
commanded him to be bound, and so to be conveyed to the casrell of Beauquesu,
where he was imprisoned by an hole year after. And the kyng^ ^eased all his
lands, and set a certain of his knights to keep his castle / and carried his
wife and children with him into France. But after a year run / the king was
so labored to by the friends of the said earl, that he was eularged from
prison, and upon suertye suffered to serve in the kings court. where he bare
him so well, yt finally the king made him knight, and restored him to all his
lands. But what fill of ye earl of Armenac the story shows not.

About the.vi. year of his reygne / king Phylyppe married Mary the daughter of
the earl of Burbon, or after some the daughter of Johan the duke of Braban /
the which he loved entyerly. whereof Peter de Broshe then being lord
chamberlayne, having envy and disdayn / sought the ways and means to mynyshe
the great love between her lord and her / and fond by his mean that a son
of ye kings named Lewys was prysoned, the which deed he by subtyle and
secret means, as though yt had nothing comen of him, laid yt to ye charge of
the queen. For this ye king made many manner of inquysycyons as well by sorcery
as other. But in all his works he found his queen gyltlesse. wherefore he
suffered the matter to pass, till he might have more assured proof in that
matter.

About this season Ferdinandus king of Castyle, that before time had married
Blanch daughter of saint Lewis, dyed / leuyng after him two sons borne of ye
said Blanch, named Ferdinande and Alphons / which by covenant at the marriage
made should be heirs unto the kingdom of Spain and Castyle. But the father
of this Ferdinande so being deed / contrary his honor and promise, wrote unto
the lords of Castyle / amonestynge them that they should admytte for their
king his second son named Sa^xyon or Sanxio, and swear to him both feautye
and homage. The which was all done according to his commandment / so that
Blanch was dyspoynted of her dower, and her chyldern of their right and
enherytau^ce. For ye which king Phylyppe her brother was grievously dysconte^tyd
/ and for reforma cyon thereof sent unto the king of Spayn his chief boteler
with other, desyryng him to perform all such couenau^tes as between him and
his fader were concluded, at the marriage of his sister Blanch / or at the
last if that he refusyd yt to do, yt he would send his said sister with her
two chyldern sauely into France. In co^clusyon ye mother with her two chyldern
were brought by the said boteler unto the king, without other pleasure other
in word or in deed. For the which he the year folokyng gaderyd a strong
host, and passed with them by Poyteau and Gascoyne, till he came unto a town
ioynynge to the border of Spain named Sainterre / where the king met another
party of his host. There by counsayll of some of his lords, the king
concluded to return into France, for danger of winter that was coming and
other hyd causes. But the rumor in the host went, yt some of the kings
counsayll had received rewards of the king of Spayn. By mean whereof the
king lost that journey, and returned into France to his great dishonor and
damage.

In time of king Phylyppes return into France / tidings were brought to
him, that Eustace de Beau March, whom the king had appointed to have the
gydyng of the country or kingdom of Nauarye / was besyeged in the city of
Pampulyne. wherefore ye king commanded ye earl of Artoys to speed him thither,
to rescowe the said Eustace. The which behauyd him so manfully, that he
rescowed the said Eustace / and chasyd Garsymerans chief styrrer of that
rebellion, and brought the people of that country again to due subieccyon.
while the earl of Artoys was thus occcupyed in the said country / messangers
came to him from the king of Spain / requyrynge him seen that he was so nere,
that he was so nere, yt he would come and disport him there for a season. where
of ye earl of Artoys sent king Philip word / and having of him lyce^ce yode
unto the said king of Spayn, as to his nere kynnesma^ / and there disported him
a certain of time to his great co^solacio^. In which season diverse letters came
out of France from some of ye kings cou^sall. By reason whereof ye king of
Spain was informed of much of the French kings cou^sayll. which letters he
showed unto ye earl of Artoys / saye^g yt he was not without fre^des in
France. But he would not disclose what persons they were. when the earl had
tarried in Spayn a co^petent season / he took leave of ye king, and deperted with
great gifts / and so sped him, ye in process of time he came unto ye king of
France / and at convenient leyser showed unto him of the letters showed unto
him by ye king of Spayn / whereof the king was not a little ameruayled. It was
not long after yt a currour or messanger, which used to bear letters from Pet
de Brosh unto ye king of Spayn fill syke at an abbay. where when he knew he
should die / were it by exortacion of his gostly fader or otherwise, he called
to him ye abbot or head of ye house / chargyng him yt he would deliver such
letters as he there had unto ye French kings own person / and after dyed.
After whose death ye said religyous man in co^uenyet have sped him unto ye
kings court, and presented him with the said letters / showing unto him ye
mind of ye said messanger. which letters when the king had vnclosyd / he anon
knew yt his cha^berlayne Peter de Broshe was the discloser of all his
cou^saylles. wherefore forthwith he commanded ye said Peter to be had under
saufe keeping. whereof heryng the bishop of Bayon fled straight ye land, and so
yode unto Rome. The king the^ yode unto Paris / where he called a cou^sayl of
his lords to examyne ye said Peter. where finally he was judged to be hanged.
After which judgment he was committed unto ward, till ye morrow following. At
which season long before the son rysyng / yo duke of Burgoyn, the duke of
Braban, the earl of Artoys, with ye provost of Paris, came unto the gayole, and
there received the said Peter, and saw him hanged or the son were up.

IT was not long after ye Peter was thus put to death, but means were made
between these.ii. kings / so that a day of metyng was appointed, yt the said
king, should mete to have co^munycacion, for the matter concerning the wro^ges
done to dame Blanch and her.ii. children beforenamed. wherefore ye king of
Spayn came unto ye city of Bayon / and king Philip to a town in y^ prouynce of
Toulouse named Mount merchant. where these two princes being in co^municacyon
of ye foresaid matter / certain messangers came to the^ from ye pope then Mantyne
ye.iiii / chargyng them upon pain of falling into ye ce^sures of yt chirch,
that they agree and fall unto accord, that war between them be not
exercysed. By reason whereof king Phylyp remitted the matter to ye pope, and
returned unto Toulouse. where met him the king of Aragon named Peter. The
which after he had there tarried with king Philip a time at his pleasure / he
took his leave of ye king and after went into Catholoyne, where he met with
Co^stance his wife and daughter of Manfred sometime king of Scycyll / y^ which
was pryued of his life and kingdom by Charles brother of saint Lewis, as before
in ye.iiii. chapyter of the storye of saint Lewys is shortly touched. This
Co^stance in all yt she might exorted her husband togader his people, and to
enter ye land of Scicill, ascertainyng him yt ye Scicillyens would take his
patye again Charles, for so myche as they well knew that she was rightful
heir to that kingdom.

In this time and season which was the.x. year of king Phylyppe / the river
of Said rose of such an hight, that yt compassed the city of Paris in such
wise, that no man might come thither without bote or barge. And the water
passed with such vyolence, that yt brake vi. arches of the great bridge of
Paris, and one of the small brydges.

Then let us turn to ye king of Aragon, which by incensyng of his wife gadered
his people / and under color that he would have gone against the Turks, had
grant of the pope to receive ye dymes of his own land for certain years.
while this was in doing / he sent certain persons into Scycyle to see the
state of that country. The which made confederacyes with diverse great men of
Scycylyens / and over that brought with them diverse of the rulers to the
presence of ye king. with whom the said Peter made certain appoyntementes /
and after returned them into Scycyle. where after their return, they
cousayled so with their rulers of Palermo, and Messene, and of other cytyes,
that in one night all the French men in Scycylle were slain / and after in
most cruel wise slew the women as well those yt were with child as other, and
left few or none of the French men in all the chief cytyes or towns of
Scicyll on live. when tidings of this myschyef was brought unto Charles being
then in the country of Angeou / he sent messangers unto the pope Martyne
the.iiii / requyrynge his aid to defend his enymyes. The which in all have
sent unto Palermo ye bishop of saint Sabyne, to charge the cytesyns upon
pain of cursynge, to obey unto Charles for their king and to none other. But
the rulers of Palermo and also of Messene would not suffer the said bishop to
pass any farther. And also said that Peter was entered the country, of whom
they would hold and on none other / with which answer he was feign to
return.

In this while Charles had sent unto his neuew Phylyppe king of France /
the which with his power to revoke Peter from Scycyll, enteryd the land of
Aragon by Purpunyan / and took the city of Ieane. In which pass time Charles
entered Scycyl, and besyeged Messene. But the town was so strongely fortyfyed,
that he lost there his labor. wherefore he left that syege, and yode into the
playnes of saint Martyne / and there tarried the coming of his son then prince
of Salerne. The pope the^ accursed Peter, for as much as certain word was
brought to him that he had proclaimed him self king of Scycyll. And to the
intent to styre the more people again him / he gave his land of Aragon unto
Charlys earl of Ualoys and son of king Phylyp of France.

when Phylyppe as before is said king of France had won Ieane / for as myche
as the ways toward Aragon were hard to pass, as well for prouysyons made by
the enmyes as otherwise / the king therefore sought great advise how he might
with lest danger wyn to his enymyes. And after many means sought / a
Russylyan was brought unto the kings presence / the which assured yt king to
gyde him away into Aragon with out the danger of his enymyes. whereof the king
being glad promised to the said Russylyan fredome and lybertye with other
great rewards, which then stood as prisoner to the French men. After which
promise made / the king put him and the more part of his host under the
ledynge of the said Russylyan. And for to blind ye more his enymyes / he sent
a part of his host toward the mountains, to make a show as though all the
host had passed the same way. when king Phylyp had orderyd all thing
after his mind, he commanded the forewade of his people to follow the said
Russilyan / the which brought them a strayte and narrow way, all to grown
with wood and busshes to the kings great travail and all his. But finally he
brought them into the playns where their enmyes lay, so that they made
prouysyon in ordering of their people to set upon the Aragons. whereof the
Aragons being ware / supposing the French men might not so lightly have
won unto them, being then out of array and dyspurueyed to fight, fled unto
the next holds / leuyng to ye French men much of their vytayll and harneys.

when king Phylyp had seen that his enmyes had forsaken their feld / he restyd
him there a season after his travail / and after yode to a town named
Pyerlaat and besyeged yt. whereof the soudyours after they had a season defended
that town / in the dead of the night fyred y^ said town And departed when
they had done. But the French men wan shortly into the town and quenched the
fire. and after the king had manned and vytaylled yt / he then went to a town
named Goron, and laid his syege there about / where he lay long after.

YE have hard in the precedynge year, how Charles king of Scycyll lay in
the playnes of saint Martyne, there abiding the coming of his son the
prince of Salerne. whyther lastely came unto him his said son, the duke of
Burgoyn, the earl of Alanson, Peter brother to king Phylyp, Robert earl of
Artoys the earls of Dampmartyne, and of Bolygygne, with the lord of Mount
Morency, and many other nobles of France and Burgoyne. After coming of which
lords / Charles with baner dysplayed sped him toward his enymyes, and so
passed the land of Calabre without fight / and sent his son to Naples with a
part of his host / and him self kept on his journey till he came unto
Prouynce. where he heryng of the great purueyau^ce that Peter king of Aragon
had made of ships, to sail toward the land of Naples / sent certain letters
unto the prince his son, that in no wise he should set upon his enmyes / but
keep him within the city of Naples, till he sent unto him such ships and
galeys as he then had ready ma^ned to be sent unto him from the haven of
Marcylle. which messanger and letters were taken with ye Aragons / by reason
whereof they knew myche of king Charles consayll.

It was not long after or the nauaye of the king of Aragons with great
tryumphe and pride came unto Naples / and prouokyd so ye French men to fight,
To myche (...) cause of repe^tau^ce
that lastely the prince with such ships and company as he might make, made
out upon them, and fought with them a long fight. But in the end the French
men were betyn and ouercomen, and the prince with the more party of his
ships taken, and sent to Constance queen of Aragon / and remained long after
vndelyueryd with many other prisoners.

within a short season after this sco^fiture Charlys came unto Naples / by which
time myche of the town was turned again him, so that the most part of the
French soudyours were slain and fled the town. wherefore after that Charlys
was entered he punyshed them right cruelly, by diverse manner of tourmentes. And
when he had done there his will, he returned into Calabre / where met with
him Robert earl of Artoys. where they took their counsayll how they might
pass the water of Phaar, and to lay their syege unto the city of Messene.
But for diverse causes he was counsayled to the contrary / so that he took
shyppynge at an haven called Brandyse. But or his people were all shyppyd /
such a sykenesse took him, that he was had again to land and dyed shortly
after, not without suspeccyon of venyme. whose corpse was then conveyed to
Naples, and there buried, in the year of our lord.xxii. hundred and.lxxxiiii,
and the.xiiii. year of the reygne of Phylyppe his neuewe then king of France.
Of which tidings Peter king of Aragon reioysed not a little, when word
thereof to him was brought / the which before that time had betaken the rule
of the land of Scycyll to Constaunce his wife then being in the city of
Palermo. And he him self with a strong nauye sailed into Aragon for to rescow
the city of Geron, which was besyeged of king Phylyppe as ye before have
hard. And when he with his people were there landid / he took his counsayll
how he might most grieve the French host. Finally he concluded that he would
make a bussheme^t with a certain number of his knights / and lie in awayte to
take the vytayll that was brought to the host from the port of Russylyan /
which port was four miles from the French host. Upon which conclusyon so
taken / he with two thousand chosen me^, lodged them where the pray should
pass, and was espied of the French men. whereof being warned the constable of
France, and sir Iohon Harcourt the^ marshal of ye host took with them the
earl of Marches with diverse other knights to the number of.v. hundred speres,
with a certain of fotemen, and went toward their enmyes. But when they came
nere unto them, and saw they were so many in number / they feryd to set
forthwarde, till they were comforted by the words of a knight in their
company called Matthew de Roya saying as follows.

O ye noble knights, behold in your syghtes the enymyes which ye have far
sought. Let us now remember that this is the day of the assumpcyon of our
blessed Lady / and trust we in her that she will help us again them yt ben
put out of holy church by cursyng. For like merit shall to us grow to
revenge ye injuries done unto the church, as though we faught again the enmyes
of Crystes faith.

By mean of which words they were so encouraged, that without fere they
set upon their enymyes, so that between them was co^mensed a sore and cruel
fight, co^tynuyng a long season or yt might be known which part had the
auau^tage of the other. At the last the king was drawn from his horse, and
constrained to fight with the other on foot so that he was in great ieoperdye
to have been taken. But by his own knighthode and good help of his men he
recoueryd his horse again. when yt French men were ware ye the king was there
in his own person / they were the more egre upon the Aragons, to the entente
to have taken or siayne their king. So that finally they compelled them to
forsake the field, and to save them self by flight, by reason whereof the king
with the more part of his knights were saved from the danger of their
enemies. But in this fight Peter kyuge of Aragone was so hurt that he dyed
shortly after. when these foresaid knights with their prisoners were returned
unto the French king, and had showed unto him of that vyctory, he rejoiced
thereof greatly / and more would have done, if he had known how sore his enemy
Peter was wounded. But to bring to fine his purpose, he daily more and more
assauted the town.

In ye time that Gereonde or Gyro^de was thus besyeged of ye French king /
the earl of Foyz, that to the capytayne of the town ought great favor, many
times by license of ye king yode into the town, and had diverse comunycacyons
with him / so that he lastly knowing the said town to be bare of vytayle,
showed to the king that he would labor the said capytayne named sir
Raymo^de de Cerdon, yt the town might be given up into the kings hands / so
that soon after yt said capytayne desired a respyte of.viii. days, to send
unto ye king of Arago^ to know whether he would rescowe the town or not. Upon
y^ which grant made / the messangers were sent, and returned with a
certaynte of the kings death. Upon which knowledge had / the said capytayne
agreed to deliver the town, upon condition to have with the^ such mouables as
he with ye cytezyns and sowdyours had within the town. All which conditions
assured / the king received the town of Geronde into his possessyon. The
which when he had manned with knights of his own / he the by cousayle,
which turned after to his harm, divided his navy / and sent a part of them
into France, and the other into Tholous, where the king intended to tarry the
winter following. But so spone as his navy was thus divided / the Aragons met
with them that rested in the haven of Russilian / and gave to them such
battle, that they took many of them / and slew the kings admyrall, and many
other noble men of France / and held the Frenchemen so short, that for so
much as they would not that so good ships should come to the hands of their
enemies, they set fire upon the remenau^t and brent the^ / and after resorted
unto the king.

when king Phylyp was ascertayned of the loss of his navy / he took it
grievously / in somoche that for that and other things that he might not bring
to his purpose, he fill into a fever and was therewith greatly anoyed. Than for
strength of his enemies, which kept the passage of the mountains called in
latin Mo^tes Pireni / and for wekyng of him self by reason of his sickness /
he passed by the strayte places, till he came to Parpynyan, where his sekenes
increased so sore, that he dyed in short time of his thither coming in yt
month of October, wha^ he had reigned xv. years lacking certain days. whose
bowelles were buried at Nerbon, and his body at saint Denis.

This Phylyp had.ii. wives. By the first Isabel by name / and daughter of the
king of Aragon, Jacques or James by name, he had.iii. sons / Jews which was
poisoned, Phylyp which for his beauty and fair shappe was named Phylyp le
Beau or Phylyp the fair, and Charles the Ualoys. And by Mary his wife and
daughter of the duke of Braban / he had Jews, Margaret, and Blau^che / which
Margarete was after married to Edward the first than king of England.

Thus ends Phylyp the.iii. of France.
Anglia.
Edward ye first of that name, and sone of Henry ye third, surnamed long
sha^ke / began his reygne over England, in the month of November / and.xvii.
day of ye same, and the year of our lord.xii.C.lxxii. and second year of the
third Phylyp than king of France. This Edward as before is showed, in
the.lv. year of his father, was in ye holy land when his father dyed / and
there at the city of Acon or Acris he did many feats of war / whereof the
cronycle makes certain mencyon. where he being so exercysed in Marciall
acts / tidi^ges was brought unto him, that his father was deed. wherefore in
all have he spedde him into England / so that he came to London the second day
of August, and was crowned at westmynster the.xiiii. day of December folowyuge,
which was in the beginning of the second year of his reygne.

Anno dn^i. M.CC.lxxii. Anno dn^i. M.CC.lxxiii. Johan Horn. Sir walter Heruy.
Anno primo. walter Potter.
IN this first year of king Edward the first / upon the day of Simon and
Jude, were certain attemptes made by some of the cytyzyns to have made such a
mayre as they had lysted / but for they were dyspoynted of their accessaryes,
they let for that time / which in the year following upon the same day took
further effect, as in the beginning of the next year shall be towched. In ye
end of this year and second day of Auguste / king Edward came to London
from his great journey of ye holy land. where of the cytezyns he was received
with all joy and honor, and so conveyed unto westmynster / where he kept
great obseruaunces for his father by a certain time after.

Anno dn^i. M.CC.lxxiii. Anno dn^i. M.CC.lxxiiii. Nicholas wynchester. Henry
waleys. Anno.ii. Henry Couentre.
IN this second year of this king / and day of Simon and Jude / when Phylyp
le Tayloure / which before was chose to be mayre, should as that day have
taken his charge in the Guyldehall of London / diverse cytezyns put him beside
the mayres seet / and set therein sir walter Heruy, that the year before had
been mayre. For the which great rumor and grudge arose among the cytezyns /
wherefore the matter was after brought before the king / the which herynge the
reasons of both parties / for somoche as he could not agree them / he put
both the said sir walter and the said Phylyp aside / and chase Henry Forwyk
for custos of the city / the which so continued till Ca^delmas after. At which
time by dyscrete and wise peasyble means / the forenamed sir walter Heruy was
set in auctorite as mayre, and so continued the full of the year after.

This year upon the.xiiii. day of Decembre / was the king crowned at
westmynster, of master Roberte kylwarby than archebisshop of Canterbury. For
Bonyface his predecessor dyed the year that king Henry dyed. At this
coronacio^ was present Alexandre king of Scotts / the which upon the morrow
following did homage to king Edward for the kingdom of Scotland.

After the Solempnytie of the coronacyon was ended / the king heryng of the
rebellyon of Lewelyne prince of walys, that dysdayned to come to his coronacyon
/ anon gathered a strong power, and went into yt province and subdued yc said
Lewelyn. And after returned, and ordained certain new laws for ye wealth of
yc realm, which are to long here to reherce. Among the which one was, yt
bakers making bread lackyng the weyghte assygned after the price of corn /
should first be punysshed by loss of his bread, and the second time by
prysonemente, and the thyrdly by the correccyon of the Pyllory / and millers
for steling of corn to be chastised by the tu^brell. And this to be put in
execucyon, he gave auctorytie to all mayres, bayliffes, and other officers
thorugh England / and specially to the mayre of London.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxxiiii. Anno dn^i. M.CC.lxxv. Lucas Patencourt. Gregory
Rokkisle. Anno.iii. Henry Frowyke.
IN the third year / the king co^fermed the lybertyes of yc city of London,
and granted to the^ some new. And this year he held his great court of
parlyamente at westmynster / and gave monycyon to Lewelyn prince of walys to
come unto the same / the which presu^ptuously that denied. wherefore the king
after Easter entered agayue into walys / and so warred upon Lewelyne, that he
was co^streyned to submyt him unto the kings grace / and opteyned it with
great difficultye. Then king Edward builded the castle of Flynt / and
strenghthyd the castle of Rutlande and other with English men, to keep the
walshemem in due obedyence / and took of their prince a great sum of money /
which of some writers is named.l.M.^i. and of some.l.M. mark, and of some
other less / and so returned into England.

In this year one water Haruy, which the first year of this king, after long
contrauersie and strife yt he had kept with ye aldermen of London / at a
folkmote kept at Poules cross was made mayre of London / and so continued to
the hurt of the city that year: this year was he accused of diverse periuries
and other detestable deeds contrary his oath. For the which, and for making
of assembles of the commons which favored him in his ill deeds, he was
depryued of his aldermanshyppe and counsel of the city for ever / and found
suertye of twelf honest persons, that he should be good of berynge, for
keeping of ye kings peace within the city for term of his life after.

Anno domini.xii.C.lxxv. Anno domini.M.CC.lxxvi. John^ Horn. Gregory Rokkysle.
Anno.iiii. Rauffe Blount.
IN this.iiii. year of king Edward Michael Tony, which in time of war had
with the walsh men demeaned him otherwise than stood with his troth and
alegeau^ce, was accused of treason, and thereof arreygned, iuged, and dampened /
and after was drawn, hanged, and quartered.

Statute of M^p^mayn
And this year was the statute of Mortmayne enacted first / which is to mean
that no man should give into the church, any lands or re^tes without a specyal
license of ye king / which act syne that time has been more strongly enacted,
and devised with many addycyons thereunto augmented or annexyd.

Anno domini.xii.C.lxxvi. Anno domini.M.CC.lxxvii. Robert Bracy. Gregory
Rokkisle. Anno.v. Rauffe Fenour.
IN this.v. year. of the reygne of king Edward / pope Nycholas the third of
that name, made doctor Robert kylwarby than being archebysshop of Caunterbury
a cardynal of Rome / and admytted to that see a friar named doctor Johan
Pekham.

And in this year the king gave unto Dauyd brother to Lewelyne prince of walys,
the lordshyppe of Froddesham. The which Dauyd dwelled in the kings court, and
did unto him plesaunte service, to the intent to spy the kings secret
cou^sayll. And if any thing were spoken or done to the hurt of his brother,
that he thereof might give to him warning, as after by his deed appeared.

Anno dn^i. M.CC.lxxvii. Anno dn^i. M.CC.lxxviii. Johan Adryan. Gregory
Rokkysle. Anno.vi. walter Langely.
IN this.vi. year the king commanded the courts of his laws, as ye kniges
be^che, yt chau^cery, yc common place, and the excheker, to be removed unto
Shrewysbury / where Myghelmas term was holde^ and kept, but again Hillary
term, yt books and officers was co^termau^ded again to west mynster to be
there hold. In which caryeng of ye records to and fro / they by reason of
great ple^te of rain which in yt season fyl, caught great hurt and were fore
defaced / in so much yt the books were greatly imperysshed, and ye clerks had
great labor to bring them to their former state.

Anno domini.xii.C.lxxviii. Anno dn^i. M.CC.lxxix. Robert Basynge. Gregory
Rokkysle. Anno.vii. wyllyam Mazerer.
IN this.vii. year, the king held his parlyament at London / which was chefely
set for the reformacion of the kings coygne, which was clypped in such wise,
that yt was thereby wonderfully mynyshed and empayred.

In the season of this parlyame^t, many of the Jews of London and other places
were taken and put in hold for money clyppyng. And in December following
certain enq^stes were charged in London to inquire of the said Jews and other
that so had blemyshed the kings coygne. By the which enquestes the Jews of
the city with diverse goldesmythes that kept exchange of silver, were indyted.

And the mondaye following the Purifycacion of our lady / the mayre with diverse
justices of the land sat at London / where before them was cast.ii.
hundred.lxxx. and.xvii. persons. Of the which but.iii. englysh men / and all
the other were Jews and Jews borne, all be yt that many of them were borne
in England, and therefore of some writers they be named English Jews / the
which were all at sundry times and places put in execucyon.

In this year also began the foundacyon of the church of the freer prechour or
black freres by Ludgate, by their founder.

And in this year the town, of Bosten was greatly blemyshed with fire.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxxix. Anno domini.M.CC.lxxx. Thomas Box. Gregory Rokkysle.
Anno.viii. Rauffe More.
IN this.viii. year / the king caused in silver the half penny to be coygned /
where before time other coygnes of metal ra^ne among the people, to their
great noyaunce and loss / and farthynges of silver were also coygned the self
time. F^r^^ coygnyng of half pens and farthynges.
And the winter following, about the day of saint Denis, or the.ix. day of
October / fell such plence of snow, that thereof ensued myche harm.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxxx. Anno domini.M.CC.lxxxi. wyllyam Faryngdon. Gregory
Rokkysle. Anno.ix. Nycholas wynchester.
IN this.ix. year of king Edward / David the brother of Lewelyn prince of
walys, the which as ye before have hard dwelled in the kings court to know
the kyuges counsayll, and thereof inform his brother / when he had that he
waited for, he secretly gat him into walys to his brother, and him excyted
again the king in all that he might and caused his brother to man and vytayll
diverse castelles within walys / and specially the castle of Swandon, wherein he
much trusted / and gathered unto him the walshemen by gifts and other means,
so that he was very strong.

whereof when the king was informed / he would thereunto give no credence, till
he had sent thither and received from the^s the certaynte. But for so myche as
winter was toward, and he might not conveniently go thither with any power / he
therefore provided to send men and vytayl, to strength the castelles of Flynt
and Rutlande, and other holds, which he there had / and with prouysyo^ made
to war upon them in the beginning of the next year, suffered that winter
to pass.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxxxi. Anno dn^i. xii.C.lxxxii. wyllyam Mazerer. Henry
waleys. Anno.x. Nycholas wynchester.
IN this.x. year / ye king heryng more and more of the unsteadfastness of the
walshe men / for to let them of their purpose to grieve his holds beforenamed,
he sent thither with a crewe of sowdyours, the earls of Northumberland and of
Surrey. with whom among other went sir Rogyer Clyfforde, sir wyllyam
Lyndesey, sir Richard Tanny, and many other noble knights and squyres. The
which with great courage entrede into walys, and made with the walshemen many
skyrmysshes / till lastly upon Palm sunday, Dauyd with a great power of
walshme^ met with the said lords and knights at a place nere to a town
called Hanardyne / where between the^ was a sore fight. But in the end the
loss fill to the Englysshmen. For there were slain sir wyllyam Lyndesey, sir
Richard Tanny, with many other / and sir Rogyer Clyfforde was taken. After
which overthrow of the Englysshmen / the said Dauyd laid syege unto the
castelles of Flynt and of Rutlande. And his brother in that season warred and
occupied the lands of sir Edmunde Mortymer / and wanne the town called
Lambatre vaure / and there threw the walls thereof down to the ground. This
town is also called Abreswith. It was not long after or the brute of this
overthrow of the Englysshme^ came unto ye town. wherefore he sped him the
faster thyderwarde.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxxxii. Anno dn^i. M.CC.lxxxiii. Rauffe Blunt. Henry walys.
Anno.xi. Hawkyn Betnell.
IN this.xi. year upon the day of saint Leonarde or the syxt day of
Nouembre, while king Edward was thus occupied in rescowynge of his men,
which were besyged of Dauyd / sir Rogyer Clyfforde with other, which intended
to make a reysynge upon the walsh men, was drowned by folly upon a bridge made
of bargys and plankes to have passed a water, between Snowdon and Anglyssey.
And the third day of Decembre following / was Lewelyne prince of walys slain
by sir Edmunde Mortymer and his company / and his head sent unto the king tha^
being at Rutlande. The which he sent unto London / chargynge that yt beset
upon the toure of London. Of this Lewelyne a walshe metrycian made these four
verses following. Hic iacet Anglorum tortor, tutor venedorum.
Princeps wallorum, Lewelinus regula morum,
Gemma ceuorum, flos regum preteritorum,
Forma futurorum, dux, laus, lex, lux populorum.
which verses are thus to mean as follows. Of Englysshmen the scourge, of
walshe the protectoure,
Lewelyn the prince, rule of all virtue,
Gemme of all lyuers, and of all other the flower,
which unto death has paid his debt due,
Of kings a mirror that after him shall sue,
Duke and praise, and of the law the right,
Here in this grave, of people lies the light.
But an English metrician wrote other.iiii. verses in dyspraysynge of the
said Lewelyn as follows. Hic iacet errorum princeps, ac predo virorum,
Proditor Anglorum, fax liuida secta reorum,
Numen wallorum, trux, dux, homicida piorum,
Fex troianorum, stirps, mendax, causa masorum.
The which may in this wise be Englysshed.

Here lies of error the prince if yewyll ken,
These, and robbour, and traitor to Englysshmen.
A dym bronde, a sect of doers ill,
God of walshmen, cruel without skyll
In sleyng the good / and leder of the badde.
Lastly rewarded as he deserved had.
Of Troyans blood the drastes, and not sede.
A rote of falshode, and cause of many ill deed.
Anno domini.M.CC.lxxxiii. Anno domini.M.CC.lxxxiiii. Jordan Goodchepe. Henry
waleys. Anno.xii. Martyn Box.
IN this.xii. year, the king being stylle in walys, pursued Dauyd the brother
of Lewelyn from town to town / so that lastly he was taken and brought unto
the king about the natyuyte of saint John^ / and so holden in ward till the
king had there sped his needs. Then the king had all the country at his will,
and gave unto Englyssh lords towns in the mids of walys / and divided the
country into shyres / and ordained there shyryfes and other officers as then
were used in England. At Aberconow he made a strong castle, where before was
a house of white monks. The which he removed thens, and ordained for them in
some other place. He also made than the castle of Carnarua^ fast by Snowdon,
and repaired again the town of Lambatre or Abreswyth which Lewelyn had before
betyn down. Also he garuysshed the castelles and holds standing upon the sea
side with Englysshmen / and made Englysshemen lords of the grounds belongyng
to the same. And when ye king had set that country in rule / the^ about
Mychelmasse he returned so Shrewysbury, where he set a parlyament. In the time
whereof the foresaid Dauyd as chyef styrrer and begynner of al this war / was
there deinyd to be drawn, hanged, and quartered / and so he was shortly after
at ye said town of Shrewysbury, and his head sent to London, and set by the
head of his brother Lewelyn.

And this year was the first son of king Edward borne, while the king was in
walys at ye castle of Carnaruan. By reason whereof he was after named Edward of
Carnaruan. He was born upon ye day of saint Mark or ye.xxv. day of April. This
year also one Laure^ce Duket a cytezyn of London, was found deed and hanged
within sait Mary bow church of chepe. For ye which enqueres were made, and
lastely for yt deed were ataynted these.vii. persons following, yt is to say,
Reygnold of lancaster, Robert Pynnot, Paul of Stepynhith, Thomas Cordwayner,
John^ Tolanson, Thomas Russell, and Robert Scotte / the which were all for
that deed drawyn and hanged. And a woman for the same deed was also brent. And
Rauffe Crepyn, Iourdan Good chepe, Gilbert Clerk and Geffrey Clerk, were also
attai^t for the same cause. But they were repryed and sent unto the toure of
London / where they remained long after and lastly delivered. And in this year
the great conduyte standing again saint Thomas of Acres in Chepe, was begone
to be made. In this year also strife and unkindness began to kyndelle
between the king and the earl of Leycester / which after grew to the great
dysturbau^ce of diverse towns of England, and specially of the city of London
as after some dele shall appear.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxxxiiii. Anno dn^i. M.CC.lxxxv. Stephen Corn^hyll. Gregory
Rokesle. Anno.xiii. Robert Rokesby.
IN this.xiii. year upon the day of the conversion of saint Paul or ye.xxv.
day of Ianuarii / ye king ceased the fraunchese and lybertyes into his hands,
^
and discharged the mayre of London tha^ being Gregory Rokkisle / and admytted
for custos or gardeyn of the city Stepha^ Sa^dewyche. The which continued in
that office till the mo^day following the puryfycacyon of our Lady. At which
season the said Stepha^ was dyscharged / and sir John^ Breton^ knight charged
for the resydue of ye year. The cause of this dyspleasure that the king had
unto the city is not showed of no certaynte. But in an old panflete it
appears, that the said Gregory Rokkisley took certain brybes of the bakers,
and suffered them to sell bread lacking.vi. ounces / or.vii. oz in a penny lofe,
for ye which the king should be sore dyspleased. But yet to me it seems no
conuenyent cause, to sease the lybertyes of the city for the offense of one
man. wherefore it is to presuppose, yt it was for a more grievous cause. And in
this year was fully fynisshed and ended the new work of ye church of
westmynster unto the end of the quere, begone as before is showed / in the
third year of the.iii. Henry. By which reason it should apere, yt this church
should be in edyfyenge upon lxvi. years. Of the first fundacyon of this church
are diverse opinions. For as before is showed in ye third Chapter of the story
of Carce, and v. part of this work / this church was first founded by a
cytezeyne of London, and after reedyfyed by saint Edward, and lastly by king
Henry the.iii. But in the same abbey of west mynster, where of lykelyhode ye
most certaynte is to be had / it is regystred that this said church was a
temple of the Brytons long or they received the faith of Christ. And in the
time of their christian king Lucius, it was hallowed of Augustyne and his
fellows. And secundaryly it was reedyfyed by Sebertus than king of Estsaxons
or Essex, about the time when Ethelbert king of Kent builded saint Paul's
church of London. which was after the time that Lucyus received the faith of
Christ, upon.iiii.C. years. Than thyrdly it was builded by saint Edward the
confessoure / which reigned upon CCCC. and.xl. years after the said Sebertus.
And fourthly or lastly by the foresaid Henry ye third, which began his reygne
after the death of saint Edward.C.l. years.

Anno domini.xii.C.lxxxv. Anno domini.M.CC.lxxxvi. walter Blount. Rauffe
Sandewyche. Anno.xiiii. Johan wade.
IN the.xiiii. year of king Edward, at a parliament holden at westmynster
were made yt statutes called Additamenta Gloucestrie / which is to mean
addicio^s of statutes, made and put to such as before time were made at ye
parlyame^t holde^ at Glouceter. The which statutes were made to refourme such
persons as mysused the lands and tenementes coming to them by reason of ye
dower or lands of their wives / so that the the children of the second
husband putt by ye ryghtfull enherytoures / or such as were next alyed unto
the first donours. By reason of which statutes and addicions now in this
parliament made, such mysorder was reformed.

In this year or nere there about, in a town of Almayne called Traiect / many
men and women (as witnesses ye auctour of Cronica cronicarum) were dau^syng
upon a bridge / which lay over a river called Moose. In which time of their
dysporte and dau^synge, came by a priest berynge the sacrament toward a seek
man / whereof the said men and women being in revel took no regard unto the
sacrament, nor did to it any honor and reverence. But were it by the wreche of
god or otherwise / shortly after the priest was passed over, the bridge brake,
by means whereof, nere unto the nombre of.CC. persons were drowned. And about
this same season in the country called in English the Swetezers / a woman was
delivered of a child, that from ye nauyll upward had.ii. complete bodies, as
iiii. arms, and two hedes, with two bodies to the wast / and downward but.ii.
legs / the which with ye fore said arms be clypped either others body. And
an other woman bare a child or a monstre / whereof the heed and the face was
like unto a man, and all the body like unto a lion / with tail and fete and
all other fetures according to the same.

In this year also a cytezyn of London named Thomas Pywylesdon, yt which in ye
time of ye barons war before in the story of king Henry showed, had been a
capytayne / and a great styrrer of the commons of the said city, for to
maynteyne the barons party again the king / was newly accused, that he with
other of evil dysposycyon, should make conuentycles and assembles to the new
dystourbaunce of the city. whereof report was made unto the king / the which
remytted the enquery thereof unto sir Rauffe Sandewyche than custos or gardeyne
of the city. The^ the said Thomas with other was put in sure keeping till
the matter were duly inquired of. After which inquysycyon made and found,
report was made unto the king. Then the king sent down a writ / and
commanded it to be proclaimed shortly after within the bounds of the city /
whereof the effect was thus, that the said Thomas Pywelysdo^, wylyam de
Heywoode, Richard de Coundris, Richard le Cofferre, Robert de Derby, Albyne
de Darby, wyllyam Mayo Mercer, and Iuo Lyng Draper / with diverse other to ye
no^bre of.l. persons, should be banysshed out of yt city for ever. And if any
of the said.lviii. persons were at that time of the proclamacio^ voyded ye
city for fere or otherwise / that they should so remain, and not to return
unto the city upon pain of life losing.

In this year also, where as of old time long before this season, ye
merchants strangers coming with their marchaundyse, were lodged within
cytezeyns of the city of London, and sold all their marchaundyses by the
procuryng of his host / for the which his said host had a certain of
every.li: by means of the said merchants strangers it was at this day
brought to pass, yt they might hyre to the^ houses for to dwell in, and for
stowage of their wares so that no cytezeyne should entermedle him with the said
strangers nor yet their wares / by mean whereof they used many disceytes,
both i vtterau^ce of false wares, and also by their weyghtes which they used
in their own houses, to the great hurt of the hole realm of England.
wherefore suddenly search was made, and their weyghtes found and proved false.
And over yt all such wares as they should have weyed at the kings beam / they
weyed much thereof in their said houses, to the hynderaunce of ye kings
custom. For which offenses again them proved / to the nombre of.xx. of the
said strangers were arrested, and sent unto the toure of London, and their
weyghtes brent and consumed in westchepe of London, the thursdaye before the
feast of Simon and Jude. And finally the said merchants were delivered by
fine making to the king of a thousand.li, when they had suffered by a season
hard and vile prysonement.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxxxvi. Anno dn^i. xii.C.lxxxvii. Thomas Cross. Sir John^
Bryton. Anno.xv. wyllyam Hawteyn.
IN this.xv. year, the Jews of England were sessed at great sums of money
which they paid unto the king. But of one other auctour it is said, that the
commons of England granted to the king the v. part of their mouables for to
have the Jews banysshe out the land. For which cause the said Jews to put
the commons from their purpose, gave of their free wylles great sums of money
to ye king. which saying appears to be true / for the said Jews were exyled
within few years after.

This year about the beginning of May the king sailed to Burdeux / and from
thens he rode into France, where as witnesses ye fre^sh book he was
honorably received of Phylyp le Beau or Philyp the fair than king of France
/ and after received homage of the said Edward for the duchy of Guyan. And when
king Edward had tarried a season in France, he returned unto Burdeux /
whyther came unto him a certain ambassadors from the king of Spain, with the
which he held long dalyaunce. wherefore of ye fre^sh king he was suspected,
that he should allye him with the king of Spain again the French king.

And this year as testyfyeth Policronycon, the somer was so excedyng vote, that
men dyed for hete.

And this year whete was so plentuous, that it was sold at London for.xl.vi. a
quarter.

Anno domini.xii.C.lxxxvii. Anno domini.M.CC.lxxxviii. wyllyam Herforde. Rauffe
Sandewyche. Anno.xvi. Thomas Stanys.
IN this.wi. year of king Edward / saint Thomas of Herforde was translated.
And this year fill dystau^ce between sir Pain Tip toft wardeyn of certain
castles in walys, and a walsh knight called sir Ries ap Mordek. So yt sundry
skyrmysshes were foughten between them, and many men slain upon both sides,
to the great dystourbaunce of all ye country.

This year upon saint Margaretes even, or the.xix. day of Iulii / fill
wonderful great hayle, that the like thereof was not of men than living seen.
And after that ensued co^tynuell rain / which dyste^peryd the ground in such
wise, that the year following whete was sold for.xviii. d. a busshel, and this
year for.xiiii. d. And so increased yearly after during ye reygne of the king,
and after in his sons days, till it was lastly sold for.xl. s. a quarter and
above.

Anno domini.xii.C.lxxxviii. Anno domini.M.CC.lxxxix. wyllyam Betayn. Rauffe
Sandewyche. Anno.xvii. John^ of Caunterbury.
IN this.xvii. year, the war before in the year last paste, between sir Pain
Typtoft sir Ryes contynuynge / to the entente that the said Ryes might revenge
his cause again the said sir Pain, he arrecyd a great multitude of walsheme^
and brent and wasted diverse fownes in walys / so that the king then being in
Normandy, sent (...) the ^tle of Cornewayll then being the kings lyeu
tenaunte in England, that he should send thither an army of knights to
withstand the malice of the walshmen. The which preparyd shortly an army, and
yode with them into the borders of Northewalys. where he with his company bare
him so knyghtly, that in the end the said Ryes was taken and brought unto
porke / where he was after drawn, hanged, and quartered.

Anno domini.xii.C.lxxxix. Anno dn^i. M.CC.xc. Full (...) saint Edmunde. Rauffe
Sandewyche. Anno.xviii. Salaman Langforde.
IN this.xviii. year upon once Lady cuyn Assumpcion / king Edward was
honorably received of the cytezeyns of London, and so conveyed unto westmynster
/ where shortly after were brought before him many grievous complayntes of
diverse of his justices; as sir Thomas weylande, Adam Stretton and other. The
which the king caused streyghtly to be examyned / and lastly were found
gylty, of such trespasses and causes as they were accused of. wherefore some of
them were outlawed and lost such goods as they had / and the other
punysshed by long enprysonemente, and lastely delivered by payenge of great
fynes.

Anno domini.M.CC.lxc. Anno domini.M.CC.lxci. Thomas Romayn. Rauffe Sandewyche.
Anno.xix. wyllyam de Lyre.
IN this.xix. year, the king ordained yt all woll which should be sold unto
strangers, should be brought unto Sandewyche / where the staple thereof long
after was, as it is now at ye town of Caleys. And this year were the Jews
banysshed the land, for the which cause the commons gave unto the king a
quindecym or fyftene.

This year also sir Gylbert de Clare earl of Glouceter, married dame Jane
daughter of king Edward. This was called Iohanne of Acrys for she was born at
Acrys, when king Edward was there upon his great journey. And soon there
after in the same year, the duke of Brabannys son wedded Margarete the sister
of the said Iohanne.

Anno domini.xii.C.lxci. Anno domini.M.CC.lxcii. Rauffe Blount. Rauffe
Sandewyche. Anno.xx. Hamonde Box.
IN this.xx. year and beginning of the maryes year, and also of the kings.xx.
year / that is to mean upon the even of saint Andrewe or the.xxix. day of
Noue^bre / dyed queen Elyanore the kings wife, and was buried at westmynster
in the chapel of saint Edward at the fete of Henry the third. where she
has.ii. were tapers brennyng upon her tumbe both day and night / which so
has continued syne the day of her buryenge to this present day. This gentle
woman as before is towched in the xxxviii. year of king Henry the third, was
sister unto the king of Spayn By whom king Edward had.iiii. sons / that is
to say, John, Henry, Alphons, and Edward. which Edward succeeded his father,
by reason that the other.iii. died before their father. Also he had by her.v.
daughters The first Elyanore, was married unto wyllyam earl of Bar / the
second Johan of Acrys, was married as before is said unto the earl of
Glouceter / the third Margarete, was married to the dukes son of Braba^t /
the.iiii. Mary by name, was made a menchon at Ambrysbury / and the.v. named
Elyzabeth, was married unto the earl of Holande / and after his death she was
married unto Humfreye Boherum earl of Hereforde.

And this year dyed also the old queen Elyanore wife unto Henry the third and
mother to this king Edward / whose heart was buried at the graye freres in
London, and her body at Ambrysbury in the house of Nuns.

Anno domini.M.CC.xcii. Anno dn^i. M.CC.xciii. Henry Bale. Rauffe Sandewyche.
Anno.xxi. Elys Russell.
IN this.xxi. year, the king held his great court of parlyament at London /
to the which with diverse lords of that province came the king of Scotts. And
after he had continued there a conuenyente season / he was conveyed with diverse
lords far upon his journey toward his own country.

And in this year, as one Rychard Bagle offycer of the sheryfes of London, was
ledynge a prisoner toward the Gayole, the which he before had arrested / three
men rescowed the said prisoner, and took him from the offycer. The which were
pursued and taken / and by judgment and law than used brought into
westchepe, and there had their right hands smyten of by the wrestes.

Anno dn^i. M.CC.xciii. Anno dn^i. M.CC.xciiii. Robert Rokysley. Rauffe
Sandewyche. Anno.xxii. Martyn Awbry.
IN the.xxii. year of king Edward, upon the day of saint Tyburce and
Ualeryan, or the.xiiii. day of May / fill a wonderful snow and therewith and
exceeding wind. By vyolence whereof great harm was done in sundry places of
England. In remembrance whereof a Metrycyan made these verses following.
Crastino Tiburci sanctorum Valeriani,
Nix cadit immanis, ventus vehemens boriasis,
Euulsit siluas, vulsit quas reperit herbas,
^des dampnose detexit and impituose,
Quas clam prostrauit / sic plurima da^pna para^it.
The which verses may thus be Englysshed as here after follows. The morrow
following Tiburce and Valerian
The blessed saints / of snow fill such plenty,
That at that day was no living man,
That might remember of so great quantyte.
The Northyn wind blewe with such fyerste,
That houses, trees, with herbys it over cast.
And many other harms by sand and eke by see,
Of that wind came, the whyse that it did last.


IN this year also about ye end of the month of Iulu, dyed freer Pekham than
archebysshop of Caunterbury. In whose see was after stalled master Robert of
wynchester.

And about the mids of Septembre following / the earl of Bar a french
man, married Elyanore ye kings daughter in ye town of Brystowe. And about the
end of this year dyed Alexandre king of Scotts / where soon after ensuyd
great war and trouble, for the enherytaunce of that land, as in some part
shall after appear.

And this year whete was sold at London for.ii. s. a busshell. In this year
also as witnesses the French cronycle Phylyp le Beawe tha^ king of France
made war in Gascoyne and Guyau, for the cause as there is showed / saying
that king Edward under color to have made a vyage into the holy land,
gathered a great army, and suddenly entered into Normandy both by land and
water, and did much harm in spoylynge and taking diverse ships of France,
and brynnyng and spoylyng diverse towns of the same / and after came unto the
town of Rochell, where to it the Englysshemen made diverse assautes, whereby the
dwellers and also the town sustained much harm.

whereof the king of France being enfourmed / sent unto king Edward,
monisshing him to come unto his parlyamente, and also to make satysfaccyon for
such harmys as his people had done within his domynyon of France and
Normandy. But for that king Edward refused that to do / therefore ye said
Phylyp le Beawe sent Rauffe de Neell tha^ constable of France into Gascoygne
with a great and mighty power / the which made sharp war upon ye
Gascoynes. But the Gascoines with help of the Englysshemen defended them in
such wise, that great hurt was done upon both parties. Tha^ finally as
testifyeth the said french cronycle, to the intent that king Edward might
make the better claim to all the hole duchy of Normandy / he sent the French
king word, yt he would give over into his hands the duchye of Guyan and
hold no land of the king of France.

Anno domini.M.CC.xciiii. Anno domini.M.CC.xcv. Henry Box. Sir John^ Bryton.
Anno.xxiii. Richard Glouceter.
IN this.xxiii. year / the walshemen by styrryng of one named Madok, rebelled
again the king. wherefore he in all haste spedde him unto westchester / and
about the feast of saint Nycholas, wan from the walshmen the i will called
Anglesya or the i will of Man, and builded new the city and castle of Beau
Maryse / and brought the unsteadfast walshemen to new reclayme / and then
caused the woods of ye country to be hewyn down, wherein before times they
used to hyde them as a cony does in his claper / and repaired so the
castelles and strong holds with building of some new, Bew the beati^^emen
were trapned from vanyn.
that he caused the walshme^ to thryue again their wylles. For by the
strength of those castelles, they were kept from their old accustomed rauyns
and stelynges / and put so in execucyon by the rulers of the said castelles and
strong holds, that they fill unto occupacyon and to byenge and sellyng and
gathered treasoure, and began to live after the manner of Englissheme^, so
that more and more that country grew to more restefulnesse and peace.

In this year also the frenchemen arrived at Dover with a certain of ships,
being under the rule of sir Matthew de mount morency and of sir Johan
Harcourte knights / and spoiled that town, and brent a part of yt.

In which skyrmysshe was slain or martyred an holy man named saint Thomas of
Dover. And in this year as testifies ye french cronicle / Charles de Ualoys
brother unto king Phylyp of France, was sent by his said brother into
Gascoygne with a great hooste. The which Charles laid his syege unto the
castle of Ryon / wherein at that time were sir Johan Seyn John^, and John^ de
Brytayne / the which manfully and vygorously defendyd the said castle again
the Frenchmen all that year and more, as in the next year shall appear.

Anno domini.M.CC.xcv. Anno dn^i. xii.C.xcvi. John^ Dunstable. Sir John^
Bryton. Anno.xxiiii. Adam Halyngbery.
IN this.xxiiii. year / the king for the great war yt he had with the French
king and else where, commanded a new subsidy to be levied upon all the
sarplers of wolle going out of England, with all fellys and hydes in like
manner. And over that, all such money as before was granted by the clergy of
England toward the defense of the holy land / the king then for report that
he had from Rome of the popes manners tha^ Bonyface the.viii, commanded it to
be brought unto his tresoury. And by a co^uocacio^ made of the said clergy /
he had granted toward his needs half of their spyrytuall and temporal
lands, beginning at.xx. mark benifice, and so ascendyng upward / the which
was not paid in one year, but by divided porcions in.iii. years ensuyng. And of
the lay fee or temporal men of England, he had granted to him the.x. penny of
their mouables / the which was paid in.ii. years next ensuyng. And this year in
ye month of March, was drawn and hanged at London for treason done in
France, a knight called sir Thomas Turbeuyle. And about ye time of Easter
when Charlys de Ualoys as ye before in that other year have hard, had lain
long at the castle of Ryon, and might nothing win upon the Englyshmen, but
daily lost of the best of his knights / he sent for more aid and socoure. At
which time came unto him sir Rauffe Nele constable of France with a fressh
company, and tha^ assawted it of new But when they had lain there a season, and
saw they prevailed nothing again their enemies / they yode unto an hold there
by named Poudency, and it assauted for so much as the more nombre of the
sowdyours there were Normans / and after.viii. days by appoyntemente or
otherwise gat the said hold, so that all the Englisshemen had their lybertye
and goods and the Normans taken as prisoners / the which they brought after
unto the castle of Ryon, and there in syghte of the sowdyours, hanged al or
the more party of the said Normans. Crueltye.
when the Gascoynes being within the town and castle of Ryons, saw then
their cosyns and country men hanged before their eyes / they cast in their
minds that yt was done by treason of the Englysshmen, and that they would at
length deal with them in like manner. By reason whereof strife and varyau^ce
arose between the Englyssheme^ and the Gascoygnes / so that either of them
feryd the treason of the other. For the which cause, sir Johan Seyn Johan, sir
John^ de Britayn, sir Robert Typtoft, sir Rauffe Ta^ny, sir Hugh Bardolfe, and
sir Adam Cretynge, with diverse other fled by see and in that manner saved them
self / and soon after the said town and castle of Ryons was won by the
Frenchemen, and the inhabytau^tes of the same sworn unto the french king.

ye have hard before in the.xxii. year of this king, how after the death of
Alexander king of Scotts many questyons fill among y^ said scotts, who by
right of enherytau^ce should be king of that land / considering that the
said Alexander had left after him three daughters, the which living their
father were married. The first to sir Johan Bayloll, the second to Roberte le
Bruze, and the third to one named Hastynges. Many of the lords of Scotland
would have crowned sir Johan Bayloll, by reason that he married the eldest of
the daughters. But the friends of Robert le Bruze withstode it with all their
power. And other there were that he^de with Hastynges / so that after great
strife and long varyaunce, the matter was brought before king Edward as
chyef lord and soueraygne of that land / promysinge to him to abide all such
determynacyon and judgment as he should set therein. Than king Edward to
the end that the scotts should know perfytely, that the king of England
ought of right to be there chyefe head and soueraygne / showed unto them
such old wrytynges as he little tofore had caused to be serched and found /
in the which it was contained by the auctorytye of old chronicles and writers,
as Maryanus ye scotte, wyllyam of Malmesbury, Roger of Huntyngdon, and other,
that in the year of our lord.ix.C.xx, king Edward the elder made subget unto
him the kings of Cumbrys and scotts.

Also in the year of grace.ix.C. and xxi. the foresaid scotts and Cumbrys,
chase the said Edward the elder to be their chyefe lord and patron. And in ye
year of our lord.ix.C.xxvi. Ethelstane than king of England subdued
constantyne than king of scotts / and after admytted the said Constantyne to
reygne as king under him, by oath of obeysau^s, with feaute and homage. Also
Edredus brother to the said Ethelstane, subdued of new the scotts with the
Northumbrys / and received of them again oath and homage. And over that it is
found in the said chronicles, that Edgar overcame Alphunius the son of Kynadus
king of Scotts, and received of him feawty and homage / and held him under
his obeysau^ce as he had done his father Kynadus before time. Moreover it is
there wytnessed / that Canutus in the.xvi. year of his reygne. subdued
Malcolyne than king of scotts, and received of him feawty and homage.
Furthermore wyllyam Conqueror in the.vi. year of his reygne, subdued Malcolyne
king of Scotland / the which before times had received the said kingdom of
the gift of Edward king and confessoure. And wyllyam the read did in
likewise unto the said Malcolyne, and unto his two sons that reigned in
Scotland the one after the other. Also Dauyd king of scotts did homage unto
Stephane than king of England.

And wyllyam king of scotts did homage unto Henry the third, at the time of
his coronacyon / and after came unto his father Henry the second, when the
forenamed Henry was deed in Normandy, and made his homage to him again.

This Henry that was son unto Henry the second is of many writers named
Henry the third, for so much as he was the.iii. king that was crowned of that
name. But for he dyed before his father, his deeds ben little spoken of / so
that of some writers he is nothing minded. And it follows in the story, how
that Alexa^dre king of Scotts in yt.xxxv. year of Henry the third, or son of
king John^, married at york Margarete daughter of the said Henry / and did unto
him homage for the realm of Scotland / and bound him and his heirs kings
of Scotland by his letters patentes, to be true unto the said Henry, and unto
his heirs kings of England, like as before time wyllyam king of Scotts had
oblyged him unto the second Henry / as before in the.xxii. year of his reygne
is more manyfestly showed.

And more to them was showed y^ popes bulls, the which were sent before times
into Scotland / by auctoryte whereof the kings of Scotla^de were accursed for
they would not be obedyent to their lords kings of England.

When all these presedentes were seen by ye Scotts / a day was assygned of
metyng at Norhm^ in the marches between England and Scotland, whyther unto
the king, came the chief rulers of the Scotts. where they excused them to be
bound unto the king for the observing of the kings ordenaunce, for so much
as they lacked a king and an head, by whom all such ordenaunces should be
maynteyned and holde^. But after by aduyce of both parties / agreement was made
by the scotts, that they should be bound to obey the kings judgment.
wheruppon bonds were made upon both parties / that is to mean the king was
bound to the^ in an hondreth thousand pound, yt within.ii. months after he
had received the possessyon of the land, he should give it unto him that was
thought most ryghtfull enherytour. And the scotts were again bound unto him,
that they should hold ferme and stable all such decre and judgment as the king
should give in that matter / and also that they should uphold and maynteyne for
their king and ruler, him that the king should admit and chose, and none
other, After which bonds made and delivered upon both sides / the scotts
seized king Edward, and delivered unto him by their chartours the possession
of Scotland, with castelles, with rightes, with customs, and al other
appertynau^ces to that kingdom belonging / and set wardeynes in the towns,
manners, and castelles, that should save to him that the king admytted, al
aduauntages and profytes, of the said towns and other in that mean while
growyng.

And when all assurau^ce was made and fynysshed to the agreement of both
parties / the king called before him and his counsayll all those parties that
made claim unto ye kingdom of Scotland. And after their reasons were well
and suffycyently argued and debated upon al sides, by aduyce as well of some of
the lords of Scotland as by his own counsayll he finally admytted for king
sir Johan Bayloll as most ryghtefull enherytour to the crown of Scotland.
The which received it of him thankefully / and for the same in presence of the
barony of England and of Scotland, did unto the said king Edward his
homage, and swear unto him feawty. And that done the scotts with their new
king returned into Scotland.

And this year was taken the forenamed Madok or Meredok / which as ye before
have herd in the.xxiii. year, caused the walshemen to rebel and was drawyn
and hanged at London.

Anno domini.xii.C.cxvi. Anno dn^i. M.CC.cxvii. Thomas de Suff. Sir John^
Bryton. Anno.xxv. Adam de Fullam.
IN this.xxv. year the king commanded in diverse shyres of England, great
quantyte of where to be gadered, and sent it into Gascoyne and Guyan, to the
nombre of an. C.M. quarters after some writers / and soon after sent thither
sir Edmunde his brother earl of Lancastre, sir Henry Lacy earl of Lyncolne, and
sir wyllyam Ueysy baron, with diverse other lords and knights, to strength
such people as he there had ready, while he prepared an other army to have
against the scotts.

ye have herd in the precedynge chapter, how sir Johan Bayloll king of
scotts made oath and homage unto king Edward for ye kingdom of Scotland. Of
the which oath he shortly repented him after, by mean of cou^sayll of the
abbot of Menros as says Polycronyco^. All be it that it should seem to be as
well by the cou^sayll of the king of France, by words that been written in the
french cronycle. But how so it was by one or by both / full untruely he
forsook his former oath and promise, and arrered war again the king.
wherefore king Edward sped him thither with a great host / and in process laid
his syege unto the town of Berwyk. But the scotts defended it egerly, and
beat the English men back, and brent some of the Englyssh ships. with the
which enterprise they were so enflamyd with pride, that in derisio^ of the
king, they made this mokkysshe ryme following. what wenys king Edward with his
long shankys,
To have won Berwyke / all our vnthankys.
Gaas pykes him
And when he has it
Gaas dykys him.


When king Edward herd of ye pride of the scotts, and knew of their
scornful ryme / he was somdeale amoued / and encouraged his knights in such
wise, that they wanne the dyche of the town / and after in process with
great labor and danger, the Bulwerkes / so that they came unto the gates,
and made there so strong assawte, that in the end they wanne the town, and
slew of the scotts as witnesses diverse writers over the nombre of.xxv.M. and
took prisoners sir wyllyam Douglas, sir Simon de Freysell, the earl Patryk,
and sir Robert Bruze, with diverse other / and in short time after the wardeyn
of the castle of Berwyke seeing that to him was sent no socoure / yielded up
the said castle by appoyntement. And wha^ the king had possession of the town
and castle of Berwyke / he than strengthed them with English men. And after
wanne the holds of Tyndall of Exham, of wyerbyrd, and of Lamerstoke, with
diverse other.

And while yt king Edward was thus besyed about the wynnyng of these foresaid
holds / he sent sir Hugh Spencer. with sir Hugh Percy and other noble men,
with a part of his host, to lay siege unto Dunbarre. where when they had
layne a certain of time, an host of Scotts came thither to remove the syege,
with whom the English men had a fyers / and cruel battle. But in ye end by
help of god and saint George, the English me^ had the vyctorye / and slew
of the Scotts above the nombre of.xx.M, and lost of the English company a
very few in nombre. wherefore the English me^ in reproach of the Scotts,
made this ryme following. These scaterande Scotts
Hold we for sottes
Of wrenches unware
Erly in a morning
In an evil tymynge
Came they to Dunbarre.


ANd after this vyctorye, the town and castle of Dunbarre was won / in the
which were taken prisoners three earls, vii. barons, and xxvii. knights, with
diverse men of the church. Than the king spedde him to Edenborow, and in
process of time wanne the town with the castle. In the which were found ye
regalyes of Scotla^de, yt is to mean the crown with the septre and clothe of
astate / the which after were offered by king Edward at the shryne of saint
Edward upon the morrow after the feast of saint Botholfe, or ye xviii. day of
Iunii, in the year following. And when the king had thus subdued the Scotts,
and set the country in a rule / he returned with many prisoners into England.
In which time and season the Englysshemen sustained many hard shoures in
Gascoyne and Gyan. Among ye which one is remembered in the French cronycle /
saying that Edmunde duke or earl of Lancastre, dyed at Bayon. After whose
death while the town and other strong holds prepared them to withstand the
Frenchemen Robert earl of Artoys, which a little tofore had encou^tred with sir
John^, and had been of him ouerset, resembled his company / and made him an
other skyrmysshe. In the which he slew upon an hundredth Englysshme^ and
Gascoynes, and took prisoners the forenamed sir Johan Seyn Johan, sir wyllyam
Mortymer, and other, to the nombre of.lxx, y^ which were sent into France
unto diverse prysones.

Anno dn^i. xii.C.xcvii. Anno dn^i. M.CC.xcviii. John^ de Stortforde. Sir John^
Bryton. Anno.xxvi. wyllyam de Stortforde.
IN this.xxvi. year / king Edward with a pusaunte army in the month of
August, took shyppynge at dover, and sailed into Flaunders, to aid and to
help Guy than earl of Flaunders again ye French king. The which at that
time was sore warreyd of the French king, in somoche that he had won the
town of Margquet and the country theraboute. And for to put the said Guy unto
the more trouble / the said French king caused Robert earl of Artoys to
invade the country of Flau^dres toward Pycardy / and encountered with ye said
Guy nere unto a town called Furnes. where atwene ye said.ii. earls was foughte^
a sharp bata^l / so that many men were slain upon both parties. After which
fight the Earl of Flaunders spedde him toward Gaunt, where as kind Edward
than soiourned / and the earl of Artoys drew him toward ye French king, the
which shortly after was received into the town of Bruges. In which time and
season while ye said.ii. kings lay thus at either town, a mean of peace was
there treated of / so that finally a peace was concluded atwene the.ii. kings,
and atwene the French king and Guy earl of Flanders, unto the feast of all
saints than next ensuenge. And from that day, unto the feast of all saints
tha^.ii. years following. After which peace so stablysshed / king Edward
departed from the town of Gaunte and yode to Bordeaux. And ye French king
returned into France. And prisoners were delivered on both parties.

(...) French (...).
In this time and season while king Edward was thus occupied in Flanders /
the Scotts by the entysement of the French king, to the intent to cause
king Edward to keep his country, and that he should not aid the earl of
Flaunders, began to make war upon the kings soudyours, which ye king had
lafte there in diverse holds. And also entered upon ye borders of
Northu^berlande, and made sharp war upon the inhabytauntes of that country.
And for that sir John^ Bayloll their king, after some writers, was at y^ time
prisoner in the tower of London, or else voyded the country for fere of the
king of England: therefore the said Scotts made them a capytayne / the
which was named wyllyam waleys a man of unknown or low birth, to whom they
obeyed as unto their king. Anon as ye king herd of the rebellyon of the
Scotts, which to him was no great wonder considering their great
unsteadfastness / he wrote his letters unto sir Henry Persy earl of
Northu^berlande, to sir wyllyam Latymer, and to sir Hugh Cressyngham than
tresourer of England, and to other, that they in all goodly haste should make
prouysyon to withstand the Scotts. The which persons after receyte of the
kings letters, spedde them all in spedy manner / so that they entered Scotland
shortly after, and compelled ye Scotts to return back unto a town named
Streuelyn, where i^ a skyrmyssh foughte^ atwene the English and the Scotts,
sir Hugh Cressyngham forenamed with diverse Englysshemen was slain. But yet the
Scotts were holden so strayte of the English host, that after that
skyrmysshe they would not of a certain time come in plain field, but kept
them within their castelles and strong holds. And this year atwene Easter
and wytsontyde certain persons of London brake up the tun in the ward of
Cornhyll, and took out certain persons that thither were committed by sir
John^ Bryton, then custos or gardeyn of the city, for night walking. For y^
which riot, the said persons, that is to mean Thomas Romayne and viii.
other, were afterward grievously punysshed / as first by prysonme^t, and after
by fynes. And this year the king in ye month of October came into England,
and so to wynchester / where the cytezyns of London made such labor unto his
grace, that shortly after they opteyned grant of their lyberties and
fraunchyses, that had in some part be kept from them by ye term of.xii.
years and more. So that upon the day of the translacyon of saint Edward king
and confessor next following, they chase them a mayre of them self / where by
all the foresaid time their custos or gardeyn was appointed by ye king, or by
such as ye king would assygne. But ye shall understand that this was not
redeemed without great sums of money. For after some writers the cytezyns
paid for it to the king.iii M. mark.

Also this year king Edward put out of his proteccyon certain Alyauntes,
which were rychely benefyced in England. The cause was for the said alyauntes
would not aid ye king with their goods, as ye other of his land did / but
purchased an inibicyon of pope Boniface the.viii, that they and their goods
should be fre from all the kings dymes or taskys. Therefore ye king ceased
their temporaltyes, and suffered the^ with their spyritualtes till they were
agreed with the king.

Anno domini.M.CC.xcviii. Anno domini.M.CC.xcix. Richard Reffham. Henry
waleys. Anno.xxvii. Thomas Sely.
IN this.xxvi. year after Chrystmasse, certain persons made a dyggyng and a
search in ye church of saint Martynes le grau^de in London, for certain
tresoure that there should be hid, as it was reported of a gardener. But
their labor was in vain, for nothing was there found. For the which deed
ye deane of Poules the second sunday of lent following, denounced all the^
accursed that were at that deed doing, or consenting to the same.

In this year about ye beginning of Aprell, the king rode toward Scotland /
and appointed his lords with their companyes to mete with him at york. where
with him met a great host, yt which he ladde into Scotland, and brent and
spoiled the country as he went / and tarried a season at Barwyke. And from thens
he spedde him in winning of the towns and castelles as he went, till he came
nere to a town named Fawkyrk or Fankyrk. where upon ye day of mary Magdaleyne,
or ye.xxii. day of Iulii, met with him ye power of Scotland, and gave unto him
a sore fight. But in the end the vyctory fill unto the Englysshme^ / so that
of the Scotts were slain in ye field as affirm diverse writers, over the
nombre of.xxxii.M. and of Englysshmen but barely.xxviii. persons. After which
scomfyture the Scotts yielded to the king the more party of the strong
holds and castelles, that they tofore had holden again him, and made unto him
new oath and promysse, and yielded them self unto his grace and mercy. And
when he had set that country in an order and rule / he tha^ returned into
England, and so to London. where by ye aduyce of some of his counsayll, he
suddenly dampened certain coins of money called pollardes, crocardes, and
rosaries / and caused the^ to be brought to new coynage to his great
aduau^tage.

ye have before herd in that other year, how that a truce or a peace was
stablysshed at wene the king and ye king of France, for the space of.ii.
years and more / the which finally was concluded this year, that king Edward
for a peace to be had between both regyons, should take unto wife Margarete the
suster of Philip le Beawe / then king of France. The which Margarete while
the king was in Scotla^de was brought unto Dover, and so unto Caunterbury /
where the king spoused her in the month of Septembre as witnesses the French
cronycle / and received of her in process of time following two sons named
Thomas and Edmunde, and a daughter named Margarete. The first of the sons
was surnamed Thomas of Brotherto^, and the second Edmu^de wodestoke.

Anno domini.M.CC.xcix. Anno dn^i. M.CCC. John^ Armenter. Elys Russell.
Anno.xxviii. Henry Fryngeryth.
IN this.xxviii. year / the king herynge of the vntrowth and rebellyon of the
scotts, made the.iii. vyage into Scotla^de / and bare him so knyghtly, that in
short process after his coming he subdued the more part of the land. And
after he sped him unto the castle of Estryuelyn, wherein were many of the
great lords of Scotland / and enuyroned the said castle with a strong siege.
But he lay there somewhat oftyme without winning of any great advantage, or
hurt doing unto the scotts. wherefore of polycy he caused to be made.ii.
pair of galowes in ye sight of the castle / and after commanded
proclamacyons to be cried, that if the scotts by a certain day would yield
that castle to the king, they should have life and lym^e. And if not, but that
he wanne it by strength / as many as were within the said castle, should be
hanged upon those gybettes, none astate nor person to be excepted. In process
of time when ye scotts had well dygestyd this proclamacyon, and saw the
strength of their enemies, and co^sydered their own feebleness and lak of
socoure / they assented finally to yield them and their castle unto the king
/ which shortly after was done. whereof king Edward being possessed, stuffed
it with Englissh knights / and after took a new oath of the lords and
capytaynes the which he found closed within that castle, of true and
feythfull allegeau^ce / and after suffered them to go where them lyked.

And when wyllyam walys, which as before is said pretended the rule and
governance of Scotland, hard tell that the strong castle of Estryuelyne
was yelden unto king Edward / and that lords and knights therein founden in
which he much affyed, were sworn to the kings allegeaunce: he feryd sore
lest ye said company would betray him, and bring him unto ye king. wherefore he
with his adherentes withdrewe him into the mareyses and other dangerous
places, where he thought he was in suertye for pursuynge of the kings hooste.

Then the poor commons of the land presented them by great companyes, and
put them holy in the kings grace and mercy / so that the king thought then
that he was in peasyble possessyon, or in a great suertye of the land.
wherefore after he had caused to be sworn unto him the rulers of diverse borughes
cytyes, and towns, with other officers of the land / he returned unto
Berwyke, and so into England, and lastly unto westmynster.

In this time and season that ye king was thus occupied about his wars in
Scotland / the queen was conveyed unto London. Again whom the cytezyns upon
the nombre of.vi.C. rode i^ one lyuerey of read and white, with the conysaunce
of diverse mysteryes brodered upon their sleues, and received her.iiii. miles
without the city / and so conveyed her thorugh y^ city, which then was
garnysshed and behanged with tapettes and arras and other clothes of sylke and
riches in most goodly wise, unto westmynster, and there lodged.

when the king this year returned out of Scotland / he caused shortly after
an Inqui^^cio^ de Troylbasion.
inquysycyon to be made thorugh his land / the which after was named
Troilbaston^. This was made upon al officers, as mayres, shyreffes, baylyffes,
excheters, and many other that had mysborne them in their said offices, and had
extorcioned or mystreated ye kings lyege people otherwise than was according
with the good order of their said offices. By mean of which inquisicyon many
were accused, and redeemed their offices by grievous fynes, to the kings great
lucre and advantage. Other means were fou^de^, also, as forfaites again ye
crown / the which brought great sums of money to the kings cofers,
toward the great charge of his wars yt he sustained in wales, France, and
Scotland, as before is showed. this year also the king for co^playnt that was
brought unto him by master walter Langton bishop of Chester, of sir Edward
his eldest sone, for that he with Pyers of Gaueston^ and other insolent
persons had broken the said park of the said bishop, and ryottously
destroyed ye game within it: he therefore inprysoned the said sir Edward his
son^e with his complyces. And in process of time after, when the king was
thorughly informed of ye lassiuyous and wanto^ disposicio^s of the said Pyers
of Gaueston^ / for that he should not enduce the forenamed sir Edward to be of
like dysposycyon: he therefore banysshed the said Pyer of Gaueston^ out of
England for ever. But after the death of king Edward ye banysshmente was
soon denulled by Edward his sone / whereof ensued much harm and trouble, as
after shall be showed.

Anno domini.M.CCC. Anno dn^i. M.CCCi. Luke Hauerynge. Elys Russell. Anno.xxix.
Richard Champeis.
IN this.xxix. year of king Edward / dyed Edmunde earl of Cornewayle, the
son of Richard sometime earl of the said country and king of Almayne,
without issue. wherefore that erledome returned again to the crown of
England.

And in this year the king gave unto sir Edward his sone the pryncypate of
wales / and joined there unto the said erledome of Cornewayle.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.i. Anno dn^i. M.iii.C.ii. Robert Caller. John^ Blount.
Anno.xxx. Peter Bosham.
IN this.xxx. year / the king held his great counsayll of parlyamente at his
city of Caunterbury.

Anno domini.M.CCC.ii. Anno domini.M.CCC.iii. Hugh Pourt. John^ Blount.
Anno.xxxi. Simon Paris. Anno domini.xiii.C.iii. Anno domini.xiii.C.iiii. wyllam
Combmartyn. John^ Blount. Anno.xxxii. John^ de Burfforde. Anno
domini.M.CCC.iiii. Anno domini.M.CCC.v. Rogyer Paris. John^ Blount.
Anno.xxxiii. John^ Lyncoln^.
IN this.xxxiii. year / wyllya^ waleys that unto the king had done so many
dyspleasures and treasons, again the troth and allegeaunce of his oath, as
some deal before is showed / was taken at the town named saint Domynyk in
Scotland, and sent unto London, and there arraygnyd / and upon the even of
saint Bartylmewe, drawn, hanged, and quartered / and his hedde set upon
London bridge, and his.iiii. quarters sent into Scotland, and there hanged
upon the gates of certain towns of the land. And at Myghelmas following, the
king holding his parlyament at westmynster / thither came out of Scotland the
bishop of saint Andrews, Robert le Bruze, sir Simon de Frysell earl of
Dunbarre, sir John^ of Cambrees earl of Atles, and sir John^ Common with other /
the whyce voluntarylye were sworn in presence of the king and his lords,
that they should be true unto the king of England, and keep the land of
Scotland to his use again all other persons. And if any rebel or other
malycyous person distourbed the land, or break ye kings peace / they should
cause him to be taken, and sent unto the king / with many other articles
concerning their allegeaunce, the which full falsely they brake and contraryed
shortly after.

Anno dn^i. xiii.C.v. Anno dn^i. xiii.C.vi. Raynold Doderell. John^ Blount.
Anno.xxxiiii. wyllyam Cansyn.
IN this.xxxiiii. year / Robert le Bruze contrary his oath to king Edward
before made, assembled the lords of Scotland / and by the cou^sayll of
thabbot of Stone and other that favored his untruth, he sent unto the pope
than Clement the.v, for a dyspensacyo^ of his oath before made unto king
Edward / and surmysed to him that king Edward vexed and greuyd the realm of
Scotland wrongfully, whereupon the pope wrote unto king Edward to leave of
such doings.

And while this matter was thus complained on unto the pope / ye said Robert le
Bruze made all the labor he might unto ye lords of Scotla^de that he were
admytted for king of ye regyon / so that upon the day of the concepcyon of our
Lady, or the.viii. day of Decembre, a great assemble of the lords was made at
the abbey of Stone. And upon the day following, by the means of the abbot of yt
place many of the said lords assented to ye will of the said Robert, except sir
Johan Common only. The which in defense of his truth and oath before sworn
unto king Edward, many reasons and excuses made / and finally said that he
would not false his oath for no man. For this the said sir Johan Common had
great maugre of sir Robert le Bruze, and many of ye nobles of Scotland. But he
held his oppynyon so fermely, that other began to take his part / that in
that counsayll rose such contrariete of opynyons and reasons, that the said
cou^sayll was dyssolued, and a new set at the graye freers of Dunfrize after
Candelmas next ensuyng. At which day of assemble whenne the cause of their
meting was by Robert le Bruze denou^ced and showed / and many of the great
lords of the land had granted to him their aids and assistence: the
forenamed sir John^ Common and other sat still and said no word. which Robert
le Bruze marked well, and to him said: And you sir John^ I trust for defense
and weal of this realm ye will not be behind. whereunto he answered, sir I
would that ye and al my lords here present know well, that for the weal and
defense in the right of this land, I would stand with it to the uttermost of
my power. But for I se that ye ente^de rather the subuercyon than the weal
thereof / I will therefore ye know, I shall another aid you with counsayll nor yet
with strength. Shamfull minder.
Some other also there were whose names the auctoure myndeth not, which
allowed the saying of the said sir John^ / and in some words admytted his
sad and true answer. For the which Roberte le Bruze was so amoued, that
when sir John^ Common with sir Rogyer his brother was departed from the
counsayll, and was common into the church of the freers / Robert le Bruze him
folowyd and wounded to the death with his sword / and after slew sir Rogier his
brother, which would have defended the foresaid sir John^. After whose death
little or no resyste^ce was made again the untrue mean and deeds of the
said. Robert le Bruze / so that he at saint Iohn^s town was crowned king
shortly after.

It was not long after that king Edward was monysshed of all this untruth of
the scotts / wherefore he prepared him to wend thither. And at Penthecoste he
held a great feast of his barony at westmyster / and during that feast made
a great no^bre of knights over.CC. after most writers. And that feast ended
/ he sent with a fair company of knights sir Aymer de Ualaunce earl of
Penbroke, and sir Henry Percy earl of Northumberlande into Scotla^de / and sped
him self with his host soon after.

Than about the feast of the assu^pcyon of our Lady / the king faughte with the
said Robert le Bruze and all the power of Scotland, Victory against the
Scotts.
in a plain nere unto saint Iohn^s town. And after long fight and great
slaughter of the scotts to ye nombre of.vii.M, he chased the scotts. In
which chase sir Simon de Fryseyll earl of Du^barre was taken, with also the
bishops of saint Adrews and of Bastoon, the abbot of Stoon or Scoon, and sir
John^ Chambres earl of Atles. which bysshoppes and abbot king Edward sent after
unto innocent the.v. tha^ pope, Bishops perjured.
with report of their perjury, and how they were taken armed in the field to
shede the blood of criste^ men. And ye te^porall lords he sent into England,
and so unto the tower of London. And Robert le Bruze after this scomfyture and
loss of his chyef fre^des, feryng lest ye scotts with such Englysshmen as
king Edward laft there would arise again him / all comfortles fled unto the
king of Norwaye, and there abode during while king Edward lived.

when this noble prince Edward had thus subdued ye scotts / he yielded thanks
to god of his vyctorye. And when he was ascertayned of the auoydyng of Robert
le Bruze, and had set ye land in a quiet and order / he returned into
England.

In this passetyme were ye forenamed lords of Scotla^de areygned at London /
and upon the even of the Natyuyte of our Lady put to death, and their heddes
after set upon London bridge. And shortly after was John^ waleys brother unto
wyllya^ waleys (which for like treason was put to death in ye preceding year)
taken and hanged and quarteryd. And some scotts that were taken as prisoners,
remained long in England or they might acquit their fynaunce.

Anno dn^i. xiii.C.vi. Anno dn^i. xiii.C.vii. Simon Bolet. John^ Blount.
Anno.xxxv. Godfrey de la Conduyt.
IN this.xxxv. year ye king for certain causes him mouyng, returned again
into Scotland. Or after some writers he tarried at Berwyke, and held his
Crystmasse and Easter in those parties / and came not into England after he
had sco^fyted ye scotts. In the season of somer as he was retournyng into
England / a sykenes took him so ferue^tly, ye he knew well he should dye.
wherefore he being at Burgthe upon the sand beyond Carleyll / called to him
sir Aymer de Ualance earl of Pe^broke, sir Henry Percy earl of Northu^berlande,
sir Henry Lacy earl of Lyncoln^, and sir Robert Clyfforde baron / and caused
them to besworne before him, yt they should crown his son Edward in as
conuenyent time after his death as they might / and keep the land to his use
till he were crowned.

And that oath by the said barons taken / he called before him his son
Edward, and charged him with diverse points upon the charge of his blessing.
Among the which one special was, yt he should never after that day suffer
Pyers of Gaueston to return into England / and so like a good christian prince
dyed shortly after, upon the day of the translacio^ of saint Thomas of
Caunterbury, or ye vii. day of the month of Iulii / when he had
reigned.xxxiiii. years, vii. months and odd days / and after with great
sole^pnite conveyed unto westmynster, and there buried in ye chapel of saint
Edward upon the southsyde, in a plain tomb of marble at the head of his
father. This noble man had.ii. wyfes / by the which as before is showed in the
xx. and.xxvii. years of his reygne, he had issue as in the said years appears.
Of this noble prince a vercifyer made these.ii. verses following. Du^ viuit
rex, and valuit sua magna potestas,
Fraus latuit, pax magna fuit, regnauit honestas.


which verses may be englysshed in this manner following. while lived this king
/
By his power all thing
was in good plyght.
For gyle was hid,
Great peace was kydde,
And honest had might.
An other vercifyer also of him made these verses following / and caused them
to be hanged over the place of his sepulture. Mors est mesta nimis, magnos quia
iungit in imis.
Maxima mors minimis, co^iunge^s vltima primis.
Nullus in orb fuit homo viuens, ne valet esse,
Qui non morte ruit, est hinc exit necesse.
Nobilis and fortis, tibi tu confidere noli.
Omnia sunt mortis, sibi subdit singula soli.
De mundi medio, magnum mors impia nouit.
Anglia pre tedio satis anxia plangere nouit.
Corruit Edwardus vario veneratus honor,
Rex nuper and nardus fragans virtutis odore,
Cord leopardus, inuictus and absque pauore,
Ad rixam tardus, discretus and eucharis ore,
Viribus armorum quasi gigas, ardua gessit
Colla superborum prudens per prelia pressit,
Inter Flandrenses fortuna sibi been fauit,
Vt quoque Wallenses, and scotos subpeditauit.
Rex bonus absque pare, strenue sua regna regebat,
Quod natura dare potuit bonitatis habebat,
Actio iusticiae, pax regni, sanctio legis,
Et fuga nequicie, premunt preconia regis.
Gloria tota ruit, regem capit haec modo fossa.
Rex quandoque fuit, nunc nil nisi puluis and ossa.
Pilius ipse dei, quem cord colebat et ore,
Gaudia donet ei, nullo permixto dolor.


The which verses, to the intent yt they should be had in mind, and also yt the
reder might have ye more desire to over read the^ / I have therefore set them
out in baladde royal, after my rude making as follows. This sorrowful death
which brings great full low,
And most and leest he joins into one /
This man to whom his pere was not know,
Has now subdued / not sparyng him alone,
which of all other this world to ouergone,
None was to be spared / of so great equytie
As he, if any, for noblesse spared should be.
Therefore thou noble or mighty, trust none other grace,
But thou shall pay to death thy natural debt
And like as he from this world did chase
This mighty prince, and from his friends fette,
For whom all England loud mourned and grette:
So shall thou and other in dethes snare fall
None shall escape, to rekyn kinds all
Edward with many and diverse graces endowed /
And like as Nardus most swetest of odoure,
In smelling passes, and most he is allowed,
Of all sweet odours / so did this knyghtly flower,
By virtuous acts surmount in honor,
All other princes / whose heart was lybarde like,
And without fere, were he hole or syke.
This prince was slow to all manner of strife,
Discrete, and wise, and true of his word,
In armies a geaunt / term of all his life
Excellyng acts doing by dynt of the sword,
Subduyd the proud, of prudence he bare the horde,
Of Flaunders by fate he had great amyte
And Walshe, and Scotts, by strength subdued he
This good king perelesse, his lands fermly gyded.
what nature might give, he failed it nothing /
No part of bounte from his was discided /
He was justice and peace, and of law stablysshynge,
And chaser of iniquyte by his virtuous living,
In whom these graces with innumerable mo,
Fermly were roted, that death has taken us fro.
That whylom was a king, now is but duste and bone.
All glory is fallen, and this pytte keeps the king.
But he that yeldeth all thing by his one,
The son of god, to whom above all thing
with heart and mouth he did due worshyppyng /
That lord of his joy perdurable to last,
Grant him sorowlesse evermore to taste.


PHylyp the.iiii. of that name and son of the third Phylyp, which was
surnamed Philyple Beawe or Phylyp the fair / began his reygne over ye realm
of France, in the year of grace.M.CC.lxxxvi, and the.viii. year of ye first
Edward tha^ king of England. This for war that he had with the duke of
Gelderlande / arreryd great imposycyons thorugh his land, both of the
spyrytualtye and also of the te^poraltye.

About the.iiii. year. of his reygne / the prince of Salerne, that long had been
holden in prison by the king of Aragon, was delivered upon a hard condycyon as
follows, first that he should to the vttermoost of his power labor a concord
and peace between the church of Rome and the Arago^s / and that done to set a
peace between the French king and him. And over that to pay in the end of.xv.
months next ensuynge, an.C.M. Floryns for his ransom. A Floryn is in value
after sterlyng money.ii. s.x. d, and so he should pay after ye value of
englisshe money.xvii.M. and.v.C. li. And y^ after that day he should never bear
armies again the king of Arago^. And if within the term of.iii. years next
ensuyng, he might not conclude the foresaid peace / she should then retourn and
yield him self prisoner as he before was. All which couenauntes fermely to be
holden, he first made solemn oath / and after delivered to the king certain
hostages and so departed.

But this composycyon or agreement was thought so unreasonable unto his friends,
that he was counsayled by them that he should sue unto the pope for a
dyspensacyon of his oath / and y^ had, they would help him to recover his
foresaid hostages. After whose cou^sayl he y^ year following made such labor
unto Honorius ye iiii. of ye name tha^ pope, that he alonely opteyned not
solucio^ of his oath, but also by hi^ he was declared king of Scicill / and of
pope Nycholas ye.iiii successoure of the foresaid Honorius after confermyd.
This prince of Salerne as ye before have herd in ye storye of Phylyp the
third and.iii. and iiii. chapyters of the same, was son unto Charles brother
of saint Lowys and king of Scicill. And the forenamed king of Arago^ that him
upon the abouesayd co^dicio^s thus delivered, was son unto Peter king of
Arago^, which as before in the storye of ye foresaid third Philip, held war
with him and with ye said Charles. This prince of Salerne was also named
Charles after the name of his father / the which after his admyssio^ of ye
pope, was crowned king of Scicil in ye city of Palermo soon after / and
defended the land knyghtly again the Arago^s, with help of the French men
by the term of.v. years after. At which terms end Alpho^s tha^ king of
Arago^ dyed / and Jacques or James, to whom the foresaid Alphons had be take
the rule of Scicill, and held war with the forenamed Charles, was as brother
and next heir unto the crown of Arago^, admitted king of ye regyon. After
which admissio^, he shortly after concluded a peace with ye said Charles / and
redelyuered unto him all such hostages and pledges as his brother Alpho^s had
before time of him received, for keeping of the former co^uencions. And for a
more stablyssheme^t of the same peace / ye said James took to wife one of the
daughters of the said Charles.

About the.vi. year of the reygne of this Philip / certain sowdyours of
France to the nombre. of.xv. hondreth, which were sent by the procurement of
pope Nycholas the fourth unto Acrys, to fortifye that town contrary the truce
between the christian and the Sowdan before concluded for ye term of.ii. years /
brake out of the town and castelles adioynant, and spoiled and robbed such
Sarazyns as to that town were dwelling nere and did unto them all the sorrow
and shame that they might. whereof the Sowdan having knowledge, was therewith
greatly amoued. But yet or he would atte^pte any war again the christian / he
sent unto the captain of the city of Acone, and wylled him to send unto him
such persons as had broken the peace, and done that iniurye to his people.
And if he it refused, he sent them word he should not blynne till he had
dystroyed the^ / as lately before he had done the inhabytauntes of the city of
Tryple. But they set his manace at naught, for so much as they thought
them able to withstand his malice. Upon which answer, the Sowdan made great
prouysyon to besiege the said city.

In which pass time in France was borne of dame Ioha^ne or Jane than queen
of France, Lowys the kings eldest son, that after his father was king of
France.

when the Sowdan had prepared all thing necessary for that iournay / he sped
him with an innumerable multitude of Sarazyns toward ye city of Acon or
Acris. In which iournay he was taken with so grievous sykenesse, that he knew
well he should shortly dye. wherefore he calling before him his admyralles /
charged a certain of them to keep forth their journey toward Acon, while
the remenaunt returned into Egypt / and there to create his son Sowdan.
After which creacyon he charged them that they should cause his said son to
haste him unto ye said siege / and soon after dyed.

Then all things was ordained as he before had devised / and ye city was
besegyd with a strong host of Sarazyns, the which assauted yt cruelly by the
space of.vi. wekes. In which season the christian defended it so manfully, that
the Sarazyns might thereof get none aduau^tage At the end of this.vi. wekes,
came the young Sowdan with a fresshe host / the which made such a dynne and
noise with their tabours and hornys and other mynstrelsy that they at those
days used, that it was hydous and ferefull to here. And after they had rested
them.ii. days, and prepared for the ryggynge of their ordenaunce / they
assauted the city xiiii. days contynually. In which season much people was
slain upon both parties / but the more nombre of the city. For by the
vyolence of their ordenaunce they over threw much housynge within the city /
where with much people were oppressed and slain as well man as woman and
child.

At the end of this.xiiii. days, when the rulers of the city had seen the
harm that they had received by this fyers and cruel assaute / as well in loss
of their sowdyours, as of the great enpeyrynge of their wallys and other
defenses of their city / they feryd sore, for y^ which they of one asse^t
co^dysse^ded and sent soon after by their ships, a great no^bre of old men
and women and children unapt for ye war, with ye relics and treasours of ye
city into Sicill. It was not long after or ye Sarazyns made a new assaute y^
continued.iiii. days / by mean whereof the city was sore defaced. Then the
king of Cyprys, which at y^ day was there as one of the chyef rulers in the
city, feigned him like. wherefore in ye night following desyryng a knight of the
city to keep his watch / he cowardly and shamefully with.iiii.M. me^ took
shipping and sailed thens / leuyng the city in all danger. Upon the morrow
when the certaynte of this was known / the patryarke of Jerusalem with other
there laft to the no^bre of.vii.M. or thereupon, sent unto ye Sowda^ for a
trewce for.ii. months But none they might purchase / and therefore they
defendyd them in ye best manner they might. But shortly after for lak of defense
upon the wallys, the Sarazyns filled the dykes / and so soon after upon
the.xxv. day of May perforce entered in the city, and slew such people therein
as they there found. Than the Sowdan gave the pray of ye city unto his
knights / and after spoylyng of the same, ^
caused the wallys and toures to be rased unto the ground / and the houses,
as well churches, temples, and all other, were clearly bre^t and distroyed And
thus was ye noble city of Acris, which is also called Tholomayda, subverted /
the which was the chyef port or hauyn town for cryste^ me^ to land at, when
any host or power of them should enter into the holy land / and had co^tynued
for the more party in the possession of criste^ me^, by the term of.C.lx.
years and above.

IN the.vii. year of this king Phylyp / the earl of Armenake was accused of
certain points of treason, by sir Raymonde Barnade earl of Foyz. where upon,
a day of battle between these.ii. earls was appointed to be foughten at
Gysours, in the kings presence and of his barony. But after by the great
instau^ce and labor made by sir Robert earl of Artoys, ye battle was fordone.

In the.vii. year of his reygne, he gadered a great talk of his co^mo^s. And
in the year foresaid, at a feast holden at Co^peyne, he made above vi. score
knights.

And in the.x. year / ye glorious confessoure saint Lowys, grandfather unto
this Philip, was the day following saint Bartylmew the apostle, translated into
a rich shryne in the monastery of saint Denis / ye which the year before of
Bonyface the.viii. tha^ pope, for his great miracles was written in the
Cathologe or nombre of saints.

In the.xi. year of his reygne / sir Robert of Artoys entered the town of saint
Omers, and took therein many Burgonions and other as prisoners / and soon after
met with Guy duke of Burgoyne at a town called Furnes where between them
was foughten a strong fight, and many men slain upon either side. But
lastly the victory fill to sir Robert of Artoys / so that he put the duke to
flight and took there prisoners Henry earl of Dabencourt, and sir Guyllyam de
Uyllers, and other. After which vyctorye by him thus opteyned / ye said town
of Furnes was yolden unto him, and a great part of the vale of Cassyle.

In this year also the war between this king Phylyp and Edward the first
than king of England, was put in ure, for so much as the said Edward took
party with the said duke or earl of Flaundres / as it is at length set out
in the xxii.xxiiii.xxvi. years of the said Edward, wherefore here now I
pass it over.

In the.xiii. year of this Phylyp, wha^ the trewce before set between king
Edward and him and the earl of Flau^dres was expired / he sent sir Charles de
Ualoys his brother with great power into Flau^dres, ye which made sharp war
upon the Flemynges, and took from them the towns of Douay and Bethune / and
after yode toward the haue^ town of Dam or Dan \ where he was encou^tred of
Robert son unto ye earl, where atwene them was foughten a cruel fight, to
the great scathe of both parties / for either departed from other without
great auaunte or bost. Tha^ the said Robert with his company drew toward
Gaunt / and the said sir Charles after the departing of the said Robert, laid
his syege unto the foresaid town of Da^me.

In this pass time the archebysshop of Orleaunce was slain by a knight
called sir Gautier / for somoch as the said bishop, as ye fame than went, had
dyfflorysshed a maiden and daughter of ye said sir Gautier. And for him was
chosen to that dygnyte master Barthra^de doctor of diuinyte.

Than to return where we lafte of the foresaid war of Flaundres / the said
sir Charles so sharply assauted the town of Dam, yt in short process after it
was yolde^ unto him. And than he prepared him to lay his syege about the
forenamed town of Gaunt. whereof when Guy earl of Flaunders was ware,
considering he might not shortly be aided of the king of England, which
tha^ warred upon the Scotts, as i^ the.xxvii. year of Edward the first it
does appear / he than made means unto the said sir Charles de Ualoys, that he
woldc be a mean to the king, that he might be accepted unto his grace and
mercy. So that by his means, the said sir Guy with Roberte his son, upon
certain conuencyons in short time after was reconcyled unto the French
king. But while these conuencyo^s were performed / the said earl with his
son Robert were kept in a lyberall prison. And the countye of Flaundres by
the assygment af the king, for the while was committed unto the rule of Jacques
de saint Paul knight. The which entreated ye co^munes of that land sternly,
and oppressed the^ with imposycyons and taskes / in so much yt in ye.xvi. year
of the king, a certain of ye town of Courtray in Flaundres after certain
skyrmysshes and loueday made, the common people in a night slew ye foresaid
sir Jacques, and as many Fre^chme^ as they might find within the town. After
which murder was known in Brugys and in other towns of Flau^dres / anon by
ill cou^sayll they also chased al such Fre^cheme^ as by ye foresaid Jacques
were put in diverse offices within ye said towns / and made them strong to
make defense again ye French king.

whereof wha^ ye French king was ascertayned / he sent thither with a strong
company, the earl of saint Poule, the earl of Boleygne, sir Robert earl of
Artoys, and Robert ye son of the earl of Cleremount, with diverse other noble
me^ of France. The which sped the^ toward Brugys / and in ye playnes atwene
Courtray and Brugys pyght there pauylyons and tents. For they might not come
no nere unto Brugys, for so much as ye Flemynges had broken ye bridge over the
river yt there runs / the which lastly not without great slaughter of me^
of both parties was by ye French me^ reedified and made / so yt the French
host passed ye river, and laid their or denauce nere to ye town of Brugys.
But the Flemynges had so garnysshed their town with defense of sowdyours, that
they fered the French men little or nothing. And of one thing they bare
them the bolder, for so much as they had within the town one of the
sons of Guy their earl, the which before was escaped from ye French kings
pryso^

Thus the Frenchemen lyenge before the town / many frayes and bykerynges were
made atwene the Flemynges and them, to their both pains. Lastly a day of
battle by ye prouocacyon and dyspyteous words of the Frenchmen was appointed
to be holden atwene them, upon the wednysday being than the.vii. day of ye
month of Iulii. At which day the Flemynges being confessed and reconciled
to god, as they should forthwith have deperted out of this world / in sober
wise, grou^dynge them upon a ryghtfull and good quarrel, that day to live and
dye for the defense and right of their country, issued out of ye town in good
order / beryng before them certain relyques of saints, in the which they had
great trust and alliance.

Anon as the nobles of France beheld the countenance of their enemies,
dysdaynynge them as vylaynes and artyfycers / trusting so much in their
stre^gthes, that they thought shortly to over ride them, and bear the^ down
with stre^gthe of their horses / and without order ran with great ire upon
their enemies, thinking to have oppressed them at ye first bro^te. But the
Flemynges with their arbalasters and their long mareys pykes set aslope before
them / wounded so their horses, that they lay tumbelynge one in the others
neck / so that they were the letters of the other which were on foot, that
they might not exercise their feat of arms. And also the shot that was
shot on the French party did asmoche harm to those horse me^ as it did
unto their enemies. So that in short while ye field was all spread with slain
horses and clean armed men. whereof sir Roberte Earl of Artoys being ware and
seeing these noble speres thus slain upon the field / auau^ced him with his
company, and slew and wounded of the Fleminges great nombre, so yt they fled
before him as sheep before the wolf / and put further back that host of
Flemynges, than they by the first metyng had auau^ced the^ self. And yfayde of
Guy de Namour sone unto the earl of Flaunders, had not the sooner been common
unto them / the said earl of Artoys had that day won the renown of the
field. Tha^ the said Guy with a fresshe compapany of Almaynes and other bold
sowdyours coragyously entered the field, and beat down ye Frenchemen egerly.
Than was the meddle new begone, in so fervent wise that men and horse fill down
to the ground wondersly thycke. And ever the earl of Artoys where so ever he
went he slew much people before him. But the Flemynges kept them so hole
together, yt he might never dysseuer them / and slew of the nobles of France
great plentye. which mortalite thus contynuynge, ye stremes of blood ran
wonders to behold. And always the French party weked more and more. Lastly
the earls of saint Poule and of Boleyn, with Robert the son of this earl of
Cleremounte, and other with the nombre of.ii.M. horsemen, seeing the rage and
woodnes of the Flemynges, which so cruelly slew and bet down the French men
/ setting a part all honor and knight hode, shamefully fled out of the feld
/ leuyng the earl of Artoys in ye myddel of his enemies, which like unto the
lion rampaunte continued in one, sleynge and killing the Flemynges without
mercy or pity. But the Flemynges like wood tygres were so enraged upon the
Frenchemen, ye they would never leave them, till they by pure force drove them
into their tents / where they slew of them a a great multitude.

In this battle were slain the foresaid earl of Artoys, Godfray de Braban
nere kynnesman to the said earl and lord of wyrson, Adam the earl of
Dabenmale, John^ the son of ye earl of Henaut, Rauf de Neell constable of
France, Guy his brother marshal of the host, Renolde de Try, Esmer
chamberlayne of Cancaruyle, Jacques ye son of Godfrey de Braban, Pyers Floot,
and Johan Bruillis master of ye arbalasters knights, and many mo me^ of name
to the nombre of.CC. and above / beside esquyers and other men of lower
degrees, as yomen, gromes, pages, to the no^bre of.xii.M. The which after this
vyctorye the Flemynges dyspoyled, and suffered the caryns of them to lie in ye
field, that all wild bestes and fowls might them perysshe and devour.

when this young knight sir Guy had thus opteyned vyctorye of the Frenchmen,
he rejoiced not a little / and soon thereafter laid syege unto the I Will or a
castle so named, and gat it also were it by trecheri or other wise. Then the
towns of Iper, of Gaunt, of Douaye, and diverse other of that country, obeyed
to him / and co^dyscended and agreed to take party either of them with other
again the French king.

Than king Phylyp herynge of the great dysconfyture of his men / made
countenance of mourning, and specially for his true knight the earl of Artoys.

King Phylyp then after for to revenge the foresaid dyspleasure to him done
by ye Flemynges / assembled by our lady day Assumpsion next ensuynge, an
exceeding nombre of men of arms / entendynge to have entered Flaundres, and
utterly to have destroyed a great part of that country / and so drew toward
his enemies, so that he pyght ye te^tes of his vanward within.ii. miles of his
enemies / and there lay to his exceeding charge, co^siderynge the great
multitude of his host by all ye month of Septe^bre. Of ye no^bre of this
host I have doubt to write. For master Gagwyn says, ye no^bre was so great
yt it may not be byleued / and yt shows well by ye expresseme^t of ye no^bre
made by ye French cronycle. For he says they were an hundredth time an.C.M,
and.xl. times.xl.M. By which saying somdele appears, how ye Frenchmen ca^
make men sou^ge. But how it was for all this great and exceeding no^bre of
Fre^chme^ / ye Flemynges lay still unhurt or assawted. And finally up on a
great substancyall cause, as ye after shall here, this great host was dissolved
or returned every man to his own / and king Phylyp with small honor into
France / whereof ye Fre^chme^ says ye occasion or cause was thus.

King Edward of England which unto ye Flemynges bare great affeccion,
co^sideryng ye great danger they were in, and he at ye time might not the^
aid nor socour / of a policy cast in his mind / and with an heavy or morning
cou^tenau^ce, Aryght notable policy
showed unto ye queen and sister unto king Phylyp, ye he was very heavy and
sorrowful for his brother and hers ye king of France. whereof, when and
wherefore she had frayned the cause / he answered and said yt he had certain
knowledge yt at such time as the Flemynges and he should mete in battle that
his lords and company should leave him among his enemies / for he was sold
unto them before hand. whereof when ye queen was thus ascertayned / anon in
all possible have she sent letters and messangers unto the French king,
counfaylynge him to be well ware of that treason and danger. To the which he
gyuynge credence / shortly after sent from him the said great company of
people, and he with a certain as above is said returned i^to France.

After which departing, the flemynges were so bold, y^ forth with they
entered into Pycardy and the country of Artoys, and spoiled and brent diverse
towns of the same. But in the year following as testyfyeth the said french
cronicle / ye Flemynges of Bruges were foughten with of Otthon than duke of
Burgoyn, to whom by reason of marriage the French king had given the erledome
of Artoys / and he of them slew with the aid of the Frenchemen.xv. thousand.

In this.xvii. year about mydsosomer / Phylyp an other son of the earl of
Flaundres, which had by a certain term passed ben in the court of Charles de
Ualoys, and by him put in trust to receive certain sums of money in Scicill
to ye use of pope Bonyface the.viii, sodaynely departed / and with a strong
company of Almaynes came into Flaundres, to aid and assiste his brother. whom
the Flemynges or Brabanders received with great joy / and by the comfort of
him invaded the borders and lands of the French king / and boldly assautyd
the castle of saint Omers. But for they there gat none advantage, but lost
many of their men / they forsook that and yode unto a town belongyng to the
French king called Thorouan Moryne / the which in process they wanne and
spoiled. About this time dyed Bonyface the.viii. of that name than pope,
Boniface the viii. pope
a man of evil name and fame / the which by his treachery caused his
predecessor Celestyne the.v. that was a good and holy man, to resygne and leave
his papacy And by this mean, when this said Celestyne had sytte^ in Peter's
chair a short time / this Bonyface espyeng his innocence, which was all set
to the service of god, as he before had used him i^ ledyng of an ankers life,
thought how he might bring him in mind to resign his high office to him.
And it to bring about he first made him friends secretly / and after hired one
of the cubyclers of ye pope, that he in the deed night should speak in a read,
and say, Celestyne if thou wylt be sauyd and be partyner of bliss renounce
this po^pe of the world, and serve me as thou before did. Or after the latin
storye, if Celestynus will be sauyd / let him clearly the papal dygnyte
resygne. which voice this ghostly man sundry times heryng, thought verily it
had been a deuyne mocyon. wherefore in all that he might, he labored to be
dyscharged / so that at ye end of.v. months he resigned. And shortly after
was the foresaid Bonyface admytted. The which not being contented with his
synystre opteynyng of this high dygnyte, but ye he for fere lest ye said
Celestyne should repent him of his insolent deed, and by strength of some
princes be restored again to his former dygnite / he therefore would not suffer
the said Celestine to return to wilderness there to contynewe his old
accustomed life, but held him in a castle as prisoner / where for sorrow and
evil keeping he dyed shortly after.

For the which this Bonyface was not unpunished. For over the sorrow and
trouble that he during the term of his papacy suffered, which was not a
little / in the end of.viii. years he was taken by strength and put in prison
/ where so miserably and cruelly he was entreated, that or he dyed, what for
madness or for hunger, he ete his own hands / and so in mysery ended his
life within.xxiiii. days of his inprysonement.

Than to return where I laft, and to show you ferther of the war atwene
France and Flaundres / troth it is that the French men with ye aid of the
Henaudours, made sundry and many times assautes upon the Flemynges. In the
which diverse chau^ces of ye war fill / so that if that one had the better at
one time, that other had as much advantage the next time. For reformacyon of
which war / sir Guy with his son^e beforenamed earl of Flaundres, that by
all this season had co^tynued in ye French kings prison, were suffered to go
in to Flaunders / upon condycyon that if they might pacyfye the country to the
kings pleasure, that then they should still enjoy their lyberte and go at
large / or else to return again as prisoners. The which earl with his said
son did what they cowde to reconcyle the said Flemynges. But al their
travail was in vain / so that by y^ day to them appointed, they returned to
their former prison. wherefore the king in the.xviii. year of his reygne,
assembled a mesurable host of people. In the which were accounted for noble
capytaynes under the king, sir Charles de Ualoys brother to the king, Lewys
earl of Euroux that oath brother to ye king, Guy earl of saint Paul, John^
earl of Dampmartyn. which noble men with many other met with the king at a
town called Mount. And when they had a season rested there / by mean of
messangers going atwene king Phylyp and the Flemynges, a day of battle was
atwene them appointed, to be foughten upon the.xvi. day of Auguste in ye
above said.xviii. year. At which day ye Flemynges of Brugys and ye other
towns set forth their ordenaunce, and made them a strong field / and
enbatayled them in such wise, that the Frenchemen made dangerous to set upon
them. Then means of treatye were offered / so that the day passed without
stroke strykynge.

But in the evening / the Flemynges thinking to take advantage upon their
enemies, came so suddenly upon the Frenchmen, that hardly the king might be
armed, or they had slain two men within his tent. wherefore hasty speed was
made, so that the king was gotten to horsbacke / and forthwith by his marcyall
power made way thorough his enemies, and slew them without mercy. And by the
knyghtly example of him / the remenaunt of his lords quytte them so
honorably, that the poor Flemynges were laid in the feld bathing in their
own blood to a great nombre / and lastly constrained to flee shamefully, and
to leave their ordenau^ce behind them. And if night had not fallen on / it is
to deem that many mo of them should have been slain / considering the great
fyersnesse of their enemies, and the excedyng rancour of malice that the
Frenchmen to them bare. But yet the Frenchemen escaped not without loss of
some noble men. For in that battle was slain the earl of Ancerre, and diverse
other knights and men of fame. After which scomfyture and chasynge of the
Flemynges / the king for darkness was set unto his tents with torche light.
where after he had buried the deed bodies slain in that field, and also
garnysshedde some strong castelles with his knights, to the end that the
Flemynges should not break toferre abroad / knowing that with his enemies he
should that year have no mo plain batayles, he returned again into France.

IN ye.xix. year of king Phylyp / by means of Enguerra^ a man in especyall
favor with the king, a peace between France and Flaundres was concluded the
which as ye shall after here dured but short while Not withstanding by the
reason of this peace, Robert de Bethune and wyllyam his brother / which by all
this season with their father sir Guy earl of Flaundres had continued in
pleasant or esy prison, were now delivered. But the father was deed in the
month of February before the co^clusyon of this peace passed / and by license
of the French king carried to Marquet a town in Flaundres, and there buried.

^
In the.xx. year of this king Phillip / a great dyssencyon and strife fylle
between the rich me^ or governors of Paris, and ye comynaltie of the same for
heythyng of ye rent of diverse houses aparteynyg to ye said cominaltie. wherefore
the said commons secretly acco^panyed them in great nombre / and yode unto the
house of Stephan Barbet that was accused to be occasyoner of that deed, and
spoiled it. And after that they yode to a manner of his in the counntre named
Courtile Barbet, and it in lykemaner spoiled / and that done set it in fire,
and brent it. And the orcharde of the same, which was passing commodious and
pleasant / they defaced and utterly dystroyed.

And not yet with this being content / they returned again unto the house of
the said Stephan / and all such wynes as were within his sellers, drank of
them till they were wood drunke^. And what they might not in that wise devour
/ they bette out the heddes and let the wine ro^ne in the street. And all
formys, stolys, and other vtensillis in the house, by them foundyn all to brake
in pieces / and of federbeddes rypped ye tykys, and held them in the wind
that the feathers might be blowyn a way and lost forever / and vnrypped the
house in diverse places, that the rain and other wederyng might enter, as than
fill about ye time soon after Crystmas. And thus contynuyng in their fury and
rage / after the dyspoylynge and defasyng of these foresaid houses, as men not
knowing what they than did / yode straight in great nombre unto the place of
the templers there nere, where at that season king Philyp with a certain of his
barons was than lodged / and there kept the entrees of that place in such
wise, that no man might issue nor enter but at their pleasures / and such
metes as were brought thither to the kings use and his household, they cast it
in the mire and fylth of the street. The king and his lords seeing the rage of
this rude and unreasonable people sent unto them the provost of ye city with
some of his lords / the which gave unto them so pleasant and comfortable
words, that at length he returned them in peasyble manner to their houses.
But upon the morrow following / the king not forgettyng this rage and riot of
the people, commanded many of the said commons to be attached, and to be sent
unto diverse prysons.

And upon Candelmasse even following, for the same riot.xxviii. of the^ were
hanged at.iiii. entrees of ye city of Paris / ye is to say.vii. at Louure,
vii. toward the parties of saint Antoyne.vii. at a place toward the roll and
other.vii. in a place toward nostre Dame or notyr Dame. which execucyon caused
the cominaltye of ye city to live long after in great fere.

In the.xxi. year of the reygne of king Philip, which makes the year of our
lord.xiii.C. and.vii. all be it that other writers affyrmeth it to be in the
year of grace.xiii.C. and.xi. all the templers in France were destroyed, and
their goods and possessions thorugh crystendom given (by auctoryte of a synod
kept by Clement the v. than pope at the city of Narbon in France) unto ye
relygyo^ of knights of saint John^ Baptyst. This order of templers was
destroyed for their detestable heresy, whereof they were co^uyct in.x. artycles
expressed in the french cronycle at length / which here I pass over for
length of the matter, and also for the rehersall thereof is not fruytefull to
all herers or reders

In the.xxiii. year of his reygn / this king Philippe, for asmoche as he by
some of the electours of the Empire was chosen Emperor / he therefore with a
great army sped him toward Rome, and passed thorugh Almayne till he came unto
the duchye of Qua rantayne. Of which duchye the people received him with all
honor. And after he passed the mountains and so came unto Padua / where also
he was ioyously received where he tarienge a season, received from My layne
ambassadors / the which offered to him that city with all couenable service.
And after his people was to him more plenarli assembled be than departed from
Padua and yode unto Mylayne. whom the lords of the city met upon the way,
and conveyed him unto the master paleys of the city, and there lodged him /
and within few days after brought him with great solempnyte unto the
cathedral church, and there crowned him king of Lo^bardy and called him
Augustus.

Tha^ he departed from Mylayn, and spedde him to the city of Cremoyne, and
laid siege to the same. But it was to him shortly yolde. From the^s he passed
to ye cite of Bresse, where he was holde^ out a long while. Thither to his aid
came many soudyours of ye town of Pyze / and made there many sharp assautes.
In which assautes Guide Namoure yt was marshal of the kings host dyed, of
hurtes yt he there took. In pcesse of time shortly following, ye rulers of Bres
offered means of treaty. But ye king was so amoued with ye death of his
marshall, yt he would grant to the^ no co^dycional peace / but to stand at his
grace and mercy. wherefore they finally seeing no better mean, offered unto him
ye keys of the city.

Tha^ king Philip for oath before made, or for some other excellency / caused
anon ye part of the town dyche fore again his pauilio^ to be filled / and and
the wall of ye city, with as many houses as stood between the wall and the
master palace of the city to be throwyn down / yt he with his host might
enter ye straight way, and so to go or ride unto the said palace. And when all
thing was ordered to his deuyse, he entered by ye way the city of Cremo^, and
therein tarried a certain season / and took his counsayll with ye Gebellynys, how
he might the city of Rome win. And wha^ he had fynys shed ye cou^sayl / he
took certain hostages of this city of Cremo^, ye which he set unto Pyze to be
kept / and so sped him toward Rome, and gettyng many cities and other holds
by ye way / lastly he came unto ye city named Bowlon la Grass / whyther came
unto hi a car dynall or legate sent from pope Clement the.v, to treat of ye
state of ye empire.

But how it was the co^tynuau^ce or fine of this iournay turned not to the
honor and pleasure of the Fre^chme^ For after the metyng of the king and this
legate, ye matter is no more touched. For the French king was again in France,
or the legate might bring unto him any answer from the pope. Also it is the
more suspect, for of this matter speaks nothing master Robert Gagwyne, which
leueth nothing out of his book ye may sou^de to the auaunceme^t of the French
nacyon. In the.xxiiii. year of the reygne of king Philip / was brent in diverse
places of France upon.lx. templers for the heresy before rehearsed.

And in the year following, a new rebellyon began in Flaunders. Of the which
Robert earl of Flanders was accused / but he acquyt him self, and after Guy
his son was attached for the same and sent to prison. Fro the which he after
escaped, for fere of proof to have been iustyfyed again him / and returned
unto Gaunt, where he was defended fro his adversaries / so that the Holanders
and Braba^ders held their party against the French king, and also again
their own earl / which so continued without any notary battle, till the.xxvi.
year of the reygne of king Philip. In the which year, upon the even of mary
Magdaleyn at the town of Courtray in Brabande / was by the bishops and other
spyrituall men of France and Flaundres a peace concluded. whereof the
condycyons were, yt the Flemynges should have pardon and forgyuenesse of all
their former rebellyon, as well again the king as their natural duke. And for
this they should pay a certain sum of silver, whereof the sum is not
expressed / and over that they should at their proper costs and expenses, beat
down certain stre^gthes and holds as the French kings depute would to them
assygne / beginning at Gaunt, and so to Bruges, and other places / and more
over they should yield unto Robert their earl ye castle of Courtray, with all
abyleme^tes of war and other necessaries theru^to belongyng. Al which
co^dicions to observe, they should deliver unto ye king of France good
hostages. But all this came to small effect, as after shall appear.

IN the.xxvii. year of this Phylyp / Jacob the master of ye te^plers, with an
other great ruler of ye said order which was named Uisytour of the same, after
long prysonment were brent at Paris.

And in the same year king Phylyp arrered a tax thorugh France, which
before that days was never herd nor spoken of. This was so grievous, that al
Normandy, Picardy and Champeygne, allied them together and utterly denayde the
payment thereof. whereof heryng other countrees, took the same opinion / so that
a great rumor and murmour was raised thorugh out ye realm of France, in
such wise that the king for pacyfyeng of the people was feign to repeal the
said tax.

In the.xxviii. year of the reygne of king Philip, in ye weke of Easter / the
iii. wyfes of the.iii. sons of king Philip, that is to say Margarete the
wife of Lowys his eldest son and king of Nauerne, Iohanne or Ione the wife of
his second son Philip earl of Poytyers, and Blaunche the wife of his third
son Charles and earl of Marches, were accused of spouse brekyng / and sent
from a place of nuns where they lay, and conveyed unto more streyghter keeping
/ ye which.iii. wyfes were al.iii. daughters unto the duke of Burgoyn. Tha^
upon strayte examynacyon made, Margaret and Iohanne were gyltye of that crime
found. wherefore they were sent unto the castle of Gaylard in Normandy, there
to be kept as prisoners term of their lives. And the forenamed Blanch, for so
much as she was founde^ gyltles / was again restored unto her lord Charles
earl of the Marches.

And in short time after, the two paramours of the said Margaret and Iohanne,
that is to say Philip Da^noy, and Gautyer Da^noy or waltier Dannoy knights,
men of fame and goodly personage and brethren / at the kings commandment
were first brent in the vysage with hot ire^s, and after drawn to the gybet
at Po^toyse and there hanged. which mysfortune the king took so grievously,
that he reioysed never after.

About the feast of saint Peter or the beginning of August / the king herynge
of the rebellyon of the Flemynges, by Engwerram his most secret cou^saylour
made an assemble of the cytezyns of Paris / and by the mouth of the saynd
Enguerram desyted a subsydye of the said cytezeyns, to maintain his war
again the Flemynges / the which by Stepha^ Barbet in the name of the hole
city was granted. By precide^ce whereof, all the great cities and good towns
of France were charged in like manner / which caused great unkindness and
grudge of the people toward ye said Enguerram. Than prouysyon was made for a
new journey into Flaunders / so that the king sent his two sons and many
other nobles of his land in the month of Septembre following, into the said
country of Flanders. The which made good speed, and laid first their siege
to the castle of the I Will and wanne it / and after that entered toward other
strong holds. But the flemynges put them of / and gave unto the French host
so sharp assautes, that in process they were constrained to return into
France with small honor. whereof the great defaute was laid upon Enguerram,
and upon one of the sons of the earl of Flaundres / which little tofore by
means of ye said Enguerra^ was made earl of Neuers. In the month of Nouembre
following / king Phylyp being at fou^tayne Beliaunt in the prouynce of
Gastenoys, was taken with such sykenesse and dyed shortly after when he had
reigned.xxviii. years and more / and his body after carried unto saint Dionise,
and there buried leuing after him ye three forenamed sons, Lowys, Philyp, and
Charlys / and a daughter named Isabell, which before time was married unto the
second Edward tha^ king of England.

Anglia.
Edward the second of yt name and son of Edward the first, born at
Carnaruan in a town of walys / began his reygne over England, in the month
of Iulii and.viii. day of the said month, in the year of our lord.xiii.C.
and.vii / and the.xxi. year of the.iiii. Phylip than king of France. The which
was crowned at westmynster the.xiiii. day of Decembre, after the oppinio^ of
diverse writers. But Ranulph monk of Chester in his book of Policronicon says,
yt he was crowned in the foresaid monastery of the bishop of wynchester, the
sunday in quinquagesima, which is the.xiiii. day after the closyng of Alleluya
/ and of the bisshoppe of wynchester, for so much as Robert than archebisshope
of Canterbury was than out of England. This Edward was fair of body and
great of strength but vnsted fast of manners, and vile in co^dicions. For he
would refuse the company of lords and men of honor / and hau^te him with
vylayns and vile persons. He also gave him to great drynkyng / and lightly he
would dyscouer things of great cou^sayl. with these and many other disalowable
conditions he was exercysed / which turned him to great dishonor, and his
lords to great unrest, as by the sequel of this his story shall appear.

Anon as his father was buried, and his exequy scantly fynysshed / he
forgetting the high and chargeable commandment of his said father, sent in
all haste for his old compere Pyers of Gau^stone. The which he received with
all joy and gladness, and auaunced him to much honor. And thus passed the
season of ye old mayre and shyreffes of London / so yt at the feasts of
Myghelmas and Simon and Jude following, ye old mayre and shyreffes, that is to
mean sir Johan Blount, Simon Bolet and Godfrey at the conduyt were dyscharged,
and the new as under follows admytted.

Juno domini.M.CCC.vii. Anno domini.M.CCC.viii. Nycholas Pygotte. Sir John^
Blount. Anno primo. Myghell Drury.
IN this beginning of this mayres year, and first year of ye king / the said
king Edward in the month of Decembre sailed into France / and the.xv. day
of Ianuarii following, at Boleyn in Pycardy married Isabell the daughter of
Philyp le Beaw than king of France / and soon after returned with her into
England, and so unto London / where of the cytezeyns they were ioyously
received, and so conveyed unto west mynster / where as before is showed upon
the sunday in quinquagesima they were both solemply crowned. At which
coronacyon was so exceeding prease, that a knight called sir John^ Bakwell was
thrested to death. Than the king gave shortly after unto Pyers of Gauestone
the erledome of Cornewayl and the lord ship of wallyngford, and was ruled all
by his wanton counsayll / and followed the appetite and pleasure of his body
nothing ordering by sadness nor yet by order of law or justice.

In this year also floured ye holy man called Robert a chanon of the house of
Brydlyngtone / the which of some wrytters is accounted for a prophet, for
verses that he made of things to come after in England, which I pass over
at this time.

Anno domini.M.CCC.viii. Anno domini.M.CCC.ix. wyllyam Basynge. Nycholas
Faryngdone. Anno.ii. John^ Butler.
IN this.ii. year / king Edward calling to mind the dyspleasure done unto him
and to his famulyer Pyers of Gauestone, by the bishop of Chester master
walter Lanton, as before is towched in the xxviii. year of the reygne of
Edward his father / commanded him unto the toure of London, where he was
streyghtely kept many days after.

Than the lords of the land, and specially sir Henre Lacy, sir Guy, and sir
Aymer de Ualance earl of Lyncolne, of warwyke, and of Penbroke / to whom ye
noble prince Edward ye.i. had given so great charge yt Pyers of Gauestone
should no more come into England, saw the rule of the land, and how the
kings treafoure by mean of the said pyers was wasted assembled them in
counsayll / and of one assent with aid of other lords of ye realm spoke so
with the king, that contrary his pleasure he was avoided the land, and
banisshed into Irelande for that year. But the king sent unto him oftentimes
secret messangers, and comforted him with many rich gifts, or made him his
chyef ruler of the country.

Anno domini.M.CCC.ix. Anno domini.M.CCC.x. Iamys of saint Edmunde. Thomas
Romayne. Anno.iii. Roger Palmer.
IN this.iii. year / diverse grudges began to move and spring between the king
and his lords, for the exilynge of Pyers of Gauestone. wherefore to content
amyte between him and them / the said Pyers about ye feast of the natiuite of
our Lady was fette home again, and so continued to the more myschyef of ye
realm.

About this time as testifyeth Cronica Cronicarum and other / the knights of
the order of saint John^ Baptyste called saint John^ of Jerusalem by their
knyghtly manhood put out of the i will of Rodes or Rodhis ye Turkys and infidelis,
that to that day occupied the said i will / and after that wanne upon the said
Turkys daily and yearly / so that at this day they have in their domynyon much
of the lands, The first wynnyng of Rody^.
which at that day and long after / was in the power of the said Turks. This
relygyo^ also was greatly preferryd by the fall of the templers / whose
possessions and lands were to them given, as it is before expressed in the
third chapter, and.xxi. year of Phylyp the fair. This year also after some
writers the crowched freres came first into England.

Anno domini.M.CCC.x. Anno domini.M.CCC.xi. Simon Croppe. Richard Roffham.
Anno.iiii. Petyr Blacnay.
IN this fourth year, the rule and power of Pyers of Gave stone more and more
encreasynge / in so much that he having the guydynge of all the kings
iewellys and treasoure, yode upon a day unto west mynster / and there out of
the kings jewel house, took a table and a pair oftrestyllys of gold / and
conveyed them with other iewellys out of the land, to the great
inpouerysshyng of the same / and over that brought the king by mean of his
wanton condycyons to manyfolde vices, as auoutry and other.

wherefore the foresaid lords seeing the myschyefe that daily increased by
occasyon of this unhappy man / took their counsayll together at Lyncolne / and
there concluded to void him again out of England, so that shortly after he
was exyled into Flaunders to the kings great dyspleasure.

Anno dn^i. M.CC.xi. Anno dn^i. M.CC.xii. Simon Merwode. John^ Gysours. Anno.v.
Richard wylforde.
IN this.v. year upon the day of saint Bryce, Birth of Edward the third.
or the.xiii. day of Nouembre / was borne at wyndesore the first or eldest
son of king Edward, yt after his father was king of England, and named
Edward the third. And this year was again revoked by the king Pyers of
Gaueston out of Flaunders / the which after his again coming, demeaned him
worse than he before did. In so much that he dysdayned the lords of England,
and of them had many dyspytous and sclaunderouse words. wherefore the lords of
one mind assented to put this Pyers to death / and soon after assembled their
powers, and besyeged him in the castle of Scarburgh / and in process wan that
castle, and took him and brought him unto Gauersede beside warwycke / and
there the.xix. day of Iunu smote of his head. whereof when the king had
knowledge, he was grievously dyspleased again the said lords / and made his
auowe ye his death should be revenged. By mean of this the rancoure that before
between the king and his lords was kendeled, now began further to sprede / so
that after this day the king sought occasyo^ again his lords, how he might
put them to greuaunce and dyspleasure. In this while dyed sir Henry Lacy earl
of Lyncolne / the which lyeng upon his death bed, required sir Thomas earl of
Lancaster that had married his daughter, that he would stand with the other
lords in their defense for the weal of England.

The which request the said earl granted / and so fermely kept or observed
it, that at length he with many other lost their lives, as after in the story
shall be showed.

Anno dn^i. xiii.C.xii. Anno dn^i. xiii.C.xiii. John^ Lambyn. John^ Pontenay.
Anno.vi. Adam Lutekyn.
IN this.vi. year / the king held his great court or counceyl of parlyame^t
with the lords spiritual and temporal at London. where by the aduyces of
them many good ordenaunces and statutes were made, to oppress the ryottouse
and other myscheues that at those days were used. Than the king was sworn to
keep those ordenaunces, and after all his lords to their powers.

After the which oath so takyn / Robert archebysshope of Caunterbury, blessed
all them that vphelde the said statutes / and accursed all such as attempted
to break any of the same. It was not long after that word was brought unto
the king, how Robert le Bruze was returned into Scotland, and had caused
the Scotts to rebel of new.

ye have before hard in the.xxxiiii. year of Edward the first, how the said
Edward chased the forenamed Roberte le Bruze out of Scotland into Normandy.
But whenne he had hard of the mysguydynge of the realm of England, and
specially of the dyuysyon between the king and his lords / he anon with a
small aid of the Norgans or Norwayes returned into Scotland.

where he demeaned him in such wise to the lords of Scotla^de, that he in
short process was again made king of that realm / and warred strongely
upon the kings fre^des, and wanne from them castelles and strong holds,
and wrought unto English men much sorrow and tene.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xiii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xiiii. Adam Burden. Nicholas
Faryngdon. Anno.vii. Hugh Gayton.
IN this.vii. year, for to oppress ye malice of ye Scotts, ye king assembled
a great power / and by water entered the realm of Scotland, and destroyed
such vyllages and towns as lay or stood in his way. where of heryng Robert le
Bruze, with the power of Scotland costed toward the English men / and upon
ye day of the natyuyte of saint Johan the Baptyst, met with king Edward and
his host at a place called Battle of Estryuelyn.
of Estryuelyn, nere unto a French river that than was called Bannockysbourne
/ where atwene the English and the Scotts that day was foughten a cruel
battle. But in the end the English men were constrained to forsake the
field.

Tha^ the Scotts chased so egerly the English men ye many of the^ were
drowned in the fore named river / and many a noble man of England that day was
slain in that battle, as sir Gylbert de Clare earl of Gloucestre, sir Robert
Clyfforde, sir Edmunde of Maule the kings steward, with other lords and
barons to the noumbre, as witnesses Guido de Columpna, of.xlii, and of
knights and baronettes to the noumbre of.lxvii / over.xxii. me^ of name which
that day, of the Scotts were taken prisoners. And the king him self from
that battle escaped with great danger / and so with a few of his host yt
with him escaped came unto Berwyke, and there rested him a season. Than the
Scotts enflamed with pride, in derysyon of the English men made this ryme as
follows. Maidens of England sore may ye morn
For your lemmans ye have lost at Bannockysborne.
with heue a low.
what weneth the king of England
So soon to have won Scotland,
with rumbylow.


THis song was after many days song in daunces in ye carolles of the maidens
and mynstrels of Scotla^de, to ye reprofe and dysdayne of English men, with
diverse other which I ouerpasse. And when king Edward had a season tarried in
Berwyke, and set that town in such suerty as he than might / he returned
with small honor into Engl^ade, and came secretly to westmynster upon the day
of saint Magne or the xix. day of August.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xiiii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xv. Stephan of Abyngdone. Johan
Gysours. Anno.viii. Hamonde Chykwell.
IN this.viii. year of king Edward / a vylayn called Johan Tanner yode about
in diverse places of England, Traiferous p^^^um^^yd of a ^^^agn.
and named himself to be the son of Edward the first / and said yt by mean
of a falce noryce he was stolen out of his cradell, and Edward which was a
carters son was laid in ye same cradel for him, and he him self was after
hardly fostred and brought up in the north par^yes of walys. But when this by
layne was laid for to be taken / for fere he fled to the church of the friar
Carmes or the white freres of Oxynforde. where he thinking to be in a suertye
because king Edward ye first was their founder / rehearsed again the former
saying / adding more there unto, that it appeared well that ye king was a
carters son, for his condycyons were according to the same, as by many
famylier examples and customs in him daily were apparent. when he had thus
continued a season not without some rumoure in the land / lastely he was taken
out of that place, and carried as a felon unto Northampton, and there reigned
and iuged for his falsenes, and so drawn and hanged. The which at ye hour of
death confessed, that he had a fend in his house in the symylytude of a catte
/ the which among other promessys to him made, had assured him that he
should be king of England. And Guydo says that he confessed that he had
served the fend.iii. years before, to bring his perverse purpose about. Thus
king Edward beset with many aduersytes / kept a counsayll at London for
reformacion of ye war in Scotland, and other things for the welfare of
England. The^ was sir Peter Spaldynge knight sent unto Berwyke with a crewe
of sowdiours, for to fortyfye that town, for somoche as the king had certain
understanding, that Robert le Bruze intended hastly to lay his syege to that
town.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xv. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xvi. Hamonde Goodchepe. Stephan Abyndon.
Anno.ix. wyllyam Redynge.
Berwyke lost
IN this.ix. year upon mydlente sunday, was the town and castle of Berwyke
yelden or lost, by treason of the fore named Peter Spaldynge as the common
fame went, unto Robert le Bruze king of Scotts. This year also the derth of
corn that had encreasyd yearly more and more, from the.xvi. year of Edward
the first, was this year at London sold for.iiii. s. a busshell. And therewith
also fill such a morayne of bestes, that al vytayle waxed scant and dear, as
after shull be showed.

In this year also.ii. cardynalles yt were sent into England from the.v.
Clement than pope, to set an union and a peace atwene the kings of England
and of Scotts / were met with upon the moore of wygylsdone in york shyre, and
there robbed of such stuff and tresure as they with them brought. For the
which robberye great enquery was made / so ye lastly a knight called sir
Robert Gylbert Myddelton was accused, and sent to prison for that felony, and
after at London drawn and hanged for the same, and his heed set upon London
bridge. But the cardynalles received of the king dowble the value of their
harms.

In this year also fyl so exceeding rain in the months of Iulii and August /
that husbands might not bring in their little store of corn that than stood
upon the ground / so that where before was great scarcyte of whete, now by
this was more / and beues and motons were at excedyng pryces, by reason of the
morayne before spoken of.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xvi. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xvii. wyllyam Caston. Johan wengraue.
Anno.x. Raufe Palmer.
IN this year ye Scotts entered the borders of Northumberlande, and robbed and
brent the country most cruelly / in somoche y^ they brent the howses that
women at that time lay in child bed, and spared another man, woman, nor
child, another relygyous nor other / and did so great harm that ye country by
it was greatly impouerysshed. To this myschefe was joined another mysery. For
as before is said, vytayll by reason of the morayne was so scante and dear, and
whete and other graynes so high prysed / that poor people ete horse flesh
and dogs flesh, and many other vile bestes, which wonder is to believe. And
yet for defaute dyed great multitude of people in sundry places of the land.
And whete was sold this year and ye next following, at London for.iiii. mark
a quarter and above. And after this derthe and scaresytye of vytayle, ensued
mortalytye of me^ by gods hand and punysshment / so that what with war of
the Scotts, and for hungre, and death by mortalite and syckenesse / the people
of ye land was wonderslye wasted and perysshed. But al those monycyons amended
not the king of his inordynate living.

Anno dn^i. M.CC.xvii. Anno dn^i. M.CC.xviii. Johan Pryoure. Johan wentgraue.
Anno.xi. wyllyam Furneux.
IN this.xi. year, ye king assembled a new host and went into
Northu^berla^de, to resyste the malice of the Scotts / which daily made
assawtes upon the bordours, and entered far within the land. wherefore for
great dystresse and need of fyghting men, the king had much people out of ye
southe and east parties of England. Among the which contrary to their
lybertye, the cite of London was constrained to find at their costs and
charge.CC. men, and so sent them to york. when the king at york had
received his people from sundry countrees and good towns of England / he
with a conuenyent noumbre rode toward Berwyke, and so sped his iournayes that
at length he came nere unto Berwyke, and laid his syege about ye fame.

But while the king was besyed in assawtynge of the town / the Scotts brake
over the water of Swale in great noumbre / and leuynge the cooste where the
kings people lay, in secret wise came down into the marchis of york shyre,
and there slew the people and robbed them in most cruel wise. wherefore ye
arche bishop of york constrained of pure necessyte to defend that country,
gathered unto him an unready and dispurueyed host for ye war, as pryours
clerks, chanons, and other spyrituel men of the church, with husband men and
other unapt people / and so with great nombre of men and few warly or
discrete cheuetaynes, yode again ye Scotts / and them encou^tred at a place
called Mitton upon Swale, the.xii. day of the month of Octobre, and gave unto
the^ battle. But for lack of wise and warely prouysyon, the Englyssheme^ were
beset of their enemies upon every side / so that of them was slain a great
multitude, and the remenaunt shamefullye put to flyghte / by reason whereof the
said archebisshop with the abbot of Selby and other were preseruyd. And for so
many spyrytuell me^ were slain in this batayl / therefore it was after named of
many wrytters the white battle. when the king was enfourmed of this
overthrow of the Northyrne men, and for it drew toward winter / he therefore
brake up his siege and retourued unto york and soon after forther into
England. Than was nothing done without ye aduyces and cou^ceylys of sir Hughe
the spe^cers, the father and the son. By whose entyseme^t many things were
done in England, to the great grudge as well of the noble men of the realm as
of the commons of the same / so yt they were had in as great hatred and
indygnacyon, as before times was Pyers of Ga^eston. And many evil reports and
great extorcyo^s were of the^ reported, as lightly men shall do that been out
of the favor of the common people.

Anno domini.M.CCC.xviii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xix. John^ Pontenay. John^ wengraue.
Anno.xii. John^ Dallynge.
IN this.xii. year, the king held his great counceyll at york / where
contrary the mind of ye lords sir Hughe Spencer the son was made high
chaumberlayne of England. By reason whereof he bare him so hawtely and so
proud, that no lord of this land might gaynsaye him in any thing that he
thought good. whereof grew the occasyon of the barons war as after follows.
In this passetyme for asmoche as ye foresaid cardinals might nothing do
concerning the peace between England and Scotland / the king purchased a
curse of the.xxii. Johan then pope, to accurse Robert le Bruze and all such as
with him held or maynteyned / and it to stand so in strenght, till the said
Robert had recompensed king Edward for all such harmys as his land had by
him received / and also till he had reedifyed the monasteryes and churches by
him and his cast down in England, and restored to them such spirytuell
goods as the Scotts had reued and taken from them. But all this auayled
nothing, but put the king and the realm to great cost and charge / so that
ye commons were vexed and trowbled many manner of ways / and their possessions
and moveable goods taken from them, upon surmysed and feyned causes / so that
many were utterly undone, and a few synguler and mysguyded persons auau^ced.
when the more party of the barons of England beheld this mysery of the
people, how they were punyshed by the hand of god, and also by the ygnoraunce
of the king / they in secret manner assembled them together at a town called
Shyrborn^ in (...), and there condisce^ded for a reformacyon of this myschefe,
to remove from the king the said Spe^sers both the father and the son. And
this to bring about sir Thomas earl of Lancastre, sir Humfrey Bohum earl of
Hereforde, sir Johan Moubray baron, sir Roger Clyfforde baron, sir Goselyn
Danyell baron, sir Roger Toket, Roger Benefeelde, sir Roger Mortymer, Sir
whyllya^ Sulla^de, sir wyllyam Elmynbrydge, sir Johan Gyfforde, and sir Johan
Tyers barons and knights, with diverse other swear each of the^ to stand by
other, till they had amended the state of the realm. And soon after by their
aduyce and agreement, sir Johan Moubraye, sir Roger Clyfforde, and sir Goselyn
Danyel, with a strong company entered upon the manours and castelles of the
said Spensers standing in the march of wales, and them spoiled and
destroyed. Of the which riot the Spe^sers complained them to the king. In
punysshent whereof, the king calling to him diverse of his cou^ceyll at
wyndsore / there determined that the said sir Johan Moubraye, sir Roger
Clyfforde, and sir Goselyn Danyell, with other their assystentes, should appear
before the kings counsel shortly after / and there to make answer upon that
riot. And if they refused that to do / that than they should avoid the land
shortly after as banysshed men. But no day of appearance by them was kept.
wherefore proclamacyons were made in diverse placys of the realm, and at London
the.xvi. day of March, that the said sir Johan Moubray, sir Roger Clyfforde
and other, should avoid the land within.x. days following upon pain of
death. whereof herynge ye lords and barons before named, assembled them a
more strenger power / and upon that sent a messynger unto ye king, besechynge
him humbly to remove from his person and counsel the Spensers, ye which
daily did unto him great dishonor, and to the comune weal of the realm great
hynderau^ce. The king herynge this humble request, nothing with it being
content, but ferynge greatly the destruccyon of his own person / assembled
his cou^feyle for reformacyon of this matter. where it was concluded that the
king should call a parlyamente at London, there to be holden in the (...)
following. And that conclusyon so there taken by the said counseyle / the
king sent his letters unto the said barons, commaundynge them to come unto
the said parlyament. The which at the day above said, with a great host of
men of arms came to London / in a suit of iakettes of cotes of demi party of
yelowe and grene, with a ba^de of white cast ouerthwarte.

For this skyll that parlyamente long after of the comune people was called
the parlyament of white bands.

Than for to se the kings pease were substancyally kept within the city of
London / the mayre caused daily a thousand men well harnessed to watch in
diverse wards, and at diverse gates of ye city / ye which began at four of
the clock in the morning, and so continued till.vi. at night. At which
season as many were ordained too take thanne the charge of the night watch,
and so to continue till the hour of.v. in the morning. And for this night
watch should be surely kept / two aldreme^ nyghtly were assygned to ride about
the city with certain officers of the town, to see the watchemen well and
dyscretly guyded. And the gates were shyt at.ix. of the clock, and opened
again at.vii. on the morrow and every cytezyn warned to have his harneys by
him, that he might be ready with short warning when so ever he were called.

Thus in ye city the said watch co^tynuyng / the foresaid parlyamente was
holden at westmynster / where among other things for the weal of the land,
as that counceyll than could think determined / one was that sir Hugh Spenser
the father and sir Hughe the son, should be banysshed out of yt realm of
England for term of life. And soon after that banysshement was put in
execucion / so that they both were brought unto Dover, there to take
shyppynge. where sir Hugh the father made wonderful great moon when he should
take his ship / and cursed his son in presence of such as had the Guydynge
of the^ / sayng that by his means he was banysshed from the flour of all
lands cristened. Than ye king dyssolued the parlyament, and every man
returned to his own. But yt was not long after that word was brought unto
the king, yt sir Hugh Spenser the son houyd upon the cooste of England, and
took prays of all merchants that passed by his course.

But the king let as he had known of no such thing / and suffered that with
many mo evil deeds to go unpunished / the which at length he repented full
soore, and took thereof great remors in conscience, as it appears in the end
of his reygne.

Anno domini.M.CCC.xix. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xx. Simon Abyngdon. Hamonde Chykwell.
Anno.xiii. John^ Preston.
IN this.xiii. year, the king revoked the acts, or withstoode them which
were made at London in the last parliament / and called again into England
the Spensers both the father and son, contrary the will of the barons / and
set them in like auctoryte as they before had be^ to the great dystourbaunce
of all the realm. And soon after under color of a title made by the queen
unto the castle of Ledys in Kent, which than belonged unto sir Barthen de
Bladysmore knight than being on the baronys party / the king besyeged the
said castle / and by help of the cytezyns of London lastly wanne it by
strength, and spoiled the mouables thereof, which was to a great value after
the saying of some writers. In this passetyme that the king had thus called
again the Spensers, and ruled many things after his sensual apetyte and
pleasure, nothing regarding the common weal of the realm / the barons
co^syderyng well that the Spencers should in process bring the land in great
ruin, and the king to great dyshonoure, ente^dyng to refourme the myschyef
that thereof might ensu / gadered unto the^ great power. And while sir Thomas
earl of Lancastre was gatheryng of his people / ye.ii. Mortymers, yt is to say
sir Roger Mortymer of work, and sir Roger of wigmoore with other, yode into
the march of walys, and took by strength certain cytyes and towns
belonging to the Spencers / and pursuyd also some of the kings servants.
wherefore the king herynge of yt rebellyon of his lords, made hasty speed and
with a great host came about by Shroysbury, and was nere unto them or they
were ware / so that for fere the said Mortymers yielded them unto the kings
grace and mercy the which forthwith were conveyed as prisoners unto the tower
of London.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xx. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxi. Reynolde at Conduyt. Hamonde
Chykwell. Anno.xiiii. wyllyam Prodham.
IN this.xiiii. year, wha^ ye king had ordered the country of the marchys
foresaid after his mind, and had to him gathered more strength about saint
Chaddys day or beginning of March, the king with his people came down to
Glowceter / where with him met the Spe^sers with their people. And from
thense he yode unto Lychefeelde / at which season the earls of Lancaster and
of Herforde were at, and the remenaunt of their host at Burto^ upon Trent /
and fortyfyed the bridge yt the king might not win over the said river. Than
the king was brought unto a foorde, and began to set over his knights,
whereof he^^ng the said earls / forsook the said town of, and yode toward
the town or city of. But or they might pass far upon their iournay / they
were encou^tred of sir Aymer de Ualance earl of Penbroke with the Spensers and
other of the kings host, upon the.xii. day of March / and of them ouerset
and constrained to fle, and so yode in process of time to Pou^tfret. In this
mean season, the earl Thomas had sent a knight of his named Robert Hola^d
into Lancasshyre, for to arere his tenauntes. But when the said sir Robert
herd of that skyrmysshe, and how his master was fled / he than drew him to
the king, and presented him with such company as he had tha^ gathered. And
thus ye kings power daily increased, and ye batons dyscreased. Tha^ the
baronys heryng of the going of sir Robert Holande unto the kings pattye, were
with it sumdeale abashed / and took their counsayll in the freers of
Pountfre^. where after many opynyons and reasons among them debated and argued
yt was finally by them concluded, yt they should goo unto the castle of
Du^stanborough / and there to hold the^ till they might purchase the kings
grace. And so spedyng their iournay thy derwarde with such people as they than
had they came in process of time to a town called Burgh bridge. where they
were encountered of sir Andrewe of Harkeley knight, with other that were come
out of ye North with a strong company. The which there nere unto the said
town set upon the barons, and in the end sconfited the^ and chased their
people. In the which fight was slain the earl of Herforde, sir Roger Benefeld,
and sir wyllyam Sulla^de and other and there was taken the earl of Lancastre,
sir Roger Clyfforde, sir Johan Moubraye, sir Roger Tuckettes, sir wyllyam
Fyzwyllyam, with diverse other, and ladde unto porke. And this feelde was
foughten as witnesses Polycronycon the.xv. day of March, in the end of yt
year of our lord a thousand three hundredth and twenty. It was not long after
that sir Hugh Daniell and sir Barthew de Bladysmoore were taken. And sir Thomas
earl of Lancastre was brought again to his own town of Pountfret / where he
was brought in judgment before sir Aymer de Ualaunce earl of Penbroke, sir
Johan Brytayne earl of Rychemounde, sir Edmunde of woodstoke earl of Kent, sir
Hughe Spenser the father* and sir Roberte Malmestorp justice with other / and
before them finally adiuged to have his hedde stryken of. whereof execucyon was
done the twelef day of Aprell, in the beginning of the year of grace after the
reckoning of the church of England.M.CCC.xxi. Of this earl Thomas are diverse
opynyons.

For some writers show of him to be a saint. But Policronico^ in ye.xlii.
chapter of his.vii. book shows otherwise. But what so ever erthlye men in
such things deem, it is far from the secret judgment of god / so that to
him and his sentence such things are to be referred.

From this time forthwarde by ye term of.v. years ensuyng, yt fortune of the
Spensers hugely increased, And as fast the queen's dyscreased, till she was
releued by the king of of France than Charles the.v. of ye name, and brother
unto her, as after shall be showed.

Than to return unto our former matter, upon the foresaid day that earl
Thomas was thus put in execucyon / sir Roger Tutkettes, sir wyllyam Fizwyllya^,
sir waren of Iselde or Isell, sir Henry of Bradborne, and sir willya^ Cheyny
Barons and knights, were drawn and hanged, and their hedes smytren of and
sent unto London. which all were put to death at Pou^tfrete foresaid, with an
esquyre called Johan Page. And at york soon after was drawn and heded sir
Roger Clyfford, sir John^ Moubray and sir Goselyne Danyell Barons. And at
Brystowe sir Henry womyngton, and sir Henry Monforde Banerettes / and at
Glowceter sir John^ Giffard and sir wyllya^ Elmyngbrydge knights / and at
London sir John^ Tiers or Tryers baron / and at wynchels^e sir Thomas Culpepyr
knight / and at wyndesore sir Fraunceys walden ham baron / and at Caunterbury
sir Barthew de Bladismoore, and sir Bartholl de Asbornham baronys. And at
Cardeeffe in walys, was put to like execucyon sir wyllya^ Flemyng knight /
upon whose souls and all christian Jesus have mercy. when the king had thus
subdued his barons / he soon after about the feast of the assencyon of our
Lord, kept his parlyamente at york. During which parlyament sir Hugh
Spenser the father was made earl of wynchester, and sir Andrew of Harkeley earl
of Carleyle, or after some writers Cardoyll / and dysheryted all such as
before had holden with the earls of Lancastre and of Hereforde, except sir
Hugh Dandell and few other / the which sir Hugh was received to grace by
reason that he had married a kynneswoman of the kings.

There was also ordained or soon after, that master Roberte Baldok a man of
evil fame should be chau^celer of England. Than forfaytes and tynes were
gathered into the kings treasoury, without sparyng of pryui leged places or
other / so that what might be found, all was seized for ye king. By reason
whereof much treasoure was brought unto the kings coffers, beside great
things yt were brybed and spoiled by the officers of diverse shyres.

Anno domini.M.CCC.xxi. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxii. Richard Constantyne. Hamonde
Chykwell. Anno.xv. Rychard Hakeney.
IN this.xv. year the king gadered the.vi. penny of temporal men's goods
through England, Irelande, and walys, that to him was granted at the foresaid
parlyame^t, for the defense of the Scotts. which was paid with great murmoure
and grudge, consyderyng the manyfolde myseryes that the common people at those
days were wrapped in. This year also the sone appeared to man's sight as
blood, and so continued by the space of.vi. hours / that is to mean in the
month of Octobre and last day of the said month, from vii. of the clock
in the morning till one of the same day. After some writers about this time ye
Scotts entendyng to win an enterprise in Irelande, and for to win that
country to their obeysaunce / entered it with a strong host under their
capytayne Edward le Bruze brother to the Scottisshe king. But how it was by
aid of English men or of them self / the Irysshe quyt them so well, and
bare the^ so manfully that they vaynquysshed the Scotts, and chased the^ out
of that country. In ye which chase and fight yt said Edward le Bruze / and
many of the noble men of Scotland were slain.

Anno dn^i. xiii.C.xxii. Anno dn^i. xiii.C.xxiii. John^ Grantham. Hamonde
Chykwell. Anno.xvi. Richard of Ely.
IN this.xvi. year, ye king made great prouysyon for to make a voyage into
Scotland / so yt about the beginning of August he entered that country. But the
Scotts consyderyng the great multitude of his host, drew them into the
mountains and other places where as the Englysshemen might not win to the^
and all to the intent for to weary and tire the kings great host. Than di^erse
maladyes fell among the Englysshmen / so that many of the^ dyed and were lost
in that iournay, as well for lack of vytayl as by infyrmyte and sykenesse / so
that the king for theyse causes and other, was constrained to return into
England about ye natyuyte of our Lady. where of the scotts being enfourmed /
sir Iamys Douglas with other capytayns of ye Scotts, with a strong hooste
followed or costed ye king, in such wise that about the feast of saint Luke,
they had almooste taken the king at dinner at an abbey called Bella Launde or
Beyghlande. Thant he king of pure constraynte defended him, and withstoode the
Scotts as he might.

But after short and weke fight the king was compelled to flee, and by that
mean to save him self. In this skyrmysshe was taken sir Johan Brytayne earl
of Rychemo^de and the kings treasoure was there spoiled and borne away / and
the ordenaunce belonging to the host, great part of it was by the Scotts
conveyed into Scotland. Than the Scotts in their retournyng homewarde wan the
castle of Norham, and robbed the town of Northallerton and other. Of this
loss and harms way sir Andrewe of Harkeley put in wit by mysledynge of the
kings host, as in the next year shall be showed.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxiii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxiiii. Adam Salesbury. Simon
Franceys. Anno.xvii. John^ of Oxynforde.
IN this.xvii. year, the king being enfourmed that he and his people were so
put unto dyshonoure (as in the precedyng year is touched) of the Scotts, by ye
untruth and treason of ye fornamed sir Andrew earl of Carleyl or Cardoyll /
sent a knight named sir Antony Lucy, for to arest the said earl, and to bring
him safely unto ye kings presence. The which sir Antony sped him in such
wise, that upon the day of saint Chadde or ye second day of March, the
said earl was taken, and so kept in prison long after till Octobre following
at which season as affermeth Geffrey of Monmouthe, at Cardoyll in walys the
said sir Andrew was arregned, and conuyete that he had taken money of the
Scotts to betray ye king his natural lord. For the which treason he was
there, or after other at westchester or at Shrowysbury drawn and hanged / and
his head sent after to London and set upon the bridge. Decasion ^^ mor^a^^
(...).


In this year the war began to Que kyn in Guyan between the Englissh men and
the French. whereof the occasyon was as says the French book, for a bastyle
or fortress made by the lord of Mount Pesayne or Pesart a lord of Gascoyne,
upon the French kings ground as the Frenchemen said. But the Gascoynes and
Englissh men iustyfyed it to be within the terrytorye of Guyan. For this first
began great words, and after Ma^asses / But lastly mortal war. So yt the
Gascoynes with aid of ye kings steward of England, slew many Frenchemen
that came to ouerturne the said bastyle. when Charles the v. or charles the
fair, which at that day was king of France, herd of the overthrow of the
Frencheme^, and how the Gascoynes fortyfyed the foresaid Bastyle within his
fygnory as he was enfourmed / he sent in all speed with a strong host his
uncle Charles de Ualoys / the which made sharp and cruel war upon the
Gascoynys, and wanne from them the towns of Angeou and Amyas with other /
and in process came unto the town or city of Ryoll, and lay his syege unto
the same. But the English with the Gascoynes issued out of the town, and
gave battle unto the French men, and put them to the worse, and slew upon
fourtene hundredth of them. Among the which a lord called the lord of saint
Florentyne with other noble men of France were slain / and the other
constrained to lie forther from the town. Now be it in conclusion the said
town by apoyntement was yelden to ye French men, upon condycyon that all such
Englysshemen as were within that town, should go freely with their good to
Bordeaux / or if they would remayn there still, the^ to be sworn to ye French
king, and to dwell there as French men. After which town so yelden / sir
Edmunde of woodstoke ye kings brother than being at Bordeaux as the kings
deputye, made such resistens again the said Charles de Ualoys, that a trewce
was taken for ye year. Than about mydlent the king having knowledge of this
war in Guyan, and how the French king intended to sease all Gascoyne and
Guyan, for brekyng of certain couenauntes before time between them made, and
not by king Edward parfourmed / sent over the queen his wife the French
kings sister, to cutreate a concord and peace between the^. And in the
beginning of August following / sir Roger Mortymer of wygmore, by mean of a
slepynge poison or drink, that he gave unto his kepers as the common fame went,
escaped out of the toure of London, and went to the queen into France. And
soon after were taken within ye castle of wallyngforde, sir Johan Goldyngton,
and sir Edmunde of ye Beche / the which sir John^ was sent unto york and there
hanged and drawn for the barons quarrel, and his head sent unto London bridge.
And about the feast of ye natyuytie of our Lady / the king sent over sir
Edward his son into France, for to do homage unto the French king for ye
duchy of Guyan, whom the French king Phylip le Beawe received ioyously, and
caused him to tarry with the queen his mother in the country of Po^tyen longer
than king Edward was pleased.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxiiii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxv. Benet of Fulham. Hamon
Chyckwell. Anno.xviii. John^ Canston.
IN this.xviii. year, king Edward being enfourmed that the French king had
given unto sir Edward his son the duchye of Guyan contrary his mind and
pleasure, and that also the queen his wife, nor the said sir Edward made no
speed into England, not wythstandyng his often sendyng for the^ / was with his
said wife and son grievously dyspleased / in so much that proclamacyons were
made at London in ye month of Decembre, yt if the queen and her son entered
not the land by the octauys of the Epyphany of our Lord next following in
peasyble wise, that they should be taken for enemies to the king and his realm
of England. But for the queen fered the trecherye of the Spe^sers and other yt
were nere unto the king, she abode still in France. wherefore king Edward
after the expyracyon of ye foresaid day, caused to be seized all such lands as
to his said wife and son belonged / and the profyttes of them took to his
own use. when this rumor was known through the more part of England /
diverse men of name of the lands, as sir wyllyam Trussell, sir John^
Cromewell, with diverse other, departed secretly out of England and saylled
unto the queen.

when king Edward was ware of this / he sent unto the French king so sharp
and sore letters, that he monysshed the queen out of his land, and would
another aid his nor her company / but as says John^ Froyzarde yt made a
compendyous work in French of the hole life or story of the third Edward, ^
and therwyth expressed many other stories and chronicles, as of France,
Flaunders, and other regions / at this time when ye queen was thus monisshed to
avoid out of France, sir John^ de Henawde brother to the earl of Henawde a man
of great fame, was then in the French kings court. The which having
co^passyon of the queen and of her yo^ge son, required her to go with him
unto his brothers court foresaid. whereof the queen being feign granted unto
his request, and spedde her thither shortly after / where she with her company
was ioyously and honorably received. In the time and season yt the queen with
her son lay thus in the court or country of the earl of Henawde / by means
of such as were about her, a marriage was concluded between sir Edward her
son, and Philip the said earls daughter, upon certain condy^^o^s, whereof one
was that the said earl should at his propre costs set over into England ye
said sir Edward with a crew of.CCCC. men of armies. For the which, prouysyon was
made with all dylygence. Of this, the fame sprange shortly in England.
wherefore the king in all haste made prouysyon to have ye hauyns and the ports
of his land surely kept, for to resyste the landyng of his enemies. For subdie
whereof / the cytezyns of London were constrained to find at their propre
costs an hundred men of armies / the which contrary their lybertyes, with a
condycyon that after that day it should be no president, they sent unto
Portchestre. In this season and pass time the queen with sir Edward her son
with a small company of Englysshemen, and a crewe of Henawders, of the which
sir John^ of Henawde the earls brother was capytayne / took shyppynge in those
parties / and had ye wind so favorable unto them, that they landed in England
at a port called Orwell beside Harwyche in Suffolk the.xxv. day of Septe^bre,
without any resistens of me^ of war again her made. To whom after her
landyng, the people of the country drew by great companyes / and so sped her
toward London. At this time of the queen's thus la^dyng / the king was at his
city of London. But when he hard of the great people yt drew to her out of
all countres, he fered. wherefore in safegardyng of him self he fled with a
small company toward walys / and left master walter Stapylto^ bishop of
Exceter behynd him, to have the rule of the city of London. It was not long
after the kings departing, that ye queen sent a letter unto the mayre and
comynaltie of the city / and required of them aid to subdue the oppressors
of ye common weal of the realm. But to that letter was made none answer.
Therefore she wrote the second time / aduertysyng them of their landynge, and
of the intent that she had to refourme ye enormytyes and mysgouernau^ce of the
land / in admonestyng them of their aid and socoure, as by the tenure of ye
said letter more plainly appears. whereof the circumstau^ce I have left out of
this book, for so much as I find varyaunce in the contents thereof / and
also for the copyes there of ben set out in the chronicles of England and
diverse other books. Than this said letter was tacked upon the cross in Chepe,
which at that day was called the new cross. In the night before the day of
saint Denis or the.ix. day of October. And other copyes of the same were
fastened in diverse other places of ye city / whereof one was fastened upon the
mayres gate. After which letter thus publysshed in the city / the bishop of
Exceter, to whom as before is said the king had committed the rule of the
city, sent unto the mayre to have the keys of the gates of the city by
virtue of his commission. By the which he stood so fermely, and used so sharp
words in the kings name, that varyaunce grew between him and the cytezyns /
so ferfourth that the commons of the city in their rage took the said bishop
the.xiiii. day of Octobre, and him with.ii. of his household esquyers beheded
irreverently at ye standard in weschep. And the same day was taken for a spy
a cytezyn called John^ Marshal, which favored the Spensers pertye and in ye
same place also beheded without process of law. And then the corpse of ye
said bishop with his.ii. servants, were haryed to Thamys side where the
said bishop had begone to edyfye a toure / and there in the rubbusshe and
sand of the same they buried or conveyed these three bodies. which dispyte to
him was done after some auctoures, for so much as he had usurped of the common
ground of the city in setting of the said toure. But for what cause was he
thus ungoodly and vnreuerentely delte with no mention is made. And in this
pass time the queen easily and a foot space followed ye king / which by this
season was co^m^ to Brystow having with him the Spe^sers and his dyffamed
chau^celler master Robert Baldocke, sir John^ earl of Arundell and other.
where by their counsayls it was agreed, that sir Hugh Spe^ser the father should
remain there and have the rule of the town and castle, while the king with
the other took shyppynge and sailed from thens into walys to raise the
walshemen. And so the king with sir Hugh Spenser the son and the other, took
shyppyng at Brystowe and so sailed into wa^ys. when the certaynte thereof came
unto the queen anon she sent to Brystow the earl of Kent the kings brother,
sir John^ of Henawde with diverse other, for to take sir Hugh Spenser the
father. The which put them in such devour, that they took the said sir
Hugh, and left a certain to hold the town and castle till the queen with
her power came thither* In the which time they sped them into walys / and in
process took ye king, his chaunceller, the earl of Arundell, and sir Hughe
Spenser the son, and brought them all to the town of Hereforde. And in this
while the cytezeyns of London wan the tower of London and kept it unto the
queen's use.

Anno dn^i. xiii.C.xxv. Anno dn^i. xiii.C.xxvi. Gylbert Moordon. Richard
Betayne. Anno.xix. John^ Cotton.
IN this.xix. year and beginning of this mayres charge, upon the morrow
following the feast of Simon and Jude / the same day that the mayre rode to
westmynster to take his charge, the same day at Brystow was sir Hugh Spenser
the father put to death, and after buried at wynchestre. And upon saint
Huys day following, or the.xviii. day of Nouembre, was sir Hugh his son
drawn, hanged, and quartered at Herforde, and his head sent to London and set
among other upon the bridge. The common fame of him went, that after he was
taken, he would take no manner sustenau^ce. wherefore he was the sooner put unto
death. Of this Hugh a versyfyer made these two verses following. Punis cum
lignis a te miser ensis and ignis
Hugo securis equus abstulit omne decus.


which verses to them that under stand no latyne, may in this wise be
expowned or englysshed. with ropes were thou bound, and
on the galowe honge.
And from thy body thine head with
sword was kytte.
Thy bowels in the fire were throw
and burned long,
Thy body in four pecys eke with
an axe was slytte,
with horse before drawyn few men
pytyenge it /
Thus with these turmentys for thy
sins sake,
from ye wretched Hugh, all wordly
welthe was take.


In this mean time and season, the king was conveyed unto the castle of
Kenelworthe, and there kept under the guard of sir Henry of Lancaster or
brother unto the earl Thomas of Lancaster that was behedyd at Pounfrette. And
master Robert Baldoke the kings chauncelloure was sent unto London, and put
into the prison of Newgate / where after he dyed myserably. The earl John^ of
Arundell was also put to death at Herforde, within four days of sir Hugh the
younger Spenser. Then ye queen with sir Edward her son and with a goodly
company of lords and gentylmen returned unto London / and there of the
cytesyns with great honor and joy was received, upon the day of saint
Barbara, or the.iiii. day of December / and so conveyed unto westmynster.
where in the octauys of the Epyphanye of our lord, a parlyament was holden /
during the which certain sole^pne messangers were sent unto the king to the
castle of Kenelworthe / that is to say, three bysshoppes, three earls, two
abbottes, ii. barons, and two justices, with the procuratoure of that
parlyament sir wyllyam Trussell, to depose him of all kyngly dygnytye, as
before was agreed by all the lords spyrytuall and temporal and commons of ye
said parlyament / and they to resygne unto the king, all homages and feautyes
to him before made in the name of all the barony of England. Then the forenamed
sir wyllyam Trussell upon the day of the conuersyon of saint Poule or
the.xxv. day of January, by the authoryte of his office in the presence of the
foresaid lords had these words following unto the king. I wyllyam
Trussell, in ye name of all men of this land of England, and procuratoure of
this parlyament / resygne to the Edward, ye homage that was made to the
sometime / and from this time forth, depryue the of all kyngly power. And I
shall never be attendaunt unto ye as king after this time. And thus was
Edward the second deposyd and his son made king / when he had reigned
full.xviii. years.vi. months and odd days. Than Edward thus remaining in
prison, as first in the castle of Kenelworth, and after in the castle of
Barkle / took great repe^tau^ce of his former life, and made a lamentable
complaynte for that he had so grievously offended god* whereof a part I have
after set out / but not all, lest it should be tedyous to the reders or
herers. Dampnum mihi con tulit tempore brumali,
Fortuna satis aspera vehementis mali.
Nullus est tam sapiens, m^tis, aut formosus,
Tam prudens virtutibus, ceterisque famosus,
Quin stultus reputabitur, and satis despectus,
Si fortuna prosperos a^ertat effectus.


These with many other after the same making I have seen / which are reported
to be of his own making in the time of his enprysonement. The which for
length of time I have left out of this work / and showed ye effect of them in
Englysh as follows. When Saturn with his cold isy face,
The ground with his frostys turnyth the grene to white,
The time of winter which trees does deface,
And causyth all verdure to avoid quyte /
Than fortune, which sharp was with storms not alyte,
Has me assautyd with her froward will,
And me beclypped with dangers right ill.
What man in this world is so wise or fair,
So prudent, so vertuese, or famous under thayre /
But that for a foose, and for a man despised,
Shall Be take when fortune is from him divided?
Alas now I cry but no man does me move /
For I sue to them that pytye of me have none.
Many with great honors I did whylom auau^ce
That now with dyshonoure done me stynge and lance.
And such as sometime did me greatly scere /
Me despise, and let not with sclau^der me to dear
O merciful god, what love they did me show,
And with detraccion they do me hacke and hew.
Alas most sinful wretch why should I thus complain,
If god be please ^ that I should thus sustain?
For the great offense before by me done.
wherefore to the good sorde I will return este soon,
And holy committee me thy great mercy until,
And take in patience all that may be thy will,
And all only the s^rue with all dysygence /
Alas that before this time I had not that cence.
But now good lord, which a^^e ^mnipotent
Behold me most wretched and greatly p^nitent /
And of my trespass forgyuenesse thou me grant /
And by what sorrow my carkes is now daunt,
Grant it may be to my soul remedy,
That the sooner I may attain it by.
For to the sweet Jesus I yield me sore weeping /
And ask of the pardon for my grievous synnynge.
Most blessed Jesus,
Root of all virtue,
Grant I may the sue,
In all humylyte.
Sen thou for our good
List to shede thy blood
And stretche the upon ye roode
For our iniquyte.
And thou most myld mother and virgin most pure
That bareste sweet Jesus the world; redempture,
That shynyst and flouryshest as flower most sine /
And like as nardus of his sweet odoure,
Passyth all other, so thou in all honor
Surmountes all saints by thy great excellence /
Wherefore to pray for my greuouse offense,
I the beseech,
Most wholesome leche
That thou wylt seche
For me such grace.
That when my body vile,
My soul shall cryle,
Thou bring in short while,
It in rest and peace.


Francia.
LEwys the.x^. of ye name, and son unto Philyppe le Beawe, or ye.iiii.
Philyppe / began his reygne over ye realm of France in the year of our
lord.M.iii. hundredth and.xv, and the.viii. year of the second Edward then
king of England. Anon as this Lewys was crowned / Enguer ra^, which as ye
have herd, was chyefe and most secret counccyloure with Phylyppe the.iiii.
last king of France, was called to account by the mean of Charles de
Ualoys uncle unto this king. And for so much as the said Enguerram had given
sharp and hastye words unto the said Charles, in affyrmyng that much of the
kings treasoure remained in the hands of the said Charles / for this he took
so great displeasure again the said Enguerra^, and bare toward him such
ra^coure and malice, that he left not till he had bereuyd him of his life / so
that in process he was accused of.xxxvi. artycles concerning treason and
injury done unto king Philip foresaid, and unto the realm of France / ye
which articles in order are set out in ye french cronicle which I here
overpasse. By force whereof this Enguerram was lastly conuycte and iuged unto
death and for the same in the even of assencion of our Lord hanged upon the
gybet of Paris. This year also fell great scarcyte of corn and fruit in
France, by mean of vnsesonable wederynge / as was in England in the.ix.
and.x. years, and before and after of the reygne of Edward the second at this
day and then king of England. By reason whereof great famyne and death of poor
people fell in France, as it then did in England.

ye have before in the.xxvii. year of Philip father unto this Lewys hard how
the Flemynges again rebelled / and how by the mean of Enguerram, the French
host was then returned with dishonor into France for reuengeme^t whereof,
this Lewys assembled a right strong army of the more party of all the noble
men of France / and in the month of Septe^bre entered the country of
Flanders and so came unto ye town or nere there unto called Courtray, and
lodged his people nere unto the river of Lys or Lyse, for so much as ye
brydges over that river by the Flemynges were broken. where the king with his
host so lye^ge / the Flemynges upon ye other side lay in howge nombre for to
defend the passage of the Frenchmen. In which time and season fell such
plenty of rain, that the ways waxed noyous and foul in all that country. By
reason whereof vytayll which tha^ was as above is said scant, was than more
scars.

And over ye the feelde where the host lay was so wete and myry / that men
and beasts were to grievously noyed. wherefore in conclusyo^ ye king
consyderyng those great hynderaunces and harms to his lords and como^s, and
that he might in no manner win over to his enemies / he returned as other
before times had done, with little honor into France / to ye great loss of
ye kings ordenau^ce and other stuff that might not be carried the^s by reason
of depenes of the way. For which cause and causes, the king was so soore
displeased / yt he made then a great oath, that if he might live till the year
following, yt he should be set so the Flemynges yt they should not escape his
danger / and yt he should never take treatye nor end with the^, except they
would fully and holy put the^ in his grace and mercy. But in the year following
about ye feast of Pentecoste when the said Lewys had scantly reigned ii. years,
he dyed at Boys in Uyncent and the.vi. day of Iunii honorablye was buried at
saint Denyse, leuyng after him none issue male / wherefore his brother Phylype
succeeded him in the kingdom.

Francia.
PHylyp the.v. of that name and brother of the forenamed Lewys, which for his
heygth was surnamed Phylyp the long / began his reygne over ye Fre^chme^ in ye
year of our lord.M.CCC. and.xvii, and the.x. year of Edward the second than
king of England. But first he reigned but as regent of France, for so much
as Clemence the wife of king Lewys was left of her said husband with child.
The which in process of time was delivered of a man child named Johan, that
dyed shortly after. After whose death ye said Phylyp was forthwith proclaimed
king of France, and crowned at Paris about Chrystmas following / al be it yt
the duke of Burgoyn with other for a while with said that coronacyon / and
would have preferred the daughter of Lewys last deed. But other of the lords
and nobles of France would not be agreeable, yt a woman should enheryte so
great a kingdom. By mean whereof unkindness kyndled atwene the king and the
said duke. But by wise medyatoures they were after acorded, in such wise that
the said duke married the eldest daughter of ye king.

In this pass time such means were made by the Flemynges, that an unity and
accord was stablysshed atwene France and them for ye time that it held.
which peace as testyfyeth the French cronycle, was labored and ended by a
cardynall named Iosselyn, and sent from ye.xxii. Johan than pope / so that by
medyacyon of the said cardynall, the earl of Flau^dres was received unto ye
kings grace / and at Paris did unto ye French king his homage, and swear
unto him feawtye.

In the third year of the reygne of this Phylyp / the provost of Paris having
in his prison a Pycarde a man of great richesse, which for felony or like
crime was judged to be hanged. The said prouoste for great benefyte to him
done, and payment of great sums by ye said Pycarde, took an other poor
innocent man and put him to death instead of the said Pycarde. Of the which
offense wha^ due proof of it was made before the kings counceyll / the said
prouoste for the same deed was put unto like judgment.

In the fyfth year of the said Phylyp, all the lazaryes of the country of
Langadocke were burnt, for so much as they were accused of their own
confession proved, that they had poisoned and intended to have poisoned all the
wells of that country. And for many Jews were unto them consenting /
therefore many of them suffered like judgment. In this year also for somoche as
in those days in diverse places of France, a fond prophecy was brought up
among the comune people, that shepherdes and herdes should win the holy
land. Than they assembled the^ self in diverse places and companyes, and
lastly came together at Paris. where they were so many in nombre, by reason of
other of the comune people that fell unto them, that the Provost of Paris was
not of power to withstand the^ / so that they brake prysones and took out
such persons as them pleased / and from thens went beggynge and robbynge
till they came into Langedocke. where they fell upon the Jews, and robbed them
of all such mouables as they might find, and slew of them also. wherefore
the other of the Jews ferynge the said comunes / gathered them with their
wives and children to the nou^bre of.v.C. into a tower, and thought to defend
them and their wives and children from the said herdes. But anon as they had
wyttynge thereof / they assawted the said tower so egerly, that in the end
seeing they might not escape, for very despyte they threw their children down
at their hedes / and after slew either other, for they should not fall in the
hands of their enemies / or else to avoid ye peynes of the fire, which the
herdes had begun to fasten upon the said tower. wha^ the said Herdes had
thus robbed and slain ye Jews of Langdocke / they departed thens and yode
toward a a country called Carcasson, entendynge like robbery as they before
had used. whereof ye country being warned / stopped and kept so the passages,
and withstode them with such power and strength, that they dysseuered the^
self by small companyes / so that many of them were taken and hanged, and the
other fled in save gardynge them self / and so this folysshe prophecy was
ended with sin and shame.

King Phylyppe by mean of ill counsel set a great task upon his comunes
/ that is to mean the fyfth part of their mouable goods. For the which,
considering he had no charg of wars i^ no place, they murmured and grudged
wonder sore. But how it was or this tax was leuyed / he fell in a fever
quarteyne and a great flyx. which sickness fell upon him by prayer of the
comunes after the French book, for leuyenge of ye said grievous tax. Than for
him was made many solemn processyons and other prayers. How be it in long
process he dyed, when he had languysshedde from the beginning of August till
the.viii. day of January. Upon which day he dyed, when he had reigned.iiii.
years and.vii. months and odd days / leuynge after him none heir male /
wherefore the crown dysce^ded unto his brother Charles earl of the Marches.

Francia. Charles the fyfth.
CArolus the fyfth or Charles the youngest of the three brethren or sons of
Philyppe le Bewe began his reygne over ye Frenchmen, in ye month of January
and year of our lord.M.CCC. and.xxii, and the.xv. year of ye second Edward
yet king of England / and was crowned at Raynes the.xii. day of February
next ensuynge. After which solempnyte fynysshed and ended / he in short
process of time after sent unto the.xxii. Johan than pope, and assertayned him
of ye gossyprede yt was atwene him and Blanch his wife. whereof the examynacyon
by ye said pope was committed unto the bisshoppes of Paris and of Beauuais, and
master Godfrey de Blessys prothonotayr of the country of Rome. The which
after due and perfyte examinacyon in that matter made / they found that Mawde
countess of Artoys and mother to the fore named queen Blanch, was godmother
unto king Charles her husband. Of the which when they had made report unto
the pope / he gave sentence that the said matrymony was not legyttymat / and
commanded a deuorce and a separacyon to be made atwene those.ii. persons. The
which was shortly after executed. In the second year of this Charles, dyed
Robert earl of Flau^dres without issue. wherefore the said erledam fell into ye
French kings hands / so that of it he was in process by thagrement of the
lords of the same, put in peasyble possessyon / all be it the earl of Neuers
made thereunto a pretense and title.

And in this year king Charles about the feast of saint Mathewe in Septe^bre,
married his second wife named Mary the sister of the king of Bohemy or Beme,
and daughter of Henry earl of Lucenbourgh and late emperor of Almayne, named
in the line of the emperors Henry the.viii, or after some writers ye.vii. Also
in y^ said year one named Iourdan of the I Will / a Gascoyne borne, and a man of
noble lynage but low and vile of condycyons, to whom the foresaid pope John^
in marriage had given his nyese for reverence of his birth / this season by
the mean of his vile condycyons and such dyshoneste company as he drew
until him, he fell into many sclau^derous vices / so that lastly he was
accused of rape and murder and of felony. Of the which he was at length
in.xviii. artycles by due proof made co^uycte by the law, and judged to be
hanged. But the king at the request of the pope and for the honor of his
blood / granted to him a charter, and pardoned him of all former
transgressyons. But that not wythstandynge he in process of time fell or
returned unto his old accustomyd condicyons. And among other great crimes by
him executed / he slew a sergeaunt of armies belonging to the king, that to
him was sent in message. For which murder and other detestable dedys, he was
newely accused / and upon that somonyd to apere at Paris before the king and
his counsel. At which day of appearance he came to the said city with a
great company, and some noble men which were to him nere of kynne / and
excused him to the uttermost of their powers. But again him and to accuse him
came many other lords and barons. Of the which the marquis of Ampton or
Dampton with his son were chyefe, that put causes of complaynt again him.
The which made such prouys and declaracyo^s again the said Iourdan, that he
was committed unto the chastelet of Paris, and there to remain as a prisoner.
And in process of time such matters and trespaces were prouyd upon him, that
he by authoryte of a parlyament holden at Compeyng was lastly judged to dye.
And soon after, that is to mean the.vii. day of May, he was drawyn to the
gybbet of Paris and there hanged. In the third year of his reygne / this
Charlys gave unto the earl of Neuers yt before time had made claim to the
erledome of Flaunders, y^ said erledom / the which of the Flemynges and
inhabytauntes of that country was well and ioyously received. Than he in short
while after gave unto the towns of Gaunt, Brugys, Ipre, and other, diverse
pryuyleges and grauntes to their great advantage and profit. But it was not
long after that he wanne of them as much grudge and hatred as he to fore had
love and good will. And all for a tax yt he set upon the dwellers of Brugys
and the country nere there unto / and specially of them that dwelled in the
country. For they thought yt their charge exceded far the charge of ye
dwellers within the town. wherefore by secret meanys they appointed a day of
assemble among them self / and suddenly well armed entered the town of
Brugys, and slew therein diverse of the earls servants, and some of the
borough masters of the said town, such as they suspected to be of counseyle
of the leuyenge of the said task. In the.iiii. year of his reygne, this
Charlys after the death of Mary his second wife, by dyspensacion of the pope
the.xxii. John^ / he married Jane his cosyn Germayn the daughter of Lewys earl
of Euroux, and uncle unto this king Charlys, or brother to his father Phylyppe
le Beawe.

IN this abouesayd.iiii. year / the queen of England and sister unto this king
Charlys of France, to treat an unite and peace between her lord and her
brother, for the war made in Gascoyne, as before is towched in the.xv. year
of Edward the second her lord and husband / and there tarried, and returned,
as above in the said year is expressed.

In this year also the earl of Flanders fore named, for suspeccyon that he
had to Robert of Flanders his uncle, lest he for his synguler auau^tage
would supplant him of that earl dome / he made letters unto the governors of
the town, where ye said Robert was resyaunt and abydyng, that they should put
him to death. But by the warnyng of his old and trusty friend the erlys
chau^cellour / he was warned and so avoided that town. For this, great malice
and rancoure arose between this Robert and the earl, which was not shortly
pacyfyed. But it was not long after that a another task or imposycyon was
leuyed of the towns of Gaunt, Brugys, Ipre, and other townys of Flaunders. The
which task was leuyed in recompenseme^t of such wars made upon Flaunders
by Phylyp le Beawe / or more dyrectely for payment of twelve thousand pownde
awardyd by Ioselyn the cardynall, as before is showed in the second year of
the.v. Phylyppe, that the Flemynges should pay to the French king for byenge
of their peace. Of this task to be leuyers or gaderers was assygned the
pryncypall men of the said towns / yt which by their demeanure in the
leuyenge thereof demeaned them in such wise, that they ran in great hatred of
the common people. In so myche that they accusyd them and said that they had
leuyed or gathered much more than the said task amounted. wherefore they
desired of the erlys counsel, that the said persons might be called to
accou^pt. But this request might not be opteyned / which caused the commons to
run in further grudge and murmr. An other thing also caused suspeccyon /
for the erlys counsel and the said collectours had so many secret
assembles. At length when the erlys counsel apperceyued the murmr of the
commons / they with the collectours condyscendyd for a train, to have taken
certain capytaynes of the said como^s / and said that at Turnaye at a day
assygned, the said collectours should yield up their accoumpte. At which day
the earl in proper person came unto the said town of Tournaye. And there
when ye earl with the other of his counceyle should have executed their
purposed enter / how it was by some warnyng or monycyon that the commons had,
they wythstode the earl and his company, and in the end slew many of their
enemies / and took the earl and put him in sure keeping within the town of
Brugys. But in this skyrmysshe by mean of ye erlys party, a great part of the
foresaid town was brent. wherefore the town took party with the Flemynges /
and were a great cause that the earl was so taken and put from his intent.
Than the foresaid commons to the more dyspleasure of the earl / admytted for
their lord and capytayne Roberte the uncle of the earl foresaid / and among
them reputed him for earl of Flaunders. The which for taking upon him
delivered from prison his friend the erlys chancellor, which as above is
said had delivered him from former danger, and made him chyefe of his
counceyle. But to all this was the town of Gaunt repugnau^t / in so much that
mortal war began to sourde between the said town and the town of Bruges
and other. And so farfourth co^tynued / that shortly after the people of Gaunt
and of the other towns, met with them of Bruges in plain battle, and fought
cruelly. But in the end they of Gau^t chased the^ of Bruges / and slew of
them beyond five hundredth men. But yet the earl was never the rather
delivered. After this the French king sent unto them of Bruges, requyryng them
in curtoyse manner that they would set their earl at lybertye. But they sent the
messangers again without speed of their message.

In this while dyed Charles de Ualoys brother unto Phylyppe le Beaw, and uncle
unto this king Charles / the which languysshed long in a consumpcyo^ or he
dyed / in so much that the opinion of the people was, yt he was so punysshed
for the injury and malice yt he bare toward Enguerram / the which as ye have
before hard in the first year of this king, was put unto death. And the rather
this fame ran upon the said Charles / for so much as in ye time of his
syckenes, he gave great alms. And to such persons as he gave or sent his
alms unto / he wylled them as well to pray for the soul of the said
Enguerram as for his own hele. This Charles de Ualoyes left after him a son
named Philipe de Ualoyes / the which Phylip for so much as this Charles now
king of france dyed without issue, he by favor of the lords of that regyon
was made king of France / and put by the right and title of Edward the third
tha^ king of England, the son of Isabel and daughter of Phylyp le Beawe.
which Isabell by dyssent was rightful enheritour of ye crown of France For
which title was after cruel war between the said Edward and Phylyp, as in
the story of the said Edward after shall appear. In the v. year of king
Charles the Burghmaysters and skepyns, yt is to mean the rulers of the town
of Bruges / delivered their earl and set him at larg upon certain conditions
following the which to be observed they caused him to be sole^ply sworn. First
that after that day he should not punysshe nor hurt any of the land of
Flaundres, for any displeasure to him done or any of his servants or council,
sen the time that he was earl, concerning any cause of their rebellion.
Secu^daryly yt he should not abrydge nor mynysshe any of their lyberties that
they of old time have had, or by him newly to them granted. Thyrdely, that
in all gross matters that concerned the governance of his realm / such as he
knew well diverse of them to be expert therein, that he should nothing
conclude or do without their aduyces and assentys. And fourthly that after that
day he should never use the counsayl of the abbot of Uersellay / which they knew
for their dedely enemy, for so much as they before time had slain his father
named Petyr Floce or Floze in the battle of Courtray as in the syxtene year of
Phylyppe le Beawe is before showed, how be it the name of the said Petyr is
not there expressed. After which artycles with other fermely by the earl
promised to be kept and holden / he was delivered and set at large.

In the syxte year of the reygne of this Charles / a great dyssencyon and
varyaunce aroose between the Dolphyne of Uyen and the duke of Sauoy / so that
mortal battle ensued upon the same. In the which much people were slain
upon both parties. But in y^ end the Dolphyn of Uyen had the better / and took
as prisoners in the feelde the duke of Burgoyne and the earl of Ancerne, with
other noble men. In this year also the Gascoynes with ye Englissh men made
war upon the borders of France. Again whom king Charles sent a cosyn of
his, named sir Alphons de Spain. But he spent the king great good, and
returned with little worship into France, where he dyed shortly after. Then
the king sent again the said Gascoynes the earl of Ewe, and sir Robert
Barthram than marshall of France, with diverse other noble men. In which
season the Gascoynes with the said Englysshemen had gotten the castle of a
town standing in y^ country of Poytyew or Poytyers named saint Oyngne /
within which town the said earl and other the nobles of France were lodged /
so yt between them daily cruel assautes were exercysed, to the great hurt of
both parties. Lastly between the^ was a day of battle in plain feelde
accorded / where the Frenchemen to the intent to have the aduau^tage of the
said feeld and there to enbatayll the^ self to their most auau^tage / the
day of the said appoyteme^t issued of yt town, and yode to the place assygned,
which was a good dystaunce from the foresaid town, and there tarried their
enemies. But the Gascoynes entendyng an other purpose, yode straight unto yt
foresaid town / and knowing it to be without great defense, assauted and
shortly gatte it and set it on fire not sparynge chyrches nor other places of
relygyon as affermeth y^ french book / and that done returned unto the
fyresayd castle, and in process of time after returned again into Guyan.
when king Charles was assertayned of this delusion / he was grievously
dyscontented again the Gascoynes, and manysshed them very sore. But in the
month of Dece^bre shortly ensuynge, he was taken with a greuouse sykenesse /
so that he dyed upon Candelmas even following at Boys in Uyncent, and was
entered at saint Denyse wha^ he had reigned five years and odd days / leuynge
after him none heir of his body, except the queen was than with child.
which child dyed soon after ye birth. wherefore some questions for that
kyngedome were moved as before touched in the end of the fourth year of this
Charles, and after shall be forther expressed.

Anglia. Edward the third.
Edward the.iii. of that name, and sonn^ of Edward the second, and of Isabell
ye alonely daughter and child of Phylip le Beawe or Phylyppe the fair, father
to Charles last king of France / began to reygne as king of England his
father yet living, the syx and twenty day of January, in the end of the year
of grace a thousand three hundredth and syx and twenty, and the fourth year of
Charles the fyfth last king of France / and was crowned at westmynster upon
the day of the puryfycacyon of our Lady next ensuynge.

In his beginning came forth plentye and gracyous happes / for the earth
took plentye, the air tempoure, the sea quietness, and to the church grew
peace.

In this first year he confermed the lybertyes and fraunchyses of ye city of
London / and ordained that the mayre for the time being should sytte in all
places of judgment within the lyberty of the same for chief justice, the
kings person only except / and that every alderman that had been mayre
should be justice of peace in all London and Myddelsex / and eueryche alderman
that had not be mayre should be justice of peace within his own ward. And
also he granted to the cytezyns the fee ferme of London for.iii. hundredth
pownde / and that they should not be constrained to go out of the city to
fight or defend the land for any need. Also that after that day the
fraunchyse of the city should not be seasyd into the kings hands / but only
for treason or rebellyon done by the hole city. And Southwerke was admytted to
be under the correccyon and rule of the city / and the mayre of London to be
baylyffe of Southwerke / and the mayre to chose and ordeyne such a baylyffe of
that borough as him lyked / which ordinance endures to this day. In the
month of Apryll, for so much as means were made by the friar prechours or the
black freres, for the delyuery of king Edward the.ii. out of prison /
therefore he was had out of the castle of Kenelworth, and conveyed unto ye
castle of Berkeley. where after about saint Mathewys tide the said Edward by
y^ means of sir Roger Mortimer was myserably slain. Of this Edward are like
opinyo^s as were of Thomas of Lancaster, which I refer to goddys judgment.
For certain it is that for his former wyld and insolent living he took great
repentance. And so he had great cause / for during his reygne there was
hedyd and put to death by judgment, upon xxviii. barons and knights, over yt
noble men that were slain in Scotland by his infortunyte.

King Edward as yet being of tender age, not passing.xv. years / heryng of
the great pride and presu^pcyon of the Scotts, and how they daily warred upon
the borders, and entryd the land in brennynge and spoylyng his people /
assembled his people about Easter, and so sped him toward Scotland. In which
mean time the Scotts were entered the land, and were comen as far as Sta^hop
in Uiridale / and had lodged the^ in the woddes of Stanhop park in diverse
bushementys. whereof y^ king being enfourmed, made such prouysyon that he beset
them round about, and trusted well to have brought the^ under his subieccyon.
But when the king thought to be of them most sure / by treason of some of
his host the Scotts were clean escaped and returned into Scotland. whereof
ye fame ran upon sir Roger Mortymer. But how so it was y^ king lost that
iournay, and returned into England with little worship. And here ye shall
understand that to this day the old mayre and shyry^^es, yt is to mean
Hamunde Chyckwell, Benet Fulham, and John^ Canston, stood in office till ye day
following of Symo^ and Jude, which was almost y^ full of ye first year of ye
said Edward the.iii. And then for the residue of the first year, and for the
more party of the second year, was elect and charged the mayre and shyryffes
following.

Anno domini.M.CCC.xxvi. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxvii. Henry Darcy. Richard Betayne.
Anno.i. John^ Hawteyne.
IN the end of the first year of this king Edward, and beginning o^ this
mayres year / the king after Crystmas married dame Phylyppe ye earls daughter
of Henawde in the city of york, in the even of ye conversion of saint Paul,
or ye.xxiiii. day of January.

The parlyame^t of Northamton.
And soon after the king about ye feast of Pentecoste, held his parlyament at
Northampton. At the which parlyament by evil cou^sayl, whereof sir Roger
Mortymer and the old queen bare the blame / the king made with the Scotts an
unprofitable and a dyshonorable peace. For first he released to them their
feauty and homage. Also he delivered unto them old ancient wrytynges sealed
with the seals of the king of Scotts, and of diverse lords of that land
both spyrytuall and temporal, with many other charters and patentes, by the
which ye kings of Scotts oblyged them to be feordaryes unto yt crown of
England. At which season also was delivered certain iewelles, which before
times had been wo^ne from ye Scotts by kings of England. Among the which the
black cross of Scotland is specially named, a relyke accounted of great
preciosyte. And not alonely the king by his synystre cou^sayll lost his title
and right that he had to the realm of Scotland, as far as the said cou^sayl
might help it / but also all lords and barons and all other men of England
that had any lands or rentes within Scotland, lost their right in like
manner, except they would dwell upon the said lands and becomme the king of
Scotts lyege men. And soon after was concluded a marriage between Dauyd le
Bruze son of Robert le Bruze, and Jane the kings sister / which of diverse
writers is surnamed Jane of the tower or Johan of Towers.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxvii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxviii. Simon Fraunces. Hamonde
Chyckewell. Anno.ii. Henry Combmartyn.
IN this year, which at this day was the second year of the king / Dauyd
foresaid the son of Roberte le Bruze tha^ king of Scotts, married upon the
day of mary Magdaleyne at his town than of Berwyke, ye fore named Jane sister
unto the king of England. But it was not long after or the Scotts in
despyte of the Englysshemen, called her Jane make peace. And also to their more
derysyon, they made diverse truffes, roundes, and songs, of the which one is
specially remembered as follows. Long beerdys hartles
Painted hoodes wytles
Gay cotes graceles
Makes England thryfteles.


which ryme as says Guydo was made by the Scotts, pryncypally for the
deformyte of clothyng that at those days was used by Englysshemen. Thanne the
king at his parlyame^t holden at Salysbury, made sir Roger Mortymer earl of
the March / and sir Johan of Eltha^ his own brother he made earl of
Cornewayll. where after the said sir Roger took much more upon him than other
lords were contented with / so that by the kings mother and him, all thing
was ruled and guyded. And such lords as before time were assygned to have the
rule and guydynge of the king, as the earl of kent, sir Edmunde of wodestock
ye kings uncle, ye earl of Lancaster, ye earl marshal with diverse bysshoppes
and barons and knights to the noumbre of.xii. in short process of time for the
more party were set by / so that the allonely rule of the land rested in the
queen and the said sir Roger. By mean whereof many and great things of the
realm grew out of order, which were tedyous to reherce.

Anno domini.M.CCC.xxviii. Anno domini.M.CCC.xxix. Richard Lazar. Johan
Grauntham. Anno.iii. Henry Gysours.
IN this third mayres year / y^ above said sir Edmunde of wodestoke earl of
kente entendynge the reformacion of the mysse order of the realm, being
enfourmed that his brother sir Edward was in life / devised certain letters
towchynge the delyuery of his said brother, and sent them to his said brother,
of which deed he was shortly after accused / and by auctoryte of a parlyame^t
holden at westmynster about Penthecost following, he for that deed was judged
to have his head smyten of. whereof execucyon was done the five and twenty day
of May following in the foresaid city of wynchester. And soon after king
Edward sailed into France, and did homage unto Phylyp de Ualoyes then newly
made king of France, for the duchy of Guyan in the town of Amyas. After
which homage so done he was rychely feasted of the French king, and solaced
in diverse manner of fourmes / as by iustes, hunting, hawkynge, and many other
pleasures / and then in loving manner took his leave of the king, and so
returned into England. The fyfthtenth day of June following, was borne the
kings first son, and at wodestoke crystened and named Edward / which in
process of time did grow to a noble and famous man, and is most comunely
called in all chronicles prince Edward. Of whom in this story some excellent
deeds shall be expressed.

In the month of Octobre upon the.xvii. day and even of saint Luke / sir
Roger Mortymer before named, by means of sir wyllia^ Mou^tague, sir Rafe
Staforde, sir John^ Neuyle and other, by a co^pased mean was taken in ye
castle of Notyngha^ / not withsta^dynge yt the keys of ye said castle were
daili and nyghtly under his ward and keeping / the king, the queen, the old
queen, with diverse other nobles, tha^ being in the same castle lodged. The
manner of the taking of this earl sir Roger Mortymer I pass over, for the
dyuersyte that I have seen thereof of sundry writers. But many agreen that he
with sir Symonde of Bedforde and other, were in that night taken and after
sent unto the tower of London / and there put in strayte keeping. Then the
king in short process after called a parlyament at London, for the
reformacyon of many things mysordered in the realm, by mean of ye foresaid
sir Roger, as the comune fame went than.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxix. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xl. Robert of Ely. Simon Swaylond.
Anno.iiii. Thomas Harworde.
IN this.iiii. mayres year and end of the third year of this king during the
foresaid parliamente as above is touched at London, the foresaid sir Roger
Mortymer was accused before the lords of the parliament of these artycles with
other / whereof v. I find expressed. And first was laid unto his charge,
that by his means sir Edward of Carnaruan by most tyrrannouse death in the
castle of Barkley was murdered. Secundaryly that to the kings great
dyshonoure and damage, the Scotts by his means and treason escaped from the
king at ye park on Sta^hope which then should have fallen in the kings
danger, ne had been yt favor of the said Roger to the^ tha^ showed. Thyrdely
to him was laid, that he for execucio^ of the said treason, received of ye
capytayne of the said Scotts named sir James Douglas, great sums of money.
And also for like mede, he had to the kings great dyshonoure and hurt of his
realm, concluded a peace between ye king and the Scotts / and caused to be
delivered unto them the charter or endenture called Ragman, with many other
things to the Scotts great aduau^tage and inpouerysshyng of this realm of
England. Fourthlye was laid to him, that where by synystre and unlawful means
contrary yt kings pleasure and will, or assente of the lords of the kings
counsayl, he had gotten into his possessyo^ much of the kings treasoure / he
vnskylfully wasted and mysspent it. By reason whereof the king was in necessyte,
and driven parforce to assaye his fre^des. Fyfthlie, that he also had
enpropered unto him diverse wards belo^gyng to the king, to his great lucre
and the kings great hurt / and that he was more secret with queen Isabell the
kings mother, than was to gods pleasure or the kings honor. The which
artycles with other again him proved / he was by auctoryte of the said
parlyament iuged to death. And upon saint Andrews even next ensuyng, at London
he was drawn and hanged. About the beginning of August following sir Edward
Bayloll the son of sir Johan Bayloll some time king of Scotts, by means
before purchased, opteyned such favor that with the aid of sir Henry
Beawmou^t, sir Dauyd of Stroley, sir Geffery Moubray, and with the aid
of.ii.M. Englyssheme^ entered into Scotland by water / where in short space drew
unto the^ such multitude of scotts, yt the said Edward was lord of a great
host / and so kept on his way till he came to a place called Gledismore, or
after some writers Crakismoore. where he was encountered of ye power of
Scotland, and fought there a cruel batayl, in ye which were slain a great
multitude of Scotts. By reason of which victory he was crowned king of
scotts at yt town of Scone shortly after. And shortly after he met with
king Edward at the town of New castle, and there unto him made his homage
and feawty for the land of Scotla^de.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxx. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxxi. John^ Mocking. John^ Pountnay.
Anno.v. Andrew Awbrey.
IN this fyfth mayres year and syx year of the king in the month of July, for
so much as ye Scotts had busyed them to have slain Edward Bayloll their
king, and him had constrained to avoid his land, or else to keep him in
sum strong hold till he might by his friends or lyeges be socoured / king
Edward for the same intent with a strong power persed the realm of
Scotland, and after laid his syege unto the town of Berwyke. Upon the.xix.
day of the foresaid month of July, the Scotts with a great power purposyng
to remove ye said syege, came toward the said town. whereof king Edward being
enfourmed, made toward the^ / and ar a place called Halydone hill, gave to ye
said Scotts battle, and of them had triu^phaunte vyctorye / in so much that
he slew of them as testifyen diverse writers, viii. earls, ix. hundredth
knights and banerettes, iiii.C. esquyres, and upon.xxxii.M. of the common
people and of English men were slain but only.xv. persons. After which
victory thus by the king opteyned / the captain of Berwyke upon ye morew
following being saint Margarettes day, yielded to the king the said town with
the castle. And that done king Edward betoke the guydyng thereof with all other
castelles and towns within that land, unto the forenamed sir Edward Baylol as
king of Scotts / and shortly after returned into England. Than Dauyd the
son of Robert le Bruze being as before is said king of Scotts, was
constrained with his wife secretly to sail into France / and thither was
brought by a Flemyng named Marcuell as testyfyeth the French cronycle. where
of Phylyppe de Ualoyes than French king / the said Dauyd with Jane of the
tower his wife was received. And for their comfort the said French king gave
unto them the castle of Gaylarde, till fortune to them would be more
frendelye. This year also as witnesses ye said french cronycle, the French
king sent unto the king of England ye bishop of Beauuays and the high
constable of France / which showed unto king Edward, that their soueraygne
lord entendyd a voyage into the holy land / and required him of his aid and
company for perfourmaunce of the said iournay. whereunto the king gave answer
unto that request, than when the French king had performed all such
condycions as he before times had promised to do / than he said he should be
contented to give such answer unto yt request by the^ in his name made, as
theru^to should be convenient. And more he added to the same, yt he maruayled
greatly that the said French king intended any such voyage, till he had
clerelye acquyted him of the said promysse and covenant with which answer
the French king was nothing contented / so that malice and murmour grew and
increased between them daily after. And an occasyon of this sharp answer was,
for so much as king Edward was credyble enfourmed, that the French king had
vytayll and manned.x. great ships to have saylled into Scotland, and there
to have warred / the which by tempest were wedyr driven into Flaunders, and so
sore betyn with the sea that after they had sold much of their stuff at ye
hauyn of Sluice, they were compelled of necessyte to return without worship
into France. This with other kyndelyd such a dedely hate between these.ii.
christian princes, y^ much christian blood in process of time following was for
their quarelles shadde.

Anno dn^i. xiii.C.xxxi. Anno dn^i. xiii.C.xxxii. Nycholas Pyke. John^ Preston.
Anno.vii. John^ Husband.
IN this.vii. year in the winter season, and as says Guydo in the month of
Noue^bre / the king yode again toward Scotla^de and held his Crystmas at
york. And after the solempnytie of that high feast ended, he sped him into
Scotla^de / where her laid siege unto ye castle of Kylbrydge, and lastely wan
it by strength / and set the country in some quietness. And after returned
unto New castle upon Tyne, and tarried there a certain of time, and held
there his feast of Pentecoste with great royalte. whyther within short space
after came sir Edward Baylol king of Scotts / and upon the day of saint
Geruasi and Prothasi, or y^.xix. day of June, made his homage unto king
Edward / and in presence of many other noble me^ of both lands, swear unto
him feawty or fydelyte. And ye done he returned into Scotland and king Edward
unto york, and so unto wyndesore. The^ were al such lords of England as
before time were in Edward the secondes days disseased of such lands as they
had in Scotland, restored again to their said possessions / and for them made
their homage unto ye king of Scotts, saving their allegeaunce unto their
natural soueraygne lord.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxxii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxxiii. John^ Hamonde. Johan
Ponteney. Anno.viii. wyllyam Hansarde.
IN this eyghte year certain / ambassadors were sent from Philip de Ualoyes
king of France / as the bishop of Thuroyn, and the lord of Ferry and
Peynguy, for to conclude certain artycles of variau^ce between their lord and
the king of England. But their purpose took none effect / except that the king
granted to send unto the French king shortly after, a certain of his lords
to have forther comunycacion with him towchyng the said artycles. The which
promise he fulfilled as appears in he next year ensuyng.

Anno domini.M.CCC.xxxiii. Anno domini.M.CCC.xxxiiii. Johan. Hynkstone.
Reynolde at Cunduyte. Anno.ix. walter Turk.
IN this.ix. year fell exceeding plente of rain / and thereupon ensuyed great
moreyne of beestes. And in the month of Decembre the king entered again into
Scotland, and held his Crystmas at the castle of Rokkysborough, the which
he caused to be newly repaired. And after things there ordered to his
pleasure, he returned into England. And soon after he sent the
archebysshoppe of Cauntorbury, sir Phylip de Mou^tague, and sir Geffrey Scrope
unto the French king / to the intent to have concluded an amyte between him
and the said french king which before was moved by ye french ambassade, as
before is showed in the eyghte year of his reygne. But wha^ these said lords
were landed in France, they were long delayed or they might come to the
kings presence / in so much that they said plainly unto such lords of
France as were assygned by ye French king to pass the time with them, that
they supposed that it was not the kings pleasure to speak with them. By mean
of which words they were shortly after brought unto the kings presence / of
whom they were received with joyous countenance, and so continued by a
certain of time in furtheryng of their ambassade / so yt in process of time a
conclusyo^ of peace to be had between England and France was accorded, and so
ferfourth spedde, that proclamacio^ thereof should have be^ made in Paris and the
country there about upon the morrow following But how it came in ye kings
mind the English ambassadoures were scantlye returned to their lodgings,
when they were again sent fore / and farther enfourmed thanne, that the
kings pleasure and mind was to have Dauyd late king of Scotts to be
included within the same peace / and that he should again be restored unto his
kingdom. whereunto yt was answered by the Englyssh ambassadors, that their
co^myssyon stretched not so far / nor that their prince had given unto the^
any such auctoryte. wherefore all ye former comunycacyo^ was revoked and
adnulled / and they returned into England without any conclusyon taking.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxxiiii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxxv. walter Mordon. Reynolde at
Cunduyte. Anno.x. Richard Upton.
IN this.x. year, for so much as no conclusyon of unity and peace might be had
between the kings of England and of France / therefore war was proclaimed
upon both parties. The which war was greatly procured by the mean of sir
Robert of Artoys, as in the story of Phylyp de Ualoyes shall be after showed.
Then either prince sought ye ways and means how either of them might
discontent other / in so much that the French king sent soon after into
Scotland a crewe of Frenchemen, to aid such enemies as king Edward there
had. By reason whereof the said Scotts made sharp war upon the kings
servants and friends, and put the land to great vexacyon and trouble / in
so much that ye king was forced to assemble his power, and to speed him again
thither. Than about mydsomer the king entered Scotland by the sea / and warred
upon the Scotts and Frencheme^. Of the which no notary batayl is specified,
except in that iournay the king subdued his enemies, and took there diverse
prisoners. Among the which one called earl of Morreta Frencheman was chyefe,
y^ after was with other in process of time there delivered in exchau^ge for ye
earl of Namur another french lord, which tha^ was taken by gyle of Scotts as
he was coming toward saint Iohfis town for to aid the party of king
Edward. wha^ king Edward had again pacifyed the Scotts, and taken homage of
such as before rebelled / he than as testyfyeth the French cronicle
stablysshed ye fore named Edward Bayloll as king of Scotts / and committed the
rule of the land unto him, as he before times had done. Than the Scotts for
the great kyndenesse which they had found in the king and in reco^pe^seme^t
of the great charge which he by sundry times had had in the defendyng of their
enemies / granted and bound them unto him and to his heirs kings of
England, that they should aid and assyste him again all princes. And when so
ever he had war, or any king of England being ryghtfull enherytoure, again
any prince other within his land or without / ye Scotts at their propre
costs and expenses should find iii.C. horsemen well armed, and a.M fotemen
well and suffycyently arrayed for the war / the which.xiii.C. men the
Scotts should wage for an hole year. And if the king of England ended not
his war within the year than he to hyre and wage the said Scotts as he does
the other of his souldyours. After which grauntes made, and bonds for the
suertie thereof received by ye king, as witnesses the French cronycle / the
king leuynge at Edenborough a certain of his knights to strength yt Scotts
against the Frencheme^, which compassed all the ways they might to bring
Dauyd the son of Robert le Bruze in possessyon of that land / he shortly
after returned into England.

Anno domini.M.CCC.xxxv. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxxvi. wyllyam Brykelsworthe. John^
Pontnay. Anno.xi. John^ Northall.
IN this.xi^ year, ye king reme^brynge the great charge yt he had with the
war in Scotla^de, and also for the charge yt he daily had in Guyan, and more
contynually should have in defe^dyng of ye fre^chme^ and wynnyng of his right /
he therefore gathered treasour upon every side / and by diverse and sundry ways
whereof ye manner is not expressed. But so great plente came to his use, yt it
was sca^t through out ye realm. By reason of which scarcytie, vytayll and
much other Mercimonies were exceeding good chepe. For at London a quarter of
whete was sold for.ii. s, a fat ox for.vi. s.viii. d, a fat sheep for.vi. d.
and.viii. d.vi. peio^s for a penny, a fat goos for.ii. d, a pygge for a penny,
and so al other vytayl after ye rate. This year also upon holy Rode day or
ye.xiiii. day of Septe^bre dyed sir John^ of Eltha^ earl of Corn wayl and
brother unto ye king without issu / wherefore ye said erldo^ fell into ye kings
hand. This man lies buried at westmynster upon ye right hand of ye high
altar. In this year also apered Stella cometa in english named ye blasyng
star, in an huge stremyng manner / whereof many and diverse construccio^s were
had among the common people, which I pass over.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxxvi. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxxvii. walter Neale. Henry Darcy.
Anno.xii. Nycholas Crane.
IN this.xii. year ye king held his parlyament, at westmynster about the time
of lent. During the which he made of the erled^m of Cornewayle and duchy, and
gave it with the erledam of Chestre unto Edward his son. And at this
parlyamente were made.vi. earls / that is to say of Derby, of Northampton, of
H^^tyngdon, of Salysbury, of Glouceter, and of Suff* as Henry of Lancastre was
created earl of Derby or after sum writers of Leyceter, wyllyam de Bothum
earl of Northampto^, wyllyam de Clynton earl of Hu^tyngedon, wyllyam de
Mou^tague earl of Salysbury, Hugh of Audeley earl of Glouceter, and Robert of
Ufforde earl of Suffolk. And in this parlyamente was an act enacted, that no
man should were no manner of sylk in gown, cote or doublet, but if he might
spend of good rent an hundredth ^^, by year, which act was not long holden.
In this year also the king among diverse pryuyleges granted unto ye
cytezeyns of London, that the officers of the mayres and sheryfes, should from
that day forthwarde use marys of silver parcel gylte.

The king of France this year for so much as he was credybly enfourmed, that
king Edward would enter the land of France, and to make war upon the same,
he therefore made great purueyaunce to resyste him. For the common fame ran
thanne in France, yt king Edward ente^ded not only to claim Gascoyne and
Guyan, but also all France as his propre and rightful enherytaunce in the
right of his mother. wherefore the French king assembled an huge host, and
committed the rule of it unto the king of Nauerne, and to the earl of Alenson
brother unto the said French king* which said capytaynes with their people
awayted daily the king of Englandes coming / which them for that year
dyspoynted. But as testyfyeth the same French cronycle / king Edward in this
while sent into Flaunders a knight called sir Barnarde de Brette, for to
treat of an amy^e between him and the Flemynges. For this cause, the earl of
Flaunders which was very fast with the French king, called his counsayll to
him, to have their aduyce how he might best order him self and his people.
In which cou^sayll were diverse opynyons / so that many thought it better for
diverse consyderacyons / which were long to reherce, that the earl should
rather prefer the amyte of the king of England tha^ of the king of
France. Of which opinion was a great furtherer or promoter a knight of
Flaunders called Countryssye* with whom the earl being for that cause
discontent sent him to prison. And soon after at the request of the French
king, which laid unto his charge that he had received great sums of
money of the king of England, for to procure and styre the Flemynges again
him / he was behedded, for which deed the dwellers of Gaunte and of Bruges
were so miscontente, that they utterly refused ye earl and his counsayll, and
made them strong to withstand his displeasure. Than ye earl was constrained
to gather his lords and knights, for the more part of ye commons were again
him. And in short process after met in plain battle i^ a place called Marchie /
where after long fight, the earl and his holte was put to flyghte; and forced
for his safeguard to take a castle named Mal or Malet. In which season king
Edward being enfourmed of ye amytie yt the Flemynges bare toward him anon
sent unto them a knight called sir Galtyer or walter de Magny, with a goodly
company of archers well appointed / the which arrived in an i will called than
Caza^ter. whom the earl of Flaunders with a certain of his knights
encountered, and gave unto the Englysshemen batayl. But in the end the earl was
shamefully chased, and many of his gentylmen slain and taken / as sir John^
Rodes sir wyllya^ Gyll, sir Nycholas Chau^cy, with many other slain. And sir
Guy bastard brother unto the earl, with diverse other taken / of yt which some
were sent as prisoners into England.

when the French king had understanding of the deuysyon that was between the
earl and his subjects, and how faithful ye earl was unto him, entendynge to win by fair means the favor of ye Flemynges, which he knew well he might
not win by rygoure. Than he sent unto Gau^t the bishop of saint Denis with
other / which made unto ye rulers of ye town and of Bruges and other towns
there assembled, many fair behestes and promyses. Among ye which one was,
that the French king would acquyte unto them and deliver unto their use, all
such lordshyppes and seygnoryes as he than withheld of theyrs and his
progenytours before him. But all was in vayn. For king Edward had so sped his
needs with the^, by the means of one named Jacques de artiuele a man of Gau^t,
which was of great substance, and passing other in boldenes and capacyte of
wit and discrecio^ yt the said town of Gau^t with Bruges, Ipre, Courtryke or
Courtrey, Cassyle, and other there about, condyssended and promised jointly and
holy, to refuse ye French king, and to take the king of Englandes party /
and the rather for the war which before time Philip de Ualoyes made upon them
in the beginning of his reygne, as in ye first year of the story of the said
Phylyp shall after appear.

Anno domini.M.CCC.xxxvii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxxviii. wyllam of Pountfreyt.
Henry Darcy. Anno.xiii. Hugo Marbre.
IN this.xiii. year, king Edward with queen Philip his wife, for more assured
stablyssheme^t of amyte to be had between him and the Holanders, Sela^ders, and
Braba^ders, passed the sea in the beginning of ye month of Iunii / and sailed
with a goodly company into the country of Braba^t, the queen tha^ being great
with child, where of the earl of Braba^t he was Honorably received. In which
season of his there being, king Edward gat unto him many friends. Among the
which Lewys of Bauyere, which than took upon him as Emperor, all be that
before that time he was of the.xxii. Johan than pope accursed, was one. This
Lewys had such favor unto king Edward, that he assygned* and ordained him
for Uycayr of ye empire, by reason of which office king Edward made out his
commandments, and did many things to his advantage and profit.

Birth of Lyonell.
In this season queen Phylyppe lyenge at Andwarpe, was delivered of a man
child, that was named Lyonell. And Phylyp de Ualoys having knowelege of all
this demeanure of king Edward, gathered unto him great strenthe / so that he
had about him innumerable people / and tarried with them at Amyas and there
about, from ye end of August till ye beginning of Octobre. And wha^ he saw
that king Edward came not / he divided ye great host, in retournyng many of
them into their own countries / and the other he sent unto strong holds
and castelles for to let yt passage of king Edward and his host into the
land of France. And in this pass time the French king had sent diverse
ships unto the sea with men of war, for to take english merchants and
other that came in their course. And so befelle that they encountered with.ii.
great ships of England called the Edward and the Cristofer the which as
testyfyeth the French cronycle were freyght with great richesse, and also
well manned. Anon as either was ware of other / gonnes and shot of long bows
arblasters and were not spared on another side / so that between the^ was a
cruel fight but not egall. For of the Frencheme^ were.xiii. sails great and
small, and of the English men but five that is to mean these two foresaid
great ships, two barkys, and a caruyll / the which three small ships
escaped by their deliver saylynge / and the ii. abode and fought beyond.ix.
hours, in so much that there was slain upon both parties above.vi.C. men But
in the end the said.ii. ships were taken and brought into ye French kings
stremes / and many of the Englysshemen that were sore wounded were cast into
the sea. In this year also the said Frenscheme^ of that Navy landed at
Southa^pton suddenly: and spoiled the town, and burnt a great part thereof.
And over this the French king made war in Gascoyn, and wanne there diverse
small pyles and one strong castle standing in the country of Gascoyne called
Agenoys, which castle was named Pe^ne. But all this season was king Edward in
Almayne, and made allyaunce with diverse princes of that country and other /
and took assurau^ces of them that they should aid and assyste him to win his
right and title y^ he had to y^ crown of France, and after returned into
Flanders, where he tarried all this mayres year.

Anno domini.M.CCC.xxxviii. Anno domini.M.CCC.xxxix. wyllyam Thorney. Andrew
Awbry. Anno.xiiii. Roger Forsham.
IN this.xiiii. year king Edward spedyng his business in Almayn and
Flanders, as in ye precedynge year is touched, returned into England, and
called his high court of parlyament at westmynster about ye time of lent. In
which parlyame^t / y^ king axed of his commons for the mayntenaunce of his
war, and to recover his right in France ye.v. part of their moveable
goods, ye custom of wolles for.ii. years to be paid before hand, and yt.ix.
shefe of every man's corn / yt which at length was granted. And for ye
leuyeng thereof, he caused ye lords of every shyre thorugh his land to answer
to hi^, every lord for yt cyrcuyte he dwelled nere unto. But or all this
grant were gadered and paid / the love of the poor people turned i^to
hatred, and prayer into cursyng. And for ye king should need and occupye for his
prouisio^s much money or this grant might be levied / he therefore borrowed
many notable sums of diverse cytyes and partyculer persons of this land.
Among the which he than borrowed of the city of London.xx.M. mark, to be
repayed of the money coming of the foresaid grant / the which foresaid.xx.M.
mark was levied in the wards of the city in form as follows. The tower
ward was sessed at.iii.C lxv. li, whereof wyllyam of Bryklesworthe lent.C. li /
and the resydue was leuyed of.xii. persons of that ward. Byllyngysgate ward
was sessed at vii.C.lxiii. li / whereof John^ de Cawston lent.ii.C. li, and
Aleyn Gyll.ii.C. li and the residue was le^t by.xxvi. perones of that ward.

The bridge was sessed at.vii.C.lxv. li.vi. s.viii. d / whereof John^ Louekyne
bare.ii.c. li., John^ Malwayn / and Rauffe de Lenone.ii.C. li / and the resydue
was borne by.xxxiii. persons of that ward. The ward of Dowgate was sessed
at.vi.C.lx. li.x. s / of ye which Henry Pycarde lent two.C. mark, Bartholmewe
Freslyng and wyllyam Le^glyshe.ii.C. mark / and the resydue was leuyed of.xxv.
persons of that ward. Langbourne ward was sessed at.ccc.lii. li.
six.s.viii. d / whereof Thomas Horwolde lent.C. li, John^ Peche.C. mark / and
the rest was lent by.xv. dwellers of yt ward.

walbrooke ward was sessed at.ix C.xi. li, whereof John^ Adam lent.ii.C li,
John^ de Bery and Simon Pystour peperer.ii.C. li, and Ada^ de Bery and John^
Not.ii.C. mark / and the rest was leuyed of.xxiii. persons of that ward.

Bysshoppisgate ward was sessed at.v.C.lix. li.vi. s.viii. d / whereof Ada^
Frauncesse lent.ii.C. li, and Symonde Brown and John^ de saint Albone ii.C. li
/ and the resydue was leuyed of x. persons of that ward.

Lymestrete ward was sessed at.C x. li / whereof Augustyne waleys lent C. li /
and.x. li. was leuyed of.iii. persons of that ward.

Cornehyll ward was sessed at.iii.C.xv. li / whereof Johan Colyng and Robert
Manhale drapers bare that one.C. li, and the last.C. mark and the rest was
leuyed of.xx. persons of the said ward.

Chepe ward was sessed at.v.C.xvii. li.x. s / whereof Barthilmew Thomasyn
mercer lent.cc. pound, Stepha^ Caundysshe draper, wyllya^ Holbech and Johan
Harwarde either of them C. mark, John^ Dolsoby goldsmyth cc. mark, and Johan
Fawkys and Iamys Naware either of them.C. li and the rest was leuyed of.lxi.
persons of the same ward.

Bradstrete ward was sessed at.v C.lxxx. and.viii. li / whereof Thomas Leg
skynner le^t.ccc. li, John^ Harwarde stoke.cc. mark / and the resydue was
leuyed of eight persons of that ward. Uyntrye ward was sessed
at.cccccc.xxxiiii. li.xvi. s.viii. d, whereof walter Turk fysshemonger lent.cc.
mark, John^ Stoday vyntener.C. li / Symonde Bolsely and John^ Rothynge.cc.
mark / and ye rest was leuyed of.xxiiii. persons of ye ward.

The ward of Bredstrete was sessed at.cccc.lxi.li.xvi. s.viii. d / whereof Adam
Brabesone lent.cc.li, and the rest was leuyed of.xxx. persons of ye ward. The
ward of Nuene hyth was sessed at.cccc.xxxv.li.xiii. s.iiii. d whereof Rychard
of Kyslyngbury le^t cc.li, and John^ of Gloucetre.C. mark / and the resydue
was leuyed of.xvii. persons of that ward.

Cord wayner street ward was sessed at two thousand and hundredth
lxxx.xv.li.iii. s.iiii.d / whereof Andrew Awbrey grocer lent.viii. hundredth
mark, wyllyam de Cawstone.cc.li, James Andrewe and Thomas Bra^don either of
them.ii. hundredth mark willyam of worceter.ii.C. mark, Johan Bechamp and the
wife of John^ Halle either of them.C. li, and John^ Bulle, John^ Gonwardby, and
wyllya^ Hampstede each of them.C. mark / and the rest which is.vi.
hundredth.lxi.xvi. s.viii. d, was lent by.xliiii. persons of that ward.

The ward of faryngedone within was sessed at.vii.C.xxx. li.xvi. s.viii. d.
whereof Gylbert Staynedrope lent ii.C. li. and the rest was leuyed of.lxvii
persons of that ward.

Faryngdone without the wallys was sessed at.C.xiiii. li.xiii. s.iiii. d.
which sum was leuyed of.xxi. persons of that ward.

Crepulgate ward was sessed at iiii.C.lxii. li.x. s / whereof Rychard Lazar
mercer le^t.ii.C. mark, Symo^de de Bedyngton.C. mark / and the resydue was
leuyed of.xxxvii. persons of the said ward.

Colmanstrete ward was sessed at M.li. li.xvi.s.viii. d / whereof Symo^de
Fraunces lent.viii.C. li, Henry of war and John^ Denis.ii. hundredth mark /
and ye residue was lent by.vi. persons of that ward.

Candelwyke street ward was sessed at.C.xxxiii. li.vi.s.viii.d / yt which said
sum was leuyed of.xxiii. persons of the said ward.

The ward of Algate was stynted or sessed at.xxx. li, and leuyed of syx
enhabytauntes of the said ward.

Portsokyn ward was sessed at xxvii. li.x.s, and was leuyed of.vii. persons
of that ward.

Castle Baynarde ward was sessed at.lxiii. li.vi.s.viii.d, and lent by xii.
persons of that ward.

Bassyngeshawe ward was sessed at.lxxix. li.xiii.s.iiii.d, and leuyed of six
persons.

Aldryshe gate ward was set or sessed at.lvii. li.x.s / and laid out or
lent by.v. persons of that ward. which sum total of the foresaid xxv.
wards, amounts to the su^me of.xiii. thousand.iii. hundredth.lxxx. and
five.li.xiii.s. and.iiii.d. which sum excedeth the sum of twenty thousand
mark.li. li.vi.s.viii..d. And ye shall understand that he y^ paid leest
toward this lowne paid.l.s, and so ascendyng to these sums above rehearsed.
whereof many was sessed at.xl li.l. li. and.lx. li, and many other of diverse
mean sums.

In this year also ye king changed his coin, and made the noble and the half
noble of y^ value of syx s.viii. d, which at this day is worth viii.s.ix. d.
or.x.d, and the half noble after the rate if they keep the true weyghte / and
provided diverse other things for the weal of his realm and speed of his
journey into France.

When king Edward had set his land in an order, and had all thing metely
provided for his need / he than about Lammesse sailed into Braban, and there
held his cou^sayl with his friends / and by their aduyces made claim to ye
hole crown of France as his ryghtefull enherytaunce / and for more auctorytye
of the same entermedeled the arms of England with ye armies of France, as ye
se them at this day. Then king Phylyp being of these things warned /
gathered an howge host, and came with them to a town called Uermendoys. And
king Edward with his people entered ye country called Theresse / and bre^t and
wasted ye country before him. Tha^ king Philip drew toward the Englisshe
host, and came unto a place or town called in french Buyro^ Fosse / where he
intended as says y^ french book to have set upon ye Englysshemen. But by
counsayl of his lords, for diverse causes he was let to his dyspleasure. For
after ye day, he might find no conuenyent time for to assail his enemies /
so that in conclusyon either host departed from other without battle or fight
/ and king Edward took his wey toward Gaunt, and king Phylip returned into
France. Than king Edward by means of his friend Jacques de Artyuele, had all
his pleasure of the town of Gaunt / and received of them oath and homage. And
after diverse conclusio^s with them and other taken / he leuyng there the queen
after the testymony of some writers, returned again into Enla^de / and left
with the queen, which tha^ was great with child, ye earls of Salysbury and of
Oxynforde / which in ye kings absence aided well ye Flemynges again the
French king, and did diverse marcyall acts / which I here pass over. But i^
process ye earl of Salysbury was taken prisoner / and diverse englyssh men slain
at ye assaut of a town called ye I Will in Flanders or of flanders.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xxxix. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xl. Adam Lucas. Andrewe Awbry.
Anno.xv. Bartholomewe Marres.
IN this.xv. year, while ye king was busyed in England to make prouysyo^ for
mete and money to withstand the French king, as well for the war that the
said French king made upon the Flemynges and other being ye kings friends,
as for his own particular causes, ye queen as before is said being at the
town of Gaunt, was delivered of a son, which after was named John^, about
Crystmas in the beginning of this mayres year, and end of this.xiiii. year.
This child wha^ he came to man's astate, was surnamed John^ of Gau^t and was
first earl of Rychemou^t and after duke of La^caster. and also fast as king
Edward provided for abyleme^tes of war in England, so fast and hasty
prouysyo^ made the French king to withstand king Edward both by land and by
water / so yt he had a great and strong navy upon and see. King Edward tha^ in
ye month of Iunii, with.ii.C. sails took shyppynge, and sailed toward
Flanders / and upon the sea met or came unto him sir Robert Morley with ye
north nauye of England / so yt he had in all above.iii.C. sails. And at myd
somer upon saint Iohn^s even he fought with the french kings navy, which
lay in a wait for him nere to the town called the Sluse. Of this navy which
were in noumber by the report of the french book upon iiii.C. sails, whereof
were chyefe admyralles sir Hugh Queret, and sir Nycholas Buchet, and one named
Barbe Noyre or in Englysh Black berde / the which capytayns or admyralles
anon as they espied ye englyssh flote they made toward the^ to begin the
fight.iiii. galeys set upon a ship of auau^tage which sailed before ye other
named ye rich Oliver / the which.iiii galeys the fore named Barbe Noyre had
the cunduyt of / and assailed this said ship on every part, and bet her with
gunneshot and her men with hayl shot excedyngely / so that of the men within
her were many slain and mo wounded, and lykely to have been shortly won ne had
be^ the rescous of her company: tha^ were the said four galeys soon becleped
with ye English navy, and so cruelly assailed, that they were borded or they
might be rescowed. Then approached the hole flote upon both sides, with hydous
and ferefull dynne and noise of gunnes, with terryble flamynge of wild fire
and other, with thycke shot of quarelles and arowes / and crusshynge of
ships, ye hydous and wonderful it was to behold / so that many a soul was
there expelled from their bodies i^ short while. This mortal and cruel fight
co^tynued as says the French story by ye space of.viii. hours or more, i^
such wise ye hard it was to know whether part had the better / and so many
deed and wounded men were cast into the sea, that the water which was in
cyrcuyte about them was colored or dyed as reed. The mansy co^rage of Edward
the third.
But in ye end by grace and great ma^hode of ye king, which there was sore
wounded. And by his great conforte / ye Frenchemen were chased, and many of
their ships bowged and taken with many prisoners in them. Among the which
the forenamed admyralles or capytaynes, sir Nycholas Buchet and sir Hugh Queret
were.ii / the which in despyte of the Frenchemen were hanged upon ye sails of
their ships, which they were taken in. And among the ships that were at
this season taken, were recovered the.ii. foresaid ships named the Edward
and ye Crystofer / the which before were taken by the Frenchemen, as it before
is showed in ye.iii. year of this king. In this battle also as is testyfyed
of many and diverse writers, were slain upon the noumber of.xxx.M. Frenchemen
/ al be it ye French book names so many to be slain upon both parties / and
excuse this mysfortune by the negligence of sir Nycholas Buchet, which kept
the French navy so long within the haven, that they were so closed in with
the Englysh navy, yt a great nou^bre of them might never stryke stroke nor
shote their ordenaunce, but to the hurt of their own company. wha^ king
Edward had optayned this tryumphaunt vyctory of his enmyes, he yielded great
thanks unto god. How be it he was feign to tarry a season with in his ship,
by reason of a wound ye which he had received in his thyghe. In which season
ye queen his wife came to vysyte him, and returned again unto Gau^t. And
after a few days passed / ye king departed from Swynne, and rode unto our
lady of Ardenbourghe / and sent his navy in the next haven to Brugys, and
much of his people unto the town of Gau^t. And wha^ he had accomplished his
pilgrimage, he rode unto Brugys, and from thense unto Gau^t / where of the
dwellers he was ioyously received. Than king Edward there called a great
counsel / by the which it was determined that he should prepare.ii. hosts /
whereof yt one should be of ye me^ of Gau^t and of ye towns there about, of ye
which certain lords of Almayne should have ye rule / and ye other host should
be of me^ of Brugys and of Englyssh archers / and of ye host was ordained sir
Robert of Artoys to be leder and captain. wha^ ye said.ii. hosts were all
garnysshed with all thing for the^ nedeful / ye first of them was sent unto ye
town of Turney, and the other unto ye town of saint Omers. The which.ii.
towns at ye day were like strength unto France, as Calays is now unto
England. wherefore the French king for the more suretye of them, sent unto
Tournay the earl of Foys and sir Bartha^ than marshall of France, with.iiii.M.
men of armis, and unto saint Omers he sent ye duke of Burgoyn with a great
company of lords and other. wha^ sir Robert of Artois had lain a certain time
before saint Omers, and many sharp assautys by him and his people had been
given to it, in the which diverse fortunes fell and chances of war, which
were tedyous and long to write / finally upon the morrow after saint James day
or the.xxvi. day of Iulii / ye duke of Burgoyne with his retynue issued out of
the town, and fought with ye said sir Robert and his people a long season.
In ye which fight was slain of the dukes party the lord of Hamelcourte, sir
Froysard de Beaford, the lord of saint Uran a lord of Spain, and a Burgonyon
lord called the lord of Branges, with other diverse knights and gentylmen to
the nou^ber of.liiii. as says ye French cronycle / and of the comune people
upon.iii.M. But in short time after the power of the duke increased in such
wise, that sir Robert with his company was feign to depart thense, and so yode
into Ipre, and there held him. Then as above is said when king Edward had
sent forth ye fore named.ii. hosts / he with the rest of his people yode unto
a place within.ii. English miles of Tournaye called in French le Pount de
Pree / and there lodged him and his people. And Phylyp de Ualoys ye French
king, came with his people unto an house of relegyon, which then was called
ye priory of saint Andrewe. At which two places these two said princes thus
lyenge with great strengthes upon either side / king Edward by counsceyll of
his lords sent unto ye French king a letter, containing as follows.

A letter sent by king Edward to the French king
Edward by the grace of god king of England and of France, and lord of
Irelande. Sir Phylyp de Ualoys, by long time we have exhorted by messangers
and other manyfolde manner of ways, to ye end yt ye should restore unto us,
and do to us reason of our ryghtfull enherytau^ce of the realm of France /
the which ye have long occupied with great wrong. And for that we se well
that ye entende to persevere in your iniuryous witholdynge without to do unto
us reason / for our right to demand we are entered into our land of Flaundres
as sovereign lord of the same, and pass by that country / doing you ferther
to understand, that we have taken with the help of our lord Jesus christ the
right, with the power of the said country, and with our people them allied /
beholdynge the right, which we have in ye heritage that ye wythholde from us
with great wrong / and draw us toward you to make a short end upon our
ryghtfull demand and challenge, if ye will toward us approach. And for so
much that so great power of me^ of Arms that came upon our parties, may not
long hold the^ togythers without great destruccyon of ye people. which every
good christian man ought to eschew / and specially a prince or other that have
the governance of people. we therefore much desire, yt in short days they
may mete. And for to eschew ye more mortalyte of the people / so that the
quarrel apparent atwene us, to the destruccyon of our challenge, may stand in
trial atwene us two / which thing we offer unto you for the causes above
said. How be it that we remember well the nobleness of your person, and your
great wisdom and aduysement. And in case that ye will not thereof / that then
in our challenge be set to afferme the battle of your self with an hundredth
persons of your party of the most suffycyent / and we in like wise with as
many. And yfye will that one wey nor the other / that then ye will assygne a
certain day before the city of Tournay to fight with strength against
strength, within.x. days after ye sight of these letters. And we would that
all the world knew, that these things above said in this our desire is not
for pride nor for great presumpcion / but for that that our Lord might set
the more rest and peace among the christian / and for that that the enemies of
god might be resysted, and crystendome enhaunced. And ye way yt ye will chose
of these offers abouesayd / write again to us by the bringer of these letters,
to him making hastye delyueraunce. Given under our great seal at Eschine sur
le scaut nere unto the city of Tourney, the xv. day of the month of Iule.
Upon receyt of which letters the French king by the advice of his counsayl
wrote again unto king Edward in manner and form as follows.

The French kings letter.
PHilip by ye grace of god king of France / to Edward king of England. we have
seen a letter sent to Philip de Ualoys brought to our court / in ye which
letter were certain requests. And for so much as the said letter came not to
us / the said requests were not made to us, like as it apereth by the tenoure
of ye said letter. we therefore to you make none answer. Nevertheless for that
that we understand by the said letter and otherwise, that ye are enbatelled
in our realm of France, doing great damage to us and our said realm, and to
the people / moved of will without reason, not regarding yt which a lyege man
ought to regard to his lyege and soueraygne lord / for ye are entered into our
homage in your self, a knowelegyng as reason is to the king of France, and
promised obeysaunce such as a lyege man ought unto his soueraygne lord /
like as it appears by your letters pate^tes sealed with your great seal, the
which we have by us, and for that should you be obedyente unto us. Our entente
is such, that wha^ we shall think it good, we shall chase you out of our realm
to our honor and mageste royal, and to the profet of our people. And in this
doing we have faithful hope in our lord Jesus Christ, from whom all good
to us commyth. For by your enterprise which is of will not reasonable / has been let the holy voyage over the sea, and great quantyte of christian people
put to death, and ye holy service of god left, and holy church vnworshypped and
vnhonoured, with many great enormyties. And in that that ye think to have the
Flemynges in your aid / we think us to be assured, that the good towns and
the commons will behave them in such wise again us, and again our cosyn the
earl of Flaunders, that they will save their honor and truth. And in that
that they have mysse done till now, has been by evil counsayl of such
people which regard not the common weal of the people, but of their own
profit only. Given in the feelde of the pryory of saint Andrew beside Air
under the seal of our secret sygnet in absence of our great seal, the
thyrty day of the month of Iule.


It was not long after that the French king had thus rescribed unto king
Edward, but that a messynger came unto him from Tourney for hasty rescouse /
for the town was daily and sharplye assauted of the English host. wherefore
in all haste he sent thither the duke of Athenesse, the vycounte of Thonart,
the vycount of Dannaye / with diverse other to ye nou^ber of.xv. men of name,
with great nou^ber of people.

The which sped the^ straight unto ye mount of Cassyle. But or they came the
said mount was gotten by ye Flemynges, so that of their lodging they were
dyspoynted. By reason whereof they fered to set upon the English host, or yet
to trauayll for ye remouyng of the said syege of Tourney / but took their
counceyll and swar^ed from Cassyle, and entered ye land of the earl of Barry,
and did much harm therein, And when they had there executed their pleasures
/ they returned unto the French king.

In this mean while king Philip counsayled with his lords, whether it were
better for him to draw toward Tourney to remove ye siege or to go into
Flaunders and to make war upon the towns that held with king Edward. By
which cou^sayll it was thought most honorable, that he should endeuer him
self to remove ye said syege. After which conclusion so taken / he with his
host drew toward Tourney / and in the end lodged him and his people at a
place or town called at that day Bowyns, within.iii. miles of Tourney, in
whose company was ye king of Nauerne, the king of Bohemy or Beam, the dukes
of Normandy, and of Loreyne, and of Athenesse or Athe^s, the earls of Alensone,
of Flaunders, and of Sauoy / with other to the nou^bre of.xiiii. earls, beside
vycountes, baronettes and knights to a great noumbre. And with king Edward
were these lords following / the earl of Herford, the earls of Northampto^ of
Derbye, of Southa^pton, of Oxynforde, of Henawd, of Harflete, and of rondell.
Also of strangers, the duke of Geldre, and of Sclauonye, and Brabant / with
many other vycountes, banerettes, and knights which I pass over. And thus
lay these two princes with two great and mighty hosts within five miles,
without great battle or fight a certain of time. But ever in mean while
the town of Tourney was assailed of ye English men and Flemynges / the which
defended them manfully and well. In the which pass time the countess of
Henaude which was mother unto the queen of England, and as testyfyeth the
French cronycle sister unto the French king, a woman of passing discrecyon
and eloquency, with ye aid of other princes as the king of Beam and other
labored such a mean of treaty, yt a day of diet was between the two kings
appointed / all be it that diverse of king Edwardes counsayll were sore again
it, and specially Iakes de Artyuele. Than for king Edwardes party was assygned
the bishop of Lyncolne, sir Geffrey Scrope, sir John^ of Henaude brother to
the earl, and sir wyllya^ Cheyny with other. And for the French king was
assygned the king of Beam, the earls of Armenake and of Sauoy, sir Lewys de
Sauoy and other. And to the end that this appoyntement might take the better
effect / a day of trewce was concluded till mydsomer following. But most
writers testyfyen that king Edward left the syege before Tourney, for defaut
of money and neglyge^ce of his slow procuratours in England, that sped not
his needs there as they should. For that one cause and for that other the king
with his host departed thense unto Gaunt, and tarried there a certain of time.
In which season the fore named lords and knights met at Tournay / and there
debated the matters of challenge of king Edward, and certain artycles
concerning the country of Flaunders. In which counsayll it was granted by
the French kings party, that ye French king should freely depart toward
the marriage of king Edwardes children, with the hole seygnoryes of Gascoyn and
Guyan, and the erledome of Poytyers, in so fre manner that no offycer of the
French king should meddle or have to do with in any part of those lordshyppes.
And for Flanders it was by the said lords granted, that the commons of that
country in all customs and laws should be iuged and ruled as they of old
times had used / and also that all bonds and oblygacyons that in times passed
the chyefe towns had made to the French king for any cause, should be
cancelled and delivered. And of their earl they should be acquyted in like
wise, for all offenses done before that day. Also all censuryes or curses yt
they before were wrapped in, should be clerelye adnulled and revoked, with
other co^clusions and offers, which I pass over.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xl. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xli. Richard Berkynge. Johan Oxynforde.
Anno.xvi. Johan Rokyslee.
IN this.xvi. year / king Edward upon saint Andrews even came to the tower
of London, and sent for such lords as before he had made his procuratours
to leuye his money in his absence, and for their negligence and mysdemeanure
cast the^ in pryso^. But in this voyage that the king passed from that other
side of the sea into England / he had exceeding tempest of wether, so that he
passed with great fere and danger which tempest after the opinion of some
writers, was rered by the negromauncers of the French king / to the end to
have peryshed the king, or else to give him the less courage to take the sea
again. In this year also were sent from ye.xii. Benet tha^ pope two
cardynalles, to treat of a peace between the kings of England and of
France. The which concluded a peace between the said two kings, as well for
them as for other countries which to the^ were allied, for the term of.iii.
years and more. In which time it was agreed, that both the said kings by
their proctours should publysshe and declare before the pope their claymes and
causes, to the end that by him and his cou^sayl a fynall dyreccion and
co^corde might be set between them. which agremente of the said cardynalles
was thus concluded in the town called Malestrete, about the feast of saint
Gregory in lent / being there present for the king of England, the earls
of Derbye and of Northampton with other / and for the French, king, the dukes
of Burbon and of Burgoyne, with other for his party. But this agremente stood
to little effect. For it not with standing the war between these two kings
was continued, so that either fortyfyed their friends and allies. And soon
after happened, that where Johan duke of Brytayn dyed without issu / variaunce
fell between Charles de Bloys and John^ earl of Mountforde, for the title of
that dukedom / so that between the^ mortal war was exercysed, as in the
story of Phylyppe de Ualoyes shall after more plainly be declared. which war
so contynuynge / the king of England aided ye party of the earl of
Mountforde, and the French king aided Charles de Bloys And over that during the
term of ye said treuce, Tinc^ Breche.
the French king made war upon the Gascoynes, as after shall apere. And in
Scotland some styrynge was made this year by excytynge of the French king,
in so much that the king was feign to send thither a crewe of soudiours to
strength such holds as he there held. And in this year was ye queen
delivered of a man child at ye town of Langeley, the which after was named
Edmunde, and surnamed Edmunde of Langley.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xli. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xlii. John^ Luskyn. Symond Fraunces.
Anno.xvii. Richard Kyslyngbury.
IN this.xvii. year / king Edward at the request of diverse of his young
lords and knights, suffered to be exercysed certain points and feats of
war, as iustys, turnamentes and other. which were executyd at Dunstable /
where the king and the queen were present, with the more party of the lords
and ladies of the land.

This year dyed the forenamed John^ duke of Brytayne / by reason of whose death
the war as in the precedynge year is touchyd, grew between the said Charlys
de Bloyes and the earl of Mountforde. This Charlys de Bloyes made his claym to
that duchery, by title of his wife, that was daughter of Guy vycount of
Lymogys, and second brother of the foresaid John^ duke of Brytayne. And John^
earl of Mountfort claymed by the title that he was third brother unto the
forenamed duke. But of this matter I entende to show more plainly, and of the
end thereof in the story of Phylyp de Ualoys as before I have said / and
rather there than here, because the fayte thereof was not done in England but
in Brytayne, whereof the said Phylyppe pretended rule and chyefe sygnory.

Anno domini.M.CCC.xlii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xliii. John^ Steward. John^ Hamonde.
Anno.xviii. John^ Ayleshm^.
IN this.xviii. year, the king shortly after Easter called a parlyament at
westmynster. In time whereof Edward his eldeste son was created prince of
walys. And many ordynau^ces for the weal of ye land there were enactyd, which
for length I pass over.

Clement the ^i. pope.
In this year also Clement the.vi. of ye name, which newly was made pope, took
upon him to give diverse bysshopryches and benefyces which then fell void in
England. wherwyth the king was nothing contented / in so much that he sent
out co^myssyons and strayte commandments, that no man in time following
should present or inducte any such person or persons, that so by the pope
were promoted without ye agremente of the king, as far as towchyd his
prerogatyue. The said pope Clement was first archebysshoppe of Roan, and munke
of saint Benettes order, a Frencheman of birth, and before called Peter / a man
of excellent cunnyng, but a waster of gods patrimony / and promoted to ye
dygnyte, by instaunt labor of the French king / which sent his son John^
duke of Normandy and the duke of Burgoyn unto the city of Auynyon or Auygno^,
to procure and further the eleccyon. By mean whereof he was there chosen pope
about the vii. day of May, and tronysed in the said month of May, in the
beginning of the year of grace after thaccompte of the church of England,
M.CCC. and.xliii. By means and favor of which pope, the French kings
causes and matters between king Edward and him were some deal promoted. For
as testyfieth the French book / the French king this year put to death one
master Henry de Malestrete, a graduat man, and brother unto sir Godfrey de
Malestrete knight, lately also put to death by the said French king, for
their fydelyte which they bare toward king Edward, as his feodaryes. whereof
king Edward made his co^playnt unto the pope, of this and other things to be
done contrary the constytucyons of the former peace concluded by the two
cardynalles / and had thereof no remedy. In this year also king Edward made a
coin of fine gold, king Edwardes Floryne.
and named it the Floryne / that is to say, the penny of the value of six s.
viii. d., the half penny of the value of three s. iiii. d, and the far thing of
the value of.xx. d. which coin was ordained for his wars in France, for
the gold thereof was not so fine as was the noble, which he before in his
fourthen year of his reygne had caused to be coined.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xliii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xliiii. Geffrey wychyngham. Johan
Hamonde. Anno.xix. Thomas Leg.
IN this.xix. year, the king held a solemn feast at his castle of wyndsore
/ where between Candel mass and lent were holden or executed many marcyall
acts, as iustes, tournamentes with diverse other / at the which were present
many strangers of other lands. Thorder of the garter.
And in ye end thereof, he there devised the order of the garter, and after
stablisshed it as at this day it is continued. In this year about midsomer,
king Edward with a strong army sailed unto Sluse, and so into little Brytayne.
But for he was dyspoynted of the aid of the Flemynges, by reason of the death
of his trusty friend Jacques de Artyuele, which than was slain of the Flemynges
of Gaunt, by a co^spyracy that they made again him by such as favored the
party of ye French king / he turned home into England again the same year /
leuynge behind him the earl of Salysbury with a strong company, to aid John^
earl of Mou^tforde again sir Charles de Bloys. The which John^ by the aid of
the Englysshme^ wan diverse towns and holds in Brytayne, upon the said sir
Charles and his Frenchmen. But in the end of this year he was taken with such
sykenes yt he dyed in a town called Corentyne. After whose death the said
Charles posseded the more part of the duchye of Brytayne.

This year the king sent ye earl of Derby with a strong army into Guya^ for to
aid the earl of Northa^pton / whom ye king before had left there at
Bordeaux, to strength that country again the French men. To whom after the
death of the forenamed sir John^ earl of Mountforde, drew many of the
soudyours that were on his party.

Anno domini.M.CCC.xliiii. Anno domini.M.CCC.xlv. Edmunde Hempnale. Rychard
Lacer. Anno.xx. John^ Glouceter.
IN this.xx. year or later end of the.xix. year, yt is to wit about saint
Nycholas tide in the beginning of this mayers year / the foresaid earls of
Derby and Northampton had won the town and castle of Bergarat in Gascoyne, and
slew there the earl of Uale^tynoys chief capytayne thereof / and took there a
noble man called ye earl of the Ilys, with many other rich prisoners. And
about Apryll ye said earls wanne a strong town called the Ryall. whereof
heryng Philip de Ualoys, in all haste sent his sonn^ John^ duke of Normandy to
wythstande and to give battle unto ye said earls. But when the said duke was
nere unto the Englysshemen, he had such tydinges of their strength that he
returned unto his father again. For the which deed his father with him was
grievously discontented / in so much yt by ye occasion to avoid his fathers
displeasure, he returned i^to Gascoyne, and laid siege unto ye castle of
Aguyllon / and there remained till ye month of August following without
getting of it any advantage / at which season he returned again to his
father. After whose departure the earl of Northa^pton with his company gatte a
strong town called in french la Roche Darien / which is to mean the Roche or
Rock of Aryen. In the time of which war thus continued in Brytayne and
Guyan / the French king made purueyaunce to defend his land again king
Edward, for whom he awayted daily. And king Edward as fast gathered money,
and made his daily purueyaunce to prepare him thyderwarde.

Anno dn^i. xiii.C.xlv. Anno dn^i. xiii.C.xlvi. John^ Croydon. Geffrey
wychyngham. Anno.xxi. wyllyam Clopton.
IN this.xxi. year, king Edward held his parlyament at westmynster about the
time of lent. And in the month of July following, he took shyppynge and sailed
into Normandy, and landed as witnesses the French cronicle at a place in that
prouynce named in French la Hougne sent Uast, with.xi.C. sails great and
small, ye.xii. day of ye foresaid month of July. And anon as he was la^ded,
he commanded his people to waste ye country before them. And by the ledyng of
a knight called sir Godfrey Harcourte / he was brought unto a town called
Melly, and from thens unto Mountboure, where the king with all his people
rested him a season.

In the which time the said sir Godfrey brent and spoiled the country of
Co^stantyne there nere adioynyng. Than king Edward departed from ye foresaid
town, and went unto a strong town called Karenten or Karenton / the which
he gate with the castle to the same belonging. And so continued his journey,
yt upon the.xx. day of ye said month of Iule, he laid his syege before the
city or town of Caen. wherein were at ye day chyef capytaynes, the bishop of
Bayen, ye earl of Ewe, the lord of Turnebu, with other diverse knights and
men of name. Than king Edward commanded that the said town should be
assailed / ye which was done with so great force, and specially with such
strong and co^tynuall shot, that the Frenchmen forsook the wallys and drew
them toward the castle. And in process after long and cruel fight, ye
Englysshemen entered the town, and there took prisoners. Among the which
there was taken ye constable of France and the kings chau^berleyne. Cane
conquered.
Than the Englysshemen spoiled and pylled the town of Caen / and bare the
pyllage unto their ships, which after was conveyed by them into England.
when king Edward had thus spoiled and brent a part of the town of Caen, and
forced the bysshope of Bayen and the other capytaynes to take the castle for
their refuge / considering the strength of the same he departed thens, and so
sped him toward the city of Roan chief and princypall city of Normandye. But
the French king with a great power was in this while come^ unto Roan^, and
had broken the brydges, and stopped the passages in such wise, that king
Edward was feign to leave ye way / so that he costed toward Paris and came to a
strong town called Uernon, and from thens to a town named Amyrlene / at
which towns he was resysted and lost some of his soudyours. And the.xii. day
of Auguste he came to a town named Poysy, and tarried there.vi. days / and
from the^s yode unto saint Germayn. And ever sir Godfrey de Harcourt byeng in
ye vawarde, brent the towns and spoiled the country as he went

And like as king Edward with his host thus passed the country toward Paris
/ so in like manner the French king with his power, passed or held his way
toward ye said city / being so nere sundry times, that either host had
sight of other. But the river of Seyne was ever between them, so that for it
they might not join in battle. when king Edward was common to a town called
saint Clowe / he set fire therein, which was seen unto Paris. which put ye
cytezeyns in great fere, in so much as witnesses the French cronycle, that if
the French king had not ben there present / the city should have be yelden
unto king Edward. Tha^ king Edward seeing he might not pass the river of Seyn
toward ye city of Paris, occupied all ye chief palaysys and royal Manours,
where the French kings were accustomed for to soiourne and lie at / and
drank the wine and occupied such stuff and necessaryes as he there fande.
And at his departing set fire upon them, and consumed the more part of them.
As at poyzy one, at saint Germayne an other, and at Mount Joy the third / and
burnt the town of Poyzy, reseruyng an house of nuns, which was founded by
Phylyp le Beawe father unto king Edwardes wife. Here ye shall under stand that
the auctours or writers favors their own nacyon. Affeccyo^ of
Historiographers.
For the English writers say, that ye French king fled / and brake the
brydges as he went, to the end that the Englysh host should not win to the
French men to give unto the^ battle. And ye French book says, that king
Edward fled, and would not abide batayl with the French men / wherefore the
French king brake the brydges to the intent that ye Englyssh me^ should not
escape his danger. But how it was as says an other writer called John^
Froysarde / the commons of France thought it a great dyshonoure unto all the
land, that the Englyssh host should so pass thorough the heart or myddell of
France / and to occupye the kings chief lodgings, and not to be foughten
with of all that season. which might not be after the opinion of the said
common people, without great treason of such as were nere about the king. Tha^
king Edward was so closed by reason of brekynge of brydges, yt he was forced to
draw back, and to reedyfye the bridge of Poyzy. The which was repaired in so
strong wise, that he and his host passed there over without parell. How be
it that in the time of repayrynge of it, the French king sent thither.ii.M. men
to let the said work. But the archers kept them of with their shot, in so
sharp manner, that ye more party of them was slain, and the work perfyghted
as above is said Than king Edward entered the country of Pycardy / and the
French king removed from saint Denis unto saint Germains, and from thens to
a town called Aubeuyle in Poyteau, and from thens to Antoygne. In this while
king Edward with baner dysplayed came unto the city of Beauuayze, and assailed
the town. But the town was well garnisshed with soudyours which defended their
enemies vygourously. wherefore king Edward co^syderynge, he might not
lyghtely win that town, set the bulwerkes on fire / and so departed thens,
and yode unto a place called in French Soygnouile or Bla^ke Tache. where he
passed the water of Sum upon a frydaye the.xxv. day of August, and lodged him
and his people nere unto a forest called Cressy or Crecy. whereof when the
French king was ware anon he sped him from the fore named town of Antoygne
unto Aubeuyle again. where after he had refresshed him and his people, he
rode unto an abbey fast by the forenamed town of Cressy.

In this pass time, John^ duke of Normandy and son of Phylyp de Ualoys,
which as in the precedyng year is towched, laid his syege unto the castle of
Aguyllon, herynge that his father was thus warreyed with the king of England /
brake up his syege, and came with his strength unto his father.

THese.ii. great hosts thus lodged within little compass, nere unto the
forenamed town of Cressy / upon the saterdaye following the feast of saint
Bartholmewe, being the.xxvi. day of the monethe of August, either cruelly
assailed other and fought there a mortal and sharp battle. whereof in the
end king Edward gloryouslye was victoure, and chaced the French king / and
slew in that fight after the saying of most writers, the king of Bohemy or
Beam son of Henry ye Emperor, vii. or the. eight, the duke of Loreyne, the
earl of Alenson brother unto the French king, Charles earl of Bloys, the
earls of Flaunders, of Sancer, of Narcourt, and of Fyennes, with diverse other
to the noumber of eight bysshoppes and earls, and xvii. lords of name / and of
banerettes, knights, and esquyers, beyo^de the noumber of.xvi. hundredth / so
that as concludes the French hystorye, in that battle was slain the flower
of the Chyualrye of France, and of the commons upon.viii.M. men / and that the
realm of France that day sustained such confusion, that the like thereof had
not be seen many years passed / and yt be people and men of no reputacyon, as
archers, by the vyolence of their importune shot, which horse nor man might
stand again. Tha^ the French king with a small company fled sore hurt
unto a town called Broy, and lodged there ye night following. And king Edward
being warned that an other host of enemies was coming toward him / abode
still in the same feelde, and set good watches, and made great fyres thorough
the host, and so co^tynued till the monday following. Upon which day in the
morning apered to them a new host of French men / to the which they gave
battle, and slew of them more in noumbre tha^ was slain upon the saturday
before. But of capytaynes or men of name the auctor reherseth none.

Than king Edward gave great thanks unto god of his tryumpha^t vyctory / and
after departed from that town of Cressye, and took his way toward
Moustruell, and from the^s to Boleyne, and lastly to Caleys. whereof than was
capytayne under ye French king a Burgonyo^ knight named sir John^ de Uye^ne /
to whom king Edward sent that he should deliver unto him the said town of
Caleys. But for the king received from him no comfortable answer / he
immedyatly laid his syege unto the said town, which was upon the third day
of the month of Septe^bre / and there abode a certain of time in making of
assautes to the same. In which time and season the earl of Derby lyenge at
Bordeaux, and having the rule of Gascoyne and Guyan / wan diverse towns and
holds from the Frenchemen, as the towns called Sayntez in Poyteaw saint John^
de Angely, and ye town of Poytyers. In the which he had excedyng treasoure
and richesse / so that he and his sowdyours were greatly enryched, by the
pyllage that they wan in those towns and country to them adioynaunt. And wha^
the said earl had spoiled the said towns, and brent a great part of the
foresaid city of Poytyers, and the kings palace within the same / he than at
his pleasure returned unto Bordeaux.

In this pass time also, the French king to the entente to haste king Edward
into England / sent Dauyd le Bruze some time king of Scotts, into ye land
with a strong army. The which gathered unto him such lords and knights of
Scotland as before times favored his party and with them entered the bounds
of Northumberlande, and spoiled that country without pity. But it shall apere
by other auctoures, that this Dauyd le Bruze at this day had recovered the
crown of Scotland / and that Edward de Bayloll was than deed, which before
was king. Than it follows when the archebisshop of york with other lords
than left in England, herd tell that the Scotts were thus entered the land
anon the said archebysshppe, with sir Henry Perse, sir Rafe Neuyle, and sir
Gilbert Umfreyle knights, and other gentylmen as well spyrytuall as other,
apparayled theyin in their best manner and sped them toward ye Scotts / so
that they met with the^ and gave unto them battle upon ye even of saint Luke
or the.xvii. day of Octobre in a place fast by Durha^ called at that day
Neuyles cross. where god showed to the English men such grace, that they
sco^fyted ye Scotts, and slew of them great foyson / and took prisoners the
said David le Bruze, sir wyllyam Douglas sir Tho^lyn Fowkys, with other of ye
nobles of Scotland / the which shortly after were surely conveyed unto the
tower of London, and there kept as prisoners.

wha^ king Edward from the.iii. day of Septembre as before is said, had by
sundry times assailed the town of Caleys, and saw well he he might not
shortly win it / he provided for hi^ and his people to lie there all ye
winter following / so yt for the lodging of him and his host, he made so many
houses and lodges, that it seemed an other Caleys. wherefore in process of time
during yt syege, of the vytelers and such as daily resorted unto ye kings
host, it was named new Caleys. where ye king in proper person abode all the
winter following, and the more part of the next somer as after shall apere.

Anno dn^i. xiii.C.xlvi. Anno dn^i. xiii.C.xlvii. Adam Bramson. Thomas Leg.
Anno.xxii. Richard Basyngstoke.
This.xxii. year, king Edward after the stormy winter was ouerpassed / he
commanded certain ships to be joined mo in noumbre unto such as before had
kept the sea, that no vytayll should come to the inhabytau^tes of Caleys / so
that ye said town was feign to hold them content with such old store as they
had for any new that to them might be co^ueyd or sent. And the kings host
was plentuously vytaylled by ye Flemynges, and by other vytayllers daily
coming out of England.

King Phylyppe having daily word of the strength of his enemies and the
encreace of them, as by Ester lynges and other nations that king Edward had to
him allied / and saw well that without the said town were shortly rescowed,
it should shortly be yolden into the hands of his enemies, to the great hurt
of all the realm of France: wherefore after a great counsayll holden at Paris,
he changed his money to his great auau^tage / and over that set an inposicion
upon his commons, to their great grudge and murmr. And that done he took his
leave of saint Denis about the quyndene of Pasche, and so yode unto a town
called Hesdom^ where he tarried the gaderyng of his host, so long that it was
nere unto the feast of mary Magdaleyn or his people were all assembled. At
which season he set forthwarde to the town of Caleys, to remove ye king of
England from that syeg^ / and so spedde him, that about the end of ye month
of July, he drew nere unto Caleys. The which before his coming was yolden
unto king Edward / so that the French cronicle shows no thing of the
French kings shame full departing, like as it is rehearsed in the English
cronycle, and of other writers that write of the same.

wha^ Calys was go^^e.
Than after most writers, ye town of Caleys was yolden to king Edward about
the end of Septembre after the king had continued there his siege an hole
year and somedeale more. After receyte whereof he tarried in the town upon a
month, and voyded clean all the old inhabytauntes and Frenchemen, and stored
it with Englysshemen, and specially with Kentyshmen. And when he had set that
town in a sure order and gydynge, and granted a peace for.ix. months at the
request of two cardynalles sent from the forenamed pope Clement the syxte,
to be holden between him and the French king / he sailed with great tryumphe
into England, and came to London about the feast of saint Romayne or the
three and twenty day of Octobre / where he was ioyously received of the
cytezeyns, and so conveyed unto westmynster.

In this year also an English knight called sir Thomas Agorne, capytayne of
the roche of Aryan before spoken of in the.xx. year of this king, was fiersly
warred of sir Charles de Bloys. But after many bykerynges and skyrmishes, a day
of batayl was set between the said Charles and Thomas. Or after the French
books declaration, the said Charles assautynge that town upon one party / the
said sir Thomas with a company of stalworth archers and sowdyours, issued out
at an other part of the town and beset the said sir Charles and his company
about / and assailed them in such wise, yt in the end the more party of his
company was taken and slain, and the said sir Charles there taken among the
other. And of men of name were there slain, ye vicou^t of Roan, ye lord
Dernall, ye lord of Quyntyne, with sir wyllm^ his son, ye lord of ye castle
of Bret, ye lord of the roche, and sir Geffrey Turneuew, with many other me^ of
honor, which I pass over. And after the said Charles was healed of such
wou^des as he had received in that fight / he was conveyed into England, and
there kept as prisoner.

Anno domini.M.CCC.xlvii. Anno domini.M.CCC.xlviii. Henry Pycarde. John^
Luskyn. Anno.xxiii. Symonde Dolsely.
IN this.xxiii. year, fill great co^tynuall rain from mydsomer to Crystmas,
whereof ensued exceeding floddes. By reason whereof the ground was sore
corrupted, so that diverse inconveniences ensued upon the same, as sykenes and
other, as in ye years following shall apere. And in France this year the
people dyed wonderfully in diverse places of the realm / so vehemently that in
the city of Paris dyed in this year or lyt tell more, over.l.M. people / and
at saint Denis beyond.xiiii.M. And in Italy and many other countries, this
mortalytye about this season reigned also inportunely / and that in Hethe^nes
as well as in criste^dome.

And in the end of this year about the end of August / this mortalytye began
in diverse places of England, and specially at London / and so continued to the
said month of August next ensuynge. And upon that ensued sterylite or
bareynes, as well of the sea as of the land, so that vytaylle and corn was more
scante than it was before.

Anno domini.M.CCC.xlviii. Anno dsii.M.CCC.xlix. Adam Bury. wyllyam Turk.
Anno.xxiiii. Rauffe Lynne.
IN this.xxiiii. year, the mortality beforesayde in England and specially in
London most ferue^tly raynynge / a treasone, as after appears was conspyred,
to have brought the town of Caleys again to the French kings possessyon.
King Edward beforetyme had committed one of the towers of Caleys unto a
Ianuay to who^ he much trusted. with the which Ianuay a knight of Burgoyn
named sir Godfrey de Charny, was very famylyer / in so much that the said sir
Godfrey at conuenyent leysex brake unto the said Ianuay, for the betrayenge of
ye town of Caleys. The which gave unto him liking answer / so that the said
Ianuay agreed for certain so^me of money to be paid in hand, to deliver unto
the said sir Godfrey and such other as he then should bring with him, the
tower that he then had in keeping. By mean whereof he should shortly after
have the rule of the town. In time of dryuynge and of apoyntynge of which
bargayne as says the French cronycle / this Ianuay sent secret word unto the
king of England / requyrynge him in secret wise to come unto Caleys. The
which then holding his Crystmas at Hauerynge Bower in Essex, upon the morrow
after new years day took his shyppynge, and landed that night at Caleys, in
so secret manner that few of the town knew of his there being.

when the day of apoyntmente of delyuery of this foresaid tower was common, and
this Ianuay had received his payment / at an hour assygned between the said
sir Godfrey and him, a toke^ was given by this said Ianuay, that the Frenchmen
should draw nere unto ye said tower to win their pray.

Then the said sir Godfrey with a certain noumber came within ye danger of
the town of Caleys, warnyng ye resydue of his company that they should tarry
there till he were enterde ye town / and than at his sendyng to come in all
spedy wise. But so soon as the said sir Godfrey was nere unto the tower, a
busshment of sawdyoures were sent out at a possterne / the which closed him
and his Frenchemen upon all sides, and slew of them many. Among the which,
sir Henry de Boys knight, with sir Gautyer de Ualence, and sir Robert of
Beuuays knights, were slain / And the said sir Godfrey taken sore wounded /
and the lord of Mountmorency escaped with great danger, the whithe gave
warning unto the other company and returned them into France. Than the said
Godfrey de Charney was laid upon aborde, and so presented unto king Edward
the which had such pity of him, that he commanded his own surgyons to look
unto him, and to cure him in their best manner. And wha^ he was somdeale cured
he was sent as a prisoner with other into England.

In this year also the king caused to be coined grotes and half grotes, the
which lacked of the weight of his former coin.ii. s. vi. d. in a. li. Troy. A
great (...) in London.
And about the end of August sessed the mortalyte or death in London / ye
which was so vehemet and sharp within ye said city, that over the bodies
buried in churches, and churcheyerdes, monasteries and other accumed buryeng
places / was buried that same year in the charterhouse yerde of London.l.M.
persons and above.

This year also was ye year of Iubile or clean remyssyon, which is kept at
Rome at every.l. winter end like as the year of Iubile or grace is continued
at Cauntorbury.

And this year by the labor of two cardynalles sent from pope Clement the.vi,
was a peace concluded between the two kings of England and of France for a
year, nere unto the own of Caleys. wherefore the stablysshynge of the said
peace for the said year, assembled the two said cardynalles. And for the
king of England, the bishop of Norwyche than treasourer and chyefe
chanceller of the king, with other unto him by the king assygned. And for the
French king, was there the bishop of Laone, and the abbot of saint Denis
with other.

And the.xxiii. day of the month of Auguste. In this year and year of our
lord.xiii. hundredth and fyfthty, dyed Phylyppe de Ualoyes king of France.
Death of Pylyppe de Valoys.


Anno domini.M.CCC.xlix. Anno domini.M.CCC.l. John^ Notte. Richard
Kyllyngbury. Anno.xxv. wyllyam worcestre.
IN this.xxv. year about ye feast of the decollacyon of saint John^ Baptyste
in the latter end of August / a noble man of Spain called sir Charles, to
whom king Johan of France had newely given the erledome of Angolesme,
entendynge to win some honor upon the Englysshemen, with a strong navy of
Spaynardes entrede ye English stremys, and did much harm unto king
Edwardes friends. King Edwardes (...) on the (...).
So that the king about the season abouesayde, met with the said navy upon
the cooste of wynchelsee / where between the king and them was a long and
mortal fight, to ye great loss of much people upon both parties. But in
the end god sent unto the king vyctory / so that he chased his enemies, and
wanne from them.xxii. of their ships after most writers, with many
prisoners.

And this year sir Thomas of Agorne, which as in the.xxii. year of this kings
reygne, took prisoner sir Charles de Bloys and other / was slain by chance
meddle of a knight of France or Brytayne called sir Rauffe de Caours.

And this year were solemn messangers sent unto Rome, for to conclude and
parfyte the peace between the two kings of England and of France. So that
king Edward should resygne and give up all his title and claim that he made
unto the crown of France / and the French king should clearly give unto him
all the duchye of Guyan / with all such lands as at any time before were
taken by any of his progenytoures from it. And that king Edward and his heirs
kings should freely hold and occupye the said duchye, without doing of
homage to any French king after that day. But the conclusyon of this matyer
was so prolonged and deferred by y^ pope, Delays of the course of Rome.
and such delays as daily ben used in the court of Rome, that the earl of
Derby with other, which were appointed for the king of England, returned
without speed of their cause. wherefore king Edward made new prouisyo^s to
war upon king John^ of France.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.li. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lii. John^ wroth. Andrewe Awbry.
Anno.xxvi. Gybbon^ Stayndrope.
IN this.xxvi. year, the castle of Guynys was yolden unto the Englysshmen
dwelling in Caleys / which as testyfyeth the French cronicle was done by
treason of a French man named Guyllyam de Beauco^roy. For the which treason
the said Guyllyam was shortly after put in execucyon in the town of Amyas.

And about the myddell of August upon the even of our Lady assumpcyon / sir
Guy de Neale than marshall of France, with a strong company gave bataylle
unto the Englysshemen than being in Brytayn in the which the said sir Guy
with the lord of Brykebet and the Chaste leyne of Beaunais, with many other
noble men were slain, and many taken prisoners.

Anno domini.M.CCC.li Anno domini.M.CCC.lii. John^ Peche. Adam Fraunceys.
Anno.xxvii. John^ Stodeney.
THe somer of this.xxvii. year was so dry, that it was many years after called
the dry somer. For from the latter end of March till the latter end of
July, fill little rain or none / by reason whereof many inconuenyences ensued.

And one thing which is specially noted / corn the year following was scante
/ whereof the price this year began to enhaunce greatly / and beuys and mottons
were also dear for scantnesse of grass and pasture / and that as well was
expert in France as in the i will of England.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lii. Anno domini.M.CCC.liii. John^ welde. Adam Fraunceys.
Anno.xxviii. John^ Little.
IN this.xxviii. year, king Edward holding his parlyament at westmynster /
among other things there enacted, soon after Pentecoste created the earl of
Derby duke of Lancaster, and ^yr Rauffe Stafforde was created earl of
Stafforde. Than this duke of Lancastre was sent again over the sea / wherein
the end of this year as witnesses John^ Froysarde, he was appealed of the
duke of Bryswyke a duke of the country of Almayne, of certain words contrary
his honor, for the which he waged battle with the said duke in the court of
the French king.

Than this Henry which of some writers is named Henry Bolyngbroke duke of
Lancastre, purchased his sauffe conduyte of the French king / and kept his
day appointed for that bataylle, in a field called in French La preauxclers.
where for them was ordained a place lyested and cloosed in goodly wise / king
Johan being present with the more part of his nobles of France. And there
came in first into that feld the forenamed duke Appellau^te / and after this
noble duke of Lancaster, to the great honor of all England. And soon after
diverse obseruau^ces according to the law of armies done and solemn oaths taken
/ either set in the rest to have ro^ne the first course. But king Johan of his
especyall grace ceased ye matter, and took the quarrel into his hands / so that
either of them departed the field without any stroke strykynge / and pacyfyed
the appeal, to the honor of the duke of Lancastre as witnesses the French
book, not with standing he was the French kings enemy.

And soon after the said duke of Lancastre with other nobles assygned to him
by the king of England, wentte to Auynyon, with the archebysshoppe of Roan than
chaunceller of France, and the duke of Burbo^ and other appointed for the
king of France / to conclude efte a peace between their two princes. The
which at the city beforesayd were hard at length, before the new pope than
named Innocente the.vi. which also like to his predecessor was a Frencheman /
and cardynall of Lymosyne in Normandy, called by his proper name Stephan
Aubert. In conclusyon after great argume^te made on either party before the
pope and his counsayl / finally it was agreed, that ye peace between the.ii.
kings should be kept and holden inuiolate till mydsomer next following.

Anno domini.M.CCC.liii. Anno dn^i.M.CCC.liiii. wyllyam Tontynghm^. Thomas
Leg. Anno.xxix. Richard Smert.
IN this.xxix. year / king Edward by the aduyce of his cou^sayll, for so much
as the towns of Flaunders brake their promise before time made, and held not
the ba^des of amyte by them promised by the life of Jacques de Artyuele, but
favored the French kings party: therefore he with drew from them the
markettes and staples of wolles, that in sundry towns of Flaunders had than
lately by the prouycyon of the foresaid Jacques, to their great advantage used
to be kept / and ordained than the said staples to be holden in sundry good
towns of England, as westmynster, Chychester, Lyncolne, Brystowe, and
Caunterbury.

And shortly after Easter / the French king sent his eldest son Charles
dolphyne of Uyenne into Normandy, for to take the rule of ye country / and
specially for to sease certain lands and castelles, which at ye day
belonged unto the king of Nauerne, which than was out of the French kings
favor, for the death of sir Charles of Spain constable lately of France, yt
he had by his means murdered in a town called the Aygle in Normandy, upon.ii.
years before passed. And while ye said dolphyne was thus besyed in Normandy /
he made such means to ye rulers thereof, that they granted unto him aid
of.iii.M. me^ for.iii. months, at their proper costs and charges.

Of this soon after sprange such tydinges, yt the king of England was
enfourmed that the French king had given to his son Charles ye duchy of
Normandy with all Gascoygne and Guyan / and how ye Norma^nes had granted unto
ye said Charles.iii.M. me^ for.iii. months, to war at their costs upon ye
Englyshme^ / which as ye French book testifies, was granted to him only to
defend ye king of Nauerne, yt came to Co^sta^tyne shortly after, for to
repossesse all such lands as the said dolphyn of his had there seized and for
that with a bygge army made war upon the said dolphyn.

But were it thus or otherwise / troth it is as diverse writers agree^, in the
month of October and end of this year, prince Edward with a great host
entered Gascoyne, and passed by Toulouse, and passed the river of Gerounde or
Geron^ / and so passed by Carcassyon, and brent the bulwerkes of that city /
and from thens he rode to Nerbon^, in pyllyng and spoylynge the country as he
went.

And in the same year king Edward with his power landed at his town of
Caleys / where he rested hi^ by all ye time of this mayres year.

And in this year was the house of the freres Augustynes of London fynysshed /
which was reedyfyed by sir Humfrey Bohum earl of Hertforde and Essex, whose
body lies buried in the quere of the said house or church before the high
altar.

Anno domini.M.CCC.liiii. Anno domini.M.CCC.lv. Thomas Forster. Simon Franceys.
Anno.xxx. Thomas Brandon.
IN this.xxx. year / the king as ye before have herd being at Caleys, shortly
after the feast of Alhalloyne took his iournay toward the French king / and
continued his iournay till he came to a town named Hesden / and brake there
the French kings park, and took such pleasures as him there lyked. In
which season of his there being, tidings were brought unto him, yt ye
Scotts had gote^ ye town of Berwyke, and how they made daily assautes to win the castle. wherefore the king made the more hasty speed, and returned to
Caleys, and so into England. For which cause says ye French cronycle, yt
king Edward fled from the French king, yt than with a strong power came
from Amy as unto saint Omers.

Than king Edward sped him into Scotland / so yt in the month of January
and beginning of the xxx. year of his reygne, Berwyke recovered.
and.xxvii. day of the said month, he laid his syege to ye town of Berwyke /
and had it yolden unto him in short process of time after. And that done he
entered ferther into the land, and subdued ye cheyf towns and holds as he
went / and pursued the Scottysshe king so narowly, that in the end he was
feign to submytte him to ye kings grace as prisoner, and resygned his power
into the kings hand. And when king Edward had set that country in a rule /
he returned with the Scottysshe king again into England, and called his
court of parlyament at westmynster. In ye which among other things to the
kings advantage, was granted to the mayntenaunce of his wars.l. s. of a
sack of woll, for ye term of.vi. years. But it continued longer though the
merchants staplers thereat grutched.

Than let us now return unto that noble prince Edward, the first begotten
son of the king / which by all this time warred upon the Frenchmen, as in
ye precedynge year is touchyd. So that lastly he returned to Bordeaux with
many rich prisoners and pyllages, to the great honor of him self, and the
great auauncement of his soudyours. And all be it that in that countrees,
which he then passed, were the earls of Armenake, and of Foyze, of Poytyers,
and of Cleremount, with sir James de Burbon^, and many other knights, the
which had dowble the people, as testyfyeth the French cronycle, that the
prince had: yet passed he from Tholous to Nerbon^, and fro Nerbon^ to Bordeaux
without battle.

And after the prince had there a while rested him and his people, and sent
diverse of his prisoners in to England / he with his host entered the prouynce
or country of Berry in the month of July, and made therein sharp and cruel
war. In which season also ye duke of Lancaster with the aid of Phylyp
brother unto the king of Nauerne, was entered the country of Constantyne / and
so with a company of.iiii. thousand men, came unto a place called Lyseux upon
the sea cost, and removed a syege of French men, that had lain at that castle
upon viii. wekes / and after repaired the said castle.

when king John^ had leuyed many great sums of money, to ye great grudge
of his commons and rebellyon of some of the said commons, as in the story of
king John^ shall be towched, and preparyd his host / he first made toward the
duke of Lancaster. But the said duke had so fortyfyed ye passage, that he
might not win to him without great ieopardye and danger. wherefore he lafte
that way, and yode to a castle named Bretnell, and laid his syege there
unto, and wan it in the end of.viii. wekes by apoyntement. Then he yode to the
castle of Chartres, and tarried there a certain time for more people / and from
thens took his iourneye toward prince Edward. The which prince in this
season was passed the river of Loyre or Leyre, and so by ye town of Romu^gtyne
/ where he was encountered of diverse nobles of France, and had with them a
sharp co^flycte. But in the end god sent to him the vyctorye / so that he
slew many of his enemies, and took of them many prisoners. Among ye which
were taken the lord of Craon^, and a knight called sir Bouciqua^t, with diverse
other to the number, as says the French book of.liiii. persons. And when he
had sent the said prisoners under saufe keeping to Bordeaux, he sped him toward
Towris.

And the duke of Lancaster with his company, after he had repaired the foresaid
castle of Lyseux, and bestowed such ordenau^ce as the French men for haste
lafte behind them at the said syege: he than took his way toward Bertneyll /
and from thens unto Euroux, in bre^nyng and wasting the country and towns as
he went / and from thens to Uermeyll in Perch, and took by strength both the
town and castle. And when he had spoiled and pylled the town, he set it on
fire and brent a great part thereof. And when he had done much of his will in
that country, he returned into Brytayne and held him there.

King John^ then as above is said, holding his way toward prince Edward /
came to the city of Towrys to fortyfye the said town again the said prince
Edward. whereof herynge the prince took his way toward Poytyers. In holding of
which way, as testyfyeth ye French book, a part of his host met with an
host of Frenchmen, and gave unto them battle, and at length chasyd the
multitude of them, and slew an hundredth sowdyours, and took upon.lx.
prisoners. Among the which were taken the earl of Sau^cer, ye earl of
Iurrygny, the lord Chastelleyn master of the kings palayes, and a knight
named sir Guyllyam de Daneham / the which prisoners were also sent unto
Bordeaux. And soon after prince Edward lodged him and his host nere unto
Poytyers. And shortly after that came the French king and lodged him in a
place called in French Chamgny, nere also unto Poytyers / so that the fro^tes
of both hoostes lay within a quarter of a mile. Than the cardynall of
Pernygourt sent from pope Innocent the vi. rode between the king and the
prince sundry times to have agreed some treaty and peace bytwen them, if it
might by his labor have been opteyned. But when he saw his labor might not
prevail / he departed to Poytiers, and tarried there the end of the battle.
The which was foughten upon a mondaye the.xix. day of September, in the year
of our lord.xiii.C.lvi, and beginning of the.vi. year of the said king Iohn^s
reygne, as after shall be showed.

THan as before is said, for so much as the foresaid cardynall might not
purchase any treaty or mean of peace between these two princes / prouysyo^ was
made upon both sides to try their matter by mortal battle / so yt about the
hour of two at after noone of the foresaid mo^dayne, ye duke of Athenes or
Athe^s with such other nobles as were with him in ye French kings vaweward set
upon the English host. The batayl of Poytiers.
The which was myghtely fensyd with wood and trees, in such wise that ye
French speres might not wyn unto them. And therwyth the shot of the
Englyshemen was so fyers and sharp, that it turned over horse and man. And
while ye said duke of Athenes, with sir John^ de Cleremount than marshall of
France with other, thus assailed the prince and his people upon one part /
the duke of Normandye king Iohn^s eldest son, and the duke of Orleau^ce the
kings brother, assailed him upon a another part. The which two dukes were
leders of two strong hosts. But as says ye French cronycle, these three
batayls did little scathe unto the Englysshemen. But by reason of their shot
they were so wounded and many slain, yt the resydue fled to the great
dyscomfort of the French kings people. Than king John^ in all that he might
comforted his people / and with a fresshe company set upon the Englyshmen, that
all ways kept them hole together, and recyued the Frenchemen upon their wepens
points, with so great force yt in the end the French men gave back, and
were vaynquisshed by the help of god and saint George / and slain as
wytnessyth ye said French cronycle to the number of.xvii. hundredth men of
armies, beside other mean sowdyours. Among the which of noble men were slain,
the duke of Burbone, the duke of Athenes, sir John^ de Cleremou^t marshal of
France, sir Reynold Camyan baneret, which that day bare the oryflambe, a
special relyke that the French kings use to bear before them in all batayls,
and the bishop of Chalons, with diverse other to ye number of.liiii.
banerettes, beside knights and other. And of prisoners taken at ye battle,
was John^ king of France, Phylyp his.iiii. son, sir Jacques de Burbon earl
of Poytyau and brother unto the duke of Burbon before slain, sir John^ of
Artoys earl of Ewe, sir Charlys his brother earl of Longeuyle, sir Guyffarde
cosyn germayn unto the French king, sir John^ de Meleoun earl of Cancaruyle,
sir John^ his son and heir, doctor wyllyam archbysshop of Sens, sir Simon
Melon brother unto the earl of Cancaruyle and earl of Uandature, the earls of
Da^pmartyne, of Uendosme, of Salysbruche, of Moyson, the Marshall of Deneha^,
and many other, as banerettes, knights, and men of name, to the nombre as
says the French cronycle of.xvi. hundredth and above. And from this battle
escaped by flight, Charles eldest son of king John^ and duke of Norma^dye,
the duke of Orleaunce, and the duke of Aniowe, with few other of great fame /
the which yode streyghte unto Paris. where shortly after was called a great
cou^sayll, for matters which in the story of king Iohanne shall after be
showed.

when the feelde was thus fynysshed / prince Edward after dew thanks and
louynges given to god and saint George for this tryu^phau^t vyctory / he with
his said prisoners sped him toward Bordeaux where ye said king was kept till
Easter after.

Anno dn^i. xiii.C.lv. Anno dn^i. xiii.C.lvi. Richard Notynghm^. Henry
Pycharde. Anno.xxxi. Thomas Dosell.
IN this.xxxi. year, that is to say the.xvi. day of the month of Apryll / ye
noble prince Edward tha^ upon the age of.xxviii. years, took shyppynge with
his prisoners at Bordeaux, and arrived in England shortly after. And
the.xxiiii. day of May / he was with great honor and gladness received of
the cytezyns of London, and so conveyed unto the kings palace at westmynster.
where the king sitting in his astate in westmynster hal, received him with due
honor / and after conveyed to a lodging for him provided, where he lay a
certain season. And after was ye said French king had unto a place called
Sauoy / which thanne was a pleasant palace and fair lodging, belonging
that time unto ye duke of Lancastre / and after burnt and dystroyed by Iak
Straw and his fawtours, in the.iiii. year of Rychard the second next king of
England, as in ye said year after shall be showed In which place the said
French king lay long after.

And in the winter following were royal iustes holden in smythfelde of London,
Iustes holde^ in Smithfelde.
and many goodly and knyghtly feats of armies done, to the great honor of the
king and all his realm, and gladdyng of all beholdours. At the which dysporte
was present / the king of England, the French king, and ye king of Scotts /
with many noble astates of all the.iii. provinces or kingdoms / whereof the
more party of the strangers were than prisoners.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lvi. Anno domini.M.CCC.lvii. Stephyn Caundysshe. John^
Stody. Anno xxxii. Bartylmewe frostelynge.
IN this.xxxii. year / pope Innocent the syxte of that name, sent into England
two cardynalles, to treat of a peace between ye two kings The which two
cardinals tarried the more part of a year in London and other places of the
land, to bring their purpose to some effect / but they sped little of their
cause.

And in this year after most writers / Dauyd le Bruze king of Scotts was
delivered from the castle of Odyhm^ at his lybertye, when he had put king
Edward in a suerty of an hundredth thousand marks for his ransom.

Anno dn^i. xiii.C.lvii. Anno dn^i. xiii.C.lviii. John^ Bernes. John^ Luffyn.
Anno.xxxiii. John^ Burys.
IN this.xxxiii. year, as wytnessyth the French cronycle / sir Robert Knollys,
sir James Pype, with other of their retynewe, warred in Brytayne. And as
testyfyeth the French cronycle, in the month of March and x. day of the
said month / the said capytaynes with one which the French book names
Thomlyn Fowke, came erely in the morning unto a town that was nere unto
Incerre called Kegennes being in the rule of Englysshmen / where the said
capytaynes taking with the^ more strength, ^akyng of (...).
yode straight unto the foresaid town of Ancerre being within two English
miles / and scaled the walls with ladders, and quyt them so ma^fully, that
they had the rule of the town or the son rysynge. And in that castle was
taken prisoner sir Guyllyam de Chalon the son of the earl of Ancerre, his
wife, and many other.

In taking of which town and castle few folks were slain / how be it
there were of armed men above two thousand, as sowdyours to defend the town.
Then the Englyshmen serched so nere, that as the common fame went, they fande
iewellys as they had been preuy to the hydyng of them, and that of great
value. Among the which as says the said cronycle, they fande certain
skynnes, the which were valued at.v. thousand motons of gold. ye shall
understand that a moton is a coin used in France and Brytayne, El moton of
gold.
and is of value after the rate of sterlynge money upon.v. s. or there about.

when the Englysshemen had pylled and spoiled the town by the space of.viii.
days, and raunsomed such as were of any substance / then they showed unto
the rulers of the town, that they would set it upon a fire, except that
they would give unto them a certain sum of money. For the which after long
treaty of this matter / the rulers of ye town to have possessyon thereof, and to
have it preserved from fire / agreed to give unto the English capytaynes.xl.
thousand motons, and lx. perlys valued at.x. thousand motons / which.l.
thousand motons should amounte after the rate of sterlynge money to.xii.
thousand and.v. hundredth pownde or nere about. So that what they fande within
ye town of any value, they bare it with them / except the iewellys and
ornaments of the church of saint Germayne / the which goods and iewelles
they took for pledge of such money as was unpaid of the foresaid.xl.M. motons
of gold, for the rau^some of the town. For ye which goods / the town of
Ancerre was bound unto the hedes of the church to pay for, or to redeem ye
said goods by the feasts of mydsomer next following / or else to pay
yearly inperpetuyte to ye said church in manner of quyte rent.iii.M. moto^s /
whereof ye value is showed in the first chapyter of Phylyp the.iiii. And over
all this the dwellers of the town agreed, that ye Englyshmen should brenne the
gates of ye town / and in diverse parties of the town, throw the wallys to the
ground.

Upon.iiii. days following the end of the said agremente / the foresaid sir
James Pype, and sir Otha^ of Holande, and other to the nombre of xvi. or.xviii.
Englysshmen, ente^dyng to have won some enterprise, were laid for by the
sowdyours of a place called the great Semyre / and by the^ taken and holden as
prisoners.

And in the month of Apryll next ensuyng, a town called in French Dabygny
sur le Meter, was by the Englysshemen gotten in like manner and form as was
the foresaid town of Ancerre. And the.ii. day of May was won by sir Robert
Knolles and his company, a town called Chasteleyn sur Lounayn / and pylled it
as they did the other. And after with their pyllage and prisoners, among the
which were many women and children of.iiii. and of five years of age / the
said Englyshme^ yode to the new castle upon Loyre. And ye shall understand,
that the party of the Englysshemen was greatly strengthed by the help of the
king of Nauerne, and of sir Phylyppe his brother and other / as more plainly
shall be showed in the French cronycle, or story of king Johan following.

And thus the said sir Roberte Knolles, with aid of the kings men of
Nauerne, daily wanne many towns and strong holds in Brytayne.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lviii. Anno domini.M.CCC.lix. Symonde wymondham. Symonde
Doffelde. Anno.xxxiiii. John^ Chychester.
IN this.xxxiiii. year, or more verily in the month of Nouembre, and end of
the.xxxiii. year of king Edwardes reygne / he with prince Edward and the duke
of Lancastre, with a puyssant army landed at Caleys / and from thens passed by
land unto Artoys, and by Uermendoys to ye city of Reins, and laid his siege
about that city / and beclypped it in such wise, that no man might enter or
go out of the city without lyce^ce of the Englysshemen.

when king Edward had lain xl. days at the siege of reins, without great
dear or hurt unto it doing / he removed his syege and passed by the country of
Champayne, till he came to a town called Guyllone / where ye king rested him
a season. In which time came unto him certain me^ of the duchye of Burgoyne,
as lords of diverse holds and towns within that duchery / and gave unto him,
to ye intent he should not molest or hurt ye country, ii.C.M. floryns of gold
/ which is to the value of sterlynge money of.xxxv.M. li. And over that the
said Burgonyons couenaunted with him, that they would mynystre to him and his
host, all such vytayles as was in ye country plentuously for his money. And
that done he departed from thens, and yode unto Neuers / and passed there the
river of Dyon or Ion^, and yode to Cola^ges upon Ion^. And from thens in the
month of March and beginning of his.xxxiiii. year of his reygn, he yode by
the country of Gastenoys toward the city of Paris. And prince Edward with his
company passed by Moret, till he came to an hold which Englysshme^ than kept
called Tournelles or Cournelles / before ye which town or hold lay at that
season certain Frenchmen in a strong bastyle, and assailed the Englyshmen
daily / and removed not thens, all be it they were monysshed of the princes
coming. They trusted so much in the strength of their bastyle, which the^
disceyued / for within.v. days of the princes coming, their bastyle was
gotten, and many of them slain, and to the nombre of.xlvii. persons of ye
company taken prisoners. Among the which were.iiii. men of name / ye is to
say, the lord of Bouyle or Bonile, the lord of Daygreuyle or of Aygreuyle,
sir John^ de Bars, and sir wyllyam de Plassyes.

Thus king Edward with his people spedyng his journey toward Paris / upon
the tuysdaye being the last day of March in the weke before Easter, came
unto a place called the hostell of Chastelon, between Mou^tlehery and Chastes /
and lodged him with a certain of his people there. And ye prince with other
lords of his host were lodged in the towns thereabout, from thens unto the
town of Corueyll, and an other town called long Iumell.

Thanne Charles eldest son of king John^, and that day regent of France /
made means of treaty. which was labored by a freer called Symonde de
Langres, prouyncyal of the freers Iacobynes, and legate of the pope. By whose
means a day of treaty was appointed to be holde^ upon good friday, in the
maledery of le long Iumel. where at the same day and place, apered for king
Edwardes party, the duke of Lancaster, the earls of warwyke and of
Northa^pton, with sir Johan de Chande, sir waltyer de Manuy, and sir wyllyam
Cheyny knights. And for the rege^t apered there, the lord of Few than
constable of France, the lord Bocy quant than marshall of France, the lord
of Sarancyers, the lord of Uyg nay of the country of Uyenne, sir Symond Bucy,
and sir Guychard of Auglye knights / which treaty came to none effect.

wherefore king Edward upon the tuysdaye following Easter day removed from
the said hostell, and lodged him nere unto Paris at a place named Chastellone
nere unto Mountrouge. And the residue of his host was lodged at Uauuys, at
Uaugerart, at Ge^tylly, and other towns there about. Tha^ upon frydaye
following, being the.x. day of Apryl / by means of ye abbot of Clugny, which
newly was sent from the pope Innocent the.vi, the foresaid lords and knights
again assembled at a place called the Ba^lye^, to treat of an accord between
the king and the regent. But their labor was spent in vain, as it before had been.

Upon the sunday next following, a part of ye kings host came before the
town of Paris, and enbataylled them in a field fast by saint Marcelles / and
tarried there from the morning till three of the clock at after noone, to
abide battle of the Frenchemen. The which made none issue out of city /
natwithstandynge that as testifyeth the French book, within Paris at that day
were great plentye of Sowdyours, over and beside the great foyson of the
enhabytauntes of the same.

when the Englysshemen perceived that they should have no battle of the
Parysyens / they about three at after noone departed the feld, and took their
way toward Chartres and so unto Bo^neuale nere unto Chaceadon. Than king
Edward was lodged at a place call Dones. To the which place came unto him out
of Paris the bishop of Beauuayes than chancellor of Norma^dye with other /
and so behaved them unto the king, that a new day of treaty was appointed to
be holden at Bretynguy, within a mile or little more of Chartres fore said,
upon the first day of May next ensuyng.

AT which day of apoyntemente / the foresaid duke of Lancaster, with the
said earls of warwyke and Northampton, and other / at the said place apperyd
for king Edward. And for the regent appeared there the forenamed bishop, with
many other lords and knights and spyrytuall men, to the number of.xxii.
persons, whose names I over pass for lengthynge of time. The which so
dylygently behaved him, that in the space of.viii. days they agreed upon an
unity and peace, the which was comprysed in.xli. artycles, as at length is
rehearsed in the French cronycle, whereof the effect is this.

The form of p^ace between England and France.
First the king of England and his heirs kings, with all the lands as he
than had in Gascoyne and Guyan / should have to him and his heirs for ever /
the city and castle of Poytyers with all the appertenau^ces to that lordshyp
belongyng. Also the city of Lymoges, with all the lands of Lymosyne and all
other their appertenau^ces. The city and castle of Perygorte, with all the
lands and revenues to that lordshyppe belonging. The erledome of Bygorre,
with all things to that lordshyppe belongyng. The erledome of Poytyau, with
all the appertenaunces. The sygnorye of Beleuyle. The lordshyp of Exanctys,
Exaucdoure, and Exancon^. The city of Again, the city of Agenoys, the cyty of
Caours, and lordshyppe of Caoursyn. The city of Tarbe, the city and country
of Gaure, Angoulesme, of Rodes, and of Rouern^. The lordshyppe of Mostruell,
with all revenues thereunto belonging. The sygnorye of Caleys, of Marquell, of
Sandgate, and Colyngn^. The lordshyppe of Hammys, of walys, and of Ouye. And
the erledome of Guynes, with all profytes thereunto belonging. All which
lordshyppes, honors, castles, towers, cytyes, and towns / the king of
Englange tha^ Edward the third and his heirs kings of England, should have
and hold for evermore, in as royal wise and like manner as done the kings of
France, without doing for them any homage, feawty, or other duty.

And king Edward after that day for him and his heirs kings of England,
should clearly renounce and give over, all his title, right, and interest, that
he had unto the crown of France, and specially the name of king of France.

Also all his right and title that he had unto the duchy of Normandye, of
Thorayne, of Aniowe, of Brytayne, and of the souerayntye of the erledome of
Flaunders / and of all other lordshyppes, cytyes, castelles, honors, towns,
towers, and manours, that any king of England before that day had any right
unto within the realm of France / and to hold him co^tente with the above
named lordshyppes, without any forther claim.

Forthermore it was agreed, that the French king should pay for his rau^some
three millions of scutes of gold / whereof.ii. should always make a noble Englysh.
ye shall understand ye a million of scutes is.x.C. thousand of scutes / which
extend after ye value of sterlyng money, unto the sum of.ii.C.l.M. mark.
And so three milions amounte unto.vii. hundredth and.l.M. mark / which makes
just.v. hundredth thousand pound of sterlynge money. Of the which.iii
millio^s of scutes, x.C.M. to be paid at Caleys by the first day of Iuny next
following the said treaty / and an other.x.C. thousand or millio^ to be paid
at the said town of Caleys, within.viii. months after ye French king was
commyn unto Caleys / and the third million to be paid at London in two years
and an half. That is to say at Myghelmasse.xii. months after the agreement
made.iiii. C. thousa^de scutes, and at Mighelmas next after ensuyng.iiii.C.M.
scutes / and at Easter than next following ii.C. thousand scutes, in full
payment of the three millio^s or.xxx.C. thousand scutes.

And further it was agreed, that after the French king was comen unto Caleys
/ he should rest him there iiii. months. whereof ye first month should be at ye
charg of king Edward / and the other.iii. months to be at the cost and
charge of the said French king / and to pay for eueryche of the said three
months, if he so long tarried there for the perfourmau^ce of the said
accord.x. thousand royal les of France / which at that time were in value
after ye rate of sterlyng money, every royal.xxi. d. or.xiiii. sous Paris /
and so he should pay for a months charge eyghte hundredth lxxv. pound.

And over that it was accorded, ye the French king John^ for ye time being,
nor no king of France after him, should aid or assist the Scotts again king
Edward, nor again his heirs kings of England. Nor king Edward nor his
heirs kings, shall allye them with the Flemynges, nor aid nor assyste them
again the said king Johan, nor his heirs kings of France.

And for the title or right of the duchye of Brytayne, which was in questyo^
between the earls of Bloys and of Mountford / it was accorded that both kings
being at Caleys, the said parties should be called before them. And if a peace
between them by the two kings might not be set / tha^ the said kings to
assign certain indyfferent persons to agree the said earls / and they to have
half a year of respyte for to quiet the matter. And if the said persons so by
the kings assygned, might not agree the said earls by that term / ye than
either of the said earls to make the best puruyaunce for him self yt either
of them could make, with the help of his friends or otherwise, whereby they
might attain to their right and claim of the said duchye. Provided always
that another of the said kings nor any of their sons, should aid or assyste
any of ye said earls / by reason whereof the peace between them accorded,
might be lowsed or broken. Also provided, ye to whether of the said two earls
the said duchy should fall by sentence of man or otherwise / that the homage
for it shall always be done to ye king of France.

All which ordenaunces and agrementes, with many mo, that would ask long
leysour to write, were ratyfyed and confermed by the instruments and seals of
ye prince of walys upon the party of king Edward for Englandes party; and
by Charles regent of France for that party / as by their letters patentes
than sealed apered, beryng date that one at Louuers in Normandye the.xvi. day
of May in the year of grace.xiii.C. and.lx, and that other at Paris the.x. day
of ye said month and year.

And over that either of the said ii. princes, that is to say Edward prince
of walys was sworn in presence of.vi. French knights, upon the sacrament of
the altar after ye third Agnus was said in time of a low mass, at the
foresaid Louuers song or said, that he to ye vttermoste of hy power, should
uphold and keep the foresaid peace in every point, as far as in him was. And
in like manner was Charles thanne regente of France sworn, in presence of sire
English knights to perform the same.

After which treaty thus fynysshed and ended / king Edward with his sons and
nobles of England, took shyppyng at Hu^flete in Normandy upon the xx. day of
May, and sailed into England leuyng behind him the earl of warwyke for to gyde
the Englysshemen that remained in Guyan and other places, and to se that the
peace which tha^ was proclaimed thorough France were kept and not broken by
the^ / which endured not long without vyolacyo^ as says the French book.

HEre I leave a part the great reioysyng and honorable receyuyng of the king
by the cytezyns of London, and other ceromonyes / which at this season I spare,
to thentent I may the more substancyally show unto you the fynall end of this
accord. Than troth it is that in this season of ye kings being in France /
king John^ for his more consolacyo^ was removed from Sauoy unto the tower of
London / where after ye kings return, he fested the king and his lords
upon the.xiiii. day of the month of Iunii. And the.viii. day of the month of
Iule next ensuyng / the French king in the morning landed at Caleys, and was
lodged in the castle, and there abode the coming of king Edward.

Upon the.ix. day of Octobre / king Edward arrived at Caleys, and went
straight unto the castle for to vysite king John^ / the which welcomed him
in a loving and friendly coutenaunce. And when the king should depart to his
lodgyng into ye town / the French king required him, yt he with his sons
should dyne with him upon the morrow following / which of the king was
granted to be upon the monday following, ye xii. day of the month. At which
day king Edward was first set and kept the astate, and than secundaryly ye
french king. Thyrdly the prince of walys, and fourthly the duke of Lancastre,
without mo at ye table. In the time of which dinner came to ye castle the earl
of Flaunders / whom the French king welcomed in most loving manner. And when
the said dinner with all honor was ended.ii. of ye kings sons of England,
and two of ye Frech kings, took leave of their fathers and rode toward
Boleyn^, where at that time the regent of France was. The which met them
in the myd way between Caleys and Boleyn^, and so conveyed: them unto Boleyn^,
and rested there with them that night / and upon the morrow lafte them there
and him self came unto Caleys, first to his father / and after his father and
he came both to the kings palace to dinner. which king Edward receuyed with
much joy and honor, and made unto them a sumptuous feast. Upon the
fourthtene day of Octobre the said regente departed from Caleys, and
returned unto Boleyn^ / and the two sons of king Edward returned from
Boleyne to Caleys.

And upon a saterdaye the.xxiiii. day of the month of Octobre, both kings
being in.ii. trauersys and in one chapel at Caleys, a mass was said before
them / to the offering of which mass another of them came. But when the pax
was borne first to the French king, and eft to king Edward, and either
refused to kiss it first / the French king rose up and came toward king
Edward. A peasyble kiss.
whereof he being ware rose up and met with him, and refused the pax and
kyssed either other. At the which mass either of them was solemply sworn to
maynteyne the articles of the said peace. And for more assurance of ye same /
many lords upon both parties were also sworn, to maynteyne the same to their
powers. ye shall also understand that in this season that the French king
so^ourned thus at Caleys, both for the paymente of his ransom and also for
the delivery of certain holds and towns which as yet were not delivered / he
put in such suerties as follows. The duke of Orliaunce, the duke of Burgoyn,
the duke of Burbone, the earls of Angeou, of Poyteau, of Bloys, of Alenson, of
saint Poule, of Escamps, of Ualentynoys, of Brame, of Ew, of Longeuyle, of
Ca^caruyle, of Ancerre of Dampmartyne, of Uendature, of Salysbruge, and of
Uendosme / the vycountes of Baudemou^t, of Beawmount, and of Ancuerre / the
lords of Craon of Deruall, of Dabyguy, of Cousy, of Fyers, of Preaux, of saint
Uenant, of Garancyers, of Aluerne, of Mountmorency, and of Angest, and also the
lord or wardeyne of the forestes / and kynghtes, sir wyllyam de Craon, sir
Lowys de Harcourt, sir John^ de Laguy, and sir Galtyerde Donehame. Of the
which.xxxviii. persons, diverse of them as before is touched were taken
prisoners at ye battle of Poytyers. For the which it was agreed, that as many
as had not paid their fynaunce before the third day of May last past,
should be acquitted by the kings fynaunce, with diverse other condycyo^s which I
pass over.

Than upon the morrow following of the taking of the foresaid oath by the two
kings, that is to say son day the xxv. day of Octobre / the French king was
freely delivered, the which the said day before noone, departed from Caleys
and rode toward Boleyn. whom king Edward conveyed a mile upon his way. At
which miles end they de parted with kissing and other loving manner / and
prince Edward kept on his way with king John^, and so conveyed him to Boloyn
/ where he tarried that night. And upon the morrow the said prince Edward, and
Charles duke of Normandy, with ye earl of Escamps and other noble me^ there
than being p^sent, were again sworn to maynteyne and hold the said peace,
without fraud, color, or dysceyte. And that done the said prince taking his
leave returned that night unto Caleys. And so yt now appears unto you, that
king John^ stood as prisoner by the space of.iii. years, and asmoche as from
the.xix. day of Septembre unto.xxv. day of Octobre.

And when king Edward had sped his needs at Caleys / he after as shall be
showed in the year following sailed into England.

It is also to be noted, yt this year while the king was occupied in his wars
in France as before is touched, the earl of Seynpoule with an army of
Frenchemen sailed about the borders of Kent and Sussex and la^ded in sundry
places / as Rye, wynchelsee, and Hastynges, and spoiled the towns and slew
many of ye men, and did much harm to the poor fysshers.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lix. Anno domini.M.CCC.lx. John^ Denis. John^ wroth.
Anno.xxxv. walter Borney.
UPon the even of saint Quyn tyne, or the.xxx. day of Nouembre, in the end of
the.xxxiiii. year of king Edward and beginning of this mayres year / the
king took shyppynge at Caleys, and sailed toward England / bringing with
him certain of his hostages. That is to say Lowys the second son of king
Johan newely made duke of Aniou and of Mayn, which before was earl of Angeou /
and John^ his brother newely made duke of Aluerne and of Berry, which before
was earl of Poytyers / which erledome now belonged to king Edward by reason
of the foresaid treaty. He also had with him sir Lowys duke of Brabant, and
the earls of Alenson and of Escampes, which were nere of the French kings
blood / with eyghte other earls and lords named in the French cronycle. with
the which the king la^ded at Dover shortly after, and so came to London
the.ix. day of Nouembre.

And in this.xxxv. year, men and beasts were perysshed in England in diverse
places with tho^dre and lygh tenynge / and the fend was seen in man's
likeness, and spoke unto men as they trauayled by the way.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lx. Anno domini.M.CCC.lx. wyllyam Holbech. John^ Pecche.
Anno.xxxvi. James Tame.
IN this.xxxvi. year / prince Edward wedded the countess of Kent, which
before was wife unto sir Thomas Holande / and before that, wife unto the earl
of Salesbury and deuorsed from him and married unto the said sir Thomas.

The second mortalyte.
In this year also was great mortality of men in England / during the which
the noble duke Henry of Lancaster dyed. This of writers is named the second
mortality. For it was ye second that fylle in this kings days.

when duke Henry was deed / sir Johan of Gaunt the kings third son, which
had married the said dukes daughter, was made duke of that duchye.

In this year also were seen two castles in the air. whereof that one appeared
in the south east, and that other in the south west / out of ye which at sundry
times as it were about the noone tide, issued of either of the^ an host of
armed men to man's sight. And that host which issued out of the castle of
the south east appeared white, and that other apered black. These two hosts
apered as though they faught each of them with other, and showed as the white
was first vyctoryous, and lastly ouercomen, and so dysapered.

In this year also a great company of diverse nacyons assembled them in Brye
and Champayne, whereof the ledders or capytaynes were Englysshemen / the which
did much harm in France.

But after the affyrmaunce of the Frenche^ cronycle / this company which there
is called the new company, began their assembles in the forenamed country of
Brye, or king John^ were delivered from Caleys. And when they were ware of his
delyuerau^ce / they departed out of Brye and yode into Champayne, and took
there diverse holds, and spoiled and robbed diverse small towns, and raunsomed
many me^. And in this year as says the french book, they took the bridge and
town of saint Sprytes upon the day of the Innocents or the.xxviii. day of
Decembre. And as affermeth Policronycon, about the same time another company
in likewise assembled the^ in Italye, which was called the white company / and
molested that country in like manner. And in the month of Apryll following /
king John^ sent the earl of Ca^caruyle, the earls of Salesbrugh, of ye
Marchez, of Forezstes and of Ioyn guy / the which earls with their retinue met
with the said company at a place than named Bruke, nere unto Lyo^ sur Rosne. At
which place was foughten a cruel fight. But in the end the French men were
ouerset and scomfyted / so that the said earl of Cancaruyle was taken
prisoner, and the two earls of Marchez and Forestes slain, with much of the
common people.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxi. Anno domini.M.CCC.lxii. John^ of saint Albones. Stephen
Caundissh. Anno.xxxvii. James Andrew.
IN this.xxxvii. year, upon the day of saint Mauryce, or the xv. day of
January / blewe so excedyng a wind yt the like thereof was not seen many years
passed. This began about eue^songtyme in ye south / and co^tynued with such
sternes yt it blew down strong and mighty buyldynges, as to wres, steples,
houses, and chymneys / and co^tynued for the more party in such sternesse by
the space of five days after. And in this year and.xxiiii day of the said
month of January came John^ king of France unto Eltham beside Grenewych / and
dyned there that day with the king. And upon that after noone, he was
honorably conveyed thorough the city of London unto Sanoye, as well by ye
cytezyns as other, the which met with him upon Blakheth well horsed in a
lyuery of one color. And while the said king John^ lay at ye said place of
Sauoy about ye beginning of March following, a grievous sykenesse took him / of
the which he dyed the.viii. day of Apryl following, in the beginning of the
year of grace xiii.C.lxiiii / and after was carried into France and buried at
saint Denis, the.vii. day of May following.

And in this year king Edward created sir Leonel his son duke of Clarence,
and sir Edmunde his other son earl of Cambryge. And in the end of this year
and.xvii. day of Septembre, began a great frost / ye which endured to the
beginning of the month of Apryl. By reason whereof much harm grew and ensued
of the same.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxii. Anno domini.M.CCC.lxiii. Richard Croydon^. John^
Notte. Anno.xxxviii. John^ Hyltoste.
ANd that year came.iii. kings into England for to speak with king Edward.
First ye king of France, the king of Sypres, and the king of Scotts.

IN this.xxxviii. year, prince Edward sailed to Bordeaux and received the
possessyon of Guyan, ye king Edward had newely given unto him. For the which
he after did his homage to his father, in likewise and manner as his father and
other kings of England were wont to do for the said duchye unto the kings of
France.

The battle of Da^hey.
And upon Myghelmasse day being tha^ upon a sunday, before the castle of
Danhoy fast by the city of Uaunes in Brytayne, met ye hosts of sir Charles
de Bloys and of sir John^ de Mountfort / which long before had stryue^ as
before is showed for the said duchy of Brytayne / and there foughten a cruel
battle. But by the help of god and of the Englysh archers, the victory fill
to sir John^ Mountfort. And in that fight sir Charles de Bloys was slain, and
many Frenchemen and Brytons that took his party. After which victory,
natwythstandynge that the wife of the said sir Charles lay within that
country / there was again the said sir John^ made no resystence, but that he
enjoyed that country in peasyble wise.

Tha^ Charles the.vi. of that name newly crowned king of France, in the right
of the woman sent ye arche bishop of Reins and the Marshal of France into
Brytaygne, for to set an unity and restfull peace between the said sir John^,
and the last wife of sir Charles. The which endeavored them so well, that in
the month of Apryll following the said battle, they agreed them / so that
the enherytaunce of that duchye should remain to the said sir John^ and his
heirs for evermore / and the wife of sir Charles should hold her contented
with ye erledome of Penyture and the vycou^tye of Lymoges / the which of old
time belonged to her ancetours.

And about this time was an ordenaunce and statute made, that sergeauntes and
prentyses of the law, should plede their plees in their mother tongue. But that
stood but a short while.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxiii. Anno domini.M.CCC.lxiiii. Symonde Mordon^. Adam of
Bury. Anno.xxxix. John^ of Metforde.
IN this.xxxix. year after some writers / king Edward upon saint Stephans
day fynisshed his wars. wherefore in the worship of god and saint Stephan, he
this year after the opynyons of the said auctours, Fou^dacyo^ of saint
Stephans chapel at Westmynster.
began ye fou^dacion of saint Stephans chapel at westmynster. The which was
fynysshed by Richard the.ii. and son of prince Edward next king of
England, after this third Edward.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxiiii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxv. John^ Brykylsworth. John^
Luskyn^. Anno.xl. John^ Drelande.
IN this.xl. year / and month of February, was borne the first son of
prince Edward, and was named Edward / the which dyed when he was about the
age of.vii. years. And in this year one named Barthran de Claycon a Norman,
with an army of Frencheme^ entered the land of Castyle, and warred upon Peter
than king of that land / and so behaved him, that in less than.iiii.
months space, he chased the said Peter out of his own land, and crowned
his brother named Henry king of Castyle, at a town called Burges upon Easter
day. wherefore the said Peter constrained of necessyte, was compelled to come
to the city of Bordeaux, for to have and ask aid of prince Edward. This
Peter was ryghtefull heir unto the crown of of Castyle, and Henry his brother
after most writers was bastard. But this Peter was so vile of condycyons,
that his subgectes had to him but little favor. And so the war continued a
season between his brother and him, as after shall appear / in the which prince
Edward with his archers took party with this Peter, and the French king with
his speres took party with Henry.

And in this year at the kings commandment, Adam Bury thanne mayre of London
was dyscharged ye xxviii. day of January / and for him elect and chosen mayre
John^ Love kyn grocer. And as witnesses Polycronicon and other / ^
this year was commanded by the king, that Peter pens should no more be
gadered in England, nor paid unto Rome, as they of long time had been used
and granted, in the time of Iuo or Jew sometime king of west Saxons, as
before in his story is showed.

But how so at that days it was than by the king forbode^ / yet never
thelesse at this present time and season, they be gadered in sundry shyres of
England.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxv. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxvi. John^ ward. John^ Louekyn.
Anno.xli. wyllyam Dykman.
IN this.xli. year, was borne the second sonn^ of prince Edward at Bordeaux
named Rychard, Birth of (...) the second.
in the month of Apryll and the third day of the said month. The said prince
Edward with the king of Nauerne and the foresaid Peter king of Castyle, met
with Henry Bastard and usurper of the said kingdom, nere unto a town called
Domyng / where between them was a cruel and long fight. How be it in the end
the victory fill unto the Englysshemen, and Henry and his men were chased.

In this bataylle was taken sir Barthram de Glaycon, and sir Arnold Dodenhamme
thanne Marshall of France, with other as well French as Brytaynes / and slain
upon five thousand men upon the party of the said Henry, and upon.xvi.
hondreth upon prince Edwardes party.

After which vyctory / the prince with the said Peter spedde them unto the
city of Burgys, which was yolden to the^ shortly after their coming / and
after help the said Peter to win other cytyes and holds, so that he tarried
there till the month of August following. At which season as says the
cronicle of France, he returned unto Bordeaux without paymente of wages for
his sowdyours, that before was to him by the said Peter promised.

In this season that prince Edward was thus in Spain / Henry Bastard fled
with his wife into France, and abode in a place or country called Carcasson.
But so soon as he was warned that prince Edward was returned unto Bordeaux /
he gadered to him a new company, and passed by the mountains of the forestes /
and so entered the said land of Castile, the.xxvii. day of the month of
Septembre following / and had the city called Calahore yolded unto him.
whereunto him drew much people of the country / so that his strength
increased hougely. Than from thens he yode unto the city of Burgys, where he
was ioyously received / and behaved him in such wise, yt in short while after
he had the hole rule of the land of Castyle / and his brother was feign to
avoid the land, and to seche aid of the Sarazyns as affermeth ye foresaid
cronycle.

And in this year about the monethe of Iuny / the company before minded in
the.xxxvi. year of this king, entered the duchy of Guyan / and there held them
in doing much harm to that country, like as they before had done in diverse
places of France by all that season of iiii. years passed. And in the month
of Decembre they departed from thens and yode into the countries of Auerne and
Berry. And in the month of February, they passed the river of Loyre, and took
the way toward Marcyll / and after entered the country of Burgoyne. And ever
as they passed the countrees, they raunsomed men, and spoiled many towns as
they went.

And all be it that the French king appointed diverse of his lords and knights
to go again them / yet at such seaso^s as they drew nere unto them, they
would suffer them to depart without batayl. For they were so many that they
were nombred at lx.M. But of their capytaynes is none named. How be it there
were Englyshmen, Gascoynes, Pycardes Frenchemen, men of Nauerne, and of many
other nacyons, which the cronycle reherseth not / and continued in their force
and strength long after, to the great damage of the countrees which they
passed thorough / as Normandy, Gascoygne, Guyan, Burgoyne, and all the chyef
countrees of France / and lived by raven and pyllage, to the great
enpoueryssynge of the said countrees and towns, which they passed by or
lodged in.

Anno dn^i. xiii.C.lxvi. Anno dn^i. xiii.C.lxvii. John^ Torgolde. James
Andrewe. Anno.xlii. wyllyam Dykman.
IN this.xlii. year / and month of March, apered Stella cometa, that is a
blasynge sterre.

And in the month of Apryll next ensuynge, that is to say the syxt day of the
said month / Leonell ye son of this king Edward entered the city of
Paris, where he was of the dukes of Berry and Burgoyne honorably received /
and so by them conveyed unto their brother the king of France unto Louure,
where he at that season was lodged. Of whom he was also ioyously received and
logged within the kings palace, and dyned and souped with the king at his
own table. And upon the morrow following he dyned with the queen at a place
of the kings nere to saint Poule, where the queen tha^ was lodged. ^
And when after dyuer he had a while daunsed and passed the time with other
dysportes / he than with the said.ii. dukes was again conveyed unto the king,
and souped with him again that night. And upon the morning being tuysdaye,
the said dukes fested the said sir Leonell at a place of theyrs in Paris named
Artoys.

And upon the wednesdaye he dyned and souped again with the queen. And upon
the thursday and morrow following, the said sir Leonell took his leave of the
king and queen / the which gave unto him gifts, and to such as were in his
company, to ye value of.xx.M. floryns and above / and was conveyed with noble
men, as the earl of Cancaruyle and other, till he was comen to Sens / and with
knights till he came to the borders of France / where he gave unto them
rich gifts with great thanks.

And after he continued his journey till he came unto ye city of Mylayne /
where shortly after he married the daughter of Galyace duke of the said city
and country, and had by her great possessions, by reason that her said father
dyed shortly after.

And in the end of this year, the earls of Armenak, of Bret, and of Perygort,
with diverse other nobles of the duchye of Guyan, appeled the prince of walys in
the French kings court, that he had broken the peace, and wronged them
contrary the peace stablysshed between England and France / and required the
French king yt the said appeal might have due process again the said prince.
The which as says the French cronicle king, Charles deferred, for certain
causes there towched, which were to long to reherce.

Anno dn^i. xiii.C.lxvii. Anno dn^i. xiii.C.lxviii. Adam wymbynghm^. Simon
Mordon^. Anno.xlii. Robert Gyrdeler.
IN this.xliii. year, or more certainly in the end of the precedynge year /
one walter Bernes mercer, was upon the day of ye translation of saint Edward
king and confessoure or the.xiii. day of Octobre, chosen by the mayre and
aldermen mayre of the city of London. But how it was for lack of substance,
or by other impedymente, which is not noted, the said walter upon the day of
Symonde and Jude following, wha^ he should have taken his oath at Guylde halle
apered not. wherefore in his rome by eleccyon of the foresaid mayre and
aldermen, was admytted for that year following Symonde Mordon^ fysshmonger
mayre of that city.

And in this year and month of March / Peter king of Castyle, which by the
aid of the Sarazyns dwelling in the borders of Spayn, had won and
recovered sum part of the land of Castyle / encountrede with his bastard
brother Henry beforesayde, and gave unto him battle nere to a town called
Sybylle. where after long fight, the said Peter was scomfyted and much of
his people slain, and him selfdryuen unto a castle / out of the which he
was shortly after by treason gotten, and presented unto his brother forenamed /
by whose sentence he was i^medyatly byheded. After whose death the said Henry
enjoyed the hole land of Castyle. which infortunytie and myschau^ce fylle to
this Peter after diverse writers, for so much as he cruelly slew his own wife
ye daughter of the duke of Burbon^.

And in this year and month of May / the king of France in his high court
of parlyamente holde^ at Paris, proceeded in judgment upon the appellacyons
before made by the earl of Armenak, the lord of Bret, and earl of Perogort,
again prince Edward, as before is towched in the precedynge year. whereupon
dyscorde and varyaunce began to take place between the.ii. kings / in so much
yt by mean of the said.iii. lords, natwythstandyng that they were before
sworn to be to the king of England true lyege men / diverse towns of the
country of Poyteaw yielded them to the French king, as Albeuyle, Rue, and the
more party of the said towns of the said country. whereupon ambassades were
sent upon both parties / and diverse means of treaty were comoned, which
conteyneth a long work, with resonynge made upon the same. But in conclusyo^
all came to none effect. So that breche of the peace which before, between ye
ii. kings was so substa^cially concluded was broken / and either king for his
party made prouysio^ for the war. In so much ye king Charles spedde him to
Roan in Normandy / and there in ye month of July rigged his navy to set them
forewarde for to war upon England.

In which time and season ye king Charles was thus occupied in Normandy / the
duke of Lancaster la^ded at Caleys with a strong company of archers and other
warryours / and from thens passed to Thoroue^ne, and so to Air, in wastyng the
country with irne and fire as he went. wherefore ye French king in defense of
those parties, sent the duke of Burgoyne with a puyssaunt army to withsta^de
the said duke of Lancaster. The which duke of Burgoyne sped him i^ such wise,
yt about ye.xxiiii. day of August he lodged his host upon the mountain of
Turnehan nere unto Arde. And the English host was lodged between Gygowne and
Arde / so that ye frountes of both hosts were within a mile. Between whom
were daily skyrmysshes and small bykerynges without any notarye battle. And
wha^ the said duke of Burgoyn^ had thus kept the said mount, from the.xxiiii.
day of Auguste unto the.xii. day of Septe^bre / he removed his host and yode
unto Hesde^. For the which deed he was after blamed of king Charles his
brother. After which departure of the Fre^chemen / the duke of Lancastre with
his host took ye way toward Cause or Caux, and passed the river of Su^me /
and so rode toward Harflew, entendynge as says the French book to have fyred
the French kings navy. But at their coming thither ye town was so strongly
ma^ned, yt they did there little scathe. wherefore the said duke departed
shortly thens, and spedde him into the country of Poyteau, and so came unto
the town of Albeuyle. where without the Frenchemen encountered him, and gave
unto him battle. In the which was taken sir Hugh Chastelon^ knight with other
knights, esquyres, and burgeyses of the town / and upon.xvi. score Frenchmen
slain. which said prisoners to the nombre of five and forty were sent unto
Caleys / and ye duke with his company yode unto Bordeaux, in spoylyng of the
Fre^chme^ as he went.

Anno dn^i. xiii.C.xlviii. Anno dn^i. xiii.C.lix. John^ Pyell. John^
Chychester. Anno.xliiii. Hugh Holdyche.
IN this.xliiii. year and month of January, dyed the earl of warwyke at
Caleys, after he was returned from the duke of Lancastre / which was a man of
great fame.

And in ye month of August, dyed that noble woman queen Phylype and wife unto
Edward the third. Death of (...) Phylyppe.
The which was a great benefactoure unto the chano^s of saint Stephans
chapel at westmynster.

And soon after dyed dame Blau^ch sometime the wife of Henry duke of Lancastre /
and was buried at Poules upon the no^thsyde of the high altar by her
husband. where she ordained for him and her.iiii. chau^tres for ever, and an
annyuersarye yearly to be kept. At the which, over great things be set unto
the deane and chanons of the church / she ordained that the mayre being
present at the mass, should offer.i. d. and take up.xx. s / the shyryffes
either of them a penny, and to receive either of them a mark / ye cha^berlayn
of the city.x. s, the sword berer.vi. s..viii. d, and every officer of the
mayres there present.xxii. d, and to every offycer to the nombre of.viii either
of them.viii. d. admytted for the shyreffes. The which obyte at this day is
holden. But by reason that the land is decayed, these forenamed sums ben
greatly mynysshed / so that the mayre at this day has but.vi. s.viii.d,
both the shyreffes six. s. eyghte. d, and other after that rate.

In this year also the king held his parlyament at westmynster. In the which
was granted unto him iii. fyftenes to be paid in.iii. years following. And by
a conuocacyon of the clergy was also granted unto him.iii. dysmes, to be paid
in like manner.

And in this year was the.iii. mortality, whereof dyed much people. And such
a morayne fill also among beasts, that the like thereof was not seen many years
before. And upon that ensued such excessiues of rain, that corn was therewith
drowned in the earth / and so bukked with water, that the year ensuynge whete
was at xl.d. a busshell.

And in ye end of ye month of July / sir Robert Knollys accompanied with
diverse noble men and soudyours, entered saint Omers. And wha^ they had executed
their pleasures there and in ye country enuyro^ / they than rode unto Arras, in
wasting and spoylyng ye country as they went. And when they had bre^t the
bulwerkes of the said town of Arras / they passed by Noyn^ and Uermendoys / and
burnt the houses of all such as would not to them give due ransom. And thus
holding their way / they passed the ryuers of Oyse and of Sire / and so came
unto the city of Raynes, and passed there the river / and rode toward Troyes,
and passed ye ryuers of Aube and of Said / and so held their way to saint
Floryntyne, and there passed the river of Ion / in holdyng their course toward
Ioyngny and so to Corbueyll and Esson or Essoyn. And upon a mondaye being the
xxii. day of Septembre / the said Englysshemen lodged them upon the mount of
saint Albone, and in the country there about. And upon wednysdaye following,
they enbataylled them in a field between the towns of Iunye and Paris.

In all which season they passed without battle thorough those foresaid
countres, in spoylyng them and raunsomyng the inhabytau^tes thereof without
resystens or impedyme^t. And all be it yt in the city of Paris at that day
were.xii.C. men of arms waged by the French king, beside the sowdyours and
strength of the cytezeyns of that city / yet the said host of Englysshemen
lay as before is said enbataylled, till it was paste noone of the foresaid
day. At which time for so much as they were credibly enfourmed that they
should there have no batayl, they brake their feld and sped them to a place or
town called Antoygny, and there lodged ye night and upon the morrow took their
journey to ward Normandy.

But after.iiii. days labor, they turned their way toward Estampys or
Escamps, by Beause in Gastenoys, in pyllynge and domagynge the countries as
they before had done / contynuynge their journey till they came into the
erledome of Angeau / where they wanne by strength the towns of Uaas and
Ruylly, with other strong holds thereabout.

But than as ye devil would, which is rote of all envy and dyscorde / the lord
Fytzwater and the lord Grau^tson, fill at variau^ce with sir Robert Knolles and
his company / which grew to so great hatred and dyspleasure, that sir
Roberte Knolles with the flower of the archers and sowdyours, departed from the
said two lords, leuynge them in the foresaid towns of Uaas and Ruylly / and
he tha^ yode into Brytayne.

whereof when certayntye was brought unto the French king / anon he
commanded sir Berthram de Glaycon^ newly made marshall of France, with a
strong army to enter the said countye of Angeou, and to make sharp war
upon the said Englyshmen. The which upon the twelf day of Octobre following,
laid syege unto the said town of Uaas / whereof issued out the said lords
of Fytzwater and Grau^tson, and gave unto the Marshall batayl. But in the end
the dyscomfyture fyl unto the Englysshemen / so that of them was slain.vi.
hundredth, and the rest put unto the flight.

In the which was taken ye said lord Grauntson with other. And that done the
said sir Barthra^ yode unto the town of Uaas, and gat it by assawte. where
also were s^ayne upon three hundredth of Englysheme^, and the other put to
flight, and many taken prisoners. And after this the said Barthram pursued the
English men that were fled, unto a town called Uersure. where in assawtynge
of the said town, he slew and took prisoners upon.iiii.C. Englyshme^. And
thus by strife and dyssenc. on among them self / those that before by amyte
and good accord were victours, ^
now by hatered and dyscorde were slain and taken prisoners.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxix. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxx. wyllyam walworth. John^ Bernes.
Aonn.xlv. Robert Gayton^.
IN this.xlv. year and beginning of the mometh of March / the archebyshoppe of
wynchester than being a cardynall, and present at Auynyon with pope Gregorye
the xi. of that name / was put in commyssyon with the archebyshoppe of Beauuays
to make or treat a peace and vnyty between the two realms of England and of
France. which said cardynall of wynchester after his departing from the pope,
came down toward Meleoune / where by the said archbysshop and also cardynall
of Beauuays, he was honorably met, and so conveyed unto the city of Melcon.
And when he had restyd him there upon.iiii. days / the two cardynalles
ensemble sped them unto Paris / where they with king Charlys had communycacyo^
towchynge the said peace. And after his pleasure known / the said archbysshop
and cardynall took his leave, and was conveyed toward Caleys / where he took
shyppynge, and so sailed in to England / and showed unto the king the popes
pleasure with the French kings answer.

And in this year following the somertyde in Guya^ were made and foughten many
and diverse skyrmysshes / in the which for the more party the Englyshemen were
put unto the worse / so that many of them were slain and taken prisoners, and
diverse holds and towns taken from them / and specially in the country of
Lymosyne. For by the first day of the month of July, the city of Lymoges
with all the country of Lymosyne forsayde was under the obeysaunce of the
French king, as wytnessyth the French Cronycle.

whereof the occasyon was as affermeth the English book, A task ^e^ynge.
for so much as prince Edward had lately before arreryd of the inhabytauntes of
that city and country, a great and grievous task, to their great hurt and
enpouerysshyng / by means whereof he lost the love of the people.

when the French king had thus opteyned the rule of the country of Lymosyne
/ he immedyately after sent sir Barthram de Glaycon into the erledome of
Poyteawe or Poytyers, and wa^ne there many towns and castles / and lastly
laid his syege unto Rochell, as after in the following year shall be showed.

A mayres (...) to the (...) of the (...).
And to the end that good and merytoryous deeds should be holden in memory /
here is to be noted that the mayre for this year being Ioha^ Bernys mercer,
gave unto the comynaltye of the city of London a chest with three locks and
keys, and therein a thousand mark of ready money / wyllyng the keys thereof to
be yearly in the keeping of three sundry persons, that is to mean the master of
ye felysshyp of the mercery to have one, the master of the felysshyp of
drapars the second, and third to be in the keeping of the chamberlayne of that
city. And so therein the said thousand mark to be kept / to the intent that
at all times when any cytesyne would borowe any money, that he should have it
there for the space of a year / to lay for such a sum as he would have plate
or other iewellys to a suffycyente gayge, so that he excedyd not the sum of
an hundredth mark. And for the occupyenge thereof if he were learned, to say at
his pleasure De profundis for the soul of John^ Bernys and all christen
souls, as often times as in his sum were comprysed.x. marks. As he that
borrowed but.x. mark, should say but over that prayer. And if he had.xx. mark
/ then to say it twyes, and so after the rate. And if he were not learned, then
to say so often his Pater noster. But how so this money was lent or gyded / at
this day the cheste remains in the chamber of London, without money or
pledges for the same.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxx. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxi. Robert Hatfelde. John^ Bernes.
Anno.xlvi. Robert Gayton^.
IN this.xlvi. year and month of February, king Edward held his parlyamente
at westmynster. In the which he asked of the spirytualtye.l.M. li, and as much
of ye lay fee. The which by the temporal was granted / but the clergy kept
them of with plesaunt answers. So that the king and his cou^sayll was with
them dyscontented / in so much that to their dyspleasures, diverse officers, as
the chaunceler, the pryuye seal, the tresourer, and other, were removed being
spyrytuall men / and in their offices and places temporal men set in. And
shortly after the foresaid cardynall of Beauuays came into England, to treat
of the peace between the.ii. realms. But he spedde nothing to the effect
thereof.

wherefore in the month of July, ye French king sent into the country of
Poyteaw the forenamed sir Barthram de Claycon^ with a strong army / where he
wan diverse holds and fortresses from the Englyshmen. In which season king
Edward for strengthyng of the country, and specially to defend ye town of
Rochell, which as above in the other year is showed was at this year besieged
by the said sir Barthran / sent the earl of Penbroke with other noble men, to
forty fie the said town, and to remove ye syege. But or he might win to the
said town / he was encountered with a flote of Spaynardes, the which king
Henry of Castyle had sent into France to strength the French kings party. Of
the which flote after long and cruel fight / the said earl was taken, with
sir Guycharde de Angle and other, to the nombre of.C and three score prisoners /
and the more party of his men slain and drowned, with the loss of many good
ships.

And in the beginning of the month of Septembre following, a Gascoygne borne, a
man of good fame, whom the king of England had admytted for his lyeutenaunt
and gouernoure of the country of Poyteaw, named le Captall de Bueffe / faughte
with an army of Frenchmen before a town named Sonbyse / where in conclusyon
his men were slain and chased, and he with.lxx. of his party taken prisoners.
Than the dukes of Berry and of Burgoyne upon the.vi. day of Septembre, came
before Rochell / and had certain communicacio^s with ye rulers of the said
town, for the delyuery thereof. In this pass time and season, king Edward
heryng of the taking of the earl of Pe^broke, and of the loss that he daily
had of his men in diverse parties of France, with also the ieopardye that ye
town of Rochell and other stood in / made hasty prouysyon, and entendyd to
have passed the sea. But the wind was co^traryous, that he might have no
passage / wherefore he returned as says Policronico^, again into the land.

Than upon the.viii. day of Septembre beforesayd, the captain of Rochell,
having no comfort of short rescous / yielded upon certain appoyntementes the
said town unto the forenamed dukes, unto the French kings use. And shortly
after were also yolden to them, the towns of Angolesme, of Exa^ctes, of saint
John^ de Angely, with diverse other.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxxi. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxii. John^ Phylpotte. John^ Pyell.
Anno.xlv. Nycholas Brember.
IN this.xlvii. year / at a wrestelynge holden upon blake Heth beside London,
was slain a mercer of London named John^ Northwode. For the which great
dyssencyon grew among the felyshyppes of ye city, to the houge dystourbaunce
of it / and a good season after or the rancoure thereof might be duly
appeased.

In this year also the duke of Lancaster sir John^ of Gaunt, and sir Edmu^de
his brother earl of Cambriged wedded the two daughters of Peter which was late
king of Castyle, put to death by Henry his bastard brother / as before I have
showed in the xliii. year of this kings reygne. Of ye which two daughters sir
John^ of Gaunt married the eldest named Co^stance, and his brother the younger
named Isabell / so that by these maryages these.ii. brethren claymed to be
enherytours of the kingdom of Castyle or Spain.

And in this year after the duke of Brytayne had received many exortacyons and
requests from the French king, to have him upon his party: he sent for
certain sowdyours of Englishmen, and strengthed with them some of this
castelles and holds. whereof heryng king Charles / sent thither with a strong
power the forenamed sir Barthran de Claycon / warnyng them to make war upon
them as an enemy unto the house of France. The which according to their
commission entered the land of Brytayn, in wastyng it with irne and fire / and
in short process had yolden unto him the more party of the chyef towns,
except Breast, Aulroy, and Deruall. Than in the end of Iuny the said sir
Barthran laid syege unto Breast / and the lord of Craon with other lay before
Daruall. In all which season the duke of Brytayne was in England. For so
soon as he had as before is said, bestowed the foresaid English sowdyours /
he sailed into England to speak with king Edward.

In the month of July, the duke of Lancaster with sir John^ de Mount forde
duke of Brytayne and other, with a mighty puyssaunce landed at Caleys. And
after they had rested them there a certain days, they rode unto Hesden, and
lodged them within the park an other season. And after passed by Dourlo^s, by
Benquesne, and so unto Corbye / where they passed ye river of Some, and rode
unto Roy in Uermendoys / where they rested them by the space of.vii. days. At
which term end they set fire upon the town, and took their way toward
Laemoys, and burned and spoiled the country as they went. And in process of
time passed the ryuers of Osne, Marne, and of Aube, and rode thorugh Cha^payne
/ and by the erledome of Brame streyghte unto Guy / and passed the river of
Seyn, and so toward ye river of Leyr, and unto Marcynguy ye no^nery. And when
they were passed the said nonnery / they kept their way toward the river of
Ancherre, and so unto Bordeaux. In all which journey they passed without
fight or battle / natwithsta^dyng the great hurt and damage they did unto ye
towns and cou^tres as they passed. Except at a place or town called Orchye,
a knight of France called sir John^ de Uyenne encountered.l. speres and.xx.
archers that were strayed from their host / and set upon them, and slew some
part of them, and took the resydue of them prisoners. So that the French
book says, for so much as for lack of meat for their horses and other
paynfull things that in that journey to them happened, that though that
iournay were unto the Englysshemen honorable to ride so far in the kings
land vnfoughten with / yet it was to them very paynfull, co^syderyng the
manyfolde chances falling to them, as loss of horses and other things
during that passage.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxiii. John^ Awbry. Adam of Bury.
Anno.xlviii. John^ Fysshyde.
IN this.xlviii. year, were sent fro the pope than being the.xi. Gregory, the
archebysshop of Rauenne, and the bishop of Carentras / for to treat of the
peace, between the.ii. kings of England and of France. The which assembled
them at Bruges in Flaundres. whyther also for king Edwardes party, came the
duke of Lancastre, and the bysshope of London, with other. And for Charles the
French king, appeared there the duke of Burgoyne, and the bishop of Amyens,
and other. The which co^myssioners, after they had spente a great part of
the lent in disputacions of this matter / the parties for the French king
desired a license of the legates, that they might ride unto Paris, and show
unto ye king the officers of the english party / and so to return with his
pleasur. whereupon it was agreed, that a certain should ride and to show unto
the French king, yt the Englysshemen abode styffely upon the souerayntye,
that the king of England and his heirs kings, shall enjoy all the former
lands comprysed in the peace made between him and John^ than king of France /
as before is showed in the.xxxiiii. year of this king, with out homage or other
duyte for them doing. For this matter as says ye French cronycle, king
Charlys assembled at Paris a great part of ye nobles of his realm, with many
other wise me^ and doctors of dyuynite, to have that case suffyciently argued
and debated. In the which cou^sayl it was plenerly determined, that the king
might not give over the said souerayntye without great peril of his soul / as
there was showed by diverse resons. when this report was brought unto Bruges /
ye said treaty was dissolved without any conclusyon taking / except the
peace was continued till the feast of all saints next ensuynge.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxxiii. Anno domini.M.CCC.lxxiiii. Richard Lions. wyllyam
walworth. Anno.xlix. wyllyam wodhowce.
IN this year, that is to understand in the beginning of this mayres year,
and end of the xlviii. year of king Edward / a new (...) wise co^playned upon
to the king, yt he was thrown into prison, where he lay many years after.

Than king Edward created Rychard sonn^ of prince Edward prince of walys / and
gave unto him ye erledomes of Chester and Cornewayll. And also for the king
waxed feeble and sykely / he than betoke the rule of the land unto sir John^ of
Gaunt duke of Lancastre / and ordained him as governor of the land. which so
continued during his fathers life.

In this year also the tenau^tes or menyall servants of the earl of warwyk,
made a riot upon the monks of Euyshm^ / and slew and hurt many of the
abbottes tenauntes, and spoiled and brake his closures and warynnes, and sewed
their pondes and waters, and did unto them many displesures / to the utter
ruin of that monastery, ne had the king y^ sooner have sent down to the earl
his letters, chargynge him to sease and withdraw his men from that riot. which
afterward was pacified, without any notary punysshement of such persons as
were begynners or executours of that riot.

Anno domini.M.CCC.xcvi. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xcvii. Androwe Pykman. Nycholas
Bembre. Anno.lii. Nycholas Twyforde.
IN this.lii. year and.xii. day of the month of Apryl / sir John^ Mynster
worth knight, for certain tresons, of the which he was convict before the
mayre and other justices of the king in the Guyld halle, was this foresaid day
at tyborne put in execucion / that is to mean, hanged, heded, and quartered /
and his head set after upon London bridge. The cause of whose death was, for
so much as he being put in trust by the king, received great sums of money
to pay with the kings sowdyours / the which he kept unto his own use, and
deceived the king and his sowdiours. And when thereof he was to the king
accused / he feryng punysshement fled into France, and there conspyred newly
again his natural prince / and so lastly was taken and received his merit.

A^hysme.
In this year also began a wonderful cysme in the church of Rome. For after
the death of the pope the.xi. Gregory was chosen.ii. popes. whereof the first was
named the.vi. Urba^, and that other the seventh Clement / the first an Italy
on borne, and that other a Frencheman. Of the which ensued such dyscorde in
eleccyon of the pope, that by the term of.xxxix. years after, there was
ever.ii. popes in such auctorytye, that hard and doughtefull it was to know
/ whether was indubitat pope.

Death of king Edward the third.
And upon the.xxii. day of the month of Iuny, dyed at his manor of Shene now
called Rychmou^t, king Edward ye third of that name / wha^ he had reigned.li.
years and.v. months and odd days / leuyng after him.iiii. sons, that is
to say Leonell duke of Clarence, John^ of Gau^t duke of Lancastre, Edmund of
La^gley duke of york, and Thomas of woodstok earl of Cambrydge. Of the which
sons with other nobles of his realm, he was honorably conveyed from his
said manor of Shene unto the monastery of westmynster, and there solempnely
within the chapel of saint Edward upon the south side of the shryne, with
this Epytaphyor superscrypcion in a table hangyng upon his tomb. Hic decus
Anglorum, flos regum preteritoru^,
Forma futurorum, rex clemens, pax populorum,
Tercius Edwardus regni complens iubileum,
Inuictus pardus, pollens bellis Machabeus.


The which is thus to be understand in our mother tu^ge as following. Of
English kings, here lies the beauteuous flower.
Of all before passed, and myrrour to them shall sue
A merciful king, of peace conseruatour,
The.iij. Edward. The death of whom may (...)
All Englysshme^ / for he by knyghtehode due,
was lyberde inuict, and by feate Marciall
To worthy Machabe in virtue peregall.


PHylyp de Ualoys earl of Ualoys, and son of Charles de Ualoys brother unto
ye.iiii. Philip was admitted for protectoure of the realm of France, in the
beginning of the month of February. And upon Trynite sunday next ensuyng, he
with his wife were crowned at Raynes, in ye year of our lord god
a.M.iii.C.xxviii, and the.ii. year of king Edward the.iii. tha^ being in
possession of the crown of England. Between this Philip and the said Edward
king of England, as some deal before in the story, and.iiii. year of Charles
the.v. is towched / great disputacions and arguments arose between their
cou^sayles, for the right and title to the crown of France. For it was
thought by the cou^sayl of England, for so much as Edward was cosyn to
Philip le Beaw, and sonn^ of ye said Philippes daughter, which had no mo
chylder but Edwardes mother / that he should rather be king of France than
Philip de Ualoys, that was but cosyn germayn to Philip le Beaw, and son of
his brother Charles. Of which dispucio^s and arguments the fynall conclusion
was, y^ for an old decre and law by auctoritye of parlyament long before made
was enacted, that no woman should enheryte the crown of France / therefore ye
title of Edward by might of the Fre^chemen was put by, and this Philip admytted
to the governance of the same. After which direccio^ thus taken, and specially
by ye means of sir Robert earl of Artoys / this Philip anon was proclaimed
rege^t of France, unto such time as the queen wife of Charles the.v. which
tha^ was with child were delivered / and so received the rule of the land as
rege^t. In time whereof, Peter Remy principal tresorer of king Charles last
deed / which Peter (living the said Charles) was accused of myspe^dyng of ye
kings tresoure, and enrychyng of him self contrary to right and reason, so yt
his goods should be esteemed at.iiii.C.M. li. after Paris money, whereof ye value
is set out in diverse places before in this work was taken out of prison and
areygned at Paris, and there convict and adiuged / and upon the.xxiiii. day of
March drawn thorugh the city, and hanged upon the common gybet at Paris. And
upon the first day of Apryll following / the old queen and wife of Charles last
king, was lighted of child, and brought forth a daughter at Boys in Uince^t,
which after was named Blanch. wherefore where before the said Philip de Ualoys
ruled before but as rege^t / now he was allowed and taken for king, and
crowned as before is said at the city of Raynes, Phylyp de Valoys ^ioned king
of France.
with ye queen his wife up on Trinite sunday. And wha^ ye sole^pnyte of his
coronacio^ was ended / he then assembled before him and his cou^sayll Lowys the
earl of Flau^dres, and received of him homage for the said erledom. And that
done, he besought the king of aid to oppress certain towns of his country
which rebelled again him. whereunto ye king granted / and by counsayll and
exortacion of sir Gautyer or walter de Crecy than constable of France, the
king sent out his commyssioners / chargynge his lords with their assygnes and
sowdyours, to mete with him in dyffe^syble arraye at the city of Arras, by
mary Magdaleyne day next ensuyng.

At which day the king with his lords and people there meting, took forewarde
upon his journey, and sped him toward Cassyle a town of Flau^dres. where within
little space of the town he pyght his pauylyons and te^tes / and wasted and
pylled the country thereabout. But the Flemynges keeping within the said town,
fered nothing the French king / but in dyrision of him and of his lords, they
caused a red cok to be painted upon a white cloth, and wrote in great letters
in ye said clothe this time following, and hanged it out over the walls. Quant
ce quoc i^y chantera.
^e roy troue ca entrera.


which is thus to mean in our vulgar speech. when that this cok lo here does
sing, than shall this found king his host in bring.

WHa^ this was read of the French men, and report made thereof unto the king /
he was therwyth sore amoued / and specially for that yt they named him the
founde^ king. Therefore they assailed them strongly upon all parties. But they
of the town defended them manfully, so that their enemies had of them none
advantage. Than the king sent sir Robert de Flaundres a knight of the
earls, with a certain sowdyours / commaundyng him to assail the Flemynges
toward saint Omers And the earl he monysshed, yt he with his people should
assail the^ toward the isle. Than the como^s of Bruges, Ipre, of Tourney, of
Fourneys, and of all Cassyle, assembled them / and provided that a certain of
the^ should keep the mount of Cassyle, and another company should keep the
country toward Tourney, and the third host should fortyfye the country
toward the isle.

The which people ordered every host his lymit to him assigned / and daily
skyrmysshed with the French men, so that between them men were slain upon
both parties. when the king had thus lain before the town a certain season /
the Flemynges not feryng their enemies, issued out of the town, and pyght
their te^tes upon the mount of Cassyle, and showed them boldly unto their
enemies / tha^ king Phylyp seeing the boldness of the Flemynges, and how
little they fered him / took cou^sayll of his lords how he might cause them to
dysce^de the hylle / for so long as they kept ye hill it was iuperdous and
perylous to stye toward them. Lastly it was agreed by the king and his
lords, that sir Robert de Flaundres with other, should assail an hold or town
thereby called Terroner de Bergner by mean whereof the king thought that they
would discende the mount, to rescue the said town. which according to ye
kings mind was done, and a bulwerke set upon a fire. But the king had never
the rather his intent. For they kept them and their gates in so sure wise,
that the French king for all his great power, might to them do no scathe. In
so much that the king considering their strength / was condyscended to
famysshe them by hunger, that they might not wynly strength / and for that took
ye less watch or regard to his people, but suffered them to play and dysport
them out of their harneys, each of the^ in others tente / thynkyng him sure of
his enemies, for any assaute or war by them to be procured or attempted
again him or his lords.

But whether it were that his enemies of this were warned, or that of their
own courage and pride they would assail the french host / upon the.xxiiii.
day of Auguste toward ye night, the said host of Flemynges aualed the mount
in as secret wise as men of watre might / and drew the^ toward the French
men, which tha^ were unarmed and in their disportes of dysynge and playeng at
the chesse and other games.

Upon whom the Flemynges came so suddenly, yt they slew many of their
enemies, and forced many to fle toward saint Omers for their sauegarde. And so
the Flemynges held on their way till they came nere unto the kings tent,
which tha^ was also unarmed. But by the noise and cry he being warned* in all
haste armed him. In the which season as god would for the French host /
certain Marshallys of the French host with a strong company, returned from
ye assaute of an hold thereby, and encountered the Flemynges / and held with
them battle, while the king and his lords made them ready. So that in
process the Flemynges were closed with their enemies and had a sharp and
cruel fight / wherein they defended them vygorously.

But in the end the loss of y^ field iourned upon the Flemynges / so yt the
capytayne named (...) was slain, Discomfyte of the Flemynge^.
with many other to the nombre of.xviii.M. and above as witnesses the French
book, over many which were there taken prisoners of poor men and artyfycers /
for the multitude of the gentylme^ were upon the earls party.

After which victory thus opteyned by the king / anon he caused ye said
town of Cassell to be set upon a fire / and after yode unto Bruges and had it
yolden unto him. And in like wise was Ipre, Poperynge, Fournays, Tournaye,
Terrouer, and many other good towns yolde^ unto him. Among the which Gau^t
is not named. wherefore it is to deem, that it was none of those towns yt at
this season rebelled. Tha^ in short process following / the king had the rule of
the hole erledome of Flaunders, and delivered the possessyon thereof unto Lowys
the foresaid earl of that country / and after returned into France with
pomp, leuynge the earl in his countye of Flaundres. The^ which did after so
cruel justice upon his subjects, that he put to death by diverse tourmentes,
as rakkynge, heddynge, and hanging, in sundry towns and places of his
lordshyppes, upon the no^bre of.x.M: over and above many and diverse which were
banysshed, some for few years, some for many, and some for evermore.

IN the second year of this king Phylyp / like as before is showed in the
third year of king Edward, the said Edward made his homage unto the said
Phylyp in ye town of Amyas, for the duchy of Guyon and countye of Poytyers.
And soon after this Phylype sent into Flaundres diverse bysshoppes and other
noble men / by whose means ye gates of Bruges of Ipre, of Courtray and of
other towns, were abated and thrown down, for fere lest the said towns
would often rebel again him or their earl.

In this year also sir Roberte de Artoys began his plee in parlyame^t again
Johan countess of Artoys for that erledome / in claymynge the right thereof by
certain endentures of couenau^tes of marriage, between sir Phylype de Artoys
his father, and dame Blau^che of Brytayne his mother / which wrytynges had been
by long time kept from him and now newly founden. And for to have the better
expedicion in his matter / he brought unto the king, the earl of Alenson, the
duke of Brytayne, with diverse nobles, the which made request for him to the
king yt he might have justice. And with the countess came the duke of
Burgoyne, Lowys earl of Flaundres, and diverse other noble men, making like
request for her and for her right. Than sir Robert showed forth a writing
sealed with the seal of armies of the earl of Artoys, containing that when the
marriage was sole^pnysed of sir Phylyp de Artoys father to the said Robert, and
of dame Blaunche daughter unto the duke of Brytayne and mother unto the said
Robert, it was accorded that the said sir Phylyp his father, gave unto ye said
dame Blau^che and to her heirs, the erledome of Artoys. which wrytynges at
the instaunce and prayer of the countess of Artoys, were than delivered into
ye court to be kept / saying that the said wrytynges were untrue and
cou^terfeted. Upon the which the said countess brought suffycient prouffe,
that the said wrytynges were falsely made and sealed by a gentylwoma^, daughter
unto the lord of Dygnon of the castle of Bethune / yt which was so learned in
Astronomy yt she took upon her to show things to come, wherein sometime she
happed upon the soth / but more oftener she failed.

By means of which woman an old chartre sealed with the seal of the
forenamed sir Phylip was found / the which she craftily took of, and set it
upon a new writing made to ye auau^tage of the said sir Robert of Artoys and
after presented them unto the said sir Robert, saying yt she had found the^
in the town of Acras. The which he joyfully received, and made his title and
claim upon the same. This matter thus ha^gyng before the king and his lords /
in the.iii. year of his reygne in ye city of Paris, after due prouffe made
upon the same, the sentence was given again sir Robert of Artoys to his great
dyspleasure. In so much that he said openly, by me he was made a king, and by
me he shall be dysmyssed if I may. And for he fered to be cast in prison by ye
French king / he therefore conveyed his horse and goods secretly unto
Bordeaux upon Gerou^de, and there took shyppyng and so passed into England his
said horses and treasour and him self yode unto his cosyne the duke of
Braba^t. with whom he bode a certain of time / and after passed into
England, and excyted king Edward hougely for to make war upon the French
king.

In the.iiii. year of ye reygne of this Phylip / the said sir Robert was
proclaimed open enemy to the crown of France, and his lands seized into the
French kings hands / and he banysshed the land for ever, except that he
within a month after Easter next ensuyng, would come into ye kings court, and
submyt him holy unto the kings grace which sentence passed again him, for
so much as he apered not.

In ye.vi. year of the reygne of this Philip / the wife of sir Robert of
Artoys, yt which was sister unto king Philip, was accused to be a great
occasioner of the offense of her husband. For ye which she with her childer was
sent into Gastenoys and there holden in strayte prison.

In ye.viii. year of his reygne, king Philip vysyted diverse parties of his
realm / and in ye doing, vysyted many places of pylgrymages which before he
had promised to seche, for the restitucio^ of health to his eldest sonn^ John^
tha^ duke of Normandy, which ye year before my mean of sekenes was in great
ieopardy of life / and co^tynuynge the said journey, rode unto Auygno^ and
vysyted there ye pope than being Benet the.xii. of ye name. And wha^ he had
sped his needs with him, he yode into the prouynce of Mercyle for to se there
his navy / and after returned by Burgoyne, where of the duke he was royally
received and feested. In which season of his there tarieng a co^playnt was
brought before him by ye said duke, again sir John^ de Chalon, for claim of
certain lands within that duchy. The which variaunce to apese the king took
therein sum pain. But no direccion he might set therein / so yt the said
duke and sir John^ departed with words of dyffiau^ce. And shortly after ye
said sir John^ accompanied with diverse noble me^ of Almayne, entered ye duchy of
Burgoyne, and therein did much harm to the country and people / and gat
certain castelles and the^ fortyfyed with Almaynes. Tha^ ye duke having in his
aid ye king of Nauerne the duke of Normandy* with ye earl of Esca^ps and of
Flau^dres* ass^eged ye castle of Chausy, and at ye end of.vi. wekes wan ye
same / and after yode unto the city of Besenson, and laid siege to it also.
But wha^ he had leyne there a long season, he was feign to conclude a trewes,
his host was in such (...) of vytayll. By reason of which peace or trewes ye
hosts were deseuered, and the end of ye war vnparfyted. But in the end
following, by mean of ye French king a dyreccio^ was taken between the said
pertyes. And this year king Philip sent certain messe^gers unto king Edward,
upon certain demau^des for ye castle of yau^tes and other for ye which
co^trauersie first began to kyndle between the said.ii. princes as in ye.x.
year of Edward is touched with the other years following.

In the.ix. year of this Philip, apered a blasyng sterre. After the which
ensued great mortalytye within the realm of France, as well of men as of
beestes. And in this year a another man of ye prouynce of La^gedok named Arnolde
of Normandy, was heded and hanged upon ye common gybet of Paris / for asmoch as
by his means it was proved, that the Englyshme^ had won the castle of
Paracoll. And in the.x. year of king Philip / king Edward of England sent sir
Barnard de Bret into Flau^dres, for causes touched and showed in the.xii. year
of the said Edward. And in ye.xi year of this Philip king Edward sailed into
Braba^t, and alyed him with Lowys ye Empour. And while the French king tarried
with his host at saint Quyntyne in Uermandoys / king Edward entered into
France, and spoiled and brent a part of Treresse, not without some note or
(...) of Cowardyse arrected to the French king and his host, of his own
subgectes. And in the same year, began the town of Gau^te to rebel with other
towns of Flau^dres, by the mocion of Jacques de Artyuyle / as in the.xiiii.
year is showed of king Edward the third.

In the twelf year of this Philip which ye French book calls the year of
confusyon, king Edward being returned into England / the French king
assembled a mighty host to go again the Henauders, Flemynges, and Brytons /
and came with the said host unto Arras / and sent from thens a part of his
people with his son John^ than duke of Normandy into Henaude, for to war
upon the country there.

which went straight unto Cambraye / and after laid siege to that castle
called Esthandune. And within.xv. days following the French king his father
came unto the said syege with innumerable people. The which castle at the end
of a month after the kings coming was given up by apoyntement. And that
done ye king removed his siege to a castle of the bishop of Cambray named
Thune, standing upon the river of Lescaut* where the king lay long time
without harm doing unto ye said castle. At length the duke of Brabant
with the earl of Gerle, with a strong host of diverse nacyons, came for to
remove that siege / so that the French host lay upon that one side of the
river, and the Brabanders upon that other. But by mean of.iiii. brydges which
were made over that river / both hosts at sundry times met and faughte
diverse sharp skyrmysshes to the loss of people upon both parties. But in
the end the castle was so betyn with gonnes, yt the capytayne thereof put all
his mouables in a ship / and after with such sowdyours as were left, entered
the said ship, and set the castle upon a light fire, whereof when the
French king was ware / in all haste he caused the walls to be scaled, and so
entered and stanched the fire. And the same night the host of Brabanders
departed also.

when the king ha^ thus won^^ this castle / he than sent the dukes of
Normandy and of Burgoyn, unto a town named Quesnoy. And when ye said dukes had
brent a part of that town and other vyllages there about / they returned
again unto ye French host. And shortly after the king returned into France
/ and there made prouycyon to send forth his navy to mete with king Edward,
which were to the nombre of.iiii. hundredth or above / the which as in the.xv.
year of Edward the third is before showed, met the English navy, and
there at a place called ye Swyn^ were ouercommen.

AFter this great victory thus opteyned by the king of England / the French
king with a great host herynge comfortable tidings of the discomfiture of
sir Roberte de Artoys, before the town of saint Omers, as before in the.xv.
year of king Edward is also showed sped him tyt he came to the pryory of saint
Andrew. where he taryenge with his people, certain lettres were sent to him by
king Edward* whereof the tenor with the answer of the same, are set out in
the foresaid xv. year, with other matters apparteynynge to the acts of both
princes. when the peace was concluded between the said kings, as in ye said
xv. year is declared / ye king of France returned to his own. And in ye.xiii
year of his reygne, dyed John^ duke of Brytayne. After whose death Charles de
Bloys and John^ de Mountfort, claymed severally to be enherytours of that
duchy. which Charles was sonn^ unto the earl of Bloys, and neuew unto the
French king, by reason y^ Margare^^ his sister was mother unto the said
Charles. The which Charles had married the daughter of Guy de Brytayne vycount
of Lymoges, second brother of the forenamed John^ duke of Brytayne. And y^
said John^ de Mou^tforte was the third brother unto the foresaid John^ duke of
Brytayn now deed. So that this questyon of this claim rested upon this point,
whether the daughter of the second brother should enheryte ye duchy or ye younger
brother, considering yt John^ the eldest brother dyed without heir of his
body, and Guy the second brother without heir male / wherefore the third
brother John^ de Mou^tfort claymed to be duke of Brytayne. which case and
question was brought before ye French king and his lords, and there debated
and argued by a long season. But in ye end sentence passed again sir John^ de
Mou^tfort / and Charles de Bloys was put in possession of ye duchy by king
Philip / to whom the said Charles did his homage for the same.

For this sentence arose mortal war between the said sir Charles and sir
John^. In the which the.ii. kings of England and France took party / so
that king Edward aided sir John^ de Mou^tfort / and king Philip his neuew sir
Charles. Thanne sir Iohanne de Mountforte before the sentence given, feryng the
sequel of the same / departed from the court, and gat him into a strong town
of Brytayne, and there held him. whereof king Philip being advertised / sent
sir John^ his son duke of Normandy, and his brother sir Charles earl of
Alenson, for to war upon ye said sir John^ de Mou^tsort. The which sped them
with a no^bre of people into Brytayn^, and besieged a strong castle sta^dyng
in an isle by ye river of Loyer. And after the wynning thereof, they yode unto ye
city of Nau^tes / the which ye cytezyns yielded unto the^ without stroke. And
soon after as testifies ye French story, upon certain co^dicio^s and
couena^tes, ye said sir John^ de Mou^tfort yielded hi^ unto ye duke of Normandy
/ ye which sent him unto ye king his father to Paris, where by the said king
he was imprisoned in the castle of Louure. But how it was by favor or
otherwise* he escaped pryso^ after.ii. years prysoneme^t. Or after some
writers, he was after.ii. years delivered upon certain co^dicions. whereof one
was, yt he should not come in Brytayne nor any thing meddle or have to do in ye
country. But this prysonemente of sir John^ de Mou^tfort not withstanding / the
war was maynteyned in Brytayn^ by ye fre^des of the said sir John^ and many
towns and castelles thereof was holde^ to the use of ye said sir John^ /
whereof to show unto you ye circu^stau^ce and process it would ask a long time.
But ye conclusion and fine of this war shall be showed in ye story of ye.vi.
Charles and sonn^ of king John^. In the.xv. year of this Philip / the earl of
Salysbury accompanied with sir Roberte of Artoys and other noble me^, entered
Brytayn, and aided the fre^des of sir John^ de mou^tfort / in doing great
damage to ye country, and bre^t much of ye French kings navy. Does of sir
Robert of Artoys.
In assaylyng whereof, sir Robert of Artoys was wounded in the thygh with a
gunne, whereupon he lay syke / and upon ye ensued a flux, and so thereof dyed,
and after conveyed into England, and there buried. And soon after king Edward
entered France with a strong army. But a peace was at wene him and the French
king condiscended for a certain term by labor of.ii. cardinales, as before
in ye.xvi. year of king Edward is declared, and in this year king Philip
arered a task of his people called a Gabell in French. This was provided, yt
no subject of ye kings nor other within his land, should bye any salt but of
the king and at his price. And over that he arered and lowed the coins and
moneys of his land, to the great auau^tage of him self, and enpouerisshyng
of his said subjects by mean whereof he fill in great hatered of his people.

In the.xvi. year of his reygne, a great dyscencion grew among the nobles of
Normandy, by reason of parties taking, some with John^ of Harecourt, and other
with sir Roberte Barthran than Marshal of France, for couenau^tes of maryge
appointed between ye son of the said sir Robert upon that one party, and ye
daughter of sir Roger Bacon^ / whose wife or maids mother was than married unto
sir Godfrey de Harecourt, brother of that above said sir John^ upon the other
party. For varyau^ce whereof great war was lykely to have ensued, if the
king the sooner had not sent strayt commandment, that either party should
keep his peace, and to apere before him and his lords at Paris, and there to
have their greuau^ce by him and his lords determined.

At which day of apperaunce, the said sir Godfrey appeared not, nor none for
him / but contrary the kings commandment, assyeged sir wyllin Berthran
bishop of Bayn^ and brother to the foresaid sir Roberte than being in a
castle. And when he saw he might not preuayll again him / he than drew unto
the Englysshme^ and aided them against the French king.

In this year also king Phylype entendynge to releue the duchye of Burgoyn
with whete which there than was sca^t / ordained that certain quarters of
whete should be gadered in the countrees of Terroner, of Orleaunce and
Gastenoys, and so sent into Burgoyn. But ye studyau^tes of Orleaunce, with the
burgeyses and commons of the city took therewith such grefe, that of one mind
they went down unto the river of Loyer, where at ye season certain ships
lay freyght with vytayll to be had unto the said country, and there fet out
the grayen, and spoiled it in such wise, that much thereof came never to good.
And that done many of that company being nedy and poor / yode unto vyllages
there by, and robbed ye people, and did much harm. wha^ the provost or ruler
of Orleau^ce beheld this rage and riot of the people, and co^sydered the
multitude of them / he forbear for a time till they were somdele assuaged. And
than with such company as he had of his officers and other, he took a certain
of them, and put them in sondrye prysons, till he knew farther of the kings
pleasur. But it was not long after that the other of that affynyte, herynge of
the enprysonement of their fellows / assembled them of new, and like wood
men ran unto the prysons / and not a lonely delivered their fellows, but also
many other which lay there for great causes and crimes / and some such as
were condemned to death for their transgressyons. when noticio^ of this great
outrage and riot came unto ye king / anon he sent thither.ii. knights of his
court with a puyssaunt army / chargyng them to take all such as were
occasyoners and begynners of this Riot / and as many as were found culpable to
be put unto death. The which knights according to their commission with aid of
ye provost of Orleau^ce, took such as were dempte gylte of this crime, and
hanged them upon the common gybet or galous of the city, among the which were
diverse clerks, and one a deaken and within orders. And in the same year and
month of Auguste, a noble knight of Brytayne called sir Olyuer de Clycon^, for
treason yt he had conspyred again king Philippe, or for he had favored king
Edwardes party was taken by a train at a iustes or tourname^te holden for ye
same cause at Paris, and shortly after judged to death / as first drawn through
the city unto the place of judgment, and theruppon a scaffold purposely
ordained was byheded / and after his body with chains hanged upon the gybet,
and his head standing there over upon a stake, or after an other auctour had
unto ye city of Nauntes in Brytayne, and there pyght upon a gate of ye city.
And in the same month sir Godfrey de Harcourte, which as before is said,
alyed him with king Edward, and would not apere after certain sommons / was
now openly banysshed as traitor and enemy to ye crown of France. And in the
same month was sir John^ de Mou^tforte delivered out of prison, upon such
conditions as before is rehearsed in ye xiii. year of this king. And soon after
were put unto death at Paris, sir Johan de Malestreet, sir Godfrey de Malestreet
the father and the son, sir John^ de Mou^talbone, sir wyllyam de Bruys, sir
John^ de Cablat, and sir John^ de Plessys knights / and esquyres, John^ de
Malestrete neuew to ye foresaid knights, Guyllm^ de Bruze, Robert de Bruys,
John^ de Senne, and Dauy de Senne. And shortly after at Paris were put in
execucion three Norman knights, for affynyte or favor, which they had borne
toward sir Godfrey de Harecourt and their heddes sent unto saint Loup in
Constantyne a city of Normandy. which said knights were called sir wyllyam
Bacon, sir Roulande de la Roche tessone, and sir Richard de Percy.

IN the.xvii. year of this Philip one master Henry de Malestrete clerk and
deake^, and brother to the above named sir Godfrey before put in execucion,
which said master Henry was master of the requests with king Philip / for so
much as he after ye death of his said brother, yode unto king Edward and
cou^sayled him again king Philip, and after by assygneme^t of king Edward
was set in great auctorite within the town of Uannys in Brytayne / which town
was after gotten by the Frenchmen, and he therein as one of the chief capytaynes
of the same taken was imprisoned within the castle of Paris. Out of the which
at this season he was taken thens, and set in a tumbrell, and thereunto
fastened with chains of yren / and so conveyed bareheded with dynne and cry
thorugh ye high streets of Paris, till he came unto ye bysshoppes palace of
Paris / and there delivered unto the bishop. And soon after by virtue of a
commissyo^ purchased by king Philip of the pope, to have the said master
Henry dysgraded / he was depryued of all degrees and ordres of the church, and
tha^ delivered unto the execucioners. The which by.iii. days co^tynuall a
certain season of ye day, set him upon a ladder in ye sight of all people / to
ye intent that every man and child might throw at him all fylth and ordour of
ye street / the which was done without all compassion and pity, in so cruel
wise, that by the third days end he was deed, and after buried irreverently.

In the said.xvii. year of king Philippe also, as before is showed in
the.xix. year of king Edward the third / Jacques de Artyuele, which was
especial promoter of the said king Edwardes causes, came unto ye town of
Gaunt / and showed unto them diverse apoyntmentes to be hold between them and
other towns of Flau^dres. Jacques de Artyuese murdered.
where upon the.xv. day of July, by diverse co^spiratours of the said town of
Gaunte, he was pursued from one house to an other, and lastly slain and
murdered by them to the kings of England great displeasure and hurt. wherefore
the said king Edward was feign to return into England without speed of
his purpose, like as before in ye said xix. year of his reygne is declared. In
this year also and the month of Decembre, dyed sir John^ earl of Mou^tfort,
which as before is said claymed the duchy of Brytayn / and left after him a
son named also sir John^ and earl of Mou^tfort, the which in likewise
claymed the said duchy of Brytayn, and maynteyned the war again sir Charles
de Bloys, as his father before had done. In the.xviii. year of king Phylyp and
first day of July, at Paris was than put to death by cruel execucio^, a
cytezyn of Compeyn^ named Symonde Poylet, a man of great riches. The which for
he had said in open audience, that the right of the crown of France belonged
more ryghtfully unto king Edward than to king Philip / he was first hanged
upon a tree like as an ox is hanged in the bochery, and there dismembered, as
first the armies, and after ye legs cut from his body, and lastly his head
stryken of, and the trunk of his body hanged by chains upon the common gybet
of Paris. And upon a saterdaye being the.xxvi. day of August in the
foresaid.xviii. year of king Philippe, was foughten at Cressy the battle
before expressed in the.xxi. year of king Edward the third / where the flower
of the chyualry of France was slain and taken prisoners. Than soon after
king Philippe for the defense of the charge of his wars, asked a subsidy of
the monks of saint Denis. And among certain iewelles of that place to be had
/ he demanded the great crucyfyx of gold standing over ye high altar of
that monastery. whereunto the monks answered yt they might not depart with
that crucifyxe / for Eugenius the third of that name pope, accursed al them
that laid any hand upon that crucifyxe, to the intent to remove it from that
place, as it appears by writing set under ye foot of the said cross / by
which answer the king was pacifyed. And in the month of Dece^bre, sir
Godfrey de Harecourte with a towell double folden about his neck, came unto ye
presence of king Philip, and yielded him holy to his mercy and grace / the
which granted unto him his pardon.

And in short while after, all the Lumbardes usurers within ye realm of
France, were taken and sent to diverse prysons. And all such persons as
stood bounden unto them, for any bargeyn or lone of money by way of usury, it
was ordained that ye said persons being dettours to the said usurers, should
pay the pryncypall debt unto the king at their days of payment / and the
resydue which remains to the usurer for his lucre of gain for the lone of
his money, should be pardoned to the dettour. And after the said Lumbardes
usurers were delivered from prison, by payenge of great and grievous fynaunce.

In the.xix. year of this Philippe, for so much as witnesses the French
cronycle, that ye Flemynges by great manacis and perforce, had constrained
their earl to be assured by bond of assurance unto the daughter of king
Edward, contrary his volu^te and will / the said earl not wyllyng to
accomplysshe that marriage, in the Easter weke by a cautele deperted out of
Flau^dres, and came to ye French king to Paris / of whom he was honorably
and ioyously received.

And in the same year, one named Gawyn de Belemount an advocate of the
spiritual law, entendynge to betray ye city of Laon^ / acqueynted him with a
poor man than dwelling in that city of Meaus named Colyn Tomelyn / ye which
before time was fled the city of Laon, and was tha^ for lack of substance
common to Meaus, and there mayntened a poor life / to ye which this Gawyn
resorted and releued. And lastely wha^ne he thought he was somdele of him
assured, he brake unto him his mind / and said if he would be ruled by him, he
would restore him to his former prosperity and wealth / wheru^to this Colyner
granted. Tha^ anon this Gawyn showed him a lettre, and wylled him to bear it
unto ye king of England, with certain reward to him gyuyng / and also
promysyng of much more, with that yt he returned to him shortly to ye city of
Raynes with a^swere of ye same. wha^ this poor and indyge^t man had received
this lettre / he cast many perelles in his mind. How be it finally contrary
his oath and promise, he took his way toward the French king, and presented
him with ye letter / in ye which was expressed all the manner and order how the
said city of Lao^ should be betrayed. when the king was aduertysed of all the
circumstaunce of this treason / he enfourmed this Colyner how he should behave
him self in beryng of his answer / and provided his time according as though
he had been in England, and by convenient day came unto him to Raynys according
to the former appoyntmente. In which season the king had sent in secret manner
unto the prouoste of Raynes, that so soon as the said Colyner had showed to
the said Gawyn his answer, yt the said Gawyn should be attached and had unto
prison / the which was accordyngly executed. And in short process following,
for so much as he was within ordres / he was by the provost sent unto ye city
of Laon, and there put to the bisshoppes prison. But when ye como^s of ye said
city hard of such a man there being prisoner, that would have betrayed their
city / they assembled the^ in great multitude, and would have broken the pryso^
to ye end to have slain him. But they were so patiently answered by the
bysshoppes officers, yt they returned unto their houses. Upon the morrow
following, to cease ye rumor of ye people / he was brought unto his judgment,
and there condemned for his dymeryte unto perpetual prison. And more thereunto
was added, yt for his more diffamy and shame, he should be set in a tumbrel
upon high bareheded, that of all people he might be seen / and so with most
shameful instruments lad through the high streets of ye city, and brought
again unto ye bisshopes prison, and there to remain for term of life. But he
was not fer in such manner conveyed by ye officers from ye Jail, but the
commons fyl upon him with cry, and castyng of mire and stones / that or he
were half way lad of his circuyte or progress, he was stoned to death / and
after his body buried within a maroys nere unto the said city.

And shortly after at Paris was done to cruel death a cytezyn of ye said
city, which ente^ded to have betrayed the said city of Paris. For ye which
treason he was first disme^bred of legs and arms, and after hanged by the
nek upon the gybet of Paris.

In the same year about ye feast of saint John^ Baptyst / ye Englyshmen yt had
holde^ the town and castle called the roch of Aryan in Brytayn, by the term
of two years passed, at this season they were besieged and fiersly assauted by
sir Charles de Bloys and his friends / in so furyous manner yt they rent with
great ordenaunce diverse places of the castle walls / and in process threw
down the rofe of a chamber where the wife of the capytayne of the castle lay
in her child bed, and so far put in fere, that the rulers of the town and
castle granted to deliver the town and castle to ye said sir Charles, with
that they might depart with their lives and goods / ye which offer to his
pain and charge he refused. For in short time after, sir Thomas of Agorn^ an
english knight with a strong company of archers and other sowdyours,
rescowed the said town and castle. And after long fight and great danger,
as by long process is declared in the French story / ye said sir Thomas took
the said Charles de Bloys prisoner, and slew many of his lords, as before is
shortly touched in the end of the.xxii. year of king Edward. After which
victory thus opteyned, and his prisoners put in suer keeping, he took ye
ordenau^ce of the duke left in ye field with other pyllage, and put it within
the town and castle aforesaid. And for ye vyllages and me^ of the country
there about, had aid the duke again the town and castle / therefore the said
sir Thomas punysshed the said vyllages and ruralles by grievous fynes, and held
the^ in great seruytude and danger / and over ye slew many of them, and many
they held as drudges and captyues. And this done the Englysshmen repaired
again the walls and such other places as were before time beten down by
force of the said syege and strengthed it in their best manner.

IT was not long after ye king Phylype at the request of the country, sent
thither the lord of Caron^ with a strong army / to whom also great multitude
of the people of that country resorted. with whose aids the said lord
assailed the said town and castle by.ii. days contynuell. But the
Englyssheme^ deffended them self vygurously / and threw upon their enemies
hot boylynge oils and other gresys, with fire coals and hot ashes, wherewith
they grieved their enemies paynfully.

Thus co^tynuyng the siege / means of treaty were offered and co^dyssended to
yield the town, with condicyo^ that they mynght saufely depart with their
lives and goods / but the Fre^chemen and Brytons would not to it be agreeable.
Than the assaute began of new. And the lord of Caron^ to encourage his
sowdyours, henge a purse and therein.l. scutes of gold upon a sperys end /
and cried with loud voice, that who that first entered the town, should have
the said l. scutes of gold. when the ianuays or sowdyours of the city of
Ieane and of the city of Italye, hard the promise of their cheuytayne / a
certain of them with long pycaxses and sharp approached them unto ye wallys
/ and so demeaned them, that in less than.v. hours they minded so the wall,
that there fill thereof as testyfyeth the said French cronycle the length
of.l. foot. By reason whereof entered first the Ianuays / and after the hole
host. The which with out compassyon or pity slew man, woman, and child that
came in their way, not sparynge the chylder that souked upon the mothers
breasts / and spoiled and robbed the town, every man getting what he might to
his own advantage. And when the Fre^chme^ and Brytons had thus miserably
slain many Englysshme^, and also Bryto^s and other inhabytau^tes of the town
/ they than assailed the castle to ye which was fled upon.ii.C. and.xl
Englyshme^. After diverse assautes it was offered by the sowdyours of the
castle, yt they would yield the castle their lives and goods saved. And
finally it was agreed, their bodies only to depart, and to be conveyed.x.
miles upon their way toward such place as they would appoint. upon ye which
appoyntement.ii. knights Brytons yt is to say sir Syluester de la Fulle and
sir wyllm^ de Stratton received them in their cotes, and conveyed the^ with
great pain and not without loss of some. For their enemies of ye host cast
stones at them, and beat them so with their staves, that diverse of them dyed
/ and the remenaunt were brought nere unto a castle than in the power of
Englysshemen, named Quyntyne.

But when the commo^s of ye town there nere, hard of the coming of such
Englysshmen under saufe conduyt, the which before in the batayl of the roche
of Arian where sir Charles de Bloys was taken, had slain their lord, that is
to mean the lord of Quyntyne / anon they issued out of the town / and for
they fond little resystence in their guydes, they slew them there except one,
which was capytayne of the Englyshme^ / which one of ye said knights caused to
be set upon his horse, and so fled from the peril. And wha^ the cruel
Brytons had thus shamefully slain the Englyshmen / they gadered ye cariens up
on an hepe, and suffered them there so to lie, to ye end that beasts and
fowls might devour them. And in short time after, ye earl of Flau^dres by
means of the French king left the daughter of king Edward, and was married
unto the daughter of ye duke of Brabant.

In the.xx. year of Phylyp / ye town of Calays was gotten, like as the
circumstau^ce thereof is declared in the xxii. year of king Edward the third.
And in the same year the mortalite or sykenes, which after reigned in England
reigned now feruentely in France, and most specially in the city of Auynyon
/ by force whereof ye third part of the people of ye city dyed. And from
thens it came unto saint Denis, and so unto Paris. In which coost it was so
fervent, yt there dyed in those.ii. towns over the no^bre of.lvi.M. within ye
space of.xviii months.

And in this year the dolphyne of Uyen named sir ymberte, sold his dolphynage
unto the French king / and became a freer at Lion upon the rosne of the order
of the freer prechours or black freers.

In the.xxi. year of this Phylyp / Charles the first begotten son of John^
duke of Normandy eldest son of this Phylip, took possession of the said
dolphynage of Uyen. And in the month of August following, dyed ye duchess of
Normandy and mother of the said Charles. And in the month of Decembre
following, dyed dame Jane queen of France and daughter of Robert duke of
Burgoyn. And in this year was the treason wroughte by sir Godfrey de Charny, to
have again won the town of Calays / like as I to you before have showed in
the.xxiiii. year of king Edward ye iii. And in ye month of January next
ensuynge and.ix. day of the same / king Phylyp spoused his.ii. wife Blau^che,
sometime ye daughter of ye queen of Nauerne lately dyscesed, which was sister
unto the earl of Foyze. which espousayles were secretly done in the manor of
Robert earl of Bray. And so the said king Philip was wydowe from the.xii.
day of Decembre to the nynthe day of January, which was by the space of
xxviii. days. And upon the.ix. day of the month of February / John^ duke of
Normandy eldeste son of this Philippe, spoused his second wife Iohanne
Countess of Boloygne, at a town called Miriaux nere unto Meulene. And so he
morned for his wife which was named ye good Duchess of Normandy, by the term
of vi. months and.ii. days lacking.

In the.xxii. year of king Philip and month of July / sir Thomas de Agorne
befornamed, was by chance medly slain of a Bryto^ knight called sir Raufe de
Cuours. And upon the.xxiii. day of August following, dyed sir Phylyp de Ualoys
king of France / wha^ he had reigned over ye Frenchmen in great vexacio^ and
trouble by the space of.xxii. years lacking v. months and odd days / and
was after enterred at saint Denis by his first wife / and left after hi^ John^
duke of Normandy for his heir.

Of king John^.
John^ the first of that name, and son of Phylype de Ualoys / began to
raygne over the Frenchmen, in the month of August and year of our lord. M.CCC.
and.l, and.xxiiii. year of Edward the.iii. than king of England / and was
crowned at Raynes the xxvi. day of Septembre following with dame Iohanne his
wife. In time of the which solempnite, king John^ dubbed his eldeste son
dolphyne of Uyen, and Lowys his.ii. son earl of Ale^son, knights, with other
noble men.

And upon the.xvi. day of Noue^bre following / sir Rauffe earl of Ew and
constable of Guynes wha^ it was French, the which was newly commen out of
England where he had been long prisoner / was accused of treason, and so
commanded unto prison at Paris. within which prison he was shortly after
byheded in ye presence of the duke of Burgoyne and other nobles.

In the third year of king John^ and viii. day of January / Charles king of
Nauerne caused to be slain with in the town of Aygle in Normandy sir Charles
de Spain constable of France. For the which murdre sourdyd great war
between king Johan and the said king of Nauerne / which continued many years
after, natwithsta^dyng that the said king of Nauerne had married the daughter
of ye said king John^. Tha^ by meditacio^ of friends, a peace was dryue^ between
them / so that king Johan should give unto ye king of Nauerne, for conte^tacyon
of certain sums of money yet owing unto him for the dower of his wife,
certain lands within the duchy of Normandy / and over that the French king
should pardone all such persons as were consenting to the death of the
constable before murdered. After which treaty thus concluded / the king of
Nauerne under assurance of hostage came unto king Iohn^s presence at Paris.
And after he had tarried there a season / he departed with dyssymulacion on
either party used, as after shall appear.

In the.iiii. year of king John^ / sir Godfrey de Harecourt, which with his
son and other had been consenting unto the death of the constable of
France, were reconsyled again to the king. The which ensensed him again
the king of Nauerne by means of their sinister report / so that the peace
between them before concluded, was dysapoynted and broken. And soon upon
this, sir Robert de Loryze that was chamberlayn unto king John^, avoided the
court for fere, lest the said sir Godfrey had showed of him any thing to
the king / and so yode unto the king of Nauerne in Normandy. After whose
coming, the king of Nauerne departed shortly thens and sped him toward
Auynyon. It was not long after that the king of Nauerne was departed out of
Normandy but that king John^ sped him thider, and seized all the lands that
the king of Nauerne had within that duchy / and put officers and rulers in
his castelles and towns such as him lyked, and dyscharged the other /
except.vi. castelles, that is to say Euroux, le Pou^t Audemer, Chirebourt,
Ganeray, Auranches, and Martaygn / the which were holden by the servants of
the king of Nauerne, and men of Nauerne borne.

In the month of January following / sir Robert de Loryze abouenamed, under
safe conduyte came unto king John^ to Paris, and there was to him in process
reconsyled. And in this year were the artycles of peace between the kings of
England and of France prolonged, till the feast of saint John^ Baptyst next
ensuynge / as before in ye end of the.xxviii. year of king Edward is more at
length declared.

In this.v. year of king Johan and month of Apryl / he sent sir Charles his
son dolphyne of Uyenne into Normandy, to ask aid of the Normannes again
the king of Nauerne. The which granted unto him iii.M. men at their charge
for.iii. months. And in the month of August following, the king of Nauerne
accompanied with.ii.M. sowdiours, came unto the castle of Consta^tyne, and
there tarried with the said people. with whose coming the sowdiours of the
forenamed.vi. castelles were so well comforted, that they robbed and pylled al
ye country about the^. And some of the said sowdiours came unto a castle of ye
French kings named Co^ket, and wa^ it by strength, and after vytayled and
ma^ned it in most warly wise / and did many other things to ye French kings
great displeasure. The which war thus co^tynuyng, by medyacio^ of fre^des the
king of Nauarn^ rode unto ye dolphyn to a town called the Uale de Rueyll /
where they metyng, and either to other showing loving countenance, upon
ye.xviii. day of Septe^bre they together took their way toward Paris. where the
king of Nauarne was brought unto the French kings presence.. where he excused
him of all trespasses done again the king syne ye time of ye last accord /
besechyng ye king to be good and gracius lord unto him, and he should be to
him as a son ought to be unto the fader, and as a true man unto his
soueraygne lord. And after the king by ye means of ye duke of Athenesse,
forgave unto him his offenses, and promised to stand his good and gracyous
lord / and so either deperted from other in loving manner.

And soon after king John^ gave unto ye dolphyn of Uyen sir Charles his eldest
sonn^ ye duchy of Normandy for ye which he did unto his father homage, in ye
house of master Martyn Chano^ of Paris, in ye cloister of the mynster called
Noterdame. And by auctoryte of a parlyame^t holde^ in the city of Paris, was
granted unto king John^ of the three astates of his realm / yt is to mean the
spiritualte, the lords and nobles, and ye hedes or rulers of cytyes and good
towns of his realm, that he should have.xxx.M. me^ waged for a year, for to
defend his ancient enemy the king of England. For puruyau^ce whereof
certain persons of the said.iii. astates assembled shortly after, to provide
for ye leuieng of that great su^me of money

After which prouysion or sessing agreed or concluded by the said persons,
and commyssyoners sent out to diverse coostes and good towns for the leuyeng
of the said money / in the town of Arras fill a dissencyo^ between the rich
and the poor of that town / the poor saying that the rich men had laid all
the burden upon the poor men, and them self bare little charge or none. For
this first began great altercacion of words, and after en^uyed strokes and
stripes, so that of the h^des and chyef burgeses of the town were.xvii. men
slain. And the day following they slew.iiii. mo / and banysshed diverse yt at
that time were absent and out of the town. And so the town of Arras rested as
than in the gydynge of the poor artyfycers of that town.

IN the.vi. year of the reygne of king Johan and month of March* he being
acco^panyed with a secret meny, before ye day departed from the town of
Manuyle / and rode streyghte, he and his lords being armed, unto the castle
of Rouan / and entered suddenly into the same. where he fande in the chyefe hall
of the castle, sir Charles his eldest son duke of Normandy, Charles king of
Nauerne, sir John^ earl of Harecourt, ye lords of Preaux and of Grauyle, and
the lord of Cleremou^t, sir Lowys and sir Guylliam de Harecourt brethern of
the foresaid earl, sir Fryquet de Fryquante, the lord of Tournebu, sir Manbuc
de Mamesmares, with Colinet Doubliec and John^ de Pou^talu esquyres.

The which lords and knights the king took at dinner within ye said halle /
and them took suddenly, and diverse of them put under sure keeping. And as soon
as the king had there taken a small and short repaste / he with his sons and
other nobles in his company took their horse and rode into a field upon a
baksyde of the castle / whether shortly after were brought in bands the
foresaid earl of Harecourt, the lord of Grauyle, ye foresaid sir Ma^bue, and
Colinet Doubliet. which iiii. were there beheded / and after the bodies of
them drawn to the gybet of Roan, and there hanged / and their heddes set over
them upon the same gybet. At the which time of the execucion of hedyng of the
said.iiii. persons / the French king as before is said was present in proper
person. After the which execucion, ye king upon the morrow following
delivered many of the other prisoners / so yt there remained no mo as prisoners
but.iii, that is the king of Nauerne, sir Fryquet de Fryquant, and John^ de
Pountalu / the which were sent unto Paris. where the king was kept in the
castle of Louure, and the other ii. in the chastelet. In which time of his
inprysoneme^t / sir Phylype brother to the king, with sir Godfrey de Harecourt
uncle to the earl lately heded, held certain castelles in Normandy / and came
with their powers into the country of Constantyne, and held it maugre the
French kings will and pleasure.

In the month of Apryll, sir Arnolde de Denham than Marshall of France, rode
by ye kings sond unto Arras / and there without great distourbaunce of the
town, took upon an hundredth of such as before had made ye former rebellion
within the same. And upon the day following / he caused to be heded in the
market place upon.lx. of the same / and the remenau^t he sent unto prison there
to abide ye kings pleasure.

In this time and season was the noble prince Edward at Bordeaux and warred
upon the French kings lands, like as it is before to you showed in the.xxx.
year of king Edward the third.

And in the.vii. year of king John^, and beginning of the same, was the battle
of Poytyers. In ye which king John^ was taken prisoner of prince Edward, and
many of his lords taken and slain, as before in the.xxx. year of the foresaid
Edward is declared at le^ght. After the which scomfyture / the duke of
Normandy which hardly escaped from the said batayl, entered the city of Paryz
the.xxix. day of Septembre / and called there a great cou^sayll of ye three
astates of ye realm, and the.xv. day of Octobre next ensuynge there to be
assembled. At which day the said duke with the said.iii astates of the realm
being in ye parlyament chamber / Peter de la Forest archebysshop of Roan and
chau^celer of France, declared there the great mysfortune that to the land
was lately fallen, by the taking of their head and prince / and exorted them by
a long oracio^ to aid and assiste every man after his power, for the
redeliuery of their prince again.

whereunto it was answered for their clergy or spyrytual / by the mouth of
master John^ de Carone tha^ archebysshop of Raynes / and for the nobles or ye
Cheualty of France, by the mouth of sir Phylype duke of Orleaunce and brother
unto king John^ / and for the commo^s of the good towns of France, by the
mouth of Stepyn Martell burgeys of Paris and provost of the same, that either
of them should help to the uttermost of their powers / and prayed that they
might have convenient leyser to cou^sayll and common for prouycio^ of the the
same / the which to them was granted.

Than the said three astates held their cou^sayll at the friar mynours or gray
friars in Paris, by the space of.xv. days. In which season they appointed
among them to the no^bre of.l. persons, to take a vyew and make search of
certain things tha^ myslad and evil gyded within the realm. The which.l.
persons wha^ they had appointed.vi. of them self to go unto the duke / they
in ye names of ye other made request unto ye duke, that he would keep secret
such things as they intended to show unto him. which request he granted.
Tha^ they showed unto the duke that the realm before time had been
mysseguyded by officers / and except that remedy for it were shortly
fou^den, it should stand in great parell to be lost. wherefore they besought
him to dyscharge all such as they would name unto him, and over yt to forfayte
their goods unto the kings use. And first they named master Peter de la
Forest archebisshop of Roan and chau^celer of France, sir Symo^de de Bucy
chyfe counceloure of the king and chyefe presydente of the parlyament, sir
Roberte de Loryze that before time was chaumberlayne unto the king, sir
Nycholas Brake knight and master of the kings paleys, Engueram of the Celer
Burioys of Paris and under tresourer of France, John^ Pryll burioys, also
soueraygn master of the money and master of thaccomptys of the king, and
John^ Cha^nean de Charters treasourer of the kings wars. All which officers
the said persons would that they should be dyscharged of all royal o^yces for
ever. Also the said constytuted persons, would yt the king of Nauerne were
delivered free from prison / also that he him self would be contented to be
aduertysed and cou^ceyled by such as they would appoynte unto him, that is to
say.iiii. prelates, xii. knights, and xii. burioys.

The which.xxviii. persons shu^d should have auctoryte to rule and ordeyne all
things necessary for the realm, and to set in and put out all officers
apperteynyng to the realm / with diverse other requests which unto the duke
were nothing agreeable. Upon the which requests, the duke gave answer yt he
would gladly feel the opinion of his cou^ceyll, and upon that shape unto them
some reasonable answer. But first he desired of them to know what aid the
iii. astates would give unto him, for the delyuery of his father. whereunto it
was answered, that the clergy had granted a dyme and a half to be paid in a
year, with that that they may have license of the pope / and ye lords asmoche
to be leuyed of their lands / and ye como^s the.x. penny of their mouable
gooddes. Tha^ upon the morn following within ye palace of Louure, ye duke
assembled his cou^sayl / and there showed unto them the desire and request of
the.iii. astates. whereupon were made many reasons / and many messages sent
between the duke and them, to refourme some part of the said artycles. But it
was fermely answered by them, that except he would reform the said
defautes, and co^ferme him unto their minds for the common wealth of all the
land / they would not aid him with their gooddes, like as they had to him
showed. wherefore the duke by secret means sent letters unto his father,
showing unto him the circumstau^ce of all his matter / the which wrote unto
him again, that in no wise he should be agreeable unto the said requests.
Tha^ the duke to ye end that he would not y^ these matters should be towched in
the open parlyame^t, sent for such persons as were the chyefe rulers of the
said.iii. astates / so that to him came for the clergy the archebysshoppes of
Raynes and of Lyo^s, and the bishop of Lao^ / and for the lords came sir
warayne de Luce^bourgh, sir Johan de Comfla^s Marshall of Champeyne, and sir
John^ de Pygueny tha^ ruler or gouernoure of Artoys / and for the como^s
Stephan Martell than provost of the merchants of Paris, Charles Cusake, with
other of other good towns.

Than the duke showed unto them of certain news that he had lately received
from the king his father / and that done he asked their aduices whether it
were best ye day to show their requests openly in the parliament chaumber,
or else to defer it for that day. And lastly after many reasons made, it
was agreed, that it should be deferred till the.iiii. day after / at the
which.iiii. day ye duke with the other assembled in the parlyament chamber.
At which season the duke said that he might not entende that day to here and
argue the said requests, for certain tidings that he had lately received from
his father, and from his uncle the Emperor of Almayne / of the which he tha^
showed some openly, and after dyssolued for that day the counsayll.

In the month of Octobre, ye.iii. astates of the prouynce of Languedocke, by
the auctoryte of the earl of Armenake tha^ lieutenau^t for ye king assembled
for to make an aid for ye kings delyuerau^ce. And first they agreed to
puruey at their propre costs.v.C. me^ of armies, with a seruyture to eueryche
spear / and over that a.M. sowdyours on horseback, and a.M. of arblasters,
with.ii.M. of other called pau^syers in French / all which to be waged for an
hole year. The speres to have for them and their custrun every day half a
floreyn, and every sowdyour and arblaster.viii. floryns for a month, and ye
pau^siers after the same rate.

Also it was forther ordained by the said three estates of La^guedocke, that no
man should were any furrys of any great price / and that women should leave the
rich atyre of their heddys, and were neither perle nor gold upon them, nor
silver upon there gyrdels, so long as the king remained prisoner. Also that
all manner of mynstrellys for ye season should be put to silence / with diverse
other things for y^ weal of that province which would ask a long leysoure
to write.

UPon all sowlyn day or the second day of November, the duke of Normandye by
the aduyce of his counceyll, dyssoluyd the cou^ceyll of the three estates
assembled at Paris / and commanded every man to return unto his own, without
effect growing of their long counceyll or assemble. wherewith many of the
said persons were grievously myscontent / saying among them self that they
aperceyued well, that this was done by the duke, to the intent that the
requests by them devised should not take place / but that the old
mysgouernaunce should continue, like as it befortymes had done. wherefore diverse
of them assembled after again at the graye freres, and there made out diverse
copyes of the said requests / to the end that either of them might bear
them into their countries, and there to show them unto the good towns. And
all be it that the duke after this cou^ceyll thus dyssoluyd, asked aid of ye
cyty of Paris and other good towns to maynteyne his warrys / he was plainly
answered that they might not aid him without the said three estates were
again reassembled, and that the grant of the aid might pass by their
authorite / whereunto ye duke in no wise would be agreeable.

In the month of Noue^ber aforesaid / sir Robert de Cleremou^t than
lyeutenaunt for the duke in Normandy, fought with sir Phylyp brother unto the
king of Nauerne, and sir Godfrey de Harcourt, the which then took party again
the French king for the death of his neuewe before put to death by king John^.
The which knights with other held the more part of the country of
Constantyne within Normandye, maugre the dukes power. In this said fight the
vyctory turned unto the French party / so that the said sir Phylyp was
chasyd, and sir Godfrey de Harcourt slain, with.viii. hundredth men of that
party. And the fourth day of December following, was the castle de la Pount
nere unto Roan, which by a long season had been in the rule of the forenamed
sir Phylyp, given up by appoyntement / the which by the dukes sowdyours had been besyeged from the month of July to that day / so that than the holders of
the said Castle departed with all their goods, and.vi. thousand frankes for
a reward for the yeldyng up of ye said castle. A frank is in value after
sterlyng money.ii. s. or thereupon.

Upon ye.x. day of December were proclaimed at Paris certain coins and values
of money newly ordained by the duke, and his cou^ceyl. with the which
proclamacyon the commons of the city were grievously amouyd. And for reformacyon
the prouoste of the merchants with other, yode upon the second day following
unto the castle or palace of Louure, there to treat with sir Lewys earl of
Angeou brother unto the duke and his lyeutenaunt while the said duke was gone
unto the city of Meaus, there to speak with Charlys of Bohemye or of Beaume
then emperor of Almayne and uncle unto the said duke* where the said
prouoste with the other made request unto the earl, that he would cease the
use of that money. And if not / they would so demean them that it should not be
suffered to be put forth nor taken within ye city. whereupon it was answered by
the earl, that he would take aduyce of his counceyll, and upon the morrow give
to the^ an answer. Upon the day following / the said provost with a great
company of ye city returned. At which season the earl in curteyse manner,
desired them to return that other day, for as much as yet he had not
suffycyentely commonyd with his cou^ceyll. Upon the morn the said provost
returned with a much greater company. where after long debatynge of the
matter, it was agreed by ye said earl and provost and his company, that the
money should be stopped and not to be put fourth, till they had further
knowledge of the dukes pleasure / for knowledge whereof the earl sent forth
messe^gers i^ all spedy wise.

And in this passetyme, Peter de la Forest archebysshop of Roan and chaunceller
of France was made and publyshed a cardynal. And the.xxiiii. day of the
month of January, the duke returned unto Paris with ye said cardynall in his
company / the which for reverence of the cardynall, was fette into the city
with processyon and other ceremonies, as well of the clergy as of the cytesyns.
The xxvi. day of the month of January the prouoste of the merchants of
Paris with other of the cyty, apered before the dukes counceyll at saint
Germayns. where it was desired of the said prouoste, that he should suffer the
forsayde money to run and be curraunt thorough the city. The which the
said prouoste with his company utterly denied / and after many great and
bold words, departed from the said counceyll in great ire / and after their
return unto the city, encensyd so the comynalty, that they set a part all
werkmanshyp and occupacyo^ in shyttyng in their shoppes, and drew unto them
their armor and harness. when the duke was enfourmed of this murmour of the
comynaltye of the city, he sent unto the prouoste / commaundyng him strayghtly
that the kings peace were kept within the city / and over that, that he with
a certain of the cytesyns should apere before him in the palayes of Louure
upon the morrow following at an hour assygned. At which hour the said
prouoste with his company came unto Louure, and so were conveyed into the
parlyament chaumber, where the duke with his counceyll was than present. Than
ye duke after certain chalengys made unto the prouoste for his obstynacy in
this matter, and mysledyng of the comynaltye of the city / said unto him, that
all be it that the king by his prerogatyue might at his pleasure and for his
auau^tage, make his moneys when he would, and so to suffer them to be currau^t
thorough his realm: yet for the weal and ease of his subjects, considering
their manyfolde and late charges / he was content that at this season this new
money should be spared / and that the iii. estates should be again assembled /
and that they should depryue all such persons than beryng offices, as they
should think preiudycyall to the realm / and over that to ordeyne such money
as might be benefycyall for ye land. Of all which grau^tes, ye provost, to ye
intent that he might of authoryte show them unto the comynaltye of the city
desired writing. The which the duke to appease the people, though it were some
deal contrary his mind and pleasure, granted unto his request. For the which
grant, diverse of the said officers, as the chaunceller or cardynall and other
absentyd them self, and came not in Paris by a tracte of time after. The.xxx.
day of January ensuynge / the duke at the request of the said provost, sent
certain officers unto the house of sir Symonde de Bucy, and of sir Nycholas
Brake, and of Enguerran of the Celer, and of John^ Prylle, which before with
other were accusyd of mysgouernaunce of the realm / whose houses were by the
said officers kept, and inuentuaryes made of such goods as than remained
within the said houses. And that done, the duke sent out commyssyons, that the
three estates should reassemble at Paris the xv. day of February next following
/ which was observed and kept. when ye said.iii. estates were again
assembled in the parliament chaumber at Paris, in the presence of the duke and
his brethern with diverse other nobles of France / master Robert Coke bishop
of Laon, by the commandment of the said duke, made a long preposycyon of the
mysguydynge of the king and the land by the mean of ill officers / as well
by chaungynge of the moneys as other many unlawful excysys and taskys, to the
great inpouerysshynge of the comynaltye of the reame, great dysclaunder to
the king, and to the synguler enrychynge and auauncement of the said officers.
wherefore the.iii. estates prayen, and specially the poor commons, that all such
officers may be removed from their offices / and other that shall be thought
more benefycyall for the king and his realm, to be admitted. Of the which the
cardynall was noted for pryncypall / and other to ye noumbre of.xxi. whereof
some were right nere unto the duke.

AFter which preposicyon or oracyo^ thus by the said bishop ended / sir John^
de Pygqueny in the name of the.iii. astates, offered that the said.iii.
astates should give unto the king.xxx.M. me^ for an hole year / with y^ that all
things might after that day be ordered as the bishop had before devised. All
which artycles were unto them by the duke granted. And inconuenie^tly all
such officers as they before had named, were clearly avoided / and other such
as by ye said.iii. astates were though most necessary, were put and chosen to
their roumes / except that some of the old, as masters of thaccomptes and
some of the presydentes and masters of the requests, were holden in for a
time, to practes and show unto ye new how they should order and guide the said
offices.

And the.xxvi. day of the month of March was a new money proclaimed
thorough Paris, such as the said.iii. astates had newly devised. Upon the.vi.
day of Apryll was proclaimed in Paris, that ye people should not pay such
subsydes as ye iii. astates had ordained for the wagynge of.xxx.M. men
aforesaid or for the kings fynau^ce / and also that the said.iii. astates
after that day should no more assemble for any causes or matters before
touched, till they had farther knowledge of ye kings pleasure. For the which
proclamacion the cytezyns of Paris were grievously amoued again the bishop of
Se^s, the earl of Ewe cousyn Germayne to the king, and again the earl
Ca^caruyle. By whose means they said this proclamacyon was purchasyd. And
treuth it is that the said archbysshop of Sens with the said.ii. erlys, were
sent from the king from Bordeaux yet there being, to the intent that they
should se the said proclamacyon put in ure. But so soon as the said
proclamacyon was made / they herynge of the murmour of the people of the city,
sped them thens shortly after. Then upon this ye commons waxed so wyld, that
they left their occupacyons and drew them to co^uentyculys and co^panyes, and
had many vnsyttyng words by the king and his counsel. whereof in avoiding
of inconuenyency / the duke commanded a watch to be kept within the city
both by day and by night / and certain gates of the city kept shytte, and
the remenaunt watchyd with men of arms. Upon the eight day of Apryll then
being Easter even, a another proclamacyon was made all contrary to that other /
by virtue whereof it was charged, that the foresaid subsydie should be leuyed,
and that also the three estates should reassemble at Paris the.xv. day after
Easter / and there to proceed upon all such matters as before were by them
begone. Upon the.vi. day of Apryll the French king shypped at Bordeaux and
so was conveyed into England, like as before is showed in ye xxxi. year of
king Edward. And about mydsomer following, ye duke of Lancaster, which by a
long season had lain before a town in Brytayne named Rosne, brake up his
syege / taking of them of that town for a fynau^ce.lx.M. scutys of gold. A
scute is worth.xi. d. sterling. About the feste of Mary Magdalene in the month
of July, controversy and varyaunce began to arise among the parso^s assygned
for the three estates. whereof the cause was, for so much as the sessyng which
they had auewed and sessed for the.xxx.M. men, would not exte^de unto the su^me
by large and great su^mes. So yt the clergy answered yt they would pay no more
than they were first sessed unto. And in like manner answered such as were
appointed for the lords and for the good towns. wherefore ye archebysshop of
Raynes, which before was one of the chief rulers of them, refused their party
and drew him all to the duke. By means of which controversy many of their
acts failed / and such as before were put out of their offices, were again
restored. About the myddel of August, the duke sent for the provost and Charles
Cusake, with John^ de la I Will / the which bare ye pryncipal rule within the
city, and also were great sayers and doers in the assembles of the iii.
astates, and had taken upon the^ much rule in ye busynes / so that much of ye
busynes was ruled by them and their means. To whom the duke gave straight
commau^demente, that they should cease of their auctorities, and not to deal
any more with the rule of the realm, but only to the good rule and
governance of the city of Paris. And that done the duke rode about unto
diverse good towns, and made request unto them for aid / and also to have the
money to be currau^t among them, which as before is showed the x. day of
Decembre was at Paris proclaimed. But he sped little of his purpose.

In this mean while, the cytezyns of Paris of one will and mind, offered
before saint Remyge a taper of wax of wonderful length and greatenesse / the
which they ordained to brenne day and night while it would last. And shortly
after they sent unto the duke so plesaunt message, yt he returned again unto
the city / whom they received with all honor and reverence. And upon the
morrow after his return / the provost with certain other of the city, showed
unto the duke that they would make a great shyfte for him toward the
mayntenaunce of his wars. And to bring that matter to good conclusyon / they
besought him yt he would assemble at Paris shortly, a certain persons of.xx.
or.xxx. good towns there next adioynaunt. The which was unto the^ granted /
so yt shortly after there assembled at Paris, upon lxx. persons / the which
held their counsayll to gyther by sundry days. How be it in the end they
showed unto the duke, that nothing they might bring to effect, without
assemble of the.iii. astates / and besoughte him that they might be efte
reassembled / trustyng that by their presence the dukes mind should be
content and satysfyed.

Upon which request the duke sent his co^myssio^s, chargyng ye said iii.
astates to apere before him at Paris, the wednysday next following ye day of
al saints. And full feign he was to do all thing that the citezyns of Paris
him required to do / for as testyfyeth the French Cronycle, he was so bare of
money that he had not suffycyente to defend his cotydyan charge.

IN the.viii. year of king John^ and wednysday after Alhalowen day / the.iii.
astates reassembled at Paris, and held their counsayll within the black
freers. During which cou^sayll the king of Nauern^ that long had been holden
in prison within the castle of Alleux, was delivered by the means of sir
Iohanne Pyquygny, than gouernoure of the country of Arthoys / and after
conveyed by the said John^ unto ye town of Amyas. when ye king of Nauerne was
thus set at large / anon his sister and other of his friends made means unto
the duke of Normandy, for an unity and a peace to be had between them / and by
them a mean was fou^den, that the king with such as were in his company,
should come under saufe conduyt to Paris to common with the duke. wha^ diverse
of the.iii. astates, as such as were of Cha^peyn and Burgoyn, knew of the
coming of the king of Nauerne unto Paris / they without leave taking departed.
And upon the even of saint Andrew the said king entered Paris with a great
company of men of arms. Among the wyche was the bishop of Paris, with many
other of ye said city. Upon the morrow following the day of saint Andrew /
the king ente^dynge to show his mind unto the comynalte of the city, caused
an high scaffolde to be made by ye wall of saint Germayn where he was lodged.
where much people being assembled, he showed unto them a long process of
his wrongefull enprysonemente, and of the mysgydynge of the land by means of
ille officers, with many couerte words to ye dyshonoure of the French king,
and iustyfycacion of him self and excusing of his own deeds, and so
returned into his lodgyng.

Upon the third day of December / the prouoste with other of the city yode
unto the duke / and in the names of the good towns or commynaltyes of the
same, required of him that he would do unto the king of Nauerne reason and
justice.

To whom it was answered by ye bishop of Laon, that the duke should not
allonly show unto the king reason and justice / but he should also show unto
him frendely brotherhode, with all grace and curtesy. And all be it that at
that season, many of ye dukes cou^sayll were present, to whom the gyuyng of
that answer had more conveniently apperteyned tha^ to ye said bishop / yet
they were at that time in such fere, that they durst not move any thing that
should sou^de contrary the displeasure of the king of Nauerne or of the
prouoste and other. Tha^ it was agreed that upon ye saterdaye following, the
king and the duke which as yet had not spoken together, should mete at the
place of the sister of the said king. where they met with vnfrendely
cou^tenau^ce / and after they had communed there a long season, departed with
little love or charity. And upon the mu^day following, were showed unto the duke
and his counsel, certain requests desired by the king of Nauerne / the
which the duke was forsed to grant. whereof the substance was, that the king
should have again and enjoy al such lands, castelles, and towns, with all
mouables to them belo^gynge, as he was in possessyo^ of ye day that king John^
was taken within the castle of Roan / and over that he should be pardoned of all
offenses by him done again the crown of France before that day, and all
other his adherentes, or such as had taken his party before yt time. And
soon upon this, was ordained that the earl of Harcourt and other, which king
John^ had caused to be beheded and after to be hanged upon the common gybet of
Roan, should be delivered unto their friends, to be buried at their pleasures.
After which conclusions taken, and assuraunces made as far as the dukes
auctoryte would extend unto / sir Almary knight, Menlene knight, with three
or four men of honor mo, were sent into Normandye, to repossesse the king
of Nauerne in all such lands, castelles, and towns, as he before time was in
possession of, with all mouables unto the said lands apperteynynge. And than
the said king and duke held famylyer company, and dyned and souped together
often sythes, at the manoir or lodgyng of queen Johan sister unto the said
king, and other places.

Also the said king delivered out of prysone, all prisoners as well
spyrytuall as te^porall, such as were thought any thing favorable unto his
cause. Among the which some there were, that for their demerites were adiuged
to perpetual prysone.

In this time and season tidings sprange within the city of Paris, that the
kings of England and of France were agreed, and that king Johan should
shortly return into France. By reason of which tidings, the king of
Nauerne made the more haste to dyspache him out of Paris / so yt he with his
company departed from Paris the.xx. day of Dece^ber, and rode toward the city
of Maunte in Normandy. Soon after the king was thus departed / diverse enemies
to the noumbre of.x. or.xii.C. came within.iiii. or.v. miles of Paris / which
were demyd to be of the company of sir Phylip brother unto the king of Nauerne.
These robbed and pylled the country thereabout / in so much that the people of
the country of Preaux and Trappes, and other there about, were constrained
with their mouables to flee unto Paris. wherefore the duke sent out his letters
and co^myssyons, for to assemble his knights to withstand the said enemies.

But the said cytesyns of Paris cast an other way / and thought it to be done
to the greuaunce or correccion of them. For dowte whereof / the provost with
other that had ye governance of the city, caused the gates to be kept / and
none should enter but such as lyked them.

In this pass time the king of Nauerne being in Normandy, required delyuere
of the castelles of Bretnell, of Euroux, and other / the which to him by ye
capytaynes were denied. wherefore he thynkyng that the duke performed not to him
his promise / gathered unto him great strength to win by strength that he
might not have his former ba^de and promise. Of this was put in great wit the
bishop of Laon, which was ye chief counceloure of the duke, and especyall
friend unto the king / so that what thing was spoken in the dukes cou^sayll,
was shortly after manifested by him and his means unto the king of Nauerne.
This also was one of ye chief rulers of the assemble of the.iii. astates / and
after left them and fell by his great doubleness and dyssymylacyon in the
dukes favor, and so became chief of his counsayll, for the which of the
common people he was named ye best with.ii. mouths. Than the cytezyns of Paris
heryng of the denayeng of the said castelles unto the king / knew well that
mortal war should grow between him and ye duke. And for they would have the
cytezyns known from other strangers / therefore they ordained them hodys
parted of read and blewe / chargynge every man that he should not pass his
lodging without ye hood and conysaunce.

Upon the.viii. day of January the king of Nauerne entered the city of Roan
with a great company of me^ of arms / and drew unto him many english men;
and such as were enemies unto the French king. And upon the.xii. day of
January the said king assembled the people of that city, and made a like
sermon unto the^ as before he had done unto the comynaltye of Paris / and did a
solemn obsequy to be done for the earl of Harcourt and the other with him put
to death, as above is said by king John^. in this while the duke of Normandy
that long while had tarried in Paris, in hope and aid of the cytezyns / and
was ever by the prouoste and other driven of from day to day: It was aduysed
him by his counsayll, that he should show his mind unto the comynaltye of the
city.

whereof when the bishop of Laon and ye provost were ware / anon they showed
unto him many doutes and impedymentes and also parelles, for to treat with a
comynaltye. Not withstanding he refused their counsayll, and caused the people
to be assembled at their common hall. whyther he with a small company came, the
xi. day of January about.ix. of the clock in the morning / where he showed
unto the commons a long and a plesaunt oracyon. whereof the effect was, yt he
bare very faithful mind unto the city / and for the weal thereof he would
put his life in ieopardy. And where as by his evil wyllers he was reported,
that he should gather men of arms to grieve the city / he said and swore it
was never his entencion, but only to avoid such enemies as daily pylled and
robbed their neighbors and friends. And where he also knew well, that great
sums of money were gathered of the people toward the kings fynaunce / he
let them understand yt no penny thereof was common to his hands.

But his mind was, that such persons as had received that money, should
with their assystence be called to a due account. which oracyon with many
kind and loving words ended / ye people with it were very well contented /
so that of them he was well commended and allowed. Upon the morrow being friday
and xii. day of January / the provost and other of his affynyte, herynge of the
favor that many of the commons bare unto the duke, and ferynge lest the duke
should by his means turn the commons upon them / assembled a great part of the
city at a place called sait James hospytall, and specially such as they knew
well favored their party. when ye duke was ware of the assemble, anon he
spedde him thither, having with him the bishop of Laon. where by the mouth of
his chau^celer, he caused to be showed a part of the matter which he him
self had showed the day before unto the comynaltye / with more, yt where as
such as ought unto him no good will, reported him that he kept not promise
made with the king of Nauerne / he showed there the contrary. And if any thing
were not to him parfourmed, it was contrary to his mind and pleasure / and
that that in his power lay not to fulfill. And so soon as ye chau^celer had
ended his tale / Charles Cusake stood up to the intent to have showed his
mind. But there was such a rumoure and noise among the people, that he might
not be hard / so that thanne the duke parted with such company as he
brought, except the bishop of Lao^, which tarried there with the provost and
other. And when the duke was departed Charles Cusake began his tale, and spoke
boldly again the kings officers / and by couerte words somewhat again the
duke. After which tale fynysshed one named John^ de saint Ounde, which by
auctoryte of ye three astates was newlye made one of the general governors of
the subsydy / stood up and said, that the prouoste nor no other person of
the three astates, had no penny of that subsydie in their hands / the which
saying the prouoste also affermed.

Forthermore showed than there ye said John^, that certain knights which he
there named sent from the duke, had received of the said subsydye to the sum
of.l. or.lx.M. mo tons of gold, the which were enployed to no good use. After
which process ended by the said Johan / Charles Cusake again began to
speak, and made a long comendacio^ of the prouydence and good dysposycion of
the provost, which had taken upon him great pain and displeasure, and spent
largely of his own for ye common wealth of the city. wherefore if he might
know that the comynaltye would not aid and stand by him for the furtherau^ce
of the same / he would be content to leave of, and get him there as he should
be quyte of al trouble, and also out of the danger of all his enemies.
whereunto was anon made a great exclamacyon by the people, saying they would
live and dye with him in that quarrel.

Upon the.xiii. day of January / the duke sent for diverse persons of the three
astates, and exorted them by goodlye and amyable words, that they would
demean them again his father and him, as faythefull and loving subjects /
and he should so report them unto the king, that they of him should have
great thanks.

And as touching him self / he would be so good lords unto them, that they
should think their kyndenes and fydelyte well bestowed. bestowed. The which
granted unto him their trothe and service to ye vttermoste of their powers /
aduysynge him to take upon him the governance of the realm / for they thought
he tarried to long or he took the rule thereof. Than soon upon this, the said
three estates ordained a more feeble money than they before had made, to the
advantage of the duke / to the end that he should wythstand the enemies
forenamed, which as yet remained in the country about Paris, and pylled the
vyllages and took prisoners / the which they conveyed unto such holds as they
tha^ held in that country. Thus during these manyfolde aduersytees among the
Frenchmen / upon the.xxiiii. day of ye said month of January, John^ Baylet
treasourer unto ye duke, was slain at Paris of a yoman or Uarlet of the
change called Peryne Mark. The which Peryne after that cursyd deed done,
fled unto saint Mary church. But at night the duke sent sir John^ de
Shalous his marchall, with the provost of ye city named Guillyam Scayse and
other / the which brake up the church doors and took the said Peryne out by
force / and ladde him unto prison called the Chastelet. Out of the which upon
the morn he was taken, and his hands smytten of / and so drawn unto the
gybet of Paris, and there hanged. But upon the third day following, by means
of the bishop of Paris he was taken down and buried within the said church
of our lady, with great reverence and solempnyte. At which obsequy was
present the prouoste of the merchants, with many other burgesis of the city.
The first day of the month of February / sir John^ de Pyquyny came unto
Paris from ye king of Nauerne, and made request unto the duke, of diverse
couenau^tes by him to be performed toward ye king, which as yet were not
acco^plysshed. which request the duke took vnpacye^tly / and gave unto the
said sir John^ many high and displesau^t words. How be it in the end ye
bishop of Laon said, that the duke should be aduysed upon ye answer of ye
kings demand. Upon ye.iii. day of February, ye provost of the merchants,
with certain of ye university of Paris and other burgeyses, yode unto the duke
unto Louure. where it was required by the said persons, that he would fulfill
unto the king of Nauerne, all such couenau^tes as were lately made with him /
and specially that the castelles of Euroux and other before named, might be
delivered unto him according to his apoynteme^t. And farthermore it was showed
unto the duke by a doctoure of diuynyte, that if he or the king of Nauerne
would swerve from any point or article of the said former agremente / that
the.iii. astates had utterly determined to aid and assyste him, that would
keep the said agreement, and to wythsta^de the other that would not obey or
uphold the said concord and agreement. whereunto the duke was well agreeable /
saying that he had performed all his promise, except the delyuere of
certain castelles, which the capytaynes wythhelde contrary his mind and
pleasure / layenge for their excuses, that by the king his father to them
they were delivered, and to him and none other they will deliver the^ again.

Upon the.xi. day of February, certain of the.iii. astates being at cou^sayll
in their place accustomed / ye prouoste of ye merchants assembled their
crafts of ye city at a place called sait Clowe or Cloy in harness.

In which time of his with them there being / an aduocat of the parliament
called master Reynolde Dacy, as he was going from the dukes palace toward his
own house, he was slain by men of the town.

And soon thereafter the said provost with a great company of armed men entered
the palace of Louure / and so with a certain complyces entered the dukes
chau^bre, and there without salutyng of the duke said unto him: Sir dysmay you
nothing whatsomeuer ye se us do, for we entende to your person no harm. And
or these words were fully ended / his company fell upon a knight called sir
Nycholas de Co^flans tha^ marshall of Cha^payne, and upon sir Robert de
Cleremou^t leuyng upon the dukes bed, and slew them out of hand. when the
duke beheld this horrible deed, he was in marvelous fere of his own person /
and prayed the prouoste with his cappe in his hand, that he would saufegarde
his person / the which y^ provost granted, with that he would by him be
aduertysed.

Than the said.ii. deed corses were drawn down the steyers without pytye /
and laid in the court that all men might behold that miserable spectacle.
And for the dukes saufegarde, the provost took unto his party a hood of read
and blewe, ye which he put upon his head / and the provost received the dukes
hood being of burnet and garnysshed with a frenge of gold / and so either
ware others hode all that day. And that done, the prouoste with his company
went unto their common hall / where he showed unto the comynalty that the.ii.
persons were especial enemies unto the common weal, and false traitors to
god and to the crown of France / and that he and his adherentes ente^ded the
preseruacion of the common weal of the realm, and the city / and would
understand of them, whether they would stand by him in that doing or not.
The which cried with one voice ouy, ouy / that is to say ye, ye. And when he
had received this comfort of ye people, he returned again unto the duke. Than
he recomforted him and said, that all that was done, was done by thassent of the
people, and for to avoid ye greater inconuenie^ce. For these that were slain
were great enemies unto the common welthe, and traitors unto the crown.
wherefore he wylled ye duke to allow that deed / and if any pardon were
requysyte for ye deed or any other to be had, that he should lyberally grant
it. All which things the duke was feign to say ye unto / and prayed him and
the other than also of the cytezyns to be his fre^des, and he would in likewise
be theyrs. And after this agreement / the provost sent for.ii. clothes one of
read / and ye other of blewe / and wylled the duke to make hoodes of the same
for all his servants. And so the duke and his servants were clothed in the
lyuery of the town / the blewe set upon the right side. Than again night wha^
the said.ii. corpsys had lain all day upon the stones of the palace / ye
provost commanded them to be laid in a cart, and so without priest or other
reverence to be conveyed unto a place of sait Katheryne there to be buried. And
when the said corpsys were thus brought unto the said place, yt carter took
one of their garments for his labor, and so departed.

It was not long after that a messanger came from the bishop of Paris, which
warned the brethren of that house to spare the buryenge of sir Robert de
Cleremou^t, for asmoch as the bysshope noted him, accursed for brekyng up of
sait Mary church, when he by force fette out Peryne Mark, as before is
showed. But after, they and also ye advocate master Reynolde Dacy were buried
secretelye. Upon the morn following the provost assembled at the friar
Augustynes a great company of the city, with all such as then were there of
the good towns by reason of ye foresaid cou^sayll. To which assemble, by the
mouth of master Roberte de Corby a man of the city, was showed a protestacio^
of all the cyrcumstau^ce of the foresaid matter / and how that by the dukes
cou^s^^l and also by ye three astates, many good ^^ynges were concluded for the
delivery of the king / and should or that time have common to good effect, ne
had been the enpechement of.iiii. persons, the which at yt season were not
named.

This business thus co^tynuyng, the king of Nauarne came unto Paris the.xxvi.
day of February, with a good company of armed men / and was conveyed by the
cytezeyns unto a place of the dukes called the Neell, and there lodged. To
whom the provost with his co^plyces made request, that he would make allyau^ce
with them, and to supporte them in that ye they had done / the which by
him was granted. Than the queen his sister and other, made instante labor to
agree him and the duke. which in co^clusyon took such effect, yt the king
should have in recompe^cement of his wro^ges, the erledom of Bygorre and the
vynery of Ramer, with ye erledo^ of Maston, and other lands to ye extente
of.x.M. li. of Paris money by year. And over that his sister called queen
Bla^che, should have ye lordshyp of Morette for her Dowry. After which accord
thus concluded / the king and the duke kept together very fre^dely and loving
familyarite, dyned and souped either with other by many and sundry times, and
either unto other gave rich gifts. Among the which one was, that the duke
gave unto the king the said place of Neell which he than lodged in.

Upon the.xii. day of March, the duke of Normandye was proclaimed regent of
France thorough ye city of Paris / and after thorough all France. And soon
after he departed from Paris, and rode into ye country of Champayne, where he
tarried a season. And the king of Nauerne returned to Maunt in Normandye. Than
the regent drew unto him the nobles of Champayne and of Prouynce / and began
to manace the provost and other of Paris, that before had put him to
dyshonoure, and slain so vylaynously his true counceyllours. And after
promise taken of the earl of Brene and other nobles of that country, yt they
should aid him again his fathers rebels and his enemies / he than rode unto
the abbey of Ponley in Monstruell / and after yode unto a castle which
belonged unto queen Blanch sister unto ye king of Nauerne, and wyllyd the
Capytayne named Tanpyne to deliver to him that castle. The which after diverse
denayes, opened the gates and received in the regente, and lodged him therein
that night. Upon the which the regent caused the said Tanpyne to swear unto
him, yt he should keep that castle to his use / and after made him still
wardeyne of the same / and so departed thens and rode to Meaux where his wife
lay.

In this time and season the prouoste of the merchants of Paris, herynge of
the regentes doing* and of the affynyte that he made with the^ of Champayne,
fered the sequel thereof. wherefore by the advise of such as favored his cause
/ he yode into the castle of Louure, and there took out artylery, gunnys, and
other abylyme^tes of war, and put them in ye store house of the city, to be
ready when time requered. The regent spedyng his iournay returned again to
Co^peygn. And where as before was appointed, that the.iii. astates should ye
first day of May assemble at Paris / the regent tha^ sent out his
commyssio^s, and charged ye said.iii. astates to assemble the third day of
the said month of May at Compeyngne aforesaid / wherewith the said cytezyns
of Paris were greatly amoued. At this assemble was granted unto the regent, a
subsydy both of ye Clergy and also of the lay fee / so yt the regent waxed
daily stronger and stronger. whereof heryng the king of Nauerne / removed from a
town called Merlo / and with a strong company came unto a place or town
named Damage, purposely for to treat with the regent for the cytezeyns of
Paris. where in the beginning of May yt said two princes met, either having
great strength of men of armies.

When the king of Nauerne had by.ii. days contynuall made request unto the
regent for the cytezyns of Paris, and might natte speed of his request / he
departed the third day and rode unto Paris. where he was honorably received
and fested by the space of.x. or.xii. days. In which season he warned them
of the great dyspleasure that ye rege^t bare toward the city / and aduysed
them to make them as strong as they might. In this pass time the bishop of
Laon being with the regent at Co^peyne, was like to have been vylonyed by some
of the rege^tes counsayll. wherefore in secret wise he departed unto saint
Denyse / and from the^s he was fette by the kings servants of Nauerne unto
Paris / in whom was put great fault of all this trouble.

About the myddell of May / one named Guyllyam Call^y gathered unto him a
company in the province of Beauaysyn, as of the towns of Cerreux Norecell,
Cramoysye, and other there about. The which being evil dysposed, slew diverse
knights and esquyers of that country, and their wives and servants / and
pylled and spoiled the country as they went, and threw down certain pyles
and other stre^gthes, and a part of the castle of Beawmou^t / and forced the
duchess of Orleaunce to forsake that castle, that than was there lodged / and
for her saufegarde to go unto Paris.

Upon the.xxx. day of May / the provost and other governors of ye city of
Paris, caused John^ Paret, master of the bridge of Paris, and the master
carpenter of the kings works, to be drawn, hanged, heded and quartered. For
it was put upon them, that they should have brought into the city a certain
noumbre of of the regentes sowdiours, and so to have betrayed the city. And
the fore said people of Beauuaysyne gathered unto them daily more people, as
laborers and vylaynes / y^ which came into the country of Mountmerencie, and
slew and robbed there ye ge^tylmen of that country as they had done of other,
and so passed the country without resystence. And ye rege^t in this while came
to the city of Sens in Languedocke, where he was honorably received / all be
it yt the commons of that city and gentyles of that country, were greatly
lenyng unto the cytezyns of Paris / and there tarried a season to express to
the^ his mind. In which mean time a spycer or grocer namer Gylle of Paris,
with one John^ Uayllaunt prouoste of ye kings money, with a company of.viii.C.
men in harness rode unto the city of Meaux / whereof ye mayre of that city
they were joyfully received, contrary his promise before made unto the regent.
where with assystence of the said mayer and other of that city, they intended
to have taken the wife of the said regent, with other noble women tha^ there
soiournyng with her / and so to have conveyed them unto Paris, there to have
kept them till the cytezyns might purchase the favor and grace of the regent.

But wha^ the earl of Foyse, which thanne had the rule of the said
gentylwomen, knew their entente / anon he gathered unto him his company / and
with assyste^ce also of some of the said city, he made upon.vi. or.vii.C. men
in harness, and issued boldly again the foresaid persons and skyrmysshed
with them. In which skyrmysshe in the end, the me^ of Paris were sconfited
and chased, and the mayre of Meaus named John^ Soulas taken with other / which
after for their rebellyo^ were put in execucion. And after this victory thus
opteyned / and in reue^geme^t of the death of a knight called sir Lewys de
Chambly there slain with other gentylmen / and for the untruth of ye city:
the foresaid earl set fire upon a side of the city, and bre^t a great part
thereof, as well churches as other / which fire was sca^tly stenched in.viii.
days after.

In this while the king of Nauerne herynge of the great harm and distruccio^
that the company of Guyllyam Calley made of gentylmen in Mou^tmere^cy and other
places, like as before is showed, yode again him / and nere unto a place
called Cleremou^t encountered him and his people, and gave unto them battle,
and slew much of his people / and took him on live, and caused his head to be
stryken of. And soon after, the cytezyns of Paris sent unto him / requyrynge
him to draw toward the^. At whose request he sped him thytherwarde, and
entered the city upon the.xv. day of Iuny / and was conveyed unto sait
Germayne in Pree and there lodged. And upon the morn he went unto the common
halle of the city / where the como^s being assembled, he made unto them a
long and plesaunt oracio^, of the great kyndenesse that he had found in many
of ye good towns of France and specially in the city of Paris. For the which
they had bound him to take their party again all other, making none
excepcyo^. After which tale by him ended / Charles Cusake stood up, and showed
unto the people what ruynous point the land stood in for lack of a wise hedde
and gouernoure. wherefore he exhorted ye people to chose ye king for their
governor. which than was so done / and he there took upon him the rule, and
promised with them to live and dye. Upon the xxii. day of the said month of
Iuny / ye king of Nauerne with a company of vi.M. speres of the city and
other, departed from Paris, and rode unto a town called Gonnesse, where an
other company of the city tarried for him / and from thens rode toward Se^lys.
But wha^ the gentylmen of his host understood that he had taken upon him to
be capytayne of the cominaltye, where again the more party of the nobles of
France were of the contrary party / they left him many of them, and specially
such as were of the duchye of Burgoyne / and with congy of him taken, resorted
into their countries. wha^ the regent had vysyted diverse countries, and won
unto him the beniuolence of ye same, and had also gathered unto him great
strength / he spedde him toward Paris / and lodged him in the end of the
month of Iuny, in a place called in French le Pount de Charenton fast by
Boys in Uyncent. In whose company were noumbred upon.xxx.M. horsemen / so that
the country there about was pylled and wasted with that host.

whereof herynge the king of Nauerne, returned back again, and came with his
host unto saint Denis within.ii. miles of Paris. And the city of Paris was
kept day and night, that no man might enter or go out, without lyce^ce of ye
prouoste and other rulers thereof. In this mean while that the said two
princes lay thus with their two hosts about the city / queen Johan sister
unto the king, made an instau^t labor unto the regent for grace for the
cytezyns. By whose means a comucacio^ was appointed to be holde^ between the
king and the regente, the eight day of July, at a place called ye wind mylle
fast by the house of saint Anthony. At which metynge it was lastly accorded
between ye said princes, that the king of Nauerne should do his best to bring
the cytezyns of Paris unto due obedyence. And if he saw in them such
obstynacy, that they would not do their duty, and to give for their rebellyon
such sums of money as by him and the regent should be thought according /
that than the king should utterly refuse their party, and turn unto the
rege^t with all his power.

And over that, the king for all demaundes that he could ask of the regent for
any cause, over the agreement between them last made, should have iii.C.M.
floryns of gold, whereof an C.M. to be paid that day.xii. months, and yearly
after.l.M. till the fulle were paid. And farther it was accorded, that the
king after yt day should take party with the regente again all persons,
except only ye king of France / And to the end yt this accord should be
fermely holde^ upon both sides / the bishop of Lyseux there being
present, with many other lords, sa^ge there mass within the tente where this
accord was concluded / and after agnus dei, swear the two princes upon the
sacrament, that without collusyon or fraud they should observe and keep
eueryche article of the said accord. After which conclusyon thus taken / the
regent repaired unto his host, and the king unto saint Denis. Than upon the
morrow the king entered Paris, and conveyed thither with him but a certain /
and so tarried there all that day, without any report sendy^ge unto the
regent.

And the second day for ye more stre^gthynge of the town, he sent for
certain English sowdyours, as archers and other, and set them in the town
wagys / and another sent nor returned unto the regente with any answer. Than
toward the night, how it was assaut was made by some of the regentes people
upon a part of the town, so that diverse men were slain upon both sides /
but the mo upon the party of the city.

Than the king of Nauerne upon the morrow returned unto sait Denis / leuynge
within the city ye foresaid stre^gthe of Englyshmen with other. when the
regente was ware of the kings being at saint Denis / he sent unto him, and
him required of perfourmau^ce of such accord as lately between them was
condissended / and syns by his means he might not enduce the cytezyns to due
obedyence, that he would according to his promise take party with him /
whereby they and other enemies to y^ common wealth, might be recou^ceyled.
whereunto the king answered and said, that the rege^t had broken ye said
accord. For where he by his dylyge^ce and labor, had brought the cytezyns to
a nere point of reco^ciliacyon and submyssio^ / the regent by the mean of that
assaute which he made unto the town, caused the said cytezeyns to renounce
all their former grant, and to bind them upon their former will fullness.
After which answer thus given by the king / the rege^t caused his people to
pass ye river of Said by a bridge made of botes, and so to brenne the town
of Uyttry and diverse other towns, and robbed and pylled the country there
about.

Upon the.xiiii. day of July, diverse of the town of Paris issued out of the
town / and with the aid of the Englyshmen endeavored them to have socoured
the said town of Uyttry / with also to have destroyed ye brydg. At which
iournay they bare them so well, that with their shot they wounded many of
their enemies / and took prisoner the regentes marshall named sir Reynolde de
Fountaynes with diverse other / and after returned unto their city.

Upon the.xix. day of July, ye queen John^ sister unto ye king of Nauern^, with
the archebysshop of Lions, the bishop of Paris, with certain other temporal
persons of the city / yode unto a place assygned without the town. where
with them met the regent and certain of his cou^sayll / and at length
concluded an unyte and co^corde between the said regent and cytesyns, without
farther pain or exaccio^ to be put unto them / except that the said cytesyns
should humbly submytte the^ unto the regent, in aknowlegyng their offense, and
askyng of him mercy and grace for the same / and over yt to be ordered forther
as the king of Nauerne, the said queen John^, with the duke of Orleau^ce and
the earl of El ca^ps, would deem and adiuge / and that granted, the rege^t to
opyn all ways and passages as well by land as by water, that al merchants
may pass as they before times used / and in likewise they of the city to opyn
the gates of the town, and to receive all strangers.

AFter which agremente thus concluded and agreed, with all other before made
between the king and the regent to be maynteyned and vpholden / the rege^t sent
from him much of his people / and appointed the said bisshoppes and the other
for the town, to mete with him ye.iiii. day following at a place called Laiguy
sir Marne. where he would have also the king of Nauerne and the other, to
perfyghte and clearly fynysh the said agreement / and upon this made
proclamacions thorough the host, that a good and perfyght peace was agreed.
wherefore many of the host for diverse causes them mouynge yode toward the
city, trustyng there gladly and louynglye to be received. But vpo^n ye morn
when they came unto the gates, they fande them watched with harnessed men,
which would none suffer to enter but such as them lyked / among the which
one named Macequetta servant of the rege^tes was mysse entreated. And not
withsta^dyng that accord / yet the mouable goods of such as were with the
regent and had houses within the city, where disperbled and stroyed.

Upon the.xxi. day of July and even of mary Magdaleyne, a strife began to
kyndell within the city / so that ye cytesyns complained them upon the
Englysshemen, surmysynge again the^ diverse causes. By mean whereof the comonte
in a fury yode unto the palaye of Necl, where at yt time many of the capytaynes
of the Englysshemen dyned with the king of Nauerne / upon whom they fell
suddenly, and slew of them upon.xxiiii. and after in diverse places of ye
city, took the other deal to the nou^bre of.iiii.C. or thereupon, and closed
them in diverse prysons. with which doing, the king of Nauerne, with also the
prouoste and other the gouernoures of the city were right fore discontented.
wherefore upon the day following, the king assembled the comynaltye at their
common halle / entendynge by plesau^t words to have caused them to have been
repe^taunt of the murder of the foresaid capytaynes, and also to have gotten
the remenaunte out of prison.

But the more the king spoke for the Englysshemen, the more woder were they
dysposed again them / saying yt those which were within the city, should
not alonely be put to death; but also such as were at sait Denis, which
there spoiled that town and country enuyron / and had had such words unto
the king, yt in the end he with the provost and the other gouernoures, were
feign to grant unto them, that they would go with them for to help to
dystres the said Englysshemen. And so the same day again night / the como^s
issued by the gate of saint Honor / and the king of Nauerne with the provost
and their company went out by ye wyndemylle, so that in the said asse^bles of
the king and the commons were noumbred upon.xvi.C. speres, and of foot men
upon.viii.M. when the king with his company was come^ into the feelde where
the said wyndemylle stands / he houed there well up on half an hour, to se
what ye other company would do. The which sent out.iii. speres to espy where
the Englyshmen were, and espied of them upon.xl. or.l. that apered by a woddes
side nere unto saint Clow / and wenynge that the said Englysshemen there had
be^ no mo, returned and showed what they had seen. whereupon the said commons
in all haste spedde them thither. And wha^ they were within the danger of
their shot / ye Englysshmen issued out of diverse parties of the wode, and
wounded and slew many of them. wherewith the other being fered fled
incontinently / whom the Englysshemen pursued so cruelly, that they slew of
the footmen upon.vi.C. in all.

which season the king of Nauern^ and also ye provost with their people, stood
still and never moved toward the^ for their defense or aid. After this
scomfyture thus sustained by the Parysyens / the king left the city and rode
unto saint Denis / and the prouoste with his company returned unto Paris. where
he was received with hydyous noise and cry, as well of women as me^, for yt he
so cowardly had suffered his neighbors to be wounded and slain. By reason of
this the murmr of the people increased daily more and more again the provost
/ so that in manner a party was taken between the prouoste and the other
governors of the city and the comynaltye. For the commons would have put to
death many of the prisoners of the Englysshemen / but ye provost with his
affynyte let them, and preserved them from their fury and malice.

And upon the.xxvii. day of July being frydaye / the said provost being
enco^panyed with.viii. score or ii.C. me^ in harness, yode unto Louure and
other prysons and, took out ye said Englysshemen, and conveyed the^ unto the
gate of saint Honor / and so sent them unto their other felysshyp than being
at saint Denis.

Of whom they were ioyously received and welcomed / and specially of the king
of Nauerne, at whose request as the common fame went, yt provost with the other
rulers of ye town them delivered. Thus more and more cyuyle dyscorde began to
encreace within the city / so that the rulers of ye city were now in as great
dought and fere of their neighbors, as before time they were of the rege^t and
his knights.

So that upon the tuysdaye following being the last day of July / ye provost
with other of his company being in harness as daily they were used, went to
dinner unto the bastyle of saint Denis. And there being at dinner / the provost
commanded to such as tha^ kept the keys of that bastyle, that they should
deliver them unto Geffrey de Masto^ than tresourer of the wars of the king
of Nauerne. But the porters denayed ye commau^deme^t / and said presysely yt
they would not deliver the keys to him nor yet to any stranger. For the
which answer many hawte words were blown on either party / so that people
gadered about them. whereof heryng one named John^ Maylart, to whom belo^ged the
watch of a quarter of ye city / wherein and in which quarter the said
bastyle stood, drew nere and gave ere unto the words / and shortly after in
bold manner said unto ye provost, that the keys should remain still with the
said kepers, and not to be taken out of their possession. By mean of which
words the prouoste with his company were encensed with more malice / and
uttered many high and dysdaynous words to fere the said John^ Maylart and the
other. wherefore the said John^ Maylart feryng the provost, lest he should
shortly call his stre^gthe to him, and by mean thereof put him and other to an
afterdele / suddenly gate him on horseback / and berynge a baner of ye French
kings in his hand, cried with alowde voice, Mon joy saint Denis au Roy et a
duke. wha^ the people saw him thus ride about, and cried joy to the king
and the duke / anon much people followed him, and cried in the same wise. And
in likewise did the provost and his company, which took the way toward the
bastyle of saint Anthony. And the said Maylarte rode toward the market
place, and there houed with his company. In which time and season one called
Pepyn de Essars, not knowing of the feat of John^ Maylart, in like manner
gathym on horsbacke / and berynge a baner of the arms of France, rode about
cryeng ye foresaid cry, and so lastly came unto the other. while the commo^s
were thus assembled in the market place / the provost came unto the foresaid
bastyle of saint Anthony / where it was reported to yt kepers of that bastyle,
that the provost had lately received letters from the king of Nauerne which
they desired to se / whereof the prouoste denayed the syghte, and specially one
named Guyffarde. wherefore after some words of dyspleasure, one struck at the
said Guyffarde, and through his harness wounded him. where with ye provost
being amoued, made resyste^ce again the said kepers / so yt either ran at
other with their wepyns. In which strife the said Guyffarde was first slain /
and after the prouoste with one of his co^peres named Symo^de Palmeyr. whereof
heryng ye fore said John^ Maylart and his company, in all haste sped the^
thither and pursued upon other yt tha^ were fled for fere / and so straightly
serched, yt they fo^de one called John^ of ye I Will, and Giles Marcell under the
prouoste of merchants, which they also slew without pytie. And after at ye
bastyle of saint Martyne, they found one called John^ Paret the yo^ger, whom
they slew also. And soon were they spoiled of all yt they had, and laid naked
in the open street for all men to look upon. And when they.vi. corpsys had so
lain by a certain time / they were than put in a carte and drawn unto a house
of saint Katheryne, and there buried irreverently. And upon the morrow
following, were taken Charles Cusake, and Iosseron or Geffrey Maston, and put
into the chastelet, and there kept in strayte prison. And thus seized this riot
within the city of Paris, that had continued for the more party by ye space
of a year and.ix. months / as from the beginning of the month of November
in the.vii. year of king John^, unto the end of ye month of July in the.viii.
year of this said king / or from the taking of the duke in his chau^bre, to the
death of ye provost by the space of.vi. months. After which persons thus
slayen / the said John^ Maylart sent unto ye regent, requyrynge him yt he would
speed him unto ye city / and in ye mean while to send some noble man to have
the rule of the same. And in that while the como^s made search, and took many
of the former rulers, as Petyr Gylle grocer, which as before is said was
capytayne unto the^ yt were sent unto Meaus. And with him was taken sir Pyers
Caylart knight and wardeyne of the castle of Louure. Also one called John^
Prenost, with Petyr Blount. Also a vocate named master Peter Puyssour / and a
fellow of his named master Johan Godarde. All which persons were shortly
after put to death by sundry times, and their bodies cast in to a river called
Bone Uoycyne. And upon the.xii. day of August, the regent was received into
Paris with all honor and gladness. whereof heryng the king of Nauerne, and
of the puttyng to death of Ioss^ran his tresourer / sent unto the rege^t words
of defyau^ce / letting him to understand that he would be revenged of that
wrong and other.

UPon the.xiiii. day of August, the regent caused to he assembled within the
common hall of Paris the cytezyns / to whom he made a long declaracion of the
treasons and ryottes done by these persons put to death, and by the bishop of
Laon and other yet leuyng / which ente^ded as he said to have made ye king of
Nauerne king of France, and to have yelden the city of Paris into the power
of Englysshemen. Tha^ the king of Nauerne with the Englyshmen yode unto Meloon
/ where they by favor and strength occupied ye isle, and all yt country which
stretched toward Byer / and warred upon the country toward Gastenoys and did
therein much harm as well by fire as otherwise. And shortly after sir John^
Pyquegny and sir Robert his brother, which were capytaynes under the king of
Nauern^, made war upon the town of Turnay and other towns of Pycardy / and
slew many of the common people, and took prisoners of the gentylmen of that
country to the noumbre of an hundredth and above.

Among the which the bysshope of Noyen was taken, and with the other ladde
unto a castle or town called Creeyll, whereof the foresaid sir Robert was
capytayne / and so continued in doing damage in diverse places, as well nere
unto Paris as else where. During which war thus made by the king of
Nauerne and his accessaries / in the month of Septembre and beginning of the
ix. year of king John^, the foresaid sir John^ de Piquegny laid his siege
unto the city of Amyas, and wa^ within the bulwerkes of the same / so that the
city was like to have been yelde^ unto him, ne had been the rescous of the earl
of saint Poule, which drove the said John^ and his people a back. But the said
sir John^ with aid of the Englyssheme^ quytte him so ma^fully, that he had the
domynyo^ of all that country of beawuasyne / so that wine nor no marchaundyse
might pass to Tournay nor other towns therabout, without his saufe co^duyt
or lyce^ce. And in like manner sir Robert knolles capytayne of the Englisshemen
in Brytayne, gatte there many holds and towns, which I pass over.

Upon the.xxv. day of Octobre, diverse of the burgeysys and rulers of the city
of Paris, as John^ Guyffarde, Nycholas Poret, and other to the nou^bre of.xix.
persons, by the commandment of the rege^t were arested and sent unto prison
/ and so remained by the space of.iiii. days. wherefore the fre^des of the said
prisoners yode unto the prouoste of the merchants than named John^ Culdoe,
and required him to make labor with other unto the regent than being at
Louure, for the delyuery of their fre^des, or at the lest to know the cause of
their inprysonement / which request ye provost and other executed. It was
answered to them by the rege^t, that upon the morrow he would be at their
common halle / where before the comynaltye yt cause of their inprysonement
should be showed. And if than the cytezyns thought good to have them set at
large / he would therwyth hold him contented. At which hour appointed, the
regente came unto the said halle / and there showed that one named John^
Damyens, which had married the daughter of John^ Restable one of the said
prisoners, had caused his said father and the other, yt they had allied them
with the king of Nauern contrary their allegeau^ce / wherefore he thought they
had deserved to dye. But for the favor that he owed unto the city and to
them, for they were of good substance / he would not do any thing to them
till they were enquered of by their neighbors. After the which declaracion
thus made by the rege^t / every man fered to speak any more for them, but
suffered the law to have his course. How be it in the end they were acquyted
of that treason, and finally delivered by the end of the next month.

Uppo^ the third day of Dece^bre, entered into Paris the cardinals of
Pierregort and of Urgell, to treat a co^corde and peace between the regente
and the king of Nauerne. But in co^clusyon nothing they sped of that they came
for / wherefore they returned unto Auynyon. In which return they were
robbed of great substance / whereof Englyshmen bare the disclau^der. And thus
this grudge ha^gynge between the king and the rege^t / many robberyes and other
harms were done unto diverse towns in France, to ye great enpouerysshynge of
the people of that land, and to the great enrychynge of such Englysheme^ as
tha^ were there abiding in daily wars, both with the king of Nauerne and
also in Brytayne.

For shortly after this, the foresaid sir Roberte Knolles and other
Englysshemen wanne the town of Ancer and other, like as in the three and thyrty
year of king Edward is before more at length declared.

In ye month of May and.xix. day of the same / ye rege^t for tidings which he
had received from his father out of England, by the report of ye archebysshop
of Se^s and other / assembled many of ye good towns at Paris. But ye ways were
so stopped by me^ of war he was feign to tarry till the.xxv. day of the said
month following. At which season was showed to ye people there assembled,
that the king of England to have a fynall concord with ye king of France,
would have over and above his ransom, ye duchy of Normandy, ye duchy of
Guya^, the duchy of Exanctes, the city of Ageu, the city of Carbe, the city
of Pierregort, the city of Lymoges, ye city of Caours, with all the dyoces of
the said cytyes belo^gyng / the erledomes of Bygorre, of Poytyers, of Aniowe,
and of Main, of Thorayn of Bouloyne, of Guynys, of Pou^tesses, or Pountyeu /
ye towns of Mou^struell, of Calays, and of Marquet / with all appertenauntes
to the said duchys, erledomes, cytyes, and towns belonging / them to enjoy
and hold without feawte or homage for them doing, with many other things to
the king of Englandes great advantage. which tidings were right dyspleasaunt
unto all that company / in so much that they answered that the said treaty was
neither honorable nor profitable. And rather tha^ the king should bind him and
his land to such inconvenience / they would prepare to make sharp war
again England. with which answer the said assemble was dyssolued.

Upon the.xxviii. day of May, the regent reassembled the said people / where
it was condyscended that the nobles of the realm with a certain persons
every man after his astate, should serve the regent in his wars by ye space of
a month at their own propre costs. And the city of Paris granted to find
to him at their charge.vi.C. speres, iiii.C. archers, and a.M. of other
sowdyours. And for so much as ye other good towns would not grant any
subsydie till they had spoken with their co^mynaltyes / therefore they were
lice^ced to deperte home, and to bring report again within xiiii. days. At
which season they showed unto ye regent, yt their countries were so pylled and
wasted by the king of Nauerne and Englyshemen, yt the people might nothing
aid him as they thought to have done. wherefore with much pain they granted
to hi^ viii.M. me^ for.iii. months.

In the beginning of the month of Iuny, ye regent with a strong power sped
him toward Meleo^ where the king of Nauerne lay with his people / so that
the king occupied the country toward Byeir, and ye regent y^ country toward
Brye. where both hosts thus lyenge without notary feate of war / a treatye
of accord was yet again moved at le^gthe, by agreement of ye Parysyens,
accorded much like unto the former accord concluded at Paris. So yt by
mediacyo^ of certain te^porall lords of both hosts, yt said princes agreed to
mete at Me^lane / and there to conclude the said peace. where about the.xx.
day of August, with hostage delivered upon both parties / the said princes
met / and after rode unto Pountoyse, where they were both lodged within the
castle / where both their cou^sayles were assygned to mete for the per
fyghtyng of this accord. But so it was yt for such lands as should be
assygned unto ye king, they cowde not agree. wherefore ye rege^t in co^clusyo^
sent unto the earl of Sta^ps or Escamps, chargyng hi^ to say, yt he to ye
intent to have his good will, had offered unto him reasonable offers.

which if he would accept, he would be feign thereof / and if not, he let him
understand yt he should have no peace with him while he lived. By reason of
which message, ye cou^sayles on both parties conceived none other, but that
this treaty should have concluded no amyte nor peace. But how it was, by
counsayll or of his own lyberalyte, when the king had degested this matter in
his mind by all that night following / he on ye morrow sent for the counsayll
of the regent / and wylled them to show unto the rege^t, that he considered
well in his mind the great danger and mysery which the realm of France
stood in. wherefore he being of the natural house of France, and one of ye
Flouredelyce / ought to se ye mayntenaunce of the honor of the same. And for
that that no ruin of the said realm should to him (if any fell) after be
are^ted / therefore he was contented to set a part all such great offers and
promyses, as to him before time had been offered and promised / and to hold him
only contented with his own right as he before times had enjoyed. And to ye
end that this his will and pleasure might to the people be known / he wylled
the regent that the people of that town of Pou^toyse should be assembled in the
court of that castle, that he might declare it to them in propre person. The
which according to his mind was done. All which rehersall he made before the
rege^t and comynalte of the town / promysyng there to deliver out of his
possession all such towns, castelles, and holdys, as he had won syn he stood
enemy to the crown of France / and to become true subject unto the king,
and loving neuewe and friend unto ye rege^t from yt day foreward. whereof the
rege^t and all the commons were very glad and joyful all be it that some
trusted little to this accord, nor yet to ye co^tinuau^ce thereof / considering
the manyfolde accordes which before times had been between them concluded. After
which accord thus ended / the king with his people returned to M^iant, and
ye rege^t to Paris / appoyntyng between them to meat at Paris the first day of
Septembre next following.

According to ye appoyntme^te made at Pountoyse between the king and ye rege^t
/ upon the first day of Septembre and beginning of ye x. year of king John^,
the said king and regent met at Paris / where atwen them was holden famylyer
company, and great kyndenesse showed upon either party. There also they
counceyled how they should withsta^de the king of England, which ente^ded to
enter France shortly after with a strong power. And after many amytees and
frendely dealings between the^ executed / ye king rode to Meleo^ to deliver
that town and castle into the regentes possessyon as the story shows. But
wha^ he was co^myn thither, were it with his will or contrary / the sowdyours
took greuouse tolles of all wynes and other marchaundyses that passed that way
/ which after was known to be for ye wage and sowde of the Nauaroys and
Englisshemen, which held the said town and castle. And so yt Frenchmen were
constrained to pay the wages of their enemies / which grieved them very sore,
considering that manyfolde harms and pyllages of them before were received.
And after the king had avoided the said sowdyours / he departed and rode unto
Mau^t leuyng Creyell in the possession of Englyshmen and other. And over these
manyfolde myseryes and myschyeues thus falling in the realm of France / there
fell so great habundau^ce of water in the Heruest season, that ye corn was
lost / so that it rose to an high price to the great damage of the common
people.

And in the month of Nouembre following / the king of England, with prince
Edward and other many lords, with a strong power la^ded at Calays / and so
perced France by Artoys in Pycardy and Uermendoys, and subdued the countries
before him till he came to Reins, like as before is showed in the.xxxiiii.
and.xxxv. years of king Edward / where all this matter with ye tenoure of the
peace between the said kings of England and of France is more at length
declared.

The last day of the month of Decembre, one Marten of Pysdo burgeyse of
Paris, was drawn unto the place of judgment / and there upon a scaffolde had
first his arms cut of and after his legs by the thyes, and lastly his head
/ and than he was quartered, and his.iiii. quarters set upon iiii.
pryncypall gates of the city, and his head set upon the pyllory. The cause
of this judgment was, for so much as one called Denysot Palmer, to whom he
had discovered his cou^sayll, and caused him to be as an accessory in all his
works / had accused him that the said Marten had agreed and couenaunted with
certain officers and capytaynes of the king of Nauern^, that they at a time
appointed should have entered the city of Paris, and to have slain the regente
and other, and to have had the city at their rule and pleasure. And so the
season tha^ of ye.x. year till yt month of July, passed in the wars and
treaty before touched / so that the.viii. day of July, the French king la^ded
at Calays, and there tarried as prisoner till the.xxv. day of Octobre following,
as before in ye.xxxiiii. year of king Edward is more plainly showed.

Than upon the.xxix. day of Octobre and beginning of his.xi. year / king John^
came to saint Omers, where he tarried till the fourth day of Nouembre. And
the.xi. day of December he came unto saint Denis / where unto him upon ye.xii.
day came the king of Nauerne, which had not seen him sen he was delivered
from prison / and brought with him certain hostages which the French king
had sent unto him for his saufegarde / putting him holy in ye French kings
grace and mercy. And upon the morrow following, he was newly sworn unto the
king to be his true and faithful son and subject / and the king again unto
him, to be his kind father and good and gracyous soueraygne lord. And forth
with were sworn the duke of Normandy and Philip brother unto the said king of
Nauerne, to maynteyne all couenauntes made and to be made between the said.ii.
kings / so that they were fynisshed and concluded by the.xviii. day of January
next following. And soon after returned the said king of Nauerne unto Maunt.
And king John^ upon the.xiiii. day of December with great tryumphe was
received into Paris.

And when he was common unto his palace, the provost of merchants with
certain burgeyses of the city, in the name of the comynaltye of the same,
presented him with a present to the value of a.M. mark sterlynge.

Upon a tuysdaye being the first day of July, was foughten a battle at Paris
between two knights / whereof the appellaunte was named sir Foukes Dorciat, and
the defendau^t sir Maugot Mawbert. which appellau^t was sore vexed with a fever
quarteyne / by reason whereof and of the great hete that ye day appeared, after
long fight the said appellau^t light from his horse for his refressheme^t /
wherefore his friends of him were in great doubt. But his enemy was also so
sore trauayled, yt what for hete and labor he was also overcome, and was
lykely to have fallen from his horse / and or he might be taken down he
swowned and dyed.

when sir Fowkes was ware of ye feblenesse of his enemy anon as he might he
dressed him on foot toward his adversary, and fande him stark deed / which by
lyce^ce of the king was after had out of the feelde, and secretlo buried / and
the said sir Fowkes for feblenesse was by his fre^des ladde unto his lodgyng.

In the.xii. year of king John^ and xxi. day of Nouembre, Phylyp duke of
Burgoyn, earl of Artoys, of Aluerne, and of Boloyngn, a child of the age
of.xiiii. years or less, dyed at a town nere unto Rome called Guyo^ By reason
of whose death king John^ as next heir had after possession of all the said
lands, and took possio^ thereof shortly after.

In the.xiiii. year of the reygne of king John^ and third day of January / he
for special causes him mouyng, as for the enlargyng of his son the duke of
Orleaunce and other yet pledges for his rau^some, took shyppyng at Boloyne, and
so sailed into England, and arrived at Dover the.vi, day of the said month /
and after yode to Eltham, and from the^s was conveyed unto London, as before is
showed in the.xxxvii. year of king Edward. In time of whose there being / sir
Barthra^ de Glaycon made war upon the king of Nauerne, and wan from him the
town of Maunt in Normandy. And by the duke of Normandy soon after was won
from the said king the town of Me^le^ce. within ye which were taken diverse
Parysyens, that shortly after for their infidelite were put in execucio^ at
Paris. And thus the war between the kings of France and Nauerne was newly
bego^. Than king John^ being as before is said in England / a grievous malady
took him in the beginning of March, of the which he dyed at London upon
the.viii. day of Apryll following / and so with great honor and solempnyte
conveyed to the sees side, and there shypped, and tha^ in process carried into
France.

where upon the.vii. day of May, and year of our lord god.M.CCC.lxiiii. he was
solempnely enterred in the monastery of saint Denis / wha^ he had reigned.xiii.
years.vii. months and odd days / leuynge after him three sons, that is to
say Charles, which was king after him, Lewys, and Phylyp.

CArolus or Charles ye.vi. of that name or.v. after some writers, ye eldest
son of king John^ / began his reygne over the realm of France, the.ix.
day of Apryll, in the beginning of the year of our lord god.M.CCC.lxiiii and
the.xxviii. year of Edward the the.iii. than king of England / and was
crowned with dame Jane his wife at Raynes the.xix. day of May following

In this first year sir Barthran de Glaycon lyeutenaunt of the said Charles
in Normandy, fought with a capytayne of the king of Nauerne named le Captall
de Bueffe, nere unto a place called Cocherell, nere unto the cross of saint
Lyeffroy / in which fight the said Captall was scomfited and great noumbre of
his people taken and slain, him self chased and taken / for whom the french
king gave after unto the said sir Barthra^ the Erledam of Longeuyle. And wha^
he had received him / he sent him unto a strong prison called the Merchy in
Meaux.

At Myghelmas following / the duke of Brytayne sir Charlys de Bloyes, and sir
John^ de Mou^tfort son and heir to the fore named sir John^ Mountforde
before deed, which by a long season both father and the son had holden
war with the said sir Charles, met in plain battle / in y^ which as before
is showed in the.xxxviii. year of king Edward, the said sir Charles was
slain and diverse noble men of France with him. In the month of Iuny and
second year of this Charlys, an other accord was yet concluded atwene this
Charles and the king of Nauerne. By reason of which accord, the Captall of
Bueffe was clearly delivered, and Maunt and Menlene again also to the king
restored. And over that to the king of Nauerne was geuyn for a recompensement,
the Erledome of Longeuyle, which as above is said the french king had given
unto sir Barthran de Glaycon, for to have the Captall to his prisoner. And also
to the said king of Nauerne was given the lordshyppe of Mountpyller. And in
the month of February began the war in Spain, where prince Edward aided
Peter king of ye land, as before is showed i^ the.xl. and.xlii. years of king
Edward.

In the.iiii. year, the peace atwene the kings of England and of France
began to break, by means of the earl of Armenake and other, as in the.xlii.
year of king Edward is before showed. And in the month of Decembre and the
said year, the queen was lyghted of a man Child in the Hostell of saint Paul
/ the which was after christened with exceeding solempnyte over other before
passed, in the church of saint Paul in Paris, the.vi. day of Decembre of the
cardinal of Paris. To whom were godfathers the earls of Mountmerency and of
Dampmartyn, and godmother Jane queen of Euroux / and bare the name of Charlys
after the earl of Mountmerency. In the.v. year of this Charlys, he called his
counsel of parlyament at Paris. During the which, the appellacyons of the
earl of armenake and other purposed again prince Edward, were publysshed and
radde / and the answers of the said prince upon the said appellacyons made,
which I ouerpasse for length of the matter. But the conclusyon was, that the
prince had broken the peace and couenauntes of the same as they there demyd.
wherefore all such towns and holds as the french king had gotten, he should
them retain / and make war upon the king of England for the recovery of
the other. where upon king Charles in the month of July following, rode unto
Roan, and there rygged his nauye / entendynge as says the french historye, to
have made war upon England / and to have sent thither his youngest brother
Philippe than duke of Burgoyne with a strong army. But while he was there
besyed about his purpose / the duke of Lancastre arrived with a strong power at
Caleys / and so passed to Tyrwyn, and so unto Air. wherefore king Charlys then
changed his purpose, and sent his said brother into those perties. Then by
that season that ye said duke was prepared with his people / the englysshemen
were common unto Arde. And the french men spedde them in such wise, that they
logged the^ the xxiiii. day of Auguste upon the mountain of Tournehawe nere
unto Arde / so that both hoostes were lodgyd within an english mile. Atwene
whom were daily bekeringes and small skyrmysshes. All which season the French
king tarried still about Rowan.

Than the king of Nauerne, which by a long season had dwelled in Nauerne,
came by ship into Constantyne / and sent unto king Charlys yt if he were so
pleased, he would gladly come unto him for to show to him his mind. wherefore
the king sent unto him as hostagys, the earl of Salebruge, the deane of Paris,
with.ii. other noble men / the which the king of Nauerne would not accept.
In the month of Septembre and upon the.xii. day / when the duke of Burgoyne
had lain as before is said nere unto the english hooste, he that day removed
his people, and so went unto Hesden. And the Englisshe host removed to Caux
and other places, as before I have showed to you in the.xliii. year of king
Edward, with other things apperteyninge unto the same matter. And in the said
month of Septembre, king Charles manned and vitayled certain galeys and
other ships / and sent them into walys, and so to have entered into England.
But they returned with little worship / natwithstandynge that he had.ii.
noble men of walys named Owan and James win, which made to him fast
promise of great things, by reason that they were enemies unto the king of
England. For this and for other charges, the king called a conuocacyon of the
temporalte and spiritualte at Paris. where to maintain his wars, was
granted to him of all thing bought and so^de except vitayle, the.iiii. penny
/ so that all thing that was sold by retayle, the seller should pay the
exaccion / and that which was sold by great, the byer should pay the said
exaccion. And the spiritualte granted a dyme to be paid in.ii. half years.
And the lords and gentylmen were stynted at a certaintye, after the value of
their lands. In the month of February, the king sent unto the king of
Nauerne than being at Chierbourgth certain messyngers, to perfyght an amyte
atwene them, lest he took party again him with the Englysshemen. But this
treatye continued a long season / so that i^ the.vi. year and month of June,
the king of Nauerne having sufficient hostages, came to the french king to
Uernon. where in conclusion the king of Nauerne made his homage unto the
french king, and became there his feodary / whereof the Frenchemen made much
joy. After which accord / the said king of Nauerne the third day following
took his leave of the king, and so rode unto Eureux. All which season ye war
was co^tynued by Englisshemen within the realm of France and province of
Brytayne, as before is expressed in the.xliiii.xlv.xlvi. years of king Edward.

In the.vii. year and month of Auguste / the duke of Braban with many nobles
of France, met in plain battle with ye duke of Iuillers and the duke of
Guellre. In which battle after cruel fight, the duke of Braban was chased /
and upon his side slain the earl of saint Poule, with many other noble men,
which the story names not. And upon the other side was also slain the duke
of Guellre, with many other upon that party.

IN the.xi. year of king Charles and month of May / he assembled his great
counsel of parlyament at Paris. where among many acts made for ye weal of
his realm / he with assente of his lords and commons there assembled, At what
age the heir to the crown of France should be crowned.
enacted for a law after that day to be continued, that al heirs to ye crown
of France their fathers being deed, may be crowned as kings of France so
soon as they attained unto the age of.xiiii. years. And in this year was the
treatye of peace labored by the two cardynalles sent from the pope, as before
is showed in the.xlix. year of king Edward. After which treatye not
concluded / the king of England lost daily of his lands in France. For in
the month of August following, ye duke of Berry, the duke of Angeo, and many
other lords to them assygned in diverse places, as in Guyan, Angeo, and Main /
gate and wanne from the Englysshemen many countries, towns, and castles / as
Pierregort, Rouerge, Caoursyn, Bigorre, Basyndas, Berregart, Daimet / with many
other towns and holds, which would ask a long leysour to reherce, to the
noumbre of.vi. score and.xiiii. what of towns, castelles, and other holds /
which in short while were won from the Englysshemen, in the parties of
France and Brytayne.

In the.xiii. year of this Charles / the Emperor of Rome and Almayne named
Charles the.iiii. of that name, came into France by Cambray, to do certain
pylgrymages at saint Denis and else where / and so was conveyed with honorable
men, as the lord of Cousy and other, unto saint Quintyne / where he tarried
Chrystmas day. And after he was conveyed to a town called E^ of Ewe / and
from thence to Noyen, and than to Compeygne / where he was met with the duke
of Burbon and other nobles. Than he rode to Senlys / where he was met with
the dukes of Berry and of Burgoyne, brethren of the French king, and many
other, as bisshoppes and other lords. And ye shall understand that all such
as rode in the companyes of these forsayde dukes, except bishops and priests,
rode in their lyuereys. As the company first of the duke of Burbon brother
unto the queen, to the noumbre of.CCC. men, were all cladde in white and blewe.
The company of the.ii. other dukes, the noumbre of.v.C. men, in black and
russet / that is to mean the earls and other lords in clothe of gold, the
knights in velvet, the gentylmen in damask and sattyn, and the yemen in
clothe. Thanne from Senlys he was brought unto Louuris / where met with him
the duke of Bar, with a company of CC. horse, and his company cladde in
grene and read. And from thens he was had to saint Denis upon the third day
of January / whither the king sent to him a chair rychely garnysshed, for so
much as he was vexed with the gout. And the queen sent to him an horse
lytter with.ii. white palfreys: where he was also met with a great company
of bysshoppes and other spiritual men, as abbottes, priours, and other / and
tarried there.ii. days.

Upon the.v. day of January being monday, he rode toward Paris. But or he
were half a mile from saint Denis, he was met with the prouoste of the
merchants, with a company of.xv.C. horse, yt cytezens being cladde in white
and violette / and so rod before him till he came to Paris. when the king
was warned that he was nere the city, he lepte upon a white palfrey / and
accompanied with many lords and other to the noumbre of a.M. men, all his
household servants being cladde i^ one liuerey of brown blewe and dark
tawny, and the servants of the dolphyn of Uyen in blewe and cremesyne every
man after his degree / and so the king with his company met with the emperor
at the mylle without the town called the wind mylle. where after due salutes
made either unto other / the French king put the Emperor upon his right
hand, and took the king of Romans son unto the emperor upon his lift
hand. And so the French king rydinge in the mids, passed thoroughe the
high streets of Paris till they came to the kings palace. where he was lodged
with all honor / and after fested with the king and the queen by the space
of.xvi. days. which term endyd, like as with all honor he was conveyed
into the land / so with great honor and rich gifts he was again conveyed
out of the land.

In the month of Februarye following and the.vi. day, dyed the queen of
France in the hostell of saint Poule in Paris / and after buried with great
solempnyte and honor in the monastery of saint Denis. In the month of March
the king received letters from certain lords of his land / in the which was
conteygned that the king of Nauerne had imagened and conspired with one Iaquet
de rue his cha^berlayne, for to poison him / the which Iaquet was than common
into France to execute his cursed purpose. wherefore the French king laid
such wait for him, that he was taken / and founden upon him a byll of
certain instruccions, how he should behave him self in accomplysshyng his
evil purpose. Than he was brought unto the kings presence / to whom he
confessed the circumstaunce of all his treason to be done at the commandment
and counsel of the king of Nauerne. Soon after the eldest son of the king
of Nauerne, which was newely commyn into Normandy, sent unto king Charles /
showing to him that if it were his pleasure, he would gladlye come unto his
presence for to speak with him / with that he might have a sure safeconduyt for
him, and all such as he should bring with him. The which to him was granted
/ and upon the same came unto Selys where the king than was. And after he had
comoned a season with ye king / he made to him request for the delyuere of
the foresaid Iaket de Rue / layenge for him sondrye excuses. But when the
king had caused the said Iaket to be brought forth before the said son
of the king of Nauerne named sir Charlys / he avouched such things before
him that he could not denaye, but that his father had committed many and sundry
treasons, as well again king John^ as now again king Charles his son.
wherefore after diverse assembles and counsels had upon this matter / the king
and the said sir Charles agreed, that all such towns and holds as the said
king of Nauerne had within Normandy, should be delivered unto ye duke of
Burgoyne to the French kings use. And for that promise should be truly
parfourmed / ye king first swear the said sir Charles / and after many of the
capitaynes which had the rule of the said towns and castelles. And for so
much as the said sir Charles had there presence with him a captain named sir
Fernande de Oyens, in whose guyding many of the said holds than were, and
suspected him that he would not perform the said promise / therefore he
caused him to be arested, and to be had unto prison, till the holds being
under his guydynge were clearly delivered. Upon which agreement thus concluded
and sworn / ye duke of Burgoyne with the said sir Charles and the said sir
Fernande as a prisoner was sent into Normandye, with a conuenyent army. where
with awe and favor the duke in process of time had to him delivered, all
such towns and holds as the king of Nauerne there had / except the town
and castle of Chirebourgth* In which pass time and season was also taken in
a town called Bretnell, a secretary to the king of Nauerne, with certain
wrytynges being in a coffer within the chamber. By reason of which wrytynges,
and also by the confession of the party / many mo things concerning the
confession of Iaket de Rue was than manifested and approved: which secretary
was named master Peter de Tertre a frenchman borne. But he had served the
king of Nauerne by the more term of his life. Upon this confession made and
written by the said secretary / the king called his court of parlyament. ^ A
scysme ^^gonne in the church ^^ Rome.
During which, both the said master Peter and also the said Iaket, were
brought before the lords and commons. where their confessyons were read, and
they examyned upon every article of the same, and affyrmed all their former
sayenges. wherefore shortly after by auctoryte of that court, they were demed
to dye for their treasons / and so were hangyd and hedyd, and their.viii.
quarters hangyd at sundry gates and places of Paris. And when the king had
received into his possession the foresaid holds belonging unto the king of
Nauerne, the which so often had rebelled again his father and him / he was
cou^selled by his lords that he should throw to ground diverse of the said
castelles / lest ye king of Nauerne them recovered again, and by mean of
their forces work unto him and his realm new dyspleasures. By reason of
which counsel, the king made even with the ground these fortresses
following. First the castle of Bretnell, of Dorlet, of Beaumou^t le Roger, of
Pacy Damyet and cloisters of the same / the tower and castle of Nogent le roy,
the castle of Euroux, the castle of Pount Andemer, the castle of Mortaygne,
and of Ganraux or Ganray, with other in the country of Constantyne. But the
town of Chirebourgth remained still in the poscessyon of the Nauaroys / the
which with aid of English men was kept from the French king. And the
forenamed sir Farnande was contyrmau^ded to prison, for so much as he was
captain of ye same town / thinking in him defaute that the said town was
not delivered with the other.

IN the.xiiii. year of this Charles and month of August / tythinges came unto
him of the scisme which was begone in the church of Rome. For after the
death of the xi. Gregory which dyed in the month of Apryll fore passed / by
mean of the French cardynalles which were.xi. in noumbre, after the other
Italyen cardynalles with other of their affinite had elected and chosen a
Napolytane and archebysshoppe of Bar, the french cardynalles with the
election not being contented, with such as favored their party, denounced
and publysshed one named Robert cardynall of Basyle, and named him Clement
ye.vii, where the first was named Urban ye.vi. Of the manner of this scysme some
what I have showed to you in the.lii. year of Edward the.iii. But to express
ye certaynty of this scysme / troth it is that after ye death of the
forenamed.xi. Gregory, the cardynalles being in ye co^clau^ or cou^sayll
chaumbre where the pope is accustomed to be chosen / ye Romans being in
harness made such exclamacions upon the cardynalles being in ye co^claue for
to have an Italia^ pope, yt the cardynalles for fere to be slain elected and
chase one named Bartholmew a Napolytan and archebysshop of Bar, and named
Urba^ the.vi. But this after he was admytted was so proud and so co^brous,
that he ruled all by will and nothing by right or goodly order of reason or
conscience. wherefore the cardynalles being repe^taunt of yt they had done / a
certain of them in the city of Fo^des, the.xx. day of Septembre elected and
chase an other named Roberte cardyuall of Basyle, and named hi^ Clement the.vii
/ and by their auctorites publysshed him for very pope, and dysalowed that
other before chose^. But the Romans would not thereunto be agreeable / but
held the^ unto their former pope. with whom also held ye provinces of
Germany and Pa^nony, with ye more part of Italy. And with the last chosen
pope, held France, Spain, Cateloyne, and England. And thus began ye scysme,
which continued by the term of.xxxix. year after. In the.xv. year of king
Charles, he for so much as sir John^ de Mou^tforte duke of Brytayne, took
party with the Englysheme^ again him, and would not apere at such days as to
him were assygned / therefore ye said king Charles sent into the duchy of
Brytayn to sease ye land into ye kings hands, the duke of Burbo^, sir Lewys
de Sa^cer marshall of France, sir Iohanne de Uyenne admyrall of France, and
sir Beria^ de Ryuyer his cha^berleyne, with other me^ of name, with a great
company of me^ of arms / the which at their coming into Brytayne fa^de ye
country all otherwise dysposed tha^ they supposed. For where as they at their
coming thought to have received ye possession of yt towns and castelles in
peasyble wise / they were denayed and plainly answered, yt they were sworn to
their duke to bear to him true fidelite and service / which they ente^ded to
observe and keep with which answer ye said duke and his company were feign to
return unto ye French king. The which shortly after sent thither ye duke of
Angeou with a strong army to war upon the country. In which season sir
John^ de Mou^tfort heryng of ye french kings intent, arrived in Brytayne with
a company of English archers. To whom drew such multitude of Brytone* yt the
duke of Angeou was fayn to return into France without worship there tha^
wynnyng.

In the month of Octobre the Flemynges of Gau^t and other, for grievous
exaccyon upon the^ set, rebelled again their earl / and slew his bailey and
offycer assigned by ye earl to gather his tolles and after besyeged other
towns which took party with ye earl again the^, as Audenarde, Terremonde and
other. whereof heryng ye duke of Burgoyn, whose daughter the said duke had
married / assembled his Burgonyo^s and sped him into the marchys of Flanders,
and so laid his syege unto Tourney. But the Flemynges defended the duke in
such wise, that the duke was agreeable to fall to a treaty. In the which it was
first accorded and agreed, that the earl at ye request of the duke, should
pardon and forgive clearly to his subjects, all offenses by them to him done
before yt day / and also yt he should grant unto them all their former
lyberties and pryuyleges, in as ample and large wise as they had them granted
at his first coming in / and maynteyn and uphold their ancient customs,
and to rule them after the same. Secondarily, if any letters have been made and
sealed contrary their pryuyleges sen ye time of this rebellyon, that the earl
shall revoke them and cancel them for ever. Thyrdely, yt all such capytaynes
of Almayne as at this time have been in ye dukes or earls wagys again the
Flemynges, shall be solemply sworn, that for any hurt or harm by them in this
war received / they nor none of their nation as far as they may let it,
shall not hurt nor harm any man of ye country of Flaunders at any time here
aft^r in reuengeme^t of this war. And so fourthly, that of.iiii. of ye best
towns of Flanders, xxv. men to be chosen by the burgesys of the same, the
which shall have correccion of al defautes not touching life and death done by
ye Flemynges / and also to have power to correct all such as be found culpable
of the earls counsayll, in co^playntes or offenses crymynall. Fyftly that the
said.xxv. persons shall have auctoryte and power, to make inquysycyon from
year to year of the governance of the land / and what fawtes ben to them
presented, as of ten as.xiii. of them be sitting together in one counsayll,
they shall have full power to give sentence upon the same / and that se^te^ce
to be obeyed without interrupcio^. And what by them is sente^sed / the earl to
uphold and maynteyne with all his might and power. Syxtely it was desired but
not concluded, that for so much as ye town of Audenarde and of Terremou^d took
party again their neighbors, that the walls of them in certain places should
be euened with ye ground, in toke^ of their unnatural dealyng. And seuently
and lastly it was concluded that the provost of Brugys should after yt day be
put out of the earls cou^sayll / and not after thereunto to be admytted without
consent of the forenamed.xxv. persons. All which artycles were agreed unto by
the earl, and passed and auctorysed by his lettre and seal / all be it this
accord co^tynued no while, as here after shall apere.

In the.xvi. year and month of Octobre the inhabytauntes of the cyty / or
town of Mountpyller, in the country of Languedoke, for an inposicio^ or aid
that was put to them by the duke of Angeou, arose by one accord again ye
mynisters and counceyllours of the duke (which duke was lewtenaunt general
under his brother the French king) and without reason or dyscrecyo^, in their
furye and rage slew sir Guyllyam Poncell knight and chaunceller to the duke,
sir Guy Desseryke stuarde of Rouerge, master Arnolde governor of Mountpyller,
master James de Chainy secretary to the duke, and many other officers and
servants of the said duke, to the nou^bre of.lxxx. persons. And wha^ they
had them slain, as tyrauntes natte being content with that cruelnesse, they
threw the deed bodies into diverse foul and stynkynge pyttes / not sufferynge
the^ to be buried as cryste^ men should.

whereof wha^ knowledge was brought unto ye duke, he was therewyth grievously
amoued / and made his oath that he should punysshe them to the fere and
example of all other / and thereupon gathered his people for to revenge this
cruel deed. when the rumor of this myscheuouse deed was some deal apeased,
and ye wise men and ancient of the town had degested this hasty and cruel
deed, and looked upon the end thereof / than they were appalled in their minds,
and were very repe^taunt of the deed that they had done. And when they had
considered all things, as the deed detestable of it self, the great might of
the duke, and over yt the aid which should to him be given of the king / they
conceived well there was no remedy but to seche for means of mercy and grace.
For opteynynge whereof they made diverse ways to the duke / but none would be
accepted Lastely in the month of January, wha^ ye duke had prepayred all
things necessary to the war / he took his iournay toward the said town of
Mou^pyler, ledyng with him a strong host of men of armies / utterly ente^dynge
to subuerte that town, and to dystroye y^ more part of the people. whereof
herynge the people of the town, took their aduyce and ordered them as
follows. First they sent out again him diverse officers of the kings such as
they knew were in his favor / and ordained them to be in a place, and there
knelynge to ask grace and mercy for the town. Secondarily they sent the
cardynall of Albany / and thyrdely all the collages and me^ of religion as well
nunnys as other / and fourthly they sent the estudyau^tes of the law canon and
cyuyle, and also of medycyne or physyke / all being set upon either side of
the way where ye duke should pass, and knelynge upon their knees, should cry
without ceasynge mercy gracyous prince mercy. Tha^ after these were set the
consuls or rulers of ye town, in gownys without their clokes vngyrde, every
man with a cord about his neck, having with the^ the keys of the city. And
at the enter of ye city, stood the women with ye mayde^s of the same / and all
men chylderne which were under the age of.xiii. years. And between that age
and.vi. years, were set next after the studyau^tes foresaid. when this
innumerable people was thus ordered, and eueryche taught in what wise they
should behave them / upon the.xxv. day of January about the hour of.iii, ye
duke with his people approached the town / and beholdynge the multitude and the
lamentable cry, was some what moved with compassyo^ / and so holdyng his way,
met with ye said cardynall. The which after conuenye^t salutacio^ unto him
made, showed that as a legate and messynger he was sent unto him from the pope
Clement the.vii, requyryng of him pardon for the town and people of Mou^tpiller
/ admonestyng him farther in the said popes behalf, that what so ever
punyssheme^t he did unto the town, yt he should absteyne him from ye shedynge
of cryste^ blood, and specially of such as he might know was innocent of yt
deed. To which message the duke gave none answer / but took the cardynall
upon his right hand, and so rode forth together. where ever the people kneled
on either side of ye way, and cried lame^tably, mercy gracious prince mercy /
and so passed till he came where ye co^suls stood, which knelyng offered unto
him the keys of ye town. But he as though he regarded the^ not, cast his look
from the^ and commanded yt senesshal of Beaucayr to receive ye said keys / and
so passed on till he came unto ye company of women; which rele^ted his stony
heart to se the great lame^tacio^ they made with their woeful cry. wherefore to
be rydde of the^, he called upon his fore ryders to pass on more faster / so
that lastly he came to his lodging.

When the duke was comen unto his lodging / anon he commanded all the
officers of the town with the consulat or rulers of ye same unto a place called
saint Germayne, and the gates of that place he took to be watched with men of
arms / and upon the morrow following, commanded all the armoure and artylery
belo^gyng unto the town, to be brought to a place by him assygned, and there
to be kept by his officers. Than the cardinal came again unto the duke, and
brought with him diverse doctors of divinity and other, which made unto him
assyduat labor for mercy to be showed unto the town and to the inhabytauntes
of the same. But all they could g^t no grant of him, but yt as upon ye morrow
they should know the sentence that he would give upon the town and
inhabitau^tes of the same. And for yt sentence might be well understood of
the people, he commanded yt at afternoon a scaffolde should be made in the
chief place or street of the town. whereupon the morrow being the.xxvii. day
of January / diverse of the dukes cou^sayll being upon yt said scaffolde, and
the people of the town being there present as well prisoners as other, after a
long oracion made by the dukes chau^celer of the great and heinous deed
lately there done by the inhabytau^tes of that town, for ye which correccyon
temporal might not be to greuouse / all be it that the duke at the
commandment of the pope, and request of his legate and cardynall there
present, had mytygate or lessed the punysshme^t, as after should well apere by
declaracyon of the sentence following / after which protestacion, the sentence
was proclaimed as follows.

First the comynaltye of the town for their rebellyon and dysobedience again
their prince done, should pay unto ye king.vi. score.M. frankes, and a frank
is worth.ii. s. sterling. And so ye town should be charged with.lx.M li. A
terryble my (...) of (...) execu^^^n.
And over that to pay all such costs and charges, as the duke had spent by
occasyon of this iournay. Secondaryly.vi. hundredth persons of the town such
as might be tried most culpable in this offense, should suffer death. That is to
wit.ii.C. to be hanged with chains.ii.C. to be beheded and their hedes to be
sent unto diverse good towns of France / and the other ii.C. such as of
ye.vi.C. shall be found most gyltye of the beginning of that riot, should be
bre^t / and that they and also the other.ii.C. which should be hanged, should
be carried unto diverse good towns of France, and there to have their
execucio^, to the utter fere and terror of all other / and all their goods to
be forfayted to the king. Thyrdely two gates of ye town such as the duke
would appoint, with the walls and towers standing between yt said gates, to
be made plain with the ground / and the dyke of the town to be be filled
with ye same. Fourthly all manner of ordenaunce and abylyme^tes for war
belonging to the town, to be forfayted unto ye king. Fyftely, the comynalty of
the city to build a chapel, and to endowe it with so much land as might
find.vi. priests there in to sing for ever, and to pray for the souls of
the persons before slain. And the bodies which they had throwe^ before into
the foul and stynkyng pyttes / the counsayll and chyefe rulers of the town,
should upon their propre backs bring them unto the said chapel, and there
cause them solemply to be enterred. Syxtly, that all such goods as the said
persons so slain had within the town, or else were spoiled by the said
cytezeyns / that it should be restored unto the wives or next kynnesfolkes of
them so deed. when the proclamacyon of this sentence was ended, there was an
exclamacyo^ and cryenge of mercy / and such sorrow and lame^tyng made of ye
people, that the noise thereof sou^ded to the heuens. But to bring this tragedy
to conclusyon / finally such labor was made unto the duke, as well by
exortacyo^ of sermons and other, that al things were pardoned, except the
fou^dacyon of the chapel / and execucyo^ of certain persons, which were
accused to be the occasyoners of this myschiefe / and also the costs of that
iournay, ye which were cessed at.xxiiii M. fra^kys or.xxiiii.C. li. sterlynges.
After which end thus made / the co^sulates of ye town were restored again to
their habyte and rule / and to them was admytted all former offices and rule
of the town, except the office of bailey wyke.

In the month of July began the inhabytauntes of Gau^t in Flanders to rebel
again their earl of new / ye cause whereof is not showed. But they with aid,
which they had of Ipre, Courtray, and other towns, made a great host / and
yode streyghte unto a town in Flanders called Dyxmew, entendyng to have taken
it. But ye earl being warned thereof / with aid of Bruges and of Fra^k and
other, ma^ned out a company again the other, and met with them in plain
field / and after a sharp skyrmysshe, put them of Gau^t to flight, and slew
of them diverse, and took of them certain prisoners / and pursued them unto the
town of Ipre, and laid syege to the same. when the heddes of the town knew
that the earl was there in propre parsone / under a certain apoyntement they
opened the gates, and received him in. But many of his enemies were fled unto
Courtray. And when the earl had rested him in y^ town.ii. days, and done
there some execucyo^ / he departed the^s and rode unto Bruges and held him
there. In which season the other which as above is said were fled unto
Courtray / fell at varyaunce within them self, and slew their capytayne /
and after fled ye town and shyfted every man for him self. Than a knight
called sir Soyer of Gau^t, came unto the town of Courtray / and so exorted the
rulers of the town, yt they promised him to take his part. whereupon he gate a
baner of the earls arms in his hand / and so riding about that town cried,
who that would take the earls party and his, let him follow that baner /
whom the people followed in great noumber. And wha^ ye earl was asserteyned of
that deed, and how the town of Courtray was turned unto his party / anon he
assembled of other towns, and also of that, and of Ipre, so much that his
host was esteemed at lx.M. me^. with the which he spedde him unto Gaunte, and
laid a strong syege there about. But by the death of the French king which
dyed shortly after, the earl was feign to change his mind, and to remove his
syege or else, as some writers report, for strength of the said town,
which might not lightly be gotten, for lack of good upon ye earls party to
maynteyne that syege. Death of king Charles
Tha^ in the month of Septembre and.xxvi. day of the same / king Charles
dyed at his manoyr called playsance sur Marne / and was buried by his wife in
the monastery of saint Denis, when he had reigned.xv. years and.vi. months
with odd days / leuynge after him iii. sons, Charles which was king after
him, and Lewys that he had made earl of Ualoys and after duke of Angeowe, and
Phylyppe earl of Poytyers.

Anglia.
RIchard the second of that name, and sonn^ of prince Edward eldest sonn^ of
Edward ye.iii, a child of ye age of a.xi. years, began his reygne over ye
realm of England, ye.xxii. day of Iuny in the year of our lord.M.CCC.xxvii /
and the.xiii. year of the.vi. Charles than king of France. This Richard was
borne at Bordeaux / of whose birth some writers tell wonders, the which I
pass over.

And upon the.xv. day of July in the year abouesayd he was crowned at
westmynster; being the day of the translacyon of saint Swythyn. In which time
and season stood Mayre and shryues of the city of London these persons
following.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxvii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxviii. Grocer. Andrewe Pykman.
Nycholas Brembre. Anno. i. Nycholas Twyfforde.
THe which continued so in their offices, that is to say ye shryues till
Myghelmas, and ye mayre till the feast of Simon and Jude. At which season were
chosen and admytted new officers.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxviii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxix. Grocer. John^ Boseham. John^
Phylpot. Anno. ii. Thomas Cornwaleys.
IN the month of August and beginning of the second year of king Rychard /
for varyaunce which was between the lord Latymer and sir Rafe Ferrers upon
that one party, and sir Robert Hal and Shakerley esquyer upon that other
party, for a prisoner taken beyo^de the sea in Spain, called the lord of
Dene, whom the said esquyers held in their possession contrary the wylles of
the foresaid knights / for the said cause ye said knights entered the
church of saint Petyr, and there fyndyng ye said sir Robert knelynge at mass,
without reverence of the sacrament or place, slew him in the church at ye
high mass season / and after that other named Shakerley was by their means
arested and had to the tower of London, where he was kept as prisoner long
after.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxix. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxx. Grocer. John^ Heylysd^ne.
John^. Hadley. Anno. iii. wyllyam Baret.
IN the month of May and the later end of the second year of king Richard
/ certain Galeys and other ships sent by Charles the syxte than king of
France, of the which was chief patron or capytayne a knight named sir Olyuer
de Clycon / landed in diverse places of England and did much harm, and
lastly entered the river of Thamis, and so came to Grauysende where he spoiled
the town and brent a part thereof and returned into France with much
richesse as affermeth the French cronycle. In this year also was holden a
parlyamente at westmynster / in the which was granted that all men and women
being of the age of.xiiii. years and above, should pay unto the king.iiii.
d. By reason whereof great grudge and murmr grew among the commons as after
shall appear. Than with ye money an army was prepared / and thereof was made
chief gouernoure sir Thomas of woodstoke earl of Cambrydge and uncle unto ye
king. The which with a company of.vii. or.viii.M. as testifyeth the French
cronycle, passed ye water of Sum, in the beginning of Auguste, and also
beginning of the third year of king Richard / and so came to Soysons, and
passed the ryuers of Oyse and of Marne and other / and so went before Troys and
wanne it / and after lodged them atwene new town and Sens. And ever as they
passed the countries, other they took great fynaunces, or else fyred the
towns as they went. And all be it that the French king had sent again
them an army of Frenchemen to withstand them, they let them nothing of
their purpose / but and they had any skyrmysshes with them, the Frenchemen were
put unto the wors / so that they bette them and took of them diverse prisoners,
and raunsomed them at their pleasures. And thus holding their iourneye, they
passed by the country of Gastinoys, and so into Brytayne / where they were
ioyously received of sir John^ de Mountforde duke of that province than newly
common thither.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxxx. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxxi. Fysshemonger. walter Doket.
wyllyam walworthe. Anno. iiii. wyllyam Knyghthode.
IN this Mayres year and end of the third year of king Richard, toward the
somer season in diverse places of the land the commons arose suddenly, and
ordained to them rulers and capytaynes / and specially in Kent and Essex. The
which named their leders, Jack straw wylwawe, watte Tyler, Jack Shepeherde,
Tomme Myller, and Hobbe Carter. These unruled company gathered unto them great
multitude of the commons / and after spedde them toward the city of London,
and assembled them upon Black hethe in Kent, within.iii. miles of London. And
upon corpus Christi day being thanne the.xi. day of June, they entered the
Tower of London / and there the king being thanne lodged, took from thens
parforce master Sudberye than archebysshoppe of Caunterbury, sir Robert Halys
lord or pryour of saint Johannes, and a white friar confessor unto the
king. which.iii. persons with houge noise and cry they ladde unto the Hylle
of the said Tower and smote of their heddes. And when they had so done, they
returned into Suthewarke by botes and barges, and there slew and robbed all
strangers tha they might find. And that done they went to westmynster, and
took with them all manner of Seyntwarymen / and so came unto ye duke of
La^casters place standing without ye Temple bar called Sauoye, and spoiled
that was therein / and after set it upon a fire, and brent it. And from thens
they yode unto ye head place of saint Iohn^s in Smythefelde, and dispoiled that
place in like wise. Than they entered the city, and serched the temple and
other Innes of court, and spoiled their places and brent their books of law /
and slew as many men of law and questmongers as they might find. And that
done they went to saint Martyns the Graunde, and took with them all sayntwary
men, and the prisoners of Newgate, Ludgate, and of both counters / and
distroyed their registers and books / and in like manner they did with the
prisoners of the Marshalsy and kings benche in Southwerke.

when Jack Straw had thus done all thing at his will, and saw yt no
resistance was made again him / he was smytten with so houge a presumpcion,
that he thought no man his pere. And so being enflamed with yt presumpcion and
pride / he rode unto the Tower where ye king was, being smally accompanied of
his lords / and caused him to ride about some part of the city, and so
conveyed him into Smythfelde. where in the kings presence, he caused a
proclamacyon to be made, and did full small reverence unto the king. ^
which mysordre and presu^pcyon when wyllyam walworthe than Mayre of London
beheld / of very pure dysdayne that he had of his pride, ran to him suddenly
with his sword, and wounded him to death / and forthwith struck of his head,
and areryd it upon a speres point / and therewith cried king Richard, king
Richard. when the rebels beheld their capytaynes head / anon they fled
as sheep. How be it many were taken and many were slain / and the remenaunt
chased, that the city and subbarbes of ye same was clean voyded of them yt
night, which was mondaye and the.xv. day of June.

when the king had beholden the great manhood of the Mayre, and assystence of
his brethren the Aldermen / anon in reward of that deed he dubbed the said
wyllyam walworthe, Nycholas Brembre, John^ Philpot, Nycholas Twyfforde, Robert
Lau^dre, and Roberte Gayton, aldermen, knights.

And in this season also called the hurlynge time / the commons of Norfolk and
Suffolk came unto the abbey of Burye, and there slew one of the kings
Justices called John^ Caundysshe, and the pryour of the place with other / and
after spoiled and bare away much thing out of that said place. But after
this, as well the one as the other of these rebels were taken in diverse and
sundry places, and put in execucyon by.x. by.xii. by.xv. and.xx. so that one of
them accused ye other, to the destruction of a great noumbre of them.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxxi. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxxii. John^ Rote. John^
Northampton. Anno. v. John^ Hynde.
IN this Mayres year and month of Aprell / landed in Kent dame Anne the
daughter of Charles the.iiii. late Emperor of Almayne lately deed, and sister
unto wensyslaus at that day Emperor / the which of the Mayre and cytezyns of
London was honorably met upon black hethe, and conveyed with great tryumphe
unto westmynster the.viii. day of the month of May / and shortly after there
solemply married unto king Richard. And about the same season, or after some
writers in the later end of June, was an erthequaue in Englange, that the like
thereof was never seen in England before that day nor sen.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxxii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxxiii. Adam Bame. John^
Northampton. Anno. vi. John^ Sely.
IN this year master Henrye Spencer bisshope of Norwyche, with a great power
of spiritual men and other, croysed by the commandment of the pope than
Clement the.vii. enduryng the scisme before touched in the last chapyter of
Charles ye.vi. than king of France. This said pope gave this auctoryte to the
said bishop to make war upon the king of Spain as some writers have /
for so much as he contrary the said popes commandment, withhelde certain
possessions belonging of right unto the duke of Lancastre sir John^ of Gaunte
/ and specially unto dame Constau^ce his wife. In perfourmaunce of which act,
the said bishop entryng the country of Flaunders, fande there ye flemynges
with diverse myscreauntes such as the foresaid king of the country of Spain
had thither sent, making resystence again him. wherefore he made to the^ sharp
war, and wanne upon them certain towns, as Grauelyng, Burburgth, and
Dunkyrke / and wanne great and rich pyllage, so that he and his souldyours
stuffed and freight with it as testyfyeth Policronycon, xli. ships. But soon
after the Flemynges assembled with such strength, that about Dunkyrke they
gave unto him such assaute, that he was constrained to give back. And for the
said ships and goods should not come unto the possessyon of his enemies / he
set them on fire within the haven, and so was wasted both ships and
goods. And all be it that after this mysse hap he recovered his strength,
and laid syege unto ye town of Ipre, and wrought the flemynges much care and
trouble / shortly after such syckenesses fell among his people, as the flyre
and other, that his souldyours dyed of them great noumbre / for the which he
was compelled to leave his journey and to return into England. In this year
also was a battle or feats of arms done in the kings palace of westmynster,
atwene one called Garton Appellaunt, and sir John^ Ansley knight defendau^t /
of which fight at length the knight was vyctor, and caused his enemy to yield
him. For the which the said Garton was from that place drawn unto Tyburne,
and there hanged for his false accusacyon and surmyse.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxxiii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxxiiii. Grocer. Symonde
wynchecombe. Nycholas Brembre. Anno. vii. John^ more.


Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxxiiii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxxv. Nycholas Exton. Nycholas
Brembre. Anno. viii. John^ Frenshe.
THis year king Richard holding his Christmas at Eltham / thither came unto
him the king of Ermony, which was chased out of his land by the Infydels and
Turks / and required aid of ye king to be restored unto his dominyon. The
king fested and comforted him according to his honor / and after counsel
taken with his lords concerning that matter, he gave unto him great sommes of
money and other rich gifts. with the which after he had tarried in England
upon ii. months, he departed with glad countenance.

And soon after Ester the king with a great army yode toward Scotla^de.
But when he drew nere unto the borders / such means were sought by the
Scotts, that a peace was concluded atwene both realms for a certain time.
After which conclusion so taken / the king returned unto york and there
restyd him a season. In which time varyaunce fell atwene John^ Hola^de brother
to the earl of Kent, and the earls son of Stafforde / by reason of which
varyaunce, in conclusion ye said son of the earl was slain of the hand of
the same sir John^ Hol^ade / for the which deed the king was grievously
amoued, and departed shortly after with his company toward London.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxxv. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxxvi. Grocer. John^ Organ. Nycholas
Brembre. Anno. ix. John^ Chyrcheman.
THis year king Richard assembled at westmynster his high court of
parliament. During the which among other many acts in the same counsel
concluded / he created.ii. dukes, a marquis, and.v. earls. Of the which first
sir Edmonde of Langley the kings uncle and earl of Cambrydge was created duke
of york / sir Thomas of woodstoke his other uncle earl of Buckyngham was
create duke of Gloucester / sir Lyonell Uere yt was earl of Oxenforde was made
marquis of Deuelyn / sir Henry Bolingbrooke son and heir of John^ of Gau^t
duke of Lancastre was made earl of Derby / sir Edward son and heir unto the
duke of york was made earl of Rutlande / sir John^ Holande brother to the earl
of Kent was made earl of Huntyngdone / sir Thomas Monbraye was made earl of
Notyngham and Marshall of England / and sir Mychaell de la Poole was made earl
of Suffolk and Chau^celler of England. And by auctoryte of the same
parlyamente, sir Roger Mortymer earl of the March, and son and heir unto
sir Edmonde Mortymer and of dame Philyppe eldest daughter and heir unto sir
Lyonell ye second son of Edward the third, was soon after proclaimed heir
paraunt unto the crown of England. The which sir Roger shortly after sailed
into Irelande, there to pacifye his lordeshyppe of wulster, which he was lord
of by his foresaid mother. But while he was there occupied about the same /
the wild Irysshe came upon him in noumbre, and slew him and much of his
company. This sir Roger had Issue Edmonde / and Roger, Anne, Alys, and
Elynoure that was made a nun. The.ii. foresaid sons died without issue, and
Anne eldest daughter was married to Richard earl of Cambrydge, which Richard
was son unto sir Edmonde of Langley before named. The which Richard had
issue by the said Anne Isabell lady Bouchier, Richard that after was duke of
york and father to king Edward the.iiii. which said Richard earl of
Cambridge was put to death by Henry the.v. as after shall appear. In this year
also sir Henry Bolingbroke earl of Derby, married the Countess daughter of
Herforde / by whom he was lord of that country. And by her he had issue
Henry that after him was king, Blaunche duches of Bar, and Philippe that was
wedded to the king of Denmark. Also Thomas duke of Clarence, John^ duke of
Bedforde, and Humfrey duke of Gloucester.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxxxvi. Anno domini.M.CCC.lxxxvii. Goldesmythe. wyllyam
Stondon. Nycholas Exton. Anno. x. wyllyam More.
IN this.x. year the earl of Arundell was sent into the duchye of Guyan, for to
strength such soudyours as the king at that time had in those parties / or
after some writers to scour the sea of rouers and enemies. The which earl in
keeping his course or passage, encountered a mighty flote of Flemynges laden
with Rochel wine / and set upon them, and distressed them and their ships,
and so brought them unto diverse ports of England. By reason whereof the said
wine was so plenteous in England, that a tonne thereof was sold for a mark
and.xx. s. the choice. And among other in that flote was taken the Admyralle
of Flaunders, which remained here long after as prisoner.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxxxvii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxxviii. Goldesmythe. wyllyam
Uenour. Nycholas Exton. Anno. xi. Hughe Fostalfe.
THis.xi. year of king Richard / sir Thomas of woodstocke duke of Gloucester,
the earl of Arundell, with the earls of warwyke, of Derby, and of Notyngham,
considering how the king and his land was mysse ladde by a few persons
about the king, entendyng reformacion of the same / assembled them to have a
counsel at Radecoke bridge, and after arrered great people, and so with a
strong power came to London, and there caused ye king to call a perliament.
whereof herynge master Alexander Neuyle than archebysshop of york, sir Lyonell
Uere marquis of Deuelyn, and sir Mychaell de la Poole Chaunceller and earl of
Suffolk, fearyng punisshement fled the land, and so died in strange
countries. Than the king by counsel of the other above named lords, during
the parlyament caused to be taken sir Roberte Treuylian chief Justice of
England, sir Nycholas Brembre late mayre of the city of London, sir John^
Salysbury knight of household, s^r John^ Beaucha^p steward / also of the
kings house, sir Symonde Burley knight, sir James Bernes, and sir Robert
Belknappe knights, and a sergeaunt of arms called John^ Uske / the which by
auctoryte of the said parlyamente were conuycte of treason, and for the same
put to execucyon at Tybourne and at the Tower hill. And John^ Holt, John^
Locton, Richard Gray, willyam Burgth, and Roberte Fulthorpe justice, with the
other foresaid lords, which as before is said voyded the land / were by
auctoryte of the said court of parlyamente banysshed and exyled the land for
ever.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxxxviii. Anno domini.M.CCC.lxxxix. Goldesmythe. Thomas
Austeyne. Sir Nycholas Twyfforde. Anno. xii. Adam Cathyll.
IN the.xii. year and month of Nouembre yet during the perlyament, was
executed in Smythefylde of London a marcyall Iustes and tournement / where as
all such persons as came in upon ye kings party, their armor and apparayle
was garnysshed with white hertes and crowns of gold about their necks. And
of that short were.xxiiii. with.xxiiii. ladies also apparayled as above is
said, ladde with.xxiiii. cheynes of gold the horses of them / and so conveyed
them thoroughe the city unto Smythefelde from the Tower of London. where the
king, the queen, and many other great estates being present, after
proclamacions by the herroddes made / many goodly and marcyall acts of war
were there put in ure, to the great recreacion and comfort of the king and
queen and all other beholders of the same. To this dysporte came many
strangers. Among the which the earl of saint Poule, the lord Ostreuaunt
son and heir unto y^ duke of Hola^de, and a younger son of the earl of
Ostryche, were greatly commended. And when this Iustes had continued by sondrye
times by the space of.xxiiii. days, to the great comfort and recreacyon of
many young and lusty bachellers desirous to win worship, and to the kings
great honor, that by all that season kept open household for all honest
comers / it was fynysshed, and the strangers returned to their countries with
many rich gifts.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxxxix. Anno domini.M.CCC.lxxxx. Grocer. John^ walcot.
wyllyam Uenour. Anno. xiii. John^ Louene^.
IN this.xiii. year of king Rychard / an esquier of ye province of Nauerne by
France, accused an Englysh esquyer called John^ welshe of certain points of
treason. For the trial whereof a day of fight was between them taken, to be
foughten in the kings palace at westmynster / where either of them kept his
day and fought there a strong fight. But in the end John^ welshe was
vyctoure / and constrained that other to yield him. where after he was
dyspoyled of his armoure, and drawn to tyburne, and there hanged for his
untruth.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xc. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xci. John^ Fraunces. Adam Bamme. Anno.
xiiii. Thomas vyuent.
IN this.xiiii. year of king Rychard / sir John^ of Gau^t duke of Lancastre,
with a goodly company of men of arms sailed into Spayn, to claim such lands
as he there should have in the right of dame Co^staunce his wife / which was
the daughter of Peter ryghtfull king of Spain, as in the.xl. year of king
Edward the third is more plainly declared. when the said duke was upon that
other side of the sea / there came unto him the king of Portyngale with a
strong army, and so entered the terrytory of Spain. But whether it were of the
English men long or of the Portyngaleys / much harm was done to the
Spanyardes, in robbynge and pyllyng of the country / which was cause of
grudge between the king of Portyngale and the duke / and caused many Spanyardes
which ought to the^ good will to wythdrawe and depart from them. In
reformacyo^ of which ille, certain persons as well English as Portyngaleys that
were found gyltye of such robbery, were put unto death / by mean whereof
the other fered so, that where by that mean the king and the duke were before
put to great afterdeale, by reason of reformacyon of that ille they gat daily
upon their enemies / so that in process of time following, ye king of Spain
was driven of necessyte to treat with the duke of a peace and concord. Of the
which peace as witnesses Polycronycon in his last book and.vii. chapyter /
the condycio^ was, that first for a fynall concord the king of Spain should
marye ye duke eldest daughter name Co^stau^ce and that done he should give unto
ye duke in reco^pensacyon of his costs, so many wedges of gold as should
charge or lade.viii. charettes / and over that yearly during the lives of the
said duke and his wife, he should at his propre cost and charge deliver to the
dukes assygneys.x.M. mark of gold within ye town of Bayon.

And after this peace was stablysshed, and suertyes taken for the perfourmaunce
of the same / the duke departed with the king of Portyngale. To whom
shortelye after he married his second daughter named dame Anne.

In this year also for cruel war which the Turks made again the Ianueys or
men of Ieane / they required aid of the kings of England and France. For
which cause out of England was sent a noble warryour called earl of Alby
with two thousand of archers / and out of France the duke of Burbon and the
earl of Ewe, with.xv.C. speres. The which kept their iournay till they came
unto a city in Barbary named Thunys, and sometime belonging to the said
Ianuays. where the said English and Frenchemen bare them so manfully with the
aid of ye Ianuayes, that in process of time they wanne ye said city from the
Turks, and put ye Ianuayes again in possessyon thereof / and took of them
many prisoners, the which were exchaunged for christen prisoners before taken
/ and over that forsed the said Sarazyns to yield unto the Ianuayes.x.M.
ducates of gold, for confyrmacyon of a peace for a certain time. But the
French cronycle says, that for so much as the duke of Burbon had
understanding yt the duke of Lancaster made war upon king John^ of Spayn /
he therefore left this iournay and aided hi^ again the said duke of Lancaster
to his little honor.

But how so ever it was / many of the Englyshme^ were lost in those countries
by reason of the flyxe and other sykenesses. Also Antoninus says, that the
Sarazyns at this journey were not dyspossessed of the city of Thunys / but for
a trewes to be had for two years, they granted unto the christen men a
certain sum of money, and restytucyon of many christen prisoners.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xci. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xcii. John^ Chadworth. Draper. John^
Heende. Anno. xv. Henry Uamere.
IN this.xv. year of king Richard / he keeping his Crystmas at his manor of
woodstocke, the earl of Penbrooke being young of age was desirouse to lern to
just / and required a knight named sir John^ saint Johan, to run with him
certain courses. At whose request the said knight ran with him in woodstoke
park certain courses. In the which were it with stroke or other myshap / the
said earl received there his dethes wound and dyed shortly after.

In this year also and month of Iuny / a bakers man berynge a basket full of
horsebrede to serve his masters customers in Fletestrete / when he came
foreagayn the bishop of Salysburyes place standing in Salysbury aley, a
servant of the bysshoppes starte unto the basket and took out one of the
louys. And for the baker would again have recovered his horse lofe / ye
bysshoppes servant with his dagger brake the bakers head. Than came the
inhabytauntes of the street, and would have brought the yoman unto ward for
brekynge of the kings peace. But he was rescowed by his fellows / and so had
unto the bysshoppes palace, which that day stood treasourer of England.

For this rescous the people being in a fury / in great multitude gathered
about the palace, and would have entered parforce to have set out the yoman.

Again whom the bysshoppes servants made resiste^ce / so yt ye rumor grew
more and more. And the people of the city, as well such as were of ill
dysposycion as other, increased into a great noumbre. Fame of this doing tha^
spra^ge to ye mayer / which in all haste with diverse aldermen and the shyryues,
sped him thither to se the peace kept / and did that he cowde to withdraw the
people. But after ye mayer and the officers of the city were common thither /
the commons out of all parties of the city drew thither, in much more
multitude thanne they had before / so that ye more they were in noumbre, the
worse they were to rule. In so much that they would not be satysfyed, but they
might have ye yoman delivered, whose name was walter Romayne. And for to
bring about their folly / they made many assautes at the gates of ye said
palace, the bishop him self being than at wyndesore. Lastly after many
showtes and lyftes at the gates made, by dyscrescio^ of the mayre and aldermen
with other dyscrete comoners of the city, the people was mynysshed and sent
again every man to his dwelling, and all was set in quiet and rest. when
word of this came unto the bishop, in much worse manner tha^ the thing was in
deed / he gyuing light crede^ce without examinacio^ made in the matter,
assocyat unto him master Arundell than archebisshop of york and chau^celer of
England / and so grievously enfourmed the king, that he took again the city
right greuouse dyspleasure / so that in all have the mayre was sent for to the
king. At whose coming was laid unto his charge great and heinous matters, that
he non otherwise ruled the city / but suffered the cytezyns to make such
assautes upon the kings head officers, to the kings great dishonor, and
ieopardy of such great treasoure as he than had of the kings i^ his custody
and keeping. And after brought unto the kings presence / of whom not
wythsta^dyng his reasonable excuse before made, he was of the king right sore
blamed and grievously said unto. Tha^ was the mayre and the sheryues dyscharged
of the rule of ye city / and the liberties of the same seized into the kings
hands / and a knight of the court called sir Edward Dali^gryge, a good man
and favorable to ye cytezeyns, was made gouernoure of the city the.xxi. day
of June / and continued in that office to the first day of July next ensuyng.
At which day being in the beginning of ye kings.xvi. year of his reygne, he
was discharged / and sir Baldewyn Radyngton knight put in his rome / and so
co^tynued till the feast of Symo^de and Jude following. And for the more
dyspleasure of the cytezyns / all plees and suits kept before time in
westmynster hall, were than removed and holde^ at york, to the great noyaunce
of all the land / which so continued till Crystmas. And in this mayres year
also, was a great tra^slacio^ of bisshoppes. This dyspleasure thus ha^gyng
toward the city / the cytezyns made contynuall labor unto the kings grace,
by means of the queen and of doctor Grauysende than bysshope of London /
which ought their especial favors unto the city. By whose means the
cytezeyns were restored unto their lybertyes, and had license to chose of
them self a mayre and two shyryues / so that upon saint Mathewis day
following, they chose for shyryues Gylberte Manyfolde or Manfelde and Thomas
Newyngton / and upon saint Edwardes day king and confessoure, they chase
for their mayre wyllyam Stondon Grocer / which by the Lyeutenaunte of the
tower were at that time admytted and sworn.

But yet the kings dyspleasure was natte reconcyled, nor the cytezeyns
admytted unto his grace and favor.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xcii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xciii. Grocer. Gylbert Manfeylde.
wyllyam Stondon. Anno. xvi. Thomas Newynghtyn.
IN this mayres year and.xvi. year of king Richard / this new mayre with the
worthyest men of the city, made assyduat and daily means unto the kings
grace, for to have his most bounteouse pardon and his especyall favor unto
ye city. The which at length by means of such fre^des as they purchased
about the king / and specially by labor of ye good queen Anne, and the
fornamed bishop of London, they were put in good comfort upon their demeanor
and submission at the kings coming to London. Upon which comfort the
cytyzyns made royal and costyous purueyau^ce to receive the king in their
best manner / and having monyssyon that the king intended to come unto his
palace of westmynster, apparayled them in one lyuerey / and to ye noumbre
of.iiii.C. horsemen well be seen, met with him upon the heth on this half
his manor of shene. where in most lowlye wise according to their duties they
submytted them unto his grace / besechynge him of his special grace and
pardon, in all such things as they before times had offended again his
highness. And to ye intent that his grace might se the co^formyte of all his
other subjects / the recorder made instau^ce to him, that he would of his
great bounte take so great pain upon him, as to ride thorough his chaumber of
London.

The which request he graciously accepted / and so held on his iournay till he
came at London bridge / where he was presented with.ii. fair stedes trapped in
rich cloth of gold partyd of read and white. The which present he
tha^kefull received / and after held on his way till he came at the standarde
in chepe / the cytezyns of ye city sta^dynge upon either side of the streets
in their lyuereys, and cryeng king Richard king Rychard / and at their backs,
ye wyndowys and wallys hanged with all rich tapettes and clothes of arasse in
most goodlye and showing wise. And at the said standarde in chepe, was
ordained a sumptuouse stage / in the which were set diverse personages in
rich apparel. Among yt which an An^gell was ordained / which set a rich
crown of gold garnysshed with stone and perle upon the kings head as he
passed by. And that done he rode to Paulys, and there offered, and so rode unto
westmynster / where the mayre and his company taking their love returned unto
London.

Upon the morrow which was the fyftene day of the month of the said mayre
and his brethren yode unto westmynster, and presented there yt king with two
guylte basyns, and in them two thousand nobles of gold / besechynge him in
most humble wise to be good and gracious lord unto the city. The which he
accepted right favorably / and gave unto them many comfortable words.

And the third day following, they received a new confyrmacion of all their
old Fraunchyses and lybertyes. wherefore by counsayll of their friends, they
ordained an altar table of silver and over gylte / and therein ymagery graven
and enameled most curiously of the story of saint Edward, the which was
valuyd at a.M. mark / and presented that also, and gave it unto the king /
the which he shortly after offered to the shryne of saint Edward within the
abbay, where yet it sta^des at this day. And for the great zele and love which
ye fore said bishop of London ought unto the city, and that by his means
their lybertyes were again restored / they therefore of their own goodly
dysposycion, after his decease accustomed them, and yet at this day done / to
go yearly upon the feestfull days following, yt is to say first the morrow
after Symo^de Jude which day the mayer takes his charge at westmynster, to
Paulys / and there to say in the west end of ye church where he lies graven
(Deprofundis) for his soul and all christian / and in like manner upon Alhalowen
day, Crystmasse day, and ii. the next days following, New years day, Twelf
day, and Ca^delmas day / with also the morrow after Myghelmasse day, upon the
which the shyryfes yearly taken their charge at westmynster. All which.ix.
days, not all only the mayer and his brethren use this progress and keep
this obsequy / but also all the crafts of the city in their lyueryes use the
same yearly.

And when the king had wythdrawen as above is said, his displeasure from the
city / thanne at Hyllarye term following ye feast of Cristmas, all the kings
courts and plees of the crown wytl; other returned from york to westmynster.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xciii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xciiii. Grocer. Drew Barentyne.
John^ Hadley. Anno. xvii. Richard whytyngton.
IN this mayers beginning and xvii. year of king Richard, yt is to mean the
month of Noue^bre / certain gentylmen of Scotla^de entendynge to win
honor, challenged certain points of arms. As first the lord Moryf
challenged the earl of Nothyngham and marshall of England / sir wyllya^ Darel
knight chale^ged sir Peter Courtnay knight and Cokborne esquyer, challenged sir
Nycholas Hawberke knight. which feats of arms were done in smythfelde of
London. But Marse was so frendely unto the Englyshmen, that the honor of ye
iournay went with them / in so much that the earl marshall ouerthrewe his
appellaunte / and so bruised him, that in his return toward Scotland he dyed
at york. And sir wyllyam Darell refused his appella^t or they had run their
full courses. And the third of them, that is to wit Cocborne, was thrown at
the second copyng to ground horse and man.

And upon the.vii. day of Iuny following, dyed yt gracious woman queen Anne /
and lies now buried at westmynster by her lord king Richard, upon ye
southsyde of saint Edward shryne / to whose soul and al criste^ our lord be
merciful. And this year in the month of Septembre as witnesses the French
cronycle, by means of the earl of Derby and other, which than were in France
for the king of Englandes party / and the duke of Burbone and the earl of Ewe
upon the French party with other / a trewes was concluded at saint Omers
for.iiii. years. But not wythstandyng that peace, the Frenchmen and Englyshemen
ran together sundry times, when the one espied to have any advantage upon
that other.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xciiii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xcv. Mercer. wyllyam Brampton. John^
Frenshe. Anno. xviii. Thomas Knolles.
This.xviii. year of king Richard, he shortly after Crystmas with a strong
army sailed into Ireland. The which iournay was more to his charge than
honor. For the manner whereof, syn it sou^ded to no honor of the prince /
mine auctor therefore list not in his book to make any long process of ye
matter In this year also or about this time, began the heresy of John^ wycclyffe
to spring in England / the which was greatly auaunced by mean of the scysme
in the church hanging at those days between two popes sittynge at ones / the
which began as before is showed in the.xxiiii. year of Charles the.vi. tha^
king of France, Urban the.vi. and Clement the syxt / and continued under
Bonyface the.ix. and Benet the.xiii. Of which erronyouse oponyons of the said
heresy, who so is desyrouse to se the contents of them / let them search
cronica cronicarum, and there he shall se the^ brefely set out.

In this year also was wonderful tempest of wind, by the space of July,
August, and specially Septe^bre / by violence whereof in sundry places of this
land, great and wonderful hurt was done both of churches and houses. This
year dyed Constance second wife to John^ duke of Lancaster, and lies buried at
Leyceter.

Anno domini.M.CCC.xcv. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxcvi. Uy^tener. Roger Elys. wyllyam
more. Anno. xix. wyllyam Sheryngham.
IN the beginning of this mayres year, and.xix. year of king Richard,
and.xviii. day of Nouembre as affermeth ye French cronycle / king Richard
being tha^ at Calays, spowsed or took to wife within the church of saint
Nycholas, Isabel the daughter of Charles the.vi. than king of France. which
lady Isabell as witnesses the said French story, at the day of her marryage
was within.viii. years of age. And as it is regestred in one of ye books of
guyldehalle of London / the French king in propre person came down with a
goodly company of lords and knights, unto a town called Arde, which
stands upon the utter border of Pycardy / where within his own domynyon a
rich and sumptuouse pauylyon was pyght. And in like manner a little beyond
Guynys within the english pale, was another like pauylyon pyghte for king
Richard / so that between the two said pauylyons, was a distaunce of.lxx.
pace. And in the mydway atwene both, was ordained ye third pauylion / at ye
which both kings coming from either of their tents sundry times there met,
and had communicacion either with other / the ways or distaunce atwene set
with certain persons appointed standing in arm.ii. and.ii / the one side
being set with Englysshemen, and that other with French. And a certain
distau^ce from either of the ii. first said pauilyons, stood both hoostes of
both princes, or such co^panyes as before either of them was appointed to
bring. Here if I should bring in the diverse metynges of ye said princes, and
the curyous services that either caused other to be fed and served within
either of their tents, or of their dalyaunce or pastymes continuynge the
season of their metynges, and the dyuersyte of the manifold spices and wynes
which there was ministered at ye said season, with all ye rich apparel of the
said pauilyons and cupbordes garnysshed with plate and rich jewels / it would
ask a long tracte of time. But who yt is desirous to know or here of the
cyrcumstau^ce of all ye premysses / let him read ye work of master John^
Froysarde made in French / and there he shall se every thing touched in an
order. And here I shall shortly touch the gifts yt were given of either of ye
princes and of their lords. And first king Rychard gave unto ye French king,
an hanap or basyn of gold with an ewer to ye same. Tha^ againwarde ye French
king gave unto him iii. standing cups of gold, with couers garnisshed with
perle and stone / and a ship of gold set upon a bear rychely garnysshed with
perle and stone. Than at their second meting king Richard gave unto him an
ouche set with so fine stones, yt it was valued at.v.C. mark sterlynge. where
again the French king gave unto him.ii. flaggons of gold / a tablet of
gold, and therein an image of saint Mychaell rychely garnisshed. Also a tablet
of gold with a crucifixe therein well and rychely dyght. Also a tablet of gold
with an image of the Trynite, rychely set with perle and stone. Also a tablet
of gold with an image of saint George, in likewise set with perle and stone.
which all were valued at the sum of.xv.C. mark. Than king Richard seeing ye
bou^te of the French king / gave to him a bauderyke or coler of gold set
with great dyamantes, rubyes, and balessys, being valued at.v.M. mark / the
which for the preciosyte thereof, that it was of such an excellency and
fynesse of stuff, the French king therefore ware it about his neck as often
as the king and he met together. Than the French king gave unto him an
ouche, a spyce plate of gold of great weight, and valued at.ii.M. mark. Many
were the rich gifts that were received of lords and ladies of both princes.
Among the which specially are noted.iii. gifts, which king Richard gave
unto the duke of Orleau^ce / for the which he received again of the duke
trebyll the value. For where his were valued at a.M. mark / the dukes were
valued at three thousa^de mark. Finally when ye said princes had thus either
solaced with other, and concluded all matters concerning the abouesayde marriage
/ the French king delivered unto king Richard dame Isabell his daughter,
saying these words following.

Right dear beloved son, I deliver here to you the creature yt I most love i^
this world next my wife and my son / besechynge ye father in heaven, that it
may be to his pleasure, and of the weal of you and your realm / and that the
amyte atwene the.ii. realms in auoydyng of effusyon of christen men's blood,
may be kept inuyolet for the term atwene us concluded / which term
was.xxx. winter as expresses the French Cronycle. After which words with
many thanks given upon either parties / preparacyon was made of depertinge.
And after king Richard had conveyed the French king toward Arde / he took
his leave and returned unto his wife. The which was immediatlye with great
honor conveyed unto Caleys / and there after to the king spoused, as before
to you I have showed. After the which solempnisacion with all honor ended / the
king with his young wife took shyppyng, and so within short while landed at
Dover / and from thens sped him toward London. whereof the cytezens being
warned / made out certain horsemen well appointed in one lyuetye of color,
with a conysaunce brodered upon their sleues, whereby every felyshyppe was
known from other. The which with the Mayre and his brethren clothed in
scarlet, met the king and the queen upon the Black hethe / and after due
salutacyon and reuerente welcomes unto them made by the mouth of the
recorder, the said cytezens conveyed the king upon his wey till he came to
Newyngton: where the king commanded the Mayre with his company to return to
the city / for he with his lords and ladies was appointed that night to lie
at Kenyngton. It was not long after but that she was from Kenington brought
with great pomp unto the Tower of London. At which season was so exceeding
prece at London bridge, that by reason thereof certain persons were thruste to
death / among the which the pryoure of Typtre a place i^ Essex was one. And
upon the morrow following, she was conveyed through ye city with all honor
that might be devised unto westmynster / and there crowned queen upon the
sunday being than the.viii. day of January. In the somer following the king
by sinistre counsel delivered up by a poyntement the town of Breast in
Brytayne to the duke / which was occasyon of displeasure atwene the king and
ye duke of Gloucestre his uncle as in the year following shall be more clearly
showed.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxxxxvi. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxxxvii. Goldesmythe. Thomas
wylforde. Adam Bame. Anno. xx. wyllyam Parker.
IN this.xx. year of king Richard and month of February / the king holding
a sumptuous feast in westmynster halle, many of the soudyours which were
newely comen from the town of Breast foresaid, presed into the hall, and kept
a rome together. which company when the duke of Gloucestre had beholden /
and frayned and known what men they were, and how the said town was given
up contrary his knowledge / was therewith in his mind sore discomforted. In
so much that when the king was entered his chaumbre, and few nere unto him,
he said unto the king: Sir have ye not seen the felawes yt satte in so great
noumbre to day in your halle at such a table. And the king answered yes, and
axed of the duke what company it was. To whom the duke answered and said, Sir
these ben your souldyours comen from Breast / and as now have nothing to
take to, nor known at how to shyfte for their living / and the rather for
that as I am enfourmed, they have benne before time evil paid. Than said ye
king it is not my will but yt they should be well paid. And if any have cause
to compain, let them show it unto our tresourer, and they shall be resonably
answered. In resonynge of this matter farther / the duke said unto the king, Sir
ye ought to put your body to pain for to win a strong hold or town by
feate of war, or ye took upon you to sell or deliver any town or strong
hold gotten with great difficulte, by ma^hode of your noble progenitors. To
this ye king with changed countenance answered and said, Uncle how say ye
thoses words. Than ye duke boldelye recyted ye foresaid words. whereunto the
king being more discontented said, wene ye yt I be a merchant or fool to sell
my land / by saint John^ baptist nay. But trothe it is, yt our cosyn the duke
of Brytaine has rendered unto us al such su^mes of money as our progenitors
lent unto him or his auncetours, upon the said town of Breast. For the which,
reason and good conscience will yt he have his town restored again. By mean
of which words thus vttred by the duke / such rancoure and malice kyndelyd
atwene the king and him, yt it ceased not till the said duke was put to death
by murdre vnlefully. Than the duke apperceyuynge the kings misledynge by
certain persons about him, entendyng thereof reformacion for ye weal of the
king and his realm / called unto him the abbot of saint Albons, and the
abbot and pryour of westmynster, and showed to them his secret mind. By whose
counselles he made assemble shortly after at Arundell / to which assemble came
at the day appointed, diverse lords both spiritual and temporal / as him
self, the earl of Arundell and other. Also thither came the earl of Notyngham
than marshall of England, the earl of warwyke / and of spiritual lords, the
archebisshoppe of Caunterbury, the abbottes of saint Albones and of
westmynster with other.

After which assemble thus made, and eueryche of them to other sworn within
the castle of Arundel / the.viii. day of August they took there their
counsel, and condiscended yts diverse lords about the king, as the duke of
Lancastre, the duke of york and other, should be put from such auctoryte
and rule of the land as they than bare / and other officers such as were
thought prejudicial unto the weal of the land, should be dyscharged and
punisshed for their demerytes. when this with many other things was among
them concluded / eueryche of them departed till the time of an other metynge
atwene them appointed. But the earl of Notyngham contrary his oath and
promise fearing the sequel of the matter / yode shortly after unto the king,
and dyscouered unto him all the premises. wherefore the king in all haste
called a secret counsel at London in the said earl of Notynghames place, or
after some at the place of the earl of Huntyngdone.

where it was concludyd yt the said earl of Huntyngdone and other, should by
strength fetch unto the king the earls of Arundell and of warwyke. And in the
mean while, the king in propre person arested his uncle sir Thomas of
woodestoke at Plasshy in Essex as says the English cronycle. All be it an
other writer in la^yne says, that king Richard in propre person rode unto
the Manoure of Grenewyche in the night time, and there took him in his bed,
and commanded him unto the Tower of London / which shortly after was
conveyed unto Calays and there pyteously murderyd. And soon after were the
foresaid earls of Arundell and warwyke brought unto the tower of London, with
also sir John^ Cobham and sir John^ Cheynye knights. But the earl of Arundell
was taken to bail and went at large under suertie, till the beginning of the
parlyament. In which season diverse other were brought to sondrye prysones.
Than the king sent out his commissyoners unto the lords of his realm, for
to come unto his parliament / which began after upon the.xvii. day of
Septembre, in the beginning of the.xxi. year of ye king, and later end of
this mayres year.

Here it is to be noted, that Adam Bame mayre dyed in the beginning of the
month of June. For whom was after chosen and admytted the viii. day of ye
said month for mayre, Richard whytyngton, to occupye the full of that year /
that is to mean till the feast of Symonde and Jude. But upon saint Edwardes
day following when the new mayre is accustomed to be chosen / Than was he
elect again for that year following. And so he stood in the office of
mayraltye an hoole year / and.v. months. Than to return to our first matter,
when the king had assembled his lords / yt which came with so strong and
myghtie companyes, that the city suffysed not to lodge the people, but were
feign to be lodgyd in small towns and vyllages nere unto ye same / within
short time after the said parlyamente was begone, the earls of Arundell and
of warwyke were brought before the lords of the parlyamente holden at
westmynster, and there finally judged as follows / the earl of Arudell to be
ladde on foot from westmynster and place of his judgment thoroughe the high
streets of the city unto the tower hylle, where his head to be stryken of /
and the earl of warwyke was also judged to death. But for his great age, by
mean of his friends his judgment was pardoned and altered to perpetual
prison, where as the king would command him. which after was had unto ye I Will
of Man in Lancasshyre / where he consumed the resydue of his old days. And
the earl of Arundelle according to the sentence upon him given, upon the
morrow following the feast of saint Mathewe being saturday, and the.xxii. day
of Septembre, was ladde on foot unto ye tower hill being accompanied with great
strength of men, for so much as it was demyd yt he should have been rescued by
the way / how be it none such was attempted / but peasably he was brought
unto the said place of execucyon, and there patiently and mekely took his
death. whose body after was by the freres Augustynes borne unto their place
within the ward of Bradestrete of London, and there in the north side of the
quyer solempnely buried / and after upon his grave a sumptuous toumbe of marble
stone set and edifyed. And by auctoryte of the said parlyament, the
archebysshoppe of Caunterbury was exyled the realm. And upon the monday
following being the xxiiii. day of Septembre, sir John^ lord Cobham, and sir
John^ Cheyny knight, were judged to be drawn, hanged and quarteryd. But by
instaunce and labor of their friends, that judgment was changed unto
perpetual prison. And this done / ye king ordained a royal feeste, and held
open household for all honest comers. For as affirms Peter Pyctauyence a
writer of historyes / this prince king Richard passed all other of his
progenytours in lyberalytie and boun^ie. The which feast and also parlyament
yet holding / the king created.v. dukes, a marquis, and.v. earls. As first
the earl of Derby sir Henry of Bolygbrooke, sone and heir of John^ of Gaunte
duke of Lancaster, was created duke of Herforde. The second which was earl of
Rutlande, was created duke of Amnerle. The third being earl of Kent, was
created duke of Surrey. The fourth being earl of Notyngham, was created duke
of Norfolk. And the fyfte was the earl of Huntyngedon, the which than was
created duke of Exeter. Also of the earl of Somerset, was made a marquis of
Dorset. And for the earls / first the lord of westmerlande named Dane Ra^y
Neuyll, was made earl of westmerlande / the lord Tresorer sir wyllya^ Scrope,
was made e^le of wylshyre / and sir John^ de Mountague was made earl of
Salesbury. And when this business was fynisshed / the parlyament was removed
unto Shrewysbury unto Hyllarye term / where it was fynysshed to many men's
dyspleasures, and dysherytynge of many true heirs.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxxxxvii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxxxviii. Mercer. wyllyam
Askeham. Richard whyttyngton. Anno. xxi. John^ wodecoke.
IN this.xxi. year of king Richard / the people of the land murmured and
grudged sore again the king and his counsel / for so much as the goods
belonging unto the crown, were disperblyd and given to unworthy persons / by
occasyon whereof diverse charges and exaccyons were put upon the people. Also
for that the chief rulers about the prince, were of low birth and of small
reputacyon / and the men of honor were kept out of favor. Also for that
the duke of Glouceter was secretly murdered without process of the law / and
many things else mysordered by the last parlyament, whereof the wit and
blame was laid unto the king and other persons after named, as well for
wrongefull dysherytynge of sondrye persons at the said parlyamente, such as
were menyall servants of the foresaid duke of Gloceter and of the earls of
Arundell and of warwyke, contrary his own proclamacyons made concerning
such matters. Also that where diverse patentes and grauntes passyd the kings
great seal, as well for pardons and other great matters / yet for the kings
singular advantage and such few persons as bare the rule about him, many of
them were called again. Also where for sheryffes and other officers of all
shyres of England, were wont to be named.iiii. by discrete persons as iuges
and other, of ye which the king should assygne two for the year following / he
of his own will and pleasure would refuse them, and chose such.ii. as him
lyked / the which he knew well would lene more to his weal, than to the
common weal of this land or of his subjects. Also that where before times ye
kings of England used to send out commyssyons unto burgeses of cities and
towns, to chose of their fre liberty such knights of the shyre as they
thought most wealefull for the comen weal of the said shyre and land /
now king Richard would appoynte the persons, and will them for to chose
such as than he named / whereby his singular causes were preferred, and the
commen causes put by. Also king Richard thoroughe evil counsel, commanded
by his letters unto the sheryffes of all shyres few excepted, that all
persons of honor within their countyes as well spirytuall as temporal,
should make certain oaths in general words, and over that to write and seal
certain bonds for perfourmaunce of the said oaths / and also for blanke
chartour, which many men of substance were constrained to seal to their great
charges. The people contynually murmured and grudgyd, for these iniuryes and
many mo, which at the time of his deposynge were artyculed again him
in.xxxviii. sundry artycles / with also the rumoure that ran upon him, that
he had letten to ferme the reueneus of ye crown, to Busshey, Bogot, and Grene
/ which caused as well the noble men of the realm to grudge again him as
other of the common people. Thus co^tynuynge this mysorder within the land /
dyed sir John^ of Gaunt duke of Lancaster, at the bishop of Elyes place in
Holborne / and from thens was carried unto saint Pouls, and there upon the
north side of ye quyre honorably buried. At whose enterremente all the chief
lords of England were present. For whom after was fou^dyd by dame Blau^che
his wife an honorable anniuersary, as before I have showed in ye.xliiii. year
of Edward the third, which of right ought to be set in this place.

This year also about the feste of saint Bartholomew, fell discencyon and
discord between ye duke of Herforde and the duke of Norfolk. wherefore the
duke of Herforde accused ye other, that he had taken.iiii. thousand mark of
the kings, of such money as he should therewith have waged certain sowdyours
at Caleys / which he left undone, and took the same money to his own use.
But an other writer says, that as ye said two dukes rode upon a time from
the parlyament toward their lodgings / ye duke of Norfolk said unto that
other: Sir se you not how varyable the king is in his words, and how
shamefully he puts his lords and kynesfolkes to death, and other exileth and
holds in prison. wherefore full necessary it is to take keep, and not for to
trust myche in his words. For without dowte in time to come, he will by such
like means bring us unto like death and distruccyon. Of which words the
said duke of Herforde accused that other unto the king / wherefore either
wagyd battle with other before the king. To whom day of metynge was given to
either upon the.xi. day of September, to fight within lystes at Coue^tre,
where all thing was ordained for. At which place at ye day assygned thither
came the said two dukes, and appeared in the field before the kings presence,
ready to do their battle. But ye king anon forbad that fight / and forthwith
exyled the duke of Herforde for x. years, and the duke of Norfolk for ever /
which sentence was shortly after put in execucyon. Thanne the duke of
Herforde sailed into France and there tarried a season. But for lack of aid
and comfort he departed thens and came into Brytayne. And the duke of Norfolk
passed diverse countries / and lastely came unto the city of Uenyce, and there
endyd his life. And soon after this was master Roger walden a chapeleyne of
the kings, made archebysshoppe of Caunterbury / the which was a special
lover unto the city of London, and made great labor for them unto the kings
grace, ye grievously with them was of new dyspleased, for so much as he was
enfourmed of them, yt they should counsel with other sheriffs to withsta^de
certain acts made in the last parlyament / for yt which the comynaltie of
the city was endyted with other sheryffes. In redress whereof / by counsel of
the said archebysshoppe, and of master Robert Braybroke than bisshoppe of
London, the cytezens made a lamentable supplicacyon unto the king. which by
aid and favor of the said two bysshoppes and other lovers of ye city / ye
kings ire and indignacyon by mean of that lowly supplicacyon was some part
appeased and withdrawn. But yet to content a perte of ye kings mind, many
blanke chartours were devised and brought into the city / which many of ye
most substancyall men of the same were feign to seal, to their pain and
charge in conclusyon / yt which shortly after was used thoroughe all
countries of England.

Anno domini.M.CCC.lxxxxviii. Anno dn^i. M.CCC.lxxxxix. Goldesmythe. John^
wade. Drew Barentyne. Anno.xxii. John^ warner.
IN this.xxii. year of king Richard / ye common fame ran, yt the king had
letton to ferme ye realm of England unto sir wyllyam S^ope earl of wylshyre
and than treasourer of England, to sir John^ Busshey, sir John Bagot, and sir
Henry Grene knights / ye which returned shortly after to their great
co^fusyo^s. This year also, Thomas ye son and heir of ye earl of Arundell
lately beheded / ye which Thomas not all to his pleasure was kept in ye house
of the duke of Exceter, passed ye see by ye means of one wyllya^ Scot mercer /
and yode unto his uncle yt archebisshop of Canterbury, and so continued with
him in the city of Colayne than being. In this pastyme great purueyaunce was
made for ye kings journey into Irela^de / so yt when all things necessary to
the honor and need of the king and his people was ready, he set forthwarde
upon his journey in the month of Apryll / leauyng for his leutenaunt in
Englange sir Edmonde of Langley his uncle and duke of york / and after took
shippyng at Brystowe, and sailed with a mighty and strong host into Irelande.
where he had so prosperous speed, that in process of time with manhood and
good polycie he subdued to him that country. In the which voyage, were it for
act that he did or of ye kings bounte / Henry sone and heir of the duke of
Herforde than exiled, was of ye king made knight. This Henry was after his
father crowned king of England, and named Henry the.v.

King Richard thus being occupied in Irelande, and receyuynge of the
capytaynes of the wild Irysshe into his subieccyon, and orderyng of that
country to set in an order and rule / Henry of Bolyngbroke duke of Herforde
before exyled, with the archebysshoppe of Caunterbury and Thomas of Arundel and
other, landed with a small company at Rauyns spore in the North country, in
the month of August / and under color of the claim of his ryghtfull
enherytaunce, ceysed the people as he went / to whom in short process great
multitude of the people drew and gatherd. Of this landyng king Richard being
warned / for hasty speed of returnyng into England, left in Irela^de behind
him much ordenau^ce / and landed at Mylforde haven in the beginning of
Septembre, and beginning also of the.xxiii. year of his reygne / and so yode
unto the castle of Flynte in wales, and there rested him and his people / and
intended there to gather unto him more strength. In the which mean time the
foresaid Henry that than had proclaimed him self duke of Lancaster in the
right of John^ of Gau^te his father, was common to Brystowe / and there without
resystence took sir wyllyam Scrope earl of wylshyre and treasourer of England,
sir John^ Busshey, and sir Henry Grene.

Also there was taken sir John^ Bagot / but after he escaped and fled into
Irelande. Than were the other three there iuged and put in execucyon. And king
Richard still being at the castle of Flynte / herynge of the great strength
yt was about ye duke, fearyd sore of him self. And in like wise so did all
such as were about him. wherefore sir Thomas Percye earl of worcetyr and than
steward of the kings household, contrary his allegeaunce, brake openly the
white rod in the hall, and commaundyd every man to shifte for him self. By
reason whereof the people voyded, and the king left without comfort, so that
he was shortly after taken and presented unto the duke. The which put him
under safe keeping / and shortly after spedde him toward London. And wha^ he
came nere unto ye city / he sent king Richard with a secret company unto ye
Tower, there to be safely kept till his coming. whereof many evil disposed
persons of the city being warned / assembled them in great noumbre, and
intended to have met him without the town, and there to have taken him from
such as ladde him, and so to have slain him for the great cruelte that he
before time had used unto the city. But as god would / the mayre and rulers of
the city were enfourmed of their malycyous purpose, and gathered to them the
worshypfull commoners and sad men / by whose polycyes not without great
diffyculte, they were revoked from their evil purpose / all be it that
lasting that rumoure they yode unto westmynster, and there took master John^
Slake deane of the kings chapel / and from thens brought him unto Newgate,
and there cast on him yrons.

Shortly after / the duke came unto London / and there by the consent of king
Richard, a perlyament was begone upon the.xiii. day of ye month of Septembre.
Endurynge which perlyament, many accusacyons and artycles of mysrulynge of the
land were laid unto the charge of this noble prince king Richard, which be
engroced at length in.xxxviii. artycles. For the which, volu^tarely as it should
seem by ye copy of an instrument here after showed / he should renounce and
wylfullye be deposed from all kynglye mageste, the monday being the xxix. day
of Septembre, and the feast of saint Myghell the archaungell, in the year of
our lords incarnacyon after the accom^te of the church of England,
M.lxxxxix. and the xxiiii. year of the raygne of the said Richard. The copye
of which instrumente here under ensues.

THis present instrumente made the mondaye the.xxix. day of Septembre, and
feeste of saint Mychaell tharchaungell, in the year of our lord
god.M.CCC.lxxx. and xix. and in the.xxiii. year of king Richard the second /
witnesses, that where by the auctoryte of the lords spirytuall and temporal
of this present parlyament and commons of the same, the right honorable and
dyscrete persons here under named, were by the said auctoryte assygned to go
unto the tower of London, there to here and testifye such questyons and
answers as than and there shude be by the said honorable and discrete persons
hard: know all men to whom these present letters shall come, that we sir
Richard Scroope archebysshoppe of york, John^ bisshoppe of Herforde, Henrye
earl of Northumberlande, Rafe earl of westmerlande, Thomas lord of Barkeley,
wyllyam abbot of westmynster, John^ pryour of Caunterbury, wyllyam Thyrnynge,
and Hughe Burnell knights, John^ Markeham Justice, Thomas Stowe, and John^
Burbage doctors of the law Cyuyle, Thomas Feryby and Denis Lopham notaryes
publyke / the day and year abouesayd atwene the hours of.viii. and.ix. of ye
clock before noone, were present in the chyefe chaumber of the kings lodging
within the said place of the tower. where was rehearsed unto the king by ye
mouth of the forsayde earl of Northumberlande, that beforetyme at Conwey in
Northwalys the king being there at his pleasure and lybertye, promised unto
the archebysshop of Caunterbury than Thomas of Arundell, and unto the said
earl of Northumberlande / that he for insuffycyency which he knew himself to
be of, to occupye so great a charge as to govern this realm of England / he
would gladly leave of and renounce the right and title, as well of that as of his
title to the crown of France and his mageste, unto Henry duke of Herforde /
and that to do in such conuenyente wise, as by the lernyd men of his land it
should most suffyciently be by them devised and ordained. To the which
rehersall the king in our said presences answered benyngly, and said that
such promise he made / and so to the same he was at that hour in full purpose
to perform and fulfill / saving he desired first to have personal speech with
the said duke and with the archebysshoppe of Caunterbery his cosyns. And
ferthermore he desired to have a byll drawn of the said resygnacyon, that he
might be perfyghte in the rehersall thereof. After which copy to him by me the
said earl delivered / we the said lords and other departed. And upon the
same after noone the king desiring much the coming of the duke of
Lancaster / at the last the said duke with the archebysshoppe entered the
foresaid chaumber / bringing with them the lord Roos, the lord Burgeyny,
and the lord wylloughby, with diverse other. where after due obeysaunce done
by them unto the king / he famylyarly and with a glad countenance to us
aperynge, talked with the said archebysshop and duke a good season. And that
communycacyon fynyshed / the king with a glad countenance in presence of us
and the other above rehearsed, said openly that he was ready to renounce and
resygne all his kyngelye mageste, in manner and form as he before seasons had
promised. And all though he had and might sufficyently, have declared his
renouncement by the redyng of an other mean person / yet he for the more
surety of the matter, and for the said resygnacyon should have his full force
and strength, he therefore read the scrowle of resignacyon him self, in manner
and form as follows.

In the name of god Amen. I Richard by the grace of god king of England and
of France, and lord of Irelande / acquyte and assoyle all archebysshoppes,
bysshoppes, and other prelates seculer or relygyous, of what dygnite, degree,
state, or condicyon that they be of / and also all dukes, marquis, earls,
barons, lords, and al mine other lyege men both spiritual and seculer, of
what manner name or degree they be / from their oath of feaute and homage, and
all other deeds and privileges made unto me / and from all manner ba^des of
allegeaunce and regaly or lordeshyppe. In the which they were, or be bounden
to me, or in any otherwise constrained / and them their heirs, and
successors for evermore from the same bands and oaths, I release, deliver,
acquit, and let them for fre, dyssolued, and acquyte, and to be harmless,
for so much as longs to my person, by any manner way or title of right yt
to me might follow of the foresaid things or of any of them. And also I
resygne all my kyngely dygnyte, mageste, and crown / with all the
lordeshyppes, power, and priuyleges to the foresaid kyngely dygnite and crown
belonging / and all other lordeshyppes and possessions to me in any manner of
wise pertaining, what name and condicyon they be of / out take the lands and
possessions for me and mine obyte purchased and bought. And I renounce all
right and color of right, and all manner title of possessyon and lordeshyppe,
the which I ever had or have, or by any manner of mean might have in the
same lordeshyppes and possessions or any of them or to them, with any manner
ryghtes belonging or appertayning unto any part of the^.

And also the rule and governance of the same kyngedome and lordeshyppes, with
all admynistracyons of the same / and all things and eueryche of them, that
to the hole empire and iurisdiccyon of the same belongs of right, or in any
wise may belong.

And also I renounce the name, worship, and regalye, and kyngly highness,
clearly, freely, syngulerly, and holly, in the most best manner and form that
I may / and with deed and word I leave of and resygne them and go from them
for evermore / saving always to my successors kings of England, all the
ryghtes, privileges, and appurtenaunces to ye said kingdom and lordeships
abouesaid belonging and appertayninge. For well I wot and knowledge, and deem,
my self to be and have been insufficient and unable, and also unprofitable /
and for mine open deserts not unworthy to be put down. And I swear upon ye
holy Eua^gels here presently with my hands touched, yt I shall never repugne to
this resygnacyon, dimyssyon, or yeldyng up / nor never inpugne them in any
manner by word or by deed, by my self nor by none other. Nor I shall not
suffer it to be impugned, i^ as much as in me is preuely nor apperte. But I
shall have, hold, and keep this renousing, dimyssyon, and leuynge up, for
ferme and stable for ever more, in all and in every part thereof, so god me
help and all saints, and by this holy euangels by me bodily touched and
kyssed. And for more record of the same / here openly I subscrybe and sign
this present resygnacyon with mine own hand. And forthwith in our presences
and other subscrybed the same / and after delivered it unto the archebysshope
of Canterbury / say^ng that if it were in his power or at his assigneme^t, he
would that the duke of Lancaster there present, should be his successor and
^ing after him. And in token thereof he took a ring of gold from his finger
being his sygnet, and put it upon the said dukes finger / desiring and
requirynge ye archebysshop of york, to show and make report unto the lords
of the parlyament of his voluntary resygnacyon / And also of his intent and
good mind, that he bare toward his cosyn the duke of La^caster, to have him
his successor and king after him. And this done* every man took their leave
and returned to their own.

UPon the morrow following being tuisday and the last day of Septembre / all
the lords spirytuall and temporal, with also the commons of the said
parlyamente assembled at westmynster: where in in the presence of them, the
archebysshoppe of york according unto the kings desire, showed unto them
seryously the voluntary renounsynge of the king / with also the favor the
which he ought unto his cosyn ye duke of Lancaster for to have him his
successoure. And over ye showed unto them, the cedule or byll of renouncemente
sygned with king Rychardes hand. After which things in order by him
fynisshed / the questyon was axed first of the lords, if they would admytte
and allow the said renouncement. The which when it was of the lords granted
and confyrmed / the like questyon was axed of the commons / and of them in
like manner affyrmed. After which admyssyon, it was than declared, that not
withstanding the foresaid renounsynge so by the lords and commons admytted /
it were needful unto the realm, in auoydyng of all suspeccyon and surmyses of
ylle dysposed persons, to have in writing and regestred, the manyfolde crimes
and ^efautes before done by the said Richard late king of England / to the
end that they might first be openly showed unto the people, and after to
remain of record among the kings records. The which were drawn and
compyled as before is said in.xxxviii. artycles / and there showed ready to be
radde. But for other causes than more needful to be preferred / the redynge of
the said artycles at that season were diff^ered and put of. which artycles for
that that they would ask long time to write, and also would to some reders ^e
but small pleasure to read / I have therefore left them out here of this
work: which at length are set ou^ in the book of the Mayres, and year of
Drew Barentyne than mayre of London.

Than for so much as the lords of the parlyament had well considered this
voluntary renouncement of king Richard / and that it was behouefull and
necessary for the weal of the realm to proceed unto the sentence of his
deposayll: they there appointed by auctorytie of the states of the said
parlyament, the bishop of saint Ass, the abbotte of Glastenburye, the earl
of Gloucester, the lord of Barkeley, wyllyam Thyrnynge justice, and Thomas
Erpyngham and Thomas Graye knights, that they should give and ^ere open
sentence to the kings deposicyon. whereupon the said commyssyoners leynge
there their hedes together / by good delyberacion, good counsel, and
auysement, and of one assent / agreed among them, that the bishop of saint
Ass should publisshe the sentence for them and in their names, as follows.

In the name of god Amen. we John^ bysshope of saint Ass or Assenence, John^
abbot of Glastynbury, Richard the earl of Gloucester, Thomas lord of Berkeley,
wyllyam Thyrnynge Justice, Thomas Erpyngham and Thomas Graye knights, chosen
and deputed special commyssaryes by the three estates of this present
parlyament, representynge the hole body of the realm, for all such matters by
the said astates to us committed: we understanding and considering the
manyfolde crimes, hurtes, and harms done by Richard king of England, and
mysgouernaunce of the same by a long time, to the great decay of the said
land, and utter ruin of the same shortly to have been, ne had the especial
grace of our lord god thereunto put ye sooner remedy / and also furthermore
auertysinge yt the said king Richard knowing his own insufficiency, has
of his own mere volunte and fre will, renounced and given up the rule and
governance of this land, with all ryghtes and honors unto ye same
belonging, and utterly for his merytes, has iuged him self not unworthy to
be deposed of all kyngely mageste and astate royal: we the premysses well
considering by good and dilygente delyberacyon, by the power, name, and
auctoryte to us as above is said committed / pronounce, discern, and declare,
the same king Richard before this to have be and to be unprofitable, unable,
vnsufficyent, and unworthy, to the rule and governance of the foresaid
realms and lordeshyppes, and all other thappurtenaunces to the same
belonging. And for the same causes, we pryue him of all kyngely dygnyte and
worship, of any kynglye worship in him left.

And we depose him by our sentence ^ifynityfe / forbyddynge expressly to all
archebysshoppes, bysshoppes, and all other prelates, dukes, marqueses, earls,
barons, and knights, and to all other men of the foresaid kingdom and
lordeshyppes, or of other places belonging to the same realms and
lordeshippes, subjects and lyeges what so ever they be, yt none of them from
this time forthwarde, to the foresaid Richard as king and lord of ye
foresaid realms and lordeshyppes, be neither obedye^te nor attendaunt.

After which sentence thus openly declared / the said astates admytted
forthwith the same persons for their procuratours, to resygne and yield up
unto king Richard, all their homage and fealty which they had made and
ought unto him before times / and for to show unto him if need were, all
things before done that concernyd his deposynge.

The which resygnacyon at that time was spared, and put in respite till the
morrow next following. And anon as this sentence was in this wise passyd, and
that by reason thereof the realm stood void without head or gouernoure for the
time / the said duke of Lancaster rising from ye place where he before sat,
and standing where all might behold him / he mekely making the sign of the
cross upon his forhede and upon his breast, after silence by an officer was
commanded / said unto the people there being these words following. In the
name of the father and son and holy ghost / I Henry of Lancastre claim the
realm of England and the crown, with all the appurtenaunces, as I that am
dyscended by right line of the blood coming from that good lord king Henry
the third / and through ye right that god of his grace has sent to me, with
help of my kynne and of my friends to recover the same / yt which was in point
to be undone for defaut of good governance and due justice. After which
words thus by him uttered / he returned and set him down in the place, where
he before had sytten. Than the lords apperceyuynge and herynge this claim
thus made by this noble man / either of them frayned of other what he
thought. And after a dystaunce or pau^e of time / the archebysshope of
Cauntorbury having notycyon of the lords minds, stood up and asked of the
commons, if they would assente to the lords / which in their minds thought
the claim by the duke made to he ryghtefull and necessary, for the welthe of
the realm and of them all. whereunto with one voice they cried, ye, ye, ye.
After which answer / the said archebysshop going unto the duke, and
setting him upon his kne, had unto him a few words. The which ended he rose
/ and taking the duke by the right hand* ladde him unto the kings sete / and
with great reverence set him therein / after a certain knelynge and orison
made by the said duke, or he were therein set.

And when the king was thus set in his trone, to the great reioysynge of the
people / the archebysshoppe of Cauntorbury began there an oracion or colacyon
in manner as after follows.

U^^ dominabitur in populo, primo Regu^ capitulo.ix. These ben the words of
the high and most mighty king, speaking to Samuel his prophet / techyng him
how he should chose and ordeyne a gouernoure of his people of Israel, when the
said people asked of him a king to rule them. And not without cause may
these words be said here of our lord the king that is. For if they be
inwardely conceived / they shall give to us matter of consolacion and comfort,
when it is said that a man shall have lordeshyp and rule of the people and not
a child. For god threteneth not us as he sometime thret the people by I say,
saying / ^sai^. 36 Et dabo pueros principes little, and effeminati dominabuntur
eis: I shall says our lord give children to be their rulers and princes /
and weke or ferefull shall have domynyon over them.

But of his great mercy he has vysyted us I trust his peculier people, and
sent us a man to have the rule of us / and put by chylderne yt before time
ruled this land after chyldysshe condycyons / as by ye works of them it has
right lately appeared, to the great dysturbaunce of all this realm / and for
want or lack of a man.

For as says the apostell Paul ad Coryntheos primo. capitulo.xiii. Cum
essem* paruusus, sapiebam vt paruusus, and soquebar vt paruusus. etc. Quam so
autem factus sum vi^ / euacuani quae erant paruusi / That is to mean, when I
was a child, I sauoured and spoke as a child. But at the time when I came
unto the state of a man / thanne I put by all my chyldysshe condycyons.

The apostell says he favored and spoke as a child / in whom is no
steadfastness or constancy. For a child will lyghtely promise, and lightly he
will break his promise, and do all things that his appetyte gives him unto,
and forgeteth lyghtely what he has done. By which reason it follows, that
nedely great inconuenyence must fall to that people yt a child is ruler and
governor of. Nor it is not possible for that king dome to stand in felicite,
where such condycyons reygne in the head and ruler of the same. But now we
ought all to rejoice, that all such defautes ben expelled / and that a man and
not a child shall have lordshyp over us. To whom it belongs to have a sure
rain upon his tunge, that he may be known fronra child, or a man vsyng
chyldysche condycyons. Of whom I trust I may say as ye wise man says in his
Prouerbys Prouerbiorum tercio capitulo. Bea tus homo qui inuenit sapientiam, et
qui affluit prudentia The which is to mean, Blessed be the man yt has
sapyence or wisdom, and that haboundeth in prudence. For that man that is
ruled by sapience, must needs love and dread our lord god. And who so loves
and dredeth him / must consequentely follow that he must keep his
commandments. By force whereof he shall mynyster true justice unto his
subjects, and do no wrong nor injury to any man / so that than shall follow
the words of the wise man the which ben rehearsed Prouerbiorum decimo.
Benedictio domini super caput iusti, os autem impiorum operit iniquitatem which
is to mean, The blessing of our lord god shall a light upon the head of our
king, being a just and rightwyse man / for the tunge of him works equity and
justice. But the tunge of wicked and of sinners, covers iniquyte. And who
that werketh or mynystreth justice in due order / he not allonely sauegardeth
him self, but also holds ye people in a surete of restfulnesse / of the
which ensues peace and ple^te. And therefore it is said of the wise king
Salomo^ Ecclesiastes decimo. Beata tetra (...) tex nobilis est, and (...)
principes vescuntur in tempore sun. which is to be understand, that blessed
and happy is that land of the which the king or ruler is noble and wise / and
the princes ben blessed that live in his time.

As who would say, they may take exaumple of him to rule and guide their
subjects. For by the discressyon of a noble and wise man being in auctorite /
many euylles be sequestered and put a part, and all dyssmilers put unto
silence. For the wise man co^sidereth and notes well the great inconuenyences
which daily now grow of it / where the child or insypyente drynketh the
sweet and delycyous words vnauysydly, and perceyueth not entoxycacion which
they ben mynged or myxte with, till he be inuyroned and wrapped in all danger /
as lately the experyence thereof has been apparent to all our syghtes and
knowleges, and not without the great danger of all this realm. And all was
for lack of wisdom in the ruler which demed and taught as a child, gyuyng
sentence of wylfulnes and not of reason. So that while a child reigned, self
will and just reigned / and reason with good conscye^ce were outlawed, with
justice, steadfastness, and many other vertuys. But of this parell and danger
we ben delivered by the especyal help and grace of god, Quia vir dominabitur
tur in populo / that is to mean, he that is not a child but perfyght in
reason. For he comes natte to execute his own will / but his will that sent
him, that is to wit gods will / as a man to whom god of his habundaunte
grace has given perfyghte reason and dyscrescyon, to dyscerne and deem as a
perfyght man. wherefore not alonely of this man we shall say that he shall
dwell in wisdom / but as a perfyght man and not a child, he shall think and
deem / and have such a cyrcu^specte with him, that he shall dylygently
foreloke and se that gods will be done and not his. And therefore now I
trust the words of the wise man Ecclesiastici decimo shall be veryfyed in our
king / saying index sapiens iudicabit populum suum, and principatus sensati
stabilis erit / that is as says the wise man, A wise and dyscrete judge shall
now deem his people / and the domynyon or lordshyppe of a dyscrete wise man,
shall stand steadfast. where upon shall than follow the second verse of the
same chapyter / saying Secundum iudicem populi, sic and ministri eius. etc.
that is, Like as the head and soueraygne is replenysshed with all sapyence and
virtue in guydynge of his people, admynistrynge to them law with due and
conuenyent justice / so shall the subjects again ward be garnysshed with awe
and loving dread / and bear unto him next god all honor, truth, and
allegeaunce. So that than it may be concluded with the resydue of the
foresaid verses, Qu alis rector est ciuitatis, tales and inhabitants in ca.
which is to mean, Such as ye ruler of the city is such than be the
inhabytauntes of the same. So that consequentely it follows, a good master
makes a good dyscyple. And in likewise / an evil king or ruler shall lose
his people, and the cytyes of his kyngedome shall be left desolate and vnhabyted.

wherefore thus I make an end, instead of a child wylfully doing his lust
and pleasure without reason / now shall a man be lord and ruler, yt is
replenysshed with sapie^ce and reason / and shall govern the people by
skylfull domys, setting a part all wylfulnesse and pleasure of him self. So
that the word that I began with, may be veryfyed of him, Ecce quia vir
dominabitur in populo. The which our lord grant / and that he may
prosperously reygne to the pleasure of god and welthe of his realm Amen.

The which oracion being thus fynyshed, and the people answering with great
gladness, Amen: the king standing upon his fete, said unto the lords and
commons present. Syrs, I thank you my lords spyrytuall and temporal, and all
the states of this land / and do you to understand, that it is not my will,
that any man think, that by the way of conqueste I would dysheryte any man of
his heritage, fraunchyse, or other ryghtes that him ought to have of right /
nor for to put him out of that which he now enjoys, and has had
before time by custom of good law of this realm / except such pryuate
persons as have been again the good purpose and the common profit of the
realm.

And this speech thus fynysshed / all sheryfes and other officers were put in
their auctorytyes, which seized for the time that the kings see was void /
and after every man departed.

And at after noone were proclamacions made in accustumat places of the city,
in the name of king Henry the fourth. And upon the morrow following being
wennysdaye, and the first day of October / the procuratours above named yode
unto the tower of London and there certified him of the admissio^ of king
Henry. And the foresaid justice wyllyam Thirnynge in ye name of the other, and
for all the states of the land / gave up unto Rychard late king, all homage
and fealte to him before time due, i like manner and form as before I have
showed to you in ye xix. year of king Edward the.ii. And thus was the noble
prince pryued of all kyngly dygnyte and honor, by reason of his evil
counsayll, and such vnlafull ways and means as he by his insolency in his
realm suffered to be used, when he had reigned.cxii. years three months
and.viii. days.

Charles the.vii. Francia.
CArolus or Charles the.vii of ye name, or the.vi. after thaccompte of ye
French hystory, a child of xiii. years of age, and son unto Charles the.vi
/ began his reygne over the Frenchemen in the month of Septembre, and year of
our lord.M.CCC. and.lxxx / and the third year of the second Richard than
king of England. This Charles was crowned king within the age of.xiiii.
years, contrary a law made in the.xi. year of his father. And where by him he
was committed unto the rule of Lewys his uncle and duke of Angeou, to the time
of the full of.xiiii. years / yet after the death of the father, such
unkindness began to spryng between the lords of the realm, that for the
common welthe of the same it was agreed by the more party, that this Charles
should be crowned at Raynes i all hasty speed. The which was done in short
season after / and so continued not without dysturbaunce of malice which
kyndeled between his two uncles, and other inconveniences, by the space of iii.
years ensuyng. The.iiii. year of his reygne / the cytesyns of Paris murmuring
and grudgynge for diverse imposycyons and taskes of them, leuyed suddenly arose
in great multitude, entendynge to have dystressed some of the kings household
servants, and such as were men of person. But by medyacyon of one dyscrete
parsone named John Marsyle, with assystence of the provost of the merchants,
the rumoure was somdele appeased / in so much that the great multitude was
wythdrawen and returned to their occupacyons. But some evil dysposed, which
in suspycyous congregacyon ever use to exyte and stir the people unto
robbynge and other unlawful acres / reassocyate them, and said and cried that
they would have the Iewys banysshed the city. To whom it was answered that the
king should be informed of their desire / and that upon it they should have
knowledge of the kings pleasure, whereupon in a rage they ran unto the houses
of the Jews / and entryd them by force, in robbynge and spoylynge them, and
bare away what they might carry / in sleynge such of the Jews as any
resyste^ce and defense made again them / and never after restored ye said
goods, not wythstandynge that the king in that byhalfe gave sore and strayte
commandments. It was not long after that such as were of ye kings secret
counsel, considering the great charges and needs of ye king, and the
weykenesse of his treasoure / by authoryte of the kings co^myssyons called
before them the rulers of Paris, of Roan, and other good cytyes. The which
being assembled, to them was showed the many and importune charges which ye
king daily had for the defe^se of his realm and subjects. wherefore by all
wise and polytyke means that they might use, they exorted the said commons
to grant unto the king in way of subsydye.xii.vi. of the pound of all
wares at that days currau^t. To the which request in conclusyo^ after advise
taken of their neighbors / it was answered that the people were so sore charged
in times passed, that they might not sustain or bear any more charges, till
their necessytie were otherwise releuyd / so that in co^clusyo^ at this season
the king and his cou^sayll were dyspoynted.

In the.vi. year of this Charles / ye Flemynges, which by a certain season had
rested them from battle / were it for necessyte or synguler couetyze of
Lewys their duke, he asked of them a great aid or task. And for he knew
well that if he might win the favor and grant of the town of Gaunt, he
should the sooner have his pleasure of the resydue / therefore he first began
by means of fayrenesse. And after wha^ thereby he saw he might take none
aduau^tage, he added thereunto manasses and thretenynges / the which not
wythstandynge the Flemynges bode steadfast in one opinion, and denayed styfly
their dukes request. whereupon he lastly departing from Gaunt, with great
displeasure said, I shall show my self to be lord and soueraygne of this
town and of the obstynat people of the same. And shortly after ye duke made
sharp war upon the^ of Gau^t / and they in likewise defended them
vigurously, so that their enemies wa^ of them little auau^tage. And after this
war had be^ a season continued, not without loss of many men upon both
parties / the Gaunteners remembrynge the obedyence and fydelyte which they
should bear to their sovereign lord and duke, made means that they might be
hard. After grant whereof, they sent unto him certain orators which
had unto him the words in sentence following. Most sovereign next god, we
deny not but we accept the for our prince and leder / and to the as thine it
becomes us to obey with all reason.

And thou again art bound to defend us. If we any thing by our ouersyght
and neclygence have again the trespassed / we mekely beseech the of
forgyuenesse. And furthermore besechynge the, that such fraunchyses and
lybertyes to us by thy noble progenytours before granted, thou will not from
us withdraw nor abrydge / by reason whereof thy people of Gau^t may not to any
tax contrary their volunte be constrained. But and to thy need of wars thou
have necessytye of aid of thy commons, they of free will all co^straynte set
a part, are ready to aid and help the, as fre and as lyberall as thy true
subjects. By reason of which words ye duke was of his ire toward them some
what apeased. But after their departing from the duke or earls presence / such
young knights as were of the earls host, had unto them many high and
dysdaynous words / saying that they were thrall unto their earl, and that
their obstynacye should be to the vttermoste of their reproach and correccyon,
and they by coaccion and constraynt forced to do their duty. By occasyo^ of
which words / the Gau^teners retournyng to their former wylfulnesse, kept
still their former opynyo^, and defended the earl and his people as they before
had done. wherefore the earl seeing he might not by stre^ghte prevail again
his enemies / studied the ways and means to famysshe them by hunger / so
that by that mean he might draw the town to his subieccyo^. And that to
bring to effect he gyrde ye town about with a strong syege. Than the
Gau^teners supprysed with more obduracion of heart again their prince / made
them a capytayne named Phylype Artyuele, the son of Iakes de Artyuele before
slain of ye Flemynges / like as to you I have before showed in the.xvii. year
of Philippe de Ualoys late king of France The which furnysshynge his people
with all habylymentes of war / made out of the town and pyghte his feelde in
a plain ioynynge unto it / where the earls people and they fought a sharp
fight and long. But in ye end fortune was unto the earl or duke so froward
that with loss of.v.M. of his soudyours he was forced to take Bruges for his
suertye.

By reason of this vyctory this Artyuele being not a little supprysed with
pride / exorted in such wise the dwellers within the town of Gaunte, and all
such as were nere neighbors unto them, to set a part all occupacyon as well
husbandry as other, and give their hole study unto acts and feats of war.
The earl thus being within ye town of Bruges / a day of great solempnytie
yerelye holden by them of Bruges approached, which they wordshypped in the
honor of our lords blood. To this day of solemptye used yearly to come,
all the inhabytauntes of the vyllages and country there about. which day of
feast Phylyp de Artiuele calling to mind / appoyntyd unto hi^.ii.M of his
soudiours / and warned them with armoure being clad under their clothes, to
ascend by.ii, by three, by four, and like small companyes unto this feestfull
solempnyte / and at such time as he gave warnyng, every man to be ready with
sword in hand, to make rome among ye prese to the end that they might take
the earl than of help destytute. which cautele thus prepared for / at the day
common of this said feeste, the town being replenysshed with people / the
said Artyuele vnsuspect of any person, with his company in manner abouesayde
entered the town of Bruges. And wha^ he saw his best time / he suddenly cried,
asarmis, asarmes. with which sodeyn cry the earl being astonyed / manfully
for a while wythstode his enemies, and encouraged the people again them. But
for that the Gaunteners were in armoure and the other unarmed / they of the
earls party fled soon. That seeing the earl, with great diffyculte fled /
and so lepyng ieopardously into the house of an old woman, escaped and went
unto Scluse, and there a while held him.

Than this Artyuele saying that by the aid of them of Bruges he was
dispoynted of the earls taking / fell upon the inhabytauntes of the town, and
slew of them a certain / and after with great pomp and pyllage returned
unto Gaunt.

IN the.vii. year of this Charles / by procuryng of his uncle Lewys duke of
Angeou, a tax was efte axed of the commons of France. The which to bring to
effect many friends and promoters were made, as well of cytezyns as other. But
anon as ye commons of Paris understood of this / they became wild, and
assembled in thycke companies / not regardyng the reasonable allegacions to
them laid and showed by Petyr Dylet and John^ Matsyll, though in them they
had great affeccion and trust / but took them to their affeccion and mind,
and made among them certain capytaynes and rulers / and kept the watch by
night as enemies had lain about ye city. which insurreccyon and rebellyon
thus begone within the city of Paris / the city of Roan^ taking thereof
exaumple, arrered a like murmr / and sensyd the city of Roane with like
prouysyon / and made them ^ mamet of a fat / and unwieldy as a vylayne of the
city carried him about the town in a cart^, and named him in dyrysyo^ of their
prince their king / and ceased not to fall into many inconuenyences, as
robbyng of holy places and other, not without shedynge of blood, whereof the
cyrcumstaunce were long to tell. But as all operacio^ of man has end so
this folly and rebellyon of Frenchemen was ceased / and many for the trespass
thereof cast in hard and dark prison. Of the which the king intended to
have taken cruel correccyon, ne had been the great instaunt labor made by
the rulers of the university of Paris, and other such as were nere about the
king. By whose means the multitude was pardoned / and a few such as were
the begynners were put in execucyon. And than as testyfyeth mine auctour master
Robert Gagwyne, for to appease the kings high dyspleasure, to hi^ was
granted an hundredth thousand frankes, which after sterlynge money amou^teth
the sum of.x. thousand li.

ye have before hard how ye earl of Flanders with great ieopardy escaped the
hands of Phylyp de Artyuele capytayne of Gau^te / and how he came to Scluse,
and there safegarded him self. where with all dylygence he gathered unto him
his people, and made a new reyse upon the said Artyuele. The which to him
had assocyat as affermeth my said auctor xl.M. me^ / so that between the earl
and him was foughte^ a cruel fight. whereof in ye e^de Artiuele was again
vyctour, and constrained the earl to forsake the feelde with loss of.x.M. of
his knights / and he him self escaped with great danger unto they land of
(...) / and diverse of his people as Fre^chme^ and other, in a good noumbre
fled unto a town called And werpe / where a season they defended them again
the malice of their enemies. In which pass time this Artyuele co^iecturyng in
his mind that the French king would take the earls patty^ / sent unto him
an ambassad^or message with letters / besechynge him not to entremedle of this
war between the earl and the Gau^teners / which war the earl had (...)
only of tyranny and not of justice, ente^dyng utterly to distroy the auncye^te
lybertye and fraunchyse. Showing also farther; that if he would not as their
co^templacyon and pr^yer forbere to aid their said earl / that tha^ to
defend their lyberte and right, they would seek aid of the king of England.
To the which request none answer was made, neither by the king nor by his
cou^sayll wherefore this Artyuele made strong prouysyon to wythstande ye
French king / and set a certain of his soudyours for to keep the syege
before* And werpe, while he made p^ouysyon for other needs.

In this mean while the earl went unto the duke of Burgoyn / and they together
yode after unto king Charles / showing to him lame^tably what wro^ges ye earl
had sustained of ye obstynat Gau^teners / besechyng him of aid to redres ye
said wro^ges. which co^playnt the king graciously herd / and benyngly granted
to them their petycyon. And natwythstandynge that ye deed of winter was
coming, he in all haste assembled his knights / and taking with him, the
Oryfflambe, with a mighty strong host perced the country of Flaunders
toward Marquet in the end of ye month of Octobre. whereof heryng Actyuele /
made prouisyon to stop the ways, The (...) of Cou^tray.
by brekyng of brydges and other means / whereby the French host was greatly
empeched and let / so that with great dyffycultye and danger, they passed ye
river of Lyze at a brydg long defended by the inhabytau^tes of the country,
with aid of their capytayne named Peter wood / which there was slain
with.iii.M. of his adheretes. After wynnyng of which bridge, the French host
passed the river, and spoiled the country before them / which unto them was
much auaylable, for that cyrcuit^ was inhabyted with many rich clothmakers
Than the king with his host made toward the mount of Ipre. whereof the
dwellers of Ipre being ware / fe^t out two freers of ye order of prechers, to
beseech the king to accept that town and dwellers unto his mercy, the which
returned with comfo^table answer. wherefore forthwyth yode forth.xii. of the
notablest of ye town, and offered the town and dwellers to be in the kings
power. The which offer the king accepted / and after entered the town. Of
whom ye king received.xl.M. fra^kes, or.iiii.M. li. sterlynge toward the
wagyng of his knights. And shortly after all the vyllages there toward the sea submytted them unto the king / bryngyng unto him certain capytaynes which
belonged unto Phylyppe de Artyuele, with also fourthy thousand frankes toward
their costs / which capytaynes the king commanded to be fourth with beheded.

when king Charles had tarried five days at Ipre / word was brought to
him that Phylype Artyuele was coming toward him with.lx. thousand me^.
wherefore the king set forward his host, and followed after as fast as he might
some deal to his pain, by reason of rain and foul way that he passed / so
that finally he approached within.iii. miles of his enmyes. Upon the morrow
following theynge the.v. day of the month of Decembre, and year of our lords
incarnacion.M.CCC.lxxx. and viii. and beginning of the viii. year of this
Charles / in a plain nere unto ye town of Courtray was foughten a cruel
battle. whereof in the beginning the Flemynges had the better and forced the
French host to lose place. But in the end, by special calling of the
French knights unto our Lady and other saints / half by miracle as
witnesses mine auctor, the Frenchmen opteyned victory, and put the Flemynges
to f^yght / and them chased in so cruel wy^e, that by death in the feelde / and
drownyng in mareys and other waters, there was of them slain at that fight
upon.xl.M. Than narowe search was made for the capytayn Phylyppe de Artyuele.
And lastly a flemynge being a capytayne of his sore wounded / said that he
saw him fall in the feelde. whereupon search being made / his carye^ was
founden oppressed of his own people as they fled. Anon as tidings came
unto the Flemynges, yt lay about Andwerpe of the losing of the field / they
in all haste leuynge their ordenau^ce behind the^, fled from the syege. That
perceyuyng their enemies, issued out of the town / and slew of them many /
and many were drowned in fennys and marycys.

when the French king had opteyned thus this glorious victory he than
entered the town of Courtray. where he so resting him / orators were sent to
him from the town of Bruges, which than had newely taken party with
Artyuele / and with ye paymente of an.C. and.xx.M. frankes or.xii.M.ii.
sterlynge money, there made a peace for the said town of Bruges.

And when the king should depart from Courtray / he commanded his knights to
beat down the gates of the same, without harm doing unto the people. But
the Frenchmen berynge in mind the rebukes and harms, which they before of
that town had sustained / beat down great part of the walls, robbed and
slew much of the people, and set fire upon the town wha^ they had done. In
robbynge of this town of Courtray* diverse letters were found of ye town or
city of Paris, which contained the rebellyo^ of the Parysyences before
declared, with comfort to them for aid if they neded which letters wha^
they came unto the kings sight, he was with them of Paris grievously
displeased / and for the same, them by fine grievously after punysshed. At such
time as the king had thus repossessed the earl of the lordshyp of Flanders /
Gaunt yet remaining in their first error, held their town so stro^gely, that
another king nor earl might win within them. All be it that after the French
king was returned into France / they sent certain orators unto him, the
which he in no wise would suffer to come in his sight.

In these passed years many skyrmysshes and fyghtes were done between the
Fre^chemen and Englyshme^, which some deal are touched in the beginning of
Rychardes reygne. But nothing to the honor of the Frenchemen, as they in
their chronicles boste and auaunce them self. Many mo rebellyo^s and
insurreccyo^s of this people might I here bring in. But for diverse
consyderacions which to wise men may appear, I think it better to spare /
and also the rehersayll of them would ask a long tracte of time. wherefore I
pass over.

AFter the appeasynge of these inordynate insurreccyo^s and murmures, and that
the land was some deal set in a quyetnes / king Charles in the beginning
of the.ix. year of his reygne, married Isabell the daughter of the duke of
Bauary. Death of Charles king of Nauerne.
In this year also dyed Charles ye king of Nauerne a man of great age / and by
a wonderful hap as reherseth mine auetoure. For so it was, that for his
feblenesse or debylyte of age / he by counsayll of physycyons was sowed in a
shete wesshed with aqua vite, to the end to rause his old body to catch
natural hete. But how it was, as this shete was tacked about his body / the
sewer taking his candell to burn of ye end of the trede, or he were ware the
fire fastened in the shete / and so burnt his flessh or it might be lowsed
from him, that he caught thereof such dyssease, that he dyed the.iii. day
following. which myshappe fell to him after ye opinion of mine auctour by ye
wretch of god, as co^dygne merit for his unsteadfastness and untroth by him
before used, as in sundry places before in the stories of king John^ and
Charles his sonn^ are manyfestly showed.

In this year also a battle was done at Paris between.ii. knights of the duke
of Alenson / whereof the cause ensuyeth. This said duke had in his court two
knights / whereof that one was named John^ Carengo^ or Carongyon, and that
other Iaquet. Gry^er, which were both in good favor of their master. This
Carongon, were it for delight to se strange countries, or cause of other
adventure as pilgrymage or other, departed out of France, leuyng his wife in a
castle or fortress of his own / which wife was goodly and fayer.

After whose departing, were it for beauty of the woman or for evil will that
he bare toward his fellow / this Iaquet Gryse entryd the castle, berynge his
wife on hand, that he was common to se that house, which showed so fair
outward. The woman casting no parell, accepting him for her husbands friend
and hyrs showed to him the cyrcuite of ye place. But he in contrary awaytynge
his, pray, when he saw the woman far from company, forsed her in such
manner, that contrary her will he co^mysed with her auoutry. At whose departing
she gave unto him many rebukeful words / saying plainly that if her husband
ever returned, she would of that velany be reue^ged. This deed was kept
secret till the return of her husband. At whose home coming, she with
lamentable countenance showed till her husband all the demeanure of the said
Iaquet.

After which complaynte by her husband well understood / he yode straight
unto the duke of Alenson / requyryng him to do correccion upon the auoutrer, or
else yt he might try it with him in ye field by fortune of battle / whereof
another the duke would grant, but brought the quarrel before the king. By whose
agreement and commandment a day by the king was set to fight at Paris.
wha^ the day of battle was comen / Carogon brought his wife unto the place,
to iustyfye her former saying. After affyrmacyon whereof / either first ran
at other with sharp speres. At which course Iaquet wounded his enemy in the
thyghe with his spear. But Carongon being with it nothing dysmayed / light
from his horse, and bare him so manfully, that he overcame his aduersarye, and
caused him to confess his offense / for the which he was straight drawn unto
the gybet of Paris, and there hanged. And to the said Carongon the king gave in
reward a thousand fra^kes or a hundredth pound sterlynge money / and over
that he gave unto him as an annual fee or rent two hundredth frankes, which is
in value of.xx. pound sterlynge money.

In these days as witnesses Gagwynus / an anchor berynge in his hand a read
cross, a man to look to of goostlye conuersacyon, came unto the French kings
court. The which by the household servants or famylyers of the court, was
long kept from his presence / all be it that lastelye he was brought unto him.
To whom he showed that he was deuynely monysshed, that he should charge him to
absteyne from his customable use in leuyenge so often taskes and subsydyes /
and yt he did not, he should well understand, that the wrath of god was nere
to him to punysshe him, if he refused his commandment. The which message the
king took at small regard. But shortly after the queen was delivered of a
daughter that dyed soon after. wherefore the king calling to mind the
ankers words / for fere of other punysshement refrayned a season from
leuyenge of trybutes and taskes.

But by the exortacion of his two vnkylles, he in short season after turned
to his former custom. King Charles thus passing his time with great murmr
of his commons, and rebellyon of the duke of Brytayn, with many other
aduersytyes which were long to write / lastly in the.xiiii. year of his reygne
or nere about, he made war upon the people of west France called in late
Cenomanni.

when Charles was entered this country, which was in the domynyon of the duke
of Brytayn / ye duke sent unto him messengers, saying to him that he should
not need to invade his country with so great stre^ghte / for he and his should
be holy at his commandment. But of this message ye king took no regard / for
as says mine auctour, he was not most wysest prince, but was ruled by his
household servants, and belyued every light tale that was brought to him /
and over that he was so lyberal that it was of wise men accounted more
prodygalyte than lyberalitye. As Charles not wythstandyng this message of ye
duke held on his iournay / coming nere unto a wood, he was suddenly met
of a man like unto a beggar which said unto hi^ whither go thou sir king /
beware thou go no farther for thou art betrayed / and into the hands of thine
enemies thine own meyny shall deliver the* with this monyssion of this poor
man / the king was astonyed, and stood still, and began to muse. In which
study he so being / one of his folowers which after him bare his spear, sleped
upon his horse back / and in his so slepyng let his spear fall upon the helmet
of his fellow* with which stroke the king was suddenly fered, thinking his
enemies had commen unawarely upon him wherefore he in a gere drew his sword
and laid about him at the geynest, and slew.iiii. of his knights or he were
refrayned / and took therewyth such an endelye fere, that he fell therwyth
dystraughte.

wherefore he was to a place there by brought, and lay there in point of death
a long season after, in so much that the fame ran that he was ded. But by
prayers and other great deeds of charity done for him / lastely he recovered
and returned unto Paris. And for he was not yet returned to his perfyghte
health / his two uncles than being that one duke of Berry, and that other duke
of Burgone, took upon them by auctoryte of the estates of the land, to rule
the realm for that season / in which season diverse officers were altered and
changed. The king thus contynuyng his lykenes / many interludes and games were
devised for the kings recreacyon and comfort.

And upon a season he being lodged in the queen's lodging in the subarbes of
saint Marcell / diverse noble men of the court made a dysguysynge, and
apparayled them in lynnen clothes glewed unto their naked bodies with pytche /
and florisshed them with diverse colors and oils so that they were covered
all except the faces / and thus apparayled with torche light entered the
Chaumbre where as the king was, and there in goodly manner showed their disport
/ so that the king was therewith well contented.

But were it of rechelesnesse or of some ^uyl disposed person / fire was put to
the vestures of the disguysers / the which anon was upon such a flame, that
no man there could quench it. wherefore the said disguysers being by reason
of pytche and oils grievously turmented, ran into pyttes and waters which
they might sonest attain unto / and so with great dyffyculte saved them
self.

In mean time whereof, the chau^ber being with the same tired, grew in so
great a flame, that in short while the more part of that lodging was
consumed / to ye great fere of ye king and other astates tha^ there being
present, and augmentynge again of his former sykenes / so that certain
appoyntementes to be holde^ between him and Rychard king of England, were for
that time put of.

IN the.xvi. year of this Charles / the marriage of peace between both realms
was concluded and fynysshed at Calays / as before I have showed to you in
the.xix. year of king Richard. And that triumph fynysshed / Charles at the
co^templacyon and prayer of the king of Hungry, sent unto him Phylyp earl of
Arroys, with diverse other knights in good noumber, to aid ye said king
again the Turkys. The which after that they had there a season warred / the
capytaynes and the more party of the Frenchemen, of the Turkys were dystressed
and slain / and many taken prisoners to their great charge.

This Charles thus contynuyng his likeness / two freres of saint Augustynes
order being desirous of money, took upon them to cure the king. And after
they had shaven his head and mynistred to him medicyns / the king daily febled
in such wise yt he was nigh deed. For which co^syderacyon / they examyned by
philosophers and doctors of physyke and founden vncunnynge, were degraded of
their presthode, and after behedded. To this folly were these fretes brought,
by the excytynge of the duke of Burgoyne as the common fame went.

In the.xix. year of this Charles the land of France was grievously vexed with
the plage of ipydymye / of which sykenesse a great multitude of people dyed.
And that year was there also seen a blasynge star of wonderful bygnes, with
stremes apperynge to me^nes syghte of most fervent brennynge. In this year
also Charles herynge of ye subduyng of king Richard, sent into England two
of his household knights / requyrynge king Henry the fourth than newelye made
king, to send home his daughter Isabell latelye married unto king Rychard,
with such do war as with her was promised.

In doing of which message king Henry took such dyspleasure, that as says
Gagwinus mine auctour, he threw the said two knights in prysone / where
through one of them named Blanchet dyed in England, and that other called
Henry, after great sykenesse returned into France. And shortly after king
Henry sent the said dame Isabell unto Calays / where she was ioyously
received of the Frenchemen, and so conveyed unto her said father, which as
yet was not of his sykenesse cured. By reason whereof among the lords of
France, eueryche of them coueytyng to have rule, great dyssencion and malice
began to kendle / and specyallye between the dukes of Orleaunce, of Burgoyne,
and of Berry. Than the duke of Orleaunce ente^dyng to promote his cause /
unknowing the other lords, allied him with ye duke of Geldre, and stre^ghthed
him with.v.C. men of his, and so entered the feeldes of Paris. And in like manner
ye duke of Burgoyne with a strong company kept an other cooste of ye country.

Natwythstandyng by means of other lords these two dukes were kept a sunder /
and at lenghte yt duke of Orleyaunce by the kings commandment that somewhat
was than amended, was ordained regente of the realm. The which anon as he
was set in auctoryte / fell to all rauyne, and oppressed the people with
cotydyan taskes and tallages / and ye spiritual men with dymes and other
exaccyons. wherefore by reason of the studyentes of Paris, he was at length
discharged of that dignyte, and the duke of Burgoyne for him put in auctoryte.
Than the duke of Orleyaunce being discontented, yode unto Luce^bourgth a town
in high Almayne, and sought again aid of the duke of Geldre foresaid. But by
his friends he was so aduertysed, yt with his own folks he returned into
France. But yet the malice and strife a twene him and the duke of Burgoyne
seized not.

About this season or soon after, dyed the duke of Brytayne. And as affermeth
the auctour before named / king Henry ye.iiii. married his wife. whereof hering ye
duke of Burgoyne, with a company of.vi.M. knights entered Brytayne / and there
by strength took from her, her.iii. sons named John^, Richard, and Arthure /
and presented them unto king Charles. In ye xxii. year of this Charles, was
borne of Isabell his wife a man child, which also was named Charles / the
which after the death of his father, unto ye great aduersyte of all the realm
of France, was king of that realm / and contrary the appointment taken a
twene Henry the.v. after king of England, and this Charles the father now of
France king / as after shall more appear in the story of the said king
Henry the fyfte.

In this year also was dame Isabell sometime wife of Richard latelye king of
England, married unto Charles eldeste son of the duke of Orleyaunce. And
John^ the eldyste of the.iii. forenamed sons of the duke of Brytayne lately
deed / took to wife Margarete ye daughter of king Charles. And Phylyppe duke
of Burgoyne dyed soon after / leaving an heir after him named John^. The
which after he was gyrde with the sword of the duchye of Burgoyne / he anon
by evil entysynge and counsel, areryd war again the duke of Orleyaunce, to
the great dysturbaunce of all the realm. For the said duke of Orleyaunce was
a prince of a wonderful high courage, and desirous of great honor / and
after the saying of Gagwynus coueyted to be king of France. The which went
to Auyngnyon / where as than sat the.xiii. Benet tha^ pope during the scisme,
and admytted by some of the Cardynalles after the death of Clement ye.vi. To
which Benet the said duke made great labor, to depryue the Uniuersite of
Paris from ye great auctoryte yt it at those days stood in / which was of
merueylous auctoryte than, as says the forenamed auctour. In this while thus
endurynge the land full of myseryes and aduersites / the queen which yt much
favored the dukes party accompanied with the said duke rode to take her
dysporte of hunting in to the country of Meldon. To which place she sent
letters unto the Dolphyn by ye duke of Bauary her brother, that he with his
wife which was daughter unto the duke of Burgoyne, should come for to dysporte
them. whereof John^ thanne duke of Burgoyne being warned / suspected the
queen, that she with aid of the duke would conueye the Dolphyn into Germanye,
and there to hold him at their pleasures. And to e^peche that purpose / he i^
all have sped him toward ye Dolphyn / and contrary the mind of the duke of
Bauarye which than was upon his way with the said Doulphyne toward the
queen, returned him and lodged him in a strong castle called Lupar. whereof
herynge the duke of Orleyaunce / assembled to him a company of.vi. thousand
knights and came again toward Paris, where as that time the duke of Burgoyne
was. And he herynge of ye dukes coming, made him strong to receive him. To
whom the cytezens of Paris were favorable and aydynge, for the evil will
that they before bare unto the duke of Orleyaunce / and also for they hoped by
him to be defended from taskes and tallages. Thus contynuynge the prouisyon
upon both parties to mete shortly in plain battle / such polytike means
was found by a noble man called Mountague, that a concord and unity was for
that time by him set atwene the said dukes. And for that new occasyon should
not by presence kyndle atwene them / therefore ye duke of Orleyaunce with his
company was sent into Guyan, to war upon the englysshemen / and that other
unto Calays to lay syege unto that town. The which before had prepared a
wonderful engyne set upon whelys / by the strength whereof he thought to
wreke great dysturbaunce unto the said town / and as says mine auctour
Gagwyne, was in great hoope to recover it again to the subieccyon of the house
of France. But that hope was soon dyspayred / for it was not long after or
the said duke by the king was countermaunded and returned. And the duke of
Orleyaunce, after he knew that rescous were coming from Bordeaux / he removed
his siege laid by him to Burgus a town of Guyan / and so returned into
France, to his co^fusyon as after shall appear.

IN the.xxvii. year of this Charles / the former malice and envy contynuyng in
the breasts of the said dukes of Orleyaunce and of Burgoyne / as the said duke
of Orleyaunce was going toward his lodging in the night of the.x. day of
Decembre, fell upon him certain knights, of the which one named Rafe
Auctouyle was leder / and slew him nere unto a gate of the city of Paris
named Barbet gate.

After which murder fynysshed / ye said sir Rafe with his adherentes fled
unto the place of the earl of Artoys, where the duke of Burgoyne used
accustomably to resort. And ye deed corpse was soon after by such as came to
ye exclamacyo^, with also a servant of his with him slain / borne into ye
next houses. when the rumor of this murder was blown about ye city / anon
Lewys uncle unto the king and than king of Scecyle, the dukes of Berry and of
Burbon with other, drew thither / and there with lamentacyon beholdynge the
corpse, commanded prouisyon to be made for the buryenge of it within the
monastery of Celestynes / where upon the second day following, he was buried
with great pomp. whom among other lords followed to his buryenge the duke of
Burgoyne, not without great suspicyon of the said murder. And that enterrement
with due obseruaunce fynysshed / auctoryte was given unto.ii. knights named
Roberte Tuyller and Peter Orpheuer, to make enquery for the murder of this
prince. whereof the duke of Burgoyne being ascertayned, voyded the city, and
brake the bridge of saint Maxence after him, that pursuit after him should not
be made / and so hastily spedde him, that that night following he came to
Andwarpe, which is upon an.C. mile from Paris. when Charles the king hard of
the escape of ye said duke / feryng lest he would accuse him to be consentyng
unto that evil deed, sent unto him comfortable messages / so that the said
duke without war restyd all that winter, sometime in Arthoys, and an other
while in Flaunders at his pleasure. In the which pastyme he sent into diverse
places of France sundry accusacyons of the duke before slain, that he
ente^ded to depose the king, and to take upon him the rule and governance of
the realm, and to have poisoned the said king, as by diverse tokens by him
affermed for perfourmau^ce of the same. And also that the said duke of
Orleyau^ce was cause of fyrynge of ye disguysers garments before showed, to
the end to bring the king in more danger of syckenes, or else to be consumed
with the same fire / with sundry other distamacyons, as leuyenge of taskes and
imposicyons of the people, to his singular advantage and hougely enrychynge,
whereby he might the sooner attayn unto his said purpose. Thus contynuyng this
great unkindness atwene the duke of Burgoyne, and the son and other of his
blood of ye duke of Orleyaunce / the said duke again the beginning of the
year, herynge that the king and the queen were departed from Paris to Charters,
assembled to him a strong power of Hola^ders and other, and came unto Paris,
in which city he much trusted / to the end to cause the king, ye queen, and
the Doulphyn, to whom he had married his daughter, for to return unto
Paris. And to strength his party, he brought with him wyllyam earl of
Hanster / which wyllyam was a man of great strength and allyaunce, and had
married his sister unto the duke of Burgoyne foresaid / and his daughter and
heir unto one of king Charles sons / and was gossyppe unto the queen. For
which said, consyderacyons, the said earl entendynge the weal of that
realm of France, labored such ways and means, that by him for that time a
concord and unity was driven and made atwene the two dukes of Orleyaunce and
Burgoyne, with assured oaths and necessary acts to that concord belonging /
and the king with his retynewe was again returned unto Paris. These dukes
thus appeased, and the duke of Burgoyne again restored to the governance of
the realm / assocyate unto him the king of Nauerne, which varyed not from
his fathers unstable condycyons / so that by him new occasyons of stry^e and
varyaunce were moved atwene the said dukes and their allies. For first they
sought occasyon again the forenamed Mountague, a man of great wisdom and
honor in the kings court, and especyall friend unto the duke of Orleyaunce
/ and by their malice and untrue surmyses finally put to death. And one
named Peter Essayer or Sayer tha^ prouoste of the city of Paris or gouernoure,
they admytted to the rule of the kings treasoury / and other diverse offices
such as were any thing favored of the duke of Orleau^ce, they clearly
dyscharged. The which for their relefe and comfort resorted unto the said
duke, showing to him all ye demeanure of their adversaries / adding thereunto,
ye all such conuencyons concerning the amyte atwene him and the duke of
Burgoyne before sworn and enacted, were clearly adnulled and broken. with
these tidings the duke being fyred with new malice, accompanied to him the
dukes of Berry, of Burbon, and of Alenson, the earls of Rychemounte, of
Alyberte, and of Armenake, with other nobles not a few / by whose counsels he
determined to be avenged upon the duke of Burgoyne and other his fautours.
whereof the said duke being monisshed, drew him toward Paris, and strengthed
the fortresses as he yode. To this duke of Burgoyne was brother the duke of
Brabande named Anthony, a man of great polycye and wisdom / the which
forecastynge the great shedynge of christen man's blood, with many other
inconuenyences lykely to have ensued of this varyaunce atwene these two dukes,
made such affectuous labor, that with great diffyculte he pacifyed them
again for that time / and brought them to personal communicacyon, and lastely
to amyable and frendely departing. After which concord and amyte thus again
concluded / the duke of Burgoyne departed into Pycardy, leaving behind him
the fore named Peter Essayr to rule the city of Paris. The which shortly
after drew to him such persons, as before time had vexed and distourbed ye
duke of Orleyaunce friends and servants with in that city. By whose means
the said Peter sought first occasyon again a knight named Uenyt Thorney / and
by false suggestyon smote first of his head, and after did his body to be
hanged upon the common gybet of Paris, in dyspyte of ye said duke as testifyeth
mine Auctoure. wherewith ye duke being wondersly amoued / resembled his
knights, and spedde him toward a town named

And for to strength another town named, he sent a certain nombre of his
knights / chargyng them with the dwellers to withstand the force of his
enemies. Of this hearing the duke of Burgoyne / anon gathered unto him the
noumbre of.xvi.M. flemynges and Pycardes / and sped him unto the said town of
And so with his instruments of war assailed the gate of the said town,
which leads toward saint Quintyne, yt in short space the said Flemynges
wan the enter of the town. In which mean season the dwellers with the other
soudyours by a back way or water, whereof the manner by this auctoure is not
expressyd / left the town, and yode unto the duke of Orleyaunce being as yet
at the foresaid town of when the Flemynges were entered the town, and found
it deserte of people and pillage / were it for that they lacked their pray, or
for other cause here not showed / they took such unkindness again the duke,
that for prayer nor yet for manasses they would not with him any longer tarry /
but returned them home in all hastily speed toward their own country. So
that the duke was feign to withdraw / and for the more surety, to ask aid
and help of Englysshemen / and so was helped by the princes comfort Henrye
son of Henry the.iiii, as after shall be touched in the.xii. year of
the.iiii. Henry.

IN the.xxxi. year of this king Charles, which was the.xii. year of the.iiii.
Henry than king of England / the duke of Orleyaunce seeing his enemy was
turned from Paris, caused such Brydges as before by his said enemy were
broken to be reedyfyed. By the which he passed the river till he came to saint
Denis / where as than he fande a capytayne a noble man named sir John^ Cabylon
of the dukes of Burgoyne, there left by him to strength the town. The which
sir John^, co^sideryng ye wekenes of ye said town. with also his lack of
strength / yielded him and the town unto the duke / swerynge to him by solemn
oath, that after ye day he should never bear arms again him. In this pastyme
an other capytayne of the Burgonyons called Gancourt, secretly by night wan
upon the french men the bridge of saint Clodalde. But not long after the
duke of Orleaunce sent thither certain Brytons / the which again recovered
the said bridge, and held it unto ye said dukes use. In which time and
season the duke of Burgoyne recouerynge his strength, passed the bridge of
Melent, and so came unto the city of Paris / and the day following with help
of the cytesyns recovered the abouesayd bridge of saint Clodald, and dystressed
upon a.M. Brytons, which had the ward of the same. Then the duke of Orleaunce
made out of saint Denis over Said bridge toward Paris. whereof that other
duke being warned, refused the city / and with the king than there being
present, removed with the Dolphyne to the town called Stamps / and sent ye
earl of March named Iamys, with a certain knights to a town named to
strength it again the duke of Orleaunce. The which of the said dukes
knights was encountered with and taken, and so sent to prison. whereof herynge
the duke of Burgoyne, in short process after returned unto Paris with the
king and dolphyne / and the duke of Orleau^ce yode to a town called Seyntclowe.

And in the.xxxii. year of this said king Charles, by counceyll of the duke of
Berry and other, seeing that the said city of Paris was so let again him with
also the king and the dolphine, sent a noble man of his host named Alberte
unto Henry the iiii yet king of England, to require him of aid to withstand
the tyranny of the duke of Burgoyne, that with his complyces entendyd to
subuerte the realm of France. To this request king Henry gave good ear,
and lastely granted to his petycyon / and sent thither as says the French
cronycle, Thomas his son duke of Clarence / also ye duke of york, with John^
earl of Cornewayle, accompanied with.viii.C. knights and sowdyours, and a
thousand archers. The which company, when they were landed in France, and
herd yt the French lords were in treaty of peace, and no man to the^ gave
wages as they tofore were promised / fell upon a town called and it ryffled /
and therein took as prisoners the abbot of that monastery with other, and
conveyed the^ to Bordeaux, and after into England / where for their fynaunce
and other money due of old by the French king, as affermeth Gagwyne, they
remained many years after. And that the Englysh men were thus departed, albeit
that in the English cronycle and.xiii. year of the forenamed king Henry, of
them is other report made / the lords of France returned to their old
disce^cyon and continued in long strife / whereof the cyrcu^staunce were long
and tedyouse to tell, and to show the vnstablynesse of them, how some while
the duke of Orleaunce was favored of the king and the dolphyne, and there
again the duke of Burgoyne cleyne out of conceyte. The which co^tencyo^ thus
enduryng king Henry ye iiii. dyed / and Henry his son ye.v. Henry, was admitted
for king of England after him / that shortly after sent his ambassadors unto
the French king, arynge of him his daughter Katheryne in marriage as affirms
the french book. But diverse other writers show, yt he asked the hoole lands
due to him within the realm of France, by reason of the composicion made in
time passed, atwene his progenytour Edward the third, and John^ than king of
France. And for he was dysdeynously answered / he therefore made upon them
sharp war, as in the.iii. year of ye said Henry after some deal does
appear. By reason of which war, the cyuyle battle or strife ye long while
had co^tynued among the french men, than did aswage. For in the.iii. year of
this Henry, which was the.xxxv. year of this Charles / the said Henry invaded
ye realm of France, and had at Egyncourte a tryumphant victory / as in the
said third year of Henry the.v. is more at length declared. Than it follows
in the story, after many towns and strong holds by the english men in
sundry places of France opteined / in ye.xxx. and.viii. year of this Charles,
a french man named ye lord of the I Will of Adam and John^ Uyllers in proper
name, gatheryng to him a company of tyrauntes to the nombre of.CCC. or mo /
whereof many were old servants of the kings household, and than put out by ye
Dolphyn and other that than had the rule of the king / by treason of a clerk
opteyned the keys of one of the Gates of Paris, and so entered the city by
night / and by a watch word among them devised, assocyate to them many
Burgonyons / and so being strong, yode where the king was, and gate ye rule
of his person. And that done, all such as they might find that than bare any
rule, they slew by one mean and other / so that upon ye day following, was
nombred of deed corfes within the city upon.iiii.M. Among the which, of
noble men was Henry de Marle than Chaunceller of France, and Graun^pre with
many other. And for to have the more assystence of the common people / the said
Uyllers set ye king upon an horse, and ladde him about the city, as he that
had small reason to guide him self / and so ruled all thing as he and his
company would. wherefore the Dolphyn feryng to fall in the danger of so wild a
company, yode to Meldune or / and there called to him such as then were left
on line to withsta^de these tyrauntes, and ye duke of Burgoyne than being
within the city, and compasser of all this myschefe as some construed and
demed. After which company to him gathered he returned to the city of Paris,
and assailed one of the gates. But when he saw ye cytezens took party
again him, he thought his travail lost. wherefore without great assaute
making, he called thence his knights, and so departed again to the place
which he came fro / and from thens unto Thuron, in appeasynge the countries
and towns as he went, which at those days were far out of frame. And than
in the.xxxix. year of the said Charles / king Henry the.v. landed with a
strong power at a place called Touke in Normandy / and after laid syege to
many strong holds and towns and them wanne, as Cane, Phaleys, Roan, and
other / as in the.vi. year of the said Henrye following is more at length
declared. In time of which war thus made by king Henry / the Dolphyn and
the duke of Burgoyne, either of them provided to defend the malice of the
other / in so much that as testyfyeth the french cronycle, the duke was
aduysed to have taken party with the Englisshemen. This saying as witnesses
an auctour named Flower of hystoryes, which touches in laten many gestes and
deeds done by kings of England / says that the French men bring in that,
for to excuse their infortune and cowerdyse / by reason whereof they lost not
all only their land, but also the honor and name of the same. Than lastely
the duke being of mind by exortacyon of Phylyppe Iosquyne and John^ de
Tolongn^, with also a lady called the countess of Great / the duke was
reconsyled unto the Dolphyne / and a day of metynge appointed at Monstruell,
where either of them should be acco^panyed with.x. lords only without mo. At
which day the said princes with their assygned lords being assembled / many
reasons and arguments were laid and replied upon both sides. By occasyon
whereof one of the Dolphyns company suddenly drew his knyfe and struck the duke
unto the heart, so that he dyed soon after. which murder was supposed to be
done by a knight called Tanguyde de Chastell / which oftyme passed had been
famylyer servant with the duke of Orleyau^ce before slain, by means of the
said duke of Burgoyne.

After which murder thus committed / the land of France was brought in
much more strife and varyaunce / in so much that Phylyppe the son of the
said John^ duke of Burgoyne being than in Paris, and having the rule of ye
king and the city, took party with the English men again ye Dolphyn. By
reason whereof as sundry writers agree, king Henryes pertie was greatly augmented
and helped / so that finally king Henry opteyned much of his will / and
shortly after married dame Katheryne daughter of Charles king in the.xli. year
of his reygne, with assurance and promise of the inherytau^ce of the realm of
France to him and his heirs after the death of the said Charles / as to you
more plainly shall be showed in the.viii. year of the said Henry the fyfte.
After which marriage concluded and fynysshed / yet ye Dolphyn ceased not to
make new mocyons and sterynges. During the which, king Charles dyed in
Octobre / and was buried at saint Denis, when he had reigned in great trouble
upon the point of.xlii. years / leauyng after him as is affirmed by the
forenamed auctour Gaguyne, a son and Dolphyn of Uyenne called Charles, which
after was king of Frenchemen, and was named Charlys the.vii. or the.viii. after
some writers.

Henry the.iiii. Anglia.
HEnry the.iiii. of that name, and son of John^ of Gaunte late duke of
La^caster / took possessyon of the domynion of ye realm of England as before
in the end of the story of the second Richard is showed, upon the last day
of Septembre in the year of our lord a.M.CCC.lxxxxix / and in the.xix. year of
Charles ye.vii. than king of France. After which possessyon so by him taken,
anon he made new officers. As the earl of Northumberlande he made Constable
of England, the earl of westmerla^de was made Marshall, sir John^ Serle
Chaunceller, John^ Newebery esquyer tresorer, and sir Richard Clyfforde knight
keeper of ye priuey signet. And yt done, prouysyon was made for his coronacyon
again the day of translacyo^ of saint Edward the confessor next than
coming. And the parlyament was prolonged till the tuysdaye following the said
day of coronacyo^. Than upon the even of the said day of coronacyon, the
king within the tower of London made.xli. knights of the bate whereof.iii.
were his own sons, Coronacio^ of Henry ye fourth.
and.iii. earls, and.v. lords. And upon mondaye being the said day of saint
Edward and the.xiii. day of October / he was crowned at westmynster of the
archebysshop of Cau^torbury. After which solempnyte fynysshed an honorable
feast was holden within the great halle of westmynster. where the king being
set in the mydde see of the table / the archebisshop of Cau^torbury with.iii.
other prelates were set at the same table upon the right hand of the king /
and the archebysshoppe of york with other iiii. prelates was set upon that
other hand of the king / and Henry the kings eldest son stood upon the
right hand with a poyntlesse sword holdyng up right / and the earl of
Northhumberla^de newely made constable, stood upon the left hand with a sharp
swerd holde^ up right. And by either of those swerdes, stood.ii. other lords
holding.ii. scepters. And before ye king stood all the dynerwhyle the dukes of
Amnarle of Surrey and of Exceter, with other.ii. lords. And ye earl of
westmerla^de tha^ newly made Marshal, rode about the halle with many typped
staves about him, to se the room of ye halle kept, that officers might with
ease serve the tables. Of the which tables the chyefe upon the right side of
the halle was begun with the Barons of the five ports, and at the table
next the cupborde upon the left hand, sat the mayre and his brethren the
aldeme^ of London. which mayre than being Drew Barentyne goldsmyth, for
service there by him that day done, as other mayres at every kings and queen's
coronacion use for to do / had there a sta^dyng cup of gold. Tha^ after the
second course was served / sir Thomas Dymmoke knight being armed at all
peaces, and sitting upon a good stead, rode to the higher part of the halle /
and there before the king caused an herowde to make proclamacyon, that what
man would say that king Henry was not right full enherytoure of the crown of
England, and ryghtfully crowned / he was there ready to wage with him batayl
than, or such time as it should please the king to assygne. which
proclamacyon he caused to be made after in iii. sundry places of the halle in
English and in French, with many mo obseruaunces at his solemnyte exercysed
and done, which were long to rehearse.

Than this feast with all honor ended / upon the morn being tuysday, the
parliament was again begun. And upon wednysdaye sir Iohanne Cheyny that
before that time had occupied as speker of that parlyame^t, by his own labor
for cause of such infyrmytyes as he than had, was dyscharged / and a squire
named wyllyam Durwarde was elect to that room for him.

And thanne was the parlyament and the acts thereof last called by king
Richard adnulled, and set at naught / and the parlyamente holden in the.xi.
year of his reygne holden for ferme and stable. And the same day Henry the
kings eldeste son was chosen and admytted prince of walys, and duke of
Cornewalle, and earl of Chester, and heir apparaunte to the crown. Upon the
thursdaye following was put into the common house a byll, devised by sir John^
Bagot than prysonere in the Tower. whereof the effect was, that the said sir
John^ confessed that he hard king Richard say diverse times and at sundry
parlyamentes in his time holden, that he would have his entente and pleasure
concerning his own matters, what so ever betyde of the resydue. And if any
withstode his will or mind / he would by one mean or other bring him out of
life.

Also he showed farther, that king Richard should show and say to him at
Lychefelde, in the.xxi. year of his reygne, that he desired no longer to live,
than to see his lords and commons to have him in as great awe and dread, as
ever they had of any of his progenytours / so that it might be cronycled of
him, yt none passed him of honor and dygnite / with condycyon that he were
deposed and put from his said dygnytie the morrow after. And if ever it came
so to, that he should resygne his kyngelye majesty / he said his mind was to
resygne to the duke of Herforde, as to him that was most ableste to occupye
that honor. But one thing he feared, lest he would do tyranny again the
church. More over he showed by ye said byll, that as the said sir John^ Bagot
rode behind the duke of Norfolk toward westmynster / the said duke laid to
his charge, that he with other of ye kings counsel had murdered ye duke of
Glocetyr / y^ which at ye time to the said duke he denied, and said at ye day
he was on live. But within.iii. wekes after, the said sir John^ by ye kings
commandment was sent with other persons unto Calays / where for fere of his
own life, he saw ye said murdre put in execucion. And farthermore he showed,
yt there was no man of honor at that days more in favor with king Richard,
tha^ was ye duke of Amnarle / and that by his counsel he took ye lords, and
wrought many other things after ye said dukes aduyce. Also he showed, yt he
hard the king being than at Chyltrynlangley swear many great oaths, yt the
duke of Herforde now king, should never return into England / and rather
than he should again enheryte his fathers lands, he would give them unto the
heirs of the duke of Glocetyr, and of the earls of Arundell, and of warwyke,
at the last parliament adiuged. And farther he showed, that of all these
matters he sent the said duke knowledge into France, by one named Roger Smerte
/ admonastynge him to provide by his wisdom to wythstande the kings malice,
which showed him to be his mortal enemy. And lastelye he showed in the said
byll, that he hard the duke of Amnarle say unto sir John^ Busshey and to sir
Henry Grene / I had lever than.x^. thousand pound, that this man were deed.
And when they had axed of him which man / he said the duke of Herforde / not
for dread that I have of his person, but for sorrow and rumors that he is
lykely to make within this realm. which bylt was than borne unto the kings
parlyamente chaumbre, and there ^adde. After redynge whereof / the said duke of
Amnarle stood up, and said as touching such artycles as in that byll were
put again him, they were false and untrue, and that he would prove upon his
body or otherwise as the king would command him. Upon friday the said sir
John^ Bagot was brought into the said parlyament Chamber, and examyned upon
every article of his byll all the which he there affermed Than it was axed of
him what he could say ye duke of Exceter. where unto he answered and said,
that he could lay nothing to his charge. But there is he said a yoma^ in
Newgate called Halle, yt can say somewhat of you. Than said the duke, what so
ever he or ye can or list to say of me / this is truth that I shall here
express. Troth it is that the last time that the king was at woodstoke, the
duke of Northfolke and ye have had me to you into the chapel, and closed the
door upon us. And there ye made me to swear upon the sacrament there present,
to keep such counsayll as there ye should than show unto me. where after ye
showed to me, that ye could never bring your purpose about, while sir John^
of Gaunt late duke of Lancaster lived. wherefore ye were aduysed for to have
shortly after a cou^sayll at Lychefelde / by the which ye co^discended yt the
said sir John^ should be arested, in such manner that he should have occasyo^ to
disobey yt areste / by reason whereof by chance medley he should be there slain.
whereunto my cou^sayl tha^ was, yt the king should call his secret cou^sayll /
and if they agreed thereunto, I for my part would agree unto ye same. To which
saying sir John^ Bagot gave none answer. And upon saturday, the said Bagot and
Halle were both brought into the parlyament chau^bre, and there examined /
and after cou^trymaunded to prysone. And as soon as they were departed / the
lord Fitz water stood up and said. Most redoughted sovereign lord, where
as ye duke of Amnarle has before times and now lately, excused him of the
death of the duke of Glouceter / I say and will iustyfye it, that he was cause
of his death and that I shall prove upon his body if your grace be so contented.
To the contrary whereof the duke with sharp words answered / so that gaugys
of battle were offered of both parties, and sealed and delivered unto the
lord Marshall. Than parties began to be taken among the lords / in so
much that the duke of Surrey took party^ with the duke of Amnarle / and said
that all that by him was done, was done by constraynte of Richard thanne king
/ and he him self and other consented parforce to the same. where again the
said lord Fytz water and other replied. wherefore silence was commanded / and
forthwyth the fore named Halle for that he had confessed before the lords,
that he was one of them that put to death the duke of Gloucetyr at Calays /
he therefore was iuged to be drawn from the tower of London unto tybourne /
and there to be hanged and quartered.

The which execucion was done upon the mondaye following. Thus with these
causes and many other this parlyamente continued, till a new mayre named
Thomas Knolles grocer was admytted and sworn, upon the day following the
feast of Symonde and Jude.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xcix. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC. Grocer. wyllyam walderne. Thomas
Knolles. Anno.i. wyllyam Hyde.
IN this first year of king Henry the.iiii. yet lasting the foresaid
parlyament / upon the wednysdaye next following the feast of Symonde and Jude,
the lord Morley appealed the earl of Salesburye of treason / and cast his
hoode for a gage to try with him by battle. The which saying he replied /
and cast from him his gloves for a gauge, to prove his saying false and
untrue / which were there sealed and delivered unto ye lord Marshall. And
upon the monday passed an act, that no lord nor other person of no degree,
should after that day lay for his excuse any constraynte or coartynge of his
prince, in executynge of any wrong judgment or other crymynous and unlawful
deeds, saying yt for fear they durst none otherwise do / for such excuse
after that day shall stand him in none effect. And also that all sheryffes
may yield account in the escheker upon their oaths / and that they be
changed in all shyres yearly. And also that no lord nor other man of might,
give any gowns or lyuereys to any of their tenauntes or other persons,
except only their household and meynyall servants. And also than was
enacted, that all repyers and other fysshers from Rye and wynchylsee and other
coostes of the sees side, should sell it them self in Cornehyll and chepe and
other streets of London, to all men that would of them bye it / except
fysshemongers and other that would bye the said fysshe, to make sale of it
again.

And upon the wednysday following / was enacted that Richard late king of
England, should for his mys governance of the realm be holdyn in such
prysone as the king would assygne, during his natural life. And than the
king granted to all persons general pardones / so that they were fette out
of the Chauncerye by Alhalownetyde next following / except such persons as
were present at the murder of the duke of Gloucester. And in this while was the
archebysshop of Caunterbury restored to his church of Caunterburye / and
doctor Roger, which there was set by king Richard, was removed and set
in the sea of London / with the which he was right well contented. And thanne
was the earl of Arundelles son restored to all his fathers lands, with
diverse other before by king Richard dysheryted. And shortly after was the
said parlyament dyssolued / and every man had deycence to depart to his own.
And than was Richard late king had unto the castle of Ledes in Kente, a^
there kept. And prouisyon was hade at wyndesore for the king to ^epe there
his Chrystmas. In which pastyme the dukes of Amnate, of Surrey, and of Exetyr,
wit^ the earls of Salesburye and of Gloucester, with other of their affyny^ /
made prouisyon for a dysguysynge or a mummynge to be shewe^ to the king upon
Twelf the nyght^ / and the time was nere at hand and all thing ready for the
same. Upon the said.xii. day came secrete^ye unto the king the duke of
Amnarle / and showed to him that he with the other lords before named, were
appointed to slay him in the time of the foresaid dysguysyng showing /
wherefore he aduysed him to pro^yde for his own suretye. At who'e warning the
king secretelye d^parted from wyndesore / and came the same night to London.
whereof the said lords being ware, and that their counsel was bewrayed /
fled in all haste westwarde. But the king caused hasty pursuit to be made
after the^ / so that shortly after the duke of Surrey and the earl of
Salysbury were taken at Syrcetyr / where they were straight behedyd, and their
heddes sent at London and set upon the bridge. And at Oxenforde were taken
sir Thomas Blont and sir Benet Sely knights, and Thomas wyntercell esquyre /
the which were there hedyd and quarteryd, and their hedes sent to London
bridge. And at Pytwell in Essex was taken sir John^ Holland duke of Exetyr /
and after brought to Plasshy a place fast ^y, where he was behedyd / and after
^ys hedde was sent to London and let there with the other upon (...) bridge
pyght upon a stake. And (...) about the same time at Bry^o^e was taken the
lord Spencer than earl of Glouceter and there be^^dyd, and his head sent unto
London bridge. And in the same year, s^^ Barnarde Brokeys, sir John^ Se^, sir
John^ Maundeley, and sir Iohi Fereby knights and clerks, we taken as
prisoners in the tower of London / and soon after foriudged, ^^nged and (...)
/ and their heddes ^^so set upon London bridge. In ^hyche passetyme, Richard
late king was removed from the castle of Ledys in Kent, and sent unto
Pou^tfreyt castle.

In this year also as before is towched in the.xix. year of the.vii. Charlys /
king Henry sent unto C^^eys Isabell late queen of England, and wife unto
Richard lately king / and with her great treasour and many ryce Iewellys, as
te^yfyeth the English cronycle / and there received by the Frenchmen
undersafe conduyte passing, and by them conveyed unto her father into France
/ and after married unto Charlys son and heir to the duke of Orleaunce, as
before I have showed in the.xxii. year of her said fathers reygne.

Than it follows in the story of king Henry / when he had fermely
considered the great conspyracy again him by the forenamed lords and other
persons entendyd and imagyned to his distruccyon / and releuynge of Richard
late king he in avoiding of like danger, provided to put the said Richard
out of this present life / and shortly after the opinion of most writers he
sent a knight named sir Pyers of Exton unto Pountfreyte castle / where he
with.viii. other in his company, fell upon the said Richard late king, and
him myserably in his chaumber slew / but not without reuengemente of his
death. For or he were felled to the ground / he slew of the said.viii. four
men, with an axe of their own. But lastely he was wounded to death by the hand
of the said sir Pyers of Exton, and so dyed.

After execucyon of which dedely deed, the said sir Pyers took great
repentance, in so myche that lamentably he said, alas what have we done / we
have now put to death him that has been our sovereign and drad lord, by the
space of.xxii. years / by reason whereof I shall be reproched of all honor
where so I after this day become / and all men shall redounde this deed to my
dishonor and shame. Other opynyons of the death of this noble prince are left
by writers, as by way of famyne and other. But this of most writers is
testyfyed and alleged.

when the death of this prince was publyshed abroad / he was after open vysaged
laid in ye mynster of Pou^frayt, so yt all men might know and se that he was
deed. And the.xii. day of March following / he was with great solempnyte
brought thorough the city of London to Paul's / and there laid open vysaged
again, to the end that his death might be manyfestly known. which was
doutfull to many one / and specially to such as ought to him favor. And than
after a few days the said corpse was carried unto the freers of Langley, and
there entered. But after he was removed by king Henry the.v. in the first year
of his reygne / and with great honor and solempnyte conveyed unto the
monasterye of westmynster / and there within the chapel of saint Edward
honorably buried upon the south side of saint Edwardes Shryne, with his
epytaphy upon his toumbe as follows. Prudens and mundus Richardus iure
secundus,
Per fatum victus, iacet hic sub marmore pictus.
Verax sermon fuit, and plenus ratione.
Corporae procerus, auimo prudens vt omerus.
Ecclesiam fauit, elatos subpeditauit.
Quemuis prostrauit regalia qui violauit.
which verses are thus to be understand in our vulgar and Englysh tongue as
follows.

Parfyght and prudent Richard by right the second,
Vaynquysshed by fortune lies here now graven in stone /
True of his word, and thereto well resounde /
Semely of person, and like to omer as one
In wordely prudence / and ever the church in c^ie
Vphelde and favored, castyng the proud to ground,
And all that would his royal state confound
But yet alas, though that this metyr or ryme
Thus does enbelysshe this noble princes fame,
And that some clerk which favored him some time
List by his conning, thus to enhau^ce his name*
Yet by his story apereth in him some blame.
wherefore to princes is surest memory,
Their lives to exercise in virtuous constancy.
when this mortal prince was thus deed and graven / king Henry was inquyet
possessyon of the realm / and fande great richesse yt before time to king
Richard belonged. For as witnesses Polycronycon, he fande in king Rychardes
tresoury.iii. hundredth thousand li. of ready coin / beside iewelles and other
rich vessels which were as much in value or more. And over that he espied in
the keeping of the tresourers hands, an C. and.l.M. nobles / and jewels and
other stuff that cu^teruayled the said value. And so it should seem ye king
Richard was rich, when his money and iewelles amu^ted to.vii.C.M. li. And in
the month of Octobre and end of this mayers year / was brent in smythfelde of
London a priest named sir wyllyam Sawtry, for certain poyntts of heresy.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.i. Goldsmyth. John^ wakele. John^
Fraunces. Anno.ii. wyllyam Ebot.
IN this second year of king Henry and month of Frebruary / were drawn and
hanged for treason a knight named sir Roger Claryngeton at tybourne with two
of his servants, the pryour of Land, and eyghte freres mynours of gray
freres / of the which some were bachelors of dyuynyte.

And in this year began a great dyscencion in walys, between ye lord Gray
Ryffyn, and a welsheman named Howen of Glendore. which Howen gathered to him
great strenghte of welshemen, and did much harm to that country / not
sparynge the kings lordshyppes nor his people / and lastly took the said
lord Gray prisoner, and held him prisoner, till contrary his will he had
married the said Howe^s daughter. After which matrymony fynysshed / he held
the said lord still in walys till he died, to the kings great dyspleasure.

wherefore the king with a strong army spedde him into walys, for to subdue
the said Howen^ and his adherentes. But when the king with his power was
entered ye country / he with his fawtours fled in to the mountains and held
him there / so that the king might not win to him with out dystruccion of his
host. wherefore finally by the aduyce of his lords, he returned into
England for that season.

In this year also whete and other graynes began to fail / so that a quarter
of whete was sold at London for.xvi. s / and derer should have be^, had not ben
the prouysyon of merchants that brought rye and rye flower out of Spruce,
wherwyth this land was greatly sustained and eased.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.i. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.ii. wyllyam Uenour. John^ Shadworth.
Anno.iii. John^ Fremynghm^.
IN this year / the co^duyte standing upon cornhylle in London, was begone to be
made. And in the somer following / sir Thomas Percy earl of worceter, and sir
Henry Percy son and heir unto the earl of Northumberlande, gadered a great
power / and upon the day of saint Praxede the vyrgyne or the.xxi. day of
July, The battle of Shr^wysbu^y.
met with the king nere unto Shrowysbury, and there gave unto hi^ a cruel
battle / but to their own confusion. For in that fight ye said sir Thomas
Percy was taken, and his neuew the foresaid sir Henry with many a strong man
upon their party was there slain. And upon ye kings party, the prince was
wounded in the head / and the earl of Stafforde with many other slain. And
the.xxv. day of July following at Shrowysbury, the said sir Thomas Percy was
beheded / and after his head carried to London, and there set upon the bridge.

In this batayl was many a noble man slain upon either party. And it was the
more to be noted vengeable / for there the father was slain of the son, and
the son of the father, and brother of brother, and neuewe of neuewe. And in the
month of August following, the duchess of Brytayne landed at Fulmouth in the
province of Cornwayll, and from the^s was conveyed to wynchester. where in
short time after, king Henry married her in the cathedral church of the said
city. And soon upon was the eldest daughter of king Henry named dame Bla^che
married at Coleyn to the dukes son of Bayer.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.ii. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.iii. Richard Merlewe. John^ walcot
Draper. Anno.iii. Robert Chichele.
IN this year and.xiiii. day of the month of Septembre, was ye foresaid
duchess of Brytayne and wife of ye king, received with great honor into the
city of London / and so by the mayre and the cytezyns conveyed unto
westmynster. where upon the morrow following she was crowned queen of England,
with great honor and solempnite / the cyrcumstaunce whereof I pass over.

In this year also, Rupertus which after the deposynge of wessenselans, was by
the electours of the empire, and by auctoryte of Bonyface the^^r* than pope,
admytted for Emperor of Rome, and came into England with a goodly company,
only to se the country and commodytyes of the same. The which of the king
was honorably received and fested / and lastely conveyed by the king toward
the sea side, where either departed from other with exchange of rich and
precious gift. For this Rurpartus was named of writers a man of excellent
bounte and largess. And he gave more lyberally / for so much as all the time
of his being in England, he lay here at the kings costs. And while he was
at London he was lodged at the house of saint Iohann^s in smythfelde.

This year also upon saint Laure^ce even or the.ix. day of August / a lord of
Brytayne named the lord of Castyle in French, la^ded within a mile of
Plymmouth with a great company of Norma^s and Brytons / and came unto the said
town, and lodged there all night and spoiled and robbed the said town. And
upon the day following when they had done what they would / they returned
again to their ships, with plente of pyllage and prisoners such as they
fande.

Anno domini.M.CCCC.iii. Anno domini.M.CCCC.iiii. Thomas Fawconer. wyllyam
Askam. Anno.v. Thomas Pooll.
IN this year soon after Ca^delmasse, the foresaid lord of Castyle trusting
to win a l^ke enterprise, as in the year passed he had done / he being
accompanied with a strong navy of French men and Brytons, was encountered with
the English floot within.ii. miles of Deermouth at a place called Blak^pooll*
where after long and cruel fight ye said lord was slain, with the more
party of the people, and diverse of his ships taken / as witnesses the
English cronycle with diverse other English auctours. But the French book
excuses this scomfyture of Frenchmen, and says that by treason o^ a Gascoyne
named Pe^y^ or Perot de Languyle, which showed unto the said lord Castyle
that he had espied certain English ships in a Greek lightly without
resystence to be taken / caused the said lord to make sail toward the said
town of Dartmouthe. where after he had continued a certain time his course /
he espied the hoteflo^e of English men which made toward him / and so at the
said Blake pool encount^^d and faughte, and lastely escaped the danger of his
enemies as testyfyeth the said French cronycle* but ^atte unhurt / for he was
so wounded in that fight that he dyed shortly after.

And the month of Apryll following, the duke of Clarence with the earl of Ke^t
and many other lords, took shyppynge at Meregate, and so sailed unto Scluce in
Flanders. And after the said duke had there refresshed him and his company,
he took shyppynge again / and holding his course toward Swyn^e, he was
encou^tred with.iii. great carykes of Ieane / the which he assailed, and
after long bekerynge them took being laden with marchau^dyse / and so with
that pray returned to Cambre before wynchelsee / in the which haven the said
goods were ca^ted and shared. But how it was, by varyau^ce among them self
or otherwise / one of the said carykes was suddenly fyred and so consumed. For
restytucyon of which goods and ships, ye merchants Ianue^ce made after
great and long suit to the king and his cou^sayl / in which passetyme they
borrowed cloth, wolle and other marchaundyses, amountyng unto great and notable
sommes of diverse merchants of England. And when they saw that they might
have none hope of recovery of their lost / they suddenly avoided the land,
and lafte ye foresaid notable sums unpaid, to the great hynderaunce and
utter undoing of many English merchants.

In this year a yoman named wyllyam Serle, sometime yoma^ of king Rychardes
Robys, was taken in the marches of Scotla^de and brought unto London / and
there in the guildhall areygned for the murder of the duke of Glouceter at
Calays. Upon which murder he was attaynt and conuyct / and upon the.xx. day
of Octobre he was drawn from the tower unto tyborne, and there hanged and
quartred / and his head was after set upon London brydg, and his.iiii. quarters
were sent to.iiii. sundry good towns.

Anno domini.M.CCCC.iiii. Anno domini.M.CCCC.v. wyllyam Lowfte. John^ Hyende
Draper. Anno.vi. Stephen Spylman.
IN this year and month of January, were certain courses of war ron in
smythfelde, between sir Edmu^de earl of Kent, and the lord Moryfa Baron of
Scotla^de, upon ye challenge of the said scottysshe lord. But the earl of Ke^t
bare him so valy auntly, that to him was given ye price of that journey to his
great honor. And in the same year, sir Richard Scrope than archebisshop of
york, and ye lord Moubraye tha^ marshal of England, with other to them allied
/ for grudge that they bare again the king, gadered unto them great
strength, ente^dyng to have put down the king as the ^ame than went. whereof
the king being enfourmed / in all haste sped toward them, and met with them
on this side york. where after askyrmysshe by the said lords made / they were
tha^ taken and after presented unto ye king at york / where they were both
demed to suffer death for their rebellyo^. A Bishop beheded.
Than when the bishop came unto the place of execucion / he prayed ye
bowcher to give to him.v. strokes in the worship of christ's five wounds, and
for his more penance. At eueryche of which.v. strokes / king Henry being in
his lodgyng, had a stroke in his neck / in so much that he demed that some
person there being with him present had stryken him. And forthwyth he was
stryken with the plage of lepyr / so that than he knew it was the hand of
god, and repented him of that hasty judgment without auctoryte of the church.
And soon after god showed many miracles for the said bishop / which called
the king unto the more repentance.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.v. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.vi. Henry Barton^. John^ woodcok
Mercer. Anno.vii. wyllyam Crowner.
IN this year, dame Lucye the duke of Myllanys sister came into England / and
was married unto sir Edmunde Holande earl of Kent, in the church of saint Mary
ouerey in Southwarke upon the xxiiii. day of January / where the king was
present and gave her that day unto the priest. And after the solempnyzacion of
the marriage was fynysshed / she was with great honor conveyed unto the
bishop of wynchesters palace there fast by / where that day for her was
holden a sumptuous and pumpous feast. And in the same year and month of May,
dame Phylyppe the yongeste daughter of king Henry, accompanied with diverse
lords spyrytuall and temporal, was shypped in the North, and so conveyed
into Denmark / where in a town or city called London she was married unto ye
king of the said country.

In this year also sir Thomas Ramston^ than constable of ye tower, by
ouersyghte of his botemen as he would have passed the bridge toward the said
tower, was drowned. And in the same year, for the grievous co^playntes that
before time had been showed and euydently proved before the kings counsayl,
and also before the mayre and his brethren, of the great dystruccion of frye
and young fysshe by reason of werys standing in diverse places of the river of
Thamys, whereby the fysshe of the said river was greatly mynysshed and wasted
/ and that also if the said werys so continued, the said river should in short
process be dystroyed: wherefore the mayre and his brethren the aldermen as
conseruatours of ye river, made such labor unto the king and his counsayll,
that they opteyned commyssyon to pull up all the werys that stood between
London and.vii. miles beyo^de Kynston^ / and in likewise for such other as
stood between London and Grauysende, as well crekes or several grounds and
other / the which commyssyon by the said mayre and his officers was this year
put in execucyon. And in this year sir Robert Knolles knight, the which in
France and Brytayne had before time done so many victorious acts, as in
ye.xxxiii year of Edward the third and other years of his reygne is somdele
towched / made an end of his work at Rochester bridge and chapel at the
said bridge foot / and dyed shortly after, when he had new reedyfyed the
body of the white friars church standing in Fletestrete, and done to that
house many notable benefytes / where after he was buried in the body of the
said church. which church and place was first founded, by the auncetoures
of the lord Gray Cotnore.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.vi. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.vii. Nycholas wotton. Richard
whytyngton^ Mercer. Anno. viii. Godfrey Brook.
IN this year and month of Nouembre, one named the walche clerk, apeched a
knight called sir Per^yuall Sowdan of treason / for trial whereof day was
given to the^ to fight in smythfylde the day above said. At which day either
apered, and there faught a season. But in the end the clerk was recreau^t.
wherefore immedyately he was spoiled of his armor, and laid upon an hardyl,
and so drawn to tyborne, and there hanged.

And in this year also, sir Henry earl of Northumberlande and the lord
Bardolf, coming out of Scotla^de with a strong company, to the dyspleasure
and hurt of the king as they intended / were met and encountered with the
gentylmen and commons of the north, and foughten with and dystressed / and
after struck of their heddes, and sent them to London / which thanne were
pyghte upon the bridge among many other.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.vii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.viii. Henry Ponfreyt. wyllyam
Stondon^ Grocer. Anno. ix. Henry Halton.
IN this year and month of Decembre, began a frost / the which continued by
the space of.xv. wekes after or thereupon / so that birds were wo^derly
famysshed and dystressed by violence of the same.

And in the same year / sir Edmo^de of Holande earl of Kente, was by the king
made admyrall of the sea. The which scowred and skymmed ye see right well and
manfully / and lastly landed in the coost of Brytayne, and besieged there a
castle named Briak, and wan it by strength. But in the wynnyng thereof he was
so dedely wounded with an arowe in the head, that he dyed shortly after. And
than his corpse was brought again into England / and buried among his
au^cetours. And in the beginning of this year, was slain and murdered the duke
of Orleau^ce in Paris / like as before it is more at le^gthe showed in
ye.xxviii. year of Charles ye.vii. king of france.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.viii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.ix. Thomas Duke. Drew Barentyne
Goldsmyth. Anno. x. wyllyam Norton^.
IN this year the seneshal of Henaude came into this land with a goodly
company of Henauders and other strangers / for to do and parfourme certain
faytes of arms again diverse nobles and gentylmen of this land. And first
the said Seneshall challenged the earl of Somerset / and other of his company
other ge^tylmen of this land, as after shall apere. For executyng of which
dysporte / the place of smythfelde by the king was appointed, and barred and
fensed for the same intent / and day set for every man to be ready by the.xi.
day of. At which day the seneshall as chalenger entered ye field pompously.
And after with a goodly company of men of honor, was the earl of Somerset
brought into the same / where they ran together certain courses and executed
other faytes of armies / whereof the pryse and honor was given by the herawdes
unto the earl, so that he wanne that day great honor.

Than the second day came in a knight Henauder as Chalengeoure. To whom as
defendaunt came sir Richard of Arundell knight / the which ran certain
courses on horsebak, and after went together with axes on foot where sir Rychard
was put to the worse, for the Henauder brought him upon his kne.

Than the third day came in an other knight of Henaude Chale^ger. To whom as
defendaunte came in sir John^ Cornewayl knight / and so well bare him, that he
put the stranger to the worse. Upon the.iiii. day came into the field an
esquyre Henauder. Again whom ran the son of sir Johan Cheyny. The which
at the second course set his stroke so egerly, that he over threw the
Henauder horse and man / for which deed ye king dubbed him forthwith knight.
Upon the.v. day. played together an Henauder and a squyre called John^ Steward
/ which day also the Englyssheman wan the worship. Upon the.vi. day
skyrmysshed there together an Henauder and an English esquyer named wyllm^
Porter / the which gatte such worshype of the same Henauder, that the king
for his guerdon made him streyghte knight. Upon the.vii. day in likewise
played insemble an Henauder and one John^ Sta^dysshe esquyer / y^ which
semblably for his prowess and manly dealyng, was also of ye king dubbed
knight. And a Gascoyn^ that the same day wan ye price of an other stranger,
was immedyatly made knight of ye king. And upon the.viii. day or last day of
this chalenger, came into the field.ii. Henauders. Unto whom came.ii.
brethren being sowdiours of Calays / ye which bekered together a long season,
so ye either pertye received plentye of good strokes, till peace by ye king was
commanded. And so this challenge was fynysshed, to ye great honor of ye king
the which after feasted these strangers, and with rich gifts sent and
returned them again to their countrees.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.ix. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.x. John^ Law. Richard Marlowe
Irenmonger. Anno.xi. wyllyam Chycheley.
IN this year and month of March / a tayloure of London named Johan Badby,
was burnt in Smythfelde for heresy: all be it that by means of the prince and
one master Courtnay thanne Chauceller of Oxenforde, he was for a while
reconcyled, and promised to leave that error. But when the sacrament^ of ye
altar was brought tofore him / he despised it, and would in no wise therein
believe / wherefore he had as he deserved. Of whom a versifier in reproach of
his error, made these ii. verses following. Hereticus credat, vt perustus ab
orb recedat,
Ne fide^ ledat, satan hu^c baratro sibi predat.


The which verses are thus much to mean in english. The perverse heretyke,
though that he do brenne,
And from this world be rased utterly /
No force, syn that he list not kenne
Our sacred faith / but it right pervers^y
^yst of his will erroniously to reply,
What force thought satan with his eternal pain
Do him reward, syn he will not refrain.


IN this year also and month of Apryll, within the lystes of Smythfeld was
foughte^ a sore fight between an esquyre named Glouceter Appellau^t, and an
other esquyre called Arthur Defendau^t. The which acquyted them either party
so ma^fully, that the king of his especyall grace seeing they were both so
well fyghtyng men, took the quarrel into his hands, and pardoned the offense
to either party.

And this year the market house called the Stokes, sta^dynge by the church of
saint Mary wolchurch of London, was bego^ to be edyfyed. In this year also the
king held his parlyame^t at westmynster. A byll p^^ up in the parlyame^t
During the which ye commons of this land put up a byll to the king, to take
ye te^porall lands out from spyrytuall me^nes hands or possession. The effect
of which byll was, yt the te^poraltes dysordinatly wasted by me^ of the church,
might suffyce to find to ye king.xv. earls, xv.C. knights, vi.M. and ii.C.
esqiers and an. C. houses of alms to the releef of poor people mo tha^ at ye
days were within England. And over all these foresaid charges, ye king might
put yearly in his cofers.xx.M. li. Provided ye every earl should have of yearly
re^t.iii.M. mark / every knight an. C mark and.iiii. plough land / every
esquyre.xl. mark by year with.ii. plough land / and every house of alms an.
C. mark, with ouersyght of.ii. true seculers unto every house. And also with
provision yt every towneshyppe should keep all poor people of their own
dwellers which might not labor for their living. with condition yt if mo fell
in a town tha^ the town might maynteyn, tha^ the said alms houses to releue
such townshyppes. And for to bear these charges they alleged by their said
bylle, yt the te^poralties being in the possession of spirytuall me^, amounted
to.iii.C. and.xxii.M. mark by year. whereof they affermed to be i^ ye see of
Canterbury, with the abbays of cristes church, of saint Augustyns,
Shrowysbury, Coggeshale, and saint Osiys / xx.M. mark by year. In the sea of
Durhm^ and other abbeys there, xx.M. mark. In ye see of york and abbays
there, xx M. mark. In the sea of wynchester and abbays there, xx.M. mark. In
the sea of London with abbays and other houses there, xx.M. mark. In ye see of
Lyncoln^, with ye abbays of Peterbourth, Ramsay, and other, xx.M. mark. In the sea of Norwych, with the abbeys of Bury and other, xx.M. mark. In the sea of
Hely, with the abbays of Hely, Spaldi^g and other, xx.M. mark. In the sea of
Bathe, with the abbay of Okynborne and other.xx.M. mark. In the sea of
worceter, with ye abbays of Euishm^, Abyngdon^ and other, xx.M mark. In the sea of Chester with precinct of the same, with the sees of saint David, of
Salysbury, and Exceter with their precinctes, xx.M. mark. The abbays of Ravens
or Reuans, of fountaynes, of Geruons, and diverse other to the nombre.v. mo.xx.
thousand mark. The abbays of Leyceter, waltham, Gysbourne, Herton^ Tircetir,
Osney and other, to the nombre of.vi. mo, twenty thousand mark. The abbays of
Douers, Batell, Lewis, Cowentre, Daue^tre, and Courney, xx.M. mark. The abbays
of Northampton^, Thortone, Brystow, Kelyngworth, wynchesco^b, Hayles,
Parchyssor, Fredyswyde, Notley, and Grymmysby, xx.M. mark.

The which foresaid su^mes amou^t to the full of.iii.C.M. mark. And for the
odd.xxii.M. mark / they appointed Herdforde, Rochester, Huntyngdon^,
Swyneshede, Crowlande, Malmesbury, Burton^, Tewkisbury Du^stable, Shirborn^,
Taunton^, and Bylande.

And over this they alleged by the said byll, that over and above ye said
su^me of.iii.C. and.xxii.M. mark / diverse houses of relygion in England,
possessed as many temporaltyes as might suffice to find yearly xv.M. priests
and clerks / every priest to be allowed for his stypende vii. mark by year.

To ye which byl none answer was made, but that the king of this matter would
take delyberacio^ and aduycemente / and with that answer ended, so that no
ferther labor was made.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.ix. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.x. John^ Pen. Thomas Knolles Grocer.
Anno.xii. Thomas Pyke.
IN this year, asquyer of walys named Ryze ap dee, the which had long time
rebelled again ye king and ^rotysfyed the party of Howan of Glendore / was
taken and brought to London / and there upon the.ix. day of Decembre,
drawn, hanged, and quartered / and his head set upon the bridge among the
other. In this year also was the guylde halle of London begone to be new
edyfyed and of an old and little cotage, made into a fair and goodly house as
it now appears.

Anno domini.M.CCCC.x. Anno domini.M.CCCC.xi. John^ Raynewell. Robert Chycheley
Grocer. Anno.xiii. wyllyam Cotton^.
IN this year and upon the.xii. day of Octobre, were three flodes in thamys /
which thing no man than living cowde remember that like to be seen.

And in this year was the lord Thomas son to the king, created duke of
Clarence. And in this year, the king at the request of the duke of Orleaunce,
sent over the foresaid duke his son to aid the said duke of Orleau^ce again
the duke of Burgoyne. Of whose acts and his company / I have before made
report in the story of Charles the.vii. king of France.

And in this year, the king caused a new coin of nobles to be made, which
were of less value than the old noble by.iiii. d. in a noble.

In this year also the king created John^ his son duke of Bedforde. And his
other son Humfrey duke of Glounceter. He made also sir Thomas Beauforde earl
of Dorset / and the duke of Anmarle he created duke of york.

Anno domini.M.CCCC.xi. Anno domini.M.CCCC.xii. Rauffe Leuenhm^. wyllyam
waldren^ Mercer. Anno.xiiii. wyllyam Seuenok.
IN this year and.xx. day of the month of Nouembre, was a great counsayll
holden at the white freers of London. By the which it was among other things
concluded, that for the kings great iournay that he intended to take in
vysytyng of the holy sepulcre of our lord / certain Galeys of war should be
made, and other purueaunce concerning the same iournay. whereupon all hasty
and possible speed was made. But after the feast of Crystemasse, while he was
making his prayers at saint Edwardes shryne to take there his leave, and so to
speed him upon his iournay / he became so syke, that such as were about him
fered that he would have dyed right there. wherefore they for his comfort bare
him into the abbottes place, and lodged him in a chamber / and there upon a
paylet laid him before the fire, where he lay in great agony a certain of
time. At length wha^ he was commyn to him self not knowing where he was / he
freyned of such as than were about him what place yt was. The which showed to
him that it belonged unto the abbot of westmynster, and for he felt him self
so syke / he commanded to ask if that chamber had any special name. where
unto it was answered, that it was named Jerusalem. Than said ye king, Loving
be to the father of heaven. Death of king Henry the.iiii.
For now I know I shall dye in this chamber, according to ye prophecye of me
beforesayd, that I should dye in Jerusalem. And so after he made him self ready
/ and dyed shortly after upon ye day of saint Cuthbert or the.xx. day of
March / wha^ he had reigned.xiii. years, v. months, and.xxi. days / leuynge
after him.iiii. sons / that is to mean Henry that was king. Thomas ye was
duke of Clarence, John^ duke of Bedforde, and Hu^frey duke of Glouceter /
and.ii. daughters, that one being queen of Denmark, and that other duchess of
Bar, as before is showed.

when king Henry was deed / he was conveyed by water unto Feuersham, and from
thens by land unto Caunterbury / and there entered by ye shryne of saint
Thomas.

Anglia. Henrici quinti.
HEnry the.v* of ye name, and sonn^ of Henry the.iiii began his reygne over
this realm of England, the xxi. day of ye month of March In the year of our
lord and end of the same.xiiii.C. and. xii. And in the.xxxii. year of Charles
the.vii. yet king of France. And the.ix. day of Apryll following, which was
that year passion sunday, being a day of excedyng rain, he was crowned at
westmynster. This man before the death of his father, applied him unto all vice
and insolency / and drew unto him all riottours and wyldly dysposed persons.
But after he was admytted to ye rule of the land / anon and suddenly he became
a new man, and turned all that rage and wyldnes into sobernes and wise sadness,
and the vice into co^sta^t virtue. And for he would co^tinewe ye virtue, and
not to be reduced thereunto by the famylyarytye of his old nyse company / he
therefore after rewards to them given, charged them upon pain of their lives,
that none of the^ were so hardy to come within.x. mile of such place as he were
lodged, after a day by him assygned.

In this beginning of this king Henry / the old mayre and shryues continued
their offices to the terms accustomed.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.ii. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.iii. Rauffe Leuyngham. wyllyam waldern
Mercer. Anno.i. wyllyam Seuenok.
Anon as king Henry was crowned, and the solempnyte of the feast of Eester
was passed / he sent unto the friars of La^gley where the corpse of king
Richard was buried / and caused it to be taken out of the earth, and so with
reverence and solempnyte to be conveyed un to westmynster / and upon the
southe side of saint Edwardes shryne there honorably to be buried by queen
Anne his wife* which there before time was enterred. And after a solemn
interment there holden / he provided that.iiii. tapers should bre^ne day and
night about his grave, while the world endures / and one day in the weke a
solemn Dirige, and upon the morrow a mass of Requiem by note / after which
mass ended, to be given wekely unto poor people.xi. s. viii. d. in pens. And
upon the day of his annyuersary after ye said mass of Requiem is song, to be
yearly destrybuted for his soul.xx. li.iii. d. And about Heruest time, was sir
John^ Oldcastell knight appreched for an heretyke and committed to prison. But
how it was he escaped for that time out of the tower of London / and so yode
into walys, where he lyned over.iiii. years after.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xiii. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xiiii. John^ Sutton^. wyllm^ Crowmer
Draper. Anno.ii. John^ Mycoll.
IN this year and month of January / certain adherentes of the forenamed sir
John^ Oldcastell, entendynge the dystruccion of this land and subuercio^ of
the same / assembled them in a field nere unto saint Gyles in great nombre.
whereof the king being enfourmed took ye field before them, and so took a
certain of them. Among the which was sir Roger Acton^ knight, sir John^
Beuerley priest, and a squire called sir John^ Brown. The which with xxxvi.
mo in nombre were after conuycte of heresy and treason / and for the same
hanged and brent within ye said field of saint Gyles.

And in the same year, John^ Claydon skynner and Richard Turmyne baker, were
for heresy burnt in Smythfelde.

And this year the king held his parlyamente at Leyceter. where among other
things, the foresaid bylle put up by the commons of the land, for the
temporaltyes being in ye church, as it is before touched i^ the.xi. year of
ye.iiii. Henry, was again minded. In fere whereof, lest the king would
thereunto give any comfortable audyence as testyfye some wrytters, certain
bysshoppes and other head men of the church, put ye king in mind to claim
his right in France. And for the exployte thereof, they offcede unto him great
and notable sums. By reason whereof the said byll was again put by, and the
king set his mind for the recovery of the same / so that soon after he sent
his letters unto the French king, concerning that matter / and received from
him answer of dirision as affermeth the English book.

And Gaguynus says in his French cronycle, that king Henry sent his
orators unto Charles the vii. thanne king of France, for to have dame
Katheryne his daughter in marriage / with other requests touching his right
and enherytaunce. whereunto it was answered by the counsayll of France, that
the king had no leyser to entende such idelnesse. whereupon king Henry made
quycke provision for to war upon the French king, as after appears.

In this year also, by procureme^t of Sigismunde thanne Emperor / a great
counsayll or synod of bysshoppes were assembled at a city in high Almayne
called constaunce, for the union of the church. And for to avoid the Scisme,
which began in the.xiiii. year of Charles the.vi, as before in the
said.xiiii. year is touched. In the said synod or general counsayll, was
the.xxiii. John^ than pope put down or resygned by his volunte. And by
auctoryte of ye same cou^sayll / the opynyons and heresy of wyklyf were utterly
anulled and dampened / and two of his disciples there present named John^ Hus
or Husse and Ierom the herytyke, were there burnt

And many notable acts for the well of ye church there were enacted. And
finally when the said cou^sayl had endured nere upon the term of iiii. years
/ they there by an hole asset chase a new pope, and named him the.v. Martyne.
which occupied Peter's chair.xiiii. years and odd months, as indubitat
pope, and so other after him.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xiiii. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xv. John^ Mychell. Thomas Fawcomer
Mercer. Anno.iii. Thomas Aleyn.
IN this year after the king had made suffycient provision for all things
concerning his war to be made upon the French king / he with his lords
honorably acco^panyed, rode thorugh London upon the.xviii. day of Iuny,
toward the port of Southamton^ / where he had appointed his host to mete
with him. And while the king there was shyppynge of his people / diverse of his
lords, that is to say sir Richard earl of Cambrydge and brother unto ye duke
of york / which sir Rychard beryng the name of Langley, had wedded dame
Anne the daughter of sir Roger Mortymer earl of March and wolster / by whom he
had issue Isabell, which after was married unto the lord Boucher earl of
Essex, and Richard which after was duke of york and father to king Edward
ye iiii. To whom also wasasse^tyng sir Richard Scrop than treasourer of
England, and sir Thomas Graye knight, were there arrestyd for treason, and
areygned, and so examyned upon the same, that the.xxix. day of July following
they were all three behedyd. After which execucyon so done / the king upon the
morrow or shortly after, with his lords took shyppynge there, and landed at a
place called Kydcaus in Normandy. And the.xvi. day of Auguste / he said syege
unto the town of Harflew, and assailed them by land and by water / and
continued so his syege unto the xxii. day of September. At which day as
says the French Gaguinus, it was delivered by Albert tha^ there capytayne /
upon condycyon that king Henry might sauely win or pass to Calayes, and
so he being there, the town to be yolden unto him. But the French writer
Gaguinus vpholdeth the honor of the Frenchemen in all that he may / and
boroweth of his conscience for sparynge the troth in report of many things.
For after most writers, ye said town after sundry appoyntementes of rescouse
/ was delivered unto the king without any condycyon the day above. said.
where after the king had ordained sir Thomas Beauforde his uncle and earl of
Dorser capytayne of that town / he spedde him toward Calays.

Than the dolphyn with other lords of France, which at that time had the
realm of France in governance, for so much as the French king was vysyted
with such malady as before I have showed / brake the bridge to let ye king of
his passage over ye water of Sum. wherefore he was constrained to draw toward
Pycardy / and so pass by ye river of Peron^. wherefore the Fre^chme^ being
ware / assembled and lodged the^ at certain towns named Agyncourt,
Rolandcourt, and Blangy, with all the power of France.

And when king Henry saw that he was so besette with his enemies / he in the
name of god and saint George pyght his field in a plain between the said
towns of Agyncourte and Bla^gy / having in his company of hoole men that
might fight, not passing the nombre of.vii.M. But at those days the yomen
had their Lymmes at lybertye / for their hosyn were than fastened with one
point / and their iackes were long and easy to shote in, so that they might
draw bows of great strength, and shote arowes of a yerde long, beside the
hedde.

Than the king considering the great nombre of his enemies, and that the act
of Frenchmen stands much in over rydyng of their adversaries by force of
spereme^ / he therefore charged every boweman to ordeyne him a sharp stake, and
to pytche it a slope before him / and wha^ ye sperys came, somdeale to draw
bak, and so to shote at the horsemen. And at the proper request of the duke of
york, he ordained him to have ye vawewarde of ye field. And wha^ king Henry
had thus prouydently ordered for his battle over night / upon the morrow being
the.xxv. day of Octobre, and ye day of the holy martyrs Cryspyne and
Cryspinian / the king caused diverse masses to be songen. And where that night
before, the English host was occupied in prayer and confession / he thanne
caused the bysshoppes and other spyrytuall men, to give unto them general
absolucyon.

And that done / with a comfortable chere ordered his people as they should
fight, having unto the^ good and comfortable words / and so abode ye coming
of their enemies, which of diverse writers were and are remembered to be
about.xl. thousand fighting men.

The which about.ix. of ye cloak in the morning, with great pride set upon
the English host / thinking to have over ryden them shortly. But the
archers, like as before they were taught pyght their sharp stakes before them.
And when they saw the French galantes approach, they a little yode back and
received them as here after ensues.

The battle of Agyncourt.
THat is to mean, they shot at them so fervently, yt what with the shot,
and goryng of their horses with the sharp stakes, they tumbeled one upon an
other / so that he or they which ran formest, were the confusyon of him or
them that followed / so yt in a short while a great multitude of horse and men
were laid upon the ground. And after their shot spent / they laid about
them with their glaynes and axes, that by the great grace of god and
comfortable aid of the king, the vyctory fell that day to the Englysshemen /
and with little loss of their company. For after the opinion of sundry writers
/ were slain yt day of Englishemen, the dukes of york and of Suffolk / and
not over.xxvi. parsons moo. But of Frenchmen were slain that day after
English writers, over the number of.x. thousand. Albeit ye French Gaguinus
says, that of the English host were slain the duke of york, and with
him.iiii. hundredth men / and of the French host.iiii.M. men of name beside
other / which he numbreth not.

Also he affermeth to be horsemen at that field upon the French party.x.
thousand over and beside the fotemen / and that the Englyshemen were nombred
at.xv.C. spear men, and xviii.M. of yomen and archers.

At this said battle was taken prisoners, the duke of Orleau^ce, the duke of
Burbon^, ye earl of Ue^dosme, of Ewe, of Rychemount, and Bursigaunt thanne
marshall of France / with many other knights and esquyres, which were tedyous
to name, to the number of.xxiiii. hundredth and above, as witnesses the book of
mayres.

And in this battle were slain of the nobles of France, the dukes of Bar,
of Alanson, and of Braba^, viii. earls, and barons above.lxxx. with other
gentylmen in cote armours to the number of.iii. thousa^de and above. By reason
of which pyllage the Englysshemen were greatly auaunced. For the Frenchmen
were so assuryd of vyctory by reason of their great number, that they brought
the more plenty of richesse with the^, to the end to bye prisoners either of
other / and also after the victory by them opteyned, to show unto Englysshemen
their pride and pompous array. But god which knew the presumpcion and pomp
turned all thing contrary to their minds and ententes.

when the king by grace and power of god, more tha^ by force of man had thus
gotten this tryumphau^t vyctorye, and returned his people from the chase of
their enemies: tidings were brought unto him, that a new, host of Frenchmen
were coming toward him. wherefore he anon commanded his people to be
enbatayled / and that done made proclamacions thorough the host, that every
man should slay his prisoner. By reason of which proclamacyon, the duke of
Orleaunce and the other lords of France were in such fere, that they anon by
license of ye king sent such word unto the said host, that they wythdrewe
them. And the king with his prisoners upon the morrow following took his way
toward his town of Caleys / where he rested hi^ during this mayres time.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.v. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.vi. wyllyam Cambrydge. Nycholas wotton
Draper. Anno.iii. Aleyn Euerarde.
This year and.xxix. day of November, as the mayre rode toward westmynster
for to take his charge / a pursyuau^t of ye kings came with letters unto the
mayre, gyuyng to him knowledge of the kings good speed. wherefore the bishop of
wynchester than chau^celler of England having like wyttynge, came that day to
Poulys, and there caused Te deum to be songe^ with great solempnyte. And in
like wise was like obseruaunce done in ye parysshe chyrches and other relygyous
houses thorough the city of London.

And at Poulys, by the said chau^celler standing upon the steps at the
quyerdore, were the said tidings denounced unto the people. And upon the morrow
following, ye said chaunceller wych other bysshoppes and te^porall lords, with
a general procession of the mayre and comynaltye of the city yode from Poulys
to westmynster on foot, and offered at saint Edwardes shryne, and so returned
to their own houses. Thanne king Henry with his prisoners shypped at Calays,
and so landed at Dover. And after he had been at Caunterbury, and there made his
offering unto saint Thomas / he than spedde him on his iournay till he came
unto Eltham, where he rested him a season.

Upon the.xxiii. day of Nouembre he was met with the mayre and his brethren
upon the Blak heth / and so conveyed with all honor thorugh the city unto
westmynster, wherein diverse places of the said city, as the bridge and cross
in chepe, were ordained certain pagentes to the kings great comfort. The
manner whereof, with all processyons and other seremonies I pass over for
letthyng of the time.

In this year also Sigismunde Emperor of Almayn came into England. And in the
month of May, by the kings commandment and.vii. day of the said month,
the mayre and brethren met him upon Blakheth. And at saint Georges met him
the king and his lords in great no^bre / and so conveyed him unto westmynster
with great honor, and lodged him in his own palace. And shortly after was the
feast of saint George holden at wyndesore / which before was deferred for his
coming. In time of which solempnyte during ye dyuyne service / the king
kept the astate. But in syttyng at the feast* the Emperor kept ye astate. The
service and sotyltees of which feeste, with sitting of ye lords after their
degrees I pass over. And shortly after came the duke of Holande into this
land, for certain causes concerning the Emperor. whom the king honorably
received / and lodged him in the bisshoppes palace of Ely in Holbourne. And so
the king entreated and chered these strangers that for the season that they
tarried in England, they lay here at the kings cost and charge.

And ye emperor and he were made knights of the garter / and also a great
duke of ye emperors named duke of Bryga. And when the emperor had tarried
upon.vii. wekes and odd days in England / which after some writers was to
thentent to set an unity and rest between the French king and king Henry:
he after took mind to return into Almayne* whom the king for his comfort
and needs that he had to do at Caleys, accompanied him thither / where either
with gifts and thanks departed from other. And the duke of Hollande went with
the emperor into Hollande and other countrees.

while the king was thus at Calys / to him came thither under saufe conduyt the
duke of Burgoyne, and had with the king diverse communycacyons / and after
returned to his own. And soon after ye king returned into England / and
came to westmynster upon saint Lukes even or the.xvii. day of October.

This year and season while the king was at Calayes, yt is to mean upon the
day of Assumpcyon of our blessed lady / the duke of Bedforde accompanied with
the earl of March and other lords, had a great conflycte and battle with
diverse carikkes of Ieane and other ships. where after long and sore fight,
ye honor fill to him and his Englysshemen / to the great loss of the
strangers both of their men, and also of their ships / as some drowned,
and.iii. of the grettest of their carykkes taken.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.vi. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.vii. Roberte wodtyngton. Henry Barton
Skynner. Anno.v. John^ Couentre.
This year the king holding his parlyame^t at westmynster / to him was
granted by auctoryt of the same a Fyftene. And by a conuocacyon of the clergy
was granted to him a dyme, for the mayntenaunce of his warrys. wheruppon new
prouysyon was made for his second vyage into France.

By authoryte of this parlyament also, Richard which was son and heir of
ye earl of Cambrydge, which earl was put to death at Southampton, was created
duke of york / which after was married unto Cecyle ye daughter of Daraby earl
of westmerlande, by reason that he brought his wardshyp of the king. By the
which lady Cecyle he had Henry that dyed young, Edward that after was king,
Edmunde earl of Rutlande, Anne duchess of Exceter, Elyzabeth duchess of
Suffolk, George duke of Clarence, Richard duke of Glouceter and after king,
and Margaret duchess of Burgoyne. And wha^ all thing was ready for the kings
vyage / he ordained John^ duke of Bedforde his brother protector of this land
in the time of his absence. And that done / he with his lords about
wytsontyde took his shyppyng at Southampto^, and so sailed into Normandye / and
landed upon La^mas day at a place called Took or Towke. And after he was with
his host there landed, for so much as he was warned of certain ships of
war ye entendyd to do some harm in England being than upon the sea: he
therefore to wythsta^de their malycyouse purpose, sent the earl of March, the
earl of Huntyngdon, with other, to scowre the sea. The which encountered the
said enemies / and after a long and cruel fight them ve^quysshed and
overcame. which fight was upon the day of saint Romayne or the.ix. day of
Auguste, as has the French cronycle. And of the French navy, was chyefe
capytayne the vycount of Narbon / which in that fight was taken with great
plenty of treasour. For as says Gaguinus, he with one Mountney an other
capytayne, to whom ye sowdyours wages was committed / of one assent of their
synguler lucre wythhelde the said wages. By reason whereof when they should
join in battle, many of them with their ships withdrew, and last their
capitayns in the danger of their enemies. But this is like to be a feigned
excuse of ye said Gagwyne, to save the honor of the Frenchmen / as he many
times semblably does in many places of his book.

Then to return unto king Henry / when he was thus landed, he sent unto ye
rulers of the town of Towke and had it unto him delivered. But the castle was
defended again him till saint Laurence day following / the which he gave after
unto his brother the duke of Clare^ce, with all the sygnory thereunto belonging.

And this done, the king spedde him toward Cane, and laid his syege thereunto
upon ye.xvii. day of the foresaid month of August. The which continued till
the feast of the Natyuyte of our lady / and than won upon ye perty yt the duke
of Clare^ce assawted. But the castle held by apoynteme^t, if no rescouse were
had till the.xiiii. day following. At which day ye said castle was delivered
with other.xiiii strong holds, which had before taken ye same apoyntme^t.
Than the king made the foresaid duke of Clarence capytayne of the said town
and castle. And in this passetyme were diverse other towns and strong holds
gotten, by diverse of ye kings retynew / as ye earl Marshall, the earl of
warwyke and other / ye which wan Lovers, Faloys, Newelyn, Cherburgth,
Arge^tyne, and Bayons the city, with many other strong abbays and pilys. Tha^
the king held there saint Georges feast, and dubbyd there.xv. knights of ye
Bath / and after co^tynued his wars during this mayres year, in wynnyng upon
the Frenchmen by apoyntementes and otherwise / whereof the cyrcumstau^ce were
very long to declare in order.

In this year also, and upon the festfull day of Ester, till a chance in
London / which to ye fere of all good cryste^ men is necessary to be noted. A
fraye on Eester day
For upon the high and sole^pne day, by excytyng of ye devil and ill
disposycio^ of.ii. women, that is to mean the wife of the lord Strange, and
ye wife of sir John^ Trussell knight / such unkindness fill between their two
husbands, yt either would have slain other within ye parysh church of saint
Du^stanes in the Eest. In pertyng of which persons diverse men were hurt and
sore wounded / and one named Thom^ Petwarde^ slain out of hand, which was a
freeman and fysshemo^ger of the cyty. Than lastly both frayers were taken and
brought unto the Cou^tour in ye Pultry. And for the said lord Strange was
demed culpable of ye begi^nyng of this fray / he therefore upon the so^day
following, and for suspendyng of the church, was denou^ced acursyd at Poulys
cross and in all parysshe chyrches of London. And finally he was demed to open
penance and did it / and made great amends unto the wife of the said Thomas
for the death of her husband.

And in the end of this year, where at London was sold for.ii. s. a busshell.

Anno domini.M.CCCC.xvii. Anno domini.M.CCCC.xviii. Henry Read. Richard
Merlowe. Iremonger. Anno.vi. John^ Gedney.
Sir John^ Oldcastell lord Cobham put to death.
IN this year sir John^ Oldcastell lord Cobhm^ / the which as before is showed
in the end of the first year of this king, escaped out of the Tower of
London / was in the month of sent unto London by the lord Powys out of walys.
The which sir John^ for heresye and treason was conuycte in the month of
following / and for the same drawn unto saint Gyles feld / where he was hanged
upon a new peyre of galowes with chains, and after consumed with fire.

And about that season, the person of wortham in Norfolk, which long time
had haunted Newmarket heth, and there robbed and spoiled many of the kings
subgettes / was now with his concubyne brought unto Newgate where he lastly
dyed.

And king Henry being still in Normandy / divided his people in three parts.
whereof one he reserved unto him self / the second he committed to the rule of
the duke of Clarence / and the third unto the earl of warwyke. which said
duke and earl employed their arms so well and valyauntly, that either of them
encroched sore upon the Frenchmen, and wanne from them many strong holds and
pyles. And the king after long syeges by him continued about Argentyne,
Cressy, saint Launde, and other / he then in ye end of this year, that is to
say upon ye day of the translacyon of saint Edward or the.xiii. day of
October / laid his syege unto the city of Roan / and continued the same till
the.xii. day of January following.

In the which passetyme the old mayre was changed to a new as follows. Upon
the.ix. day of October dyed John^ Bryan sheryfe / and for him was chosen to
that office John^ Parnes Draper.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xviii. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xix. John^ Bryan. wyllyam Seuenoke
Grocer. Rauffe Barton. Anno.vii. John^ Parnesse.
This year the foresaid syege about the city of Roan co^tynuynge / upon
the.xii. day of January foresaid, the Frenchmen offeryd to treat, which
treaty ye king admytted unto the erlys of warwike and Salysbury with other. And
for the French party, was appointed the captain of the city named sir Guy de
Bocyer and other. By reason of which treaty it was agreed, that ye said
captain upon the.xix. day of the said present month of January, at such an
hour as it should please ye king to assygne / should deliver unto such
persons as the king would appoynte the city and castle of Roan in all
peasyble wise / except the said city and castle be rescowyd by the dolphyne
of France before the said xix. day.

And the.xxii. day of the said month, the inhabytauntes of the said city to
pay unto the king.xv.C. scutes of gold / whereof two should always be worth
and english noble. And other.xv. hundred of like scutes, they should pay
upon the.xxiii. day of February next following. which couenauntes with many
and diverse other co^prysed to.xxv. artycles, were by the assurance of both
parties surely ratifyed and assured. And for no rescouse by the said dolphyn
or any other Frenchman, was made by the day above lymytted / therefore ye said
capytayne according to his bond and promysse, delivered the said city and
castle, upon the.xix. day of January before said being the day of saint
wolstan.

The winning of this city of Roan ascrybeth Gaguinus, unto ye ciuyle dyscord
that was between the cytesyns and their first capytayne named earl of Danmale
/ whom they expulsyd ye cyty with a strong power of Normans. But yet as he
affermeth, the cytesyns held the cyty till they were constrained for lack of
vytayll to eat horses, dogs, cattes, rattes, and other vermyn.

when king Henry had set ye cyty of Roan in an order / he then passed ye
countrees toward France / so that he subdued the cities and towns as he
rode. And the.xx. day of May he came to Troys in Cha^payne, where he was
honorably received.

In which passetyme, John^ duke of Burgoyne that before time had been the
occasyon of the murder of the duke of Orleaunce, was now slain in the presence
of the dolphyn / like as before I have showed to you in ye xxxix. year of
Charles the.vii. wherefore Phylyppe his son and duke after him, refused the
dolphyns party and drew him unto king Henry / and delivered to him the
possessyon of Charlys the French king and dame Katheryne his daughter, as
affermyth Gaguinus.

Then were means of concord and unity sought and labored by the Frenchemen,
in so effectual manner, that shortly after for a fynall peace to be had
between both realms / king Henry at Troys in Cha^payne forsayde by the means
of the said Phylyppe duke of Burgoyn, married the forenamed Katheryne, upon
Trynite sunday than being the.iii. day of Iuny.

Before solempnysacyon of which marriage a treaty and conclusyon of a peace
conteynyng.xxxvii. artycles between both kings was concluded. whereof ye
effect was, that king Henry should be admytted and named regent of France /
and yt Charles should be king for term of his life, and receive the issues
and profytes of the same / and queen Isabell his wife to enjoy her dower for
term of her life to queen's of France due and accustomed. And queen Katheryne
king Henryes wife, to have her dower in England to the value of.xl. thousand
scutes / which should be in value ten thousand mark English. And if the
ouerlyued king Henry / then she to have dower of the realm of France, to ye
value.xx. thousand frankes yearly to beleuyed of such lordshyppes as Blaunche
sometime wife to Phylyple Beaw held. And after the death and time of the
forsayde Charlys, the crown with all ryghtes belonging to the same of the
realm of France, to remain unto king Henry and to his heirs kings. B^d
for the said Charlys was vysyted with sykenesse / the king as regent should
have the hole governance of the said realm and defense of the same / and
specially again the dolphyne, which intended and did his uttermost power to
distourbe the said peace. And that the lords and nobles of France as well
spyrytuall as temporal shall make oath unto king Henry, to be obedyent unto
his lefull commaundmentes concerning the foresaid governance and defense /
and they with ye hedes and rulers of cytyes, castelles, and towns to maintain
and uphold the said peace to the uttermost of their powers / and after the
death of ye said Charles, to become his true subjects and lyege men. And that
al such lordshyppes as after that day should be be conquered or won fro the
Dolphyn and other dysobedyentes, that they should remain to the use of the
said Charles during his natural life. Provided that if any were won within
ye duchy of Normandy / that they should incontynently remain to king Henryes
use. And that after the dyscease of the said Charles, the duchy of Normandy
and all other lordshyppes thereunto belonging, to be as one monarchye under the
crown of France. And also that during the life of the said Charles / king
Henry should not name or write him self king of France. And that the said
Charles should in all his wrytynges name king Henry his most derest son
Henry king of England and enherytour of the crown of France. And that none
imposycyon or task should be put upon the commons of France, but to the
necessary defeuce and weal of the realm. And that by the aduyce of both
cou^sayles of the realms of England and of France, such stablysshed
ordynau^ces might be devised, that when the said realm of France should fall
to the possessyon of king Henry or his heirs, that it might with such unity
join unto the realm of England, ye one king might rule both kingdoms as
one monarchye / reserved always to either pryncypate or realm, all ryghtes,
lybertyes, fra^chyses, and laws / so that another realm should be subiecre
unto other. And that perpetual amyte and frendshyp with all famylyer
conversation, as well by byenge, selling, and all other lefull, to be co^tonued
atwene both subjects for ever / all customs and pryuyleges to either realm
to be paid and obeyed. And that king Charles nor Phylyp duke of Burgoyne,
should make any concord or pea^ with the Dolphyn of Uyen, without the assent
and agreement of king Henry. Nor he in likewise without the consent of the
said Charles and Phylyp. And the said Charles during his life, should
honorably be found and entreated / and to have in his household and about him
noble men of his own nacyon, with all other things concerning his estate /
and to be lodged in notable places of his realm, where the people to him should
be most obedyent.

After which artycles by the consentes of both princes well and nobly
ratysfyed and confermed, and solempnyzacion of the foresaid marriage ended /
king Henry with his people sped him toward Paris, where he was honorably
received. And when he had with his new wife rested him there a season / he
than with the duke of Burgoyne and diverse other lords of France, laid seyge
unto diverse towns which held upon the Dolphyns party, and them wanne by
strength or by appointment / and lastly laid syege and his ordenaunce about
a strong town named Meldune or Meleon, whereof was capytayne a noble warryour
named Barbasan, the which defended that town manfully. Than the king seeing
the foresaid sternesse of ye captain / beclipped that town with a strong
syege / lyenge himself on that side toward the wood, and the duke of Burgoyne
upon the other side again the temple or monastery of saint Peter / which
syege so con^^ued during this mayres year.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xix. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xx. Robert whytyngham. Richard
whytyngham Mercer. Anno.viii. Johan Butler.
THis year continued still the former syege about Meleon till about the mydle
of Nouembre. At which time the fore named capytayne sore famysshed, sought me
anes of treaty. By mean whereof it was agreed, that he with all other should
sauely avoid by a day lymyted / except all such persons as before time had been consenting unto the death of John^ lateli duke of Burgoyne. For the which
crime the forenamed capytayne named Barbasan was after accused with many other
/ and sent unto Paris, and there holden in prison. And that done king Henry
laid his syege unto a town called Melden. The which finally was also given
up by a like apoyntment. wherein were founden certain persons detected of ye
foresaid murder / for the which after due examynacyon made, they were hanged
upon an elmen tree standing by ye way ledynge unto Paris. when king Henry had
thus wrouthte much of his will in France / he took leave of his father the
French king / and with the queen his wife sailed into England, and landed at
Dover upon Candelmas day / leuynge in France for his deputye his brother the
duke of Clarence. Than the king sped him on his iournay toward London / and
came thither on the.xiiii. day of February. And the queen came thither upon
the.xxi. day of ye same month. But here for length of time I will pass over
the great and curyous ordinance provided by the cytezyns for the receyuynge of
the king and queen, as well of their ordinate metynge with them upon
horseback, as the sumptuous and honorable dyuyses prepayred within the city
to the kings and queen's great re^ioysynge. And forth I will proceed to show
unto you some part of the great honor, that was used and exercysed upon the
day of the said queen's coronacyon / which was after solempnysed in saint
Peter's church of westmynster, upon the day of saint Mathy the apostle or
the four and twenty day of February. After which solempnysacyo^ in that
church endyd / she was conveyed in to the great halle of westmynster, and
there set to dinner. Upon whose right hand satte at the end of the same table
the archebysshop of Cau^torbury, and Henry surnamed the rich cardynall of
wynchester. And upon the left hand of the queen satte the king of Scotts
in his astate / the which was served with coueryd mess like unto the
forenamed bysshoppes, but after them. And upon the same hand and side nere to
the bordes end, satte the duchess of york, and the countess of Huntyngdon.
The earl of ye March holding a ceptre in his hand, knelyd upon the right
side. The earl marshall in like manner knyled upon the left hand of the queen.
The countess of Kente satte under the table at the right foot / and the
countess Marshall at the left foot. The duke of Glouceter sir Humfrey ^as
that day ouerloker / and stood before the queen bare heded. Sir Rychard Neuyll
was that day caruer to ye queen / ye earls brother of Suffolk cupberer / sir
John^ Steward Sewar / the lord Clyfford panterer instead of the earl of warwyk
/ the lord wyllughby boteler instead of the earl of Aru^dell. The lord Gray
Ruthyn or Ryffyn naperer The lord of Awdeley amner instead of the earl of
Cambrydge. The earl of worceter was that day earl Marshall in absence of the
earl Marshall, the which rode about the hall upon a great courser, with a
multitude of typped staves about him to keep the room in the hall. Of the
which hall, the barons of the.v. ports began the table upon the right hand
toward saint Stephe^s chapel / and beneth the^ at the table sat the bowchyers
of the chauncery. And upon the left hand next unto the cupborde, sat the
mayre and his brethren alderme^ of London. The bishops began the table
foreagayne the barons of the.v. ports / and the ladies the table again the
mayre. Of which.ii. tables, for the bysshoppes began ye bishop of London and
the bishop of Durham / and for the ladies, the countess of Stafforde / and
the countess of March. And ye shall understand, that this feast was all of
fysshe. And for the orderyng of the service thereof were diverse lords appointed
for head officers / as steward, controller, surueyour, and other honorable
offices. For the which were appointed the earls of Northumberlande, of
westmerland, the lord Fitz Hughe, the lord Furneuall, the lord Gray of
wylton^, the lord Ferers of Groby, the lord Ponynges, the lord Haryngton^, ye
lord Darcy, the lord Dacre, and the lord Delaware.

The which with other orderyd the service of the feast as follows / and thus
for the first course.

Brawne and mustarde. Dedellys in Burneux Frument with Balien Pyke in Erbage
Lamprey powderyd Trought Codlyng Plays fried Marlyng fried Crabbys Leche
lumbarde florysshed Tartys.
And a sotyltye called a Pellycane syttyng on his nest with her birds / and an
image of saint Katheryne holdyng a book and dysputyng with the doctors /
holding a reason in her right hand, saying Madame le Royne, and ye Pellycan
as an answer Ce estia sign, et du roy, pur tenir joy, et a tout sa gent, esse
mete sa intent.

The second course.
Gely colored with columbyne flowers white potage or creme of almandes Breme
of the sea Counger Solys Cheuen Barbyll with Roche Fresshe Samon Halybut
Gurnarde Rochet broyled Smelth fried Creuys or lobster
Leche Damask witw the kings word or proverb flourysshed, Vne sanz plus.

Lamprey fresshe baken Flampeyne flourisshed with a scochon^ royal / and
therein.iii. crowns of gold plantyd with flower delyce and flowers of camemyll
wroughte of confeccions.
And a sotyltye named a Panter with an image of saint Katheryne with a whele
in her hand / and a roll with a reason in that other hand, saying, La Royne
ma fise, in ceste i will, per bon reason, aues renount.

The third course.
Dates in compost Creme motle. Carpe deore. Turbut. Tenche. Perch with goion.
Fysshe sturgeon with welkes Porperies roasted. Men's fried. Creuys de eawe
douce. Pranys. Elys roasted with lamprey. A leche called the white leche
flourysshed with hawthorne leuys and read hawys.
A march pain garnysshed with diverse fygurs of angellys / among the which was
set an image of saint Katheryne holding this reason, I lest escrit, pur voir
et eit, per marriage pure cest guerre ne dure. And lastely a sotyltye named a
Tigre lokynge in a myrrour / and a man sitting on horse back clean armed
holdyng in his arms a Tiger whelpe with this reason, Par force sanz reason ie
ay pryse ceste best. And with his one hand making a countenance of
throwynge of myrrours at the great Tygre. The which held this reason, Gile the
mirror ma fete distour.

And thus with all honor was fynysshed this solemn coronacyo^. After the
which / the queen soiourned in the palace of westmynster till Palm sunday
following. And upon the morn she took her iournaye toward wyndesore where
the king and she held their Eester. And after that high feast passed / ye
king made prouysyon for his war in France, during the term of this mayres
year.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xx. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxi. John^ Boteler. wyllyam Cambryge
Grocer. Anno.ix. wyllyam weston.
THis year upon Eester even, being than the.xxii. day of Apryll, the duke of
Clarence brother unto the king, who^ at his departing out of France he had
laft there for his deputye / was at a place called in French Baugy or Bauge,
ouerset and slain, by a French capytayne named sir John^ de la Croyse. And the
erlys of Huntyngdon and of Somerset with many mo gentlyme^ of England and
Gascoyne taken prisoners, to ye kings great displeasure. Than shortly after ye
king held his pliame^t at westmynster. By autoryte whereof and of a co^uocacio^
of ye clergy holden at Poulys, was granted to him a Fyftene and dyme. And for
ye money thereof should not be hastily called on of ye como^s / the bishop of
wynchester of his own fre mind, lent to the king.xx.M. li.

And about Pentecoste following king Henry shypped at Dover, and say led to
Calays / and from thens yode the third time into France, where he warred
during this mayres year.

Anno domini.M.CCCC.xxi. Anno domini.M.CCCC.xxii. Richard Gosselyn. Robert
Chycheley Grocer. Anno.x. wyllyam weston.
IN the beginning of this mayres year and.vi. day of Dece^bre / was king Henry
the.vi. borne at wyndesore. And in ye.ix. day of ye said month began a
parlyament at Poulys. Birth of (...) the fy^te.
By the which was granted to the king a fyftene and a deem of the clergy. And
for the coin of gold at those days was greatly mynysshed with clyppyng and
wasshyng, to great hurt of the commynaltye / therefore at this parlyament it
was enacted and agreed, that in the paymente of this aid to the king granted
/ his officers should receive all light coins of gold, so that they wanted
not in weyghte over the rate of.xii. d. in the noble. And if any noble wa^ted
more than.x.i. d, or any other pese of gold after the rate / tha^ the owner to
make up the value to.vi. s.viii. d. By reason of this also, silver, as grotes
and pens were geson / for all men put forth the gold and made store of silver.
This year also after Easter, the queen took shyppyng at Southampton, and sailed
to the king into France / where she was honorably received of her father and
mother, and of the cytyes and good towns. And in the city of Paris upon
whytsonday, the king and she sat crown at Dinner, which had not before time ben
seen of any king of England.

In this mayres year also, but the x. year of the king and.x. day of August /
a new wedyrcok was set upon the cross of saint Paulys steple of London.
Tha^ king Henry being still occupied in his wars in France, and daily wynnyg
upon the Frenchmen in this said month of Auguste and x. year of his reygne /
he waxed syke at Boys in Uincente, and dyed there like a good christian man upon
the last day of August, when he had reyned ix. years.v. months and.x. days
/ leuyng after him his only young son Henry of the age of.viii. months and
odd days. And than his body was enbawmed and ceryd, and after brought unto
westmynster / as in the beginning of the next mayres year shall be showed. And
in the month of Octobre following, dyed the French king father unto the queen,
as in his story before is declared.

who that would take upon him to reherce all the conquestes and triu^phaunt
victoryes opteyned by this most vyctorious prince, with other laudable deeds /
he should to reherce the^ ceryously make a great volume. But where to fore I
have showed to you breuely some part of the famous deeds of this excellent
prince, touching the actuel dedys of his body / now I will breuely touch the
acts done by him for the merit of his soul. And first for asmoche as he
knew well that his father had labored the means to depose ye noble prince
Richard the second, and after was co^se^tyng to his death / for ye which
offense his said father had sent to Rome, of that great crime to be assoyled
/ and was by the pope enjoined, ye like as he had beraft him of his natural and
bodily life for ever in this world, that so by contynuall prayer and suffragyes
of ye church, he should cause his soul to live perpetually in the celestyall
world / which penance for that his father by life did not perform, this
goostly knight in most habu^dau^t manner performed it. For fy^st he
builded.iii. houses of relygyon / as the Charterhous of monks called Shene,
the house of close nonnes called Syon, and the third was an house of
obseruauntes builded upon that other side of thamys, and after let fall by him
for the skyll that follows as testyfyeth the book or Regyster of mayres.

where it is reported that after this noble prince had thus founded these
said.iii. houses, and endowed them with co^petent lands / he of a goostly
dysposicion with a secret company for to vpsyt them and to se how they kept
their dyuyne service / would diverse times go fro his manor of Shene now
called Rychemounte unto the said three places, for ye causes abouesayde. At
which times and seasons he ever found the two houses of monks and nonnes
occupied as their statutes required. But the third house which was of French
friars, he fande sundry times neglygente and slack in doing of their duty.
wherefore he called before him ye father with some other of that place, and
reasoned with the^ sharply, why none otherwise they intended their divine
service, and prayed more specially for him as they were bound of duty.
whereunto it was after pardon required lastely by the said father answered,
that in conuenyent wise they naturally might not pray for him and his good
speed, considering that he daily warred upon their fathers and kynnesmen, and
slew of them and spoiled the^ daily / and enpouerysshed that land, which
they of very kind ought to love and pray for. After which answer thus by
them made / the king avoided the house of them, and turned the land thereof to
such use as him best lyked, and suffered the house to fall in ruin. And over
this great act of fou^dyng of these.ii. religious houses / he ordained at
westmynster to brenne perpetually without extinccion, iiii. tapers of wax
upon the sepulture of king Rychard / and over that he ordained thereto / to be
continued for ever, one day in ye weke a solemn Dirige to be song, and upon
the morrow a mass / after which mass ended certain money to be given, as
before is expressed with other things in ye beginning of this kings reygne.
And over this his great business in war natwithsta^dyng / this most criste^
prince by his life chase his place of sepulture within the foresaid monastery /
and there ordained for him to be song.iii. masses every day in the weke while
the world lasts, in manner and form as by these verses following does appear.
Henrici missae quinti, sunt hic tabulatae.
Quae successiue sunt per monachos celebratae.
Prima fit Assumptae de festo virginis almae.
Poscit pusiremam Christus de morte resur gens. Dominica
Prima salutate de festo virginis extat.
Nunciat angelicis laudem postrema choreis. ^unc
Esse deum natum de virgin prima fatetur.
Commemora natam, sic vltima missa Mariam. Martis
Prima celebretur, ad honorem neupmatis almi.
Vltima conceptam denunciat esse Mariam. Mercurij
Semper prima coli, debet de corpore Christi.
Vltima fit fata, de virgin purificata. Iouis
Concedet vt prima, celebretur de cruce sancta.
Atque salutate fiet postrema Mariae Veneris
Omnes ad sanctos, est prima colenda supernos.
Vltima de requie, pro defunctis petit esse. Sabati
Semper erit media, de proprietate dei. Omni die
Missa Assumptionis M^tiae.
Missa dn^ieae resurrectionis. 1
Missa salutationis Mariae.
Missa annu^ciatio^is Mariae. 2
Missa natiu^tatis Christi.
Missa natiuitatis Mariae. 3
Missa sancti spiritus.
Missa conceptionis. 4
Missa corporis Christi.
Missa purificationis. 5
Missa sanct^ae crucis.
Missa salutationis Mariae. 6
Missa omnium sanctorum.
Missa de requie. 7
Missa diei quotidie.


which verses may thus to vnletteryd be englysshed. Loo here is noted and put
in memory,
That over these acts noble and Marcyall /
This excellent prince, this fyfte king Henry,
His soul to endowe he was memoryall.
For with suffrages which ever last shall,
Of masses three that follow ceryously,
At westmynster he ordained to be said daily.
Sunday.
Upon sunday the first mass to begin,
Devoutly to be said, of the Assumpcion
Of our blessed Lady / and not thereafter blynne,
But than the latter of the resurreccion.
Monday.
And on the mondaye, of the Uisitacion
The first mass after ordained is.
Of the Annunciacion the latter mass said is.
Tuysday.
Upon the tuysday, to keep the order just,
The first to be said of crystes Natiuite.
Than of our Lady birth the latter follow must.
wednysdaye.
On wednysdaye, the holy ghost hallowed to be.
And of the Concepcion the third wylled he.
Thursdaye.
The thursday to sing the first of Corpus xp^i /
Of the Purificacion the last of our Lady.
Frydaye.
Upon the frydaye, a mass of crystes cross /
And of the Salutacion the latter for to sing.
And for of day or time should be no loss
Saterdaye.
Upon saterdaye, the first of that morning
A mass of all saints to pray for the king.
Than mass of Requiem to be last of all.
Quotidie.
And every day, the day mass amyd these masses to fall.


Lenuoy.
O merciful god, what a prince was this,
Which his short life in marciall acts spent
In honor of conquesi / that wonder to me it is,
How he might compass such dedys excellent /
And yet for that his mind nothing detent,
Al^ ghostly health for his soul to provide,
Cut of his world or he fatally should slide
So that though I had Tullyes eloquence,
Or of S^^ek the great moralyte,
Or of Solomon the perfyght sapience,
Or the sweet dyties of dame Caliope:
Yet might I not in prose or other dytte,
Accordyngly auaunce this princes fame,
And with due honor to enhaunce the same.
Consideringe his acts, whereof percell appear
In this rude w^rke / with many mo left out /
The time also, which was less than ten year,
That he so shortly brought all thing about /
By divine grace forthryd without doubt,
That myghtfull lord he hal^e his ghostly knight
With grace and honor to pass this worlds sight.
And to have reward dowble and condign.
And first for marciall acts by him done,
To be auaunced among the worthys Ny^e
And for his virtues used by him efte soon,
With many good deeds which he in earth had done
Above the Hierarches he is I trust now stalled,
That was on earth / king of kings called.
Anglia. Henry the syxte.
HEnry the.vi. of ye name, and only son of Henry the.v, and of queen Kathryn
daughter of Charles ye seventh king of France / began his reygne over the
realm of England, the first day of September, in the year of our
lord.M.iiii.C. and.xxii. and in the end of the last year of the reygne of
the foresaid.vii. Charles than king of France.

This Henry for the insufficience of his age, which as before is showed was
but of.viii. months and odd days / was committed unto the rule of his
uncles, the dukes of Bedforde and of Glouceter. The which during his none age
ruled the realms of England and of France honorably / as the duke of
Glouceter protector of England, and duke of Bedforde regent of France. Than
upon the.xxi. day of October during this mayres year Robert Chyceley / dyed at
Paris the above named vii. Charles king of France. By reason of whose death,
by force of appoynteme^t before made between Henry the.v. and him, as before is
towched in the seventh year of the said Henry / the realm of France and
right thereof fylle unto the young king Henry. To whose use the nobles of
France, except a few of such as held with the Dolphyne, delivered the
possession thereof unto the duke of Bedforde, as regent thereof during that
nonage of this king.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxii. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxiii. wyllyam Estfeylde. wyllyam
walderne. Anno primo. Robert Tatersale.
IN the beginning of this mayres year, and first year of the king / that is to
say the.vii. day of ye month of Nouembre, the corpse of ye excellent prince
king Henry the fyft was with great solempnyte and honor brought unto the
monastery of westmynster / and there at the fete of saint Edward with due
reverence enterred / to whose soul Jesus be merciful. And upon the.ix. day of
ye said month, was a parlyament called at westmynster. By reason whereof, the
kings governance during his nonage was provided for / with all the rule of
both realms of England and of France. And by auctoryte of the same, the duke
of Glouceter sir Humfrey, was ordained protectoure of England / and duke John^
of Bedforde regent of France. And during the parlyament / was granted unto
ye king for a subsydie for.iii. years, v. nobles of every sack of wolle that
should pass out of the land. And the first day of March after, was of his
preestehode deregraded and heretyke named wyllyam Tayllour, and bre^t to ashes
in smythfeld. whose opynyons for the herynge of them should be tedious and
unfruitful / I therefore will not with them blot my book. In this month of
March also was the town of Pou^t Melane delivered by apoyntmente unto the
regent of France. Of the which apoynteme^t one article was, that all horses,
abylme^tes of war, harneys, and other, should be left within the said place
/ and also gold and silver and other iewelles there to remain holy. And if
that any person were within ye hold found, which before time had been gylty
or consenting to the death of the duke of Burgoyne / that he should be
delivered to the regent / and not to take any benefyte or pryuylege by that
appointment.

And this year the west gate of the city called Newgate, was newly builded and
repaired by the executours of Richard whytyngton late mayre of London. And
this year after mydsomer fill great water or rain / so that for the more party
every day atwene the beginning of July and end of Septembre, it rayned
little or much / and yet that not withstanding, that year was co^uenyent
plentye of al grain, so that whete passed not eight shyllynges at London, and
malte five shyllynges.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxiii. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxiiii. Nycholas James. wyllyam
Crowmer draper. Anno.ii. Thomas wadeforde.
THis year, that is to mean in the begynnge of this mayres year and.xiii. day
of Nouembre / the king and the queen his mother removed from wyndesore toward
London, and came that night unto Stanys / and on the mo^owe being sunday when
he was borne toward his mothers chare, he shyrled and cried so fervently, that
the noryce with her breasts nor nothing else that the queen could deuyse
might content him. wherefore the queen being fered that he had been dyseased,
returned again to her chamber / where anon he was in good rest and quiet.
This of some writers is noted for a dyuyne monycyon, yt he would not travail
upon the sunday. But how it was, the queen tarried with him there that night /
and on the mo^owe he was borne to ye chare with glad semblant and merry chere,
and so came to Kyngeston that night / and upon ye morrow unto his manor of
Kyngeston. Upon wednysday, the queen sitting in her chare and he upon her
lap, passed with great tryumphe thorughe the city / and so unto westmynster,
where than was holden his parlyament / and there set in his kyngly mageste
within the parlyame^t chamber among all his lords, where the speker of the
parlyament made a famous preposicion / whereof the effect was, of the grace yt
god had endewed the realm with, for the presence of so toward a prince and
soueraygne governor as he was, with many other words of commendacyon, which I
pass over. The.xxvi. day of the same month of Noue^bre / the king with ye
queen removed from westmynster unto waltham holy cross. And after he had there
a season soiourned / here moved unto Hertford, where he held his Crystmasse,
and ye king of Scotts with him. And ye foresaid parlyame^t was iourned unto
ye.xx. day of Crystmas. In ye which parlyament among other acts, was
ordained yt what prisoner yt for grau^d or pety treason was committed to ward,
and after wylfully brake the same, it should be demed pety treason / and that
the goods of him so escapynge, should be forfeyted to the lord of that soil
that they were found in. In the month of Februari, sir James steward king of
Scotts married in the face of the church of saint mary Ouereys in Southwerke,
dame Iohane ye duchess daughter of Clarence / which was daughter unto the
earl of Somerset first husband unto the said duchess. And the feast was
holden in the bishop of wynchesters place by. And soon after upon the xiii.
day of February, the foresaid parlyament being again holden at westmynster /
for brekynge of the foresaid act of brekynge of prison, sir Johan Mortymer
was accused by a yoman named wyllyam King and servant unto sir Robert Scot
knight and keeper of ye tower of London, of diverse points of treason as
folowen. First he cou^seyled with the said wyllyam King to the end to break
out of prison / and promised to him for the same, the yearly value of xl. li.
land, and in process an erledome. Also the said Mortymer should say that he
would go into wales unto the earl of the Marches / and there he would
raise.xl.M. me^, and with that power he would enter this land, and stryke of
the heddes of the lord protector and of the bishop of wynchester, to the
intent that he might tell or play with some of his money.

And ferthermore he accused him, that the said Mortymer should say, that the
earl of March should be king by right enherytaunce / and that he himself was
next ryghtfull heir to the said crown after the said earl of March.
wherefore if the said earl would not take upon him ye crown and rule of ye
land, he said that he else would. And over this the said wyllyam. alleged
to the said sir Johan Mortymer, that he should say that if he failed of his
purpose, and might not wyn^e unto the earl of Marches, that than he would sail
unto ye Dolphyn and aid and take his party / where he wist well he should be
accepted, and have good aid of him to bring about his purpose. All which
matters were duly approved by the said wyllyam again the said sir Johan,
before the lords and commons of the said parlyament / for yt which treasons
he was after drawn and hanged.

In this year also the duke of Bedforde being in France as regene, warred
strongly upon ye Dolphyn, and wanne from him many strong holds and towns /
as Crotey, Basyde, Ryol, Rulay, Gyrou^de, Basyle, Mermou^de, Mylham, Femel,
Seintace, Iensak, Mauron, Duras, Mountsuer, La venak, Palageeu, Cerneys,
Noelam, Cusak, and Doual with diverse other / and so continued till he came unto
Uerneyll in Perch. The which he held so straight, that lastly Gyrande the
captain thereof agreed to deliver it by a certain day, except he were
rescowed. After which appointment so taken / the said Gyrande as witnesses
Gaguinus, sent word to Charles the.viii. of ye name or ye.vii. after diverse
writers, which of his fautoures was than accounted for king of France. And he
in all possible have, sent thither ye duke of Alanson, ye earl of Turon^ or of
Douglas, of Bowgham or Boucam, of Daumayll, and ye vicou^t of Nerbon^, with a
strong power of Armenakkes, scotts, and Fre^cheme^ / ye which host or it might
approach to ye said town to make rescouse, ye day expired, and it unto ye duke
delivered. wha^ ye duke of Ala^so^ was asserteyned of ye deliuere of ye town,
he took his advise of ye other capitaynes, whether it was better to retourn
consyderyng the town was yolden, or to give battle unto the English men. But
finally for no reproach should be to them arected as they had fled for fere /
they kept on their iournany, and pyght their field in a plain nere unto the
said town of Uernoyl. where they being strongely enbataylled, upon the.vii.
day of the month of August, the duke of Bedford with his retynue gave to the^
sharp and cruel battle / the which endured long without knowledge of
vyctory.

But finally by gods ordenau^ce and power, the vyctyry fyl to the English
party, to the great loss of their enemies. For in the fight was slain / as
testyfyeth the French Gaguyne, the earls of Turon, and Boucam, of Daumayle,
with the Uycounte of Narbon^, and diverse other men of name. And of the commons
were slain to the nombree of five thousand. And there was taken the duke of
Alanson, the Marshall of France, and other. But ye english writers
affermeth.x.M. to be slain and mo.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxiiii. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxv. Symonde Seman. John^ Mychell.
Anno.ix. John^ Bywater
This year after Easter, ye king held his parlyamente at westmynster / the
which began upon the day of Etkenwalde or the last day of Apryll, And.ii.
days before, the king with the queen his mother came thorugh the city from
wyndesore. And when he came at the west door of Poulys / the lord protector
took him out of the chare, and so was ladde upon his fete between ye said
lord Protector and the duke of Exceter, unto the steps going into ye quyer.
Fro whe^s he was borne unto the high altar / and there kneled in a trauers
purueyed for him. And when he had be there, he yode to the rode of ye north
door and there made his offerynges. And then was he borne into the church
yerde, and there set upon a fair courser, and so conveyed thorugh chepe, and
the other streets of the city unto saint Georges bar / and so held his
iournay to his Manor of Kenyngton^. And contynuyng the foresaid parlyame^t /
the king was sundry times conveyed to westmynster / and within the parlyament
chamber kept there his royal astate. By auctoryte whereof, to him was granted
a subsidye of.xii. d. in the.li. of all manner marchaundyse coming in or
passing out of this realm and.iii. s. of a tun of wine for ye term of.iii.
years to be holden. And ferthermore it was enacted, that all merchant
strangers should be set to an English host within.xv. days of their coming
to their port sale, and to make no sale of any marchaundyse or they were so
lodged / and them within.xl. days following to make sale of all that they
brought. And if any remained unsold at the said xl. days end / that than
all such marchaundyse being than unsold, to be forfayted unto the king. Also
that all strangers that carried any wolles out of this land, should pay.xliii.
s.iiii. d. for a sakke custom, where ye English marchaunte and denyzen paid
but.v. nobles / with many other condycyons and penaltyes as well for Englysh as
the other merchants, which would are long leysour to show, enacted and
passed during this said parlyamente.

And the second day of the month of Auguste, was yolden unto the earl of
Salysbury appointed with other by the regent, the city of Man's, under
appoyntemente comprysed in.ix. articles. whereof one special was, that if any
persons were found within the city which had been consentyng unto the dukes
death Johan late duke of Burgoyne, that they should stand at the grace of the
said regent.

Also this year the duke of Glouceter lord protector, which lately before
had married the duchess of Holande a woman a great possesio^ / for cause of
rule whereof, to have domynyo^ of the same, he with the said duchess sailed
toward that country, and thereof her subgectes was peasybly and with honor
received. But finally he had such chere, yt he was glad to return into
England, leuynge his wife therein a town of her own named Mounse But after
his departing, the duke of Burgoyne so demeaned him to the rulers of that
town, were it by battle or otherwise, that they delivered her to the said
duke / and he forthwyth sent her unto Gaunte, there to be kept as prisoner.
But by the Frenshyppe of one named sir Jacques de la Grayll a Burgonyon knight,
and her own polecy / she escaped thens in a man's clothing, and came to a
town in zelande named zyryxe / and from thens to an other town in zelande
called Ghwode or Ghow-Ghowde, where she wythstode the dukes power.

Than the duke of Glouceter heryng of the escape of his wife, and of the malice
of the duke foresaid / in all haste provided a strong company of soudyours
and archers, and committed them unto that rule of ye lord Fitzwater. The which
in process of time landed with them at a place in zelande called Brewers haue^
/ where of their e^nemyes they were encountered and dryue^ back, and so
returned into England without any great fete doing, leuynge the duchess
behind them for that season.

This year about Myghelmasse ye prince of Portyngale came into England / and
was honorable received and fested of the kings uncles / and tarried here the
time of this mayres year. This year also began a grudge to kyndle between the
lord protector and his half brother the bishop of wynchester / the which
after grew to a great dystourbaunce of the city of London, as in the next
mayres year shall be showed. And in the end of this year, were many honest men
of the city apeched of treason, by a false and malycyous person belonging
unto the said bishop / and put them unto great vexacyon and trouble.
which was done by the procurement of the said bishop as the common fame than
went. And not alonely men of the city were thus vexed, but also other
burgeyses of diverse good towns, as Leyceter, Canterbury, Northampton, and
other.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxv. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxvi. wyllyam Mylrede. John^ Couentre
Mercer. Anno.iiii. John^ Brokle.
IN this year the.xxix. day of Octobre, and self same day that the mayre for
the year following yearly at westmynster takes his charge / at such time as he
was holding his great dinner, he was by ye lord protector sent for in spedy
manner. And when he was common to his presence / he gave to him a streyghte
commandment, that he should se that the city were suerly watched in that
night following, and so it was. Than upon the morrow following about.ix. of the
clok / certain servants of the forenamed bysshope would have entered by the
bridge gate. But the rulers thereof would not suffer the^ in so great nombre /
but kept them out by force, like as before they were commanded. wherwyth
they being grievously dyscontented / gaderyd to them a more nombre of archers
and men of armies, and assauted the gate with shot and other means of war. In
so much that the commo^s of the city herynge thereof, shytte in their shoppes
and sped them thither in great nombre. And lykely it was to have ensued great
effusyo^ of blood shortly thereupon, ne had been the dyscrescion of ye mayre and
his brethern, that exorted ye people by all polytyke mean to keep the kings
peace. And in this pass time, the archebysshop of Cau^torbury, with the prince
of Portyngale and other, took great labor upon them to pacyfye this
varyau^ce between the lord protector and the bysshope / in so much that they
rode between them.viii. times or they might bring them to any reasonable
conformyte. Than lastly they agreed to stand to the rule of the rege^t, or of
such as he would assygne. whereupon ye city was set in a more quiet. Tha^ the
bishop of wynchester wrote a letter unto ye duke of Bedforde or lord rege^t,
whereof ye tenure ensues.

RIght high and mighty price and right noble, and after one leuest erthly lord
/ I recommaunde me unto your grace with all mine heart. And as ye desire the
welfare of the king our soueraygne lord, and of his realms of England and of
France, and your own weal with all yours / haste you hyder, for by my
truth and ye tarry long, we shall put this land in ieopardy with a field /
such a brother ye have here god make him a good man. For your wisdom knows
well, that the profit of France stands in the welfare of England. Right
high and mighty prince, I beseech you hold master Johan Estcourt your
cou^cellour excused of his taryeng / for it is much again his will. But the
counsayll here has made him do contrary his mind. And that it may like you to
give crede^ce unto your chamberlayne sir Robert Boteler. And the blessed
Trinite keep you. written in great haste at London the last day of Octobre.

Upon the.x. day of January next ensuynge, ye said duke of Bedforde with his
wife came unto London. And with the^ came also the said bishop of wynchester.
And the mayre and the cytezyns received him at Merton, and conveyed him thorugh
ye city unto westmynster / where he was lodged in ye kings palace / and the
bishop of wynchester was lodged within ye abbottes lodging.

Than upon the morrow following or ye.xi. day of January / y^ mayre presented
the rege^t with a payere of basyns of silver and over gylte, and in them a.M.
mark of gold. But the bishop had so incenced him again the city, that they
received but a small thank for all their labor and cost. Upon ye.xxi. day of
February, tha^ began a great cou^sayl at saint Albonys / and after it was
adiourned unto Northampton. But for due conclusyons might not be driven by the
said counsayll / therefore upon the xxv. day of March ensuynge, was called a
parlyament at Leyceter / the which endured till the xv. day of Iuny
following. This was cleped of the common people the parlyament of battes. The
cause was, for proclamacyons were made, that men should leave their swerdes and
other wepyns in their innys, the people took great battes and stauys in their
necks / and so followed their lords and masters unto the parlyament. And when
ye wepyn was inhybyted them / thanne they took stones and plu^mettes of led,
and trussed them secretly in their sleuys and bosomys. During the parliament /
among other notable things for the weal of the realm, the varyaunce that
was between the foresaid lords was herin debated and argued. In so much that
the duke of Glouceter put in a byll of co^playnt, again the bishop
conteynyng.vi. artycles. whereof the first was, that where the lord protector
would have had his lodging within the tower of London / he was by the comfort
and aid defended and let of the bishop, and of Richard wydeuile esquyer tha^
being Lyeutenaunt of the same. The second was, for that that the bishop would
have removed ye king from Elthm^ / and have set him at his governance,
without the aduyce and counsel of the lord protector. The third was, that
when the duke was informed of the bysshoppes intent / and he entendynge
according to his office and duty, in peasyble wise to have ryde^ to ye king
to have given upon him attendaunce: ye bishop ente^dynge ye distruccio^ of ye
duke, assembled a great multitude of men of arms and archers in Southwarke /
and there drew the cheyne at the bridge foot, and set up pypes and other
engynes to stop the kings hye way / and ordained me^ to stand in chambres
and solers to throw stones / and by their ordenau^ces and pollycy, to have
destroyed ye duke and his company. The.iiii. article was, that king Henry the
fyft should by his life time show unto ye said duke, that by the opening of
a spaynell, a man was taken behynd a tapet in one of the kings cha^bres. The
which man after examyned by the earl of Arundel / confessed that he was sent
thither by ye said bishop, to the end to murder king Henry the forth.
After which co^fessyon / the said earl let sakke that man, and so cast him
into the Thamys. The fyft was, that the said Henry the fyft being prince and
heir parant to the crown / the said bishop should come unto him and say, that
for somoche as his father was vexed with grievous sekenes, and was not apt to
come in conversation of the people, nor might not conveniently gyde the realm
/ that he therefore should take up on him the rule and governance of the same,
and put his father from all kyngly power. The.vi. and last article was, that
sediciously the said bishop had by his letters sent lately unto the duke of
Bedforde / wrongfully accused him, in that he should areyse the kings people,
and iuparde this land by a field / contrary to the kings peace and common well
of this land.

All which articles were by ye bishop well and suffycyently answered and
replied / so yt he laid from him the blame. And finally by the prouydent
counsel of the lord regent / all the said artycles and matiers of varyaunce
atwene the said two lords hanging, were put to the examynacyon and iudgmente
with the assystence of ye lords of the parliament, of Henry the archebysshop
of Caunterbury, of Thomas duke of Exceter, of John^ duke of Northfolk / Thomas
bishop of Durhm^, of Phylype bishop of worceter, or John^ bishop of Bathe,
of Humfrey tha^ earl of Stafforde, of Rauffe lord Cornewell, and of master
wyllyam Alnewyke than keeper of the preuy seal. The which lords with
assystence of the other lords of the parlyament, made a decre and a ward / so
that either party took other by the hand, with fre^dly and loving words /
none having ame^des of other, except the bysshope had words of submyssyo^ unto
the duke, in requyryng him of his favor and good lordshyp. And ye accord
thus fynysshed, the parlyament was adiourned till after Easter. Upon
whytsondaye following, was a solemn feast holden at Leyceter forsayde / where
the regente dubbyd king Henry knight. And than forthwyth the king dubbyd
Richard duke of york, that after was father to king Edward. Also he dubbyd
knights, the son and heir of the duke Johan, duke of Northfolke, and the
earls of Oxenforde and westmerlande, with other lords and gentylmen to the
noumbre of.xxxiiii.

And after that feeste with all honor was endyd / the king with the regente
and other of his lords drew toward London. And so the regente continued with
the king in England, by the full term of this mayres year.

Anno. dn^i. M.iiii.C.vi. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.vii. John^ Arnolde. John^ Raywell
Fysshmonger. Anno.v. John^ Hyghthm^.
IN this.v. year and month of February / the regent with his wife and
household meyny passed the sea unto Calays, and so thorugh Pycardy into
France. But or he departed thens, that is to mean upon the day of
annuncyacion of our Lady / the bishop of wynchester within the church of our
Lady of Calays was created cardynall, by auctoryte of ye bulls of pope Martyne
the.v. of ye name. And after that sole^pnyte don / the regente took him on his
right hand, and so conveyed him unto his lodging.

This year was unreasonable of wederyng / for it reyned most part contynually
from Easter to Myghelmasse, where thorugh hay and corn was greatly hyndered.

And in this year the duke of Ale^son, that before was taken prisoner at the
battle of Uernell in Perch, was delivered for a raunson of.ii.C M. scutes of
gold as testyfyeth Gaguinus, which is fyfty.M. mark sterlyng money.

In this year also the earl of Salysbury, which of diverse writers is named the
good earl / accompanied with the earl of Suffolk, the lord Talbot, and other,
laid a strong syege unto the city of Orleaunce, and held the cytezyns very
straight / and maugre the duke of Orleaunce and the Marshal of France thanne
named Boussaak, the Englysshemen wanne from them diverse strong holds
adioynynge to the city / and forced them to brenne a great part of the
subbarbes of the city.

But sorrow it is to tell and doolfull to write, while one day the said good
earl sir Thomas Mountagu, rested him at a bay wyndow, and be held the compass
of the city, and talked with his familiers / a gonne was leueyled out of the
city from a place unknown, which brake the tymbre or stone of the wyndowe
with such vyolence, that the pecys thereof all to quasshed the face of the
noble earl / in such wise that he dyed within three days following. Upon whose
soul and all christian Ihesu have mercy Ame^.

This after diverse writers was initium malorum. For after this myshappe, the
Englysshmen lost rather there than wanne / so that little and little they lost
all their possessyon in France. And all be it that somewhat they gate after /
yet for one that they wanne they lost three, as after shall appear.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xxvii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.xxviii. Henry Frowyk. Johan
Gedney draper. Anno.vi. Robert Otley.
IN this.vi. year and beginning of the same / the king held his parlyament at
westmynster. By auctoryte whereof was granted to him a subsydye in manner as
follows. First of every tonne of wine yt came into this land, from ye feast
of saint Ambrose or the fourth day of Apryll till the end of that year, the
king should have.iii. s. belonging to a denyzyn or the kings lyege man. Also
of all marchaundyse passing or coming into this land, shypped by denyzon /
the king to have of every. xx. s..xii. d. except woll, fell, and clothe.

Also to him was granted, that of all parysshens thorughout his realm being
the benefyce of the valewe of.x. mark, that.x. of the said parysshons should
pay of their mouables six shyllynges and eight pe^s, after ye rate of eight
pens every man. And of all benefyces that were of.x. li.x. parysshons to
pay.xiii. s. and iiii. d. all cytyes and borowes to be excepted. And so rate
rate like from the lowest benefyce to the highest. And for the inhabytauntes of
cities, boroughes it was enacted that eueman being it valewe of.xx. s. above
his stuff of household and his apparayl and his wyfes, shulne pay.iiii.d. and
so after the rate unto the rychest.

In this year also and day of saint Gyles or the first day of Septe^bre / the
cardynall of wynchester was met by the mayre and his brethren and certain
cytezyns on horse back without the city, and so brought unto his palace in
southwerke.

About the same time, a Bryton that a good wydow and honest woman had
cherysshed and brought up of alms, dwelling in white chapel paresshe without
Algate / murdered the said woman in a night slepynge in her bed / and after
conveyed such iewelles and stuff as he might carye. But he was so pursued
upon, ye for fere he took a church in Estsex, and there forsware ye kings
land. And ye constables caused him be brought to London, and so intended to
have conveyed him westward. But so soon as he was commen in to the parysshe
where before he had committed the murder / the wyfes cast upon him so much
fylthe and ordure of the street, and not withstanding the resystence made by
the co^stables, they slew him there out of hand.

Anno dn^i M.iiii.C.xxviii. Anno dn^i M.iiii.C.xxix. Thomas Dushous. Henry
Barton skynner. Anno.vii. Raffe Holande.
THis year upon the.viii. day of Nouembre / the duke of Norffolke accompanied
with many gentylmen, took his barge at saint mary Ouereys / entendynge to have
passed thoroughe the bridge, and so unto Grenewytche. But by the mysgydynge of
the sterysman, he was set upon the pyles of the bridge, and ye barge whelmed /
so yt all were drowned, except the duke and a few persons that lepte upon
the pyles, which after were drawn up with ropes and so saved. And in the
month of I^ny following, the cardynall of wynchester with a warly company
passed the sea / entendynge to have made war upon the heretykes or lollers
inhabyted in the country of Prage. But how it was for need of men that the
rege^t had in France / the cardynall changed his purpose, and tarried there
a season with the said regent.

After some writers it was for to strength and replenysshe certain holds,
that weked by reason of a co^flycte that the Englysshemen had with the
Frenchemen. At the which the lord Talbot was taken prisoner / and the lord
Scalys with many other to the nombre of.iii.M. English men were slain and
taken. But after the opinion of the French cronycle / this vyctorye should be
opteyned by Jane or Johan called in French la puzele de dieu, in the.xi. year
of this king.

Of ye foresaid heretykes of Prage speaks somdeale the auctour of Cronica
Cronicarum / and shows that the chyef capytaynes of them were named
Procapius, Saplicius, and Lupus a priest, with other both learned and unlearned.
And Policronico^ shows in ye.xix. chapyter of his last book, that in the
twelfe year of king Henry, the foresaid three capytaynes were slain / with one
master Peter clerk being an Englyssheman taken on live with diverse other /
and of ye said heretykes slain at.ii. iournayes over two and twenty thousands.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xxix. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xxx. wyllyam Ruff. wyllyam
Estfelde mercer. Anno.viii. Raffe Holande.
IN this eight year upon ye day of saint Leonarde the.vi. day of Nouembre /
king Henry being upon the age of nine years, King Henry the.vi. crowned.
was solemply crowned i^ saint Peter's church of westmynster. At whose
coronacyon were made six and thyrty knights of the bathe. And after that
solempnyzacyon in the said church fynysshed / an honorable feast in the great
hal of westmynster was kept / where ye king syttyng in his astate, was served
with.iii. courses as here under ensues.

Frument with venyson Uyand royal planted losynges of gold Bore hedes in
castelles of gold and enarmed Befe with motten boylyd Capon stewyd Sygnet
roasted Heyron roasted Great pyke or luce A read leche with lions coruyn therein
Custarde royal, with a lyoparde of gold syttyng therein, and holdyng a flower
delyce Frytour of sun facyon, with a flower delyce therein.
A sotyltye of saint Edward and saint Louys armyd, and upon either his cote
armoure / holdyng between them a figure like unto king Henry standing also in
his cote armoure / and a scripture passing from them both, saying behold.ii.
parfight kings under one cote armor. And under the fete of the said saints
was written this balade. Holy saints, Edward and saint Lowice,
Conserve this branch borne of your blessed blood
Live among christian most soueraygne of price,
Enheritour of the flouredelice so good /
This sixth Henry, to reygne and to be wise,
God grant he may to be your mode /
And that he may resemble your knightehude and virtue,
Pray ye hertely unto our lord Jesu.


Uiand blank barred with gold Gely party written and noted with Te deum
laudamus. Pygge endored Crane roasted Byttore Conyes Chekyns Partryche Pecok
enhakyll Great Breme


A white leche planted with a read antelop, with a crown about his neck with
a chain of gold. Flampayne powdered with leopardes and flower delyce of gold.

A frytoure garnysshed with a leopardes head and.ii. Estryth feders.

A sotyltie, an emperor and a king arrayed in ma^telles of garters / which
fygured Sigismu^de ye emperor and Henry. the.v. And a figure like unto king
Henry ye.vi, knelyng tofore them with this balade takkyd by him. Again
miscreau^tes the emperor Sigismu^de
Has showed his might, which is imperial.
And Henry the.v. a noble knight was found
For Christ's cause in acts marciall /
Cherysshed the church, to lossers gave a fall,
Gyuyng example to kings that succeed,
And to their branch here in especial,
While he does reygne to love god and dread.


Quynces in compost Blau^d sure powderyd with quarter foyles gylt Uenyson
Egrettes Curlew Cok and partryche Plouer Quayles Snytes Great birds Larkys
Carpe Crabbe Leche of.iii. colors A bake meat like shylde quartered red and
white, set with losynges gylt and flowers of borage. A frytour cryspyd.


A sotyltie of our Lady sitting with her child in her lap / and she
holding a crown in her hand. Saint George and saint Denis knelynge on either
side, p^sented to her king Henryes figure beryng in hand this balade as
follows. O Blessed lady Christ's mother dear,
And thou saint George that called art her knight
Holy saint Denis o marter most entere /
The sixth Henry here present in your sight,
Shedeth of your grace on him your heavenly light /
His tender youth with virtue does auaunce,
Borne by descent and by title of right,
Justly to reygne in England and in France.


THis sole^pne coronacyon with all honor and joy finysshed prouycyon was made
for the kings iournay into France. In which passetyme, that is to mean upon
ye xxiii. day of January, an heretyke was brent in Smythfelde.

And upon the morrow next following, was in that field foughten a strong fight
/ between John^ Upton^ Appellant, and John^ Down Defendant. But for they quyt
them both so manfully / the king at length relesed their quarrel, and
pardoned the^ of their trespass.

Than upon saint Georges day following, or the.xxiii. day of Apryll / the king
took shyppynge at Dover and landed the same day at Calays / having in his
company.ii. dukes, of york and Northfolke, three bysshoppes, of Bathe, Ely, and
Rochester, eight earls, that is to mean, of Huntyngdon, Stafforde, warwyke,
Orenforde, Deuynshyre, Morteyne, of Ewe, and of Urmund / and.xi. barons, that
is to say, lord Bowchier, Beawmounde, Typtost, Fytzwater, Roos, Arundell,
Awdeley, Fawcunbrydge, Gray, Codnoor, the lord Scroope, and the lord wellys.

In this time and season that the king lay thus at Calays / many skyrmysshes
were foughten between the Englysshemen and the Frenchemen in diverse parties of
France. And greatly the Frenchemen prevailed by ye help of a woman / which
they as before is touched named the Maiden of god. So that lastly she with her
company came to a town called Compeyne, to the intent to remove the syege
laid thereunto by ye duke of Burgoyne and other of the English capytaynes.
And theruppon the.xxiii. day of May, she gave battle unto Englysshmen and
Burgonyons / and faughte with them long time. But in the end, by the manhood
of a Burgonyon knight named sir John^ Luxemburghe, she was taken on live, and
her company dystressed, and she carried to the city of Roan / and there kept a
season, for so much as she feyned her with child. But when the contrary of it
was known / she was there foriuged and burnt.

Of this woman Gaguynus makes a great process, of her parenty, and of her
first taking upon her / whereof a part I entende to show after in the.vi.
year of Charles next following king of France.

And in this time and season, one Rychard Hounden wolle pakker of London, was
conuycte of heresy and brent at tower Hylle. Than king Henry thus lodging at
Calays, was asserteyned of the taking of the foresaid woman, by the letters of
ye duke of Burgoyne. And after he took his small iournayes till he came into
France, and so unto Paris. Of whose cytezyns he was honorably received, and
taken for the soueraygne and king / and there so tarried all this mayres year.
In which season as witnesses Gaguynus / the Frenchemen wan diverse holds of
Englyshemen and Burgonyo^s in the country of Brye. And a capytayne named
Barbasan scomfited.viii.M. Englyshme^ and Burgonyo^s, at a place called in
latyne Cathalamencis, as affermeth the foresaid auctour.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xxx. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xxxi. water Chertsey. Nycholas
wotton. Anno.ix. Robert Large.
This.ix. year about mydlent / a priest named sir Thomas Bagley and vycar of a
vyllage in Essex called Manueden a little from walden, was detect of heresy.
Upon the which he was degrated, and tha^ brent in the place of Smythfelde. And
soon upon Easter following / the lord protector was warnyd of an assemble of
heretykes at Abyndo^. wherefore he sent thither certain persons, or rode thither
him self as some writers afferme / and there arrested the baylly of that town
named wyllyam Maundeuyle a weuer, the which was appointed for a capytayne of
ye said heretykes. And for to draw the people unto him / he changed his name
and called him self Iak Sharp of wygmorys land in walys. But after he was
examyned, he confessed to have wroughte much sorrow again priests / so that he
would have made their heddes as chepe as sheep heddes, so that he would have
sold.iii. for a penny or.x. after some writers. And the same season were taken
many of his complycys, which were sent unto diverse prysons. And the said Iak
Sharp was for his offense, drawn, hanged, and hedyd at the forenamed town of
Abyndon, upon the tuysday in whytson weke / and his head was sent to London,
and there pyght upon the bridge. And the other of his fawtours were put in
execucyon in diverse places and countrees, to the terror of other. And upon
the.xiiii. day of July, that year was one named Richard Russell a wolle man,
drawn, hanged, and quartered at tyborne for treason.

And this year the king being still in France / the earl of Arundell
acco^panyed with.ii.M. of English sowdyours, sent a certain of his company
unto a town called Beale Mount, to provoke the Frenchemen to issue out of the
town. which small company when Bossycant and Seyntrales tha^ capytaynes beheld
/ anon they with their sowdyoures of that town spedde them forth to take
the said Englysshemen. The which little and little gave bake, till they had
tolled the Frenchemen a good space from the town / and tha^ set upon them
with a stern courage, and held them on hand till the said earl with his
company rescowed them. Than between them was a cruel fight. But in the end
the Frenchemen were chased / and ye said Seyntrayle with many foot men of the
said town were slain at that iournay. And shortly after the duke of Burgoyne
with aid of the Englysshemen, at a place called Bar, scomfyted a great
company of Frenchemen / and took.ii. capytaynes belongyng to the duke of Bar
the which were named Renat and Barbazan / for whose ransom the duke had
yielded to him the Uale of Cassyle in Flaundres.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxxi. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxxii. John^ Adyrlee. John^ welly
Grocer. Anno.x. Stphyn Brown.
King Henry the.vi. crowned in Paris.
IN this.x. year and.vii. day of Dece^ber / king Henry the.vi. was crowned in
Paris of the cardynall of wynchester. At the which coronacyon was present the
lord Regent, the duke of Burgoyne, and diverse other nobles of France / whose
names Gaguinus puts not in his book, for reproach of the Frenchmen. And
after the solempnyte of this fest was ended, whereof the cyrcu^staunce to show
in order would ask a long leysour / the king departed from Paris, and so
came to Roan, where he held his Crystmas / and that done he sped him to Caleys.

And when he had soiourned there a season / he took shyppynge and returned
into England, and landed at Dover the.ix. day of February. Than he was met
upon Baram Down or Baram Howth, that is between Dover and Cauntorbury, with a
great company of gentyls and comoners of Kent all cladde with read hodes. The
which accompanied him till he came to Blak Heth / where he was met with the
mayre and the cytesyns of London upon a thursdaye being the.xxi. day of
February / the cytesyns being cladde in white, with diverse works or
conysaunces browderyd upon their sleues after the facultye of their mysteryes
or crafts. And ye mayre and his brethern were all clothed in scarlet. And
after due obeysaunce and salutynge of the king / they rode on before him
toward the city. when the king was comen to the bridge / there was devised a
mighty Gyau^t standing with a sword drawyn, having this speech written by him.
All tho that been enemies to the king /
I shall them clothe with confusion /
Make him mighty by virtuous living,
His mortal soon to oppress and bear down.
And him to increase as Christ's champion,
All mischeues from him to abridge,
With grace of god at the entry of this bridge.


ANd when the king was passed the first gate, and was comen to ye draw
bridge, there was ordained a goodly tower hanged and apparayled with sylke and
clothes of aras in most rich wise. Out of which suddenly appeared.iii. ladies
rychely cladde in gold and sylke, with coronettes upon their heddes. whereof ye
first was named dame Nature, the second dame Grace, and the third dame
Fortune / the which unto the king had this speech. We ladies three all by one
consent,
Three goostly gifts heuynly and dyuyne,
To the sir king, as now we do present.
And to thine hyghnes here we do this time,
Utterly show and them determyne.
As I Grace, first at thy coming,
Endowe the with science and conning.
And I Nature, with strength and fayrnesse,
For to be loved and drad of every wight.
And I Fortune, prosperyte and richesse,
The to defend and to give the might,
Long to enjoy and to hold thy true right,
In virtuous life with honor to proceed,
That thy two ceptours thou may well possede.


There was also in the said tower xiiii. vyrgyns all clothed in white.
whereof.vii. stood upon ye right hand of ye said.iii. ladies, and.vii. upon ye
left hand. The.vii upon ye right hand, had bawderykes of saphyr color or
blewe. And ye other.vii. had their garments powdered with sterres of gold. Tha^
the first.vii. presented ye king with the.vii. gifts of ye holy ghost / as
sapyence, intellygence, good counsayll, strength, cunning, pity, and dread of
god. And the other.vii, gave unto him the.vii. gifts of grace in manner as
follows. God the endowe with crown of glory,
And with the ceptre of clennesse and pytye,
And with a sword of might and victory,
And with a mantell of prudence clad thou be,
A shylde of faith for to defend the,
An helm of health wrought to thine encreace,
Gyrte with a gyrdyll of love and parfyte peace.


And after they had thus saluted the king / anon they began this roundell
with an heavenly melodye and song, as follows. Sovereign lord, welcome to
your city /
Welcome our joy, and our hearts pleasaunce /
Welcome our gladness, welcome our suffysaunce,
Welcome* welcome, right welcome ^ut ye be /
Singing before thy royal mageste,
We say with heart withouten varyaunce
Sovereign lord, now welcome out of France.
The mayre and cytesyns with all the comynaltye
Rejoice your coming newly out of France /
Whereby this city and they rescuyd be,
Of all their sorrow and former greuaunce,
Wherefore they say and sing without greuance,
Welcome welcome, welcome our hearts joy,
Welcome you be unto your own new Troy.


Than the king rode forth a soft pase till he came at the enter of Corn hylle.
where upon ye hylle was ordained a tabernacle of curyous work / in the which
stood dame Sapyence, and about her the.vii. arts or scyences lyberall / as
first gramer, logike, rhetoryke, musyke, arithmetyke, geometry, and astronomye
/ euerych of them exercysynge their conning and facultye, and the lady her
self had this speech to the king. Lo I chyefe pryncesse, dame Sapience,
Show unto you this sentence of scripture /
Kings that been most of excellence,
By me they reygne, and most joy endure.
For through my help and my besy cure,
To increase their glory and their high renown /
They shall of wisdom have full possession.


Than the king passed on till he came to the conduyte in Cornehylle. where was
set a pagea^t made cercle wise / and in the summet or top thereof was set a
child of wonderful beauty, apparayled like a king. Upon whose right hand satte
lady Mercy, and upon the left hand lady Troth / and over them stood dame
Clennese embrasyng the kings trone. Then before the king stood two judges and
viii. sergeauntes of the coyfe. And dame Clennesse had this speech to ye vi.
Henry the king. Lo by the sentence of prudent Solomon,
Mercy and right preseruyn every king.
And I Clennesse observed by reason,
Keep his trone from myschyefe and fassynge,
And makes it strong with long abiding.
So I conclude that we ladies three,
A king preserve in long prosperity.
And Dauyd said, the psalm beryth witness /
Lord god thy dome thou to the king /
And give to him thy troth and ryghtwysnesse,
The kings son here on earth living.
And thus declared he by his writing
That kings and princes should about the^ draw,
Folk that been true and well learned in law.


After his speech thus declared / ye king rode forth a quycker pase till he
came unto the conduyt in Chepe. where were ordained diverse wellys as ye well
of mercy, ye well of grace, and the well of pity. And at every well a lady
standing, that mynystred the water of every well to such as would ask it /
and that water was turned into good wine.

About these wells were set diverse trees with flouryshynge leaves and
fruytes, as orenges, almandes pomegarnardes, olyues, lymones, dates, pepys,
quynces, blau^derelles, peches, and other more common fruytes, as costerdes,
warde^s pomewardo^s, rycardo^s, damysyns, and plu^mes, with other fruytes long
to rehearse / ye which were so cu^nyngly wrought, that to many they appeared
natural trees growing.

In the bordour of this delicious place which was named Paradyse, stood two
forgrowen faders, resembling Enocke and Hely / the which had this saying to
the king. Ennok first with a benygne chere,
Prayed god to uphold his prosperity /
And that none enemies have of the power /
Nor that no child of false iniquyte,
Have power to pertu^be thy feiycyte.
This old Ennok to process can well tell,
Prayed for the king as he rode by the well.
After Helias with his sokkys hoar,
Said well deuoutely sokynge on the king /
God conserve the and keep evermore,
And make the blyssed here on earth living
And preserve the in all manner thing,
And special among kings all,
In enemies hands that thou never fall.


And that speech fynyshed / ye king rode forth a little forther. And there was
ordained a tower garnysshed with the armies of England and of France. This
tower was wonderful to behold / for there was showed in order the title
which the king had unto the crown of France. And vpryght by this tower
stood.ii. grene trees artifycyally with grene leuys garnysshed and wrought /
that one verynge the genelogy of saint Edward, and that other of saint Lewys /
and garnyshed with leopardes and flourdelyces. And over these.ii. foresaid
trees was ordained the third / which was made the forth spryng of Iesse /
wherein was showed the genelogy of our blessed lady set out in most curyous
wise. And upon the front of this tower were written these verses following. By
these.ij. trees which here gr^we upright,
From saint Edward and also sent I owys /
The rote I take, palpable to each sight,
Conveyed by syne from kings of great price,
Which some bare Leopardes, and some flourdelice /
Armies excellent of honor have no lack,
Which the.vi. Henry may now bear on his back,
As in degree of just successiowne,
As old cronicles truly determine /
Unto this king is now descended down,
From either party right as any syne.
Upon whose head now fresshesy does shine,
Two rich crowns much soueraygn and pleasau^ce
To bring in peace between England and France.


Than from this the king passed on till he came at the co^duyt at Paulys gate /
where was pyghte a celestyall trone / and therein was set a personage of the
Trinyte, with a multitude of angels playenge and singing upon all
instruments of musyk. And upon the front of ye said trone, was written these
verses or balades following / the which were spoken by the father unto the
king. To you my angels this precept ye assure,
This prince that is so young and tender of age,
That ye entende and do your besy cure,
To keep and save him from all manner damage,
In his life here during all his age,
That his renown may sprede and shine far,
And of his two realms to cease the mortal war.
And I will ferther as I show to him here,
Fulfill him with joy and worldly habundaunce /
And with length of many a wholesome year,
I shall comfort and help with all pleasaunce /
And of his lieges to have faithful obeysaunce /
And also multiply and increase his line,
And cause his nobles thorugh the world shine.


ANd this done he entered the churcheyarde / where he was met with processyon
of the deane and the chano^s of Paulys. with whom also in pontificalibus came
the archbysshop of Cauntorbury and chau^celer of England, with the bishop of
Lyncolne, of Bathe, of Salysbury, of Norwyche, of Ely, and of Rochestre / the
which so conveyed him into the church, and there made his oblacyons. And that
done he took again his stead at the west door of Paul's, and so rode forth
unto westmynker / where again he was of the abbot and covent received with
procession and by them conveyed unto saint Edwardes shryne, and there tarried a
while Te deum was song in the Quyer. And that finysshed / he was of his lords
conveyed unto his palace. And than the mayre with his cytezyns returned ioyusly
to London.

Than upon the saturday following being the.xxiii. day of Februarii / the
mayre and aldermen yode unto the king, and presented him with an hamper of
gold, and therein a thousand pound of fair nobles / for the which the king
yielded unto them loving thanks.

This year also by reason of ye sowdyours of Calays, a restraynte was made
there of the wolles / for they were not co^te^t of their wages. wherefore the
regent of France being tha^ Capytayne of Calays, came down thither in the
easter weke. At which time being the wednesdaye in the said weke, many
sowdyoures were arested and put in ward. And when he had so done, he rode to
Tyrewyn / and there by the means of the bishop of Tyrewyn, he married ye earl
of saint Paul's daughter / and shortly after returned to Calays, and caused the
said sowdyours to be inquired of / and finally.iiii. of them were demed to
dye. which.iiii. yt is to say Johan Maddely; Johan Lundaye, Thomas Palmer, and
Thomas Talbot, were beheded at Calays the.xi. day of Iuny. And an hundredth
and.x. sowdyours were banysshed the town / over sir score banysshed before
that time. And upon mydsomer even following, the said lord regent with his
new spouse came unto London / and so tarried in England till the later end of
August.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxxii. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxxiii. Johan Olney. Johan Parneys
Fysshmonger. Anno.xi. Johan Pa^dystey.
IN this.xi. year after some writers / was by the auctoryte of pope Martyn^
the.v. of that name, Countyse of Basyse*
ye cou^sayl of Basyle gadered. During the which, the heretykes of Prage
otherwise called of Bohemy or Beme were somoned thither. The which under a
suertye or saufe co^duyte, sent thither for the^ with other, an English Clerk
named master Peter a renegate. The which defended so styfly their erronyous
opynyons, that they returned without reconsylyacyon. Thus ha^gynge this
cou^sayll, pope Martyn dyed / and for him w^schosen Eugeny the fourth. Bugeny;
ye pope.
The which being admytted, demeaned him so nycely in the beginning, that he
was put out of Rome / and diverse princes took party again him, in such wise
that he was lykely to be deposed. But after he bare him so sadly, yt he
recovered such as he had lost, and continued the sea by the space of.xvi.
years / and ruled so, that of some writers he is called Eugenius gloriosus. And
that is of relygyous men / for unto them he had a special zele and favor.
And upon the eyhgte day of July / king Henry this year began his parlyamet
at westmynster, and so continued it till it was Lammas / and than it was
aiourned unto saint Edwardes day.

And this year in the southe weste appeared a sterre which was like to a
blasynge sterre / and of some it is so named. The earl of Huntyngdon^ also this
year was sent into France with a warly company / and did there great feats as
says the Englyssh cronycle. But of yt is nothing towched in the French book.

Anno dn^i. M.iii.C.xxxiii. Anno dn^i. M.iii.C.xxxiiii. Thomas Chalton^. Johan
Brokley draper. Anno.xii. Johan Lynge.
IN this.xii. year and.ix. day of Nouembre / the terment of the earl of saint
Pawle father unto the duchess of Bedforde was solemply holde^ in Pawles
church of London / where the more party of astates of this realm were
present. And the.ix. day of March following / the lord Talbot with a goodly
company passed thoroughe the city of London toward the sea into France /
where he wrought much woe unto ye French men, whereof the partyculers be not
towched. Contynuynge the foresaid war in France / the town of saint Denis
which is within.ii. Englyssh miles of Paris, was gotten by treason or practyse
of one named Johan Notyce a knight of Orleau^ce, from Matthew Gougth and Thomas
Kyryell capytayns / and slew there many Englysshemen and many they took
prisoners. But soon after the said capytaynes with strength taken to them
of the Parysyens and other, laid such a strong syege round about the said
town of saint Denis, that finally they agreed to redelyuer ye town, if they
were not rescowed of the French king within fyftene days / so that ye said
days expyred, it was returned to the Englyssheme^. But this not with
standing the Frenchemen wanne daily upon the English men, both in those
parties and also in Normandy. Among which gaynes, ye French Gaguyne brings
in a matyer of game, as he reherseth to ye mockage of Englysshemen / and says
that in this year and feast of Myghelmas at a place called Fewgeri in Guyan, a
strong fight was foughten between the Englysshmen and the Fre^chemen. During
the which / one named Boosaprest a French Knight, for fere fled from that
fight and hid him in a couerte of busshes / and there stood still till the
fight was ended, and the Englysshemen scomfyted and scared. Of the which two
of adventure to sauegarde them self fled to the said thycke busshe, where
the cowarde French knight stood. The which when he had espied and learned
of them, that the French party had won the field / he became so
coragyous, that he forced the said two Englysshemen to become his prisoners /
and so with them entredde the host of the Frencheme^, and bare a countenance
as he had won them in the foresaid fight. But at length when all his
demeanoure was known / he was for his feate had in great derysyon, and by
his chief capytayne named Guylla^ de saint Albyne pryued of his prysones.

And in this season also the earl of Arundell, which in Normandy had manly
borne him / herynge that one Hyrus a French capytayne had fortyfyed a
strong castle named Gerborym before distroyed of English men, took with him
a certain of sow dyoures, and gyrde the castle with a strong syege / and
assawted it by sundry times ma^fully, as says the French cronycle. But
Gagwyne in his cronycle says, that or the syege were fully laid or the
castle were fully repaired / the said Hyrus with his company issued out of the
castle, and gave unto ye said earl a cruel skyrmysshe, in the which the
said earl received a deedly wound, and dyed shortly after. And that vyctory
so by ye French men optayned / that castle was to ye hurt of the
Englysshemen reedyfyed / and a place called Dyepp^ with other also won from
them.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxxiiii. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxxv. Thomas B^rnwell. Robertr
O^lay grocer. Anno.xiii. Symonde Air.
IN this.xiii. year and even of saint Katheryne / began a frost that endured
unto the feast of saint Scolastica, or the.x. day of February / the which
frase the Thamys so fervently, that ship nor bote might come with vytayle to
London. wherefore such ships as came this year to Thamys mouth from Burdeux
were dyscharged there, and the wine and other marchaundyse by them brought,
carried by land to the city. And in the latter end of Decembre this year
ended the parlyamente holden at westmynster, begone at Myghelmas term before
passed.

This year also by means of the pope than Eugeny the.iiii, at Aras in Pycardy
was holden a great counsel, for to conclude an union and peace atwene the two
realms of England and France. To the which counsel, by the said popes
co^mau^dment came as a person indyfferent, Nicholas cardynall of ye holy
cross, with six Romayne bysshoppes to him assygned. And for the king of
Englandes party was there assygned the cardynall of wynchester, the
archebysshop of york, the earls of Huntyngdon^ and of Suffolk, with diverse
other. And for the French king, was there the duke of Burbon^, the earl of
Rychemount, ye archebysshop of Raynys chaunceler than of France, the deane of
Patys with many other which I pass over. There were also as fortherers of the
matyer, the cardynal of Cyprys. And for the duke of Burgoyn^, was there the
bishop of Cambray, and Nycholas Raulyn the said dukes chaunceler, with diverse
earls and barons of that duchy. And for the duke of Brytayne, were there the
earls of Alenson and of Bar with other / over and above diverse oratoures
appointed for the countye of Flaundres. At which assemble and counsayll thus
holden as testifies diverse writers / many great offers by mean of ye above
named cardynal of holy cross or ^ai^^ cross, to the English lords were
offered. But as says Gaguinus the Englyssheme^ were so obstinately set on
war / ye reason might not co^te^t. By reason of which obstinaci / ye
cou^sayll was deferred till an other day. At which day the Englysshemen
entendynge the co^tinuaunce of war, absentyd them self. wherewith the said
cardynall being dyscontented, made means of an entreaty of peace atwene
Charles, that took upon him as French king, and Phylyp duke of Burgoyn.
whereof the said Charles was so feign, ye for stablysshynge of the peace, and to
satysfye him for ye murder of his father / he gave unto him all the utter
bounds of Champeyn^ marching upon Burgoin, with diverse cities, as saint
Quyntyne, Corbie, Peron^, Abbeuyle, and other, with the county of Poytyaw and
lordshyp of Macon^. And as witnesses ye foresaid Gagwyne / many mo things
were unto the duke by the said Charles promised, which after their both
dethes were broken and stood for naught. After which peace thus atwene them
confermed and proclaimed / the said duke became utter enemy to the king of
England, as after shall appear. And soon after the said duke began his order
of the lyle and the golden flese, and ordained certain knights of that order
/ and made thereunto many statutes and ordenaunces, whereof diverse were like unto
the statutes of the garter. And in the end of this year and.xiiii. day of
Septembre / at Roan^ in Normandye died the noble prince John^ duke of Bedforde
and regent of France / and was after with great solempnytie buried within the
church of notir Dame of the same city, where for him are founded wonderful
things after some me^nes report. But for I find thereof in writing nothing,
I pass it over.

Anno. dn^i. M.iiii.C.xxxv. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xxxvi. Thomas Catworth. Henry
Frowyk mercer. Anno.xiiii. Robert Clopton^.
IN the.xiiii. year and beginning of the same / the duke of Bar accompanied
with Burgonyo^s and Frenchemen, wanne ye town of Harflewe with diverse other
vyllages. And in Apryll following / the said duke accompanied with ye lord
Teruan and the master of the kings chyualry, took the town of saint Denis,
and slew therein above.iiii.C. Englysshemen / and took prisoner Thomas
Beleamounde their capytayne with many other. And than ye French men assawted a
tower thereby called Ueuen, and took it by appointment.

Tha^ one named Notyce a knight of Orleau^ce, with a strength of Knights drew
him nere the city of Paris / and there at a house of relygyon of ye
charterhouse order, lodged him beyond saint Denis over the water of Sayn^ /
and co^federed with certain cytezen of the city named Michaell Laylery, Johan
Frountayne, Thomas Pygacen, Johan de saint Benoit, Nicholas Lorueyn^, and
Jacques Bergery, for to betraye the city, and to bring it out of ye English
possessyon. The which persons being hedes of the city conveyed their
purpose in such wise, that they turned the commons of the city upon the
English men / and suddenly arose again them, and by force slew of them a
great nombre, and there they did take many prisoners. And as the English men
fled or faughte by the streets, the women and other feeble persons cast upon
them stones and ho^e lycoures to their great confusyon / so yt the English
men were in passing mysery and desolacyon. In this time of persecucion, the
bishop of Mor^^, which than was named chaunceler of English men in those
parties with other / hardly escaped and took the tower of saint Denis, which
as yet rested in the English possessyon.

Than the other host of Frenchemen herynge of this rumor in the city / anon
drew nere, and entered by saint James gate without much resystence / and so
enjoyed the city at their pleasure.

Than the Englysshemen being in the tower of saint Denis, feryng that they
might not long hold the said place again their enemies / fyl to a treaty,
and co^dyscended to pass fre with their lives. The which wha^ they should pass
upon their iournay were di^ided and scorned of ye Fre^chenacyon out of all
mesure. And when the city of Paris was thus subdued to the French dominion /
anon ye Englyssh people that there abode under fine and raunsom, were sworn
to Charles the seventh than taking upon him as French king. And anon after
were won from ye Englyssh power, the holds named Creoll and saint Germayne.
In which pass time and season, for to stre^gthe and have the gydynge of
Normandy / the duke of york encompaned with the earl of Salysbury, and the
lord of Fawcou^brydg sailed into France. And the earl of Morteyn^ being tha^
at Calays, made a vyage into Flaundres, and skyrmysshed with them ye bordred
upon Pycardy, and slew of them over. CCCC, and gate a great drove of beestes,
and brought them unto Calays. And for that certaynte was had that Phylyp duke
of Burgoyn ente^ded to lay his syege about Calays / therefore London and all
the good towns of England were charged to send thither certain men well and
suffycyently for the war apparayled. whereof London sent at their charge men.

Than upon the.ix. day of Iuyll / the duke of Burgoyn with a great multitude
of Burgonyons and Flemynges appeared before Calays, Calys besyeged.
and there pyght his pauylyons and tents / so that every town of Flau^dres
had their tents by themself. At which season was Lyeutenaunt of Calays sir
John^ Ratclyf knight, and of the castle was lieutenaunte the baron of Dudley.
And so that syege endured upon.iii. wekes. In which seson many knyghtly acts
were done and exercysed upon both parties, which for lengthynge of the time I
pass. Than upon the second day of August, the duke of Glouceter and
protector of England with a company of.v.C. sails as some writers have,
landed at Calays / and intended upon the third day following to have issued
out of the town, and to have given battle to ye Flemynges. But as testyfyeth
all English writers / so soon as ye duke of Burgoyn was ware of the great
power of the lord protector, he took with him of his ordenau^ce that he might
lightly carry / and the other that were heavy and combrous, he left behind him.
Among the which one was left before Guynes a great gunne of brass named
Dygon, over diverse serpentynes and other great gunnes. And the Flemynges left
behind them a great quantyte of bear, beside wine and flower and other vytayle.

But of this vyage writes otherwise Gaguyne / and says that ye duke well and
manfully, as a valyaunte knight i^ his acts, continued his syge before Calays
over two months / And there did many noble acts in assaylyng of his enemies.
And after ye Flemynges by reason of their murmr and rebellion had refused
him, and in manner lafte him almost with out company / yet not withsta^dynge he
daily assailed his enemies / and after with such small company as was laft
him, wha^ he saw he might not prevail he returned into his country. And so
thus always in all the said Gagwynus book, he wypeth from ye Englysshemen in all
that he may the honor / and excuses their enemies to his power. when the
duke with his host was thus fled / the lord protectoure with his people
followed him into the country by the space of. xi. days. In which season he
brent but two towns / which were named and yet be, Poperynge and Bell / and
returned to Calays and after into England.

And this year was the castle or town of Rokkesborouth in Scotland besyeged
of the king of Scotts. But so soon as he had wyttyng that sir Rauffe Gray
knight was coming with a competent nombre for to remove that siege / anon he
departed, leuynge some part of his ordenaunce behind him / to his great
dyshonoure.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxxvi. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxxvii. Thomas Morsted. John^
Mychell. Anno.xv. wyllyam Gregory.
IN this.xv. year and third day of Ianuarii / queen Katheryne mother unto
Henry the syxte, wife of Henry the fyfte, dyed at Barmundissey in southwarke /
and after with due solempnyte brought thorughe the city, and so conveyed to
westmynster / and there buried in ye mids of our lady chapel under a to^be of
marbell. But when our soueraygne lord Henry the.vii. than being king, caused
the chapel to be taken down and builded a new, without the like there unto as
now to men does appear / than the corpse of ye excellent princes was taken up,
and set by the tomb of her lord and husband during ye time of the building
of the said new chapel / and after buried by her said lord within the said
chapel. And ye xiiii. day of ye said month fill down suddenly the furthest
gate toward Southwarke with ye tower thereupon, and.ii. of the furthest arches
of ye said bridge, but as god would no creature was therewith perysshed, that is
to mean of humayne persons.

And the.xxi. day of this same month of Ianuarii / the king began his
parlyament at westmynster, which before was purposed to have benholden at
Cambrydge. To this parlyament came ye bishop of Turuyn / and the counsel of
the earl of Armynak, whereof I find not ye cause expressed. And after easter
was a day of dyot holde^ between Grauenynge and Calays, for matters touching ye
king and the duke of Burgoyne / where for the king appeared the cardynall of
England, ye duke of Norffolke, and the earl of Stafforde, with diverse other.
And for the dukes party, appeared there the duchess his wife, with diverse
other of the said dukes counsel. where by means of the said persons, an
abstynence of war was taken for a certain time in the duchess name. For the
king would take none appoyntme^t with the duke / for somoche as he had gone
from his truth and allegeaunce, that before time he had made with ye king.
And upon the second day of July this year dyed queen Jane, the which sometime
had been the wife of king Henry the.iiii, and before that the wife of the duke
of Brytayne / and was carried from Barmundessey to Cauntorbury, and there buried
by her husband Henry the.iiii. And this year fell a chance that had not ben
seen many years before. For all ^yons dyed in the tower / the which had
co^tynued there a long season.

In this year also ye king of Scotts was traitorously murdered by servants
of his own. king of Scotts murdered.
Of the which traitors the capytayne of them was named Robert Grame / y^
which after was with other of his company taken and put unto most paynfull
death. This said king of Scotts had ^en prisoner fyftene years in England.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xxxvii. Anno. dn^i. M.iiii.C.xxxviii. wyllyam Chapman.
wyllyam Estfelde Mercer. Anno.xvi. wyllyam Halys
IN this.xvi. year and month of Nouembre / king Henry caused to be kept a
solemn obyt or terment within the church of Paul's, for Sygysmonde the
emperor and knight of ye garter. This was a man of merueylous great and worthy
fame, as by the auctour of Cronica Cronicarum is expressed. After whose death
the gydynge of ye empire fill to Albert that had married the only daughter of
ye said Sygysmonde.

Anno. dn^i. M.iiii.C.xxxviii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xxxix. Hugh Dyke. Stephen
Brown Grocer. Anno.xvii. Nycholas yoo.
IN this year, upon new years day in the after noone, a stake of wood fill
down suddenly at Baynardes castle upon Thamys side, and slew.iii. men and
hurt diverse other. And at Bedford this year at the keeping of a shyre day, by
the falling of a steyer were.xviii. murdered and slain / beside many other
sore hurt and maimed. And the last day of Apryll, dyed in Roan sir Richard
Beauchamp called of common fame ye good earl of warwyke. This was lyeutenaunt of
ye king in Normandy, and demened him there full well and manfully / whose body
was after brought unto warwyke, and there in a new chapel builded upon the
southe side of the quyer, buried full honorably.

This year also was great derthe A derthe.
of corn in England and also in France / in somoche yt a busshell was sold
at London for.iii. s. and iii. s. and iiii. d. And in France i^ Paris, it was
at like value. And there also they dyed sore of the sickness of ipidimie. For
this scarcyte of whete in England in many places the people made them breed of
fetches, pesyn, and benes. And after some writers for lack of these foresaid
graynes, some poor people made them breed of Fe^necotes. But yet by the
prouydence of Stephen Brown this year Mayre / many ships were freyghte with
rye out of Pruce, and dyscharged at London, that eased the people nere to the
city greatly. This of many writers is named the second dear year.

In this year ended the counsel or synod holde^ at Basyle, begone as before
is said in the.xi. year of this king. Pope Eugeny deposed.
By auctoryte of which counsel Eugeny the.iiii. was deposed / and Amedeus a
duke and prince of Sauoy, was chosen for pope in the place of the forenamed
Eugeny. But yet he had such aid, that he continued in Rome as pope all his
lives time. And that other which was named of his ayders Felix the.v,
continued his dygnyte in other places / so that tha^ arose a great scisme in ye
church, whether of these.ii. was indubitat pope. For some countrees vphelde ye
one and some that other / so that therwere allowed none of them both / and that
was called ye neutralytie. This scysine continued upon.ix. years, the term
while Eugeny lived. After whose death was chosen a cardynall named Thomas
Sarazan / and after was named Nycholas the.v. To whom the said Felix after
that he was admitted for Peter's successor, of his own good mind renounced
his dygnyte of papacy / and submytted him to the rule and obedyence of the^
said.v. Nycholas tha^ being indubitat pope. And thus cessed y^ scysme in the
church, which had continued by the term above specyfyed. This Felix was a
devout prince and saw the sons of his sons / and after lived a devout and
holy life, and lastly was chosen pope as before is showed / for the which he is
of diverse writers accounted for happy. But and he had not meddled with the
title of the church, and therewith blotted his old age / he had after the
opinion of other writers, be named or allowed much more blessed and happy. And
this year in the month of August in London, were two bawdes punysshed with
werynge of ray hodes / and after.xl. days enprysonment, they were banysshed
the town and driven out with most shame.

In this year also the conduyte in Fletestrete was begone by sir wyllyam
Estfelde knight and late mayre / and so fynysshed of his good disposicion
without cost or charge to the city. And he with sir Jews and Johan of Estsex
were made knights of the Bathe in the same year.

And in this year dyed Robert Chicheley grocer and twyes mayre of London / the
which wylled in his testament, that upon his mind day a good and competent
dinner should be ordained for.xxiiii.C. poor me^ / and that of houssholders of
the city if they might be found. And over that was.xx.li. destrybuted among
them / which was to every man two pens.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xxxix. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xl. Robert Marchall. Robert Large
mercer. Anno.xviii. Phylyp Malpas.
THis.xviii. year upon the day of saint Botolph or.xvii. day of Iuny / a
priest after he was degrated of his prestly dygnyte named sir Richard was
brent for heresye at ye tower hill / how well in his latter day he took great
repentance, and dyed gods man and in the faith of the church. This for
words spoken by his life that the posterne of ye tower should synke as after
it did, and other fantastycall deeds or words / he of many lewd folks was
accounted for an holy man. wherefore after his death they came to his place of
execucyon, and there made their oblacyo^s and prayers, and arered a great hepe
of stones, and pyght there a cross by night / so that ^i this means a great
dysclaunder ran upon the church, and specially upon such as had put him to
death. But to cease that rumoure / co^mau^dment was sent from ye king to
punysshe all such as thither went on pilgrimage. By virtue whereof ye mayre and
shyreffes did such dylyge^ce, that shortly after all ye sekyng and offering
was fordone and laid aparte.

This year also ye shyreffes of London fette out of saint Martynes legraunt.v.
persons being there in sayntwary / and ladde them to the country in bred
street, where they remained certain days. But those days expired / they were
by ye kings Justices restored unto sayntwary. In this passetyme the war
atwene England and France endurynge / in a winter season when the ground was
covered with a mighty snow, and therewith all a great frost had hardened the
pondes and dyches / the Englysshme^ which lay in a strong hold nyghe unto a
town called Pountlarge, arrayed them in white clothes over their harneys / and
so in great nombre approached the dykes, and passed upon the yse to ye walls
and them scaled / and the watch of ye town slepynge, took the town and
distressed therein myche people. From the which danger escaped right
hardly.ii. capytaynes of that town named Johan de Uyllers and Narabon^ a
knight Burgonyon. The country about Paris was also sorevexed with ye rauyne
of wolves, that proclamacyon was made, that every grene or new flayn skyn^e of
a wolf that was brought unto Paris, ye provost should give to the brynger.xx.
shelynges or.xx. sous of that country money / which amou^teth to.ii. s. vi. d.
sterlynge. Dyf^rrcyo^ of wolf
It was not long after, or Charles the French king laid unto ye foresaid
town a strong siege. But it by ye duke of york and the lord Talbot was well
and knyghtly defended / in somoche ye one time they put the Frenchemen to
rebuke, and were lykely to have taken their king, ^e had be the sooner rescous.
Lastly ye duke of york and the said lord Talbot, for urgent causes departed
the^s to Roan / and betoke the town to ye rule of sir Gerueys of Clifto^
knight and other, having with them to the nombre of a thousand sowdyours, But
the third day after the dukes departing / the French king so fyersly
assailed the town, that in the end he wanne it by strength, and slew therein
many an Englyssh man, and took many prisoners. And soon after was the towns
of Meleon, of Corbeyll, and of the Ebreouse, lost from the Englysshmen. For ye
shall understand that sundry and many times ye towns and holds in France
were lost and efte won. But ever ye more loss turned / to the English
party, till all Normandy were lost, and all other lands of France
appartynynge to the king of England.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xl. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xli Johan Sutton. Johan Paddysley
goldsmythe. Anno.xix. Wyllyam wetynhale.
THis.xix. year began murmr and grudge to break at large, that before had been
kept in mewe, atwene persons nere about ye king, and his uncle the famous
Humfrey duke of Gloceter and protector of the land. Again whom diverse
co^iectures were attempted a far / which after were set nere to him, so yt
they left not till they had brought him unto his confusyon.

And first this year dame Eleanoure Cobham, whom he was familier with or she
were to him married, was arested of certain points of treason / and thereupon
by examynacion convict, and lastly demed to dwell as an outlawe in the isle of
Man, under the ward of sir Thomas Stanleye knight. And soon after were
arested as ayders and councelers of the foresaid duchess, master Thomas
Southwell a Chanon of saint Stephyns chapel at westmynster, master Johan Hum
a chaplayne of the said duchess, and master Roger Bolyngbroke a man expert
in nygromancy, and a woman called Margery Iourdemayne surnamed the wytch of Eye
beside wynchester. To whose charge it was laid that these iiii. persons
should at the request of the duches, deuyse an image of wax like unto ye king /
the which image they delte so with, that by their deuyslysshe incantacyons
and sorcery, they intended to bring out of life little and little the kings
person, as they little and little consumed ye image. For the which treason and
other, finally they were co^uycte and adiuged to dye. But master Thomas
Southewell dyed in the tower of London, the night before he should have been
judged on the morn / as in the next year following shall be declared.

ye have in ye preceding year herd, how the town of Pountlarge was won by
Charles ye took upon him as king / where as mani Englysshme^ were taken
prisoners and sent to a castle named Coruyle. where they so being in prison,
labored unto the ruler of that hold, that one of them might be set at large
to labor to their fre^des for their raunsom. The which person when he was
at his lybertye / went unto a strength thereby, whereof an aragon knight was a
Capytayne under the duke of york, and showed to him that the castle of
Coruyle was but sklenderly ma^ned, and that it might be won by polycy and
strength. whereupon the said capytayne named Frauncys in the night following,
set a busshmente nere unto the said castle / and in the daunynge of the
morning arrayed iiii. of his sowdyoures in husbandme^nes, array, and sent them
with sakkes filled with diverse fruytes to offer to sell to the occupyers of the
castle. The which when they were common to the gate, and by their langage
taken for Frenchemen / anon without suspicion were taken in / and seeing that
few folks were styrryng, held ye porter muet while one gave the foresaid
bushmente knowledge / so that shortly they entered and took the capytayne in his
bed, and after spoiled the castle, and delivered the English prisoners,
and conveyed the Fre^cheme^ with all the goods yt they might carry out of the
castle unto Roan^.

Upon the day of the translacyon of saint Edward or the twelfe day of Octobre /
upon which day the mayre is named by the mayre and his brethren for ye year
following / that day when the commons of the city after their auncye^t custom
had chosen two alderine^ such as before had been shyreffes of London and of
myddelsex, that is to wete Roberte Clopton Draper and Rauffe Hola^d tayllour,
and them presented by name unto the mayre and his brother than sitting in the
utter chamber where the mayres courts ben kept, to the intent that the said
mayre and his brother might chose one of the said two such as they thought
most necessary and worshypfull for the rome: the said mayre and his brethern
chase there Roberte Clopto^ and brought him after down upon his right hand
toward ye hall. whereof when certain tayllours there being were ware, and
saw that Rauffe Hola^de was not chosen / anon they cried, nay nay not this
but Rauffe Holande, wherewyth the old mayre being astonyed, s^ode stylle upon
the stayer, and commanded them to keep silence / and after held on his way
to the eest end of ye hall, and there set him down, and his brethern about
him. In which mean time the said tayllours had continued their cry, and
encensed other of low felysshyppes of the city as simple persons, to take
their part and to cry as fast as they / and would not cease for speech of
the mayre nor oyes made by the mayres sergeaunt of arms. wherefore the mayre
to appese the rumor, sent down the shyreffes and commanded them to take the
mysdoers, and to send the^ unto prison.

The which precept observed, and a twelf or syxten of the chief of them sent
unto Newgate / the said rumor was anon ceased. Of the which prisoners some
were after fined and some punysshed by long inprysonemente.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xlii. wyllyam Cumbys. Robert
Clopton. Anno.xx. Rychard Rich.
IN this.xx. year / and in the month of following / the parties before in that
other year arrested for treason, were brought unto the guyldhall of London, and
there arreygned of such points as before ben reherced / and for ye same
finally master John^ Hum and master Roger Bolynbroke were judged to be
drawn, hanged, and quartered, and the wytche to be brent. But master Thomas
Sothwell dyed in the tower ye night before yt he should have be judged. Tha^
according to the sentence of the court^ before passed / master Roger was
drawn to tyborne, and there hanged and quartered / the which at ye season took
upon his death, that he was not gylty of ye treason that he was put to and iuged
for. And the next day following was the wytch burnt in Smythfelde / and master
Johan Hum was pardoned and suyd out his charter.

This year also ye lord Talbot laid syege before an haven town in Normandy
named Deep, and set his ordinance upon an hylle called Poleet / where among
other engynes and instruments of war he had devised a mighty tower of
tymbre, out of the which he shot his gunnes and other ordinance, and
therewyth brosyd and crasyd the wallys, and wrought thereby great dyspleasure
unto the town of Deep.

In this town was capytayne Charlys Mareys a French knight knight / the
which manfully defended the town, till unto him with rescous came John^
Notice of Orleaunce knight with a company of.M. sowdyours. And there after came
to the rescous of the said town.ii. other knights named Arthur de Lo^geuyle
and sir Thomas Droynon, with.vi.C. me^. And after this Charles which named him
self French king / sent thither the third rescous of.v.C. men of armies and
a.M. of other sowdyours, under.ii. leders called Theodalde / and Guyllyam
Rychauyll knights. The which rescous not wythstandynge / the said lord
Talbot well and ma^fully co^tynued his syege, and assawted the town in right
cruel manner, so that they were feign to call for more aid. whereof the lord
Talbot being ware, thinking that shortly the Frenchmen should be constrained to
give over the town / left the gydyng of the syege unto sir wyllyam Poyton and
sir John^ Ryppela^d or Tryppelande knight, and after departed. After whose
departing with in short while, ye Dolphyn of Uye^ne Lowys by name, and son
unto the forenamed Charles French king / accompanied with the earl of saint
Paul and other to the nombre of.xvi.C. knights, came unto the rescous of the
said town. And after he had a day rested him and his sowdiours he sent the
forenamed Theodalde with a strength of.iiii.C. men for to assail the forsayde
tower of tymbre / but little hurt did they thereunto. Than the said Dolphyn
sent an other strength of.vi.C. men to assail it / but the Englyshemen quyt
them so manfully that they slew.viii. score Frenchmen, and wou^nded
over.iii.C. wherwyth the Dolphyn being grievously amoued / assembled the
uttermost strength he might make, as well of the town and other, and set upon
the English men, which were ^ore bruised with daily fight and few in nombre
/ and finally scomfited them, and slew of them upon.CCC. and took ye rest
prisoners. Among yt which the foresaid two English capitaynes were taken /
and a kynnesma^ of the lord Talbottes or more verily one of his baste sons.
And thus was Deep rescowed, and the Englysshmen dyscomfyted / after they had
ma^fully maynteyned that syege by the space of.ix. wekes and odd days.

(...) in (...)
Also this year in ye month of August was a great affray i^ Fletestrete, atwene
the getters of the ynnes of court and the inhabytauntes of the same street.
which affray began in ye night / and so continued with assawtes and small by
kerynges till ye next day. In which season much people of the city thither
was gadered / and diverse men of both parties were slain and many hurt. But
lastly by the presence and dyscrecyon of ye mayer and shyreffes this affraye
was appesed. Of the which was chyfe occasyoner a man of Clyfforde ynne named
Herbotell.

In this year also, by certain ambassadoures yt were sent out of England into
Guyon / a marriage was concluded in the beginning of the year following, atwene
the king and ye earls daughter of Armenak. which conclusion was after
dysalowed and put by, by the means of the earl of Suffolk. which kyndled a
new brande of brunynge envy atwene ye lord protector and him / and took fire
in such wise that it left not till both parties with many other were
consumed and slain, whereof ensued much myschefe within the realm, and loss
of all Normandy / as after to you shall appear.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xlii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xlili. Thomas Beaumount. Ion^
Athyrley Irenmonger. Anno.xxi. Richard Nordon.
IN this.xxi. year / the foresaid earl of Suffolk, which as before is touched
had fordon the co^clusyon of the marriage taken by the ambassadors, between the
king and ye earl of Armenakes daughter, went over him self with other unto
him assygned / and there in France concluded a marriage between the king and
dame Margarete the kings daughter of Cecyle and of Jerusalem as says the
English cronycle. And for that marriage to bring about / to the said king of
Cecyle was delivered ye duchye of Angeou and erledome of Main, which are
called the keys of Normandy.

But the French writer Gaguyne says in his latyne cronycle, yt about this
time the earl of Suffolk came unto Charles the French king to a town in
Lorayn named Naunce or Nau^t, and axed of him his daughter to be queen of
England / but he gives to her no name. The which request of the said Charles
to the said earl was granted. Also he affermeth little tofore that season, a
peace between both realms was concluded for the term of.xxii. months /
which peace endured but a while after.

And this year upon Candelmas even, the steple of sait Poules church in London
was set on fire by tempest of lyghtnynge / and lastly quenched by great
dylygence and labor of many persons. But of all that there labored, the
morrow mass preeste of Bow church in chepe was most commended and noted.

Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xliii. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xliiii. Nycholas wyfforde. Thomas
Catworthe Grocer. Anno.xxii. John^ Norman.
This.xxii. year / ye earl of Stafforde was made or created duke of Bukkyngham,
the earl of warwyke, duke of warwyke, the earl of Dorset marquis of Dorset, and
the earl of Suffolk marquys of Suffolk. The which marquys of Suffolk soon
after with his wife and other honorable personages as well of men as of women,
with great apparayl of chayres and other costyous ordenaunce for to convey the
forenamed lady Margarete into England, sailed into France / where they were
honorably received, and so tarried there all this mayres year.

In this year was also an act made by auctoryte of the common cou^sayll of
London, that upon the sunday should no manner of thing with in the fraunchyse
of ye city be bought or sold, another vytayll nor other thing / nor none
artyfycer should bring his ware to any man to be worn or occupied that day,
as tayllours garments or cordewayners shoys / and so in likewise of all other
occupacyons.

The which ordenaunce held but a while.

Anno dn^i. M.CCC.xliiii. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.xlv. Stephyn Foster. Henry Frowyke
Mercer. Anno.xxiii. Hughe wyche.
This.xxiii. year and month of the foresaid lady Margarete came over into
England / and in the month following she was married unto king Henry at a town
called Sowthwyke in the country of Hamshyre. And from thens she was honorably
conveyed by the lords and estates of this la^d, which met with her in
sundry places with great retynewe of men in sundry lyueryes, with their sleuys
browdered and some betyn with gold smythes works in most costly manner. And
specially the duke of Glouceter met with her with five hundredth men in one
lyuerey. And so she was conveyed unto Black heth / where upon the.xviii. day
of May she was met with the mayre, aldermen, and sheryfes of the city, and
the crafts of the same, in brown blewe with brawderyd sleuys. That is to mean
every mystery or craft with conysaunce of his mystery, and red hoodes upon
either of their heddes / and so the same day brought her unto London, where
for her were ordained sumptuous and costly page^tes and resemblau^ce of diverse
old hystoryes, to ye great comfort of her and such as came with her, ye
manner whereof I pass over for lengthynge of the time. And so with great
tryu^phe she was brought unto westmynster / where upon the.xxx. day of the
month of May, that was the sunday after Trynyte sunday, she was solemply
crowned.

After which feeste, iustes were there holden by three days continual within
the seyntwary before ye abbey. Of this marriage are of diverse writers left
diverse remembraunces / saying that this marriage was unprofitable for the
realm diverse ways. For first was given up for her out of the kings
possession the duchye of Angeou and the erledome of Main. And for the costs
of her conueynge into this land, was axed in plain parlyamente a fyftene and
an half by the marquys of Suffolk. By reason whereof he grew in such hatered
of the people / that finally it cost him his life. And over that it appeared
that god was not pleased with that marriage. For after this day the fortune of
the world began to fall from ye king, so that he lost his friends in
England and his revenues in France. For shortly after all was ruled by the
queen and her counsayl / to the great dysprofyte of the king and his realm /
and to the great maugre and obloquy of the queen.

The which as syn that time has been well prouyd, had many a wrong and false
report made of her, which were to long to rehearse. All which mysery fill,
for brekynge of the promise made by the king unto the earl of Armenakkys
daughter / as before in the.xx. year of the king is touched as agrees most
writers. which mysery in this story shall somdeale appear, as first by the
losyng of Normandy, the deuisio^ of the lords within this realm, the
rebellion of ye cominaltye again their prince and soueraygne, and finally the
king deposed, and the queen with the prince feign to fle the land, and lost
the rule thereof for ever.

Anno. dn^i. M.iiii.C.xlvi. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xlvii. Robert Horn. John^
Olney Mercer. Anno.xxv. Godfrey Boloyne.
This.xxv. year, was a parlyament holde^ at saint Edmondes Bury in Suffolk. To
ye which town all the commons of that country were warned to come in their
most defe^cyble array, to give attendaunce upon the king. And so soon as this
parlyame^t was bego^, and the lords assembled / sir Hu^frey duke of Glouceter
and uncle unto ye king, shortly after was arrested by the vycounte Beawmo^de
tha^ high constable of England / whom accompanied ye duke of Bukkynghm^ and
other. And after this arest was executed / all his own servants were put
from him / and.xxxii of the pryncypall of them were also put under arest, and
sent unto diverse prysons / whereof arose a great murmour among the people.

Than thus co^tynuyng this parlyament, within.vi. days after the duke was
arrested, he was found deed in his bed being the.xxiiii. day of February.
Of whose murdre diverse reports at made, which I pass over.

Than his corpse was laid opyn yt all me^ might se him, but no wonde was found
on him. Of the honorable fame of this man, a long style I might make, of ye
good rule that he kept this land in, during the none age of the king / and
of his honorable household and liberty which passed all other before his time
/ and true of his allegeaunce that no man could with right accuse hi^, but
malycyous persons which his glorious honor and fame lafte not to malign
again him, till he were put from all wordly rule / and specially for it was
thought, that during his life he would withsta^de the delyuery of Angeou and
Main before promised. This for his honorable and lyberall demeanure was
surnamed the good duke of Glouceter. Than after he had lain opyn a season yt
all men might be assured of his death / the corpse was honorably provided for
and so conveyed unto saint Albonys, and there buried nere unto the shryne of
saint Albone / to whose soul god be merciful Amen.

And when this noble prince was thus enteryd / five persons of his household,
that is to say, sir Roger Chamberlayne knight, Myddelton Herbarde, and Arthur
esquyers, and one Richard Neda^ yeman, were sent unto London / and there
arayned and iuged to be drawn, hanged, and quartered. Of the which sentence
drawing and ha^gynge were put in execucio^. But wha^ they were cut down to be
quartered / ye Marquys of Suffolk there being present, showed ye kings
chartour for the^ / and so were delivered to the great reioysyng of ye
multitude of ye people there being present. But for this the grudge and murmour
of ye people ceased not again the Marquys of Suffolk, for the death of the
good duke of Glouceter / of whose murdre he was specially suspected.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xlvii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xlviii. Wyllyam Abraham. John^
Gedney Draper. Anno.xxvi. Thomas Scot.
IN this.xxvi. year after concordau^ce of most writers or nere there about /
ye.xxiii. scisme of ye church ceased, that before had co^tynued between Eugeny
the.iiii. and Felix the.v. upon.xvi. years.

This scisme as before is touched, began by reason of the deposycyo^ of the
said Eugeny at the cou^sayll of Basile, for that that he would not observe the
decrees before made in the cou^sayll of Co^stau^ce, and other causes to him
laid. But yet that deposyng natwythstandynge / perforce he co^tynued pope by
the term of.xiiii. years after. And the said Felix at the said cou^sayll
admitted in like manner, co^tynued as pope by all that said season / like as
before to you I have showed in the.xvii. year of this king. And as now by
exortacyon of christian princes, as the king of England, whose messangers in ye
behalf were the bishop of Norwyche, and the lord of saint Iohn^s, and other
princes / the said pope Felix to set a perfyte union in the church, in this
year of his own volu^te resigned his auctorytie of papacy, and submytted him
unto the obedience of Nicholas the.v. of that name / not wythstandynge that the
said Felix was a man of great birth, and allied to the more party of all
christian princes. And this Nycholas a man of low birth, and of unknown kynred
within the city of Ieane.

Than was Felix made legate of France and cardynal of Sauoye / and lived after
a blessed and holy life and so ended. And as some writers testifye, god for him
has showed diverse miracles syns he dyed. And for this scysme thus gracyously
was ended / a vercyfyer made this verse following. Lux fussit mundo, cessit
Felix Nicholao.


The which verse is thus to mean in English. Light into the world now does
spring and shine.
For Felix unto Nicholas all freely does resyne.


Also as testifies Gaguyne and also some english writers, yt trewys between
England and France co^tynuyng / a knight of ye Englysh party named sir
Frau^ceys Arrogonoyse, took a town upon the borders of Normandy belo^gyng unto
ye duke of Brytayne. For yt which he co^playned him unto Charles the French
king / and he at the said dukes request sent unto ye king of England John^
Hanart and Guyllm^ Co^synot knights, to axe restitucyo^ of ye harm. The which
were answered of ye kings cou^sayll, yt the deed was right displeasau^t unto
ye king / and that ye said sir Frau^ceys had enter prysed ye fayt of his own
presu^pcion and nothing with the kings mind or pleasure. Tha^ after this
answer thus made / it was agreed by the duke of Somerset tha^ lieutenau^t
under the king in Normandy, yt a comynycacio^ for thy^ matyer should be had
at a town named Lovers. To the which place at the day assygned apperyd and
came certain persons for both parties / where they so being occupied, a
train was compassed by the French me^ to take from ye Englyshmen a strong town
or hold named Pou^t all Arche, whereof the manner was this.

A French man or Norman being a carter, which daily used to enter this town
with vytayll and other lodynge of his carte / seeing the negligence of the
Engglysshemen, how lyttel head they took unto the watch of the town, warned
a French capytayne named Floquet / annd said that with little help that town
would be gotten. For expedycyo^ whereof, this Floquet with other couenaunted with
the said carter to bring about their purpose / and ordained unto him.ii. hardy
sowdyours of Frencheme^, which bare in their necks.ii. carpe^ter axes to
show that they were carpenters. And after agreement made among the^, how they
should enter into the town, and where they should mete the carter, which after
his old custom entered the gates without susspycyon / and soon after with his
axe in his neck came by one sowdyour, and in a while after that other / and so
with little questyonyng to them made, passed ye gates / and so lastly unto the
house of ye carter before appointed, and there kept them secret till night was
commyn knowing well that the host of the house was enemy to Englysshemen, for
an injury to him of an English man before done, and showed to him all their
counsayll. The which promised to them all the assystence and aid that he
might make. In this nyghtes pass time for the fortheraunce of this purpose /
the lord of Bressy with a chosen company of knights lodged him in a bussheme^t
nere unto ye town toward the gate of saint Andrewe / and the forenamed
Floquet lodged him with an other chosen company under the part of the town
which is toward Lovers, being with him sir Iamys de Cleremont and other men of
name. These ordenaunces and prouysyons thus ordained for / the forenamed carter
with his.ii. sowdyours forenamed in the spring of the morning, as in the
month of Octobre, came erely unto ye gatewith his carte, and called the porter
by name in fair manner to opyn ye gate, and promised to him a reward for his
labor. The porter knowing well the carter, and taking little regard to the
other.ii. which came with him / opened the gate, and sent an other fellow of
his to opyn the former gate. when the fryste was opened / the carter set his
carte in the self gate, and drew to his purs to give to the porter his reward
before promised. And as he told the money into his hand / of a falshode he let
part of the money fall upon the ground. The which while the porter stouped to
take up / the carter with his dagger or other wepyn gave such a stroke unto ye
porter, yt he ne spoke nor cried after. And so soon as this myschyefe was don
/ so soon was the other porter slain of ye.ii. sowdiours. And y^ done, one of
the^ ra^ forth of ye gates and gave a sign unto the lord of Bressy / which
forthwith entered the town, and took and slew all such as to them made
resyste^ce / and wa^ne in short while ye castle as the town, and slew therein
much people, and took many prisoners. Among the which as says Gagwyne, the
lord Facounbrydge as capytayne of that town was there taken prisoner. when
this town was thus won by the cautele of the Frencheme^, and the term of the
trewis was not yet expyred / tha^ was labor made unto the French king for
restytucyon of this town and other wrongs done in wynnyng of ye same. To the
which it was answered, that if the Englysshemen would restore the town of
Fogyers with other harmys there done / that than the Frenchemen should restore
this town with the other harmys. For treaty whereof a day of metyng was
appointed at a place called Bou^port / where the time was spente in vain of
both parties / so that of ye metyng came none effect.

Of the taking of this said town of Fogyers ensuyed much harm to the
Englysshmen / for this was the occasyon, by the which the Frenchemen after
gatte all Normandy.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xlviii Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xlix. Wyllyam Cantlow. Stephyn
Brown Grocer. Anno.xxvii. wyllyam Marowe.
IN this.xxvii. year as witnesses the English cronycle, a knight of France
called sir Lowys de Bueyil, chale^ged an esquyer of England named Rauffe
Chalo^s of certain feetes of war. The which to approve, a day to them was
given to mete at a town in France named Maunt or Maunce where the French
king at that day was present. But fortune to Chalo^s was so frendely, that he
ran the French knight thorugh with his spear / whereof the said sir Lowys
shortly after dyed. Than this Chalons like a charytable christian man, mourned
for his enemy, and kept for him his obsequy as he had been his carnal brother.
For the which deed of ye French king he was greatly allowed / all be it he was
bound so to do by the law of armies.

Anno. dn^i. M.iiii.C.xlix. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.l. wyllyam Hulyn. Thomas
Chalton. Anno.xxviii. Thomas Canynges.
IN this.xxviii. year / the king called a parlyaments at westmynster, the
which was adiourned to the black freers at London / and after Crystmas to
London again. In which passetyme, as ship man of the west country named
Roberte of Cane, with a few ships of war took an hole flete of merchants
coming from the Baye being ladyn with salt / the which were of Pruce,
Holande, and zeland, and other parties of Flaunders / and so brought them to
Hampton^, and there made his port sale* For the which pryse the merchants
goods of England were arested in diverse places of flanders / as Bruges, Ipre,
and other good towns / and might not have the said goods delivered, till
they had taken appoynteme^t for to pay for the said prise and their hurtes and
damages.

And contynuyng the foresaid parlyame^te / the duke of Suffolk was arested,
and sent as prisoner to content some minds unto the tower / where he was kept
at his pleasure a month and after delivered at large / the which dyscontented
many me^nes minds. For to him was laid the charge of the delyuery of Angeou
and Main, and the death of that noble prince Humfrey duke of Glouceter. Than of
this grudge ensued rebellyon of the commons, in so much that they assembled
them in sundry places, and made of them self capytaynes, and named them Blewe
berde and other counter fayte names / and so ente^ded to have gadered more
company. But anon as the kings counsayll was thereof warnyd, they were laid
for, and taken, and put to death.

Thanne the foresaid parlyamente was adiourned unto Leyceter / whether came
the king and with him the duke of Suffolk. Than the commons of the common
house made request to the king, that all such persons as were consenting and
labored for the gyuynge over the duchye of Angeou and erledome of Mayn^, might
be punisshed. Of which offense to be gyltie / they accused the foresaid duke
of Suffolk, the lord Sey, the bishop of Salysbury, and one Danyell a
gentylman, with Treuylyan and other. Than to appease the common house / the duke
was exyled for.v. years, and the lord Sey as tresorer of England / and ye
other were put a part for a while, and were promised to be sent unto the
kings gayoll or ward.

Than the duke in obeynge ye sentence foresaid, sped him toward ye sees side
in the month of Apryl, and took his shyppynge in Northfolke, ente^ding to have
sailed into France. In keeping of which course / he was met with a ship of
war named Nicholas of the Tower, the which took his ship. And wha^ ye
capytayne was ware of the duke / anon he took him into his own ship, and so
kept his course toward Dover. And wha^ he was comen unto the rode / anon he
caused him to be confessed of his own chaplayne / and that done shypme^ put
him in a shypbote, and there upon the side of the boat, one struck of his head.
which head with the body was soon after conveyed to the land of Dover, and
there left upon ye sands / and the said shypmen returned to the sea again.
And thus one myschefe ensued upon an other, to the dystruccyon of the nobles of
this land. And so upon the first day of May, was this deed corpse found upon
Dover sands, and after conveyed to his resting place to This year also being
the year of our lords in carnacyon.xiiii.C. and.l. was the Iubile or the
plenary pardon at Rome, which of Englysshmen is called the year of grace.

And this year a town in Normandy named Uernoyll, was taken by ye treason of a
French baker / the manner whereof were long to write. But finally it came to ye
possession of Floquet before rehearsed, to the great dystruccyon of Englysshmen.
For now was ye trewes ended, and mortal war was executed upon both pertyes /
and the Englysshme^ unto ye French wrought much myschyef diverse ways, which
were long to write. But as to fore I have showed to you sundry times / the
most loss turned ever last ward upon ye Englyssh pertie. For this season also
were ye towns of Noge^t and pou^t Andenere won by the earl of saint Paul
and other. And in ye month of Iuny this year, Insurreccio^ in Kent.
ye commons of Kent assembled the^ in great multitude, and chase to them a
capitayee, and named him Mortymer and cosyn of the duke of york / but of most
he was named Iak Cade. This kept ye people wonderously together / and made such
ordenau^ces among the^, yt he brought a great no^bre of people of the^ unto ye
Blak hethe. where he devised a byll of peticio^s to ye king and ye cou^sayll /
and showed them what iniuryes and oppressio^s the poor co^mo^s suffered, by
such as were about ye king a few persons in no^bre, and all under color
to come to his above. The kings cou^sayll seeing this byll, dysalowed it, and
cou^sayled the king, which by the.vii. day of Iuny had gathered to hi^ a
strong host of people, to go again his rebels, and to give unto them
battle. Than the king, after the said rebels had holde^ their field upon
blak hethe.vii. days / made toward the^. whereof heryng the capytayne, drew
back with his people to a vyllage called Seuenok, and there enbatayled* the^.
Tha^ it was agreed by ye kings counsayll, that sir Humfrey Stafforde knight,
with wyllyam his brother, and other certain gentylmen, should follow the chase
/ and the king with his lords should return unto Grenewyche, wenynge to them
that the rebels were fled and gone. But as before I have showed, when sir
Humfray with his company drew nere unto Seuenok / he was wared of ye capytayne
that there abode with his people. And when he had counsayledde with the other
gentylmen / like a manfull knight set upon the rebels, and fought with them
long. But in the end the capytayne slew him and his brother with many other,
and caused the rest to give back. Al which season the kings host lay still
upon Blakhethe, being among them sundry opinions / so that some and many
favored the capytayne. But finally when word came of ye overthrow of the
Staffordes / they said plainly and boldly, that except the lord Say and
other before rehearsed were committed to ward, they would take the capytaynes
party. For the appeasynge of the which rumor, the lord Say was put into ye
tower / but that other as tha^ were not at hand. Thanne the king having
knowledge of the scomfyture of his men, and also of the rumor of his ostynge
people / removed from Grenewyche to London / and there with his host rested
him a while.

And so soon as Iak Cade had thus ouercomen the Stafforde / he anon
apparayled hi with ye knights apparayll, and did on him his bryganders set
with gylte nail and his salet and gylte spores. And after he had refresshed
his people, he returned again to Blakhethe / and there pyght again his feld
as here tofore he had done / and lay there from the nine and twenty day of
Iuny being saint Peter's day, till the first day of July. In which season
came unto him the archebysshop of Cantorbury and the duke of Bukkyngham / with
whom they had long co^munycacyon, and fond him right dyscrete in his
answers. How be it they could not cause hi to lay down his people, and to
submyt him unto the kings grace.

In this while the king and the queen herynge of the encreasynge of his
rebels, and also the lords ferynge their own servants lest they would
take the capytaynes party, removed from London to Kyllyngworth / leuynge ye
cite without aid, except only the lord Scales / which was left to keep
the tower, and with him a manly and warly man named Mathewe Fowth. Than the
capytayne of Kente thus houynge at Blakhethe / to the end to blind the more
the people, and so bring him in fame that he kept good justice, be heded
there a pety capytayne of his named Paris / for so much as he had offended
again such ordinance as he had stablysshed in his host / and herynge yt the
king and all his lords were thus departed, drew him nere unto ye city. So
that upon the first day of July, he entered the bourgh of Southwarke, being
than wednesday / and lodged him there that night, for he might not be suffered
to enter the city.

And upon the same day, the commo^s of Essex in great nombre pyght them a
field upon the plain at miles end. And upon the second day of the said
month, the mayre called a common counsel at the Gyldhall, for to puruey the
withstanding of these rebels and other matyers. In which assemble were
diverse opinions / so that some thought good that the said rebels should be
received into the city, and some otherwise. Among the which, Roberte Horn
stok fysshmonger than being an alderman, spoke sore again them that would
have them enter. For y^ which sayenges, the commons were so amoued again him,
that they ceased not till they had him committee to ward.

And the same afternoon about v. of the clok, the capytayne with his people
entered by ye bridge. And wha^ he came upon the draw bridge / he hew the ropes
yt drew the bridge in sondre with his sword, and so passed into ye city /
and made in sundry places thereof proclamacyons in the kings name, that no man
in pain of death should rob or take any thing parforce without payeng
therefore. By reason whereof he wanne many hertes of the commons of the city /
but all was done to begyle with the people, as after shall euydently appear.
For he rode thorough diverse streets of the city / and as he came by London
stone, he struck it with his sword, and said now is Mortymer lord of this
city. And when he had thus showed himself in diverse places of the city, and
showed his mind to ye mayre for ye ordrynge of his people / he returned into
Southwarke, and there abode as he before had done, his people coming and
going at lawful hours when they would. Than upon the morn being the third
day of July and frydaye / the said capytayne entered again the city, and
caused the lord Sey to be fet from the tower and ladde unto the Guyldhall /
where he was areygned before the mayre and other of ye kings justice. In
which pass time he intended to have brought before ye said justices the
foresaid Robert Horn. But his wife and friends made to him such instau^t
labor, that finally for.v.C. mark he was set at his lybertye. Than the lord
Sey being as before is said at Guyldhall, desired yt he might be judged by
his peers. whereof herynge the capytayne, sent a company of his unto the hall /
the which parforce took him from the officers, and so brought him unto the
standarde in the Chepe / where or he were half shryuen they struck of his head
/ and yt done pyght it on a long pole, and so bare it about with them.

In this time and season had the capytayne caused a gentylman to be taken named
Cromer, which before had been shyreffe of Kent, and used as they said some
extorcyons. For which cause, or for he had favored the lord Sey, by reason
that he had married his daughter / he was haryed to Miles end, and there in ye
capitaynes presence byheded. And ye same time was there also byheded a man
called Baylly / ye cause of whose death was this as I have herd some men
report. This Baylly was of ye famylyer and old acquaintance of Iak Cade.
wherefore so soon as he espied him coming to him ward, he cast in his mind
that he would dyscouer his living and old manners, and show of his vile kynne
and lynage. wherefore knowing yt the said Baylly used to vere scrowes and
prophecyes about him, showing to his company yt he was an enchaunter and of
ill dysposycion, and yt they should well know by such books as he bare upon
him / and bad them search, and if they found not as he said, yt tha^ they
should put him to death / which all was done according to his co^maundment.
when they had thus be heded these.ii. men / they took the head of Croumer and
pyght it upon a pole / and so entered the city with the hedes of the lord Sey
and of Croumer. And as they passed the streets / they joined the poles together,
and caused either deed mouth to kiss other diverse and many times.

And the capytayne the self same day went unto the house of Phylyppe Malpas
draper and and alderman / and robbeb and spoiled his house, and took thens a
great substance. But he was before warned, and thereby conveyed much of his
money and plate, or else he had been undone. At which spoylynge were present
many poor men of the city, which at such times ben ever ready in all places
to do harm, where such ryottes ben done.

Tha^ toward night, he returned into Southwarke / and upon ye morn reentred
ye city, and dyned that day at a place i^ saint Margaret Patyns parysshe
called Gherstys house. And when he had dyned / like an vncurteyse gest he robbed
him as the day before he had Malpas. For which.ii. robberyes, all be it that
the porayll and nedy people drew unto him, and were partyners of that ill /
the honest and thryfty comoners cast in their minds the sequel of this
matyer, and fered lest they should be delte with in like manner / by mean
whereof he lost the peoples favor and hertes. For it was to be thought, if he
had not executed that robbery, he might have gone far, and brought his
purpose to good effect, if he had intended well. But it is to deem and
presuppose, that the intent of him was not good / wherefore it might not come to
any good conclusyon. Than ye mayre and aldermen with assystence of the
worshypfull comeners, seeing this mysdeanour of ye capytayne / in sauegardynge
of themself and of the city, took their counsayles how they might drive the
capytayne and his adhere^tes from ye city, wherein their fear was the more,
for so much as the king and his lords with their powers were far from
them. But yet in aduoydynge of appare^t peril / they condyscended, that they
would withstand his any more enter into the city. For the performau^ce where
of ye mayre sent unto the lord Scales and Mathewe Gowgth than having the
tower in gydynge / and had of them assent to perform ye same.

Than upon the.v. day of July ye capytayne being in Southwarke, caused a man
to be heded, for cause of his dyspleasure to him done as the fame went / and
so kept him in Southwarke all ye day. How be it he might have entered the city
if he had would.

And when night was coming / the mayre and cytezyns with Mathewe Gowth like to
their former appoynmtent kept the passage of ye bridge being sunday, and
defended the Kentysshe me^ which made great force to reenter the city. Than
the capytayne seeing this bykerynge begone / yode to harneys, and called his
people about him / and set so fyersly upon the cytezyns, that he drove the^
back from ye stulpes i^ Southwarke or bridge foot unto ye draw bridge. In
defending whereof, many a man was drowned and slain. Among yt which, of men
of name was Johan Sutton alderma^, Mathewe Gouth gentylman, and Roger Heysande
cytezyn. And thus continued this skyrmysshe all night till.ix. of the clock
upon the morn / so that sometime the cytezyns had the better / and thus soon
the Kentysmen were upon the better side. But ever they kept them upon the
bridge / so that the cytezyns passed never much the bulwark at the byrdge
foot, nor ye Kentysshme^ much ferther tha^ the draw bridge. Thus co^tynuyng
the cruel fight to the dystruccyon of much people on both sides / lastly
after the Kentysshmen were put to the worse, a true was agreed for certain
hours. During the which true, the archebysshop of Cantorbury than chaunceler
of England, sent a general pardon to the capytayne for himself, and an other
of his people. By reason whereof he and his company departed the same night out
of Southwarke / and so returned every man to his own.

The End of Jack Cade.
But it was not long after that the capytayne with his company was thus
departed, that proclamacyons were made in diverse places of Kent, of Southsex,
and Sowtherey, that who might take the foresaid Iak Cade other on live or
deed, should have a.M. mark for his travail. After which proclamacion thus
publisshed / a ge^tylma^ of Ke^t named Alexander Iden^, awayted so his time
that he took him in a gardyn in Sussex. where in the taking of him the said Iak
was slain / and so being deed, was brought into Southwarke the day of the
month of and there left in the kings benche for that night. And upon y^
morrow the deed corpse was drawn thorugh the high streets of the city unto
New gate, and there heded and quartered. whose head was than sent to London
bridge / and his.iiii. quarters were sent to.iiii sundry towns of Kent.

And this done / the king sent his commissions into Kent, and rode after him
self / and caused enquery to be made of this riot in Caunterbury / where for
the same.viii. men were iuged and put to death. And in other good towns of Kent
and Southsex, diverse other were put in execucyon for the same riot.

In this year also, in the west country was slain the bishop of Salysbury by
the commons of that country. Bishop of Salysbury s^ayne.
wherefore after the king had sped his business in Kent and Sussex, he rode
thither to se also those malefactors punysshed.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.l. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.li. John^ Myddylton. Nycholas
wyfforde Grocer. Anno.xxix. wyllyam Dear.
IN this.xxix. year upon sait Leonardes day or the.vi. day of Nouembre, began
the parlyamente at westmynster. And the first day of Dece^bre following / the
duke of Somerset which newly was commyn out of Normandy, was put under arest
/ and his goods by the commons were fowly dyspoyled and borne a way out of
the blak friars. For at this season was much people in the city by reason of
the parlyament / and specially of lords servants, which were awaytynge
upon their lords and masters in great multitude. For ye shall understand,
ye temporal lords in those days kept other manner of housholdes and other
manner of reteyndour of household servants and other nombre, far exceeding
that the lords at these days done. wherefore at parlyament times and other
great counsayles / the cytyes or towns where they assembled, were hougely
stuffed with people. Than after this riot this committed / upon the morrow
following proclamacyon was made thorugh the city, that no man should spoil or
rob upon pain of death. And the same day at the sta^darde in Chepe, was a
man beheded for brekyng of the said proclamacio^. And thus bego^ rumor and
malice to spryng between ye lords of the land. And specially ye duke of
Somerset and other of ye queen's cou^sayll were had i^ great hatered, for ye
losi^g of Normandy / whereof ye chief city of Roa^ was lost or give up by
apointeme^t ye year precedyng, as witnesses Gaguynus upon co^dycyon that the
duke of Somerset with his wife and Englyssh sowyours, should with such goods
as they might carry, depart freely from ye city. For which fre passage he
should pay unto ye French king lvi.M. scutes which amou^te to.xiiii.M. mark
sterlyng. And also he was bound to deliver into the French kings possession,
all towns and castelles that at that day were in the possessyon of
Englysshemen within the duchy of Normandy. For performaunce of which
couenauntes, the lord Talbot was set for one of the pledges / and so by one
Floquet before named all the said towns and castelles were by him to the
French kings use received / Harflete only excepted. whereof ye capytayne
named Cyrson or Curson denied the delyuery / with assystence of one named sir
Thomas Auryngham. The which in despyte of all the French kings power laid
both by see and land, held it from the beginning of Decembre till the
month of January / and than for lack of rescouse gave it up by appoynment in
ye beginning of this mayres year. For this yeldynge up of Normandy, much
dyspleasure grew unto the queen and her counceyll / in so much yt the duke of
york father unto king Edward the.iiii. with many lords with him allied, took
party again her and her counsayll / so that mortal war thereof ensued as
here after in this story wall appear.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.li. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lii. Mathewe Phylyp. wyllyam
Gregory skynner. Anno.xxx. Chrystofer warton.
IN this.xxx. year and.xvi. day of February / the king being accompanied with
the duke of Somersette and many other lords, took their iournay toward the
marchys of walys / for so much as he was credibly assertayned, yt the duke of
york assysted with diverse other lords and me^ of name, had in those parties
gathered great strength of people, and with them was entering the land / and
so held on his journey toward him. But when ye duke had wytyng of the kings
great power / he swaued the way from the kings host, and took the way toward
London. And for he had received knowledge from the city, yt he might not there
be received to refresshe him and his people / he therewith went over Kyngstone
bridge and so into Kente / and there upon an hethe called Burnt heth, he pyght
his field. whereof the king houynge knowledge, sped him after / and lastly came
unto Black hethe and there pyght his field. where both hosts being thus
enbatayled / meidacio^ was made of peace by twene both hosts, For furtheraunce
whereof / to the duke were sent ye bysshoppes of wynchester and of Ely, with
the earls of Salysbury and of warwyke. To whom it was answered by the said
duke, yt he nor none of the company intended none hurt unto the kings
person, nor to any of his counsayll being lovers of ye common weal and of
him and of his land / but his intent and purpose was, to remove from him a
few evil disposed persons, by whose means ye common people was grievously
opressed, and the comynaltye greatly enpouerysshed. Of y^ which he named for
principal the duke of Somerset. Of whom it was finally agreed by the king*
that he should be committed to ward, there to abide and answer unto such
artycles as the duke of york would lay again him. Upon which promise so made
by the king the first day of March being thursdaye, the duke brake up his
field, and so came unto ye kings tente / where contrary the former promise
made, he fa^de the duke of Somerset as chief awayter and next unto the king.
And tha^ was ye duke of york sense before to London, and was holden somedeale
in manner as prisoner / and more streyghter should have been kept, ne had been
tidings which daily spra^ge, that sir Edward his son tha^ earl of ye
March, was coming toward London with a strong power of welche men and March
me^ / which fered so the queen and her counsayl, that ye duke was lyberted to
go where he would. And so after he departed unto his own country / and peace
was dyssymuled with feyned love for a while.

Ann odn^i. M.iiii.C.lii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.liii. Rychard Lee. Godfrey
Feyldynge. Anno.xxxi. Rychard Alley.
IN this.xxxi. year / ye king held a solemn feast at westmyster upon
the.xii. day of Cristmas / where he created.ii. earls the which were his
brethren upon the mothers side queen Katheryne, that after the death of king
Henry the.v. was married unto a knight of walys named Dwayne, the which begat
upon her these foresaid.ii. sons. whereof that one this said day was created
earl of Rychemou^t, which was named sir Edmonde / and the yo^ger called sir
Jasper was creat the earl Penbroke. The which lastly was created duke of
Bedforde by our sovereign lord king Henry the.vii. and so dyed. And in March
following as witnesses Gaguyne, was the town of Herf^ewe won by the
Frenchmen. And soon after the city of Bayons was given up by appointment / so
that the souldyours should leave their armoure behind them. And for every woman
there being was granted an horse to ride upon / and to every horse man.x.
scutes to pay for their costs / and to every foot man.v. without more by them
to be taken. And this year the king lay long syke at Claryngdowne / and was
in great ieopardye of his life. And in ye end of this mayres year and
beginning of the.xxxii. year of the king, that is to mean upon the day of
tra^slacyon of saint Edward or ye xiii. day of Octobre / ye queen at
westmynster was delivered of a fair prince.

For the which great reioysyng and gladness was made in sundry places of
England, and specyallye within the cy^ye of London / where of the
expressemente of the cyrcumstaunce would are long leysoure to utter. This
prince being with all honor and reverence sacred and crystened, was named
Edward / and grew after to perfight and good lie personage / and lastly of
Edward the fourth was slain at Tewkysburye feelde, as after to you shall be
showed.

whose noble mother sustained not a little dysclaunder and obloquy of the common
people / saying that he was not the natural son of king Henry, but changed
in the cradell, to her great dishonor and heaviness, which I over pass.

This year also which was the year of grace.M.iiii C.liii. Mahumet tha^ prince
of Turks, in the month of Iuny and.iiii. day of the said month being the
third year of his empire or reygne / after.l. days of co^tynuall assaute by
his innumerable multitude of Turks to the city of Consta^tyne the noble with
excedyng force and crueltye made and excercysed, Constanty noble conquered of
Turks.
wan and opteyned the domynyo^ and rule of the same / to the great hynderau^ce
and shame of all crystendome, and enhau^cynge of the power and might of the
said Turks. Of the exceeding noumber of men, women, and children that in that
city at that day were slain / I will not speak of, for the great dyuersyte
that I have seen of writers. Among the which the emperor named Paleogolus
with many other nobles of the city being taken on live, were tha^ behedyd /
and many a priest and relygyous man put unto death by sundry cruel turmentes.
After which great crueltye, with many other long to reherce put in execucyon /
a commandment passed from the said emperor of Turks, that all children
being above the age of.vi. years as well men as women kind, should be
straight put unto death / the which after some writers excedyd the number
of.iiii.M. Here for tydeousnesse and lamentable process, which I might show
in the rehersall of the abomynacyon of the most dampnable and accursyd Turkys,
by the^ done unto the crucyfyxe and other images of the chyrches and temples
within the city, I cease. For paynefull it were to read, and more paynefull
and sorrowful to here, that the faith of Christ should in so vile manner be
despised.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.liii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.liiii. Draper. John^ walden.
John^ Norman. Anno.xxxii. Thomas Cook.
IN this.xxxii. year, John^ Norman foresaid upon the morrow of Symonde and
Iudys day, the accustomyd day when the new mayre vsyd yearly to tide with
great po^pe unto westminster to take his charge / this mayre first of all
mayres brake that ancient and old co^tynued custom, and was rowed thither by
water / for the which ye watermen made of him a roundell or song to his great
praise, yt which began, Row ye bote Norman row to thy lemma^, and so forth
with a long process.

ye have in your remembrance, how I before in the.xxx. year of this king
showed to you of the apoyntement taken between the said king and ye duke of
york at Brent heth / which apoyntement as before is said, was soon broken
and set at naught. By reason whereof great envy and dyscencyon grew between
ye king and diverse of his lords / and most specially between the queen's
counseyll and the duke of york and his blood. For all contrary ye kings
promise, by means of the queen, which than bare ye cure and charge of the
land / the duke of Somerset was set at large and made capytayne of Caleys,
and had as great rule about the king as he before days had. wherwyth not
only some of the nobles of the land grudgyd, but also the commons / which by
his counsayll and other than rulers as the fame went, sustained many grievous
imposycyons and charges. This fire, rancour, and envy by ye space of.xvii.
or.xviii. months smokynge and brennynge under covert dyssymulacyon / now at
this day brake out in great and hot flamys of open war and wrath / in so
much that the duke of york being in the Marches of walys, called to him yt
erlys of warwyke and of Salysbury with other many honorable knights and
esquyres, and gathered a strong host of people / and than in the month of
Apryll took his journey toward London, the king there tha^ being with a
great retynewe of lords. whereof when the queen and the lords were
aduertysed, that the duke was coming with so great power / anon they cast in
their minds that it was to none of their profytes. And for yt in all possible
haste as they might / they gathered by the authoryte of the kings co^myssyons
such strength as they could have / and intended to have conveyed the king
westwarde, and not to have encountered the duke of york. And for the execucyon
of this purpose / the king acco^panyed with him the dukes of Somerset and of
Buckyngham, ye erlys of Stafforde and of Northumberlande, with the lord
Elyfforde, and other many noble men of the realm, departed upon the.xx. day
of May from westmynster / and so held his journey toward saint Albonys.
Then the duke of york having knowledge of the kings departing from London,
costed the countrees / and came unto the end of saint Albons upon the.xxiii.
day of May foresaid, then beyuge the thursday before whytsondaye. where
while means of treaty and peace were comonyd upon that one party / ye earl of
warwyke with his March men entryd the town upon that other end, and fought
egerly again ye kings people / and so continued the fight a long season. But
in conclusyon ye vyctory fell to the duke of york and his party / in so myche
that there was slain that duke of Somerset, the earl of Northumberlande, and
the lord Clyfforde, with many other hono^^ble men of knights and esquyers,
whose names were tedious to write. After which victory thus opteyned by the
duke / he with honor and reverence upon the morn following conveyed the king
again to London, and there lodged him in the bishop of Londons palace. And
soon thereupon was called a parlyament and holden at westmynster / by
authoryte whereof ye duke of york was made protector of England, the earl of
Salesbury chancellor, and the earl of warwyke capytayne of Caleys. And all
such persons as before were in authoryte and nere about the king, were
clearly amoued and put by / and the queen and her counsel that before days
ruled, all utterly set a part concerning the rule of the king and of ye
land. which continued for a while, as after shall apere.

In this year also as affermeth the French cronycle, this mysery and
unkindness thus reygnynge in England / the lord Talbot than being in
Normandy, and in defending of the kings Garyso^s was beset with French men at
a place named Castillyon, and there strongely assailed. where after long and
cruel fight, he with his son and to the number of.xl. men of name and.viii.
hundredth of other English soudyours, were myserably slain / and many mo
taken prisoners.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.liiii Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lv. John^ Field. Stephan
Forster. Anno.xxxiii. wyllyam Taylour.
IN this.xxxiii. year of Henry ye vi. certain evil dysposed persons being
sentuary men within saint Martens the graunde, issued out of ye said place and
frayed with some cytesyns, and of them hurt and maimed / and that done reentred
the seintuary. wherewyth the commons being amoued, with certain rulers of the
city entered the said sayntwary by force, and pulled out the occasyoners of the
said fraye, and committed them to prysone. Of this matter by the deane of
saint Martens and such as favored him, was a grievous complaynt made unto the
king and his counsel, of ye mayre and the cytesyns. For dyscharge whereof the
recorder of the city with certain aldermen to him assygned, were sent unto
the king then lyeng at ye castle of Egle in Herford shyre / where after the
matter duly debated before ye kings cou^sayll, they were with letter of
commendacyon retournyd unto the mayre, willing him to keep the said persons
sauely till the kings coming to London / at which season he intended to have
ye matter more clearly examyned.

Anno domin.M.iiii.C.lv. Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lvi. Grocer. John^ young. wyllyam
Marowe. Anno.xxxiiii. Thomas Dulgraue.
IN this year and month of May / an Italyans servant walked thorough Chepe
with a dagger hanging at his gyrdell. whereof a mercers servant that before
time had been in Italy, and there chalengyd or punysshed for werynge of a like
wepen, challenged the stranger, and questioned with him how he was so bold to
bear such a warrely wepyn, considering he was a stranger and out of his
natyue country, and also knowing that in his country no stranger should be
suffered to bear any like wepyn. To which questyon such answer was made by
the Italyan, that the mercer took his dagger from him, and brake it upon his
head. The stranger thus being delte with complained him unto the mayre / yt
which upon the morrow following keeping a court at the Guyldhall, sent for the
young man / and after his answer made unto this complaynt, by agreement of a
full court of alder men, sent the said mercer unto prison. And after this
court was fynysshed / for rumor that he hard of, to be among the servants
of ye mercery, he with the two sheryffes took his way homeward thorough chepe.
But when he was nere unto the end of saint Lawre^ce lane toward chepe / he was
met with such a multitude of mercers servants and other, that he could not
pass for ought that he might do or speak, till he had contrary his will
and mind, delivered the young man, that before was committed by him and his
brethern to ward / and so was he forthwith delivered. This thus done / rumor
sprange thereof lyghtely about the town / in so much that among many cytesyns,
it was construed that this was done by the assent of the masters and
householders of the mercery, to ye intent to have the strangers punysshed, for
so myche as they took from them great living by reason of their vtteraunce of
cloth of gold and sylkes to the estates and lords of the realm. But how so
it was unto men of honest / to vacabo^des and other that looked for pylfry and
ryfflynge, it was a great occasyon and styrynge. And that appeared well / for
the same afternone, suddenly was assembled a multitude of rascal and poor
people of the city / which without head or guide ran unto certain Italyans
places, and specially unto the Florentynes, Lukessys, and Uenicyans, and took
and spoiled what they in their places might find, and did great hurt in
sundry places, but most in.iiii. houses sta^dyng in Bredstrete ward / whereof
three stood in saint Barthelomewys parysshe the little, and one in saint
Benettes parysshe, and much more would have done, had not been the spedy aid
of the mayre and aldermen and worshypfull comoners of the city / which with
all dylygence resysted them, and of the^ took diverse that robbed, and sent
them to Newgate. And finally not with out shedyng of blood and maymyng of
diverse cytesyns, the rumor and people were appeasyd. when the young man
begynner of all this business saw this inconuenyence ensue of his wantonness
/ were it by counsayll or otherwise feryng the sequel of the matter, yode
straight unto westmynster / and there tarried as a sayntwary man, till all the
matter were endyd. It was not long after or the duke of Buckyngham with
justices and other noble men, was sent down from the king into the city / and
charged the mayre by virtue of a commyssyo^, yt an enquery should be made of
this riot. And so by virtue of the said co^myssyon called an Oyer determyner,
a day was kept at Guyldhall upon the day of the month of / where the said
day sat for judges ye mayre as the kings lyeutenau^t, ye duke of Buckyngham
upon his right hand, ye chyefe justice upon ye left hand, with many other
men of name which I pass over. while the mayre and the said lords were
calling of the panels of the enquestes at ye Guyldhall / the other comoners of
the city not being content with the order, many of the^ secretly armed them
in their houses / and ente^ded as the common fame after went to have ru^ge Bow
bell, and so to have raised and gathered ye comynalty of the city / and by
force to have delivered such persons as before for ye robbery were committed to
ward. But this matter was so discretely handeled, by the cou^sayll and labor
of some dyscrete comoners, which appeased their neighbors in such wise, that
all this fyry haste was quenchyd, and came to none effect / saving ye word was
brought unto the duke of Buckyngham, that the comynalty of the city were in
harnysse, and if he tarried long there, he with the other lords should be in
great ieopardy. with which untrue tidinges he being fered / hastily took leave
of ye mayre, and so deper^ted unto his lodgyng, and so ceasyd ye enquery for ye
day. Upon the morrow, for so much as ye mayre had understanding of ye secret
murmur / he commanded the common counsel with all wardeyns of felysshyppys to
apere upon the morrow at Guyldhall. where by the recorder in the kings name,
and the mayers as his lyeutenaunt, was commanded to euerych wardeins, that in
that after none following either of them should assemble his hoole felisshyp at
their propre hallys / and there to give every cytezyn straight commandment,
that every man see and entende to see the kings peace with in the city. And
if they find any person that makes any reasonynge, whereby they might co^ceyue
or espy that he favored any gatherynge of companyes, or the delyuerey of
such persons as were in ward / that the said wardeyns should with fair
words exorte him to the best / and with out sign or token thereof showing,
secretly co bring the name or names of him or them unto the mayre. By mean of
which polycy and good order the cytesyns were brought in such a quyetnes, that
after that day the foresaid enquery was duly pursued / and iii. persons for
the said riot put in execucyon and hanged at tybourne. whereof.ii. after some
writers were seyntwarye men of saint Martyns / and the third was a shypma^ or
boteman.

The queen with certain lords which favored her party / dysdayned sore the
rule which the duke of york bare and other / and specially for that that the
said duke bare ye name of protector, which argued that the king was
insuffycyent to govern the realm / which as she thought was a great
dishonor to the king and to all the realm. wherefore she made such means,
and wan by her polycy such frendshyp of diverse of ye lords both spyrytuall
and temporal, that she caused ye duke of york to be dyscharged of his
protectourshyp, and the earl of Salysbury of his chauncellershyp / which was
cause of new war as after shall appear.

Anno. dn^i. M.iiii.C.lvi. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lvii. Grocer. John^ Steward.
Thomas Canynges. Anno.xxxv. Raufe Uerney.
IN this year and beginning of the same / the queen suspectynge the city of
London, and demyd it to be more favorable unto ye duke of yorkes party than
hyrs / caused ye king to remove from London unto Couentre, and there held him
a long season. In which time the duke of york was sent for thither by pryuey
seal, with also the earl of Salesbury and the earl of warwyke / where by
couyne of the queen they were all.iii. in great danger. How be it by monys
sheme^t of their friends they escaped. And soon after the said duke or earl
went into the North / and the earl of warwyke with a goodly company sailed
unto Calays. And shortly after were taken at Eryth within.xii. miles of
London.iiii, wonderful fysshys / whereof one was called Mors Maryne, the
second a Sword fisshe, and the other.ii. were whalys / which after some
exposytours were pronostycacyons of war and trouble to ensue soon after. In
this year also was a great fray in the North country, between the lord
Egremo^de and the sons of the earl of Salysbury / and diverse me^ maimed and
slayen between them. But in the end the lord Egremonde was taken / and how it
was by the dome of the kings counsayll or otherwise, the said lord Egremo^de
was founden in such defaute, that finally he was condemned in great sums of
money to be paid unto the said earl of Salysbury. For lack of payment whereof,
or of putting suertye for the same / the said lord Egremonde was committed
to Newgyte. where after he had continued a certain of time, he brake the
prysone and escapyd with three other prisoners, to the great charge of the
sheryffes.

It was not long after that dyscencyon and unkindness fell between the young
duke of Somerset and sir John^ Neuyll son unto the earl of Salysbury, being
than both lodged within the city. whereof the mayre being warned ordained such
watches and prouysyo^s, that if they had any thing styrred, he was able to
have subdued both parties, and to have put the^ in ward till he had known
the kings farther pleasure. whereof the friends of both parties being ware /
labored such means that they agreed them for that time.

In this also as testyfye the English cronycle and also the French / a nauye
or flote of Frenchemen landyd at Sandwyche, and spoiled and robbed the town,
and excercysed there great crueltye. Of which flote was capytayne a French
knight named after the French book sir Guyllyain de Pomyers. And this year
after the opinion of diverse writers / began in a city of Almayne named
Magounce, the craft of enprentynge of books / which sen that time has had
wonderful encreace, as experyence at this day proves. In this year also the
prisoners of Newgate by negligence of their kepers brake out of their wards,
and took the ledys of the tower, and it defendyd a long while again the
sheryffes and all their officers / in so myche that they were forced to call
more aid of the cytesyns of the city / by whose aid they lastly subdued
them, and put ye said prisoners in more streyghter keeping. Cronica cronicaru^
says that about this time was such an erthquake in ye prouynce of Naples,
that byforce thereof there were perysshed over.xl.M. christian soulys. Of the
abouesayde spoylynge of Sandwyche speaks Polycronycon / and says that sir
Pyers de Bresy senes shall of Normandy, with the capytayne of Deep and many
other capytaynes of France, came with a great and strong navy into the
Downys by night / and upon the morrow came certain of them unto Sandwych, and
there spoiled and robbed the town, and took with them great prays and many
rich prisoners / whereby or by which saying appears some dyuersyte between
the English writers and the French.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lvii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lviii. Mercer. wyllyam Edward.
Godfrey Boleyn. Anno.xxxvi. Thomas Reyner.
IN this year and the third day of December, Reynolde Pecoke than being
bishop of Chychester / at Lambyth by the archebysshop and by a Cot of
diuyns, was abiured for an heretyke and his books after brent at Poulys cross
/ and him self kept in mewe ever while he lived after. And soon after, for
to appease this rancoure and malice between the queen and the the other lorder / a
day of metynge was appointed by the king at London, whyther the duke of york
with the other lords were commanded to come by a certain day. In obeynge of
which commandment, the duke of york came unto London the.xxvi. day of
January, and was lodged at Baynardes castle. And before him the xv. day of
January came the earl of Salysbury to London, and was lodged at his place
called the Erber. And soon after came unto London the dukes of Somerset and of
Exetyr / and were lodged both without temple Bar. And in likewise the earl
of Northu^berlande, the lord Egremonde, and the yo^ge lord Clyfforde, came
unto the city, and were lodged in the subbarbes of the same. And the.xiiii.
day of February came the earl of warwyke from Calays, with a great band of
men all arrayed in read iakettes with white ragged staves upon them / and was
lodged at ye gray freres. And lastly, that is to say the.xvii. day of March
/ the king and the queen with a great retynewe came unto London / and were
lodged in the bishop of Londo^s palace. And ye shall understand that with
these foresaid lords came great companyes of me^, in so much that some
had.vi.C. some.v.C and the leest.iiii.C. wherefore the mayre, A good (...).
for so long as the king and the lords lay thus in the city, had daily in
harness.v.M. cytesyns / and rode daily about the city and subbarbes of ye
same to se the kings peace were kept. And nyghtly provided for.ii.M. me^ in
harness, to give attendau^ce upon iii. aldermen / and they to keep the night
watch till.vii. of the clock upon the morrow, till the day watch were
assembled. By reason whereof, good order and rule was kept, and no man so
hardy ones to attempt the brekynge of the kings peace. During this watch, a
great counsayl was holde^ by ye king and his lords.

By reason whereof, a dyssymuled unity and concord between them was concluded.
In token and for joy whereof, the king, the queen, and all ye said lords, upon
out Lady day annuciacion in lent at Poulys went solemply in processyon / and
soon after every lord departed where his pleasure was. And in the month of
following, was a great fray in fleet street, between the me^ of court and the
inhabytauntes of the said street / in which fray a gentylman being ye queen's
attorney was slain.

Upon the thursdaye in whytsonweke, the duke of Somerset with Antony Ryuers and
other.iiii, kept iustes of peace before the queen within the tower of London,
again three esquyers of the queen's / and in like manner at Grenewych the sunday
following. And upon Trynyty sunday or the monday following, certain ships
apperteynyng unto the earl of warwyke met with a floote of Spanyardes / and
after long and cruel fight, took.vi. of them laden with iron and other
marchaundyse / and drowned and chased to the noumber of.xxvi, not without
shedyng of blod on both parties / for of the Englyshmen were slain an.C. and
many mo wounded and sore hurt.

In this year after some auctours, a marchaunte of Brystowe named Sturmyn,
which with his ship had trauayled in diverse parties of Leuaunte and other
parties of the Gest, for so much as the same ran upon him that he had gotten
grene pepyr and other specys to have set and sown in England as the fame
went / therefore the Ianuayes waited him upon the sea, and spoylyd his ship
and other.

But this is full like to be untrue that the Ianuayes should spoil him for any
such cause / for there is no nacyon in England that delyth so little with
spycys. But were it for this cause or other, troth it is that by that nacyo^
an of fe^ce was done / for the which all the merchants Ianuayes in London
were arested and committed to ye flete, till they had found en suffycyent suer
tie to answer to the premysses. And finally for the harmys which their nacyon
had done to the said Sturmyn and to this realm / vi.M. mark was set to
their pain to pay. But how it was paid no mencyon I find.

In this year also was made an ordinance by auctorytie of ye king and his
counsayll, for the ordering of the seyntwary men within saint Martyns the
graunde. whereof the artycles are at length set out in ye book of. K. within
the chaumbre of guylde hall in the leefe.CC.xcix. whereof the execucyon of
observing were necessary to be used / but more pity it is, few points of it
ben exercysed.

Anno. dn^i. M.iiii.C.lviii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lix. Draper. Rafe Iosselyn.
Thomas Scotte. Anno.xxxvii. Richard Nedeham.
This year about the feeste of Candelmasse, the foresaid dissymulyd loueday
ha^gyng by a small threde, between the queen and yt fore named lords,
expressed in the precedynge year / the king and many lords thanne being at
westmynster, a stray happened to fall between a servant of the kings and a
servant of the earls of warwyke / the which hurt the kings servant and after
escaped. wherefore the kings other meynial servants seeing they might not
be avenged upon the party that thus had hurt their fellow / as the said earl
of warwyke was coming from the cou^sayll, and was going toward his barge,
the kings servants came unawarely upon him, so rabbysshely that the cookys
with their spyttys and other officers with other wepyns, came runnyng as mad
men, entendynge to have slain him, so yt he escaped with great danger and
took his barge / and so in all haste rowed to London, not without great maymys
and hurtys received by many of his servants. For this the old ra^cour and
malice which never was clearly cured, anon began to break out / in so much
that the queen's cou^sayll would have had the said earl arested and committed
unto the tower. wherefore he shortly after departed toward warwyke / and by
polycy purchased soon after a commyssio^ of the king, and so yode or sailed
unto Calays. Thanne increased this old malice more and more / in so much that
where the queen and her cou^sayll saw that they might not be avenged upon the
earl, that so unto Calays was departed / than they malygned again his father
the earl of Salysbury, and imagened how he might be brought out of life. And in
process of time after, as he was riding toward Salysbury, or after some from
his lodgyng toward London / the lord Audeley with a strong company was
assygned to mete with him, and as prisoner to bring him unto London. whereof
the said earl being warned, gathered unto him the mo men / and keeping his
journey, met with the said lord Audeley at a place called Bloreheth / where
both companyes ran together and had there a strong by keryng. whereof in the
end the earl was vyctoure, and slew there the lord Audeley and many of his
retynew. At this skyrmys she were the.ii. sons of the said earl sore wounded,
named sir Thomas and sir John^ / the which shortly after as they were going
homeward, were by some of the quenys party taken, and as prisoners sent unto
Chestry. when this was known unto ye duke of york and to the other lords of
his party / they knew and understode that if they provided not shortly for
remedy for them self, they should all be destroyed. And for that they by one
assent gathered to them a strong host of men, as of March men and other /
and in the month of Octobre, yt was in the beginning of the.xxxviii year of
the reygne of king Henry, and the later end of this mayres year, they drew
them toward the king / to the intent to remove from him such persons as they
thought were enemies unto the common weal of England. But the queen and her
counsayll heryng of the intent and strength of these lords, caused the king in
all haste to send forth co^myssyons to gather the people / so that in short
while the king was strongely acco^panyed, and so spedde him upon his journey
to ward the duke of york and his company. whereof heryng ye said duke, tha^
being with his people nere unto the town of Ludlowe / pyghte there a sure and
strong feelde, that none of his foes might upon any part enter. where he so
lyeng, came to him from Calays the earl of warwyke with a strong band of me^
/ among the which was Andrewe Trollop and many other of ye best soldiers of
Calays. The duke thus keeping his feelde upon that one party, and the king with
his people upon that other / upon the night precedyng the day that both
hosts should have met / the forenamed Andrewe Trolloppe with all the chief
soudyours of Calays, secretly departed from ye dukes host, and went unto the
kings, where they were ioyously received. wha^ this thing to the duke and the
other lords was asserteyned they were therewhyth sore dysmayed / and specially
for the said lords had to the said Andrew showed the hoole of their ententes,
which thanne they knew well should be clerelye dyscouered unto their enemies.
wherefore after cou^sayll for a remedy taken / they concluded to flee, and to
leave the feelde standing as they had been present and still abydyng. And so
incontynently the said duke with his two sons and a few other persons
fled toward walys / and from thens passed sauely into Irelande.

And the earls of Salysbury, of March, and of warwyke, and other, with a
secret company also departed and took the way into Deuonshyre / where a
squire named Johan Dynham (which after was a lord and high tresourer of
England, and so lastly in Henry the.vii. days and xvi. year of his reygne
dyed) bought a ship for a.C. and.x. marks or a leven score nobles / and in the
same ship the said lords went, and so sailed into Gerneley. And wha^ they
had a season there soiourned and refresshed them self / they departed thens,
as in the beginning of the next mayres year shall be clearly showed. Upon the
morrow when all this couyne was known to the king and the lords upon his
party / there was sendynge and ru^nynge with all speed toward every cooste to
take these lords / but none might be found. And forthwith the king rode unto
Ludlowe, and dyspoyled the town and castle, and sent the duchess of york
with her children unto the duchess of Buckyngha^ her sister / where she rested
long after.

Anno. dn^i. M.CCCC.lix. Anno dn^i. M.CCCC.lx. Fysshemonger. Hohn^ Plummer.
wyllyam Hulyn. Anno.xxxviii. John^ Stocker.
This year that is to mean upon the friday next ensuyng Alhalowen day, after
the said earls of Salysbury, of March, and of warwyke had as before is said
refresshed them in the i will of Gernesey / they upon the friday foresaid la^ded
at Calays / and there were at a posterne by their fre^des ioyously received.
Tha^ anon upon this these foresaid lords were proclaimed rebellys and
traitors / and the young duke of Somerset was made captain of Calays.
wherefore in all haste he made purueyaunce and saylyd thither to take possessyon
of ye town. But he failed of his purpose / for the foresaid earls there
being, kept so ye town, that there he might have no rule / natwythstandyng
that he showed the kings letter pate^tys, with many other straight
commandments of the king. For which cause the said duke yode unto Guynys,
and there held him for a season. And anon as the said duke was la^ded / some
of the shypmen, which had brought him thither, for good will that they owed
unto the earl of warwyke conveyed their ships straight into Calays haven, and
brought with them certain persons named Genyn Fenbyll, John^ Fellow, Kayles
and Purser, which were enemies unto the said earl of warwyke / the which
were presented unto the lords, and soon after within the said town of Calays
they were beheded. This rumoure thus contynuynge / daily came unto these lords
great socoure out of England. And upon that other party the duke as before
is said lyeng in the castle of Guynes gate unto him aid and strength of
souldyours, and made out and skyrmysshed with them of Calays many and sundry
times. In which assautes many me^ were slayen and hurt upon both parties /
but most wekyd the dukes party. For all be that the lords lost many men /
yet they daily came so thycke to them out of diverse parties of England, that
their loss was not espied / so that they wantyd no me^, but money to maynteyn^
their daily charge with. For remedy where of they shyfted with the staple of
Calays for.xviii.M. li. which sums of money when they had received, ye said
lords of one assent made over ye forenamed master John^ Dynham with a strong
company / and sent him unto Sandwyche to win ye kings nauye than there
lyenge, and other things for their needs necessary. The which sped him in
such wise, that he took the lord Ryuers in his bed, and wanne the town, and
took the lord Scalys son unto the said lord Rivers, with other rich prays
and after took of the kings navy what ships them lyked, and after returned
unto Calays / not without consent and agreement of many of ye mariners, which
owyd their synguler favors unto the earl of warwyke. In this journey was the
said Johan Dynham sore hurt, that he was may med upon the leg, and haltyd
while he lived after. Than after this journey thus acheuyd / the said lords by
tayled and ma^ned the said ships / and sent with them as chief capytayne the
earl of warwyke into Irelande, to speak with the duke of york, and to have his
counsayll for matters concerning their charge, as reentre into this land and
other. where wha^ he had happelye sped his nedys, he returned toward Calays,
bryngyng with him his mother the countess of Salysbury / and also kept his
course till he came into the west country. where at that time was the duke of
Gretyr as admyrall of the sea, with a compete^t nou^ber of ships well ma^ned
/ in so much that the earl of warwyke provided to have given battle unto ^he
said duke, if he had made any countenance toward him. But the duke hard
such murmr and speech among his own company, which founded unto the earl
of warwykes favor, that he thought it was more unto his profit to suffer
him to pass than to fight with him. But were it for this cause or for other
which ye common fame runs upon which were long to write / certain and
troth it is that the said earl passed without fight, and came in sauete to
Calays. In this pass time a parliament or great cou^sayll was holde^ at
Couentre. By auctoryte whereof the duke of york and all the other foresaid
lords with many other were attaynted, and their lands and goods seized to
the kings use. And for the more surer defense that they should not efte land
in Ke^t, provision was made to defend the haue^s and portys upon the sees
side. And at Sandwyche was ordained a new stre^gthe with a capitayn named sir
Symo^de Mou^forde. And over this provision was ordained, that no merchant
passing into the costys of Flanders, should pass or go by Calays, for fere
that any should come to ye aid of the said lords. But this prouysyon
natwythstandyng / comfort to them was sent daily out of England.

Than these lords herynge of all this prouysyon made upon the sees side to
wythsta^de their la^dynge, sent out an other company unto Sa^dewyche / the
which there skyrmysshed with the said sir Symo^de Mountforde, and in the end
took him and brought him unto Rise Bank, and there smote of his head. The
foresaid lords than co^syderynge the strength, which they had with them, and
manyfolde friends and hartys, which they had in sundry places of England /
condysce^ded for to sail into England, and so to bring about their intent and
purpose. which was as the common fame went, to put a part from the king all
such persons as were enemies to the common weal of the land. And this to
bring about, after they had set the town of Calays in an order and sure
keeping / they took shyppynge, and so sailed into England, and landed at Dover
/ and from the^s held on their journey thorughe Kente, so that they came to
London the.ii. day of July. And after they had there refresshed them and
their people / they departed thense, and sped them toward the king, which at
ye same time of their la^dynge was at Couentry, and there gathered his people /
and so came unto ^
Northampton where he pyght his field. whereof the said lords being enfourmed,
sped them thytherward / so that upon the.ix. day of July, both hostys there
met and fought there a cruel battle. But after long fight, the victory
fell unto the earl of Salysbury and the other lords upon his party / and the
kings host was sparcled and chased, and many of his noble men slayen. Among
the which was the duke of Buckynghan, the earl of Shrowsbury, ye vycou^t
Beaumou^d, the lord Egremo^de, with many other knights and esquyers / and the
king taken in the field. After which victory thus by these lords opteyned /
they in goodly haste after returned unto London, and brought with them the
king keeping his estate, and lodged him in the bishop of London palace. And
after spedye knowelege sent of all the premysses unto ye duke of york yet
being in Irela^de / a parlyame^t in the name of the king was than called and
holden at westmynster. During which parlyament ye duke of york came unto
westmynster upon the frydaye before saint Edwardes day or the.x. day of
October, and lodged him in the kings palace. whereof anon arose a noise
thorugh the city, that king Henry should be deposed, and the duke of york
should be king. Uppo^ this this parlyamente thus contynuynge, the duke came
one day into the parlyament chaumber / and there boldly being the lords
present, set him down in the kings sete / and so there sittynge, made a
pretense and claim unto the crown, affermyng it to be his ryghtfull
enherytau^ce / and had there certain bold words in iustyfyenge of the same /
wherewyth all the lords present were greatly dysmayed. For this, great and
many opynions were moved among the lords. How be it as well diverse of his
friends as other, were of the mind that he should not be admytted for king,
during the life of king Henry. For appeasynge whereof, many great cou^sayles
were kept as well at the black freres as at westmynster.

In all which time and season the queen with such lords as were of her
affynyte, held them in the north country / and assembled to them great
strength in the kings name, to the end to subdue as she said the kings
rebels and enemies. Thus contynuynge this unkindness between the king and
the duke / all be it that at that season both the king and he were both
lodged within the palace of westmynster / yet would he natte for prayer nor
instaunce ones bysyte the king, nor see him, till the counsayll were concluded
upon some fynall end concernyug this great matter / the which so continued
the full term of this mayres year.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lx. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxi. Grocer. Richard Flemynge.
Richard Lee. Anno.xxxix. John^ Lambarde.
This year which was in the beginning of the.xxxlx. year of king Henryes
reygne, that is to mean upon the even of all saints or the last day of
October / it was condyscended by the lords spyrytuall and temporal, and by
the hole auctoryte of the said parliament, that king Henry should co^tynue and
reygne as king during his natural life / and after his death his son prince
Edward to be set a part, and the duke of york and his heirs to be kings
/ and incontynentely the duke to be admytted as protector and rege^t of the
land. And if at any time after the king of his own free will and mind were
dysposed to resygne and give up the rule of the land, that tha^ he should
resign unto the duke if he than lived, and to none other / and to his heirs
after his days / with many other matters and co^uencyo^s which were tedious to
write. All which conclusyons as than by man's wit might be assuryd for the
parfourmaunce of them when time required parfyghted / the king with the
duke and many other lords tha^ there present, came that night to Poulys, and
there hard euynsong / and upon the morrow came thither again to mass, where
the king yode in procession crowned with great royalte / and so lay still in ye
bysshoppes palace a season after. And upon the saterdaye following being
the.ix. day of November / the duke was proclaimed through the city heir
paraunt unto the crown of England, and all his progeny after him. Than for as
much as queen Margarete accompanied with price Edward her sonn^, the dukes of
Somerset and of Excetyr, and diverse other lords, held her in the north as
above is said, and would not come at the kings sendyng for / therefore it was
agreed by the lords tha^ at London presence, that the duke of york should
take with him the earl of Salysbury with a certain people, to fetch in the
said queen and lords abouesayde. The which duke and earl departed from
London with their people upon the second day of December / and so spedde
them northwarde. whereof the queen with her lords being ware, and having with
them a great strength of Northernemen / met with the duke of york upon
the.xxx. day of December nere unto a town in the north called wakelfeld were
between them was foughten a sharp fight. The (...)
In the which the duke of york was slain with his son called earl of
Rutlande, and sir Thomas Neuyll, son unto the earl of Salysbury, with many
other / and the earl of Salysbury was there taken on live with diverse other.
when the lords upon the queen's party had gotten this vyctory / anon they
sent their prisoners unto Pountfreyte, the which were after there behedyd /
that is to mean the earl of Salysbury, a man of London named John^ Narowe, and
an other capytayne named Ha^son / whose heddes were sent unto york / and
there set upon the gates.

And when the queen had opteynyd this vyctory / she with her retynewe drew
toward London / where at that time during this troublous season, great watchys
were kept daily and nyghtelye / and diverse opynions were among the
citesyns. For the mayre and many of the chief comoners held upon the queen's
party / but the comynaltie was with the duke of york and his affynyte. when
tidings were brought unto the city of the coming of the queen with so
great an host of Northernemen / anon such as were of the contrary party
brought up a noise thoroughe the city, that she brought those Northernemen to
the entente to ryfle and spoil the city, where thoroughe she was encreasyd of
enemies. But what so her entente was / she with her people held on her way
till she came to saint Albons.

In the which mean time the earl of warwyke and the duke of Northfolke,
which by the duke of york were assygned to give attendaunce upon the king /
by consent of the king, gathered unto them strength of knights, and met
with the queen's host at saint The bata^ll of sa^^te Albons:
Albons foresaid / where between them a strong fight was foughten upon
shroue tuysday in the morning. At yt which the duke of Northfolke and the said
earl in the endewere chased / and king Henry taken efte upon the field and
brought unto the queen. And ye same after noone after some writers, he made his
sonn^ price Edward knight which than was of the age of.viii. years / with other
to the noubre of.xxx. persons.

when queen Margaret was thus commen again to her above / anon she sent unto
the mayre of London, wyllyng and commaundynge him in ye kings name that he
should in all spedy wise send to saint Albonys certain carts with lentyn
stuff for ye vytaylyng of her host. which commandment the mayre obeyed /
and with great dylygence made prouysyon for the said vytayll / and sent it in
cartys toward Crepylgate for to have passed to the queen. where wha^ it was
co^myn / the commons many there being, which had hard other tidings of the
earl of March as after shall be showed / of one mind with stood the passage of
the said carts, and said it was not behouefull to feed their enemies, which
intended the robbyng of the city. And not wythstandynge that the mayre with
his brethren exorted the people in their best manner, showing to them many
great dangers which was like to ensue to the city if the said dytayll went
not forth / yet might he not turn them from their obstynat error but for a
co^clusyon was feign to apoynt the recorder and with him a certain of alderme^
to ride unto the kings cou^sayll to Barnet, and to make request unto them
that the Northe^ me^ might be returned home for fere of robbynge of the city /
and ouerthys other secret friends were made unto the queen's grace, to be good
and gracious unto the city. During which treaty / diverse cytesyns avoided the
city and land. Among the which Phylip Malpas, which as before is showed in
the.xx. and.viii. year of this king, was robbed of Jack Cade / which Malpas
and other was met upon the sea with a Fre^chman named Columpne, and of him
taken prisoner / and after paid.iiii M. mark for his ransom. Thus passing
the time / ye tidings which before were secret, now were blowe^ abroad / and
openly was told that ye earls of March and of warwyke, were met at
Cottyswolde, and had gathered unto the^ great strength of Marchemen, and were
well spedde upon their way to ward London. For knowelege whereof, the king
and ye queen with their host were returned Northwarde. But or they departed
from saint Albonis / there was beheded the lord Bonuyle and sir Thomas Teryll
knyghet, which were taken in the forenamed field. Tha^ the duchess of york
being at London, herynge the loss of this field / sent her two younger sons,
that is to mean George which after was duke of Clare^ce, and Rychard that
after was duke of Glouceter, into Utrych in Almayne / where they remained a
while.

Tha^ the foresaid earls of March and of warwyke sped them toward London, in
such wise that they came thydervpon the thursday in the first weke of lent. To
whom resorted all the ge^tylmen for the more party of the south and eest
party of England. And in this while that they thus rested at London / a great
cou^sayl was called of all lords spyrytuall and temporal that than were there
about. By the which finally after many arguments made, for so mothe as king
Henry contrary his honor and promysse at the last parlyament made and
assured, and also for that y^ he was reputed unable and insuffycyent to rule
the realm / was than by their assentes deposed and dyscharged of all kyngely
honor and regally. And incontinently by auctoryte of the said counsayll and
agreement of the commons there present / Edward the eldeste son unto the duke
of york, tha^ was there elected and then chosen for king of England. After
which eleccyon and admyssyon / the said earl of March gyuyng lawde and
preyse unto god, upon the.iiii. day of March accompanied with all the
foresaid lords and multitude of commons, was conveyed unto westminster / and
there took possessyon of the realm of England. And sitting in his astate
royal in the great halle of the same with his scepter in hand / a question was
axed of the people than present, if they would admytte him for their king and
soueraygne lord / the which with one voice cried, ye ye. And tha^ after ye
accustumed use to kings to swear and after the oath taken / he went into the
abbey, where he was of the abbot and munkys met with processyon, and conveyed
unto saint Edwardes shryne, and there offered as king and that done received
homage and feaute of all such lords as there than were present. And upon ye
morrow following, were proclamacyo^s made in accustomat places of the city, in
the name of Edward the.iiii. thanne king of England. Upon which day the king
came unto the palace at Poulys, and there dyned / and there restyd him a
season, in making prouysyon to go Northwarde for to subdue his enemies. Than
upon the saterdaye following being the day of March / the earl of warwyke
with a great puyssaunce of people departed out of London northwarde. And upon
wednysdaye following the kings fotemen went toward the same journey.

And upon frydaye next following, the king took his voyage through the
city with a great hand of men / and so rode forth at Bishop pesgate. In
which self same day, which was the.xii. day of March / a grocer of London
named walter walker, for offense by him done again the king, was behedded in
Smythfelde. But his wife, which after was married to John^ Norla^de grocer and
lastely alderman / had such friends about the king, that her goods were not
forfayted to ye kings use. The king than so holdyng his journey, met with
his enemies at a vyllage.ix. miles on this half york called Towto^ or
Shyreborn / and upon Palm sunday gave unto them battle. The which was so
cruel, yt in the field and chase were slain upon.xxx. thousand me^ over the
men of name / of the which here after some ensue. That is to say the earl of
Northumberlande, the earl of westmerlande, the lord Clyfforde, ye lord
Eyromonde, sir John^ sir Andrewe Trollop, and other to the noumber of.xi. or
mo. And among other at the same field was taken the earl of Deuonshyre, and
after the earl of wylshyre / which said earl of Deuonshyre was sent unto
york, and there after beheded. Henry than which lately was king, with the
queen and their son sir Edward, the duke of Somerset, the lord Rose and
other, being than at york / herynge of the overthrow of their people, and
great loss of their men, in all haste fled toward Scotland. And upon the
morrow following, the king with much of his people entered into york, and
there held his Easter tide. And upon Easter even, tidings were brought unto
London of the winning of this field. wherefore at Poulys Te deum was songe^
with great solempnyte, and so thorugh the city in all paryssh churches. And
thus this goostly man king Henry lost all, wha^ he had reigned full.xxxviii.
years.vi. months and odd days. And ye noble and most bou^teous princess
queen Margarete of whom many an untrue surmyse was imagened and told / was
feign to fly comfortless, and lost all that she had in England for ever.
when that king Edward with great solempnyte had holden the feast of Easter at
york / he than removed to Durham. And after his business there fynysshed, he
returned again Southwarde / and left in those parties ye earl of warwyke to
se the rule and guydyng of that country.

Than the king coosted and vysyted the countries Southwarde and Eestwarde /
that about the beginning of the month of Iuny he came unto his manor of shene
now called Rychemou^t. In all which pastyme purueyau^ce was made for the kings
coronacyo^. In acco^plysshyng whereof the king upon the.xxvii. day of Iuny
being friday, departed from ye said manor and rode unto the tower of London.
Upon whom gave atte^daunce yt mayre and his brethren all cladde in scarlet,
and to the noumbre of.iiii.C. co^moners well horsed and cladde all in grene.
And upon the morn being saturday / he made there.xxviii. knights of the
bath, and after that.iiii. moo. And the same after noone he was with all honor
conveyed to westminster / the said.xxxii. knights rydyng before him in blewe
gowns and hoodes upon their shulders like to prestes, with many other goodly
and honorable ceremonies yt which were long to rehearse in due order.
Coronacyon of Edward the fourth.
And upon the morn being sunday and sait Peter's day / he was with great
tryu^phe of the archebysshop of Caunterbury crowned and enoynted before the
high altar of saint Peter's church of westmynster. And after this
sole^pnysacyon of the crownyng of ye king with also the sumptuous and honorable
feast holde^ in westminster hall was fynysshed / the king soon after created
George his brother duke of Clarence.

And in the month of July following at the sta^darde in chepe, ye hand of a
servant of the kings called John^ Dauy was stryken of / for that he had
stryken a man within the palace of westmynster.

Francia. Carolus.viii
CArolus or Charles the.vii. of ye name after the account of this book, or the
vii. after the French hystory, son of Charlys the.vii. or.vi, began his
reygne over the Frenchmen in the month of October in the year of our
lord.M.iiii.C. and.xxii / and in the beginning of Henry the.vi. than king of
England. Of this Charlys sundry writers sunderly write / in so much as some
afferme him to be the natural son of Charles the.vii / some afferme him to
be the son of the duke of Orleaunce and borne of the queen / and some there
ben that name him the sonn^ of Charles fore named gotten in the baste, upon
his most beauteous paramour named Agnes / the which as testyfyeth Gaguynus,
excelled all other women in feture and beauty, and for the same to be surnamed
the fayer Agnes. This in her myddell age dyed / and was so rich yt her
testament amou^ted to.ix.M. scutes in gold, the which in sterlynge money
amou^teth to the sum of.x.M. li. Tha^ to return to this Charlys / lykely it
is that he was not ye natural son of the forenamed Charlys, for as much as
his said father ordained and wylled the realm of France unto Katheryne his
daughter and wife unto king Henry the.v / and agreed with the consent of the
more part of ye lords of his realm both spyrituall and temporal, that
during his life the said king Henry should be rege^t of France, and after his
death to be king of the said reg^o^, as more at length before I have showed
unto you in the.vii. year of the said Henry the.v. But whether he be his
legyttymat son or not, where uppo^ I purpose no le^ger to stand / troth it
is that he was by his father admitted and made dolphyne of Uyen / by reason
whereof he was in a great auctoryte, and wan to him favor of some lords of
France, which strongly maynteyned his party during the life of king Henry
the.v, and after all yt season while the duke of Bedforde occupied there as
regent of that regyo^, and was of some parties of France reputed for king.
How be it he was never crowned, so long as the said duke of Bedforde lived.
Nevertheless he by mean of polycy and his fre^des so defended him self, that
little by the Englysheme^ was won upon him, of such lands as he first was
in possessyon of. But polytykely he defended them, and little and little so
prevailed again them, that in the end he all only wanne not to him the
possession of that province yt which is named France, but also he wanne to him
in the end the king of Englandes old enherytaunce, that is Normandy, with
all domynyons to the same apperteynynge.

The manner of winning of them I woll not in this story speak of, for so much
as in the former years of king Henry the.vi. I have there expressed the manner
of sum part thereof. But that I shall speak of the^, shall be of things done
between him and other princes. And for that I before in the.viii. year of Henry
the vi, promised in the.vi. year of this Charles to show unto you some what of
the mayde^ or pucel, which ye French men named La ^ucesse de dieu.
la pucelle de dieu, and her for a messenger from god to be sent reputed / I
shall here follow ye saying of Gaguyne, which says as follows. In the.vi.
year or there about, to rekyn from the death of this Charles father / a we^che
or maiden being bred in a street or vyllage called in latyne Ualli color, and
in this time being spro^ge to the age of.xx. years or there about, having to
father a poor man named Iakes Delarch and her mother Isabell, she also berynge
the name of Jane or Johan / required by diverse and sundry times an uncle of
hyrs being prefecte of the foresaid vyllage, that he would present her unto
the French king for things concerning greatly the weal of him and of his
realm. which said prefect after many delays, for so much as in her words
he had little trust / yet at le^gthe her said uncle being named Robert
Baudryncourt, sent her with a co^uenyent company unto the king, with letters
certyfyenge him of all the manner of this maid. whereof the said Charles being
asserteyned / thought he would use some mean to know the virtue of this wenche.
And for he had perfyghte experyence that before times this woman had never seen
his person / he thought he would change his rome and habyte, to se whether
she by her virtue could know him from other / and that done, he standing
among other of his familiers as one of them / she was called into the
chaumber, and demanded if ever before time she had seen the king. And after
she had answered nay / she was bydde^ to espy out the king, which there
stood among that company.

The which anon without dyfficulte him fande and saluted as king, And all be
it that he refused her reverence, and said yt she erred in her choice / yet she
parseuered kneling at his fete and said that by gods purueyau^ce she was
taught that he was her very soueraygn prince and none other. wherefore the king
and all his lords had in her the more affyau^ce, that by her the land should
be releuyd, which at that day was in passing mysery. Than after diverse
questyo^s to her made, what was the cause of her thither coming / she
answered and said that she was sent from god, to stablisshe the king in his
realm / and that by her she being leder and capytayne of his people, by
dyuine grace only the king should shortly subdue his enemies. By reason of
which words, the king with his lords were somedeale comforted.

Upon this, armor and sword was sought for this mayde^ / the which as says
my said auctour, was fou^den myraculously / whereof the process to me appears
so dark and fa^tastycall, yt therewith me list not to blot my book but suffer
it to pass by. Than this we^che being purueyed of all things necessary to the
war / a company of knights and soudyours to her by the king was assygned.
And so she riding as a man and in man's habyte / continued by the space
of.ii. years and more, and did many wonderful feats / and gat from the
Englysshemen many strong towns and holds. wherefore among Frenchemen she
was wordshypped for an angel or a messynger sent from god, to releue their
great myserye. And as affermeth the said auctour / she by her prouydence caused
the said Charles as king of France to be crowned at Raynes, in the year of
our lord.M. four hundredth and.xxix.

All be it nouther the French cronycle nor other, which I have seen
testyfyeth that / but affermyn that he was not crowned during the life of the
duke of Bedforde. But almighty god which for a season suffers such sorcery
and deuelyssh ways to prospere and reygne, to the correccyon of sinners /
lastely to show his power, and that good men should not fall into any error,
he shows the clerenesse of such mystycall things / and so he did in this.
The End lapucelle de dieu.
For lastely she by a knight Burgonyon was taken, and after sent to Roan, and
there bre^t for her demerytes, as in the.viii year of Henry the.vi. is more at
length showed. Tha^ the time forth passing, and co^tynuall war between
England and France contynuyng / among many trybulacions by this Charles
sustained, one that was his own sonn^ named Lewys, comforted and assysted by
the dukes of Burbo^ and Ale^son with other me^ of name, rebelled again his
father, and warred upon him / and by strength wan from him certain towns
and strong holds. For remedy whereof / the said Charles made war upon the
forenamed duke of Burbon / and wasted with iron and fire the countries of the
said duke of Burbon. By mean whereof, after this unkindly war had duryd
by the space of six months or more / a peace and unity between the father
and son was treated / and by means of the earl of Ewe, a co^corde and unite
between them was finally concluded / and he ye said Lewys and all such as with
him were retained or allied, were for this offense by ye said Charles clearly
pardoned / one person all only excepted named Iaket or Iakis, by whose treason
the castle of Maxente was lost and taken / for which offense he was after
drawn, hanged, and also quartered.

Tha^ in process of time following the flemynges of Gau^te rebelled again
their duke or earl named Philyp. The cause of which rebellyon was, for that he
areryd a greuouse task upon salt / and put the people there by to greuouse
charge. whereupon dedely war between the duke and his subiectys arose, to
the dystruccio^ of much people upon both parties, whereof the cyrcumstau^ce
were long to write. How be it in the end ye duke or earl by aid of the
French king was vyctour / and held them of Gau^te so streyghte, that they
were compelled by force to bye their peace with great sums of money, and to
their other many fold domages.

About the.xxxi. year of this said Charles / came unto him from pope Nycholas
the.v. of that name an ambassade, for to require aid again the Turkys, for
the defense of Co^stantyne the noble, which the Turkys purposed shortly after
to assail. To which ambassade by the said Charlys it was answered, that to
him it was right greuouse to here of the intolerable persecucyo^, which ye
criste^ daily sustained of the Turkys. But he was of ye Englysh nacyo^ so vexed
and warred, that he might not leave his land without an hedde, to the comfort
of other, and to lose his own. But to the intent that he before times might
have warred upon the said Turkys / he for that cause only had offered unto
the king of England many reasonable offers. And if of the English party any
like offers might be to him proffered / he would gladly them accept, and
turn his spear inco^tyne^tly again the fore named Turks. And over that he
would for the furtherau^ce of the matter, send with them unto the king of
England certain ambassadors, to se if that as yet any reasonable peace might
be between them concluded. For accomplissheme^t whereof as testyfyeth mine
auctour Gaguynus he sent the archebysshop of Raynes with other honorable
persons. The which when they to king Henry and his counsayll had showed
their legacyo^ / it was to them shortly answered, that at such season as the
Englyssheme^ had won again so much land as the Frenchemen by cawtelys
had wo^ne from them / tha^ were it good time and season to treat of accord,
and not before. By reason of which answer / the popes ambassade returned to
Rome without aid or comfort. And thus ye French writers lay ever the charge
from their prince, and put it unto other. But of this ambassade or answer,
find I no memory of any English writers.

About the.xxxiiii. year of ye reygn of this Charlys / Lewys his son before
named being a man of great lyberalitye and largess, thought his father
departed not with him of his mouables and possessyo^s as he had cause to do.
For the which by comfort of yo^ge persons as he had about him, he rebelled
this second time again his said father / and by reason of his largess and
lyberalyte, drew unto him much wa^ton and wild people / and with their
assystence warred upon his fathers fre^des, and entendyd to depryue his father
of all governance of the realm. whereof herynge his father / in all possible
haste gathered to him great strength, and spedde him toward his said sonn^.
But wha^ Lewys was warned of the coming of his father with so great an host,
and considered his quarrel and wekenesse / he with a few persons fled
toward Burgoyne. whereof herynge the father sent in all ^haste people to keep
the passages / and did that he might to have stopped him of his way. But that
prouysyon notwythstandynge / the said Lewys escaped, and came sauely unto the
presence of Phylyppe then duke of Burgoyne / the which him received with
glad chere, and entreatyd him according to his estate, and so kept him
during his fathers life. Nowbeit he made for him great suit and labor, to win him to his fathers grace. But all was in vain. For what by obstynacy of
the same yt he would not submytte him to his father, and comme unto his
presence when he was sent for, and for the great stomach of the father, that
he would not be condycyoned with of the son / this varyaunce continued between
them as above is said ye term of his fathers life. In the which pass time
this Charlys concluded a marriage between his daughter called Magdaleyne, and
Ladyslaus king of Beme, Hungary, and of Polayne. But while the bryde with great
apparayle and pomp was conveyed toward her husband to be married / her said
husband was taken suddenly with sykenesse, and dyed with in.xxiiii. hours
after that he first co^playned him / which was by force of poysone as most
writers agreen. Of which tidings when Charlys was asserteyned / he therwyth
took such a pe^syffenesse, that he dyed shortly after, when he had ruled a
part and the hole realm, to reken from ye death of his father.xxxvi. years.
How be it of French writers no certain term of his reygne to him is assygned
/ for so myche as king Henry the vi. long after the death of his father, was
alowyd in Paris and many other Cytyes of France for sovereign and king of
that regyon. This Charlys thus being deed, left after him two sons / that
is to say Lewys that after him was king, and a younger named Charlys, with ye
forenamed daughter named Magdaleyne, or after some Margarete. And after with
great pomp his corpse was conveyed unto saint Denis, and there buried.

Francia. Lewys the.xi.
LEwys the.xi. of y^ name after the account of this book, and.x. after the
French account, whereof ye cause is before showed, son to Charles last deed
/ began his dominyon over the realm of France, in the month of October, in
the year of grace.M.iiii. hundredth and.lviii. and the.xxxvi. year of Henry
the.vi. than king of England. This of Gaguinus is called the sturdy or fell
Lewys. The which at the time of his fathers death, being, as above is said
vnrecou^syled in the prouynce of Burgoyne, and herynge of the death of his
father / with aid of the foresaid duke Phylyp shortly entered ye realm of
France, and took upon him ye rule in every good city and town as he passyd as
king of ye same / so yt many lords and head officers drew unto him. By mean
whereof he was strong / and put such unto silence, as after ye will and purpose
of his father would have preferred his yo^ger son named Charlys. Than this
Lewys by strength of his friends was shortly after at Raynes crowned king of
France. After which solempnyte fynysshed, he repaired unto Paris / and there
by consent of his counceyll made a law, yt no man of what degree that he were,
should use hu^tyng or hawkynge without special lyce^ce / and specially for
chasynge or huntyng of woluys / nor to keep with him any hounds or other
instruments whereby the game might be destroyed. And that done, Phylyp
foresaid duke of Burgoyne after counsayll to him given that he should forgette
and forgive all dyspleasurs to him ^ofore done by any of his lords, and them
to honor and cherysshe / and specially his young brother Charlys to norysshe
and to depart with him louyngly of his fathers possessions / took leave of him
and departed. After whose deperture / he contrary the foresaid counsayll,
refused the company of his lords and also their counsayll / and drew unto him
as his chyefe counsaylours vylaynes and men of low birth. Of yt which,
the.iiii. pryncypall were named as follows, John^ de Lude, John^ Balna, Olyuer
Devil, who^ for the odyousnesse of the name the king caused it to be changed
and to be named Da^man / and the fourth was named Stephan and vssher of the
kings chaumber door / the whithe he promoted to great honor and dygnytees.
Among whom Balna being a priest, was by his means at length made a
cardynall of Rome.

Thus he using the counsel of these persons / murmur and grudge began to
spring between him and his lords / in so myche that first the duke of
Brytayne began to estrau^ge him from the king, and refused to come unto his
presence wha^ he was sent for. whereof herynge the earl of Ewe with other,
drew them unto ye duke. To the which party soon after, ye kings brother
Charlys, with also the duke of Burbon which had married the kings sister, with
many other noble men of the realm, resortyd. when the king was ware that his
lords conspyred again him / ferynge the rebellyon of his como^s, sent in
spedy manner unto Paris the forenamed John^ Balna with other certain persons,
to keep that city in due obeysau^ce toward him / thinking that the other
cytyes and good towns of his regyon, would take ensample thereof, and demean
them as that city did. After whose coming / the rulers of Paris by the
amonystement of the said John^, ordained good and sure watch / and so by that
mean kept the city in good order. And in the mean season, the king gathered
to him great foyson of knights and soudyours, that his host was nombred
at.xxx. thousand men. And in like wise the other party had assembled as many
or mo. And not wythstandyng the assyduat labor and means made by ye duke of
Burgoyne, and Carlota wife to ye duke of Burbon and sister to the king as is
above said, to make an unity and peace between Lewys and his lords / yet
finally the king and they met in plain battle at a place called Chartres,
where between them was a long and cruel battle, to ye loss of much people
on both parties. And all be it that the king in the beginning had the
better of his enemies / yet in the end he was ouercomen, his men chaced, and
he forced to fly, and to take for his sauegarde a castle named Mountclere.
From the which he shortly departed, and yode to an other castle called
Corboyll, and from thens lastly unto Paris / where he entendyd to have gathered
new people, and to have revenged him of his enemies. But by the wise and good
exortacyo^ of the bishop of Paris, the king changed his purpose / and all
was set in a quietness for that time. But how or in what manner, or what the
condycyons of ye accord were / mine author does not express. The which
accord thus concluded / the king continued his old manners, and delyted him
more to company with simple and inreuerent parsons to eat and drink with
them, to the end that he might talk of rybaudry and vain and vycyous fables
/ than to accompany him with his lords, where he might have won him myche
honor. This Lewys also was of so diverse and wanton condycyon, that he would go
more lyker a yoman or a seruyng man, than like a prince. The which was for no
regardshyp nor sparyng of good / for as before I have showed, and also after
shall appear, he was a prince of most lyberalyte, and therewith an oppressor
of his subjects.

LEwis thus passing his time / was driven of necessyte for lack of money, to a
priest of the cytesyns of Paris. The which after many excusys by them laid to
put it by, and might not be allowed / they lastly denayed the kings pleasure.
where wythall he being grievously dyscontentyd, removed diverse from their
offices / and other which were of the rychest and head men of ye cite, he
sought again them surmysed causes / and without prouys or justice, put many
of them to death. For these foresaid causes and many other which tedyouse were
to express, the foresaid lords again assembled their people / ente^dyng to
subdue ye king, and to set his brother in his place / or to cause him
otherwise to rule ye common weal. And to strength the barons party / John^
son unto ye duke of Calabre approached to them, with a good band of men. And
to them came also the son of the duke of Burgoyne named Charlys. All which
barons of one assent met at a town called Stampys / where they co^tynued
their counsel by the space of.xv. days / and after that counsel fynysshed,
took their iournaye toward Paris. In which pass time a spy of the duke of
Brytaynes, called Peter Gerold was taken in Paris, and drawn, hanged, and
quartered / and diverse men and women yt were suspected to owe favor unto the
lords, were sacked and cast in to the water of Seyn. Then for to strength and
guide the city of Paris, the king sent thither the earl of Donoyse / by whose
prouysyon all warly ordenaunce for to defend their enemies was there preparyd.
In the which time and season, ye lords in.iii. parts enbatayled, approached
the city. whereof ye first host ladde Charlys brother unto the king / the
second the duke of Brytayne / and the third Charlys the son to the duke of
Burgoyne. Provided that Charlys first named ladde the myddleward. wha^ the
said earl of Donoyse had well considered the strength of the lords / he
sent unto them a messanger, saying that in his mind he maruayled to see so
great a multitude of people assembled again the city and common weal of ye
land / consyderyng that he was set there by the king as a medyatour and a
mean, rather to make peace than war, if they were contentyd that by him any
medyacyon might be labored and had. But this came to none effect, so that
small assautes and skyrmysshes ensued, to the little damage of both parts. In
which pass time the king sent by secret means unto the forenamed John^
son unto the duke of Calabre / and him by many means instaunted, to leave the
company of the lords. But all his offers auayled right naught. Then the
foresaid lords thus lyenge before the city of Paris, in the plain where
stands the monastery of saint Antony / Charlys brother to the king
caused.iiii. letters to be devised. whereof one he sent to the bysshoppes and
spyrytuall men within the city / the second to the consulles or head men / the
third to ye scolers of the university / and ye.iiii. unto the comynaltye. Of
which letters the intent ensues / that he nor none of his company was comen
thither as an enemy to the city, or to make war again it or the common weal
of the land / but for the encreace and augmentacyon thereof, to the uttermost of
their powers. After receyte of which letters, and the matter in them contained
well understood and debatyd / certain orators for the said.iiii. parties
were assygned / as three for the spyrytuall men, three for the consuls, three for
the university, and three for comynaltye / whose names I over pass. The which
with the bishop of Paris were sent unto the barons / and after long
communycacyon with them had, returned to the city with such report as
follows.

First the lords would that the inhabytauntes of the city should consider
the condycyons of the king, yt which yearly oppressyth his subjects with
taskes and other greuouse seruagys. Secondaryly how he despyseth ye noble blood
of his realm, and draws to him vylaynes and men of no reputacyon / by whose
cou^sayls only all the common weal of ye land is ruled and guyded. Thyrdely
how he rules his subjects by force and will, without mynystracyon of justice
/ and him self in all cou^sayls and parlyaments is judge in all causes, and
callyth his self counsayls and parlyamentes, more for his synguler weal than
for the common weal of his realm. Fourthely how he enhaunsyth men of low
birth unto great honors and causyth noble men to be obedyent unto them /
entendynge to bring the same ignoble men, for to be egall with the princes of
the land. Fyftely how the laws be delayed and bolstred by such as stand in
his favor / where thorugh as this day law is will and will is law / and no
man almost in any suerty of life or goods / in so much that daily many ben
banysshed and put to death for unlawful causes / and also to any noble man at
this day no power or rome of honor belongs / so that to wild bestes in the
forestes apperteyneth more lybertye and suertye, than the more party of the
kings subgettes. Syxtly the great taskes and sums of money which daily be
leuyed of the como^s ben not spent in the kings honorable needs and for the
common weal of the realm / but are spent nysely and ryottously, and brybed out
of ye kings cofers. For which enormities and mysgouernau^ce with many other /
the said lords were thither comen in defensyble array, for ye sauegarde of
their own persons / as to the head and pryncypall city of the realm, for to
have aid and counsel to refourme the foresaid euyls / not with standing any
harm unto the kings person, or yet to remove him from his regally or kyngly
majesty / but to enduce him and aduertyse him to that that should be his honor
and the weal of his realm, and to live in welthe and honor as his noble
progenitors have lived before him. For the which causes and consyderacyons
with many other which I pass over / the said lords as ye kings true
subeittes and friends unto the common weal of the land and of that city,
desire to enter / there to refresshe them and their people, and to pay truly
for all thing that they should take, and without doing harm or vyolence to
any person. All which requests and matters of the lords showed unto the
inhabytauntes of the city, by favor of some friends that they there had, it
was with the more party well acceptyd, and thought conuenyent that they said
nobles should be received into the city. How be it that after long debatynge
of this matter, by mean of the forenamed earl of Donoyse, a sparynge of this
receyte of the lords should be, till they had forther knowledge of the kings
pleasure. which prouysyon the said earl fande, for so much as he was secretly
warned of the kings thither coming. And upon this agreement the city rested.
For suertye whereof, such as were within the city of the kings servants and
friends, rode daily and nyghtly about ye cyty with a strong company in
harneys, to se the people kept in due order. Than upon the day following
came unto Paris a capytayne of ye kings named Mou^talbone, and with him a good
bend of men / the which showed unto the cytesyns that the king was coming out
of Normandye with a great host of. The lords being warned / enbatayled them
in the foresaid plain of saint Antoyn, to show the strength of their host
unto the city, or such as were therein as their enemies. where they so lyenge
/ certain knights of the kings party, diverse and sundry times brake out by
sodeyne resys, and skyrmysshed with the lords people, to the little hurt of
both parties. In the which pass time king Lewys coming out of Normandye,
was received into the city. where after his coming he put in execucyon.v.
persons, named John^ worter, Eustace and Arnolde worter, John^ Coart, and
Fraunceys Hasle. The which persons were accusyd to him to be chyefe
occasyoners of the legacyon made unto the lords. Of which said.v. persons /
three, as John^ Coart, Fraunceys Hasle, and Arnolde worter, were messengers
assygned in the said legacyon for the consuls of Paris / and the forenamed
Eustace worter, was one of the three assygned for the clergy.

The king thus being in possessyo^ of the city / many and diverse assautes
and skyrmysshes between his knights and the lords were made / but no notary
battle, for the king was far weker. And over that in this time and season,
the said lords gat unto them sundry castles and strong holds. Than at
length means of a peace was offeryd by ye king. For concludyng wherofes for
the king was admytted the earl of Man's, with certain other persons. And for
the barons, was assygned John^ son unto the duke of Calabre, Lewys earl of
saint Poule and other / the which assembled and co^moued together by sundry
times.ix. days. In which season came unto the king a new strength of
soudyours out of Normandye / the which the king appointed to keep the subarbes
of saint Marcell. This treaty thus hangyng without conclusyo^ or end taking /
upon the.xiiii. day of October in the.vii. year of ye reygn of this Lewys, was
proclaimed thorough the city and also the host a day of longer treuce / so
that thanne the lords wythdrewe them unto their strong holds and castles,
holding with them many soudyours which fill to robbynge and other unlawful
acts, to the great danger and hurt of the land. And at such seasons as
the arbytrours met to fynysshe this great matter / among other things offeryd
by the king, he granted to give unto his brother Charlys for his porcyon, all
Champayne with the lordshyppe of Brye / the cytyes of Melde, Monstruell, and
Meldune thereof to be excepted. And unto Charlys son of the duke of Burgoyne,
he was contented to give so myche money as he had spent in that iournay. But
all was refused. And finally for obstynacy of both parties / the day of
expyracyon of the true approchyd, without hope of accord co^cludyng. wherefore
prouysyon for war upon both parties was devised. Than began grudge and
murmr bytwen the cytesyns and the kings sowdyours / wherthorough many of the
commons hertes turned to the lords / so that for fere the surer and stronger
watches were kept to the kings great charge. Shortly after tidings were
brought unto the king yt the castle of Gysons was of the lords vesyeged /
and that also the prefecte of the kings paleys in Roan, was taken of the
cytesyns and holden in prysone. And the day following came an other
messengare, showing unto the king that the duke of Burbone was by the
posterne received into the castle of Roan / and was lykely to have shortly
the rule of the city / which came to effect in short while after. when the
lords had gotten the castle and cyty of Roan, which is head city of
Normandy as Paris is head of France / than in manner of derysyon they sent unto
ye king, saying that another with Champayne nor with Bry his brother Charlys
would be contented, but scantely with the hole duchy of Normandy. Than king
Lewys co^syderyng the great auau^tage, which ye lords had of him, both by
strength and favor of his commons which daily drew unto them by sundry
co^panyes / in auoydyng of more danger, concludyd a peace. For perfourmau^ce
whereof, he granted unto Charlys his brother ye hole duchy of Normandy / taking
to him in exchau^ge the county of Berry. And to Charlis son to the duke of
Burgoyne, Peron^, Roya, and a city or town called in latyne Mondideriu^ / and
therewith he joined Gwynary and ye erledome of Boloyne / which lordshyps ye said
king Lewys had before times bought of duke Phylyp his father. To John^ of
Calabre he granted all such su^mes of money as he demaundyd, to wage with
soudiours to aid his father again Fardynande then king of Aragon. And to
John^ duke of Burbon, yt which as before is said had married his sister / he
granted all such dowar as to him was promised at ye time of marriage / and all
such pencyon as he was wont yearly to take, of the grant of Charlys last king
within the realm of France. To the duke of Brytayne was restoryd the erledome
of Mou^tferard, with great su^mes of money which the king had received of the
said county. And to ye earl of Dampmartyne was restored all such lands as
before by act of parlyame^t were forfayted to ye king. To the earl of saint
Poule was restored the office of the constablerye of France / and to other me^
of name other notable things which I pass over. All which grauntes fermely
and fastely assuryd / proclamacyons were made of this pease thoroughe the
realm of France. And after this pease was thus concluded / the king and his
lords met. To whom he showed great semblaunt of kyndnesse / and specially
unto his brother. wherein appeared great dyssymulacyon, as here after shall
appear. For this Lewys was of such condycion, that what he might not over come
with strength, he would win with dyssymulacyon and trechety, After which
peace thus concluded, and the lords departed / the king festyd the rulers and
consuls of the city of Paris / and gave unto them due thanks, for the great
troth and fydelyte, which they bare toward him during that troubelous season
and granted unto them such things, as then they would ask for the weal of
that city.

IT was not long after, that dyssymulacyon fell between Charlys duke of
Normandye, and John^ foresaid son unto the duke of Calabre and the earl of
Dampmartyne. whereof a part of the cause was, that the said Charlys after
their thynkyng, had not so bounteously rewarded them as they had deserved. Of
which dyscorde king Lewys was feign / and in spedy manner rode unto a town
called Argentyne / and there with the said John^ than being duke of Calabre,
by reason of his fathers death, held with him long and great counsayll, to ye
intent to dyspossesse his brother of the duchy of Normandye. By reason of which
dyscorde between the said two dukes / king Lewys as ayder of the duke of
Calabre, made war in the parties of Normandye / and in process wanne therein
diverse castles and other strong holds, and compelled his brother to hold the
city of Roan for his refuge. where he so being / the king wanne daily upon
him / in so myche that diverse towns and strong holds submytted them to his
grace. whereof hering the cytesyns of Roan, made an ambassade unto the king,
for purchase of grace for their duke and for them self. The which when the
duke understood, ferynge lest his own cytesyns would betraye him, fled thens
/ and so yode to Humflewe, and from thens to Cadomy. In which pass time ye
king was with due honor received into ye city of Roan / where he removed
many from their offices, and of his servants or such as lyked him put in
their places / and much of the ordinance and of abylymentes of war
belonging to ye town he sent unto Paris / and the provost of Roan named
Gauyne Manuell he put to death / and after his body was cast into the river, and
his head set upon a pole / and diverse of the colege with the deane of ye same
place were put unto death. And all which tyranny by the king executyd, and the
town put in suertye by strength of soudyours / he after spedde him unto
Orleaunce, where as says mine author he puruayed an honorable ambassade, and
sent it unto Edward the.iiii. then king of England.

In the.ix. year of ye reygne of this Lewys was so great a mortalyte of men in
France, that in Paris dyed that year over.xl.M. people. And in this year began
a grudge to grow between this Lewys and Phylyppe duke of Burgoyne. But it was
kept unkindly during ye life of ye duke, which dyed shortly after. To whom
succedyd Charlys his son before named, which in process of time married dame
Margarete sister unto king Edward ye.iiii. as after shall be showed. It was not
long after that this Lewys assembled a great host of people to make war
upon Charlys duke of Burgoyne. Of which people he had committed the rule and
charge unto John^ Balna, which at that day was priest and cardynall / and he
as a te^porall capytayne, took of them the mustyrs and other orders. where at
the te^porall lords dysdaynynge / the earl of Da^pmartyne said in the names of
them unto the king. Most redouted sovereign lord, it has pleased your
highness to commytte unto a spyrytuall man ye charge of your puyssaunt host /
and he not ferynge god, has taken upon him the cure and charge of them, to the
effusyon of cryste^ me^nes blood. wherefore it may like your most noble grace,
to send me a temporal man to vysyte his dyocese, and to take the charge of
his flock / which is as sitting for me, as that other deed is for him. At
this saying the king had good game / but for all yt he did as to him semyd
best. Of this war between ye king and duke Charlys of Burgoyne I entende not
to speak / for the matter of it is somde^e long and tedyous to write. But in
this while that Lewys was occupied in this war / yt Brytons with an exceeding
power assailed ye parties of Norue having Charlis brother unto Lewis to their
leder, which to the duke of Brytayn was fled for aid and socoure. whereof
herynge king Lewys / all such host of sowdyours as he had purposed other
ways, he than ladde again his brother. In which host as after myth mine
author, were an.C.M. men, over such as had the guydyng of the ordenau^ce. wha^
Charlys was aduertysed of the great strength of his brother / by polytyke
means he sought for a peace. And after many delatory communycacyo^s and other
delayous means wroughte upon both parties / lastely the king sent unto his
brother John^ Balna cardynall with other, to show unto him his mind and
pleasure. whereof when Charlys was suffycyently instructed / he gave for an
answer, that if a perfyghte concord should be stablysshed between his brother
and him, that it should be authorysed by the hole concent and counsel of the
barony of the realm. with which answer the king being contentyd / at Turon in
the month of Apryll and x. year of his reygne, assembled a great counsel of
his lords spyrytuall and temporal / in the which ye demau^dys of the said
Charlys and offers of the king were showed. And after the said counsel had at
length reasoned the said demaundes and offers / it was finally determined, yt
the duchy of Normandye was so approuyd unto the king of France and to his
heirs kings, that in no wise it might be dysseueryd from ye crown. But to
the intent that a perfyght unity might be had between the king and his
brother / the king shall be instau^ted to give yearly unto his said brother in
reco^penseme^t of ye said duchy.xii. thousand pound of Turo^ money / with also
a certain of land to him to be assygned with the name of a duke / and over
that ye king to be instanted to give unto him during his natural life, for
such porcyo^ as he claymed to be his right within the realm.xl.M. li. of
annuell rent yearly to him to be paid of the foresaid Turo^ money. To all
which grauntes the king was agreed / and over that to pardon ye duke of
Brytayne all offenses now newly done again his majesty, and contrary the
dukes faith and allegaunce / and all such lordshyppes as the king had won
within Brytayne, to restore unto the duke and his assygnes. All ye which offers
might not satysfye the counsel of the said Charlys / but clearly was set
aparte and refused.

AFter the foresaid offers were by Charles refused / the king in spedy wise
upon the refusayll sent a strong host into Brytayne, under the guydynge of a
knight called Arnolde. And in the mean season the king vysytyng the bordours
of his realm / put in execucyon diverse parsones, such as were accused to
offend again him. Passing which season, were it for the greuys which the
foresaid host wroughte within the country of Brytayne, or for other skyll /
the foresaid Charlys and the duke of Brytayne made new means for a peace unto
the king / and offered to be contentyd, with that they might stand in his
favor and grace, with such proffers as the cou^sayll of the realm was
before time agreed and co^dyssended upon. where unto a sophystycall answer was
made by the king / so that the said Charles at that time might not be
asserteyned of peace or of war. How be it in the year following by instau^t
labor of the fore named John^ Balna cardynall, the king agreed to give unto
his brother Charlys the duchy of Guyan only. where with he held him co^te^ted
/ and so ceased of his war in Normandy.

It was not long after that this said John^ Balna forgetynge ye manyfolde
great benefytes showed to hi^ by the king / co^spyred again him, and devised
certain letters / the which he sent unto Charlys duke of Burgoyne. wherein was
contained that he should beware and have him self in good gayte / for the
unity and peace which lately was stablysshed between the king and Charlys his
brother, was principally to dear and war upon him, and to bring him in
subieccyon. wherefore in avoiding that danger / he aduysed him in all possible
haste to assemble his knyghtys, that he were not taken unpurveyed. The which
letters were it by reason of the berer or otherwise, came to ye kings
presence. After receyt of which letters, and knowledge of the content of them /
anon the king caused the said John^ Balna to be taken, and to be cast in
strong prysone. And that done he rode unto Thuron / whyther to him came his
brother Charles, and to him did homage, and swear unto him feauty for the duchy
of Guyan. And for to knytte the duke of Brytayne more fastly to him / he sent
to him a scepter with a chain of gold / the which the duke refused to take,
wherewyth Lewys was grievously dysco^te^ted. The cause of which refusal was,
for the said duke of Brytayne had lately before that allied him with Charlys
duke of Burgoyne, and had received his lyuerey of golden flees. And soon
after, which was the.xi. year of this Lewys / Carlota his wife was lyghted of
a sonn^, and after named Charles by Charlys his brother / which after his
father was king of France. And shortly after by means of Charlys duke of
Guyan, and of the duke of Burbon and other / the duke of Brytayn was
recou^cyled unto the kings favor. And in ye.xii. year of ye reygn of this
Lewys, dyed by force of veni the above named Charlys duke of Guyan. But by
whose means mine auctour myndeth not.

Than co^tynuynge the war between this Lewys and this duke of Burgoyne / a
merchant of Guyan named Itery, which after the death of the said duke of Guyan
was fled unto the duke of Burgoyne, and with him a season remained / showed
unto him many tedyous talys of ye king. wherefore the duke apperceyuynge yt he
owed to the French king no favor / exorted him to poison ye said king. And
if he might bring to effect his purpose / he should therefore have.l.M.
florynes of gold. A floryne is in value of sterlynge money.iii. s. After
which promise and assurance thus made by the duke / this Itery to bring his
evil purpose about, made his servant named John^ de Boldy of cou^sayll / and
promised to him great things, if he would take upon him that act. And after
grant had of the said John^ / the said Itery provided ye poison, and
delivered it unto his said servant. The which incontyne^tly sped him unto
Ambasye, where the French king than lay / where this John^ de Boldy being of
famylyer acquaintance with one named Popyn, to ye intent to bring his intent
ye better to effect, after assurau^ce of oath to hi^ made to keep his
counsayll / showed unto him all his mind, and promised to him.xx.M. florynes
if he would help to bring to conclusyon his purpose. The which Popyn made
unto him assured promise / and said y^ to bring this matter about, it was
very expedyent to have of counsayll the kings master cook named Colynet /
whom he knew well to win, for the great favor that either of them owed unto
other. And after co^munycacyon had with the said Colynet / the said poysone to
him was delivered. wherwyth the said Colynet and Popyn his fellow went a
conuenyent time unto the king, and showed to him the compass of all ye matter.
where after anon the said John^ de Boldy was taken, and confessed the
cyrcumstau^ce of all the hoole treason / for the which at Paris he was after
drawn, hanged, and quartered. Soon upon this, Frederyke ye iii. of ye name
than emperor of Almayne, sent unto this Lewys / wyllyng and requyryng him
that he would not endeuer him to any peace or accord with ye duke of Burgoyne.
For he ente^ded in such wise to aid his party, yt he trusted in god to
bring the said duke to his due, and conuenyent obeysau^ce and subieccio^. But
the king regarded nothing the emperors request / but concluded a trewys with
the duke for a year following, by auctoryte of a great counsayll or parlyament.
At the which the duke of Ale^son was iuged to lose his head, and his
heredytamentes to be forfayted unto the king.

Than it follows in the story / or this foresaid trewys between the king and
Charles the duke were fully expyred / ye said Charles made war upon the said
Lewys, and procured king Edward of England, whose sister he had married, to
make also war upon him. For expedycyon whereof / the said king Edward landed
at Calays shortly after, with a competente noumber of soudyours, as after in
the.xiiii. year of the reygne of the said Edward the.iiii. it shall be to you
more clearly showed, with co^clusyon of a peace and other things. After yt
which peace between the said ii. kings agreed / a unity and concord was also
stablysshed between this Lewys and the duke of Burgoyn for.ix. years.

About the.xvii. year of this Lewys / ye steward of Normandy named Lewys
Brysey, yt which had married the nece of king Lewys / being warned of ye wa^ton
rule of his wife, and of her auou^try with one named John^ Louyr / upon a day
to prove his said wife, went on hu^ting / and at his retourn^ feyned him weary
and feynt for labor, and went to his bed. And she anon demyng her husband
to be at his natural rest / yode straight unto ye chamber of ye said John
Louyr. whereof ye husband being warned / with his sword in hand sped him unto
ye said chamber and after ye door broken up by violence, and fyndyng the^ in
bed or other suspeciouse manner, with his said sword slew first y^ said
John^ / and after natwythsta^dyng her miserable and lamentable crye^g, and
asking forgyuenes upon her knees, he also slewher / and after fled till he had
made his peace with the king.

Long it were and also tediouse to follow mine auctour, in declaryng of every
particular deed done by this Lewys. wherefore to shorte^ this story / troth it
is yt after this Lewys had by long time exercised him in wars, he lastly fell
in a greuouse sykenesse. The which continued and so increased upon him / yt he
knew well he should not long endure. wherefore he disposed there after / and
caused many deeds of alinesse to be done for him. Among y^ which within saint
Iohn^s church the Baptist within Paris, he founded certain priests to sing for
him in perpetuyte. For suste^tacion of whom, he gave of yearly re^te a.M. li.
of Paris money. And so la^guysshyng by ye space of.iii. years more before he
died passed his time with great tribulacyon. In the which pass time orators
were sent from the Flemynges for to conclude a marriage between Charles his
eldest son, and Margarete than daughter of Maxymylian son of Frederyke the
emperor / which Maximilia^ before those days had married Mary the daughter of
Charles duke of Burgoyne. After which co^clusyon ended and fynysshed / the king
gave unto the said orators xxx.M. scutes of gold, which amou^teth to.v.M. li.
sterlyng money. And over that gave to them in plate purposely made, to the
value of.v C. li. sterlynge. And in the.xxv. year of the reygne of the said
Lewys / the forenamed Margarete a child of tender age, with great and
sumptuouse po^pe was brought unto Paris. And from thens she was conveyed unto
Ambasye / and there in the month of July, cowpeled by marriage unto the
forenamed Charles sonn^ unto the king. After which solempnyte fynysshed / the
said Lewys felyng his sykenesse more and more encreasyng / upon a season
called his said sonn^ Charles before him, The words of king Lewys dyenge to
his son.
and exorted him in this wise as after follows. My most deryst child, I
feel and know well yt I shall not tarry long in this country / for I am more
nerer mine end than thou know. For I am so contynually greuyd with
sykenesse, that no medecyne may or can releue me. And thou art he that must
rule this land after me. wherefore to the it is specially behoueful and
necessary, to have true servants. Among many yt I have proved in my days /
ii. there ben, the which I specially commend unto the / that is to mean
Olyuer Damman, and John^ Doyacos. whose seruyces I have in such wise used,
that by their means and counsayll I think my life has been long preserved.
And therefore specially these.ii. keep nere about yt, nothing mynysshyng to
them of their offices or possessions, that I before times to them have given.
And after these ii / take to the for thy counsaylours, Guyot and Bochage / and
for to guide yt wars, Phylyp Desquyer / yt which in featys of war as I have
well p^oued, has passing experience. And other which I have auau^ced to offices
within this realm / let them so remain. And the commons of the land, the
which by occasyo^ of wars I have grievously tarid and greatly weked and
enpouerysshed / socoure and favor to thy power. To the Burgonyo^s me thought
ever good to show favor / or else me thought it should have sounded to my
dishonor. So I think it shall be good that thou so do. After that king Lewys
had thus exorted and counsayled his sonn^ / he than returned unto Turon.

where for the mytygacyon of this paynfull sykenesse, which of mine auctour is
called in latyne Morbus Elephantie / he commanded to be brought before him all
the cunnyng masters of musyke within his realm, that by the melodyous sou^de
of their instruments, he might be eased of his pain. But when he had
assembled of the best an.C. and.xx. in noumber / a few shepardes pypes were to
him more solace, than all the other or any part of them / yt which he held
still in his court, and commanded that every day the said shepherdes should
play a certain dystaunce from the place where he lay. And over this he sent
for all ankers and other relygyous men that were famed for holy and parfight
men / and for them ordained places within Turo^, that by the mean of their
prayers he might be released of his contynuall pains. And to have longer
contynaunce of life / mine auctour says yt this Lewys had so great a desire
to have length of life / for so much as he knew well that the realm of
France should be in great trouble and vexacyon shortly after. But not
wythstandynge all these prouysyons and ordenaunces, with many moo which long
were to write / finally this Lewys dyed, wha^ he had been king of France by
the term of.xxvi. years or there upon / and after was buried in the church
of our Lady of Raynes, where before time he provided his sepulture, and in time
of his sykenesse l^ye in it a certain season, while that certain orysons were
over him said.

Anglia. Edward the.iiii.
Edward the.iiii. of that name, son^ of Richard duke of york as before is
touched / began his reygne over ye realm of England the.iiii. day of March
in the end of the year of grace, to reken after the church of
England.M.iiii.C. and.lx / and the.ii. year of Lewys the.xii. tha^ne king of
France. The which Edward after his possessyon taking at westmynster and
gettyng of the feelde at Touto^ by york, was crowned and anointed for king at
westmynster foresaid, the.xxix. day of Iuny, as before is showed in the end
of the last year of Henry the.vi. After which solempnyte fynysshed / the
king in August after rode to Cauntorbury / and from the^s he rode to
Sandewyche / and from thens a long by the sees side to Southampto^ / and so
into the march of walys / and returned by Brystowe, where he was with all
honor received / and after visited sundry parties of his realm. In which
season or soon after, the time of Rychard Lee mayre of London expyred / and
Hughe wyche mercer was admytted for the year following.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxi. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxii. John^ Look. Hughe wyche.
Anno.i. George Irelande.
THis year being the later end of the first year of Edward the.iiii, and the
beginning of this mayres year, that is to say the fourth day of September / a
parlyamente was begone at westmynster. And upon ye morrow following dyed John^
duke of Northfolke / the which had been a special ayder of the king. And upon
Alhalowen day before passed / ye king created Richard his younger brother duke
of Glouceter, the lord Bowchyer earl of Essex, and the lord Fawcumbrydge earl
of Kent / and upon the.xii. day of February, was the earl of Oxenforde, with
the lord Aubry his elder son, sir Thomas Tode^ham^, willya^ Tyrell, and
other, brought unto the tower of London. And upon the.xx. day of the said
month, ye said lord Awbry was drawn from westmynster unto the tower hylle,
and there beheded. And upon the.xxiii. day of the same month / sir Thomas
Tode^ham, wyllya^ Tyrell, and John^ Mo^gomory, were also there beheded. And
upon the friday next ensuynge, or the.xxvi. day of the said month / the earl
of Oxenforde was ladde from westmynster upon his feet to ye said place of, and
there also beheded. whose corpse was after borne unto ye friar Augustynes / and
there buried within the quyer for that time. And in the later end of the
month of July / was the castle of Awnewyke yelden unto the lord Hastynges by
appoyntement.

when king Edward was thus stablysshed in this realm / great suit and labor
was made to him for the repayment of the foresaid.xviii.M. li. to him and other
delivered by the stapelers, as before in ye.xxxviii. year of Henry the.vi. to
you I have before showed. whereof was laborer, were it by the agreement of the
said stapelers or otherwise, one named Richard Heyron a merchant, of
pregnaunte wit and of good manner and speech. To whom at length was answered by
the kings counsayll, that ye said xviii.M. pound with much more, the which
was covertly kept from the kings knowledge, belonged of right unto ye earl of
wylshyre / which at the time of delyuery of the said goods, was high
tresourer of England / and after for treason by him done again the king, the
said earls lands and goods were forfayted unto the king. wherefore the king
retained the said.xviii.M. li. as parceyll of his forfayture, and would
reteyne as his own. Upon which answer / this heyron seeing that of the king
he might have no remedy, and for so much as much of the said good belonged to
his charge, he tha^ resorted unto the stapelers for conte^tacyon of the said
money. But how it was that there be fa^de no comfort / he finally sued the
mayer of the staple and his company, and put them unto great vexacyon and
trouble. And in the end fande such favor in the court of Rome / that he
denou^ced all the merchauntes stapelers accursed. How be it that soon after
they purchased an absolucyon. And he in conclusyon after long being i^
westmynster as a seyntwaryman / without recovery of his costs or duty, dyed
there, being greatly endetted unto many persons.

Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxii. Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxiii. wyllyam Hampton. Thomas
Cook. Anno.ii. Barth Iamys.
This year and begynnyge of ye month of November / Margaret late queen of
England came out of France i^to Scotland and from the^s i^to England, with a
strength of French men and Scotts. wherefore the king sped him into the north
with a strong host. whereof herynge the queen / brake her array and fled / and
took a caruyle, and therein intended to have sailed into France. But such
tempest fell upon the sea, that she was constrained to take a fysshers bote /
and by mean thereof landed at Barwyke, and so drew her unto the Scottysshe
king. And shortly after her la^dyng tidings came to her, that her said
caruyll was drowned, within the which she had great treasoure and other
richesse.

And the same day upon.iiii.C. of the Frenchemen were driven upon land nere
unto Bambourth. where they for so much as they might not have away their
ships, they fyred the^ / and after for their sauegarde took an island within
Northumberland. where they were assailed of one called Manners with other in his
company / and of them slain and taken prisoners as many as there were. when ye
king was ware of the queen's thus avoiding / he ente^ded to have followed, and
to have made war upon the Scotts. But he was than vysyted with the sykenes
of pockes, yt he was forced to leave that iournay. In the weke of Crystemas
following / the Scotts with a strong power perced the land, entendynge to
have rescowed certain castelles in the north. But they returned shortly
without harm doing.

And shortly after the duke of Somerset and sir Rauffe Percy, submitted them to
the kings grace.

when the king was cured and returned southwarde / the Scotts about the
time of lent entered again into England / and laid a syege unto Banbourth
castle and wanne it, wherefore the king in the month of Auguste following,
rode again northewarde with his power / and over that vytayled certain
ships in the west country, and manned them, and sent them thither to make
war upon the sea coost.

And in the latter end of this mayres year / the duke of Somerset herynge that
king Henry was coming into the land with a new strength, departed secretly
/ and went again to him.

Anno. dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxiii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxiiii. Robert Basset. Mathewe
Phylyp Goldsmyth. Anno.iii. Thomas Muschampe.
IN this year and month of May, which was in the begynyng of the.iiii. year
of king Edward / the lord John^ of Mountagu having than the rule in the
north parties, being warned of the coming of Henry late king with a great
power out of Scotland, assembled the Northynmen, and met with him about
Exhm^, and there skyrmysshed with ye Scotts, and at length wan ye vyctory of
his enemies / and chased Henry so nere, that he wan from him certain of his
folowers trapped with blewe velvet, and his bycoket garnysshed with two crowns
of gold and fret with perle and rich stone.

He also took at the said journey ye duke of Somerset, the lord Hungerforde,
and the lord Roos. which said duke was shortly after put to death at the said
town of Exhm^ / and the other ii. lords were soon after beheded at new
castle. And other which were after that fight taken in a wood fast by, as sir
Phylyp we^tworth, sir Edmond Fiz knights, Black Iaquis John^ Bryce, and
Thomas Hunt / were also put to death at Exhm^ foresaid or Myddelham after some
writers / and sir Thomas Husey knight was beheded at york. And in the month
of July next following, the said lord Mountagu with aid of his brother earl
of warwyke, wan by strength the forenamed castle of Bamburgth / wherein as one
of the said capitaynes was taken with other, sir Rauffe Gray / which shortly
after at york was drawn hanged and quartered.

In such pass time in most secret manner upon the first day of May, king
Edward spoused Elizabeth late the wife of sir Johan Graye knight / which
before time was slain at Toweton or york field. which spousayles were
solempnised erely in the morning at a town named Graston nere unto
Stonyngestratforde. At which marriage was no persons present, but the spouse,
the spousesse, the duches of Bedford her mother, the priest, two gentylwomen,
and a young man to help the preeste sing. After which spousayles ended / he
went to bed, and so tarried there upon.iii. or.iiii. hours / and after
departed and rode again to Stonyng stratforde, and came in manner as though he
had been on huntyng, and there went to bed again. And within a day or.ii.
after, he sent to Graston^ to the lord Ryuers father unto his wife, showing
to him, that he would come and lodge with him a certain season / where he was
received with all honor, and so tarried there by the space of four days. In
which season she nyghtely to his bed was brought, in so secret manner that
almooste none but her mother was of counsayll. And so this marriage was a season
kept secret after, till nedely it must be dyscouered and dysclosed, by mean
of other which were offered unto the king, as the queen of Scotts and other.
what oblyquy ran after of this marriage, how the king was enchaunted by the
duchess of Beforde, and how after he would have refused her with many other
things concerning this matyer / I here pau^e it over.

And this year was king Henry taken in a wood in the north country by one
named Cantiowe, and presented to the king / and after sent to the tower,
where he remained long after.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxiiii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxv. John^ Tate. Rauffe
Iosselyne Draper. Anno.iiii. John^ Stone.
IN this year was a new coin ordained by ye king, yt which was named ye
Royal / and was and yet is in value of.x. s. the half royal.v. s / and the
ferthyng.ii. s.vi. d. And over yt he ordained ye second coin of gold and
named it ye angel, which was and yet is in value of.vi. s.viii. d / and the
half angel iii. s.iiii. d. He ordained also a new coin of grotes, half
grotes, and pens which were of less weight than the old grote was by.viii. d.
in an ounce. And tha^ was fine gulde auau^sed from s. to.xl. s an ounce / and
other baser goldes after ye rate. And silver that before was at.viii. grotes
and.xxx. d. an vunce, was hyghed to.xl. d. an vunce and.iii. s.ii. d.

And in this mayres year and beginning of the.v. year, that is to say the.xxvi.
day of May that year whyt sunday / queen Elizabeth was crowned at westmynster
with great sole^pnytie. At the which season at the tower / the night before
the coronacyon / among many knights of the bathe there made, was as of that
company sir Thomas Cook, sir Mathewe Phylyp, sir Rauffe Iosselyne, and sir
Henry wauyr cytezyns of London thanne and there made knights.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxv. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxvi. Sir Henry wauyr. Rauffe
Uerney Mercer. Anno.v. wyllyam Constantyne.
IN this year, that is to say the xi. day of the month of February / was
Elizabeth pryncesse and first child of king Edward borne at westmynster.
whose crystenynge was done in the abbaye with most solempnyte. And the more,
because the king was assured of his physycyons that the queen was conceived
with a prince / and specially of one named master Dominyk, by whose counsayll
great prouysyon was ordained for crystenynge of the said prince. wherefore it
was after told, that this master Domynyk to the entente to have great thank
and reward of the king / he stood in the second chamber where the queen
trauayled, that he might be the first that should bring tidings to the
king of the birth of the prince. And lastly when he hard the child cry / he
knocked or called secretly at ye chamber door, and frayned what the queen had.
To whom it was answered by one of the ladies, what so ever ye queen's grace
has here within / suer it is that a fool stands there without. And so
confused with his answer / he departed without saying of the king for that
time.

Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxvi. Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxvii. John^ Brown. Sir John^
young Grocer. Henry Bryce. Anno.vi. John^ Stokton.
IN this year and month of, dyed the forenamed Henry Bryce / and for him was
chosen immedyatly a sheryfe for this year John^ Stokton. And in the month of
Iuny following, were certain acts and feats of war done in Smythfeld,
between sir Antony wy deuyle called lord Scalys upon that one party, and the
bastard of Burgoyne chalengour on that one party. Of which the lord Scalys
wan the honor / for the said bastard was at the first course rennynge with a
sharp sperys overthrown horse and man. which was by the rage of the horse of
the said bastard, and not by violence of the stroke^ of his enemy / and by a
pyke of iron standing upon foreparte of the sadell of ye lord Scalys. wherwyth
the horse being blind of the bastard was stryken into the nose thrylles, and
for pain thereof mounted so high upon the hinder fete, that he fill bakwarde.
Upon the second day they met there again upon foot, and faughte with their
axes a few strokes. But when the king saw that the lord Scalys had
advantage of the bastard, as ye point of his axe in the vysour of his enemies
helmet, and by force thereof was lykely to have borne him over: the king in have
cried to such as had the rule of the field, that they should depart them / and
for more speed of the same, cast down a warderer which he than held in his
hand / and so were they departed to the honor of the lord Scalys for both
days. Upon the morrow following and the other days, were certain acts of
war done between diverse gentylmen of this land, and certain of the said
bastardes servants. Of the which also the Englyshmen wan the honor. In this
year also one named John^ Derby alderman, for so much as he refused to carry or
to pay for the caryage away of a deed dog lyenge at his door, and for
vnsittynge langage which he gave unto the mayre / he was by a court of
aldermen demed to a fine of.l. pound which he paid every penny.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxvii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxviii. Humfrey Heyforde.
Thomas Owlegraue. Anno.vii. Thomas Stalbroke.
IN this year of the mayre, and in the beginning of the.viii. year of this
king Edward, that is to mean upon saturday next ensui^g the feast of corpus
christi / dame Margarete sister unto the king, rode thorugh London toward the
sees side to pass into Flaunders, there to be married to Charlys duke of
Burgoyne before named in the story of y^ xi. Lowys king of France. After whose
departure, sir Thomas Cook late mayre, which before was peched of treason by a
servant of the lords wenlokkes called Hawkyns, and at the request of the said
lady Margarete upon suertie suffered to go at large / than was arrested and
sent unto the tower, and his goods seized by the lord Ryuerse than tresourer
of England / and his wife put out of his house, and committed to the charge
of the mayer / in whose place she lay a season after. And after the said sir
Thomas had lain a time in ye tower he was brought unto the Guyldhal, and there
areygned of the said treason and quyt by sundry enquestes / and after that
committed unto the countour in Bradstrete, and from thens to the kings be^che
in Southwark. where he lay within the said pryso^ till his friends agreed
with sir John^ Brandon than kepar of ye said pryso^, to take him home to his
place where to his great charge he remained as prisoner long after. In which
time and season he lost much good / for both his places in the country and
also in London were under the gydynge of the said lords Ryuers servants,
and of the servants of sir John^ Fogge than vndertresourer / the which
spoiled and dystroyed much thing.

And over that much of his iewelles and plate with great substance of the
marchaundyse, as cloth of sylkes and clothes of aras, were dyscouered by such
persons as he had betaken the said goods to keep / and came to ye
treasourers hands, which to the said sir Thomas was a great enemy. And
finally after many persecucyons and losses / was compelled as for a fine set
upon him for offense of mysprysyon, to pay, unto the king.viii. thousand
pound. And after he had thus agreed, and was at large for the kings interest
/ he was thanne in new trouble again the queen.

The which demanded of him as his right, for every thousand.li. paid unto
the king by way of fine, an hundredth mark. For the which he had after long
suit and great charge / and in conclusion was feign to agree, and to give to
her a great pleasure / beside many good gifts that he gave unto her counsayll.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxviii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxix. Symonde Smyth. wyllyam
Taylour Grocer. Anno.viii. wyllyam Haryot.
This year and.xxi. day of Noue^bre / a servant of the dukes of Exceter named
Rychard Sterys, after his judgment was drawn thorugh the city unto the tower
hyl, and there parted in two pesys / that is the head from the body. And upon
the day following / two persons being named the one Poynys and that other
Alforde, were drawn west ward to tyborne / and there wha^ they should have been
hanged, there chartours were showed and so preserved.

And about this season or soon after / was the earl of Oxenford, which before
time was taken by a surmyse in ielosy of treason awayted for and after
delivered. In the latter end of this mayres year, and.ix. year of ye king /
the merchants eesterlynges were condemned unto the merchants auenturers
Englyssh, after long and sumptuous exspences in the law and before the kings
counsayll / in.xiii.M.v.C. and.xx. li. whereof the payment was kept secret
from writers.

In this year the dyssymuled favor, which between the king and the earl of
warwyke had still continued syne the marriage of the queen, began to appear /
in so much that the earl wythdrewe him from the king, and confedered unto
him the duke of Clarence that before had married his daughter.

whereupon the commons of the north began to rebel, and chase them a
capytayne, whom they had named Robyn of Ryddysdale. The which did many feats
/ and lastly bare him so wisely, that he and his company were pardoned of the
king. In the which rumor and styrryng / the lord Ryuers, and sir John^ his
sonn^, that before had married the old duchess of Northfolke, lyenge at a place
by Charynge cross called the Muys, were taken by Lyncoln^shyre men and brought
unto Northamto^, and there beheded.

Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxix. Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxx. Richard Gardyner.
Richard Lee Grocer. Anno.ix. Robert Drope.
This year soon after Alhalowen tide, proclamacio^s were made thorugh the
city of London, that the king had pardoned the Northyrnme^ of their riot /
and as well for the death of the lord Ryuers, as all dyspleasures by them before
that time done. And soon upon this, a new styrryng began in Lyncoln^ shyre
whereof the occasyoner was the lord wellys, as the fame than went. For whom
the king sent by fair means, promysyng him to go safe and come safe as it
was said. But troth it is after his coming to the king had he before such
promise or not, he was shortly after beheded.

Than in February following / by medyacyon of lords a treatye of unity and
concord was labored between the king and his brother and the earl of warwyke.
For which cause the said earl came thanne unto London. And shortly after came
the said duke, as upon shrouesonday following. And upon the thuysday following,
the king and the said duke mettte at Baynardes castle, where ye duchess of
york their mother than lay. In the which passetyme ye earl of warwyke was
returned to warwyke / and there gadered to him such strength as he might make,
as it was reported.

And in Lyncoln^shyre / sir Robert wellys son unto the lord wellys before
put to death, in this while had also assembled a great bend of men, and
purposed to give the king a field. Of all which tidings wha^ne the king was
assertayned / he with his said brother the duke spedhim north ward / and in
that while sent to the said sir Robert wellys, wyllyng him to send home his
people, and come to him, and he should have his grace. But that other answered
that by like promysse his father was dysceyued / and that should be his
example. But in conclusyon when the king with his power drew nere unto hi^,
he took such fere that he fled / and soon after was taken, and with him sir
Thomas Dymmok knight and other, the which were shortly after put to death.

In this season was the duke of Clarence departed from the king / and was
gone unto the earl of warwyke to take his part. To whom the king in likewise
sent, yt they should come to his presence without fere / where unto they made a
feigned answer. And than considering their lack of power again ye king /
departed and went to the sea side, and so sailed into France / and required
the.xi. Lowys than king of that regyon, that he would aid and assyste them to
restore king Henry to his ryghtfull enherytaunce. whereof the said Lowys being
glad, granted unto them their request / and held the^ there, while they
with the counsayll of queen Margarete provided for their return into England.

when the said lords were thus departed the land / the king commanded them
to be proclaimed as rebels and traitors thorugh out his realm. And in the
Easter weke following / sir Geffrey Gate and one named Clapha^, which intended
at South ampton to have taken shyppynge and to have sailed to the said lords,
were there taken by the lord Hawarde and sent unto ward. which said Clapham
was beheded soon after / and the said sir Geffrey Gate fande such frendshyp,
that lastly he escaped or was delivered / so that he yode after to saint wary.

Thanne was the lord of saint Iohn^s arrested. But at instaunce of the
archebysshop of Caunterbury, he went a season at large under suerty, and was
finally committed to the tower. In which passetyme the earl of Oxenforde gat
over unto the foresaid lords. Thus enduryng this trouble / a stirrynge was
made in the north parties by the lord Fitz Hugh wherefore the king sped him
thyderwarde. But so soon as the said lord knew of the kings coming / anon
he left his people and fled into Scotland. And the king which tha^ was
commyn to york, rested him a season there and there about.

In the month of Septembre and.x year of the king / the foresaid duke of
Clarence acco^panyed with the earls of warwyke of Penbroke and of Oxenforde and
other many gentylmen, landed at Dartmouth in Deuynshyre / and there made their
proclamacyons in the name of king Henry the.vi / and so drew ferther into the
land. whereof herynge the commons of that country and other / drew unto them
by great companyes.

Than the Kentyshemen began to were wild / and assembled them in great
companyes, and so came unto the out parties of the city of London, Rad^lyffe,
saint Katherynes, and other places, and robbed and spoiled the Flemynges and
all the bear houses there as they came.

Tha^ the foresaid lords holding on their iournaye / drew toward ye king
being in the north as above is said. whereof he being warned, and having with
him as than but small strength whereof some to him were not very trusty / he
with a secret company took the next way toward the wash in Lyncolneshyre / and
there passed over with great danger, not without loss of diverse of his
company / and so passed the countries into Flaunders, and stynted not till he
came to Charles his brother thanne duke of Burgoyne / with whom he rested a
season. wha^ the queen which than was in the tower hard of the kings
avoiding / anon she departed from thens and yode unto westmynster, and there
regystred her self for a seyntwary woman / and in like wise did many of king
Edwardes friends.

And than about the beginning of Octobre / sir Geffrey Gate that till that
time had holden the said seyntwary and other with him, went unto the prysons
about London / and all such as they had favor unto, took them out and set
them at lybertye. And than shypmen and other evil dysposed persons as than
drew to the said Geffrey Gate / robbed again the berehouses, and set some of
them in fire / and after resorted unto the gates of the city, and there would
have entered by force. But the cytezeyns wythstode them with such force, that
they were compelled to depart thens.

Upon the.xii. day of October, the tower was given up by appoyntme^t / and king
Henry was taken from the lodgyng where he before lay, and was than lodged in
the kings lodgyng within the said tower. In which passetyme the duke and the
foresaid lords drew nere unto the city.

And upon saturday than next following / the said duke accompanied with ye
earls of warwyke and of Shrowysbury and the lord Stanley, rode unto the tower /
and there with all honor and reverence fet out king Henry, and conveyed him
to Poulys / and there lodged him in the bysshoppes palace / and so was tha^
admytted and taken for king thorugh all the land.

Readoptio Henrici.vi.
HEnri ye.vi. of that name before by Edward ye.iiii. put down, was again
restored to the crown of England, the. day of Octobre, in the year of
grace.M.iiii. C.lxix / and the.x. year of Edward ye iiii / and the.xii. year
of the.xii. Lowys than king of France.

In whose beginning of readopcyon, the earl of worceter which for his
cruelnesse was called the bochier of England / was taken and put in straight
prison. And upon the xv. day of October, was the said earl aregned at
westmynster in the white hall, and there endyted of treason / and upon the
mo^daye following adiuged that he should go from the same place unto the tower
hylle, and there to have his head smytten of. But as he was coming from the
said place of judgment toward his execucyon / the people presyd so
inportunatly upon him for to se and behold him, that the sheryfes were feign
to turn into the Flete, and there to borowe gayoll for him for that night.
And upon the morrow after at afternoon being saint Lukys day and xviii. day
of Octobre / he was ladde to the tower hylle / where he took his death full
patiently. whose corpse was after borne with the hedde unto the black freres,
and there honorably buried in a chapel standing in the body of the church
which he before time had founded. And than was daily awaytynge upon the sea
side, for the landyng of queen Margaret and prince Edward her son / and also
prouysyon made for the defense of landynge of king Edward and his company.

Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxx. Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxxi. John^ Crosby. Anno
Henrici.vi. primo. John^ Stokton^. mercer. John^ ward. Anno Edwardi.iiii.x.
IN this year, which was in ye end of the.x. year of king Edward, and
beginning of the readopcion of king Henry, that is to mean the third day of
Nouembre / queen Elizabeth being as before is said in westmynster seyntwary,
was lyghted of a fair prince. And within the said place the said child
without po^pe was after crystened. whose godfathers were the abbot and pryour
of the said place, and the lady Scrope godmother. And the.xxvi. day of the
said month following, began a parlyament / and from thens proroged to Paulys,
where it co^tynued till Cristmas. In the parlyamente sir Thomas Cook before
trowbeled as I have showed in the.vii. year of king Edward, put in a byll
into the common house, to be restored of the lord Ryuers lands and other
occasyoners of his trowble, to the sum of.xxii.M. mark. Of the which he
had good comfort to have been allowed of king Henry, if he had prospered /
and the rather, for that that he was of the common house, and therwyth a man of
great boldness in speech and well spoken, and syngulerly wytted and well
reasoned.

Than during this parlyament / king Edward was proclaimed usurper of the
crown, and the duke of Glouceter his younger brother traitor / and both
attaynted by auctorytie of the said parlyament.

And upon the.xiiii. day of February, came the duke of Exceter to London. And
the.xxvii. day of ye said month, rode the earl of warwyke thorugh ye city
toward Dover for to have received queen Margarete / but he was dyspoynted. For
the wind was to her contrary, that she lay at the sea side taryeng for a
conuenyent wind, from November till Apryll. And so the said earl after he had
long tarried for her at the sea side / was feign to return without speed of
his purpose.

Thus during this queysy season / the mayre ferynge the return of king
Edward feigned him syke / and so kept his house a great season. All which time
sir Thomas Cook which than was admytted to his former rome, was set in his
place, and allowed for his deputye / which turned after to his great trowble
and sorrow.

Than finally in the beginning of the month of Apryll / king Edward landed
in the north at a place called Rauynspore with a small company of Flemynges and
other, so yt all his company exceded not the number of.M. persons / and so
drew him toward york, making his proclamacyons as he went in the name of
king Henry / and showed to the people, that he came for none intent but only
to claim his enherytaunce y^ dukedom of york / and so passed the countres
till he came to the city of york, where the cytezyns held him out till they
knew his intent. And when he had showed unto them as he before had done unto
other, and confermed it by an oath / he was there received and refresshed for a
certain time, and so departed and held his way toward London / and passed
by favor and fayer words the danger of the lord Marquys Mountagu, which
in that costs lay than in awayte for him purposely to stop his way, and had
people dowble of no^bre that king Edward had of fighting men. wha^ king
Edward was thus passed the said Marquys, and saw that his strength was
greatly amended, and that also daily the people drew to him / he than made
proclamacyons in his own name as king of England / and so held on his
iournay till he came unto London. In which passetyme, that is to mean upon
sherethursdaye / the archebysshoppe of york being than at London with king
Henry, to the intent to move the peoples hertes toward ye king / rode about
the town with hi^, and showed him to the people / the which rather withdrewe
me^nes hertes than other wise. And in this season also sir Thomas Cook
before-named avoided the land / ente^dyng to have sailed into France. But he
was taken of a ship of Flaunders, and his son and heir with him / and so
set there in prison many days / and lastly was delivered unto king Edward.

Than upon sherethursdaye at after noone, king Edward was received into the
city / and so rode to Poulys, and there offered at ye roode of the north door
/ and that done yode incontynently into the bysshoppes palace, where he fande
king Henry almost alone. For all such lords and other as in the morning
were about him, when they hard of king Edwardes coming, anon they fled,
and every man was feign and glad to save him self. Than king Edward lodged
him / where king Henry lay, and put him under safe keeping / and so rested
him there till Easter even. Upon the which even, heryng of his brothers
coming and ye other lords with him with a strong host unto saint Albonis /
sped him thyderward, and lay that night at Barnet. In which season the duke of
Clarence contrary his oath and promise made unto the French king refused the
title of king Henry / and suddenly with the strength that he had, rode
streyghte unto his brother king Edward / wherewith the other lords were
somdeale abashed. The which not wythstandynge / the said lords, by the
special comfort and exortacyon of the earl of Oxenforde as it was said,
held on their iournay toward Bernet, the said earl of Oxenford being in the
vawarde / and so came unto ye plain without Bernet, and there pyght their
field. Then upon ye morrow being Easter day and the.xiiii. day of Apryll
very erly, both hosts met. whereupon that one party were two knyges present,
as Henry the.vi. which king Edward had brought thither with him, and king
Edward the.iiii. And upon that other party was the duke of Exceter, the lord
Marquys Mountagu, and the two erlys of warwyke and of Oxenford, with many other
men of name.

There the said earl of Oxenforde and his company quyt them so manfully, that
he bare over that part of the feeld which he set upon / so ferforthly ye
tidings came to London, that king Edward had lost the field. And if his men
had kept their array and not fallen to ryfflyng / lykely it had been as it
was after told, that the vyctory had fallen to that party. But after long
and cruel fight, in conclusyon king Edward optayned the upper hand, and
slew of his enemies the marquis Mountagu and the earl of warwyk his brother,
with many other. And upon the kings party was slain the lord Barnes. And of
the como^s upon both parties were slain upon.xv.C. men and mo.

Of the mystes and other impedymentes which fill upon the lords party by
reason of the incantacyons wrought by friar Bu^gey as ye fame went, me list not
to write. But troth it is that after this vyctory thus won by king Edward
/ he sent the deed corpse of the said Marquys and earl of warwyke unto Poulys
church / where they lay two days after naked in.ii. coffyns that every man
might behold and se them. And the same after none came king Edward again
unto London, and offered at ye roode of the North door at Poulys / and after
rode unto westmynster and there lodgyd him. And soon after that the king was
thus passed tho* ough the cyty, was king Henry brought riding in a long gown
of blewe velvet / and so conveyed thoroughe Chepe unto westmynster, and from
thens unto the Tower / where he remained as prisoner all his lives time after.

The repossessyon of Edward the.iiii.
EDward the.iiii. before named began again his domynyon over the realm of
England, the.xiiii. day of Apryll, in ye beginning of the year of our
lord.M.iiii.C.lxxi / and the.xii. year of Lewys the French king / and
reposseded all things as he before had done. And when the said two corpse
had lain in Poules openly from the Sunday till the Tuysdaye / they were
had from thens and buried where ye king would assygne them.

The king then being in authoryte / made prouysyon for the defense of the
landynge of queen Margaret and her son / the which all this while lay at
the sea side taryenge the wind / and so lastely landed at, and came with a
strength of Frenchmen and other, as far within the^ land as to a vyllage in
called Tewkysbury. where the king met with her and her dystressyd, and chasyd
her company and slew many of them. In the which battle she was taken, and
sir Edward her son / and so brought unto the king. But after the king had
questyoned with the said sir Edward, and he had answered unto him contrary
his pleasure / he then struck him with his gauntelet upon the face. After
which stroke so by him received / he was by the kings servants
inco^tynently slain upon the.iiii. day of the month of May.

when king Edward had thus subdued his enemies / anon he sent queen
Margarete unto London, where she restyd a season / and finally she was sent
home into her country. And the goods of sir Thomas Cook were again ceasyd /
and his wife put forth, and commanded to be kept at the mayers.

Upon the.xiiii. day of May following / the bastard of Fawconbrydge, that
unto him had gaderyd a ryottous and evil dysposyd company of shypmen and
other, with also the assystence of ye commons both of Essex and of Kent / came
in great multitude unto the cyty of London. And after that the said company
was denied passage thorough the city / they set upon diverse parties thereof, as
Bysshoppes gate, Algate, London bridge, and alonge the waters side, and shot
gonnes and arowes, and fyred the gates with cruel malice, as Bishops gate and
Algate / and faught so fyersly that they wanne ye bulwerkes at Algate, and
entered a certain within the gate. But the cytesyus with comfort and aid of
Robert Baset alderman assygned to the gate / wythstode the said rebels so
manfully, that they slew all such as entered the gate / and compellyd ye other
to draw a back and forsook the gate. Upon whom the cytesyns pursued / and
chased them unto the forther Stratforde, and slew and took many of them
prisoners.

whereof herynge the other which assailed the other parts of the city, fled
in like wise. whom the other cytesyns pursued as far as Depforde, in sleynge
and taking of them prisoners in great number, and after them raunsomed as they
had been Frenchemen. And the bastard with his shypme^ were chasyd unto their
ships lyenge at Blackwall / and there in the chase many slain. And the said
bastard the night following stale out his ships out of ye river / and so
departed and escaped for the time.

Than upon Assencyon even next ensuynge, the corpse of Henry the.vi. late king
was brought irreverently from the tower thorough the high streets of the cyty
unto Poulys church, and there left that night / and upon the morrow conveyed
with gleyuys and other wepens as he before thither was brought unto Chertyssey,
and there was buried.

Of the death of this prince diverse tales were told. But the most common fame
went, that he was stycked with a dagger by the hands of the duke of Glouceter
/ which after Edward the.iiii. usurped the crown, and was king as after
shall appear.

Than king Edward after this victory thus had at Tewkesbury, returned unto
London / and upon the mondaye following Assencyon day, he took his iournay
into Kent, having with him a strength of people / and there set his justices,
and made inquysycyons of the riot before done by the bastard and his
accessaryes. For the which at Caunterbury and other good towns in Kent,
diverse were put in execucyon. Of whom the hedes were sent unto London, and set
upon the bridge. And in like manner inquysycio^s were made in Essex / and some
also of them put in execucyon. Of which a capytayne named Spysynge was hanged,
and his head set upon Algate. And many of the rich commons of Kent were set at
grievous fynes, both for them self and for their servants. And when the king
had thus spedde his iournaye / he returned and came to London upon whytson
even. And that done, soon after was bishop Neuyll archebysshop of york sent
unto Guynes, and there kept as prisoner long after. This was brother to the
lord marquys Mou^tagu and to the earl of warwycke.

Also in the end of this mayers year, was the forenamed bastard of
Fawconbrydge taken about Southamton, and there put to execucyo^. whose head was
sent to London, and pyght upon London bridge among other.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxi. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxii. John^ Aleyn. wyllyam
Edward Grocer. Anno.xi. John^ Chelley.
IN this year the earl of Oxenforde, which syn the season of Barnet field had
holden saint Myghellys mount / was by an appoyntement taken thens, and
shortly after sent to the castle of Guynes. where he remained prisoner till
the last year of Richard the third, which was upon.xii. years. In all
which season my lady his wife might never be suffered to come to him / nor
had any thing to live upon, but as the people of their charytees would give
to her, or what she might get with her nedell or other such connyng as she
exercysed.

Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxxii. Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxxiii. John^ Brown. wyllyam
Hampton Fysshemonger. Anno.xii. Thomas Bledlow.
IN this year upon the syxt day of October, began a parlyament at
westmynster. By authoryte whereof an aid was granted to the king, toward the
great charge of his wars / the which was leuyed of men's lands, as well
of lords as other.

This mayre above all other, corrected sore bawdes and strumpettes / and caused
them to be ladde about the town with raye hoddes upon their heddes diverse
and many / and spared none for mede nor for favor yt were by the law attained
/ not withstandyng that he might have taken.xl. ^i. of ready money to him
offered, for to have spared one from ye judgment.

Anno. dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxiii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxiiii. wyllyam Stocker.
John^ Tate Mercer. Anno.xiii. Robert Byllysdon.
IN this year was the duke of Exceter fou^den deed in the sea between Dover and
Calays / but how he was drowned the certaynte is not known.

In this mayers year also was one wyllyam Oldhall condemned, unto a draper of
London called Chyrstofer Colyns. For the which condempnacyon he remained as
prisoner in Ludgate. whereupon a season he went at large with a keeper / he brake
from him, and so escaped / and after was taken and brought again to the said
prysone. But that not wythstandynge the said Chrystofer sued the sheryffes,
and caused them to spend great money in defendyng of his accyon / and finally
were feign by way of compremyse to give unto him an hundredth mark for his
duytye of lxxx.^i. and odd.

And in this year was one John^ Goos a loller brent at ye Tower hill for
heresye / the which before dy^er was delivered to Robert Byllydon one of the
sheryffes to put in execucyon that same after none. wherefore he like a
charytable man had him home to his house, and there exorted him that he
should dye a crystenman and renye his false errors. But that other after long
exortacyon herd, required the sheryffe that he might have mate / for he said
that he was sore hungered. Then the sheryffe commanded him mete / whereof he
took as he had ayled nothing / and said to such as stood about him: I eat
now a good and competent dinner / for I shall pass a little sharp shower or I go
to souper. And when he had dyned he required that he might shortly be ladde
to his execucyon.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxiiii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxv. Edmonde Shaa. Robert
Drop Draper Anno.xiiii. Thomas Hylle.
This year the king entendyng to make a vyage over see into France called
before him his lords severally both spyrytuall and temporal, to know their
good minds, what of their free wylles they would aid and depart with him
toward the said vyage. And after he had so known their good dysposycion to
him ward / he then sent for the mayre of London and his brotherne the
aldermen, and them severally examyned and exorted to aid and assyst him toward
the said iournay. Of which the mayre for his part granted.xxx. li / and of
the aldermen some.xx. mark / and the leest.x. li.

And that done he sent for all the trusty comoners within the said city / and
them exorted in like manner. which for the more party granted to him the wages
of half a man for a year. The which amounted to iiii. li.xi. s.iiii. d. And
after yt he rode about the more part of the land, and used the people in such
fair manner, that he raised thereby notable sumes of money. The which way of
the leuyeng of this money was after named a benyuolence.

Then the king thus having this great substance of goods / made purueyannce
for the said iournaye. And upon the.iiii. day of July following, in the.xv.
year of his reygne rode with a goodly company thorugh the city toward the sea
side / and so spedde him to Caleys, and from thens into France. whereof
herynge Lewys the French king / assembled his people in great number, and so
spedde him toward the king. But when both hosts were met / within short
space such offers of a peace were proferyd by the French king, that finally
both princes agreed upon a pease to be had for the term of both their lives,
and a year after, as some writers have. For the perfourmaunce of which said
pease / both princes after met upon ye day of the Decollacyon of saint John^
the baptyste or the.xxix. day of Auguste, at a place named in French Pynyak /
and the.iiii. day of Noue^ber as affermeth Gaguinus. But yt can not stand
with / for king Edward was received again into London after his return out
of France the.xxviii. day of September. At this place was a river / upon the
which a bridge was made such wise, that both princes thereon might mete, with
such company as either for them had appointed. There also was ordained a place
with a partycyon between both princes, yt another of them might enter unto
other / but made with a lowpe, that either might se other and take either
other by the hand.

where at the day lymyted, either met with other hosts standing a certain
distaunce from the ryuers side in conuenyent array. Then the said kings there
after salutacyon due made, either to other had long co^munycacyon. In
conclusyon whereof, as says Gaguyne, a peace was co^fyrmed between both realms
for vii. years. For perfourmau^ce whereof as affermeth the said author / the
French king gave unto king Edward inco^tinently.lxxv.M. crowns of gold /
and yearly after during ye said.vii. years.l.M. crowns. And so he received
in hand accomptyng every crown at.iiii. s.xv.M. li. and yearly after.x.M. li
/ which said.xv.M. li. the said French king borrowed of his cytesyns of Paris.
After this treuce and peace thus concluded between these two princes / anon
after their sonderyng, ploclamacio^s were made thereof thorough both hosts /
and commandment given to the capytayns, that they should provide for their
return homewarde. And soon upon the French king sent unto the dukes of
Clarence and of Glouceter with other lords such as were in king Edwardes
favor, great and costyous gifts. Of the nyse and wanton dysgysed apparel
that king Lewys ware upon him at that time of his metyng I might make a long
rehersall. But for it should sownde more to dishonor of such a noble man,
that was apparayled more lyker a mynstrell tha^ a prince royal / therefore I
pass it over. For all be it yt he was so newfangyll in his clothing / yet had
he many virtues. whereof largess was one / as it appeared by sondy gifts, which
he gave unto so^dry strangers, which in his story somdeale I have towchyd. And
also his bounty apperyd by a gift yt he gave unto ye lord Hastynges than lord
cha^berlayn / as xxiiii. dosen of bollys, whereof half were gylt and half white
/ which weyed upon.xvii. nobles every cup or more.

The^ to return unto king Edward / troth it is yt after ye co^formacyon of
ye foresaid peace, king Edward returned to Calys and there shypped / and so
sped him yt upon the.xxviii. day of September following, he was with great
tryumghe received of the mayre and cytesyns of London at Blakheth, and with all
honor by them conveyed thorough the city unto westmynster / the mayre and
aldermen being cladde in scarlet, and the comoners to ye number of.v.C. in
murrey.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxv. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxvi. Hugh Bryce. Rober Basset
Salter Anno.xv. Robet Colwych
This year this mayre did sharp correccyon upon bakers for making of light
bread / in so much that he set diverse upon ye pyllory. Among the which in the
month of John^ Mondue baker was there punysshed. And in the month of one
named wyllya^ Hubbard was also there shryned for like offense. And a woman
named Agnes Deynty was also there punisshed for selling false myngyd butter.

Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxxvi. Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxxvii. Richard Rawson.
Rauffe Iosselyn Draper. Anno.xvi. wyllyam Horn.
IN this year the mayre having a great mind to have the walls of the city
repaired / by a co^sente of the benche and of the common counsel, caused the
More field to be serched, and there provided for bryk and lyme. As first
caused the earth to be dyggyd and tempred, and then set men or work to
moolde / and then sent into the west country and there purueyed wode for to
bren it. And that done sent into Kent, and there purueyed chalk, that
shortly was brought into the said More field. And right there in a kylle
which he in that season had provided, was brent and made lyme of a great
fortheraunce of that work.

The mayre then being purueyed of bryk and also of lyme, the which was brent
within the said more / caused by consent of a comen counsel to be granted,
that in every parysshe church every Sunday, every parysshon should pay
toward the charge.v. d. And for an ensample to other felysshyppes / he caused
his own company to make as much of the wall as strechyth from the church of
Alhalowen within the said wall unto Bysshoppes gate. which presydent caused
other worshypfull felysshyppes to make the other parter as now appears new
made / and the more part thereof done in this year by his procuring and
calling upon of him. which was wonderful that so myche should be spedde in
one year, considering the puruyaunce of the stuff, which had been suffycyent
for some man to have purueyed for in an hole year.

Anno. dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxvii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxviii. Henry Colet. Humfrey
Heyforde Goldsmyth. Anno.xvii. John^ Stocker.
IN this year that is to mean the.xvii. day of February, the duke of Clarence
and second brother to the king thanne being prisoner in the tower, was
secretly put to death and drowned in a barell of maluesye within the said
tower. And this mayre this year pursued also the reparacyon of the wallys / but
not so dylygently as his predecessor did / wherefore it was not sped as it
might have been. And also he was a syke and feeble man, and had not so sharp
and quycke mind as that other had. And one other cause was which ensues of a
generalyte, that for the more party one mayre will not fynysshe that thing
which that other begins. For then they think be the deed never so good and
profitable, that the honor thereof shall be ascrybed to the begynner and not to
the fynyssher. which lack of charity and desire of veyn glory, causes many
good acts and deeds to dye and grow out of mind, to ye great decay of the
common weal of the city.

Anno. dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxviii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxix. Robert Hardynge.
Richard Gardyner Mercer. Anno.xviii. Robert Byfelde.
IN this year was great mortalyte and death in London and many other parties of
this realm / the which began in the latter end of September in the
precedynge year / and continued in this year till the beginning of November.
In the which pass time dyed innumerable people in the said city, and many
places else where.

In this year also the mayre being at Poules knelyng in his deuocyo^s at saint
Erkenwaldys shryne / Robert Byfelde one of the shyryffes vnauysedly knelyd
down nyghe unto the mayre. whereof the mayre after resonyd him, and laid it to
his charge. But that other being somdele rude for lack of conning / answered
the mayre stubbernly, and would not be aknowe of his offense. wherefore the
mayre showed his behauour both of word and deed unto the benche / by authoryte
whereof after ye matter had been there at length debated, the said Robert was
fined at.l. pound, to be paid toward the reparacion of the conduytes.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxix. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxx. Thomas Ilam. Bartylmewe
Iamys Draper. Anno.xix John^ ward.
IN this year one called Robert Deynys, for that that he presumed to mary an
Orphan without license of ye mayre and aldermen, was for that offense demyd to
pay to the chamber as a fine.xx. li.

And in the year and month of / were.iiii. fellows hanged at the Tower hylle /
and incontynently their bodies with the gybbet brent unto ashes. which
execucyon was, for that they robbed a church, and entreated the sacrament of
the altar inreuerently.

Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxxx. Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxxxi. wyllyam Danyell. John^
Brown. Anno.xx. wyllyam Bacon.
This year king Edward required great su^mes of money to him to be lent of ye
cytesyns of London. To whom after diverse assembles / they granted to lend
unto him.v. thousand mark. For the leuyenge whereof, a man was chosen of every
ward / that is to mean.xxv. men. The which.xxv. persons assembled in the
Guyldhalle, sessyd all the cyty over with two persons of every parysshe to them
assygned / which said.v. thousand mark was repayed in the year following.

Anno. dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxxi. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxxii. Robert Cate. wyllyam
Haryat Draper. wyllyam wykyng. Anno.xxi. Richard Chawry.
This year in the month of February, or end of January, dyed wyllyam wykynge
one of the sheryffes / for whom was imedyately chosen Richard Chawry. And in
the month July following, ye king rode on hunting in to the forest of waltham
/ where he commanded the mayre with a certain of his brotherne to come, and
to give attendau^ce upon him with certain comeners of the city. where when
they were com^^ / the king caused the game to be brought before them / so yt
they saw course after course, and many a der^ both read and falowe to be
slain before them. And after that goodly d^spo^t^ was passyd / the king
commanded his officers to bring the mayre and his company unto a pleasant
lodge made all of grene bowys and garnysshed with tables and other things
necessary / where they were set at dinner, and served with many deynty dysshes
and of diverse wynes good pleynty, as white read and claret / and caused them to
be set to dinner or he were served of his own / and over that caused the lord
chamberlayn with other lords to him assygned, to chere the said mayre and his
company sundry times while they were at dinner / and at their departing gave
unto them of venyson great pleynty. And in ye month of August following, the
king of his great bounte sent unto the mayresse and her systers aldermennes
wyfes two hearts and.vi. buckes, with a tonne of wine to drink with the said
venyson. The which venyson and wine was had unto the drapers halle / to
which place at a day assygned the mayre desired the alderme^ and their wyfes
with sundry comoners / and there the venyson with many other good dyshes were
eryn, and the said wine merely dronken. The cause of which bounty thus showed
by the king, was as most men took it, for that that the mayre was a merchant
of wondrous auentures into many and sundry countrees. By reason whereof, the
king had yearly of him notable sums of money for his customs, beside other
pleasures yt he had showed to the king before times.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxxii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxxiii. wyllyam white.
Edmonde Shaa Goldsmyth. Anno.xxii. John^ Mathewe.
THis year, that is to mean of ye mayre and beginning of the xxiii. year of
the king / at westmynster upon the.ix. day of Apryll dyed the noble prince
Edward the iiii. late king of England. whose corpse was after conveyed with
due solemnyte unto wyndsore, and there honorably buried / when he had
reigned to reken his beginning out of the land with all other time full.xxii.
years, and as much as from the.iiii. day of March unto the.ix. day of Apryll
/ leuynge after him.ii. sons, that is to say prince Edward his eldest son,
and Richard duke of york / and.iii. daughters, as Elysabeth that after was
queen, Cecyle, and Katheryne.

Edward the.v.
EDward the.v. of that name and sonn^ unto Edward ye iiii / began his reygne
over the realm of England ye.xi. day of Apryl in the beginning of the year of
our lord god.M.iiii.C.lxxxiii / and the.xxiiii. year of the.xi. Lewys than
king of France.

Anon as king Edward the.iiii. was deed / grudge and unkindness began to
take place between the kings and the queen's allye. For ye lord marquys of
Dorset brother unto the queen and other of his affynytye, had then the rule
and keeping of this young king, which at the time of his fathers death was of
the age of.xi. year or there about / and so being in his guydyng in ye March
of walys, conveyed him toward London, and there to make prouysyo^ for his
coronacyon and for other necessary things for his weal. But the duke of
Glouceter brother unto Edward the.iiii. entendynge otherwise as after shall
appear / with a competent number of gentylme^ of the North all clad in black,
met with ye king at Stonyngstratforde / and there after dyssymuled
countenance made between him and the foresaid Marquys, dischargyd him of the
rule of ye king, and took upon him the rule / and so from thens being
accompanied with the duke of Buckyngham, brought the king with all honor
toward London. whereof heryng queen Elysabeth mother unto the king / feryng the
sequel of this business, went or took sentwary within westmynster with her
younger son Richard the duke of york. And the king drawing nere unto the
city / upon the.iiii. day of May, was of the mayre and his cytesyns met at
Harnesey park / ye mayre and his brethren being clothed in scarlet, and the
cytesyns in vyolet to the number of.v. hundred horses / and than from thens
conveyed unto the city / the king being in blewe velvet, and all his lords
and servants in black clothe / and so after conveyed unto the bishops
palace of London and there lodgyd. And shortly after the said duke of
Glouceter inueleged so the archbisshop of Canterbury named Bowchyer / that he
went with him to the queen Elysabeth, and there made such assured promise to
the said queen, that she upon the said archbyshoppes promise delivered unto
them her younger son duke of york. And than the said duke caused the king
to be removed unto the tower, and his brother with him. But the queen for all
fair promyses to her made / kept her and her daughters within the foresaid
seyntwary / and the duke lodged him self in Crosbyes place in Bysshoppesgate
street.

Than provision was made for the kings coronacyo^. In which pass time the
duke being admytted for lord protector / caused sir Antony wydyuyle called
lord Scalys and brother unto ye queen a virtuous knight with the lord
Richard the queen's son, sir Richard Hawte, and sir Thomas Uaghan^ knights,
to be beheded at Pountfreyt / more of will than of justice. Than the lord
Protector in furtheryng of his purpose and cuyll intent / sent for the more
party of the nobles of the land / and behaved him so covertly in all his
matyers, that few understood his wykked purpose. And so daily keeping and
holding the lords in counsayll and feeling their minds / suddenly upon
the.xiii. day of Iuny being within the tower in the counsayll chamber with
diverse lords with him, as the duke of Bukkyngham, the earl of Derby, the lord
Hastynges tha^ lord Cha^berlayne, with diverse other, an owte cry by his
assent of treason was made in the utter chamber. wherwyth the said lord
Protector being warned / roose up and yode him self to the chaumber door, and
there received in such persons as he before had appointed to execute his
malycious purpose. The The which incontynently set hand upon the forenamed
lord Chamberlayne and other. In the which styrrynge the earl of Derby was hurt
in the face and kept a while under the hold. Than by commandment of the
said lord Protector / the said lord Chamberlayne in all haste was ladde in
the court or plain where the chapel of the tower stands / and there without
judgment or long time of co^fessyon or repentance, upon an end of a long
and great timber logge which there lay with other for the repayrynge of the
said tower, caused his hedde to be smyten of / and all for he knew well that
he would not assente unto his wicked intent. whose body with the head was after
carried unto wyndesore, and there buried by the tomb of king Edward.

After which cruelte thus done / he shortly after set in sure keeping such
persons as he suspected to be again him. whereof the bysshoppes of york and
of Ely were.ii. as it is said And the earl of Derby for fere of his son the
lord Strange, lest he should have arered Chesshyre and Lancastershyre again
him, was set at large.

Than began the long covert dyssymulacion, which of the lord Protector had been so craftly shadowed, to break out at large / in so much that upon the
sunday following at Poules cross, him self with the duke of Bukkyngham and
other lords being present, by the mouth of doctor Rafe Shaa in the time of his
sermon, was there showed openly that ye chylderne of king Edward the.iiii.
were not legytymat, nor ryghtfull enheritours of the crown / with many
dyslaunderous words in preferryng of the title of the said lord Protector and
in dysanullynge of the other / to the great abucion of all the audience,
except such as favored the matter which were few in noumbre, if the troth
or playnesse might have been showed.

Of the which declaracyon as the fame went after / the said doctor Shaa
took such repentance, that he lived in little prosperytie after. And the
more he was wondered of, that he would take upon him such a business,
considering that he was so famous a man both of his learning and also of
natural wit. Than upon the tuysdaye following / an assemble of the commons
of the city was appointed at the Guyldhalle. where being present the duke of
Buckyngha^ with other lords sent down from the said lord protector / and
there in the presence of the mayre and comynaltye, rehearsed the right and title
that the lord Protector had to be preferred before his of his brother king
Edward, to the right of the crown of England. The which process was in so
eloquent wise showed and vttred without any impedyment of spyttynge or other
countenance, and that of a long while, with so great sugared words of
exhortacyon and according sentence, that many a wise man that day merueyled
and commended him for the good ordering of his words, but not for the intent
and purpose the which theruppon ensued.

Upon the Thursdaye than next ensuynge being the.xx. day of Iuny / the said
Protectoure taking then upon him as king and governor of the realm / went
with great pomp unto westmynster, and there took possessyon of the same. where
he being set in the great halle in the Sea royal, with ye duke of
Norffolke before called the lord Hawarde upon the right hand, and the duke
of Suffolk upon the left hand / after the royal oath there taken, called
before him the judges of the law / gyuynge unto them a long exhortacyon and
straight commandment, for ye mynystryng of his laws, and to execute justice,
and that with out delay. After which possessyon taking, and other ceremonies
there done / he was conveyed unto the kings palace within westmynster and
there lodgyd.

In which pass time, the prince or of right king Edward the.v. with his
brother the duke of york, were put under suer keeping within the tower / in
such wise that they never came abroad after.

And thus ended the reygne of Edward the.v / when he had borne the name of a
king by the space of two months and.xi. days. And upon the Frydaye being
the.xxii. day of Iuny was the said lord Protector proclaimed thorough the
cyty king of England, by the name of Rychard the third.

Then soon after for fere of the queen's blood and other which he had in
ielousy / he sent for a strength of men out of the North. The which came
shortly to London a little before his coronacyon / and mustred in the More
feldes well upon.iiii.M. men in their best iackes and rusty salattes, with a
few in white harneys not burnysshed to the sale / and shortly after his
coronacyon were countermaunded home with suffycyent rewards for their trauayll.

In which foresaid pass time / ye Marquys of Dorset brother unto queen
Elysabeth yt before was fled, escaped many wonderful dangers both about
London, Ely and other places / whereof* to write the manner and cyrcumstaunce
would ask a long and great leysour.

Richard the third.
Richard ye third of that name, son to Richard late duke of york, and
yongeste brother unto Edward ye iiii. late king / began his domynyo^ over the
realm of England the.xx. day of mydsomer month, in the year of our lord
god.M.CCCC.lxxxiii. and the.xxv. year of the.xi. Lewys than king of France.
Of whom tedyous it is to me to write the tragedyous hystory / except that I
remember that good it is to write and put in remembrance the punyshement of
sinners, to the end that other may exchew to fall in like danger.

Than it follows, anon as this man had taken upon him / he fill in great
hatred of the more party of the nobles of his realm / in so much that such as
before loved and praised him, and would have ieoparted life and good with him
if he had remained still as protector, now murmured and grudged again him /
in such wise that few or none favored his party, except it were for dread
or for the great gifts that they received of him. By mean whereof he wanne
diverse to follow his mind / the which after deceived him.

And after his coronacyon sole^pnysed, which was holden at westmynster the.vi.
day of July, where also ye same day was crowned dame Anne his wife / he then
in short process following rode Northward to pacyfye that country, and to
redress certain ryottes there lately done. In the pass time of which iournay
/ he being at york created his legyttymat son prince of walys / and over
that made his bastard son capytayne of Caleys, which encreaced more grudge
to hymwarde as after shall appear.

Anno. dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxxiii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxxiiii. Thomas Norland.
Rober Byllysdon Haberdassher. Anno.ii. wyllyam Martyn.
IN this year ye foresaid grudge encreasynge, and the more for as myche as the
common fame went, that king Richard had within the tower put unto secret
death ye two sons of his brother Edward the iiii. For the which and other
causes had within the breast of the duke of Buckyngham / the said duke in
secret manner conspyred again him, and allied him with diverse gentylmen, to the
end to bring his purpose about.

But how it was his entente was espied and showed unto the king / and the
king in all haste sent for to take him, he then being small acco^panyed at
his manor of Brekenok in the March of walys. whereof the said duke being
ware, in all have he fled from his said manor of Brekenok unto the house of a
servant of his own called Banaster / and that in so secret manner, that few
or none of his household servants knew where he was become.

In the which pass time / king Richard thinking that the duke would have
assembled his people, and so to have given to him battle, gathered to him
great strength / and after took his iournaye westwarde, to have met with the
said duke. But when the king was infourmed that he was fled / anon he made
proclamacyons, that who that might take the said duke, should have for a
reward.M. li. of money / and the value of an hundredth pound in land by year
to him and to his heirs for ever more. whereof herynge the foresaid Banaster,
were it for mede of ye said reward, or for the fere of losyng of his life and
good / dyscouered the duke unto the sheryffe of the shyre / and caused him to
be taken, and so brought unto Salysbury, where the king than lay.

And all be it that that the said duke made inportune labor to have commyn to
the kings presence / yet that natwythstandynge, he was beheded upon the. day
of the month of without speech or sight of the king. Than all such gentylmen
as had appointed to mete with ye said duke, were so dysmayde, that they knew
not what for to do / but they that might fled the land, and some took
seyntwary places as they might win unto them. But the king to the end to
let them of their purpose, sent to the sea costs and stopped their way in
that he might. And he with a certain strength rode unto Exceter / where about
that season was taken sir Thomas Selenger knight, and.ii. gentylmen that one
being named Thomas Ram and that other

The which.iii. persons were there shortly after beheded

And soon after in Kent were taken sir George Brown knight, and Robert
Clyfforde esquyer / and brought unto the tower of London. And upon the. day of
Octobre, the said sir George and Roberte were drawn from westmynster unto the
tower hill and there beheded.

And the same day were.iiii. persons lately yomen of the crown with king
Edward the.iiii, drawn out of Southwarke thorugh ye city unto tyborne, and
there hanged. And when the king had sped his iournay in the west country / he
hasted him toward London. whereof the mayre and the cytezyns having knowledge,
made prouysyo^ to receive him / and upon that made puruyaunce for horse with
violet clothyng and other necessaryes.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxxiiii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxxv. Rychard Chester.
Thomas Hylle. Thomas Bretayne. Anno.ili. Raffe Astry.
IN the beginning of this mayres year and second year of king Richard / that
is to mean upon the.ix. day of the month of Nouembre, the mayer and his
brethern being cladde in scarlet, and the cytezyns to the nombre of.v.C. or mo
in vyolet / met the king beyond Kenyngston in Sutherey / and so brought him
thorugh the city to the ward robe beside the black friars, where for that
time he was lodged. And in short time after was sir Roger Clyfforde knight
taken about Southampton / and from thens sent to the tower of London, and
after areygned and iuged at westmynster / and from thens upon the. day of
drawn unto the tower hylle. But when he came fore again saint Martyns le
Grant / by the help of a friar which was his confessor, and one of them yt
was next about him, his cords were so lowsed or cut, that he put him in deuoyr
to have entered ye seyntwary. And lykely it had been yt he should have so done /
had not ben the quycke help and rescous of the sheryffes and their officers.

The which constrained him to lie down upon the hardyll / and newly band
him, and so haryed him to the said place of execucion, where he was divided in
two pecys / and after his body with the head was conveyed to the fryeres
Augustynes, and there be buried before saint Katherynes altar.

And in the month of February following / dyed Richard Chester one of the
sheryfes. For whom was immedyatly chosen Raffe Astry, to continue for that
year following. King Richard than ledynge his life in great agony and doubt
/ trusting few of such as were about him, spared not to spend the great
treasour which before king Edward the.iiii. had gadered, in guynge of great
and large gifts. By mean whereof he alonly wasted not ye great treasour of his
said brother, but also he was in such danger, that he borrowed many notable
sums of money of rich men of this realm, and specially of the cytezyns of
London / whereof the leest sum was.xl. li. for suertye whereof he delivered to
them good and suffycyent pledges.

In the which passetyme many and sundry gentylmen and diverse sheryffes,
departed over the sea into France and there allied them with that virtuous
prince Henry son unto the earl of Rychemonde, dyscended lyneally from Henry
the.iiii. lately king of this realm / and conuenaunted with him, that if he
would mary Elizabeth ye eldest daughter of Edward the.iiii, they would with
gods help strength him to be king of England and aid him in such manner,
that he and also she were or might be possessed of their ryghtfull
enherytaunce. Among the which gentylmen / sir Iamys Blount than keeper of the
castle of Guynys was one / which with him conveyed the earl of Oxenford, that
long tofore had been prisoner within the said castle.

Upon which agreement thus concluded / prouysion by them and their friends was
made, to sail into England. And after all things prepared / the said prince
with a small company of English, French, and Brytons, took shyppynge in
France or Brytayne / and so landed lastly in the port of Mylbourne in the
month of August. For whose defense of landynge king Richard for so much as
he fered him little, made but small provision.

while these foresaid gentylmen of diverse coostes of England escaped as is
abouesayde over the sea / of that affynite was one named wyllya^ Colyngbourne
taken. And after he had been holden a season in prison / he with another
gentylma^ named Turbyruyle were brought unto Guylde hall, and there areygned.
But ye said Turbyruyle was repryed to prison / and that other was cast for
sundry treasons / and for a time, which was laid to his charge that he should
make in derysyo^ of the king and his counsayll as follows. The catte, the
ratte, and louell our dog.
Rules all England under a hog.


THe which was meant that Catysby, Ratclyffe, and the lord Louell, ruled the
land under ye king which bare the white bore for his conysaunce. For the which
and other upon the. day of he was put to ye most cruel death at the tower
hill, where for him were made a new payer of Galowes / upon the which after he
had hanged a short season, he was cut down being a live, and his bowellys
ryped out of his belly and cast into the fire there by him, and lived till the
boucher put his hand into the bulk of his body / in so much that the said in
the same instant O lord Jesus yet more trouble / and so dyed to the great
compassyon of much people.

Than to return unto the noble prince and his company, when he was commyn
unto the land / he inco^tynently kneled down upon ye earth / and with meke
countenance and pure devotion began this psalm: Iudica me deus, and decerne
causam meam. etc. The which when he had fynysshed to ye end, and kyssed the
ground mekely, and reverently made the sign of the cross upon him / he
commanded such as were about him, boldly in the name of god and saint
George to set forewarde.

when the landyng of this prince was blown about the land / many was the man
that drew unto him, as well such as were in sundry seyntwaryes as other that
were abroad / so that his strength increased shortly. Than the king gadered his
power in all haste / and spedde him in such wise, that upon the.xxii. day of
August and beginning of the third year of his reygne / he met with the said
prince nere unto a vyllage in Leycetershyre named Bosworth, nere unto Leyceter.
where between them was foughten a sharp battle / and sharper should have been, if the kings party had been fast to him. But many toward the field
refusyd him, and yode unto that other party. And some stood houynge a far
of, till they saw to the which party the vyctory fill.

In conclusyon king Richard was slain / and upon his party ye duke of
Northfolke before time named lord Hawarde, with Brakyngbury Lieutenaunt of the
tower, and many other. And among other was there taken on live the earl of
Surrey son to the foresaid duke of Northfolke, and sent unto the tower of
London / where he remained as prisoner long time after.

Than was the corpse of Rychard late king spoiled, and naked as he was borne
cast behind a man / and so carried irreverently ouertwharte ye horse back
unto the friars at Leyceter. where after a season that he had lain that all men
might behold him he was there with little reverence buried. And thus with
misery ended this prince / which ruled most what by rygour and tyranny, when
he in great trouble and agony had reigned or usurped by the space of.ii.
years.ii. months and.ii. days.

And than was the noble prince Henry admytted for king, and so proclaimed king
by the name of Henry the.vii. The which sped hi^ shortly to London / so that
vpopn the.xxviii. day of the said month of Auguste, he was by the mayre and
the citesyns met in good array / as the mayre and aldermen in scarlet, and the
cytesyns in vyolet, at harnesey park / and from thens conveyed thorugh the
city unto the bishop of Londo^s palace, and there for that time lodged.

And upon the.xi. day of Octobre next following, than being the swetynge
sykenesse of new begone / dyed the said Thomas Hylle than of London mayre. And
for him was chosen as mayre sir wyllyam Stokker knight and Draper, which dyed
also of the said sykenesse shortly after. And than John^ ward Grocer was
chosen mayre / which so continued till the feast of Symonde and Jude following.

Francia. Charles the.ix.
KArolus or Charles ye.ix. or.viii. of ye name, sonn^ unto the.xi. Lowys /
began his reygn over ye realm of France the fourth day of Septembre in the
year of our lord god.M.iiii.C.lxxxiiii / and the second year of Richard the
third at ye time king of England.

This Charles was noble of wit and meke of condycyo^ / the which his father
would not set to lernyng of letters in his youth, lest that by such study he
should at his lawful age have thereby the more refrayned him from knyghtly and
marcyall acts. But when he came to man's astate he than was right sorry, and
would say full often to his famylyers, A prince is greatly blemysshed, when he
lakketh conning of lecture. He was also in his youth so weke and impote^t,
that he lakked natural strength as was according to his age, in so much that
he might not go. And when he should ride, he had always on either side of the
horse.ii. men to stay him, and to give on him like attendaunce. Than after
solempnytie of his coronacyon ended at the city of Raynes, which there was
solempnised with great pomp upon ye sunday nerte ensuyng the feast of saint
Denis / commissions were sent out into all coostes of his domynyon, for to
enquere of all superfluous gifts given before time by his father / the which
shortly after were resumed into the kings hands. And in that season, Olyuer
Damman whom Lowys had in many great romes and offices set, and by his days
had him in synguler love and favor, in so much as before I have showed in
the end of the story of the said Lowys, he made a special request unto this
Charles his sonn^ that he should specially cherysshe this said Damman / now was
appeched of treason with one Danyell a Flemynge. The which after inquisycyon
of them made / both after the law of that land were iuged to death / and so
put in execucyon of hanging. whose death of the nobles and astates of the
realm was little ruyd / consyderyng the rome that he bare by king Lowys
days, and the ignobilitie of his birth, as an handcrafty man and harbor.
After whose death a metrycyan compyled these verses following. SVnt tua
criminibus ride^tia te^pora to^sor
Currere, quae subito prouida parc^ vetat
Hoc poteras osim so^ge prenoscere damma,
Vt saltem horr^res tollere cede pios.
Te natura humilem cum matter Flandra tulisset,
Art vna noras radere Cesariem.
Hunc talem and seruum te saepe Lutetia vidit,
Tutus ab hac poteras ducere sort dies.
Raptus ad excelsam, Lodowici principis aulam,
Mox herebifur surias, moribus ante venis,
Et caput huic tendeus / du^ suffers singere ficos,
Pre ducibus regi, regulus alter eras.
Quid tibi nen sicuit, sobeles tam dira Neronis,
Nemo non vixit, te reserente reus,
Nemo deisacra censuram, nemo gerebat,
Gaudia, qui renuit premere dona tibi
Protenus exilium, vel mors vel mulcta negantem
Pressit, eras Iudex lictor and exicium.
Regnasti, satis est, surgunt n^ua sedera mundo,
Turba coelestorum, territa luce sugit.
Agnosce o to^sor, quo te scoelus extulit atrox,
Et te praecepitem depulit in laqueos.
Te Daniel, te dira cohors, te menimius odit,
Et scelerum auctorem, dampnatet insequitur.
Nescio quid de te superi velfata deponunt,
Seu lictore cades, seu cruce liber eas.
Vna tamen vulgi constans sententia, furcas
Expedit, vt faciet, te periunte odium
Interea vinctus, culpas absterge gemendo,
Peccasti, morte est nunc redimenda salus.


The which metyr or verses to them that have none understanding in latyne,
may be expouned in manner as follows. The laughing times with their crimes
spent,
Thou barboure are run / the which by sudden fate
Are now forboden. whereof the clear intent
Thou might have known Damma right well the state,
when thou by means which were inordynat,
Put unto death many an innocent man,
By cruel malice / and well remembered than.
That of low birth Flaundres thy mother the fled,
And taught the a craft, the here well to shave
Lutecia that city where thou thy life led,
witnesses the a servant therein thy living to crave,
And for thy days an honest life to have /
But when thou were in Lowys court up brouht,
Than had thou no mind that thou were come of naught.
But like the hell hounde thou waxed full furyous,
Expressing thy malice when thou to honor styed /
Thinking for so much as that prince bounteuous,
His head and berde to the he naught denied,
And with all worldly pleasure he also the allied,
The before his princes making his governor /
Thy self thou blyndest, with wordly vain honor.
which made the so proud, thou son of hard Neron,
That none might live that thou accused of crime,
No man was cursed nor none had punyssyon,
That would thy hand with gold of gifts lyme /
And who that not his gift offered in time,
Other death or exyle to him was soon applied /
For as judge and hangman thou all thing excercysed.
Thou reigned long enough / but now are spronge^ new
Sterrys to the world / and fled is now clearly
The scelerat flokke. wherefore thou harbor yet rewe,
Thine odyous acts which have the suddenly,
Cast down from wealth in snares vytterly.
For also Daniell thy most odyous fere
Dampneth the of crime which with the dies here.
I know not what of the the upper bodies above
Have defyned, whether by sword or by gybet
Thou should end the life. But one thing I approve,
The sentence holy of the people is set,
That on a galowe thou should pay death his debt.
Inwardly therefore bewayll so thine offense,
That by this death, to god thon may make recompense.


THus execucyon of this Damman and his fellow ended and fynysshed, to the
little compassion of the people / within few days after another of the
affeccionat servants of king Lowys named John^ Doyacon for trespass and
hatered by his occasyon and deserte unto the common people, was with all shame
brought unto ye market place of Paris, and there beraft of both his erys.
After which vylony to him done, he was there right banysshed the court for ever.

And thus two of the most special and derest beloved servants and
counsayllours of king Lowys, were shortly after his death brought unto
confusyon. By reason whereof as affermeth mine auctoure Gaguyne, arose a
proverb among the French men / saying, Principibus obsequi haereditariu^ non
es^e. The which is to mean, the service of princes is not hereditable. This
time thus passed with many other matyers, which I over pass / the season
approached that variaunce and ^nny began to move among some nobles of the land
/ in so much that ye duke of Orleaunce dysdayned, that Anne sister to the
king with such as she would call to counsayll, had all the rule about the
king. wherefore he entendyng to have the said rule, for so much as he had
married that other daughter of Lowys / gadered unto him strength of knights,
purposely to remove from the king such as he lyked / and to set about him
such persons as he thought conuenyente.

But how it was for lack of wise ordering of his people or other negligence /
at a place called saint Albynys he was taken of his adversaries / and so by the
king commanded to prison to the castle of Byturice^ce, where he remained long
time after. It was not long after, that Marymylyan the which had married duke
Charles daughter of Burgoyne, gathered his soudyours to have releued the
foresaid duke of Orleaunce out of prison / but he prevailed not. During which
war, Fraunceys duke of Brytayn dyed / whose daughter named Anne and
enherytour of that duchye, Maxymylyan had before troth plyted for his
lawful wife. wherefore he herynge of the death of ye said Fraunceys / shortly
entered the terrytory of Brytayne, and seized it for his. But Charles with his
Frenchmen wythstode him, by such force yt he was constrained to axe help of
our soueraygne lord king Henry ye vii. The which in most bounteous manner
aided and assysted him both with men and money / to the kings excedyng great
charge and cost. How be in the end the French king had his intent / and than
married ye said Anne duchess of Brytayne, and refused Margarete ye daughter of
Ma^imylyan, which he before had married at Ambasy / as before I have showed to
you in the end of the story of his father Lowys. After which vyctory thus
opteyned by this Charles in Brytayn / he made claim and pretense unto the
land of Scicilia or Scicilie. And by the exortacion and styrryng of the pope
Alexander the.vi. he with a strong host entered ye same both by land and by
water. To whom was a great aid the duke of Mylayne / by whose means he
shortly wan a strong city or town named Campania and diverse other towns and
in process Naples the chyef city that belonged unto the king of Naples. In so
much that he constrained Alphounce that than was king of Naples and of
Scicile to forsake that country / and so had the dominion of the more part of
both the said countrees. The which when he had set in such order as he
thought conuenyent / he took his iournaye home ward into France thorough
Italy. In which passage this Charlys was beset of the Uenecyans and other
Italyans, the which entendyd to have stoppyd his way / and metyng with him at
a place called in latyne Fornouiences, gave unto him battle. whereof as says
mine author he wan the vyctory to his great honor, considering his few
sowdyours again their multitude and strength.

But to this saying repugne the Italyans dwelling in London / and say that if
the said Charlys had not spedde him fastly into France, he had not comen there
that year. But how so it was he eetourned home in sauete.

And soon after pope Alexander foresaid took such dyspleasure again ye said
Charlys, that he styrred almost all christian princes of the world again him /
he had such hatred to the great honor of ye French king as says mine
author Gagwyne, yt which in all his works extolleth the deeds of Frenchemen
forther tha^ may be veryfyed in much of his writing. But what so he write of
the pope / it is to be demyd that he would not take so great party again this
Charlys, and exite other princes to do the same, except it had been for great
and vrge^t causes / and not for malice as he affermeth only.

And thus the said Gagwyne ends the story of the said Charlys, in the year
of our lord god.M.iiii.C. xcv / and the.xi. year of the reygne of the same
Charlys thanne presently reygnynge and guydyng the realm of France / which
was the.x. year of our most redoutyd prince king Henry the.vii.

Henry the seventh.
HEnry the.vii. of ye name son unto the earl of Richemou^t, began his
domynyon over the realm of England, the.xxii. day of Auguste, in ye year of
our lord god.M.iiii.C.lxxxv / and the second year of the.viii. Charlys then
king of France. And the.xxx. day of October following with great solempnyte
ye said Henry was crowned at westmynster.

And here according to my first saying in the beginning of this rude work,
I make an end of the vii. part and hole work, the.vii. day of November in
the year of our lord Jesus Crystes incarnacyon.M.v.C. and.iiii / and the.xx.
year of our most christian and drad soueraygne lord king Henry after the
conquest of ye name the.vii. For which expedycyo^ and good exployt that I have
had in the accomplysshyg of this work, wherein is included to rekyn from the
landynge of Brute in this i will of Albion, unto the first year or beginning of
the reygne of our most dead said sovereign lord, ii.M.vi.C. and xx. years: I
here again salute and give thanks unto that most excellent vyrgyn our lady
saint Mary with the last and.vii. joy of the foresaid, vii. joys, beginning,
Gaude virgo matter pura etc.
Be joyful and glad virgyn and mother pure
For ferme and steadfast thy joy shall abide
And these.vii. joys shall evermore endure,
And never hereafter minishe by time nor by tide
But ever shall encreace ^^ory^^e and abide,
By worlds all, ever in one to last
Time to come, time present, and time that is past.


And thus than endyth this seventh part, the which from the first year of
wyllyam Conqueror to ye last year of Richard the third includes.
iiii.C.xvii. years.
Lenuoy.
Limas adest, praecessit opus, ne li^idus assis.
Lector habent mendas, denia presa suas
Quoduis ingenium, quadam vel part redundat
Vel rudu^, vel mancu^ est, vel grave vel fluidu^
Concio ^rebra tibi, culpatur furta Maronis,
Est Cicero elumbis, pes tibi naso ceser.
Non satis historiae, Crispi praefatio quadrat,
Nil adeo cultum, liuor iniquus habet.
Non minus hoc poterit tantillum capere morsor,
Laeserit illustres cum fera lingua viros.
Sed quid agas residem, taxabit inertia mutum
Scriptorem risor, extenuabit inners.
Audendum tamen est, spernendi m^lle latratus
Occidet a busto murmur and inuidia.
The which verses to them that been unlettered may be Englyshed in manner and
form as follows. An end of this book, or of this rude warke
Here is now fined / whereof the sense precedyth.
Thou that shall it read, be thou lay or clerk,
Be not enuyous / consider how it ledyth
The reygne of princes. And where as mendement nedyth,
If thou expert be, the fawtes thereof amend /
And him ascrybe no sclaunder, that did but well entende.
Consider every science, in part that it is such,
To rude or to curyous, to breef or to long.
Some blamyn! Liuins for that he wrote so much /
Some other Uyrgyle / and Cicero among
For he was to scarce. Salust that dytyes song
So excelently, yet is he not vnblamed /
So that to all men nothing is duly framed.
Than syn the old writers which were so excellent,
Might not all men please with their famous writing /
No maruayll though I which never conning h^nt,
Might order this matter to every mannys liking /
And specially to such as have their delyghtynge,
Ever with dysclaunder most writers to lack,
And bark while they may to set good writers a back.
But though that ignorance and derysyon ben met,
And reprove the maker in all that they can /
why should any good work for their malice be let.
For though they grudge and scorn / yet every wise good man,
will take the intent and praise the maker than /
And him allow for his laborous deed /
And require of god that he may have his mede.


Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxxxv. Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxxxvi. John^ Tate. Hugh
Bryce Goldsmyth. Anno.i. John^ Swan.
IN this year a pressed was made to the king of.ii.M. li / of the which the
mercers, grocers, and drapers lent.ix.C.xxxvii. li. and.vi. s. The coronacyo^
was holden at westmynster the.xxx. day of October. And this year whete was
at.iii. s. ye busshell, and baye salt at the same price.

Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxxxvi. Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxxxvii. John^ Percyuall.
Sir Henry Colet Anno.ii. Hugh Clopton.
In this year the king married king Edwardes eldest daughter named Elizabeth.
This year was slain at Stookfelde the earl of Lyncolne. And in the month of
September was borne prince Arthur.

Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxxxvii Anno domini.M.iiii.C.lxxxviii. John^ Fenkyll.
wyllyam Horn. Anno.iii. wyllyam Remyngton.
This year was the queen crowned at westmynster upon saint Katheryns day. And
this year was a pressed of.iiii.M. li. / whereof mercers, grocers and Drapers
lent.xvi.C. and.xvi. li. And this year was an other pressed of two thousand. And
this year John^ Ashley with other two were put in execucyon at the Tower
hylle.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxxviii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxxix. wyllyam Isaak.
Robert Tate Mercer. Anno.iiii. Rafe Tynley.
IN this year the commons of the North slew the earl of Northumberlande / and
Chamberlayne their capytayne with diverse other were after at york hanged. This
year was the task of the tenth penny of men's lands and goods. This year was
the field o^f Dykysmew in Flaunders foughten by the lord Dawbeney.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.lxxxix. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xc. wyllyam Capell. wyllyam
white Anno.v. John^ Brook.
IN this year one named Roger Shauelok slew him self. For whose goods was
business bytwen the kings amner and the sheryffe. But the amner optayned.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xc. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xci. Henry Coot. John^ Matthew
Mercer. Robert Revel. Anno.vi. Hugh Pemberton.
IN this year dyed Robert Revel shyryffe / and in his stead was chosen Hugh
Pe^berton. And in March sir Robert cha^berlayne knight was behedyd. And this
year was a great benyuolence granted unto ye king for his iournay into
France / where unto the felysshyp of the Drapers granted more than any other
felysshyp of the city / and every alderma^ of London that time being, paid
volente and nolente two hundredth pound. Over which sum the comoners sum
exte^dyd to.ix.M.vi.C.lxxxii. li.xvii. s.iiii. d. And this year was a busshell
of whete at.xxii. d.

Anno domini.M.iiii.C.xci. Anno domini.M.iiii.C.xcii. Thomas wood Hugh Clopton
Mercer. Anno.vii. wyllyam Brown.
IN this year a yoman of the crown named was put to death at Tybourne for
treason. And in this year was the city of Garnad gotten by ye king of Spayn.
And i^ this year was sir Iamys Parker knight slain in iustynge at Rychemont,
with a gentylman named Hugh Uaghan. Also in the month of September the king
took his vyage toward France.

Anno domini.M.iiii.C.xcii Anno domini.M.iiii.C.xciii. wyllyam purchase.
wyllyam Martyn Skynner. Anno.viii. wyllyam welbek.
IN this year upon the.ix. day of November, was red a letter in the Guyldhall,
yt showed of a peace concluded bytwen the kings of England and of France. And
the.xvii. day of December following, the king landed at Dover. And the
saterdaye before Cristmas he came to westmynster. Upon the.xvii. day of May
were.iiii. men put to death at Tyborn for treason. And this year in the month
of October and end of this mayres year, was the fray made upon the
Eesterlynges by the commons of the city, and specially mercers servants.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xciii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xciiii. Robert Fabyan. Rafe
Astry Fysshemonger. Anno.ix. John^ wyngar.
IN this year in ye beginning, an enquery was made for ye riot forenamed / for
the which many young men were punysshed by long imprysonment. Also upon
the.xxii. day of February, were regnyd at ye Guyldhall iiii. persons named
Thomas Bagnall, John^ Scotte, John^ Heth, and John^ Kenyngton / which were
taken out of saint Martyns seyntwary. whereof.iii. were put to death at Tyborne
/ and Thomas Bagnall was had unto the tower of London. And the xxvi. day of the
said month, with ye foresaid.iii. persons was put in execyon willya^ Bulkley a
yoman of the kings chamber, and a duche man. This year whete was at.vi. d. a
busshell, and bay salt at.iii. d. ob. And this year doctor Hylle bishop of
London pursued grievously Persy than pryour of Crystes church in London. And in
this year was the royal feste kept in westmynster halle by ye king. This year
in the end of Apryll was brent in Smithfelde an old woman for heresye, which
was called mother to the lady young. And this year the xv. day of August were
reyned at the Guyldhalle one named John^ Norfolk, and an other named John^
white / and co^uict for baudry and set upon ye pillory.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xciiii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xcv. Nycholas Alwyn. Richard
Chawry Salter. Anno.x. John^ warner.
THis year the day that ye mayre took his charge, in ye afternone came thorugh
the city Henry duke of york a child about.iiii. years of age toward
westmynster riding upon a courser, with many goodly gentylmen to convey him.
And upon the.ix. day of November following, was holden a goodly iustyse within
the paleys of westmynster. whereof were chalengeours sir wyllya^ de la Pool then
duke of Suffolk, therle of Essex, sir Robert Curson, and John^ Pechy esquyre.
Also this year about Cristmas, sir Robert Clifford which before was fled the
land / came again and appechyd sir wyllya^ Stanley than chamberlayne to the
king of treason. which sir wyllyam upon the.xvi. day of February following,
for the said treason was behedyd at the Tower hylle. And ye same season was
adjudged to death at the Guyldhall the deane of Poulys a famous doctor and
precher, the prouyncyall of the blak freres, and ye pryour of Langley, the
person of saint Stephyns in walbroke named doctor Sutton, sir Thomas Thwatys
knight, Robert Ratclyffe, wyllyam Dawbeney, willya^ Cressener esquire with sir
Simond Mou^ford knight, and mo other / whereof ye more part was pardoned. And
this year was white heryng at.xl. d. a barel. And this year began the first
trouble of sir wyllya^ Capell alderman. And in July Perkyn with his rebels
arrived in Kent which named him self Rychard second son of Edward the.iiii.
And in ye same month was doctor Draper perforce borne out of Poulys, and so
ladde to La^behyth for varyaunce that than was between the bysshoppes of
Can^terbury and London. And soon after was hanged in sundry costs of England
an.C. and odd persons of the forenamed rebellys. And this year was a
perlyamente holden at westmnynster. Also in the month of October was an
exceeding thunder.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xcv. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xcvi. Thomas Kneysworth. Sir
Henry Colette Mercer. Anno.xi. Henry Somyr.
IN this year in the.xvi. day of Noue^ber, was holden the sergeau^tes feste
within the bishop of Elyes place. This year was the body of Rychard Hakendyes
wife takyn up in saint Mary hill church hole, yt had lain in the ground
over.C. and.xx. years. And this year was great bysynesse for the intercourse
between England and Flaunders. And this year the king of Scotts made sharp
warro upon the marches. And this year many lollers stood with fagottes at
Poulys cross.

Anno domini.M.iiii.C.xxvi. Anno domini.M.iiii.C.cxvii. John^ Shaa. John^ Tate
Mercer. Anno.xii. Richard Haddon.
THe latter end of October, by great cou^sayll holden at westmynster / was
granted to the king fer the defense of the Scotts.C.xx.M. li. The.xviii.
day of November was Poulys church suspendyd by a fraye of two young men. And
in the same month was granted to ye king a pressed of the city of.iiii.M. li.
And the same month at Calys was behedyd the lord Fitzwater. The.xxi. day of
January a parlyament began / whereby was granted two dymes and a half, two
aids and two fyftenys, to leuy the foresaid.C.xx.M. li. And in the month of
Iuny and.xvii. day were the Cornyshmen dysco^fyted at Blakheth. ^
And upon the.xxviii. day of Iuny, the Smyth and a gentylman named Fla^mok two
capytaynes of ye said rebels, were put in execucyon at Tybourne. And shortly
after the lord Audeley, which was head capytayne of the said rebels, was put
to death at ye Tower hylle. And this year was concluded a marriage between my
lord prince and the kings daughter of Spain. This year also the king sent
into Scotland an army, under ye guydyng of the earl of Surrey and the lord
Neuyle / the which made sharp war upon ye Scotts. And i^ ye month of
October Perkyn landed in Cornwayle, and assailed the town of Exceter and other
towns But finally he took the seyntwary of Beawdely / and after was pardoned
of his life.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xcvii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xcviii. Bartholomewe Read.
wyllyam Purchase Mercer. Anno.xiii. Thomas wyndowght.
IN this year upon the.xxviii. day of Noue^ber, the said Parkyn was brought
thorugh the cyty unto the Tower, and there left as prisoner. And with him a
tall yoma^ sometime sergeau^t ferrour to the king / which ferrour and one named
Edward, were shortly after put to death at tibourn. Upon saint Nycholas day
was a proclamacyo^ made thorugh ye city, of a peace between the realms of
England and Scotland for term of both kings lives. And in December a
carpenter called Godfrey, took down the wedercok of Poulys slyple and set it
up again. And this year in Crystmas weke was a part of the kings palayes of
Rychemou^t brent And this year upon the.ix. day of Iuny, the forenamed Parkin
being at large in the kings court, went secretly away / and lastly went to
the fader of Syon. And after the second pardon to him by the king granted, he
was showed at westmynster and in Chepys side, with much wonderment / and
finally had to the Tower and there keped.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xcviii. Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xcix. Thomas Bradbery. Sir
Ion^ Percyuale. Anno.xiiii. Stephyn Ienyns.
IN this year upon the.xxx. day of Octobre, came my lord price through ye
city with an honorabell company toward westmynster. And upon shroue tuysdaye
was put in execucio^ at saint Thomas warrynge, a strepelyng of.xx. years of age
/ which had auau^ced him self to be the sonn^ or heir to the earl of warwykes
lands, and was the son of a cordyner of London. And this year master John^
Tate alderma^ began ye new edefyinge of saint Anthonies church. And this year
upon the.xvi. day of July being sunday / and upon the sunday following,
stood.xii. heretykes at Poules cross shryned with fagottes.

Anno dn^i. M.iiii.C.xcix. Anno dn^i. M.v.C. Iamys wylforde. Nycholas Alwyn.
Anno.xv. Rychard Brond.
IN this year the.xvi. day of Noue^ber, was areyned in ye white halle at
westmynster the forenamed Parkyn and.iii. other. The which Parkyn and one John^
Awatyr were put shortly after in execucio^ at Tyborne. And soon after was the
earl of warwyke put to death at the tower hylle / and one Blewet and Astwood at
Tyborne. And this year in May the king and the queen sailed to Calays. And this
year was Babra^ in Northfolke bre^t. And in July was an old heretyke bre^t in
Smythfelde. And this year was a great death in London / whereof died over xx.M.
of all ages. And this year dyed doctor Morto^ cardynall and chaunceler of
England in the month of October.

Anno. dn^i. M.v.C. Anno dn^i. M.v.C.i. John^ Hawys. wyllyam Remyngton.
Anno.xvi. wyllyam Stead.
IN this year the.xxi. day of Dece^ber, in the night was an hydyous thu^der.
And this year was the name of the kings palace of Shene changed, and called
after ye day Rychemou^t. And this year in August departed secretly out of this
land, the duke of Suffolk. And the.iiii. day of October la^ded at Plymmowth
Kateryn^ daughter of ye king of Spayn. And this year was fynysshed by master
Tate the church of saint Anthony.

Anno domini.M.v.C.i. Anno domini.M.v.C.ii. Sir Laurence Aylemer. Sir John^
Shaa Anno.xvii. Henry Head.
IN this year began the mayre and his brethren to ride to the barge and other
places. Upon sait Erke^waldes day, was my lord prince married to the king of
Spaynes daughter. And this season the duke of Bukkyngham with other was chief
chale^geour, at a royal justice and turney holde^ in the palace of
westmynster. And this year came a great ambassade out of Scotland / by reason
whereof conclusion of marriage was made between the king of Scotts and dame
Margarete eldest daughter to our soueraygne lord. Also this year was an
excedyng great fysshe taken nere unto Quynbourgh. And in March sir wyllyam of
Deuynshyre, sir Iamys Tyrell, and his eldest son^, and one named welborne, were
arested for treason. And in Apryll ^olowyng dyed ye noble prince Arthur in the
town of Ludlow. And upon ye last day of April were set upon ye pyllory.ii.
yo^gmen, for defamyng of ye kings cou^sayll / and there erys cut of. Also
about this time yt gray friars were compelled to take their old habit russet,
as ye sheep does dye it. And the.vi. day of May Iamys Tyrell and sir John^
wyndhm^ knight, were beheded at ye tower hyl And a shypma^ for the same treason
was the same day drawn to tyborne and there hanged and quartered. And soon
after a purseuau^t named Curson, and a yoman called Matthew Ionys, were put in
execucio^ at Guynys / and all was for aydyng of sir Edmond De la pool. Also
this year about mydsomer was taken a fellow which had renewed many of Robi^
hodes page^tes / which named him self Greneleef. And this year began the new
work of ye houses office within the Guyldhall of London. And in the end of
October, was proclaimed a peace between the king and the archeduke of Burgoyne.
And ye sunday before saint Symo^d and Jude was showed a bull / by virtue whereof
were denou^ced at Poules cross as accursed, sir Edmond de la pool late duke of
Suffolk sir Roberte Curson knight, and.v. other persons. And all such as
aided any of the^ again ye king.

Anno domini.M.v.C.ii. Anno domini.M.v.C.iii. Goldsmyth. Henry Kebyll.
Bartholmew Read. Anno.xviii. Nycholas Nynys.
IN this year began the new werk of the kings chapel at westmynster. And upon
the.xi. day of February, dyed queen Elizabeth within the tower lieng in
chyldbed. And upon the first sunday of le^t, was solemply accursed at Poules
cross with bell and candell, sir Edmond de la pool, sir Robert Curson and
other, and all yt the aided again the king. And in the^de of the month of
march, was ye pryour of ye Charterhous at Shene sinfully murdered with an
other mu^k of the same house, by synyster means of a munk of the same place
named Good wine and other mischeuous persons. And this year the felisshyp of
tayllours of London purchased a grant of the king to be called merchant
tayllours. And ye viii. day of August, was the king of Scotts married unto ye
eldest daughter of ye king. Also in July were areyned at the Guyldhall Olyuer
saint John^, Robert Simpson, wellys^orfi before named, Pool bailey of Thorok
amp;.iiii. other all being cast for treason, whereof the said Olyuer and Pool
with hyppemen were put in execucion at Tyborne, and the other were pardoned.

Anno. dn^i. M.v.C.iii. Anno dn^i. M.v.C.iiii. Draper. Chrystoffer Hawys. Sir
wyllyam Capell. Robert wattes. Anno.xix. Thomas Granger.
IN this year the.xiii. day of Noue^ber, in the palace of ye archebysshop of
Canterbury at La^behyth was holde^ the sergeau^tes feast. And the.xxi. day of
Noue^ber in the beginning of ye night, was a dredeful fire upon the north end
of London bridge. And upon the.vii. day of January were certain houses
consumed with fire again saint Botulphis church in Thamys street. Upon
the.xxv. day of January, began a parliament at westmynster. And ye.xxvii. day
of March, was an house bre^t again saint Mattyus le grant. And the same day
was hurt done with fire in the paryshe of faint Peter's the pore. And in the
forenamed parlyame^t was ordained a new coin of silver, as grotes, half
grotes, and shyllynges with half faces. And in the forsayde parlyame^te was
granted to the king an aid of xxxvi. thousand.li. And a correccyon was
dyuysed for clipped grotes.

Anno domini.M.v.C.iiii. Anno domini.M.v.C.v. Grocer. Roger Achylley. John^
wyngar. Anno.xx. wyllyam Brown.
IN this year the cytezyns of London granted to the king.v.M mark for
confermacio^ of their lybertyes. whereof a.M. mark was paid in hand,
and.iiii.M. mark in.iiii. years next ensuyng. Upon sat Georges day ye king went
in procession in Poules church / where was showed a leg of saint George
closed in silver, which was newly sent to the king. And upon the.xxv. day of
Apryll, was a money maker one of the coyners of the tower drawn to tyborne,
and there hanged. And in ye later end of this year, came the third cappe of
mayntenaunce from the pope.

Anno domini.M.v.C.v. Anno domini.M.v.C.vi. Fysshemonger. Richard Shore.
Thomas Kneysworth Anno.xxi. Roger Grove.
This year upon.xii. even, the kings chamber at Rychemou^t was bre^t. And
upon the even of saint Maury began an hidious wid / which endured upon.xi.
days following more or less, in co^tynuall blowyng / by mean whereof the
wedercok of Poules was blowe^ down, and much other harm done. And by force
of this tempest the archeduke of Burgoyne was dryue^ to land in the west
country. And upon the second sunday of le^t stood at Poules cross the pryour
of saint Osyes and.v. other heretykes. And in ye end of ye month of March sir
Edmond de la pool was conveyed through the city unto the tower, and there left
as prisoner. And in May month was the lord of Burgeueny co^mytteth to the
tower, for a certain displeasure which co^cerned no treason. This year a new
bylded galerey fill in the night at Rychemou^t. And this year in the end of
July was a gracyous miracle showed by our Lady image of Barkyng, by a maiden
child that a carte laden with stone yode over.

Anno domini.M.v.C.vi. Anno domini.M.v.C.vii. mercer. wyllyam Copynger. Sir
Rychard Haddon. Thomas Iohn^son. Anno.xxii. wyllyam Fytz wyllyam.
IN this year about Crystmas was the bakers house in warwyke lane bre^t. And
this year was a wonderful easy and soft winter, with out stormys or frostes.
And this year the king of his goodness delivered out of all prysons in London,
as many prisoners as lay for.xl. s. and under. And this year was Thomas
Kneysworth late mayer and his.ii. shyreffes conde^pned to the king in great
sommes of money / over paynfull prysonement by them in the marshalsy sustained.

Anno domini.M.v.C.vii. Anno domini.M.v.C.viii. mercer. wyllyam Butler. wyllyam
Brown. Anno.xxiii. John^ Kyrkby.
This year in the end of April, dyed the said wyllyam Brown / and for him was
immedyatly chosen sir Laurence Aylemer, for the resydue of that year /

Anno supradicto. Anno supradicto. Draper. wyllyam Butler. Sir Laurence
Aylemer. Anno predicto. John^ Kyrkby.
IN this year upon the last day of Iuny, was an house in Southwarke nere unto
the bridge consumed with fire. And this year was sir wyllyam Capell again put
in vexacyon, by suit of the king, for things done by him in the time of his
mayralte.

Anno. dn^i. M.v.C.viii. Anno dn^i. M.v.C.ix. Tayllour. Thomas Exmew. Stephyn
Ienyns. Anno.xxiiii. Rychard Smyth.
IN the beginning of the mayres time, sir wyllyam Capell after his prysonement
in the cou^tour and shyreffes house, was by the kings counsayll commanded to
the tower / where he remained till the king dyed / and shortly after was
delivered with many other. And in likewise was sir Laure^ce Aylemer dalt with /
and committed to the ward or house of Rychard Smyth shryfe / and there
remained as prisoner by ye space above said.This year upon the saterdaye next
before saint Georges day in the night, which saterdaye was the.xxi. day of
Apryll, dyed the king our soueraygne lord at his manor of Rychemount / upon
whose soul and all christen Jesus have mercy. Amen.

And so this foresaid noble prince reigned.xxiii. years and.vii. months, and
one day thereof lakkynge.

This magnyfycent and excellent prince Henry the.vii. thus paid to death his
debt of nature as before is said. Of whom suffycient laud and praise can not
be put in writing, co^syderyng ye co^tynuall peace and tra^quylete which he
kept this his land and commons in / with also the subduynge of his outward
enymyes, of the realms of France and Scotland by his great polycy and
wisdom, more tha^ by shedyng of criste^ blood or cruel war. And ever
ruled so myghtly his subgectes and mynystred to them such justice, yt not
allonely they loved and drad him / but all christian princes heryng of his
glorious fame, were desirous to have with him amyte and allyaunce. And for that
he in all te^porall polycies and provisions exceded all princes by his time
reygnynge / diverse popes, as Alexander the syxte, Pius the.iii, and Julius
the.ii. now being pope, by their times either of the^ sunderly with
auctorytie and consent of their spyrytuall and deuyne cou^sayll, elected and
chase this excellent prince, and admytted him for chyefe defensour of Christ's
church, before all other christian princes. And for a confermacio^ of the same /
sent unto this inuyncibyll prince by.iii. sundry famous ambassades, three
swerdes with.iii. cappes of mayntenaunce. what might I write of the steadfast
contyne^cy, great justice, and merciful dealyng of this prince. what might I
report of his excelle^te wisdom and most sugared eloquence, or of his
inmouable patience and wonderful dyscressyon. Or what should I tell of his most
beautyfull byldynges, or excedyng charges of manifest reperacio^s and over all
this of his exceeding treasoure and richesse innumerabyll. But as who would
say, to consider in order all his notabyll acts, which would ask a long
tract of time, with also the lyberall and somptuous endoweme^t of the monastery
of westmynster and other, to write / I might conclude yt his acts passed all
the noble acts of his noble progenytours syne the conquest / and may most
co^gruly above all erthly princes, belykened unto Salamo^ king of ye Israelytes
and be called the second Solomon for his great sapience and acts by him done
his lyuys time executed. All which premysses tenderly considered, every
natural Englysshma^ now living, has cause and ought devoutly to pray for the
soul of this most excellent prince Henry the.vii, that he may atteyne that
celestyall mansio^, which he and all true christian souls are enheritours unto /
the which god him grant. Amen.

And the rather because of the exelle^t virtuous bryngyng and leuynge unto us
by gods aid and prouysyon, of our most gracyous and most d^ad soueraygne
lord Henry ye viii. of that name, as tyghtfull enherytour unto the.ii. crowns
of England and of France. The which began his most gracyous reygne ye xxii.
day of Apryll, in the year of our lord god.M.v.C. and.ix.

HEnry the.viii. of that name and second son of the forenamed excellent
prince Henry the seuith began his most gracyous reygn over the realm of
England the.xxii. day of Apryll, in the year of our lord god M.v.C. and.ix.
To whom by all honor, reverence, and joyful contynau^ce of prosperous reygn,
to the pleasure of god and weal of this his realm. Amen.

Thus ends Fabyans cronycle.
Printed by.w. Rastell, and fynysshed the last day of December, in the year
of our lord.M.v. C. and XXXiii.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.


