St. PAVLES-CHVRCH HER BILL FOR THE PARLIAMENT, As it was presented to the
Kings Matie on Midlent-Sunday last, and intended for the view of that most high
and Honorable Court, and generally for all such as bear good will to the
reflourishing estate of the said CHVRCH.

Partly in Verse, partly in Prose.

Penned and published for her good by HEN: FARLEY Author of her Complaint.

For the Lord will comfort Zion and repair all her decays: He will make her
Desert like Paradise, and her Wilderness like the Garden of the Lord. Mirth
and joy shall be found there, Thanksgiving and the praise of melody. Isaiah
51. 3.



Anno Dom. M. DC. XXI.

TO THE HIGH Court of PARLIAMENT.
All blessings from the Highest be ever present in your high and Honorable
Designs for CHVRCH and COMMONWEALTH.
MAy your Wisdoms be pleased to accept these my Labors as an humble suite
out of my zeal, for the good of Gods House. What honor shall accrue thereby, I
will ever attribute to his glory, and your goodness; only intimating to your
memories something fitting to be considered of at this time; not as an
arrogant teacher, but as an humble Remembrancer. Never had any Church more need
of Reparation and Reformation; for every day she consumes, and every base
fellow pisseth against her doors and defiles her walls, as if She only (who
should be the only She for Beauty and Example) were the only contempt and
scorn of all the rest. Her West door, and Brazen Pillar, where his Majesty
kneeled, and prayed for good success to his Pious intendment for her
restoration, is the most odiously and ignominiously abused; and because there
is no power by laws and penalties to punish the offenders, they are so bold
that none of her Officers, or others, dare control them: I most humbly
refer the consideration thereof to your Grave Wisdoms, it being the only
cause that has moved me to publish this work. There are many of my Honorable
Masters among you (the Commissioners appointed by his Majesty for the
reparation of the said Church) of whose furtherance in this and much more, I
have no doubt; and of whose noble favors I have had some taste. So trusting in
the Almighty they will continue the same, and humbly beseeching your pardon,
protection, and Patronage, I remain in my Prayers as I first began,

Prostrate at your feet in all loyal and humble obedience during life. H. F.

S. PAVLES to the BOOK.
THose that read thee with good will,
As my friends respect them still;
But if Carpers wince, or strike,
Tell them they are galled belike.
Sure I am my Authors mind
Was to please in every kind,
And his Work well ordered is,
If it be not taken amiss.
The BOOK to PAVLES.
NOt S. Peter, nor S. Paul,
Nor our Savior could please all,
Therefore let no man alive,
In that vain of pleasing strive:
I will gladly please each friend,
And the rest pray God amend.
S. Paul's her Reply.
THen be gone incontinent
To the Court of Parliament,
And in truth and reverence,
(Without filed Eloquence)
Speak the best thou can for me,
So farewell, God prosper thee.
The Author breaking forth in joy at this Conference, says in the behalf of
the Church and himself, thus:
IF my Book pass current there,
Then be gone all grief and fear:
For mine eyes shall shortly see
What my soul long wished should be,
To my hearts high exaltation,
And the honor of our Nation,
That Is your speedy reparation.
Before S. Paul's does speak any more, She approves how she may speak, etc.
though but stone, etc.
AS it is said that Ships do fight,
When it is the men that in them be:
So I (poor Church) pray, speak, and write,
When it is my Friend does all for me.
For never yet could wood or stone
Do any of these things alone.
A Posie of sundry Flowers and Herbs, gathered out of the Garden of Gods Word,
knit up together, and set in the Frontispice of this Work, for the smell of
every good Reader, as a sweet odor to the rest that follows:
It being full of divine Caution and Example. (viz.)

HAGGAI 1 Chap. Ver. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. THis People say the This
is Black Time, and a fearful herb; If Hearb-grace, or Gods mercy, did not
grow by it, to quench his anger with man's repentant tears, etc.
Time is not yet come, that the Lords House should be builded.

The Branches of this Time are many: (viz.)

Then came the Word of the Lord by the Ministry of the Prophet Haggai, saying:

Is it time for your selves (O Ye) to dwell in your seiled houses, and this
House lie waste?

Now thus says the Lord of Hosts; Consider your own ways in your hearts; ye
have sown much, but ye bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye
drink, but ye are not filled; ye cloth you, but ye be not warm; and he that
earneth wages, puts it into a broken bag.

Get you up into the Mountain, and fetch In this branch (being the middle
branch) does Gods mercy appear, (if man will be warned.)
wood and build this House, and I will be glorified, and I will take pleasure
in it, says the Lord; Ezra 6. 10. That ye may have to offer sweet Sauors to
the God of Heaven, and pray for the Kings life and for his Children.

Ye looked for much, and lo, it came to little; and when ye brought it home, I
did blow upon it, And why (says the Lord of Hosts?) because of my house that
is waste, and ye run every man into his own If the Separatists and
Browniti-call vermin of this time, would but smell well to this Branch, they
might learn to love me their mother Church much more then they do; I mean as
I am an ancient house of God.
house.

Therefore upon you the Heaven is stayed from Dew, and the Earth is stayed from
yiedling her increase.

And I have called for a drought upon the Land, and upon the Mountains, and
upon the Corn, and upon the Wine, and upon the Oil, and upon all that the
Earth brings forth; upon Men, and upon Cattle, and upon all the labor of
the hands.

When Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and Ioshuah, the son of Iosedech the
high Priest, with all the remnant of the People, heard the voice of the Lord
their God, and the words of the Prophet Haggai, as the Lord their God had sent
him:

Then the People did This Herb may well be called Sage, or Sapience, for the
Fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom.
fear before the Lord.

And the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zorobabel, etc. and the spirit of all
the People, and they came and did the work in the house of the Lord of Hosts,
their God.

Ezra 7. 27. etc. Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, which This is Carduu^
Benedictus, or Blessed Thistle.
has put such things as these into the heart of our good King, to beautify
the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem, etc.

2. Chron. 24. 8. 9. 10. etc. And at the Kings commandment they made a Penny
Royal, or the Kings Royal Penny or gift.
Chest, and set it without at the gate of the house of the Lord; and made a
Proclamation through Judah and Jerusalem, etc.

And the Lords and all the People rejoiced, and This may be called Angelica,
when Angels are so offered.
brought in until there was sufficient, etc.

2. Kings 12. 9. 10. 11. 12. But Iehoiadah the high Priest took a Chest, This
is (as I take it) Bursa Pastoris, or Shepherds purse or the Clergies Chest.
and bored a hole in the lid of it, and set it beside the Altar, on the right
side, as every man comes into the Temple of the Lord, etc.

And when they saw there was much money in the Chest, the Kings Scribe, and the
high priest came up and told the money, etc. and gave it sealed into the hands
of them that executed the work, and such as had the oversight of the house of
the Lord. Thus they did day by day, and gathered money in abundance. And so the
workmen wrought, and the work amended through their hands, and they made the
house of God as it ought to be, and strengthened it. So Iehoiadah Thus far
extends the pious branches of the good herb called the Shepherds Purse.
waxed old, and died full of days, etc. And they buried him in the City of
David, among the Kings, because he dealt well with Israel, and with God and his
House.

Here follows Mother-Time, gathered by the good King of our time, and sent to
the Reverend Kingly Bishop, Physician, or Father of this Mother Church, as an
Herb of most excellent virtue to cure all her diseases. (viz.)

Psalm 102. verses 13. 14. THou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion, for the
This sweet Mother or Mountain Time may also be called the precious ointment
upon the head, that ran down unto our Aarons beard: yea even to the skirts of
his Clothing: or yet more properly, like the Dew of Hermon, which (by a divine
Sermon) fell upon our sacred hill of Sion.
Time to favor her, yea the set time is come.

For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof.

A Parallel of present time with time past: Or, of a good King living, with a
faithful good King long since deceased.
IN the 18. year of the reign of our good King James Over England, France,
and Ireland.
, it pleased his sacred Majesty to visit me (poor Church) and soon after to
send the Governor of his City, with diverse of his Nobles, Reverend Fathers, and
Elders, to survey my wants, and to return unto his Highness all my diseases
and corruptions, and their causes; that so he might (like a most excellent
Supreme head and governor in Church and Commonwealth within his Majesty's
Dominions.
Physician next under God) take course for my cure. And so in the same year he
called a Parliament intending first to purge the land and the Temple, and then
(I hope) to send his Nobles, etc. again, that shall never cease till I be
totally cured, and most beautifully repaired.

This may then be worthily paralleld with the noble acts of that famous and
faithful King Josiah recorded and renowned in the second Book of the Kings,
the 22. Chapter, and in the second Verses 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. etc. Verses 8, 9, 10.
etc.
Book of Chron. the 34. Chapter.

For in the 18. year of his Reign (when he had purged the Land and the
Temple of Heresy This is heavenly Hysope.
and Corruption) It should seem this was at the end of a Parliament, which was
a heavenly conclusion of one good work, and a most sacred beginning of
another. Nota quaeso, etc.
he sent Saphan the son of Azaliah, and Maasiah the Governor of the City, and
Ioah the son of Ioahaz the Recorder, to repair the House of the Lord his
God, etc.

And when they came to Hilkiah the high priest, they delivered the money that
was brought into the house of God, which the Levites that kept the Entries had
gathered of the hands of Manasseh and Ephraim, and of all that yet remained in
Israel, and of all Judah and Benjamin, and they returned to Jerusalem: and they
put it in the hands of them Men did not then come like Bears to a stake to
such a business, but like poor beggars to a xijd. dole. Happy was he that
could do any thing which might dignifie and set forward the work.
that had the oversight of the house of the Lord, and they gave it to the
Laborers that wrought in the house of the Lord, to repair and mend the House:
even to Masons and Carpenters gave they it to get hewed stone and timber for
Couples and for Beams, etc.

And the men did work, etc. And the Overseers of them to courage them forward,
were Iahath and Obadiah, Leuits of the Children of Merari; and Zechariah, and
Meshullam of the Children of the Kohathites, which all could skill of
Instruments of music:

And over the bearers of burdens, and over all that wrought in whatsoever
workmanship, were there Scribes, Officers, and Porters of the Levites, etc.

Thus far the Posie of heavenly Herbs and Flowers, gathered out of the Garden
where millions more might have been culled for my purpose, but I hope this is
enough to him that delights in sweet Odours of piety and good works.

And to that end I will pray as follows.

This Prayer or Petition is for the King, Prince, etc. and directed to the King
of Kings.
O King of Kings, and Lord Omnipotent,
Direct, protect King James in Parliament;
Make all those wholesome Laws he treats upon,
T'approue him still, a second Solomon;
A blessed Peacemaker, Churches Amender:
And (in Great Britain long) true Faiths Defender.
That every Pen may write a sacred Story
Of all his Noble Acts, done to thy Glory:
And Sin (corrupt and base) may (out of hand)
Be purged quite and clean out of the Land.
His Son (likewise) thy Son (O God) so guide him,
That all good hopes and haps may still betide him;
And as he is a Prince of prudent carriage.
So bless him (Lord) in Single life and Marriage;
Make him thy Iem of Iems, thy Pearl of Pearls,
(Next to his Majesty) our Princely Charles;
Thy conquering Champion when he goes to Wars,
(As he is Conqu'rer at the Tilting-barres;)
And thy strong Sampson (valiant in the Field,)
That he may fight and kill, and never be killed.
Bless also all his noble Lords and Peers,
His Bishops, Burgesses, and Knights of Shires,
And give them Joy, Prosperity, and Health,
That do their best for Church and Commonwealth.
O let not any man be so unholy,
From henceforth for to beg a I mean such as are helpful to one Subject, and
hurtful to all the rest.
Monopoly:
For well I wot, Much-ill proceeds thereby,
It wrongs the STATE, and sokes the Subjects dry;
Hardens men's hearts, all good I doubt it has a little choked men's good
devotions toward me.
designs does choke,
And (such as pinch) does to revenge provoke;
"(A thing inhumane, that one Christian Brother,
"Or fellow Subject, should devour another.)
And for my Sovereigns love to me last Lent,
Upon a Holy day divinely spent;
Love him (good Lord) and let him plainly see,
It Is much the more for his great love to me;
That so his Highness may (without Omission)
Most royally proceed in the Commission
By Him appointed for my Restoration,
Upon my humble Plaint and Supplication;
"For never came more honor to a King,
"Then my repair will to his Highness bring:
"Nor can a work be of more note or name,
"To raise Him and His seed Immortal Fame.
O let them be as Heavens bright shining stars,
That are my Friends, his true I have 70. Commissioners and 40. almost are of
the Parliament, I hope one good Phinees among them, will stand up in my cause.
Commissioners,
And such as seek to frustrate his Decree,
Darius Ezra. 6. 11. 12. etc.
Sentence light on them for me,
Or turn their hearts, that they may rightly know,
I am thy House, so builded long ago;
With State, with Honor, and Endowments plenty,
Though Woluish times, and Men have made it scanty;
For burial of the dead, for pious uses,
And not for Gods House was wont to be had in reverence, but I and my Courts
are made a place of Sir-reuerence, and as base as any Laystall, etc.
Profanation and abuses;
That so men may have better conscience
To use me (like Gods house) with Reverence.
And let those base, profane, and idle Rout,
That daily pass with burdens, in, and out;
Those that Such as I here mean love neither Mother Churches, nor reverend
Fathers: They make a fair tall show of Faith, but (as Maypoles) they grow
slenderer and slenderer, till they come to be Weather-Cockes, and then their
Faith turns with every wind, and so be like the Tree that was hewn down and
cast into the fire; having neither Roor, Rind, Sap, Bough, Branch, Leaf,
Blossom, or Fruit of good Works, etc.
deride me with their scoffs and Songs,
That wish my downfall with their spiteful tongues,
Those hollow upright Maypoles that do hate,
To see their Mother Church be fortunate;
Those that have sucked my Breasts till all is dry,
And yet are backward me to dignifie;
All that pollute my sacred Courts and Walls,
Know there is a scourge for them, whense're it falls;
O whip them soundly that abuse thy Temple,
That others may be warned by their Example.
Hear me thy Sion, from thy Sanctuary,
Help me (O God) make haste and do not tarry.
Sic Opto, sic Oro.
This is another Prayer or Petition, for the King, Prince, etc. and directed to
the Prince of Princes.
O
Christ the Son of God,
Alpha and Omega,
Ruler of heaven and earth,
Orderer of all things,
Light of lights,
Very God of very God,
Savior of the world;
Preserve the King and Prince, I was cured of the Kings Evil by his gracious
coming, and I hope (if he come once more) I shall be cured of the Wolf and
Dropsy, and preserved from fear of the falling Sickness.

Restore my Fame,
Justify my Friends,
Nullify my Foes,
Cure all my evils and infirmities,
Endow me with plenty,
Prosper great Britain,
Send peace to all Christendom.
And the God of peace, etc. make you perfect in all good works, etc. So be it.
Amen.

This is a Petition to the Kings Majesty only. I hope to see the 26. day of
March to be celebrated as a holy day for ever at my Cross, for a Thanksgiving
to the Lord that he stirred up the heart of my good King to visit me, and to
take course for my good, and then will there be 3. holy days of great
solemnity together: viz. March. 24 Coronation day. 25. Anunciation day 26.
Visitation of St. Paul's.

I Humbly beseech: Whereas upon the 26. day of March last past, (being then
Mid-Lent Sunday) it pleased your Majesty (after the royal solemnity held upon
your Coronation day, and the Anunciation of our blessed Lady, etc.) to visit me
with your Sacred presence in an honorable Assembly; and to declare your Kingly
love toward my Retriumphant estate by your own gracious speeches, and by the
divine Oratory of my Reverend Diocesan at that instant, and soon after by a
most Noble Commission, etc. For the which all people (my good Friends) that
have heard thereof, do heartily honor and applaud your Highness, as a second
Solomon.

That likewise it may please your Majesty (now in this holy time of Lent, or
some other time in the Interim of this high and most Honorable Court of
Parliament at this present holden) to renew If a competent sum were in cash,
and Scaffolds setting up, and a Register appointed for a record of men's
Beneuolences, as in Sr. Thomas Bodleis Library, I should not fear the wanr of
money during my Reparation, or ever after.
your pious favor toward me, by gaining some little benevolence to set on
the work, as a free Offering or gift, and for redress of my intolerable
wrongs, by some penal Laws, and severe punishment of the offenders.

And I shall continue my prayers for your sacred Majesty, your Princely
Posterity, your long, peaceable, and prosperous Reign; and for that Noble,
Reverend, and Worthy Assembly (by the help of my Well-willers) to the worlds
end. And this poor man (who has been my voluntary servant these 8. years,
by Books, Petitions, and other devises, even to his own dilapidations) will
(according to his bounden duty) approve himself your Majesty's loyal Subject,
and my faithful Proficient during life, etc.

St. Paul's her Conceit after this Petition.
OF many Molehils, Mountains may be made,
By many Springs, great Rivers we do see,
By many hands a Burthen's light it is said,
That (for some few) too weighty seems to be;
So many hands might make quick work of me:
Though hard it seem at first (most Royal King)
Yet once begun it will prove an easy thing.
And rather benefit then loss.
For so shall many work and pay their debts,
And what rich Subjects gives, poor Subjects gets:
No Money goes out of Thy Land thereby,
Or from the Chamber, or Thy Treasury:
But all to offer freely at a Chest, One little free Benevolence to begin, will
be more prosperous then 1000. forced Collections or Taxations.

What gifts they please, as at a Marriage Feast;
So Mites to Millions at the last may rise,
And I be made a Princely Edifice.
Here follows a Petition written in my name, and presented to the King, two
days before his Majesty came to visit me, (viz) on Friday the 24. of March
1619. But the Master of Requests then attending, took it away from his
Highness before he could read it, as many things had been so taken before,
to the great hindrance and grief of the poor Author.

To the KINGS most Sacred MAJESTY.
Whereas (to the exeeeding great joy of all my dear Friends, there is
certain intelligence given, that your Highness will visit me on Sunday next:
And the rather I believe it, for that I have had more sweeping, brushing and
cleansing, then in 40. years before. My workmen looked like him they call
Muld-Sacke after sweeping of a Chimney.


May it please your most Excellent Majesty (among your royal Intendments to
be celebrated in me upon that Holy day) to manifest (withal) your pious
Affection toward Repair of my Decays, and I shall daily pray, etc. The
Authors Conceit written under my PETITION.
St. PAVLES (O King) since I her suite began, This (for 500. li.) my Author can
approve by oath that it came to me by my Complaint, which he made, that put Mr.
Parker (a Benefactor) in mind to do me good, as handsell to bring on more good
Customers.

has gained by five (almost) eight hundred pound;
Grace thou her Suite, and I Am assured than,
each hundred will a thousand pounds be found;
Each thousand, ten; and every ten, a score,
Till she break forth in thanks, and crave no more.
A Petition to the PRINCE.
ONe only Advocate with God we have,
(Christ Jesus, our sweet Savior, his dear Son)
By whom alone we get all things we crave,
in humbleness, and just petition;
Great Prince, you are my Sovereigns only Son,
Resemble then the Course twixt God and man,
And grace my humble suite the best you can;
And (as I Am bound) so will I ever pray,
That God will bless your Highness night and day.
A Petition to the Right Honorable, the Lords of his MAJESTY'S most Honorable
Privy Council.
FOR his sake which (for your sakes) once did cry Eli, Eli, lamasabacthani;
For their sakes, which (for Gods sake) did not spare
Or pains, or cost, or ought, for my welfare;
For all your Honors sakes, I humbly crave,
That now (if ever) I your helps may have:
My Suite is honest, just and reasonable,
The Work is good, the End most honorable:
Wherefore if you shall please to speak for me,
I Will pray that heaven your dwelling place may be.
Your Honors now as aforesaid, and also when you have ended your labors, if
you please (as some of your forefathers have done) to rest with me. S. PAVLES.

St. PAVLES concludes in an Ecstasy, alluded to the sense of hearing, being as
it were ravished with joy of her hopeful success.

What Wight is he in England-Isra-el,
That knows my wants, loves me, and can speak well?
Let him stand up with Zeal and sound intent,
And speak for me now in this Parliament;
Is he a Leuite, Priest, Samaritan?
Has he the voice of Angel, or of man?
Who should he be (sweet sense do not thou err)
Which does in that high Court my Bill prefer?
O, now I know; hark how the people sing,
Glory to God, and honor to the King.
Is It He indeed? is it that peerless Iemme?
(BEST OF BEST SPEAKERS IN JERUSALEM.)
Is It He that holds me still in Reverence?
Is It He that gets me a Benevolence?
Is It He that (for my good) lifts up his Voice?
And do the people thus for me rejoice?
Blessed be such a King, and blessed all
That thus do honor me their Church of Paul.
Thus much (for the most part) of what was given to the King on Midlent-Sunday
last.

Here follow other things of the Author, done long before, and not impertinent
to that which is herein intended (that is) to stir up good minds to set
forwards a good work. (viz.)

Certain Additions,
Voices and Visions,
Speeches and Parley,
Twixt Paul's and Farley.
As they have been given to the King at sundry times, but not till now
published.

S. PAVLES. FIRST, recite to me in brief the Dream or Vision thou had
after thou did publish my Complaint, which thou did present to his Majesty
by a picture, and which picture thou intendedst to have given to his Majesty,
if thy Petition had not failed thee.


FARLEY. It was a Dream in three parts.

1 The first showing the King, This was in the life time of our gracious Q.
Anne, and came to pass (in some part) the said 26. day of March, 1619.
Queen, and Prince; with all the Nobles, Reverend Bishops, and Clergy; Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, Citizens, and people, coming as from the Tower (in great
state and solemnity) to offer for your good at a Chest standing at your great
North-dore.

In this Dream (me thought) I saw presents of Vide queso, etc. 1. Kings Chap.
5. verse. 8. 9. 10. etc. all the chapter.
stone and timber sent by foreign Princes, to congratulate with his Majesty
in that pious work intended for your reparation as * Hiram sent to King Solomon.

Also (me thought) I saw a Posie written in Capital letters over your Gate
next Cheapside, to this effect; viz. BEHOLD THE KING COMES WITH GREAT JOY,
etc. And (me thought) I saw a great glory in the Heavens, and heard two voices
sounding in my ears, one toward the King thus, For thy Temples sake, etc. I
wish thee all prosperity: The other voice sounding toward the middle of the
city in these words, Many good things are done in thee, o thou fair City.

2. The second Dream showing the royal solemnities This part of my Dream
has also proved true.
at the Offering, and you in that ragged poor, and smoaky case, as now you
are, and the King, etc. sitting to hear a Sermon in the same very Window and
place where his Majesty did sit indeed when He came to visit you.

Me thought I saw (among all your Grieuances that then were opened to his
Majesty's sight and hearing) one thing written in Capital letters, which was
well observed on all parts, (viz.)

VIEW, O KING, HOW MY WALL-CREEPERS,

HAVE MADE ME WORK FOR CHIMNEY-SWEEPERS.

The Psalm that was sung before the Sermon was (me thought) the Vide.
122. Psalm.

The Text was out of the 24. Chapter of the second Book of Chron. the 10.
verse (viz.)

And all the Lords and all the people reioiced, and brought in, and cast into
the Chest, until there was sufficient.

The Preacher (me thought) was that Reverend This approved true in part.
Bishop of this Diocese, whose lot was afterward to perform that task in
another Text appointed by his Sacred Majesty.

Me thought he divided the Text aforesaid thus, The Lords and People reioiced,
and brought in, and cast into the Chest.

They not only brought in and cast into the Chest (said he) but they also
rejoiced, for so (indeed) God is well pleased, who accepts and loves a
Cheerful giver, and the cheerfulness of the Giver does much commend the
Gift.

Then he observed the readiness of the People by the particle, All.

Not some of the Lords, or some of the people offered, but All the Lords, and
All the People, even the poor Widow cast in her Mite.

Then the peoples continuance in well doing. For (said he) they gave not a
little at the first for fashion sake, or in show of devotion, and then grew
weary, but they brought in and cast into the Chest, until there was sufficient.

Therein he also observed, how the End crowns the Action, for to begin well,
and not to end well is to be a Christian by halfes, and that in the worst
half too.

And these (me thought) were the principal divisions of the Text, whereat I
was never a whit vexed, etc.

After the Sermon was ended, I went in, and at two of your Pillars near Sir
Christopher Hattons Tomb (me thought) I saw two Chests, chained to two
Pillars, one having these words and verses in Capital letters written in a
fair Table, hanging over the Chest as follows, (viz.)


THE KINGS CHEST.
COme all good Subjects loyal, and liege people,
With cheerful hearts to help this Church and Steeple,
For here is the place of offering appointed
By JAMES our sacred King, and Gods Anointed:
Where such as (with devotion) offer free,
Shall in true Register recorded be,
To their great honor, fame, renown and praise,
From this time forward, to the end of days:
His Highness has begun for your example,
Come then I pray it is for Gods holy Temple.
THE QVEENES CHEST.
THis Chest, which here inchained you do find,
(Prepared for the gifts of Or kind Women.
women-kinde)
Queen ANNE (chief foundresse, and S. Paul's wel-willer)
Commanded to be fixed to this pillar,
And 'cause she would her pious heart unfold,
She first put in a Princely shower of gold.
Come Ladies then, her goodness imitate,
And let Paul's know she shall be fortunate.
Nay come all women, bring away your crowns,
Pounds, shillings, pence, from Countries, Cities, Towns:
O let it be to all a joy and pleasure,
To help this Church with some part of your treasure:
It is a blessed work, and well't does suite,
That faithful trees should bring forth holy fruit.
Your Offerings shall be kept in true Record,
Until the second coming of the Lord.
Come then (I pray) and let this Proverb stand,
When Women give they have a luckie hand.
These two Chests, one for the men, and another for the women's Offerings (me
thought) one told me, were placed there, not so much for the present Offering,
(which was then in general at your North door, for getting money to set on
the Work) but for future, during the time of your Reparation, and were
attended by one appointed by the King of purpose to This Register or Record, is
humbly required by, etc. as a Grace to what he has done.
record the gifts which should be brought in, either as volu^tary by the
living, or as Legatory by the deceased; To the end his Majesty might once a
year see how his loving Subjects, and loyal people did second his Highness,
and imitate his goodness (to their power) in his pious designs.

And thus I concluded my second Dream, viz. As wicked works do bring our
souls damnation, So pious works are steps to our salvation.

3. My third and last Dream was in this manner, Me thought I saw you suddenly
renewed, beautifully repaired, and cured of all your evils, and infirmities.

And then (me thought) appeared a far more glorious splendour in the Heavens
then that which I saw in my first Dream, and near to the Kings Picture,
(which (me thought) was rarely engraven and cut in stone upon your Steeple) I
saw eight Angels flying up and down, rejoicing with great melody, and sounding
Praises with Trumpets and heavenly Voices as follows: (viz.)

1 Angel.
For this good work King James shall rule in peace,
And 'cause (by him) the Gospel does increase,
2 Angel.
He shall be prosperous in all his ways,
He shall have health, long life, and happy days.
3 Angel.
His Royal Seed shall mighty be and many,
And shall increase as much as ere did any.
4 Angel.
He shall plant Colonies in every Nation,
To forward still the Gospels propagation.
5 Angel.
Like as the Sands on Sea, or Stars in Sky,
So shall his People grow and multiply.
6 Angel.
He shall have conquest when he goes to fight,
And shall put all his enemies to flight:
7 Angel.
And (at the last) to end our blessed story,
He shall be crowned in heaven with endless glory.
8 Angel.
Where Angels and Archangels ever sings
All praise and honor to the King of Kings.
S. Pa. So be it.


Fa. Amen.

This glorious sound of the Angels, so much inflamed my spirits with divine
desires to hear and see more, (being also rapt and ravished with joy at your
beautiful appearance) that I suddenly start up in my bed, and was thereby
awaked.

And thus have I ended my third Dream, and as briefly as I could repeated all
three of them.


S. Pa. Did you not write a Book of this at large, and give it to his Majesty
when you presented the Table?


Fa. Yes that I did, but for want of a Friend in Court, I failed of my desires,
which was, to have published it; such ill success had I with my Petitions,
that (although) his Majesty seemed well pleased with any thing I gave him in
your behalf, yet could I never get Reference upon any: So that oftentimes I
went by Chearing (alias Charing Cross) in the Morning, and home by weeping
Cross at night.


S. Pa. What time of the year did you fall into these contemplative Dreams?


Fa. Upon the Eve of S. James the Apostle it began, but it continued long
after, as you shall see by the Prologue, which is before the Dream in the
Book which I gave to the King, in this manner;


The PROLOGVE.
VVpon the Feast of JAMES The Apostle last,
At ten a clock in the night, and somewhat past;
I went to bed, and after I had prayed,
I turned me on my right side, and so laid;
Intending there in quiet sort to sleep,
Until the Lark did sing, or day did peep;
So musing broad awake a little while,
At last a slumber did mine eyes beguile;
And what I thought but then, before I slept,
I dreamed thereon, and in that Dream was kept
Four hours at least, nay (as I now remember)
It did not end until the last November;
Except some thrice, and then I felt some pain;
So dreamed, so wak't, then dreamed, then wak't again,
As if I had been It might have made a better head then mine ache above three
times.
made of dream and sleep,
Sometimes I laughed, and sometimes wail and weep,
By which I called to mind a sacred Theme,
That all man's life is but a Sleep or Dream,
A Span, a Flower, a Ship at Sea, a Bubble;
Like to a Tale that is told, like Grass, like Stubble;
Like any thing that soon does change and fade,
Such is the life of man, whom God has made;
I mean in this life, frail and transitory,
Until he do attain the life of glory.
And then began my waking dreaming Story.

S. Pa. Now I pray thee repeat the Conceit thou made in my name, which thou
gave to the Lord Mayor of London, when thou did present my Complaint unto
him, a little after Christmas. 1615.


Pa. I will give you the effect as well as I can remember. (viz.)


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir John Iolles Knight, Lord Mayor, etc. It was in his
time, etc.

The Humble Petition of H. F. for S. Paul's Church in London.
WHereas it is a laudable Custom in this Honorable City, that about this
time in every year, the Alderman of every Ward does present unto the Lord
Mayor (for the time being) all abuses, misdemeanors, annoyances and decays,
to the end they should be reformed, avoided and amended.

It may please your good Lordship (in regard that no Ward-mote Inquest has as
yet taken notice of my decays and annoyances,) to accept of this my
Presentment made by my Friend, and to do to me His answer was Honorable and
worthy at that time.
what honorable favor and respect you can toward my redress: And I shall
pray, etc.

S. Pa. Set down likewise, the Letter which you devised in my name to the
Reverend Preachers that come to my Cross, for it will not be impertinent to
be inserted.


F. I shall gladly do it as follows. (viz.)


MY very Reverend Friends, you are the Lords Ambassadors, whom therefore should
you fear? You see before your eyes my miserable estate, how (of the fairest
Caedar in Lebanon) I am become the least respected in London. Like a great
withering Oak in a green flourishing Forest, and of the most remarkable
See-farre, a forlorn, and a forsaken Cipher; your Wisdoms know I have raised
and maintained many; O then let me not be forgotten in mine old age: you know
likewise, that Brief upon Brief goes current for the restoration of the
profane houses of men, which have been ruined by misfortune of fire, as I was,
and how they are new builded and made better then before. I hope therefore you
will do somewhat for Gods house. You give thanks for the benefits that are
bestowed on them that come with the Lords Embassage to my Cross: And pray for
the increase of such benefactors. I desire that you would pray likewise for
such Benefactors as will contribute to my good; that so the Church and
Churchmen may thrive together. For the houses of men there are prouisoes and
Covenants to tie the Tenants to reparation, or to forfeit their Leases: are
there no such Prouisoes and Covenants for Gods Tenants? If there be not, then
sure it is because he holds them so worthy that they need not be bound: I say
no more, because I doubt not of your love and care. And so I commend you to the
heavenly protection of the Almighty, and rest in silence ever hereafter as your
loving Mother Church,

S. Paul's.


S. Pa. Now set down what other things you think fit, and let us draw to
conclusion.


F. Then first I will write the Carroll which I gave to his Majesty on
Christmas day, before his going into Scotland (viz.)


IN Paradise was Adam borne;
Jesus Christ but in a Stall:
By the first we were forlorn,
by the second saved all:
Glory be to God on High,
Joy at Christ's Nativity,
God preserve your Majesty.
Euah out of Adam came,
Christ of Mary took his birth,
By the first came woe and shame,
by the second joy on earth;
Glory be to God on High, etc.
Peace be still within thy walls,
Plenty to all needy souls,
So (good King) remember Paul's.
This following I gave to his Majesty when he took Coach at Theobalds, in his
Highness Progress to Scotland aforesaid, as my faithful Farewell or fair
wish to the good success of his Sacred Majesty, and of all his Noble,
Reverend, and Worthy followers, etc. viz.

RIde on with honor (mighty King)
With Princely high Renown,
From London unto It may well be called ^^d^n, or a place of Joy where so
gracious a Peacemaker was borne.
Edinburgh,
Thy native Seat and Town:
And blessed be thy Majesty,
In every place thou go,
Unto the joy of Man and Boy,
From highest to the lowest.
Ride on ye Noble Lords also,
God bless you and our Master,
And in the Progress as ye pass,
Defend you from disaster:
And Trinity in Unity,
Be still your guide and glory;
That of this time each pen may rhyme,
A pleasant Progress story.
And ride ye on, ye Reu'rend ones,
For you are for our souls;
And when you are at Edinburgh,
I pray remember Paul's:
For she will pray both night and day
For your prosperity;
Because your words much help affords,
In her necessity.
Ride on likewise, ye worthy Knights,
With Iovialty and pleasure,
And see you have a noble ear
To bring again our No nation can have a greater Treasure in a Prudent and a
gracious King then we have, if we were so thankful to God as we ought to be.
Treasure:
Your fealty and loyalty,
The Lord will ever bless,
And for the same you shall get fame,
And heavenly happiness.
So ride ye on his Officers,
And Yeomen strong and trusty;
Some guard before, and some behind,
Be valiant, bold and lusty:
Yet see you be for Courtisie
In Scotland well commended:
That love and peace may still increase
until the world be ended.
And as in Progress so in Regresse,
O, let us ever pray,
That God will bless his Majesty,
And Queen and Prince always:
That North, and West, and South, and East,
His glory we may sing,
And nights and days give thanks and praise,
For JAMES our Sacred King.
Now follows a Welcome to his MAJESTY, as I intended to present the same at
Windsor, but was hindered of my purpose. (viz.)

VVElcome Dread Sovereign from that Paradise,
Where Nature gave thee Birth, Grace, Edifice:
Welcome Great Britains Treasure, and best Iemme,
From Edinburgh to our Jerusalem:
Welcome Peacemaker, Lover of Unity,
Europes admired King for Majesty,
And for all Virtues that good Kings befit,
As Mercy, Justice, Learning, Wisdom, Wit.
Welcome ten thousand times, and blessed be
All those that (with true hearts) do welcome Thee,
And all thy Noble, and thy faithful Train,
That went with Thee, and brought Thee safe again.
Such joy succeed thy travels to the North,
That thereby peace and concord may spring forth,
And spread it self throughout great Britany,
To the perfecting of true Amity.
That so from East to West, from North to South,
Gods praise, and Thine, may be in every mouth.
And to thy meeting with thy Turtle Royal,
(Thy sacred second self, thy Queen most Loyal)
Thy Princely Son, (our High and Mighty CHARLES,)
Thy Noble Counselors, Lords, Ladies, Earls,
Bishops, Clergy, Knights, Gentry, Commons, All
That long have wished thy presence at Whitehall:
And thy true Citizens of famous London,
That (for thy absence) thought themselves undone;
Such joy succeed as never was before,
And God increase that joy for evermore.
And as I pray, so pray all loyal people,
Never forgetting S. Paul's Church and Steeple.
This following is another Christmas Caroll which I gave to his Majesty on the
Christmas day next after his Highness Return from Scotland.

THe This day we were saved from eternal death.
five and twentieth of December,
And the This day from a sudden fearful, and a most inhumane death.
fifth day of November,
Let us thankefully remember;
And with joy for ever sing,
Praises to our heavenly King,
and be doing some good thing:
Glory be to God on High,
For our Christ's Nativity, Nothing can be more remarkable then Paul's Repair,
in thankful memory of our wonderful delivery from the Gunpowder Treason.

And our great Delivery.
God preserve your Majesty.
Peace be still within Thy walls,
Plenty to all needy Souls;
Now (good King) remember Paul's.
Here my Candle was clean burnt out, and this last Caroll, was the last thing
I presented to his Majesty, until two days before His coming to visit you,
(which was the Petition before recited.) In this Interim I grew much dismayed,
for that I saw little hope of your help; many rubs I rannne through, many
scoffs and scorns I did undergo; forsaken by my Butterfly Friends, laughed
and derided at by your Enemies; Let them that scoff at this beware of
Suretiship.
pursued after by Wolves of Wood-street, and the Foxes of the Poultrey,
sometimes strongly Incountred, and sometimes at the point of Death and
Despair: In stead of serving my Prince, which I humbly desired, (though but as
a doorekeeper in you) I was pressed for the service of King Lud, where all the
comfort I had, was, that I could see you, salute you, and condole with your
miseries: my poor clothes and rags I could not compare to any thing better
then to your West End; and my service to nothing less then bondage: So I was
troubled in my sleeps, and dreamed I heard fearful voices sounding in, and
about you, which were as follow. (viz.)

The first voice (me thought) was in the Chapel which now is beautified and
repaired by Mr. Raphe Chamberlein, and made a place of It lay before like a
Swinestie, with dust, rubbish, and soote, and the windows as if Hags and
Hobgoblins had torn them.
morning Sacrifice to the Lord.

Where a ghastly Ghost start up out of an old Tomb or Grave, and said thus:

HAd I and my Forefathers thus neglected,
To see Gods houses mended and erected;
Or for to give of rich Endowments plenty,
That none which did his service might go empty;
Qu. Where had his Word been taught, to me express?
An. In uncouth places, Caves, and Wilderness.
"O then repair what to your hands we builded,
"Lest all your works prove painted shows ore gilded.
Then another Ghost appeared near that which is commonly called Duke Humphries
Tomb, and made a voice like the voice of Pity. (viz.)

When Winter with his blasts, floods, frosts and snow,
Has made all things look old, and dead to see;
In comes the Spring: so once a year you know,
All Caedars, shrubs, and plants renewed be:
O thanklesse man, is God thus good to thee?
Why do thou then neglect his good example,
In many Springs not to renew his Temple.
Another starts up under the Arches of the Consistory where the Lawyers get
Fees, and says thus in answer of Pity.

THe Causes why, This was Truth.

I Will soon discry;
For when men strive themselves to magnify,
To flaunt in worldly pomp and rich array,
They do forget Gods house to dignifie,
That Is left to run to ruin and decay,
Alas, alas, alas, and welladay:
The time has been when such a famous Church,
Could not (for want of Friends) bin left in the lurch.
Then spoke Zeal out of the two Towers at the West End (viz.) Lollords Tower,
and the Tower where yeur treasure Ardent Zeal two voices.
was kept in a hole of your wall. (viz.)


A quaint Baboon, an Ape, an Owl,
A dancing Bear, a Giants bone,
A foolish Ingin move alone,
A Morris-dance, a Puppit play,
Mad Tom to sing a Roundelay,
A Woman dancing on a Rope;
Bull-baiting also at the Hope;
A Rimers Jests, a Iuglers cheats,
A Tumbler showing cunning feats,
Or Players acting on the Stage,
There goes the bounty of our Age:
But unto any pious motion,
There Is little coin, and less devotion.

For purchasing, or greedy gain,
For Let Mr. Critic think I reach no higher then the Vulgar Vp-start in
these two lines, or the Prodigal spend-thrift: I censure not the Pleasures and
pastimes of the truly Noble, and of all others that exercise any laudable
sports for Recreation of wit, and agility of body.
Dicing, Drinking, foolish sporting,
Hunting, Wenching, Coaching, Courting,
There is enough in every Function,
But to this Church is small Compunction.
This voice being ended, I awaked, and in an Impatient manner made this mine
own voice, as follows. viz.

IF it be so, farewell Britania,
For I will go unto Virginia,
To see what Saluages will do,
When Christians are so hard to woo:
Take heed all Writers in this kind,
For Church Complaints are wasted wind.
So going to the Treasurer for Virginia, with Resolution to depart the Land
with speed; he being not then at leisure, appointed me to come Upon a Saturday
in Lent.
the Wednesday following: and at my return from Aldersgate to your presence
again, there came news by a sweet Western gale of wind that his Majesty
would certainly come to visit you on Mid-Lent Sunday in great solemnity. At
which most joyful Tidings I forgot Virginia again, and attended with hope of
some happy succcesse, to my hearty desires, toward your Reparation; which (I
thank the Lord) was performed to the full of my expectation for that time.

DOMINE SALVVM FAC REGEM IACOBVM.
Thus for your good I Have written to the full,
Weari'd my Muse, and made my spirits dull;
Spent time and Coin (good God) what shall I more?
Only a good Success I do implore.
S. Pa. Be of good cheer, and let God work his will,
Speak to the King, for he is Gracious still,
If so thou can not either speed or thrive
Let me alone, and do no further strive;
Thy Charges has been great I must confess,
Thy pains (likewise) I do accept no less,
Therefore when any good to me does fall,
Be sure my Love shall prove Reciprocal:
And at the last, when Death shall strike thee dead,
Within my Womb thou shall be buried:
Where (for thy kindness unto me expressed)
Thou shall remain, till Christ say, Come ye Blessed;
So to conclude, and make our Friends to laugh,
I Will tell thee what shall be thy Epitaph.
(viz.)

Under this Stone, my HARRY lies interred,
Never till now, by Friends or Fates preferred,
For though by Death his Body's here in Dust,
By Christ his Soul's preferred among the Just;
He (for my Good) did labor late and early,
His Christi'n Name you know, his Sirname's FARLEY:

Fa. I humbly thank your Greatness, and do pray,
You may prove happy till the latter Day,
Expect each Or the 26. of March.
Mid-Lent Sunday while I live,
Something (for you) I Will to my Soueragine give.

Veritate and Reuerentia.
Yea, because of the house of the Lord our

God, I will seek to do Thee good, Ps. 122. 9.

Blessed may that Preacher be, That will pray and speak for me.



A POSTSCRIPT
To the Courteous and Charitable Reader.
ACcept my meaning (Worthy Friend)
Although my wit be weak,
And from the Crittickes me defend,
If any against me speak.
A Scholar I confess I Am none,
By Reading or by Art:
But truly I love every one
That is so, with my heart.
When I the fair Parnassus Mount
To climb was almost able,
I fell too short of my account,
And went but to Dunce-table.
So like a Dunce I Have writ this Book,
(With grief I it reveal,)
Where Is naught As touching Art or Scholership.
praiseworthy (if you look)
But only my true Zeal,
In which I vow to all good men,
My love to Paul's is such,
That if I had an Angels pen
I Would write ten times as much:
Or if of other Angels I
Had (as some have) great store
She should not need to beg or cry
To King or People more.
But of those Angels last my Purse
Is too too thin and bare;
And every day grows worse and worse
As Paul's her self does fare.
Therefore in me what here is scant
Of Money, Art, or Wit:
Do thou supply unto our Want,
So God bless thee, and it.
Thy faithful and thankful Friend, H. F.

FINIS.

