THE FISHER CATCHED IN HIS OWN NET.

M.DC.XXIII.

THE OCCASION AND ISSVE OF THE LATE CONFERENCE HAD BETWEEN Dr. White Deane of
Carleil, and Dr. Featly, with Mr. Fisher and Mr. Sweet, Jesuits, was this as
follows.
EDward Buggs Esquire, about the age of 70 years, being lately sick was
solicited by some Papists then about him to forsake the Protestant faith,
telling him there was no hope of salvation without the Church, there was no
Catholic Church but theirs, and to believe the Catholic Church was the Article
of his Creed, and by it could no other Church be meant but the Church of Rome,
because it could not be proved by all the Protestants in the kingdom, that
they had any Church before Luther.

This Gentleman being much troubled in his mind with these and the like
suggestions, who all his life time had bin and professed himself a religious
Protestant, became now more sick in mind then body; and if by Gods merciful
goodness he had not recovered of this sickness, it is to be feared he had
fallen both from his Mother Church and his former faith, as some of the nearest
of his own blood (to his great grief) have lately been seduced by like
inticements.

After his recovery, being much troubled in mind with these former suggestions
of the popish Priests, he repaired to Sir Humfrey Lynde Knight, who by reason
of his alliance and long acquaintance with him, gave the best satisfaction he
could to his said cousin Mr. Buggs, who seemed to take content in such his
conference, and to be well satisfied by him in all points.

But the Popish Priests and Jesuits not desisting to creep in further where
they had once made a breach, perseuering still in questioning him, where his
Church was before Luther. Whereupon he repaired again to Sir Humfrey Lynde,
and required some further satisfaction of him concerning that demand. And
thereupon Sir Humfrey Lynde told him, it was first in Christ and the Apostles,
consequently also conspicuous in the primitive Church for 600 years after
Christ, after which time some errors crept into the Church, as diseases into a
man's body; so that the Church which Luther and we acknowledge, was in general
the same Christian Church, as his body was the same substantial body, being
now well, and lately sick, though different in the qualities.

And for the better strengthening of his mind, the said Sir Humfrey Lynde
invited him to his house in the country, thereby the better to prevent the
daily solicitation of those dangerous seducers. And after his return to
London, the said Sir Humfrey Lynde going to Mr. Buggs his house in Drury lane
to visit him, found Mr. Fisher the Jesuit there, where after some debates
about Religion and the visibilitie of the Church, Mr. Fisher called for pen and
ink, and set down this question in terminis; thereby adding under his hand,
that he would answer upon it negatiuely, as chalenging and expecting opposers,
delivering also the paper into the hands of the said Sir Humfrey Lynde, who
upon view of it, answered, that it was an historical question, and not so
proper for disputation. But Mr. Fisher. urging it, Sir Humfrey told him, if he
would go to Dr. Whites, where formerly he had been, the said Doctor would
easily resolve those doubts. Which being refused by the Jesuit, the said Sir
Humfrey did then return him his paper again, and so left him.

About two days after, Mr. Buggs repaired to Sir Humfrey Lynd, and entreated
him (for his satisfaction) to give Mr. Fisher a meeting, saying, that Mr.
Fisher had again told him, that he would maintain what he had set down, and
that our Divines could not prove our Church visible before Luthers time.
Whereupon Sir Humfrey told him, that Dr. White and Dr. Featly were to dine with
him on Friday following; and if after dinner Mr. Fisher would come thither with
four or six at the most, they should be admitted for his sake and his wifes,
who (by reason of such solicitation) were troubled in their minds, and
satisfaction should be given as occasion required. And these were the true
causes of the meeting, as is before declared. Upon which Friday, being the 27
of June 1623. Mr. Fisher, Mr. Sweet, Jesuits, and some others with them, came
to Sir Humfrey Lynds house, into a little dining room, where they found the
aforesaid Mr. Buggs, his wife and children, and others of Sir Humfreys friends
that had then dined with him, together with some others also; whose coming in,
as the said Sir Humfrey did not expect, so he could not with civility put them
forth his house, but did instantly cause his doors to be locked up, that no
more might enter in; notwithstanding which his command, some others also came
in scatteringly after the Conference began.

A RELATION OF WHAT PASSED IN A CONFERENCE TOUCHING the visibilitie of the
Church. Iun. 27. 1623.
DOctor White and Doctor Featly being invited to dinner by Sir Humfrey Lynde,
and staying a while after, had notice given them that Mr. Fisher and Mr. Sweet,
Jesuits, were in the next room ready to confer with them touching a
question set down by Mr. Fisher, under his own hand, in these words: viz.

Whether the Protestant Church was in all ages visible, and especially in the
ages going before Luther: 2. And whether the names of such visible Protestants
in all ages can be showed and proved out of good Authors.

This question being delivered to the parties above named, and it being
notified unto them that there were certain persons who had been solicited (and
remaining doubtful in religion) desired satisfaction especially in this point,
they were persuaded to have some speech with the Jesuits touching this point,
the rather because the Priests and Jesuits do daily cast out papers and
disperse them in secret, in which they vaunt, that no Protestant Minister dare
encounter them in this point.

At the beginning of his meeting, when the disputants were set, Dr. Featly drew
out the paper, in which the question above rehearsed was written, with these
words in the margent, viz. I will answer that it was not; and demanded of Mr.
Fisher whether this were his own hand; which after he had acknowledged, Dr.
Featly began as follows.

(...), D. Featly.
To this universal demand, requiring rather an Historical large volume, then
a Syllogisticall brief dispute, we answer:

1. That although divine infallible faith is not built upon deduction out of
humane history, but divine revelation, as is confessed by your own
Schoolmen, and expressly by Cardinal Bellarmine: Historiae humanae faciunt
tantum fidem humanam, cui subesse potest falsum: Humane stories and records
beget only an humane faith, or rather credulity subject to error, not a
divine and infallible belief, which must be built upon surer ground.

2. Although this question be grounded upon uncertain and false supposals; for
a Church may have been visible, yet not the names of all visible professors
thereof now to be showed and proved out of good Authors; there might be
millions of professors, yet no particular and authentical record of them by
name. Records there might be many in ancient time, yet not now extant, at least
for us to come by; yet we will not refuse to deal with you in your own
question, if you in like manner will undertake the like task in your own
defense, and maintain the affirmative in the like question, which we now
propound unto you here in writing:

Whether the Romish Church (that is, a Church holding the particular entire
doctrine of the now Romanists, as it is comprised in the Council of Trent) was
in all ages visible, especially in the first 600 years: And whether the names
of such visible or legible Romanists in all ages can be showed and proved out
of good Authors.

Here Dr. Featly reading this question, through a mistake, in stead of out of
good Authors, read out of Gods word. Whereunto Mr. Fisher replied, No, I will
prove it out of good Auhors.

Then said one that sat at the table: By no means can Mr. Fisher endure to
demonstrate his Church out of Gods word.

Dr. Featly. God is a good Author, Mr. Fisher, but it is true I did mistake;
what say you to the condition, will you undertake to name visible Papists in
all ages out of good Authors?


Mr. Fisher. I will so you prove the visibilitie of your Church.


Here an order was set down, that Dr. Featly should for an hour and a half
oppose M. Fisher in this question; and afterward M. Fisher for the last hour
and half should oppose D White in the contrary question for the visibilitie of
the Roman Church.

M. Sweet. Before you proceed to dispute, I desire these conditions may be
assented unto on both sides:

1. That all bitter speeches be forborne.

2. That none speak but disputants. Which conditions were well approved of by
the whole company.


D. Featly. I desire a third to be added thereunto: viz. that both the Opponent
and Respondent be tied to Logic form.


M. Fisher. I hold not that condition fit, because the company understands not
Logic form.


D. Featly. There are of the company that understand Logic as well as you or
I, and the rest are men of understanding and reason; therefore I am resolved to
keep Logic form, and expect from you direct answers.


M. Fisher. You your self confess, that this question is not to be handled
Syllogistically.


D. Featly. I said indeed, that it required rather a large Historical volume,
then a brief Syllogisticall dispute; the more you too blame to propound such a
question, and my task the harder; yet being propounded as a question, I will
keep my self to Logic form. But before I propound my argument, I crave
leave in few words to lay open the vanity of the usual discourse, wherewith
you draw and delude many of the ignorant and unlearned. You bear them in hand,
that there was no such thing in the world as a Protestant before Luther; and
that all the world before his time believed as you do. That your Church has
not been only visible in all ages and all times, but eminently conspicuous and
illustrious; which is such a notorious untruth, that I here offer before all
this company to yield you the better, and acknowledge my self overcome, if
you can produce out of good Authors, I will not say any Empire or kingdom, but
any City, parish or hamlet, within five hundred years next after Christ, in
which there was any visible assembly of Christians to be named, maintaining and
defending either your Trent Creed in general, or these points of Popery in
special, to wit,

1. That there is a Treasury of Saints merits, and superabundant satisfactions
at the Popes disposing.

2. That the Laity are not commanded by Christ's institution to receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper in both kinds.

3. That the public Service of God in the Church ought or may be celebrated
in an unknown tongue.

4. That private Masses, wherein the Priest says, Edite and bihite ex hoc
omnes, and yet eats and drinks himself only, are according to Christ's
institution.

5. That the Popes pardons are requisite or useful to release souls out of
Purgatory.

6. That the effect of the Sacrament depends upon the intention of the
Minister.


M. Sweet. These are Scholasticall points, not fundamental.


D. White. Those things which are defined in your Council of Trent, are to you
matters fundamental.

Whatsoever article denied makes a man in heretic, is fundamental.

But the denial of any of these, makes a man an heretic.

Ergo, every one of these articles is fundamental.


To which argument nothing being answered, D. Featly proceeded.

7. D. Featly.
That Extreme Unction is a Sacrament properly so called.

8. That we may worship God by an image.

9. That the sacred Host ought to be elevated, or carried in solemn procession.

10. That Infidels and impious persons, yea Rats and mice may eat the body of
Christ.

11. That all Ecclesiastical power depends of the Pope.

12. That he cannot err in matter of faith.

13. That he has power to canonize Saints:

14. To institute Religious Orders: 15. to depose Kings, etc. which latter
points and the like, I leave to D. White to maintain against you, when
(according to your promise) you do undertake to name visible and legible
Romanists in all ages.


M. Fisher. After you have proved your Church visible in all ages, and named
the professors thereof, I will satisfy you in your particulars.


D. Featly. In the mean while name but one Father, but one Writer of note, who
held the particulars above named, for 500 years after Christ. To which instant
demand of D. Featly, nothing was answered.


Sir Humf. Lynd. M. Sweet, prove me but this one point out of Saint Augustine,
namely, Transubstantiation; or satisfy such arguments as I shall bring you out
of Saint Augustine to the contrary, and I will promise you to go to Mass.

To which M. Sweet made no other then this answer, That is not now to the
question.


M. Fisher. I expect your argument D. Featly.


D. Featly. There are two means only to prove any thing by necessary
inference, to wit, a Syllogism and an Induction: other forms of argument have
no force, but as they are reducible to these. I prove the visibilitie of our
Church by both; and first by a Syllogism:

That Church whose faith is eternal and perpetual, was ever visible in the
professors thereof.

But the faith of the Protestant Church is eternal and perpetual.

Ergo.


M. Fisher. You conclude not the question.


D. Featly. There are two quaeres in your question; first, whether the
Protestant Church were in all ages visible; and secondly, whether the names of
such visible Protestants in all ages can be showed. I have concluded in my
Syllogism the first Quaere.


M. Fisher. There are not two quaeres or parts in the question; it is but one
question.


D. White. Where there are two propositions with two distinct vtrums, there are
two questions: But here are two propositions with two distinct vtrums, to wit,
Whether the Protestant Church, etc. and Whether the names, etc.

Ergo.


M. Fisher. Conclude any thing syllogistically D. Featly.


D. Featly. You your self make the first part a question by it self: for at
the margent over against the first part, Whether the Protestant Church was ever
visible, you write, I will answer, it was not. Which words can have no
Grammatical construction, if you refer them to both parts, or at all to the
latter part, to wit, Whether the names can be showed.


M. Fisher. Let us hear a Syllogism.


D. Featly. In this copulative proposition which you offer for a question, and
require me to prove; either you deny both parts, or one only: if both, I am
to prove both, one after the other; if one only, then you grant the other. A
copulative is not true unless both parts be true; do you deny both, or one
only?


M. Fisher. I say they are but one: for the latter part is to expound the
former: for I mean by visible, so visible, that the names of such visible
Protestants may be showed.


D. Featly. This is to confound two distinct questions in one. For a Church may
have been visible, and yet the names of such visible professors not now to be
showed.


M. Fisher. They are my words, and I am best able to expound my own meaning.


D. Featly. An exposition which the construction of the words will not bear,
is not to be received. But the construction of the words will not bear this
your exposition. Therefore it is not to be received. And is a conjunction
copulative, and must add somewhat to that which goes before. It is all one, as
if you should expound the words of the Apostle, Provide honest things before
God and men, before God, that is, before men.


M. Sweet. What need you stand so much upon this; if there were visible men,
certainly they may be named. Name your visible Protestants, A Romanist standing
by.
and it suffices.

Name visible Protestants in all ages.


D. Featly. It seems you are nominals rather then reals; you stand so much
upon naming: will you undertake to name visible Papists in all ages?

If neither you nor we can name visible professors of our Religions in all
ages, The same Romanist standing by.
for ought I know, the best way for us is, to be all natural men.


D. Featly. This is the right reason of a natural.


M. Sweet. If there were visible Protestants in all ages, certainly they may be
named.


D. Featly. That is a non sequitur, for the reasons before named by me. What
say you to a people of Africa, who (if we may believe Pliny) have no names at
all.


M. Boulton. Yet they have descriptions, and may be known by some periphrasis.


D. Featly. What say you then to the heretics called Acephali, who are so
called, because their head and author cannot be named, nor particularly
described, yet the Author was a visible man. Are all visible men's names upon
record? Are all the records that were in former times, now to be produced?


Here diverse of Mr. Fishers company, called, Names, names, names.

D. Featly. What, will nothing content you but a Buttery book? you shall have
a Buttery book of names, if you will stay a while.


Here diverse of the auditors wished Dr. Featly not to proceed any further in
the disputation, unless Mr. Fisher would suffer him according to the laws of
all disputation, first to conclude the first part of his copulative question,
and then the second: yet D. Featly desirous to bring the disputation to some
better issue before he left it, was content to yield to M. Fishers unreasonable
demand, and conclude both parts of the copulative question in one Syllogism.

D. Featly. That Church whose faith is eternal and perpetual, is so visible,
that the names of some professors thereof may be showed in all ages.

But the faith of the Protestant Church is eternal and perpetual.

Ergo.


M. Fisher. Faith eternal, who ever heard of faith eternal? Saint Paul says,
that faith cease.


D. Featly. You have a purpose, M. Fisher, to cavil; you know my meaning well
enough, by the term perpetual, to wit, that Christian faith which has
continued from Christ's first publishing it till this present, and shall
continue until his second coming. The Church which holds this faith, you
believe shall be so visible, that the names of the professors thereof may be
showed in all ages.

But the Protestant Church holds this perpetual faith.

Ergo.


M. Fisher. Your argument is a fallacy, called, petitio principii.


D. Featly. A demonstration a causa, or a priori, is not petitio principij.

But such is my argument.

Ergo.

Is it not a sounder argument to prove the visibilitie of the professors from
the truth of their faith, then as you do the truth of your faith from the
visibilitie of professors? Visible professors argue not a right faith.
Heretics, Mahumetans and Gentiles have visible professors of their impieties;
yet will it not hence follow, that they have a right belief. On the contrary,
we know by the promises of God in the Scripture, that the Church which
maintains the true faith, shall have always professors more or less visible.


M. Sweet. You ought to prove the truth of your Church a posteriori, for that
is to the question, and not a priori.


D. Featly. Shall you prescribe me my weapons? Is not an argument a priori,
better then an argument a posteriori? This is, as if in battle you should
enjoin your enemy to stab you with a knife, and not with a sword or dagger. I
will use what weapons I list; take you what buckler you can.


M. Fisher. A proof a posteriori is more demonstratiue then a priori.


Here Mr. Fisher shows his Academicall learning, A Protestant sitting by.
in preferring a demonstration a posteriori, before that which proceeds a
priori. Is not a demonstration of the effect from the cause, more excellent
then of the cause by the effect?

From this place and so forward, it was agreed by the disputants, that the
Arguments and Answers should be taken by one common writer, and that the
Opponet D. Featly should set his hand to each several Syllogism; and the
Respondent M. Fisher to his several Answers.

D. Featly. That Church which is so visible as the Catholic Church ought to
be, and as the Popish Church is pretended by M. Fisher to be, is so visible,
that their names may be produced and showed.

But the Protestant Church is so visible, as the Catholic Church ought to be,
and as the Popish Church is pretended by M. Fisher to be.

Ergo.


M. Fisher. I deny the minor.


D. Featly. That Church whose faith is eternal and perpetual and unchanged,
Minor probatur.
is so visible as the Catholic Church ought to be, and the Popish Church by M.
Fisher is pretended to be.

But the faith of the Protestant Church is eternal, perpetual and unchanged.

Ergo the Protestant Church is so visible as the Catholic Church ought to be,
and the Popish Church is pretended by M. Fisher to be.


M. Fisher. I distinguish the mayor. That Church whose faith is perpetual and
unchanged so as the names can be showed, is so visible as the Catholic Church
ought to be, and as M. Fisher pretends the Roman Church to be, I grant it.

That Church whose faith is perpetual and unchanged, yet so as the names cannot
be showed in all ages, is so visible as the Catholic Church ought to be, and
as Mr. Fisher pretends the Roman Church ought to be, I deny it. To the minor
I apply the like distinction; and consequently to the conclusion in the same
manner.


D. Featly What? answer you to the conclusion also? This is a strain of new
Logic.


Mr. Fisher. Toll distinctionem.


D. Featly. All this was spoken, but not committed to the writer.
A strange distinction of the eternity of faith by professors to be named and
not to be named. What are professors nominable or innominable to the eternity
of faith?


M. Fisher. Conclude that which I deny, That the Protestant Church is so
eternal, as the names of all visible Protestants in all ages may be showed.


D. Featly. That Church whose faith is the catholic and primitive faith once
given to the Saints without which no man can be saved, is so perpetual as the
names may be showed in all ages.

But the faith of the Protestant Chruch is the primitive and catholic faith
once given to the Saints, Tollitur distinctio.
without which none can be saved.

Ergo the faith of the Protestant church is so perpetual, as the names may be
showed in all ages.


M. Fisher. I answer to the minor. If this proposition be taken simply in it
self, I absolutely deny it; but if this proposition be considered (as it must
be) as related to the first question and the end thereof, I further add, that
it is not pertinent to that end for which the whole dispute was intended, to
wit, to show to those who are not able by their own ability to find out the
infallible faith necessary to salvation, without learning it of the true
visible Church of Christ; and consequently the visibilitie of the Church is
first to be showed before the truth of doctrine in particular shall be showed.


D. Featly. First, what speak you of those who are not able by their own
abilities to find out faith? These words were also spoken but not set down by
the writer.
is any man able by his own ability, without the help of divine grace? 2.
What helps the visibilitie, to confirm the truth of the Church? Visibilitie
indeed proves a Church, but not the true Church.

Here M. Fisher alleged some words out of D. Field of the Church, supposing
thereby to justify his former answer; whereunto D. Featly promised answer
should be made when it came to their turn to answer; now he was by order to
oppose M. Fisher.


D. Featly. The sum of your former answer was, that the minor of my former
Syllogism was both false and impertinent. It is neither false nor impertinent.
Ergo, your answer is false and impertinent. And first, it is not false.


M. Fisher. I answer to the antecedent, That it is both false and impertinent;
but I add, that for the present it must first be proved to be pertinent, or
else it diuerteth us from the chief end of our dispute, which was, as I said
before, That infallible truth may be learned of the true visible Church, and
not the true visible Church by first finding every particular infallible truth,
and by that to conclude which is the true visible Church.


D. Featly. I prove that the minor is pertinent. That minor proposition which
together with the mayor does necessarily and directly infer the conclusion of
the minor last denied, is pertinent to the probation of that minor denied.

But the minor proposition of the third Syllogism, does necessarily and
directly infer the conclusion of the minor last denied.

Ergo the minor of that Syllogism is pertinent.


Note that M. Fishers answers to every one of these Syllogismes were penned by
him verbatim, with the advice of M. Sweet and one other, aduising privately and
amending what they thought fit, which breeding much delay, irksome to the
hearers; and the Opponent then saying, You are very long M. Fisher. A stander
by said, Let him alone, for he and his learned council are not yet agreed.

M. Fisher. I distinguish the mayor. That minor proposition which together with
the mayor does necessarily and directly infer the conclusion of the minor in
such manner as it may serve for that purpose to which the whole dispute is
ordained, I grant it to be pertinent. But if it do infer the conclusion, yet
not in such manner as it may serve for that purpose for which the whole dispute
was ordained, I deny the mayor.


Here the disputants iarred, and so the writer ceased; yet that which follows
was then delivered by them.

D. Featly. That minor which together with the mayor inferres the proposition
last denied, the whole process having been per directa media, is pertinent to
that purpose to which the dispute is ordained.

But this minor together with the mayor directly and necessarily inferres the
Proposition last denied, the whole processus having been made per directa media.

Ergo it is pertinent to that purpose to which the dispute is ordained.


M. Fisher. Your media in your Syllogismes were directa, but they tended not ad
directum finem.


D. Featly. This is a B^ll, Mr. Fisher. Media directa, yet not ad directum
finem, that is, direct and not direct: for media are said to be directa only
ratione finis.


M. Sweet. Is there not a fault in arguing, called transitio a genere in genus?
when a man by arguing quite leaves the maine question and subject.


D. Featly. I acknowledge that transitio a genere in genus, is a fault in
disputing; but I never heard, that the inference of the effect by the cause was
transitio a genere in genus: such was my argument. For faith in a right
believer produces profession and confession thereof, which makes a visible
member, and the like profession of many members a visible Church. Where the
cause is perpetual, the effect must needs be perpetual. Therefore where the
faith is perpetual, the profession thereof must needs be, and consequently the
visibilitie of the professors thereof. Is this transitio a genere in genus?


A stander by. M. Sweet, you once learned better Logic in Cambridge then you
show now.


Here again those of M. Fishers side calling for names, D. White said, Where
are your names?

D. White. This is nothing but an apparent tergiuersation. You will not answer
any argument directly, nor suffer us to proceed in our arguments; and therefore
I require you Mr. Fisher, according to the order mentioned in the beginning,
for each party to have an hour and a half, that you now oppose, and suffer
me to answer. Prove by Christ and his Apostles, or by any of the Fathers, for
the first 600 years, these present tenets of the Roman Church: viz.

1. That all power of order and jurisdiction in respect of the Churches, is to
be derived from the Church of Rome.

2. That no Scripture, sense or translation thereof is authentical, unless
the same were received from the Roman Church.

3. That the Roman Church only was and is the authentical custos of
unwritten traditions?

4. That all general Councels were called by the sole authority of the Pope;
and that he might ratify and disanull whatsoever pleased him in them.

5. That the Pope only had power to canonize Saints.

6. That the Pope had or has power to depose Princes. Prove all or any of
these, and we will neither carp nor cavil about names, but answer directly,
without all delays, cuasions or tergiuersations.


M. Fisher. When you D. White or D. Featly have proved your Church to be
visible in all ages, and named visible Protestants, then I promise you to prove
the visibilitie of the Catholic Roman Church; but that is not done by you yet.


D. Featly. It had been done but for your delays and tergiuersations; answer
briefly and directly to my former argument, and I will descend to my induction,
and produce the names of such eminent persons as in all ages have maintained
the substantial points of faith, in which we differ from your Roman Church.

That Church whose faith is the catholic and primitive faith once given to the
Saints, without which none can be saved, is so visible, that the names of the
professors in all ages may be showed and proved out of good authors.

But the Protestant Church is that Church, whose faith is the catholic and
primitive faith once given to the Saints, without which none can be saved. Ergo.

The mayor is ex concessis. What say you to the minor?


M. Fisher. I distinguish the minor.


D. Featly. Upon what term do you distinguish.


M. Fisher. I distinguish of the proposition, not of any term.


D. Featly. Here is again another strain of new Logic, to distinguish of a
proposition, and apply the distinction to no term: howsoever, I am glad to
hear you distinguish, and not simply to deny that the Protestant faith is the
Catholic primitive faith. Mark, I beseech you, you that are present, that Mr.
Fisher demurres upon the proposition; his conscience will not suffer him simply
to deny, that the Protestant faith is the Catholic primitive faith; we simply
and flatly, and in downright terms deny that your present Tridentine faith is
the Catholic primitive faith.


M. Fisher. I answered you before, that your minor is false and impertinent.


D. Featly. I have proved already, that it is pertinent: what say you to the
truth of it?


M. Sweet. This is to divert the question: the question is not now, whether our
faith or yours be the catholic primitive faith, but the question now is of
the effect, to wit, the visibilitie of your Church, which you ought to prove
out of good authors.


D. Featly. May not a man prove the effect by the cause? Is there no other
means to prove the effect, but by naming men and producing authors for it?


M. Sweet. An effect is posterius; the question is about an effect; therefore
you ought to prove it a posteriori.


D. Featly. What a reason is this? May not an effect be proved by his cause?
Must an effect be needs proved by an effect? or a posteriori, because an effect
is posterius?


M. Sweet. Leave these Logic disputes; bring the names of your Protestants;
that is it we expect.


D. Featly. If I should relinquish my former argument, to which yet you have
given no manner of answer, you Mr. Fisher would report that I was nonplussed,
as you slandered D. White in a former conference, who (I tell you M. Fisher) is
able to teach us both. Whereto Mr. Fisher replied nothing.


To prevent all such misreports to the wrong of either, it was moved by the
hearers, that is should be written down by the common writer of the
conference, that both the Disputants being willing to proceed, D. Featly was
defired by the company (because it was late) to produce the names of such
Protestants as were extant before Luther in all ages. This being written and
subscribed by them both, D. Featly proceeded to his induction.

D. Featly. An Induction is a form of argument in which we proceed from
enumeration of particulars, to conclude a general, after this manner:

It is so in this and this, and sic de caeteris.

Ergo it is so in all.

According to this form of arguing, thus I dispute:

The Protestant Church was so visible, that the names of those who taught and
believed the doctrine thereof, may be produced in the first hundred years, and
second, and third, and fourth, and sic de caeteris.

Ergo it was so in all ages.

First I name those of the first age; and I begin with him who is the beginner
of all, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, blessed for ever, at whose Name all
knees must bow both in heaven and earth, and under the earth, (at which words
all the company expressed an holy reverence;) after Christ I name the twelve
Apostles, and Saint Paul: and because there were few writers in the first age,
at least whose undoubted works have come to our hands, I name only I gnatius
after the twelve Apostles and Saint Paul.


M. Fisher. These are enough for the first age, Christ, the twelve Apostles,
Saint Paul and Ignatius.


Here at the name of Ignatius some of M. Fishers side seemed very glad and
confident, saying, We are sure enough that Ignatius is on our side.

D. Featly. I mean not the new Ignatius Loyola, but Ignatius the Martyr,
between whom there is more difference in quality, then distance in time.


M. Fisher. Name of all the ages, or else you do nothing.


D. Featly. I cannot name all at once: will you have me name men of so many ages
with one breath? will you have me eat my whole dinner at a bit? can I name
twelve severally, but I must name first one, then two, then three, and so
forward. I name (as I said before) in the first age for our Religion, our
blessed Lord and Savior the Founder of all Religion, the twelve Apostles, and
after them St. Paul and Ignatius the Martyr. For the second age, I name Justin
Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Saint Cyprian; and I begin first with Christ
and his Apostles.


M. Fisher. You shall not begin with Christ and his Apostles.


D. Featly. You are not to make my Induction; I will begin with Christ and his
Apostles; where should I begin but in the first age, and with the first of it:
shall I make a catalogue of the Christian Church, according to the several
ages, and leave out Christ and his Apostles in the first age? Answer first to
them, and I will proceed to others.


M. Fisher. Name the rest in all ages, and then I will answer you.


D. Featly. First answer to the first age, and then I will proceed to the
second. If you grant me the first age, then I will proceed presently to the
second; otherwise I must stay in the first.


M. Fisher. Unless you give me a catalogue of names throughout all ages, I
will not answer.


D. Featly. Will you not answer Christ and his Apostles in the first place?


M. Fisher. I will not before you have named the rest.


D. Featly. Will you not be tried by Christ and his Apostles?

That which Christ and his Apostles taught in the first age, was taught by
succeeding Christians in all ages; this is confessed on both sides.

But the doctrine of the Protestants was taught by Christ and his Apostles in
the first age. Ergo.

Answer this Syllogism, if you will not answer my former Induction.


M. Fisher. I will not answer you any thing till you have made your catalogue.


D. Featly. Mr. Fisher, I charge you, as you will answer it before Christ
himself at the dreadful day of judgment, answer now upon your conscience
before all this company, whether you believe that Christ and his Apostles
taught our faith or yours; this is the maine point of all; answer directly to
my Induction.


Notwithstanding this deep charge, M. Fisher still refused to answer to the
argument of instance in Christ and his Apostles; whereupon diverse thereupon
expressing their distaste at such refusal, desired D. Featly to surceasse,
telling him that he ought not to talk any longer with such a one who refused
to answer Christ and his Apostles. And so the Conference brake up.

This Conference though it took not that progress which was desired, by
reason of the Jesuits tergiuersation, not permitting Dr. Featly to come to the
ripeness of any argument; yet it has not bin fruitless: for since that time,
the aforesaid Mr. Buggs came to Sir Humfrey Lynde, and gave him many thanks for
the said meeting, and assured him that he was well resolved now of his
Religion; that he saw plainly, it was but the Jesuits bragging, without
proofs* and whereas formerly by their Sophistical persuasions he was in some
doubt of the Church, he is now so fully satisfied of the truth of our Religion,
that he does utterly disclaim the Popish priests company, and their doctrine
also.

Upon Monday following, M. Fisher and M. Sweet came unsent for to the house of
Sir Humfrey Lynde, to know of him, whether the parties that had formerly
conferred, would proceed or no; who answered, that if they might confer
privately with leave in some other place, they would easily make good their
cause; and so they parted without further resolution of place or meeting.

Since which time, notice being given by my Lord Bishop of Durham of his
Majesty's pleasure, that the truth of the late Conference should be certified
to his Majesty, and further meetings staid; a Romanist has confidently
auerred to Mr. Buggs, that our side has labored to have all future meetings
touching this occasion forbidden, because we durst not, nor are not able to
make good our assertions against them.

And this is the true relation of the Conference it self, together with the
occasion thereof, and the effect which it produced.

FINIS.

