True Valor

^. Challenge.

Valiantly refused Cowardly accepted

I accepted the Challenge.

Suffer.

fight.

Who stands not in his Li^, Will Choose the right.

I feel him not

I better him.

DVELL-EASE A WORD WITH Valiant Spiritts Showing the abuse of Duells, that
Valor, refuses Challenges and Private Combats.

Quicunque effuderit humanu* Sanguine fundetur sanguis eius. Genesis 9. Who so
Sheddeth man's blood by man shall his blood be Shedd. Genesis 9. Verse. 6. set
forth by G. F. a Defendour of Christian Valor.

I revenge.

I Challenge

Imprinted by* Ann Griffin London. 1635.

Nec enim Lex iustior Vlla. Quam necis artifices art perire sua Nor is there
Law more right* Then that Who draws his brothers blood Shall Spill his own
by fight.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT AND POVVERFVLL PRINCE CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King
of England, Scotland, France, Ireland, Cyprus, etc.
GOD has stored your Majesty with such excellent wisdom, as by it he rules
more then your own kingdoms. You are his Eye for Europe, and at your sacred
girdle, Heaven hangs the Storehouse-keyes of Christian blood.

We may well say it; Since in this age of blood, none has grieved more to
spill it then your Majesty, none labored so much to spare it. You have weakened
its swelling streams, to the anger of puissant Princes.

Had your Armies trodden the banks of Danow; Nations well know, what bloody
floods you had increased; Your Treasure Star has led you a more milken way,
rather to lead Christian orbs quiet, then to hasten them to the wrenching of
their own sinews, satisfied in your self that those who best use the Olive,
will soonest wear the Laurel.

We have lived to see (but o, tears should have curtained our eyes) the
greatest inundation of blood that ever flowed from Christian veins, and that
by so many tides. Great Kings have kept open the sluices, whom in respects most
proper to their boasts of better Religion, it would better become to dry up
those ruddy springs, were it with the loss of their designs and fortunes. Say
Christian drums must needs beat, and bullets fly sometimes to spend of their
own fiery spirits, yet may they not find out a fitter Enemy in Asia, or frame
one out of Africa? Heaven has only enlightened your Majesty to abhor
deluges of homicides, wallowing in baptized blood. Your reg^ll beams of piety
most advisedly reflected, that all quarrels are not to be decided by the
sword, nor every difference to make its full point at Tyburne. More, even in
Kings, desires, although just, must not always be obtained, all cannot be had,
many but at seasons, and of those which may be had, some ought to suffer a
bar, but such as shall be warded with ages of happiness. Not upon a crossing
of I will have, are bowels to be drawn out by the Hangman, or lims suddenly
severed by Armies; humane blood is a liquor not to be stirred without much
warines; if wrongs draw it, it gusheth not out without crying to Heaven.
Sanguis clamat de Genesis 4.
terra. The greatest wit, Aristotle instructing a most valorous Prince says,
Parce effundere sanguinem humanum. Arist. ad Alex.
Draw not the blood of men by rivers, but by drops. What Art offered to
Alexander, your Majesty holds by Nature; whereby our Albania, better
claymeth now her name from the candorous splendor of your Royal Scepter then
from her native Rocks. This your Majesty's most wary disposition to prevent a
waste of men, wingeth my hopes flying to your Majesty's feet with these few
leaves, which cover or discover (as your Majesty's bright shining eye shall
open, or close them) some few Antidotes to prevent and cure a fiery distemper,
a Consumption, or waste of blood fatal to the noble bowels of your kingdom.
These times have begotten this idle belief in the brave ones, and they will
own it; that who is stained by any abuse is bound in honor to scour it by a
challenge, and he from whom the mistake first slipped, must presently be drawn
to Calis sands: whence if the one be carried to a grave, the other walks home
with honor.

Your radiant wisdom to the high glory of your Diadem enlightneth and
rectifieth this mervailously mistaken way. May a dueller raise honor, because
death stumbled upon the better man? No, it is not ever the lot of the Valiant
or Innocent, to be death-free in Combats, there are confused uncertainties:
death is not always borne by strong arms, nor does the mightiness of Manhood
always cite it: sometimes a sand under foot, a Moate in the Eye, a very silly
misfortune brings it. But alas, this is a disease of cradle-courage: duellers,
take them at any action of able men, and we shall find honor, and them of
very small acquaintance: yet forsooth they become honour-sicke; for they deem
their honor must needs dye, unless they drink the blood of the bravest.

Will Kings suffer them so precious a Niceph. lib. 7. hist Eccl. cap. 33. Bar.
to. 3. Annal. ad an. Dom. 324.
potion? it is physic too chargeable for a Kingdom. Great Constantine was
but once allowed humane blood to cure his direful disease, he thought it too
dear for a Caesar; and must mean duellers daily to cure a distemper merely
in fancy, be permitted blood, not of Infants, but of men? yea the stoutest;
for commonly to the meaner man an abuse is given, and to the better a
Challenge; for by the better spirit, as readiest to spend its metal, the
affront is offered, and by the baser creature, a Challenge is thrust on, as not
able to creep into Honor, but by the casualty of a combat, where a desperate
Coward is often Victor against a Hector.

By this means is a way oft-times Proc^am 11. Jacob.
found to draw blood out of the breasts of your Majesty's best servants, and
daily there are lost brave subjects; which moved your Father of happy memory
our dread Sovereign Lord King ^ames, to thunder out by his Proclamations and
Edicts, severe punishments against all hatchers of Challenges, and putters on
of such counterfeit manhood.

We hope your Majesty will renew and endow them with a double vigor:
penalties may be put up upon such as provoke duels, and a way laid open to an
easy redress of wrongs by whomsoever offered: So shall you become an English
Augustus, and we will say with Seneca, excubat Principis cura pro salute
singulorum: Seneca de brevit vitae.
omnium domos tua diligentia defendit, omnium delitias tua industria; your
Princely care assures all men safety, freeing your fair dominions from the
canker of Duellisme, and fond Mothers shall owe unto you their darlings. Why
may not Laws cure losses of honor, as well as of life and fortunes? Let him
keep his council whom wrongs privately pinch, and they are cured; if abuses
further vent into an open noise, the Marshals court may arraigne them; when the
matter is scarce perceptible: it is much, so small a weapon should hurt one,
and such a person is too delicate, tender, and unfit to live among men that
must bristle: but if there be left a scarre, a blemish to be seen; your
Majesty may graciously provide for a fair satisfaction, and when wrongs be
such as dare not produce, but must hide their cause, there is no right owing
them, as no light to darkness.

Here I lay down my pen, and deities; being to be adored at a distance. From
my chamber in the Temple, I kiss your Majesty's Royal feet, and with all
happiness to your Crown and Person; for which I am ready cheerfully to pawn
the life of

Your faithful and most humble subject. G. F.

Preface.
To the Gentle Reader.
FRom the press I come to Paul's, to be gazed on by many: some will read and
guess at my good meaning, that it was not so much to keep steel out of
sight, as to keep manhood in possession: and that my leaves of Paper are not
for cowards to shelter themselves under. I do not aim to oppose true valor,
by branding it with ignominy: I guild not the dross of mankind with glorious
excuses: the brave-worded faint-hearts with warranties of their effeminate
weakness. I rather do honor unto manlike courage, and wish it long life.

I truly apprehend valor a precious Jewel; therefore not to be handled
disrespectfully: a principal ornament in a well ordered common weal,
therefore not to be abused by every horse-groome, not to be trampled in every
tavern, nor to wayt upon every fond lover: with freedom may I speak it;
valor is not to be hazarded upon mean enterprises, but to be laid up for
dearer times: by it Kings do hold their scepters, without it Equity will fall
out of credit, and the world shall not dare to show a good liking to honesty:
men must keep courage to look vice in the face; to make it to hear its own
name. And in this respect there is great oversight in the havocke of valorous
spirits, which daily the power of vulgar opinion makes perish in Duells.

Yet I do not generally denounce an exile to all Duels, from al countries,
from all occasions; sometimes they have their lawfulnes; the unadvised are
insufferable, and such I desire to suppress: the too too much levity in
falling into wrath, turns the merit of courage into a mere shadow, which
ever follows, but such as wander out of the light of reason, misled by strong
passion: for certainly when the causes of quarrels are no bigger than little
sands, they lie only on the eye of such, as are over flowne with an Ocean of
Anger.

To the Dueller.
YOu will say I deal with brave Duellers, too too discourteously: favor me,
it is your Vice I kick at; I both honor and extol your valor. Be not
offended, if I say Duels be bad, that they are acts unlawful, unluckie, that
the combater breeds most mischief to himself when he is victor, when he
kills his Adversary: I do but tell you what the nature of Duellisme is. You
will needs notwithstanding make a challenge, you will go to the field, when
you rage: but understand, you go out of your way, I show it you, you are in
the dark, in a passion; what harm do I unto you, if I light you with a
candle? Stout Pericles, the mirror of Athens and forty Bas. hom. 24 de
legendis libris Gentilium.
years ruler of that common wealth, heard one a whole day wrangling and
reviling him; provoking him from the word to the sword; and when the currish
fellow had done barking, Pericles lighted him home with a lantern. You are
enraged, you will answer the Duel; I will but light you with a lantern, that
you may see what a foul thing you go about; how injurious to your self, to
your King, to your country: how you make your self a mere child in suffering
your self to be led by the sleeve to the field like a babie: you make your
self a Bedlam by running into fury and frenzy: Did you desire Honor, to be
thought valiant; I do here show you wherein true Honor, and true Valor does
consist: if yet ye will leave the true for the shadow, and being hungry, will
choose painted meats before the wholesome; blame not me for warning you,
before you fill your self with wind, which will shame you.

You will tell me I presume, when I talk of valor: it is out of my element,
valor is in the highest region of the fire, and I in low water, cold, snowy,
the point of the pen, ever has had small acquaintance with the point of the
weapon: none but Eagles can look on bright valors rays: I am but an Owl that
flies by night, and use not the world by day light, where when men's courages
rise up, there must be rushing to whet them, else manhood will grow rustie. I
commend in you the care of valor, keep it, but loose not your wits, keep
altogether and know from me; some may want skill to use their weapons and not
want knowledge to use courage, and to teach you. Gladiatores perfectissimos
(says Tertullian) non tantum magistri, sed etiam Idiotae quique adhortantur
Tertull. ad Mar. c. 2.
de longinquo, et saepe de ipso populo dictata, suggesta profuerint, you most
expert swordmen, Gladiatores perfectissimos, call me Idiot in arms: Idiote,
but yet, confess a mean skill, can tell you in your ear something that will
do you good, when your swords are clashing: de ipso populo suggesta profuerint.

To the Schooleman.
I Have affected brevity, because I speak unto passion, that never stays
long to hear any thing. I come not often to the school for the definition of
things, that's too fine a thread for bleere-eyed quarellers to look on: it
suffices me to have a quiet word with plain reason, not caring much for
formality in persuasion, which it self indeed is not much in use (as men use
to say now a days) in a Nation that so little suffers to be persuaded to
any thing, though fondly led to most things, by creatures of no choice, not by
any good quality, but by a kind of fancy: Preachings and persuasions, say
many, may be found for any caprich: as if reasoning were a kind of Iugling,
fast and loose, or that becommed not rational creatures, to be led by reason,
no more then to be led by the nose: Men claim not that name, until they can
lead themselves; the Cannot becomes only women and children. I run often upon
Examples, because they delight longer, and move stronger: of what we see other
worthies have done, perchance we may take to do something, whiles we will be
persuaded to nothing; in matter of knowledge, our own must ever be the best,
because (as we pretend) we see circumstances, we see presidents: and there are
fashions of passions, as well, as of apparel, which the power of opinion will
have followed.

To the Common wealths-man.
IT is you that sit in gowns; that must overrule weapons: cedant arma togae. I
dare not require my pen to Cic. in epist.
reach unto Virtue, that were to be ieered at: I ask but Order, and ask no
more, but what a civil commonwealth must grant me: I pray assistance. If you
bid me reflect, that boiling youth, and their fiery vayns, are not yet fit, for
the still music of the heavens, I know it; yet in many kingdoms the God of
this world gathers up brave youth in clusters; whiles indeed in some
countries heaven finds but a poor picking: let hot spurs in these inferior
orbs, where so much striving and struggling is for means and manners, feel
what is for the best advantage of the universe: so grace them, and make you
them wear the diamond of valor, now and then, with a foil, I say not of
Piety, but of Christianity: your wisdoms be pleased to effect it. If men must
now and then, hew one another limbs; yet let them not go on, like wild
beasts; of these, their fights and Fates end together, and have no after
reckonings: but men must come again before a just God; therefore help them to
keep good quarter: and you that are the Treasurers of the Commonwealth,
increase your treasure, give them a good behavior, which may keep them, so
they will keep it: bind them to Peace, and I will end, and hold mine.

To the courteous Reader.
GEntle Reader, it was the authors intent to have presented thee with a
complete receipt for the cure of this bloody flux, wherewith the gallants of
our age are too much distempered, but some intervenient occasions unhappily
diverting the current of his endeavors to another course, he has not been
able to comply with his earnest desires, yet having already prepared some few
sheets for the press, he judged it not inconvenient to communicate them with
thee, as an essay and pledge of what he intends to perfect hereafter: hoping
they may prove as sometimely preparatives, to assuage and mitigate the sharp
and corrosive humors, wherewith many hearts are unnaturally tormented. And if
he shall find the success in this kind to be in any reasonable degree
correspondent to his desires and expectation. I make no question, but he will
esteem their ease not only a sufficient recompense for his forepassed
endeavors, but also a forcible encouragement for their further cure, to
accomplish that which ye^ ^^mayneth unperfect. The fruits whereof thou may
expect this next term: till when and ever, I wish thou may enjoy thy self
in perfect peace and patience: which is no less my desire, than the Authors
intent.

Section I. Reason Pleads against the custom of Duelling.
1 The first founders of duells were base Creatures. 2 By duell-Law, wise men
must follow fools. 3 Strength, can be no trial of truth. 4 To enter a Duel,
is to turn thief. 5 The Dueller, always mistakes his enemy.
DVellers are fraught, with most violent passion: therefore, they must needs
be voydest of reason. Reason is a light, Passion is darkness: what is more
contrary to light then darkness? Hence, I find Duellisme, though it creep
into use, can be but a blind custom. Some men will affect a custom, for
their respect due to the beginner of it: in that, may appear reason: but see,
who were the first devisers of Duells.

Point. 1.
Plea. 1. The first founders of Duells were base Creatures.
DVells and Devils begun together. Lucifer conceited himself the better
creature, and would not give wall to man made of a mould-hill: he worded the
matter, with the master, stepped to his face, Ascendam, and told him to his
teeth, Esaias. 14.
he was as good as God: Similis ero altissimo: upon this quarrel, Lucifer and
Michael met, with their seconds: the valiant Archangell (with leave) came to
close Apoc. 12.
fight: and the lawless challenger Lucifer, with his seconds fell. Here lie
the first Duellers, and their fortune. After these quarrelling spirits were
sent to hell: I hear no more of combats, till the fashion of Cowards came in.

Cowards and chalengers, came hand in hand into the world together. Scarce had
God made ground, for men to work upon: when Cain, an idle fellow, that had
many obligations at home, yet spent his time all abroad in hunting: whilst
Abell, his younger brother did play the good husband: and therefore the Lord
loved him, Cain hates him, and makes it a quarrel. Cain will prove himself
the better Genesis 4.
man by a combat: when good men be all gone, Cain hops to come into election.
Like a wretched Coward he inveagles Abell to the field, eamus in Agrum, without
weapon: and suddenly sets upon him, and kills him. Here I show you the next
dueller.

So Duellisme brings its badge of infamy, even from the beginning; Inquire the
worthies, whom maintainers of Duels do imitate, you will find but Devils and
Cowards. Therefore let noble spirits, yield thus far unto reason, that
Duellisme in the cradle, deserves no love, for the fathers sake: and let us go
nearer it, to look if reason will afford any better regard for its own
merits.

Duel law is, that differences must be tried by the weapon: as wrongs will all
the year be budding, so men must ever be bleeding. Duellisme, is a game;
where you shuffle swords, and the maddest gamester has ever the leading: so
that, one maine thing in this hot sport, is, that wisemen must follow fools.
If a fellow gaze at noone and swear it is night, nay will swear it by the
sun that shines, and say you lie if you deny it, and challenge you, and go
to the field, why, there goes a fool: and you must follow him: else by staying
at home, you loose your honor, and where? nay I cannot tell, nor you neither,
where you had it.

Point. 2.
Plea. 2. By Duell-law wisemen must follow fools.
Will you see, two wise challenge-makers, stuffed with honor, as a goose with
groates? which is but for wise men to Relatum mihi a side digni^.
feed on: Both were big-lookt soldiers: our happy age did bring them: the
lofty low-countryes did breed them: amongst the most warlike troops of Europe.
The one set to dice, and proved unlucky; his money being out, his mettle got up,
and from dicing, he would needs to duelling, but wanted matter: he spies on his
own head a black hat, he casts that down bravely, and swears it is white.
This champion fights not now, for the beauty of his mistress, but for his old
hat: if any dare gain say him; he does challenge, and will kill: thus he
crakes up and down, like a gander. The rest of the flock, were fluttering in
their game, and so the challenge stays unanswered. Till anon, another of the
hopeful company, was cast away on the same shore, the waves or the knaves had
swallowed up his money: and away sayleth he to give a cross challenge, for now
he that was fooled out of his money, he was in the right cue of a Dueller: he
will challenge; and fight, and kill, and looks black: and all, to maintain
the hat was black.

Just, our Duellers now adays: much to the like, or lesser purpose, our
quarrels: for a false smile of a beauty; a simple conceit, of some hollow
friend: a light mistake of a foe, things all of no value, a challenge must
pass, must have its answer: else honor go exiled for ever. That such men are
not wise, I say not: but surely, to be a follower of such men, is a very poor
service, for honor.

If a Bedlame in known attire, arms naked, and cap-feathered, challenge you,
to hurl your self down a rock, and break your neck: though he lead to
the bottom upon the same terms, shall you be termed a Coward, if you follow
him not? In Westminster, if those grave Senates, were challenged by
plaintiffes; must all the Judges, rise ftom the Bench, run to cutlers and buy
swords, thence to S. James his fields: and make of their books bucklers? what
confusion of mankind? would not this heavily be censured in Star chamber,
that such able men, follow such weak ones? And is it not, as punishable; when
men by their blood, of great worth: by their nature, of excellent wit: by their
experience, of singular wisdom: do cast all these good merits, into the flame
of a Duel, only because some inconsiderate man does challeng them Valor,
should ever think it base, to lie open, unto every ones anger: to wait at a
mad-caps heels, to be at hand whenever he calls to the field: there ought
to be a greater distance, between courage and folly, between greatness and
weakness.

Lewis the 12 of France, when in a lower fortune, ^yps^ Mon^^. Polit. lib. 2.
c. 12.
he was but Duke of Orleance, suffered a great abuse from some peers, and was
thoroughly sensible thereof, he minded to right himself by his weapon, and
reach his enemy to the heart: the mean time advanced him from a Dukedom (of
Orleance,) to a kingdom, of France, and now sitting so high, he has quite
lost the sight of quarrel: he fancieth not any feeling of it: his nobles,
friendly remember him, to revenge himself: no says Lewis. Parum de little est
regi Galliarum iniurias illatas Aurelianorum ducibus ulcisci; it becomes not a
king to take up so low a quarrel: that were, to wreath the Scepter with
disgrace, to hang the crown upon infamy. The affront did call, but upon a
Duke, Iniurias Aurelianorum ducibus illatas, why shall a king follow it? when
the creature which offends, is but mean, and is too base, for a Lion-courage
to prey upon?

Thus you (if you hold your self worthy) should discourse with your self;
when you are called to combat, say you will not stir, not because you are too
weak, but because you are too great: what lies too far below us, is as far
out of our reach, as what is placed too far above us; cast a stone at the
stars, they will not send you a challenge by night, they cannot fight with such
Lownes as you: They know their glory is too high for you to blemish, or hope to
offend: therefore, they can have no cause to be angry with you. So you know your
self, to be a bright star of valor, a spark of the planet Mars, and scorn
to come near little ones. If a child revile you; will you cite him, wild to
the field? why, quarrelling duellers, are but children; they know no more where
they set their feet when they go to the field, no more to govern themselves,
nor their weapons, then if they were babies; and it were good, the nurse should
swadle again their arms up, they use them so crookedly; they will never keep
their fingers out of their mouths, all the strength of their arms hangs still
at their tongues end. O Gentlemen of worth and of honor! when you are by some
fiery hot-spur challenged to the field, say with King Lewis, Parum decorum est
ulcisci, look upon the greatness of your own valor, and do not abuse it,
by using it so meanly. It is cowardly: a man, all clothed in steel, to draw
upon a man naked? I hold it worse, a man fortified with valor, to set upon a
weakeling quareller? it is ever a weakness of stomach to turn sour at
every morsel: and quarelling spirits are certainly of the softest kind of
metal; every little touch does so bruise them, that they will leake blood
presently. The worthier you are, the less warrant you will still find, to
follow a quareller to the field: which ponderation Holy court.
moved Augustus Caesar that most valiant and victorious Prince, Prudently to
refuse Mark Anthony his rash and indiscreet defiance, commanding the
challenge-bearer for to tell Anthony, that when he was weary of his life, he
could find other more noble means to be deprived of it, then in hazarding it
with Anthony in single combat: so (that is much to be lamented) this base
combating humor, has so far crept into honor, and that it lurkes most in
good blood: whilst the infection, cannot spread amongst meaner Persons; it
seems these are grown to a stronger constitution of manhood.

This was it: the wiseman teaching to our times, Eccles. 10. 7.
so much wondered at: Vidi says he, servos in equis, Principes ambulantes in
terra, A strange sight! I see a mean man, hot in passion, provoked mightily by
his foe, grown so furious, that you would judge rage runs away with him
beyond all reason: and yet he handles the raines of his passion so well, he
keeps his saddle sure that he falls not, vidi servos in equis: he holds still
that command over himself, that none can draw him a Duelling: he feels, it
must be his own undoing: in pursuit of his right: he appeals still, from his
own arm, unto a court of justice. And yet, those that wear honor out at the
elbowes: and the world calls, its best men: at the very first guird of anger,
loose their stirrops, and reele, vidi Principes in terra: they follow they know
not whither, any passionate man, that will lead them: and wilfully, will carry
their wrongs, to trial bysteele, contemning all legal causes, as though, all
gentlemen's rights, must admit of no other probatur, but the rapier.

Point. 3.
Plea. 3. Strength, can be no trial of truth.
THis giddy Duelling: is no fruit of honor, it is the worm of honor: a fit
of falling sickness, of manhood: when reason, is out of doors, and souls
are cast, quite past their senses. But will you come to your self; and hear
reason! Your enemy, offended you; why, so he did the law too; then let law
punish him, for you both, rather leave the weapon, to the stronger hand: let
law answer the challenge; so will you be sure to revenge, your king will be
your second.

If you grow out of love, with kings laws: and to come by your right, you will
call no jury, but fury: whosoever makes of you (as you say) an ass, you will
make of him an ox, and knock him in the head. Let us then, pull Littletons
quoyfe over his eyes, and turn the blind fool out of Westminster: we will
make that hall, a goodly shambles: of Inns of Courts, we will devise fencing
schools: and will have, no more assizes: all care must be, to find out a
lusty butcher, that can knock down readily. Whosoever, has best skill in
arms, shall have best right, to others lands: (we will have a new conquest)
if you deny, the strongest man's right; he shall give you the lie, and boar a
hole in your bosom, and that way come into possession. The truest tongue,
shall ever grow nearest the lustiest shoulders: and from the stoutest mouth,
you must always gather verities: Nay, we will pass into trades: the
valiantest tailor, shall do your work, so you may go out of fashion: the
lustiest mason, shall be your layer, so your house may fall on your head. And
such be the consequences of unruly courage.

These like tenets, are too mad; to pass for current, amongst men. One will
fight, will kill, to prove himself the valianter man; that is no good
consequence. It may be your enemy his foot failed him, not his heart, he
stumbled; so you killed him: His weapon forsook him, not he, the action; so
you overtooke him. The wrenching of a sinew, hindered the right rule of his
sword, whereby you got within him: so, you reached him his deadly wound. And
thus, the valianter man; ofttimes dies.

Go on: and let us hear, your further discourse: your enemy gave you the
lie, therefore you will fight, you will kill him; to prove that your self
speaks, more truth then he: That is a worse consequence: strength of body, and
true dealing, fall often a sunder: if every word, the strong man speaks, must
pass for current truth: that Ancient, was a very fool, which first invented a
Polyphemus; a mighty strong fellow, and yet with one eye only: compacted, with
strong limbs, and weak sight: a face, with a single Eye, and it out of the
way, in his forehead, in this pendent-haire fashion now a days, he would be
always hud-winked. Surely Ulysses had done great mischief to the world, in
putting out that one eye, had he not presently knocked out his brains: for,
we should have had, a fellow as blind as a betle, most strong, most powerful,
and so turn teacher of every body: for, all truth, must be delivered from his
mouth, his lips only keeps the treasure of wisdom: from him, we must take
new doctrines, new councels, new customs, and every body must believe him,
after his eyes be out, else every body must be knocked in the head; because,
he is strong enough to do it.

If strength must thus maintain truth: then let us resolve first, who is the
strongest man in a country; let that man prate at pleasure; fair maidens must
owe unto him, their good names: and gentlemen their good blood. If you once
find the strongest man of a kingdom: he may freely geere, and discourse. Let
him say; there is no honor, in peace: no valor, in war: Captains, be but
kettles, of base extraction: some, forced, for fear of the pothookes, to hang
over the fire of war; as not able, at home, to keep open kitchings. Others,
often, boil ever; they enrich themselves, so fast. Most, the rather maintain
fire of dissension about them, to have meat within them. Let him say: that men,
are but frogs in ho^e and dublet: quackers, that women are but bundles of
doubts, moved up and down by the wind fi^kers. Let him say: there is, no
enclosure upon earth: no kings, in the stock: no great cards, but coted
knaves; some bigger, some lesser, some thinner in clothes, some mufled in
larger garments: and knaves all, that shuffle the queances, amongst them. And
all this, must be so: nay, though, as he denies a king on earth, so he deny
unto the heaven, a godhead.

And all this must be true, because he is the most strong man, that says so:
and will challenge you, if you deny it: and proves all by the sword, as by a
most bright argument. Is not all this, against reason? when strength carries
away truth, what shall poor women have? they must speak never a true word;
and so their amorous swordmen, shall have work enough, to make, for every lie,
a quarrel.

O Inconsiderate Duellers, will no reason force you, to put up your weapons?
but still, they play, to gain you honor: then, take this point; they can win
you, no honor, but what must be stained, with Infamy. I know, honor and
wealth, are things in great price. But hark; a tall fellow, that never sowed,
will now gather wealth upon the highwayes: and you, like it not: such moneys,
come in basely; who will have them so must be a thief: why no otherwise you,
the honor which you get by murdering, is as base; when you duellize, you
latronize: when you project combats, you do noe otherwise then as in an honest
neighborhood, to turn thief: and who protects you, is no better, then a
receiver of the e^es.

Point. 4.
Plea. 4. To enter a Duel is to turn Thief.
IN a Duel, what do you strive for? life: why, that is not yours: when you
rob a man of his life, you steal it; then if you go a combating, you go a
stealing. You kill your enemy, you expose your self, to be killed; why, you
dispose of things, none of your own; that is but a trick of a thief. Your
life, God has given it, to your king; and unto you, but the loan of it: the
king keeps it, for his own turn; you may take the use of it, in your own
affairs, only during the kings pleasure: when the king calls for it, to the
war, or his other service, you must carry it: is it not then, against all
reason, that you should spoil your life when you will? May one murder
himself in the field? no heathen dare say it: why, neither can you carry your
self to field, to be murdered by any other: you are accessory to both crimes,
equally; a stranger, should have, rather less power over your life, then you
have your self; so, you foulely mistake, in concurring with any, to kill you.
You will call any private man, thief, that drives but a beast off your ground,
and sels it: that takes, against your will, but a crust out of your house, and
casts it to the dog: and will not you call him a worser thief, that snatcheth
a soul, out of a living body, and casts it perchance to the devil.

Your life is not your own; God keeps it for his own use; there are two
Joint lords of your life; God, and Caesar; God will have you, to live longer,
to pay him services: God, is Lord of the Honor: and he will have you live a
longer term. Gods bailey Reason, warns you, that it is not fit, you should
remove out of Gods f^alty, disrespectfully: you cannot leave Gods service
suddenly, at your pleasure, or displeasure; take heed, it will bear an action,
in the leet of heaven.

This reason, was so strong, that in a great uprore, it held the courage, of
the valiant Weneslaus king of Bohemia, in very good order. His brother
Bodeslaus, set upon him furiously, striking with every blow to kill: king
Weneslaus manfully defending himself, unweaponed his brother, whom spreading
now upon the ground, when the waves of anger in Weneslaus, would have swallowed
up Bodeslaus, when just fury did cry, kill and revenge. At that instant,
reason strikes in, and Weneslaus reflects, what he is going about: to take
away, a life, unto which indeed he has right, because he is Caesar; but yet
God has also a right unto it; and therefore, Weneslaus resolves to meddle no
further with it: but sheatheth his steel, and says those golden words:
mallem ut fraterdeo sanguinis reddat rationem, quam si ego in fratrem manus
iniecero, et fratris necis ^^usam apud (...). Polit.
Deum dicere compellerer. I will not adventure to steal out of the world a
life, for the which, in a higher court, one day, I must come to trial: let my
brother, keep his life, and answer in Court himself, for it.

Why will not subjects, submit unto reason, that forced so mighty a prince:
when they be called to combats, may they not without blushing, speak after so
warlike a king, and refuse, least necis causam apud deum dicere compellerer. I
will not run away with men's lives, and have a punishing God at my heels. But
our Duellers will gather lives, as leaves: and mow men's heads, with as much
pleasure, as husbandmen do their meadows. Neither God nor king, shall keep
them from killing men, they will drink blood to cool their choler: and rather
then want it, they will go so far out of all reason, that they will take the
lives of those that never offended them: they will bereave innocence, of its
possession: it seems they will fight, for no other cause, but to show they can
kill.

Point. 5.
Plea. 5. The Dueller mistakes always his enemy.
HOw often, has it happened* that in a sudden distaste, you mistook your
iniurer; you struck, and did not touch, the man that wronged you. Let reason,
here in a corner, talk with you a little, of things out of fight. We all
know, we have unknown Foes; and a bosom enemy still bites nearest the
heart: a wound, least in eye, is most in danger. To open the truth to you; the
Devil is your greatest enemy, he brought the man, which you term your
abuser, to the Alehouse; to squabble with you, there: do not then challenge
the Drunkard, but charge the Devil: else, you mistake your enemy; you use to
say, you will fight with the Devil; why strike him now, when Man does strike
you. More, it is drink, that has been the brocher of all the quarrel, and
has stirred the man, against you: else, all had been quiet: then turn the
drink, up and down the floor, and tumble not the Drunkard: but pity, to
see, how the Devil plies him with fire and water, with fury and small Ale.

If you do otherwise; you are so far out of reason, that you turn an
irrational creature: you turn Cur: Simile quiddam canibus admittis, says
Basil, speaking ^^s. hom. de ir^.
of the quarrelling man, qui saxa mordere solent, non jactantes: Cast a stone
at a dog, and how quick he will meet it in the field! what a combat, what a
gnawing, what a pawing; O had the dog but a sword by his side, what a brave
Dueller he would make! And all the while of this doggishnesse, there is no
looking, where is the man that did hurt the dog, no notice taken of the hand
that moved the stone to set at the dog, and did all the mischief.

So you Duellers: You use a just dog-trick, when you carry your selves so
^^^^ishly toward him tha^ thumpes you with heavy words: it is true, he it
is, whose breath does touch you: it is him, you feel: and from whom comes
your smart: yet he is, but the stone, and very like it, blind and heavy:
reflect then, there is another hand, which does throw him at you, which wheels
him, and violently casts him upon you. Therefore in all reason, in hunc hominum
interfectorem, iram transfer: the Devil is the iniurer, and feign would be
your murderer, hominum interfectorem: therefore, turn all your hatred upon
the Devil: it is crafty Satan, that sets on a fellow blind with passion, to
anger you; take pity, to see, how the devil plays upon him, making him a
block to lie in your way to stumble at, fratris in te peccantis miserere,
commiserate, when you feel him under you, remembering it was the devil, that
laid him there.

Does your enemy abuse you in a public meeting, does he invite you to a
bosom full of your blood? aliquis te infestat says Chrysostom, is he very
peevish with you? yet look not after him, in ipsum ne respice, it is not worth
your labor; you will never come that way within reach of him that did you the
wrong in daemonem instigantem iram funde, engage your rage, your courage, in
setting upon the Devil. You may arm your self with weapons of proof;
wherewith you may anger him: be but patient and meek, you will fret him
mightily: be humble, you give him a great buffet; use any goodness, and you
will stabbe his very heart; keep but one grain of grace, and he dare never
tarry with you. Why will you not then, lay down your sword, wherewith you
mistake your enemy, and take up some better weapons, wherewith you might beat
the devil your murderer.

Thus you see, how Duellisme, is every way against reason: the dueller mistakes
his masters, they be devils, cowards, or fools: he mistakes his way; to the
trial of truth: he mistakes himself, to make himself a thief: and lastly,
he mistakes his enemy: and having mistaken himself so many ways, he runs
yet into further mistakings; he does mistake his God, for he goes about to
set up a new Deity, and ^o heave the true God out of heaven.

Section II. It is prime valor, to put off Challenges, and to suffer.
Either,
1. To shun the greater harm. Or, 2. To be master of your own courage. 3. To
reserve your valor for weightier employments. 4. To overcome your self.
THere is no speaking to some Sparks. Men are many times of so stubborn
Spirits, that God himself, let him say any thing contrary to their minds,
rather than endure it, they will do themselves a mischief. A Hot Spur,
before he will bear a small distaste one hour, will break his own neck
for ever.

God forbade a lusty Captain, to taste a Honeycomb 1 Reg. 14. 27.
which hung in a tree: he snuft at it, and grew distempered: he apprehended it
unworthy so tall a Fellow, to be checked like a Child, not eat but with
license; and he lifted up his Truncheon, (against God) touched the Honey,
bearing it to his lips, so, pitifully mildewing a plentiful Harvest of
victories, and blasting the future springs of all his flourishing fortunes. Who
could imagine a Soldier, would so much to his loss, strive with God for a
lick of Honey?

From a great Queen, God took but one Apple: Genesis 2. 17.
and yet left it her growing, to beautify her Garden: But charged her, not to
eat it; God reserved it, for his own dish: he advised her, not to mind it:
she termed that a scorn of her sovereignty, to chide her fancy; quarrelled
with God about it, and heaped a world of sorrows and wants, unto her self and
all her children. Who would believe, a Queen of the earth, to contend with the
King of Heaven for an apple? But read the Chronicles of Palestine, and see Genesis
3 16.
what befell them both, for striving with their betters; and learn thereby to
go slowly into distastes against your greater.

Point 1.
Suffer. 1. It is true valor, to suffer, when you must lose, by striving.
IT is prime valor, often times, to suffer: for no other reason, but because one
that is above you, (by Scepter, or Crozier, by might, or craft) will have you
suffer; and you cannot hinder it, but by doing your self more hurt, than all
your suffering can mount unto: in such a case, I say, true valor does bid you,
not seek revenge, but force your self to suffer: you show stoutnesse, to dare
look an abuse in the face, and not to squeale out at the first touch of it. You
call it courage, to submit to the Surgeons knife, when a disease has made him
your Master: so if your weakness makes a mean man way to master you, you show
good metal, when you let him cut you: for you fence still a greater mischief
off, with a lesser: and prove, it rests in no enemies power, to lay on you
what load he please: you will take up your own burden; that is manlike. To
live free from all sufferings, were to live beyond the rate of mortal men: a
mean Cottenger makes often times a mighty man suffer. The difference between
valiant and cowardly spirits I find is, that valor will be still his own
carver; whilst cowards do gape, like Cewetts, when you bob them under the
chin. The stout man can for his advantage, hold his own snarlish nose to the
Grindstone, when it grows too sharp, and dull the edge of honor: he will
suffer a lash of disgrace, or discontent, to get free from a more burdensome
evil: and to wind himself into a better occasion, to get his right, to
punish his abuser, and not abuse himself too.

Certainly, men ought not to be so pettish with God and man: means should be
used, to bring suffering a little more into credit and practice: suffer a great
man, sometimes, be it but for his greatness. If great God, will take from you
your honey, your delight, your apple, your profit; strive not therefore; you
and God grow not to be enemies. A greater, a craftier, a peevisher man than
your self, will have some of your ancient rights from you: why, if he will
needs snatch them, be not presently a struggling; beat him not out of breath,
with dry blows of bags of money: if you waste your treasure in Law, so you
join with your enemy to undo you: never fetch a golden fee over the bar at
Westminster, because a great man leaps over your hedge a hunting: fence not a
little harm off with a mighty one: that is not to be Prudentes sicut
Serpents; upon every distaste Matthew. 10. 16.
be not a striving. A great heart may stand a time under a great burden of
wrongs, and the stoutest shoulders rise not upon the legs that are the quickest
kickers.

Abraham was a man of good rank in the world, Genesis 12. 1.
and had great wealth, a fair house, certain and goodly demeanes in Vr and
Haran: his Landlord God, upon a small warning turns him out a doors, sets
house and lands over his head to another. Abraham is silent, he never
questioneth God in the high Chancerie of his mercies. Abraham knew his time to
suffer, And he suffers more yet; He has but one son, upon whom he had
bravely builded the hopes of a Gen 22. 2.
mirth of posterity, all the comfort of those ages: God will needs make a
Calfe of this Son, and knock him on the head, as a Victime unto the
Almighty. Abraham carries his son to the slaughter.

Caius Caesar had a subject stout, wealthy, and honorable: he was of the order
of Knights, the only Nobility of those ages, when Dukes now deny, Kings
claimed no place at the side of the Scepter. This noble Knight was father to a
hopeful Heir, and was Owner of a Spanish metal, which ever breeds the
best steel: his name was Pastor, and learned Lipsius observes some of that
name at this day in Spain. This Pastors eldest son was undeservedly called
to execution by the angry Emperor Caius: the father has both love to feel,
and valor to revenge, yet striveth not against the potent Prince, but
suffers his son to dye: and bears it out so cheerfully, that between his
words and thoughts you could not spy a sorrow: Nec dolorem aliquo signo
erumpere passus est. Pastor is mightily sensible, and yet you perceive him not
discontented. If you ask him how his sons wrongful death goes down with
him so gently? why is his stoutnesse so pliable to suffer? Seneca answers you
for him wittily, Pastor had another son to lose, Habuit alterum. Pastor Lib.
2. de I^^, cap. 33.
did suffer, to save himself from greater sufferings: the Knight had more yet
to lose, therefore his best course was to be quiet: had he contended with his
Prince, had he urged that mighty arm, it would but enlarge his harm: so
Pastor might have lost all his children, and himself too.

Have you a few acres in a whole Manor, or one Manor amongst many, which a
neighbor great or covetous gapes after, and sighs for sorely? ease him and
your self too, and let him take it; sometimes merrily, because upon that
ground, you will raise no unkindnesses: remember with Pastor, Habes alterum,
you have more lands to lose; and if you cannot suffer one to rob you of this,
in some byway he will wait for you, he will set law upon you, to rob you of all
the rest. When such a cross mischief must come into request, deny it not;
there is no cure, but to diet your choler, and walk out of the way of your
conceit of honor: if you will go to law, to answer a great man's gall, all
your lands may sink in it: take therefore Pastors counsel in time, suffer one
loss, lest you suffer many. Your child, your wealth, your comfort, let it go
when mighty God will have it so: remember Habes alterum; if you be impatient,
if your heart rise, God will pick the rest away from you. Your enemy has
gauled you, and Dulce est dolorem reddere, It is honey to you to cut his Seneca
de Ira, lib. 2. cap. 32.
throat: lose that honey, that sweetness of revenge, though you can reach it:
say with Pastor, Habes alterum; you have a life to lose, a quietness of life
to lose, which is all the comfort of life; and if you stir to your enemy his
loss, for your self, you must make another: therefore set your heart at rest
to suffer.

You shall see Abraham suffer yet more: he had a Genesis 12 14, 15, 16.
wife, the Flower of all Asia, that ever has brought forth the primest
Beauties: her face might have enamoured the Heavens. If the ancient amorous
Angels any more were to come to court the filias hominum, the Damosells of
Damaseene, this beautiful creature would surely draw those merry Spirits from
their Heavens: her pretty countenance was a cluster of all the perfections of
Nature: from her fame Apelles afterward stole all his neatest features: when
she faded, her crimson she left to the Rose, her candor unto the snow, which in
her kept heat enough to inflame millions. This woman being Abraham's wife, God
bad him trust her to court, thrust her to the Kings bosom, and she her self
adventured the bed of a Pharo: yet Abraham made no quarrel against his God, nor
against his consort^ rests quiet: she will be faithful to the homely
heardsman, amiddest the embraces of a king. Certainly, honest Abraham both had
the Desert to meet, and the happiness to enjoy a most honest wife: he
believed God would keep her.

More: Abraham was a sufferer, not only of God, Gen 13. v. 8. 9.
who he was sure, could master him: but you shall see in him, toward mean men,
a great deal of mildness. Abraham had a great stock; his Cosen Lots
shepherds, fenced up pastures (for themselves) and drove off Abraham's cattle:
grass began to be short, and the hungry beasts bellowed aloud for meat:
Abraham's heart did ring with sorrow; yet he held it quiet; he went not about to
try the title with Lot, by Law, nor arms, nor yet offered any blows to the
shepherds. But after a while goes to Lots house, with hat in hand, obsecro, I
pray fair dealing, without foul words: upon the goodly banks, by these
fertile brooks, in the shadie dales, there grows grass in plenty; and we
have room enough for us both, therefore let us have no iusling between us;
Obsecro non fit jurgium inter nos; to what purpose should we two, go to bore
holes in one another skins, for our money to drop through into the Surgeons
fingers? we are Cosens, let not mis-beleevers censure the kindred of the
faithful for most unkind: its true, a kinsman ought not to suffer too much
from a kinsman, sometimes such may quarrel; but let us see first what cause we
have to fight, and then we will try, how we can fight it. I pray thee Lot, let
us not kill our selves out of an humor, for a handful of grass: we are but
strangers in the country, and we are but two to strengthen one another, let us
not break our backs to fill our beasts bellies.

All this pleading the matter was but a staidness of Abraham's valor, no
slownesse of his metal: Abraham reflected upon inconveniences of greater
consequence, and so withstood his own combating courage: for though you hear
Abraham here a great sufferer, you shall see him anon a great soldier; and
know you hereby, that when you suffer, you be not presently of the sise of a
coward; rather when you suffer to advantage your self, you show a piece of
very good manhood. About this same time, of Abraham's crouching to his neighbor
Lot, Kings in person led martial troops abroad the country: and you shall
see Abraham dare look Kings in the face and beat them: five kings rove abroad
and pillage, and one Abraham will be able to make a rescue: Genesis 14. v. 1^. ^^.
16.
a few servants, a handful of shepherds, led by an Abraham; do kill kings,
rout troops, return spoils, and fill the air with applauses of victory: see
whether Abraham be a man of metal or no, and whether his suffering was his
want of feeling, and of valor; no it was his judgment, to lead always his
courage unto his best advantage. O Dueller, you of the number of the faithful?
si filii Abraham estis, opera Abraham facite; whom willingly you follow in
faith, be not ashamed to follow in good manners: I like well, you be as
Abraham was, with your weapon, a mighty doer; but I would have you also be, as
Abraham was, at fit times, a meek sufferer.

Point. 2.
Suffer. 2. True valor is to be master of your own courage, and not upon any
ones call, to combat.
I Observe, some men take wonderful pleasure in squabbling; thereby they vaunt
spirit, (which they call) the touchstone of generositie, they care not after
what cause they go, so they carry it stoutly: this kind of courage, hangs
sometimes upon a good heart, yet it is not the fruit, it is but some little
dead leaf that falls from the goodly plant of valor; or reckon it, as a moat
amongst the rays of valor. The shining Sun, will not be long without moats,
it will find them through one hole or other: it is as true, a man Genesis (...)
of bright and sharp metal cannot belong without meats, he will fetch them
strangely out of corners. Yet that is not, because the light does like
imperfections, or valor love mis-usage; but because, as moats do follow the
glorious Sun, so some madness does ever follow manhood: nullum ingenium
magnum Sen. l. de Tranquil. sine.
sine mixtura dementiae, scarce shall you meet a great courage, but it has a
little of unruly carriage; those that can bridle it, are the most excellent men.

Therefore, if you love credit, keep your valor at a stand: suffer it not to
stir, until it sue first for leave; to the Queen of moral virtues,
Prudence: so you shall truly be master of mettle, and not, your mettle master
of you, that is not to be a man, but to be a slave of manhood, haled up and
down by mettlesome passions basely. These be harsh masters, when they
tyrannize over you. The greatest skill of a swordman, is not to go, but to stay
to choose an opportunity, to wrench it from his enemies in spite of them; else
you are angry, but as the moldy worpe, which with blind fury biteth all it
meets withal: if an offense call on you and your anger rise, bid it lie down
again, and sleep until you awake it. Will you have your heart to be the
center of valor? then hold you quiet, when all the world flies to pieces
about you: for of all the earth, only the center can never be moved.

Caius Marius was undoubtedly of the best soldiers The French Academy of
Pierre de Primandie.
the Roman Military bred: he was powerful in victories, he hewed to pieces
one hundred thousand brave Low-countreymen in one battle: he was dreadful to
his foes, he put the rugged Cambriats to quick flight, the noise of his name
defeated many enemies. Yet when Paulus Sylla stepped to his teeth and dared him
to fight, Marius stands still like a lamb: it was not because Marius had lost
his mettle, but because he held the reins of it, and would not suffer it run
after so silly a fellow as Sylla was* but plainly refuses the challenge, and
says, If Sylla holds himself so tall a fellow, that he can beat Marius, let
him try to force Marius to fight in spite of his heart: for Sylla must know
Marius maintains, he will not fight, but when it please himself. It is a
greater strength to hold back the roaring Bull, than to run as fast as he: nay
it is much more might, to hold his striving strength quiet, than to fight with
him. You Duellers, when you are called to the field, if you will be master of
the field, stay your valor: look upon Marius, who will draw upon no man's
command, no man's challenging, no man's bidding: all challengers are but
pratlers; to talk of fightings, and fierceness unto Marius, are but tales of
Robin-hood.

Men of best valor themselves know best, what time to fight: and the
quarreller, with his humorous words, is no clock for them to count by: they
will not be tied to keep any man's hour: valor will be his own chuser, for
time, place, and quarrel, and will hold nothing under its enemy; it will owe
no service, and will fight, but for what it self will. Certainly, it is a most
poor custom, crept now adays into credit, that men must fight when they be
bidden, (when they be challenged) that is to make of men children. What
difference between the cradle and gray hairs? but that the one is carried
(and so is the duell-answerer) the other walks where he please: the little
one feels not where it goes, the great man knows he has great charge (of
honor) about him, and therefore will take his own time of the day.

Fabius Maximus the Non plus ultra, upon the Pillars The French Academy of
Pierre de Primandy.
of the Roman Fortitude, had the command of a select troop, at the time
Hannibal entered Italy; a Fabian soldier, thought it unworthy his so great a
Commander lying in the way, the Garthaginian standard should approach the walls
of Rome; and therefore with angry speeches, attempted to rouse the most mighty
General Maximus to fight: but he stirred not; all those winds blustering
from foolish lips, shaked no corn in Fabius his ears: Fabius says, be will show
valor, in that he will not be drawn from his deliberation (which is to stay a
convenienter time) not for all their tarring reproaches: Fabius his valor
runs not out of sight for a child's chasing; his heart is no hen, that will
be driven off the nest (of his hopes) with a hushing: that man is very weak
headed, that suffers his heart, to run away with him: that is but a
convulsion of courage. Fabius reflected, his credit was great, his foot must
not stir, but the whole earth must shiver: his head must not move, but the
very heavens must tremble: when he rouseth, the whole universe must quake in a
dreadfulnesse: therefore Fabius bids his courage be quiet, until such time as
an opportunity falls out, he may do something becoming a Maximus. Say you
so too, when you are challenged by a boisterous quarreller, that you hold him
no fit matter for your courage to work upon; and so show that you can take
time to deliberate, what a man of your rights to honor is fitting should do.

Old Soldiers, (that ever be the valiantest men) will stick long before you
can get their heads into a quarrel: they know what obligations follow men that
go to the field, what ties of honor do gird their great hearts. When a
valiant man is bent upon revenge, he will take it: he must not play the
weather-cocke, if the thunderbolt strike, it must turn the bardest metal
into dust: and stout men's anger must not be the push of a feather, blown off
with a fair word, with a little entreatie. The valiant man reflects what a
great opinion of valor, the world holds on him: a very sweet and pleasing
thing to carry, but chargeable in its retinue; when wrongs do call it abroad,
it must have a great train of blood after it, to amaze an Injurer. The stout
man considers the great report there is of the excellency of metal within
him: and therefore now that it is to come forth, if it do not carry away the
eyes of all men, he shall be a scorn for ever: his honor has been yet
amongst his neighbors, but as the blossom on a tree, or corn in the buske;
now time is come that all men will expect a harvest, the sickle must go, and
every body will be gaping at what is reaped; wide gaping wounds must be the
barnes, where he must inn his honor. With these and like reflections,
courage does hang its course almost still in the deepest resentments; and
certainly, whilst quarrellers, like little brooks, keep a loud prattling,
manhood glides so quiet, that you would think it is not moved.

Fabius Maximus commanded his courage to forbear Hannibal, expecting for his
valor some better service, to present it to his Country; it was not fear of
death, that frighted him. So you shall see; let Rome, in whose hands he
willingly leaves the raines of his valor, set him aworke with three hundred
men only, he will set upon all the warlike troops of Hannibal. The
necessity of the Commonwealth, bids the Roman Eagles fly, a Fabius shall
fly before them: and all the beams of Hannibals glistring Army, shall not
dazzle the eyes of Fabius: But he shall pull the rays from Hannibals head, and
strike therehence his frontlet: and so like a Phoenix of Honor, dye amid the
beams of the African glory: having the frontlet about him.

Certainly, men may stay from fighting, and yet have a great mind to fight;
when a good occasion is wanting, it is wisdom, to lock up your valor,
fortunate be they that can do it. When you are too weak, to go into the
blustringaire, you keep your chamber; that is not to keep your house, but to
keep your health: so to stay out of the way, is not always servile fear,
sometimes it is strength of courage, that expects hard for a victory. The
Soldier that undermineth the wall, you will not say, he hides himself
blindly in a wonty-locke; he walks but a while in a hole, to raise up his
valor with a brighter glory. So when men stay from fighting, if a challenge
be given, and no answer had, let it not be termed cowardlinesse; it may be
manhood is laboring with its full strength, to reach the furthest pitch of
valor, it is not to run away, but to fetch a fee to leap beyond the Worthies.
Actions of consequence, as honor is, required good deliberation: we see very
often times, men wish themselves again at the the beginning of a quarrel,
whereunto they have fallen too too suddenly: therefore the best Soldiers are
slow fighters, and it will be a long time before hot words can heat them: the
fuel that makes the strongest fire, you take it tardie a kindling, whiles
light straw will soon present your eye with flashes.

Point. 3.
Suffer. 3. True valor reserveth it self, for weightier employments, than to
dance in a Duel.
HAve you true courage? the mark will not be, that you rore booted and spurred
for a Duel: when valor is in you, you will hang out for your sign, Silence.
A man that lays up gold in heaps, lies; spends not on Ladies smiles, sugar
suppers: nor turns his money to smoke in a Kitchen: and who owneth the
treasure of valor, shuts it up better than to vapor it out, to draw it forth
upon every Mad-caps frown to a killing: When affronts call men of courage
abroad, their valor invites them to stay at home: it is gentile, and must not
go into ill company. Great valors have always great fortunes to follow, and
no leisure to attend quarrellers: therefore when private wrongs do fly, the
valiant man's eye does not regard them.

The Roman Orator leading a stream of eloquence to overflow the merits of
Caesar, presents us with his piety in war, his courage in peace, his staid
heart in victories, and his rising hopes in misfortunes: One fault Cicero
confesses in him, that he had no memory. And was Caesar so forgetful
indeed? I am sure he forgot himself less than all the Roman Captains that
went before him; for quickly he took up the Diadem from under a company of
Gulls or Consulls, that so long bred it amongst them, and never spied it. But
yet (says Cicero) Caesar was forgetful, of what? Extollens dicebat Cicero,
says the learned African, me thinks I see Cicero break out into a smile,
and say, Nihil oblivisci solebat nisi injurias: Apud Aug. Epist* 5. ad Marcall.
Valiant Caesar could not frame himself to pick strawes, or pick quarrels,
(which is all one) he could never bestow so ill his courage; and therefore you
would think ever he did forget his injurer: his private abuses, he laid so
far out of mind, that time would say, he could never remember them. It seems
he kept all the rooms of his thoughts for conquests: for every corner of his
heart, he had a several Kingdom: therefore he would make no place for
shuffling quarrels: no, it was a furtherance to his victories, that Caesar had
a special gift, in having no gift at all of memory, for his wrongs: and so
Cicero goes on neatly, observing Caesar, who was of so excellent a memory, so
rare in that Art, that he was not known ever to have forgotten any thing:
Nihil oblivisci solebat: yet, to every man he did seem mainely forgetful of
his injuries, he did so wonderfully sleep in them: and it was, he would not
stir in them, he had so much other work for his courage.

Had not the singular valor of Caesar done so, says Augustine, yet Cicero did
most well to say so: because great Caesar, should have done so: and not only
all the great masters of the earth, but also every man of manhood: valor
should follow glory, not humor: so neat a thing as valor is, should be set
upon better work, than to cobble up Duells: Dicebat adulator, did Cicero but
complement with Caesar, yet truly Talem esse debere ostendebat Principem
civitatis August. ibid.
qualem illum (Caesarem) praedicabat: Cicero wisely expressed what was fitting
for great courages to do; men that will be great, must keep their stomachs
to hard meat; it must not be said of them, they can swallow nothing but milk
sops: You must learn to digest great quarrels, you must have the stomach of
an Ostrich, sometimes to swallow iron: though one draw on you, and wound you,
yet a more glorious employment, must hold your courage, from laying your heart
upon the revenge of it: valiant men must not admit, that every little crum of
discontent can choke them: no, valor must swallow better than so: else the
world, that so swarmeth with displeasing successes, had never made, of valorous
men, its victors. Hence it came, that when Mark Antonie quarrelled with
Caesar, yet Caesar would not awake, he was so sleepie, that his legs could not
carry him to the field, as I said before.

This great Augustus was a Prince, got well by his weapon, therefore he had no
reason to refuse to use it; and the edge of his courage was well steeled with
skill, therefore there was no great cause for him to fear Mark Antonie his
arm, that was but a pillow for Ladies to lie on. This Caesar is the very same
(though others say it was Julius Caesar) that comforted the timorsome Boat-man,
with a Caesarem vehis: Flerus.
assuring him, rough misfortunes durst not appear in the presence of Caesar:
why then should Caesar fear an effeminate Antonie? surely it could not be
fear, it was love, that Caesar bore to his valor. He resolved to reserve the
thing he loved so dear, for more glorious actions: he would not spend of it,
with that Spend-thrift of honor, Mark Antonie: he played the better husband,
and kept good metal for good use.

So, when the perfumed Courtier Antony challenges Caesar to fight in single
combat, Caesar says to him in sadness he will not: does Caesar therefore not
love fighting? not so, Caesar rather loved it so well, that he will not bestow
it upon the Egyptian: Caesar prizeth fighting higher, than to cast away, as
much as one crash, on a coward: Caesar's fights, are to win kingdoms, not to
win conceits: a Caesar will not spend his blows to beat off cocks-combs, but
to strike down crowns: weighty must be the occasion, that can make stout men
stir: children may run after shittle cocks.

So you men of worth, you should set more by your lims, then to lay them at the
stake to any that will play against them: shall every coward cut the cards upon
you? call you at all times of the night of dark passion, and shall he so
trample your life, that is the fruitful bed of honor, wherein so many
glorious actions grow, in peace and in war? will you hazard all, of a
challenger will draw cuts for it: if he will cut off your neck, will you
carry it to the field as quickly, as for your Prince to the scaffold? see what
soveraigntie you give unto base quarrellers. This is to make Apes leaders of
Lions: with lives men of great credit, should not part so easily: our jewels
sometimes we loose, yet we find them again; but our lives once gone, we never
meet them more, till the great wake of Iosaphat: therefore, you valiant men,
seeing you gain so much by life, you should have more care to keep life on
foot: all sparkling honor, all glittering valor, life is the cabonet that
keeps it: hacke life to pieces, what remains, can nevergain you honor: it is
but a lump of senseless flesh, so cowardly, that abuse it then, cast it on the
ground, it dares not stir: affront a body then, see if it dare challenge, it
dare do nothing but grinne, and look pale: wherefore if you love valor so
well for honors sake; love life a little better, and keep it, to get you more
honor, cast not life away so slightly.

But do you in honor burst with a Phanaticke desire, the world should know,
that in your heart does grow the orient pearl of valor; and I pray you, what
is it? forsooth, that you can carry through your hot heart, a piece of cold iron
and smile at it: that death never brings unto you her dreadfulnesse: why if you
be so hot, walk alone to the war, and show so much there: do service to
your most weldeserving king therewith, who will regard your advancement by pay;
so, your valor, unto honor, you shall add profit, and by this, you may rise
further into honor. Creep not up and down a country, killing rotten sheep,
poor silly fellows, that when you bore them, you loose more ale than blood
out of their bodies. If you will strike like a mighty one, strike at the
mountains of manhood, set at armies: if you have fire, burn high Cedars, let
low shrubs alone for little ones to blaze on: the high region of a thundering
air sends its boults against the highest towers, it sets against what stands
mightiest; but you must take in hand what lies nearest: as soon as a neighbor
angreth you, then you must needs fight: good Lord, how soon your valor rises
at home: if your courage be so early up, why do you not send it abroad to the
field breath it up a rampire, where it shall find work enough? But your work
must be by the fire side, you must fight at home, that is your goodly valor.
I must tell you, such men be always of the chillest courage: and I believe
though they now glow in London, they will quickly have a cold fit at the news
of a Canon: I wish them to take Physic, and from Saint George his field, to
lead their courage under Saint George his banner: it will turn their stomach,
and cure their choler.

That famous Bachet, luster of the East, and Holy court.
General of the Turkish Armies, understanding one of his Captains had
challenged his fellow soldier; and both were gone to field, to cool their
choler with cold steel: Bachet broke out into a most feeling compassion. O,
quoth he! what is our meaning? shall we kill no more enemies, have we done
with the Jewish Redeemers children (that deserve not the names of men) shall no
more of them scrawle on the tops of our lances? In a world of hateful
adversaries, can we find leisure thus to turn our weapons upon the hearts of
our fellows? have we no more greatness to offer unto Mahomets glory, that
thus we hang up our weapons in the bosoms of the supporters of his temple? O,
English Dueller, this Turk remembers you of a noble lesson: if your choler
boyles so fast about your heart, that it makes your fingers ends tingle: lay
them not therefore upon your neighbors, your kings subjects; but go further
from home, to prey upon humane blood: your king has enemies in the world, fall
you on them abroad, and the kings laws will in requital fall upon your foes at
home. When your King has no enemies, yet you may find your self warre-like
work: bring in new found lands, to in large your kings kingdoms: the
greatness of his royal merits deserve room to spread over far more large
territories: the Ocean should burst with shame to press meares unto his
Empire: rather it should open its bosom, and give ground to lay unto his
Dominions: and go to overflow with its waves the countries of less deserving
Princes: not bite away one crown from the Britain shores; great Charles his
glory has need of every sand, to reckon his singular merits.

Walk you Dueller with your valor, abroad the world, it has a large scope,
and many skirts; find you one to lie upon, and lay on in a just conquest
lustily: show greatness of valor in that you can make your good king greater;
and waste not his subjects at home, so you make him lesser: to show your fiery
mettle consume not your kings power. If you have skill to kill, open your shop
where that trade will be in good liking: if all your labor is to make the
world know you care not for death; walk there where you shall see it wait at
your heels; and cries round about you every minute, bring you tidings, it will
be anon within you. Bachet was a great soldier, of stout courage, and though
bloody enough (he was a Turk) yet he misliked mightily challenges and private
combats: he deemed them but a havocke of manhood. If we will needs play at
kill-game, let us not play like boys, that must always play near their own
doors; let us go where there is want of killers: at home there wants good
livers.

Point 4.
Suffer. 4. The valorous man his greatest victory is to overcome himself.
But will you live at home, and fight too, and come by a mighty opinion of
valor: I will descry unto you near your own doors, a terraincognita (your
self nosce teipsum) a whole country to win, A microcosmos, a little world,
full of great Commanders and fierce enemies, to conquer. I will carry you before
two great high towers, of two mighty powers: the one, you will find so
understanding to master you, that it is all knowledge, the other so wilful to
cross you, that it is nothing but will: so strange, that all the power of
heaven and earth never makes it do, but its own will. I will lead you amongst
the ambushes of sensual pleasures; and show you the strong hold of delight:
the industrious sleights of profit: the wearilesse toil of gain: the
wonderful confidence of ease. Muster up here your couragiousest resolutions,
you shall march amongst a number of most cunning foes: do you know where the
most potent lord Self reigns? one so ambitious, that the whole face of the
earth has bin ever yet too narrow for him to lay his eye upon; he rowles it
into the bottom of the seas, unto the center of the earth, and cries out still
for more room. One so mightily troublesome that he pillageth all the fields of
Nature with whole armies of unsatiable Passions, that swell against the very
heavens; that strike at the very face of him that holds his head higher than
the stars. One so venomous in his very heart, that after he is utterly
defeated and laid on the ground, severed in pieces like a Snake, yet the one
part of him will stir, and keep such a stir, that it will rail and revile
against its Victor, for a whole eternity.

Do you desire not to go far, and yet to go a combating? why, take this
combat in hand; set at this strong enemy, and try your valor on him: he dwells
near enough unto you, you may be quickly with him, he is your own self. I
say, if you desire to take a masterpiece of work in hand, master your self;
and one thing know for your comfort, if you can compass it, the noise of your
worthiness shall surpass all the nine of the fame. For who overcommeth
himself, may challenge the freedom to take the first place amongst the
valiant. Call you in valiant Caesar to a first chair: him, so universal a
conqueror, that the Princes of the earth presented him with Scepters, as mean
tenants do their Landlords with Chickins: you think this old soldier becomes
the chair well: you shall see a young Cato, a conqueror of himself, come in
and bid him rise, and will take place of him.

Cato the younger, at the time the Roman glory was The French Academy of Pierre
de Primandy.
clouded in the sad siege of Vtica, was moved by his fellow Romans, lying al
close blocked up, to submit unto conquering Caesar, else all must die. Valiant
Cato at the mention of death, reads the inventorie of all his goods or
goodnesses of all his life; he has a long roll of many good moral virtues:
under the head of his conquests, he runs over a number of great price: but
under the head of his self Conquests he finds a great store: it seems it was
usual with him to overcome himself. He often had curbed his anger, rising
against some great men of the City, which might have driven him into
rebellion. He had mastered his ambition, which perchance would haveled him
upon the same action, as Caesar now is, to command the gates of Rome: but Cato
bridled his unruly passions, better. Cato therefore answers, he will not
submit unto Caesar. I (says Cato) have trulier conquered than Caesar;
therefore Caesar should rather submit unto me. Caesar he is now taken and
overcome: therefore none can make submission unto him as conqueror. Caesar,
his own vicious ambition to master all, has cast him over us all. His great
fear (having offended some of the Senate) has bound him fast to the Scepter
to fence himself withal: for, could Caesar have submitted his fierce
disposition to the grave Laws of the Senators, which doubtless would have had
a worthy feeling of him; their own profit by his conquests, would have
sweetened their trouble in the ruggedness of his nature: for wise men know a
great spirit cannot serve them, but it must sometime offend them; and actions
from humane flesh, we must be contented to take them* as fish, a good one, and
a shrow: could Caesar but have been a little tractable to the light of higher
powers, his heart had never vapoured so much heavy grief as would presume to
cloud the laws of Rome, and for ever to eclipse the government of so many
hundred years shining: usurping over the Senate sovereign power himself, who
by right of cradle, deserved not to be their meanest fellow. Therefore Cato
still says, he will account himself the invincible, because in mastering of
himself, he is mightier than Caesar. Cato scorned to yield unto the Victor of
Rome: breathing the glory of being Victor over himself.

We are now come to the hold and keep, who must be the better man, he that can
quarrel, or he that can suffer; who mastereth many others, or who subdueth
himself. We dare go over shoes in blood to angle for honor, but we know
not whether to go from home with Caesar amongst strangers, or home again with
Cato unto ourselves. An offense is given, and you resolve therefore you must
overcome your enemy, why do you not resolve, you must overcome your self? you
say you must fight, why say you not, you must be quiet: How do you prove, that
it becomes a valiant man better to fight, than to suffer? Or how is it a lesser
victory to conquer ones self, than another? You plead you must discover
valor, I say so to, but let us find the best way: it will ever fall out, that
we shall still come home again to your self, and within your self, we shall
find the best matter of victories. It is a golden verse of a good Poet,
repeated by most Writers; it seems the witty saying does take many:

Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit* Man^uanu^.

Moenia: nec virtus, altior ire potest.
Arduares, vicisse alios, victoria major,
Est animi motus, composuisse sui.
Overcome your self, that's more than towers of brass
To win, your virtue can no higher pass.
Hard thing it is, strong Armies to confound;
But more to hold your raging passions bound.
Sentence is given: it is more to beat ones Self, than a many thousands:
therefore if you run a duelling, only out of a desire to get honor: lay
challenges with others aside, and make it your quarrel to master your self:
choose it, as the most difficult Duel, to overcome your self.

The nearer an enemy lays siege to a City, the more valor it is, to beat
him back; and what can be more near you, then what is within you. Magis sunt
periculosa quae domestica, as Lactantius, very wittily Lib. 1. inst. cap. 9.
observes. A civil war is the forest blow to a kingdom: because each part
is sure to weaken the other, and all parts growing weak, that body must needs
die. Yet there, only one part is against the other; but here all against
every part of you; you rob your hands of their labors, your understanding you
bereave o^ ^^s ^^ght; from your will you steal its good customs: and from
your internal senses, their gentle inclinations to right; and thus you whose
greatness consists of many Powers, do engage your whole self in undoing
every several part of your own strength: then here is a civil war more
dangerous: When two Combators have lost the wales of their weapons, and cannot
keep one another out any longer, when fencing can maintain no distance
between them, but they are come within one another arms, then begins the
bloody part of the combat, there is nothing but poaching at life, strikes
every blow as fast as the weapon can come and go. Can any be more within you,
than your own self? none does lay at you more fiercely. Then this is the most
dangerous Duel. You shall not gape to eat, but the enemy creepes in at your
mouth, and turns your full stomach, to desire what is not, to torture you. You
shall not go to bed, but he follows you between sheets, and sets difficult
fancies on you, and keeps your eyes open in spite of the rod of Mercury: if
toil cast you into a little sleep, the enemy watches your first waking, he
falls to the same game again, and pestereth you with most heat, when you be
most naked. Rise, and he will make you sow tears in vain, reap words with
no gain: and between wind and water he will hit you so sore, that it is a
thousand to one, he will sink you. Is it not therefore good reason, that the
subduing of his enemy, (ones Self) should be judged the greatest conquest.

This enemy does fight upon such advantages, that it must needs be your
greatest glory to conquer him. And hence you shall ever find those your best
victories, whereof some part is, to overcome your self. A golden consequence!
if to conquer, you must master your self, your victories be profitable: the
more they have of selfe-mastership, the more they will have of profit: for by
our difficulties and dislikes, we know what does become us: and by our desires,
we reckon still our mistakings: I will talk still of things within the
compass of courage.

You are right valiant, as light to fight as a feather. Why there be peevish
opposing Spirits abroad in your parish, that men cannot dwell by with quiet: if
you durst but touch them with a word, they would like a Betle leave their
filthy burden of malice: and you find great difficulty to speak, you sweat
and groan with the conceit that a word must come out of your mouth, you are in
labor. Overcome your self here, choose this combat, and let Challengers alone.
More, I will choose you another combat. Your servants, within your own doors,
dare be disorderly: your Officers over-carelesse, or over-covetous, or both: if
you have a stomach that can rise, set against these. O you will not endure the
toil, you cannot suffer the barking noise of your own disorders, you will
never abide to hear again of your own foolish expenses, to offer you notes is
to cast motes in your eyes, you find mighty trouble. Why, overcome your
self, you shall see it one of your best conquests: be not a coward, run not
away from your self, master your self for shame, to be master of your own:
sure, you are so great, so honorable, that you are afraid of your self:
subdue your self in most things, so your spoils shall be the heaps of many
happinesses.

-- Tunc omnia jure tenebis, Claud. ad Theod. Imp.

Cum poteris rex esse tui.
Will you put all conquests into one, conquer your self: who cannot do so,
will never be Lord Treasurer of valor.

Hercules, you think, was a tall man, and had good strength: that could tear
Lions, bear on his back whole miskins, overrun horses, over-flie birds, and
roll up and down the world doing wonders: Surely he had great limbs, yet
Lactantius noted, they wanted their best sinews: Vellem adjecisset Lact. ut
supra.
de insolentia: I wish I could hear of some feats of Hercules, how he dealt
with his enemies at home: you tell me he did beat monsters, but durst he touch
himself: I hear he did cleanse neighbors dung-hills, but was he not apt to
crow upon his own dunghill? Vellem adjecisset de insolentia: I fear he was
a little insolent. I should be glad to hear some news, how he mastered his
own mind: and then says Lactantius, I will yield unto antiquity, and
confess that Hercules was a valiant man indeed, and a mirror of valor.
Otherwise I will say, Hercules deserves not his name, under the fame as it
goes. For I will no more esteem him, for conquering beasts, birds, and
enemies, than I will esteem of a child treading upon so many little Ants.
Animum vincere fortissimum est, It is the conquest of himself that must make
Hercules famous.

If you be ambitious of glory, here is a way for you to go beyond Hercules:
Non enim fortior est judicandus, qui leonem, quam qui iracundiam in se inclusam
Lact. ibid.
superat. When your heart does fill with filthy revenge, sweeten it with
mercy, and you shall be Hercules, not the other fellow for cleansing the
Kings stables: when your angry thoughts fly unto the Higher Powers for
punishment against your enemy; fly you to overtake those thoughts, and tell
them there is a God in Heaven, that bids you forgive: so you shall be the true
Hercules, and not he that overtooke a bird with an arrow. If the light of
reason might be suffered to prefer a ray in the Star Chamber; it would most
humbly desire reflection upon the riots against reason, wherein by violence of
weapons such strange value of valor is maintained; such unlawful measures of
honor are sealed with blood. One that can but force a Bear, or face a Bull,
is cried for valiant; and he that does the wonder of wonders, who mastereth
himself, is jeered for a Coward. Let one overcome himself, he must outrun
his Country; all men will so point at him for a mere Noddie, as fit for
nothing but to make a Lubber, to lie in a Monastery; whiles perchance, for a
worthy effusion of blood he has a better courage, than you that do but play
the Scullion, running up and down the field to stick a Goose. I admire not
that vice is in good liking, it does unto most men a pleasure: but when men
without blush do praise vice, I fear their faith has a tainture. It may be a
wonder in future ages that men desired to do well, and said they durst not,
for fear of the imputation of the vulgar; they acknowledged they did ill, and
could do no otherwise, they must be so overruled by the coyish fancy of the
Commons.

Section III. Seven Antidotes, or quick Reasons to put off Quarrels.
1. Take not notice of every wrong. 2. You are not the worse for a
discourtesie. 3. Put off wrongs with some pleasant jest. 4. In base occasions
suffer wrongs to punish yeur self. 5. Bear with friends, be quiet and you
punish your foes. 6. Revenge not wrongs suddenly. 7. Will nothing do good?
Remember the tree at the Towns end.
D^seases of Duellisme have so long raged in our Kingdom: our overgreat hearts
swell so quickly with desires of cruel revenge, that to endeavor a cure, is
but to wash an Aethiope: there is difference indeed in color, as between the
jet and the scarlet: but color in grain hardly admits a change, and
Quarrellers are in grain commonly. The nature of this burning fever, is to
strike to the heart, which in an heap of resentments, not well digested,
falls into such an Apoplexy, that it finds ease in nothing, but in
bleeding. And though a combat be but one to one, it is an hundred to one both
dye of it.

To come now and profess cures, for all such as roar under these dangerous
purples, were but to act a Mountebanke, which if he can but make names for
some few salves, it suffices for his gains: he takes men's moneys, and for
men's cures he cares not: these must ever bear an after-date, until such time
as he shall be absent from place and shame, and then it never troubles him
that never returns. I should be glad, if of a few that read my receipts, I
could ease any; many be the occasions of Duells, diverse the dispositions of men
that move them, and unto man and matter the Antidote should fit, else it will
but trouble the eye, and enter no further: yet I must adventure to give, and
you Reader, perchance to seek, and to find nothing.

Point. 1.
Antidote. 1. Take not notice of every wrong, you will otherwise but vex your
self, without need.
SOme men will feed upon poison, and certainly some stomachs relish nothing
but wrangling: the world works now adays a strange kind of medley, of
cunning and folly: some forget themselves mightily, they will sleep drunk in
every tap-house, and yet they will watch; they will remember a shrewd turn a
neighbor does them, from the cradle to the grave. They will find such gaps to
creep into quarrellings; through a hedge they will follow a pig: through a hole
of a cott, they will follow a calfe for a straw: they will turn bloud-hound
and tract a child for a stick; a man for treading a grass that does but peep
out of a path: and all this industry only to find themselves brabbles. O
quam solers est iracundia ad fingendas causas furoris! I admire says Seneca,
the cunning that froward men have to frame combustions of nothing.

If Law will not serve quick, as their peevish mind does call; if paper bills
cannot hurt, they will put in sharper weapons; the steel, the pistol shall
cock abroad: and thus in a peaceable kingdom, we live (as it were) on the
frontiers of a merciless enemy* now you see cattle driven, now violent hands
laid on men, and they so handled, that it mattereth not whether they be drawn
to an averse king, or a dread full dungeon: for slavery is the end of both
Iourneyes.

The subtlenesse that some men use (though otherwise simple) to trick up a
quarrel, and to set it forth, meriteth observation. What a quick eye to note
it? what a curious ear to take it up, amongst a noise of by-matters? Some have
the sleight of raking sparks of discontents together, and keeping them long
hot under the ashes of a counterfeit correspondency; so at their pleasure they
will steal an opportunity, to set all a Country together by the ears.

Certainly, such conditions are of the nature of Witches, that lie always in
ambush to do mischief: they live the life of a cutpurse, whose neck is
nearest the halter, when his hand gets nearest the treasure: so these, when
they be fullest of matter of quarrels, (which they greedily gape after) then
they be furthest from their own quietness.

Wherefore, wisemen will rather bestow their wits in taking upon them sometimes,
not to see what their own eyes does show them. Do any affronts sti^re, by
word or deed against you? still the occasion, neither blow nor breath, be
neither hot nor cold; carry your self so, that the standers by shall not
perceive you do hear it. So they may come almost to think it was not you that
was injured, they will rather draw in some other: that is an excellent skill.
Hereby you shall keep your valors credit, freeing it from engagements for
your honor; and you may have your full strength to put upon actions more for
your profit, to tug in matters that may rather increase strength than draw
blood from you.

Turn therefore a quarrel off with some pretty question, or sudden discourse
to a stander by: draw your spirits so hastily another way, that your blood
shall not have leisure to rise into disorder: distract the hearers with an
unexpected event: with draw your senses, fasten upon some object, cloase choler
that would stir: round men's ears with new reflections, turn them into
cares: nip a discourse, giddy it, that it may not turn directly unto you
again: break off company, upon pretense of a weighty business, and then let
none bring you thither again. Let the affronter put on never so openly; an
undaunted spirit will deceive him of his mark, and put him out of his aim.

Cato, that worthy Roman, in a bathe was bare enough: Senec. l. 2. de ira.
a saucy fellow taunted him, and gave him a box on the ear; yet Cato took no
notice of it; Cato said nothing. What could be a more public wrong; and in the
bathe, we hear no news of it, no charging the Constables with the villain
that struck Cato. All is in a hush: sure Cato was not stricken: yes, Catonem
(indeed) quidam percussit, says Seneca, but Cato would take no notice of it,
maluit non agnoscere.

No question but Cato did feel the smart: yet his excellent wit found way to
put shame by: doubtless his ear did glow, but his heart would not show it.
The man that struck felt Cato so steadfast, that having given the blow, he
thought almost that he was mistaken, and had not hit Cato at all; rather that
Cato was not there, either was gone in an ecstasy, into some region of Nature,
profoundly searching out curiosities: or into the School of the Stoics
preparing maxims to bridle humane passions, and wholly was not there when the
blow was strooken at him; it was but the shadow of Cato, or a bunch of stones,
or hard bones that was smitten, as if one had struck but the house for the
owner. See how this striker has lost his mark, and has done nothing: he
aimed to affront Cato, but could not, because Cato could then not be with his
body, to the others thinking. So Cato saved himself from disgrace by his wise
deportment, and rightly said, Maluit non agnoscere, quam ignoscere. It was to
be expected from Cato that he should so do, he must not say, an affront did
pierce him that he was hurt: abuses must pass by him, as waves by a rock,
that never reckons them. It is a better testimony of ones greatness, never
to have had a foe, than to have revenged or forgiven him (which is the revenge
of a Cato) for if you forgive, you confess you were wronged, and that is a
weakness; therefore Maluit non agnoscere, quam ignoscere: a Ruffian may strike
a Cato; but yet Cato will say he was not touched; so will you become a great
spirit, a Cato: take no notice, feel not weak ones, they may do wrong to you,
and harm themselves, but never hurt you.

Point. 2.
Antidote 2. You are not the worse for a discourtesie. Then busy not your
self with nothing.
COnsider with your self, what are you the worse, for the neglect full word or
act of another? you use to say, words break no bones; why then will you break
your heart to be revenged of them? your enemy spoke unto you a word, and
perchance but a word, and is your choler so quick, that therefore you will to
blows with him? You say, he touched you in your honor, what then? he did but
touch you, and will a touch hurt you? men that will be esteemed of valor, says
Gonsalvo, should Verulam de irae number. 57.
have telam honoris crassiorem: is your honor so thin skinned, that a push with
a rush will tear it? is there no honor of Musket proof? shall every
beardlesse boy with a crosse-bow that can scarce scarre a Sparrow, astonish
you? still your self rather a little, with a reflection, an acknowledgement of
your own courage: cry not out, one pinch has undone you: hold a while rather
than confess your honor to be of such an over-delicat temper: what hurt can
the touch of a word do? can a little disrespect wound, which hits only by
conceit, and is nothing but ens rationis? We have an old country man of our
own, which our new ones might imitate with credit.

Constantine the Emperor, his picture was drawn with a singular
representation of great Majesty: stored Chrysostom. hom. 20. ad pop. Antioch.
Garo. to. 3. ad An. Dom. 324
with Crowns, and strewed under feet with scepters, as rushes: beams rounded
it with glory, and embroydered curtains on rods of gold did defy the motes
that dare set at the rays of the Sun from defiling that Picture: all this
ambition of reverence as an expression of a more veneration unto the Emperors
person, freed not this Picture from a disgraceful affront. A most idle fellow,
found an opportunity to cast filth on it.

See now Constantine with his beams and bravery, all to besmeared with dirt by
a most base creature: the mighty Emperor of the world is laid in the mire,
think you him not mightily displeased? can you imagine him not thoroughly
enraged? must not a world flow with bloodshed to quench the fury of his just
revenge? Surely it would so happen were you Constantine; oh you are but a
little Constantine.

See what Constantine the Great did, when officious complainers thronged in to
plead against the audacious delinquent; and the whole earth expected
Constantine would revenge the disrespect done him, to an everlasting terror of
al such as cast scoffs and scorns: what does Constantine that wanted not
courage? he was Great, wanted no power, he was Emperor of the rising and
setting Sun. Well friends (says Constantine) you tell me of a fellow that
has disgraced me, and contemptuously cast dirt on me: he has cast dirt
upon my Picture, I hear, but nothing do I feel upon Constantine: I see
Constantine clean, the glass shows no ordure in my face: your conceit may
term my face foul and filthily abused; but my conceit tells me nothing of
it, how then can I be angry? I pray tell me, if Constantine feel no blow, no
wound, no offense, the Picture be torn; yet if Constantines skin be whole,
for what shall Constantine be angry?

So should you discourse with your self, when one reviles you: what are you the
worse? your enemy hewes your name to pieces, tears your credit to totters,
he frets and roares. So as one would think he could overturne mountains of
honor into an abyss of disgrace, but yet you are never the worse: he does but
frame your name in his mouth, it is but a vocal image of you, it is but your
picture, and in the air, that is something less than a picture in colors.
And that name of yours, your picture, he rowles up and down his dirtie mouth,
and dasheth it with disgrace: say then, your self are never the worse, never
the fowler, and say with Constantine, why should you be angry? O thrice happy
Constantine! whom heaven favored with that excellent temper, that so neatly
could break off occasions of unkind quarrels; and not spend time in harkening
unto boys. Play, but better busy himself in the conquest of kingdoms, which
made him so mighty.

A great Wit being asked how the Romans from August. ad Marcellinum. Ep. 5.
so poor beginnings had grown to so vast an Empire, Quomodo Romani ex inopi
Rempublicam magnam fecerunt? Presently answered for them thus; it was because
Accepta injuria ignoscere, quam persequi malebant. The Senate of Rome did not
spend their time, they wasted not their warlike Legions, they cast not the
coin of the Capitol, they did neither bruise nor busy that lusty body in
revenging private grudges against their near, and perchance (notwithstanding
one offense or fault) their true-hearted Subjects: but made the best of their
own strength about them, to compass victories further from them. Which
Lesson, when afterward their children forgot, busying themselves in quick
exceptions, one against another: they shaked to pieces their own mightiness,
to which otherwise all the kingdoms of the world could have done no hurt, saving
by adding unto it greatness. So doubtless it would be unto you a great
happiness, if you could reserve your selves for weightier imploiments of
profit, and nearer cares: and not go a wrangling for every babble, as children
do for Butter flies.

Point 3.
Antidote 3. Put off wrongs with some pleasant jest.
SOmetimes, it is an excellent piece of wit to cut off quarrels with a jest,
and not to profess as it were, to be a common crier of ones own shame, an
aggravater to ones own disadvantage. Have not so coyish a stomach, as to take
every course morsel like the venom of an Aspe: look not sour upon every
distaste; speak sometimes merrily when your heart aches, then your sore will be
the lesser. Jests now and then pass away evil times, and why not evil
tempers? Rodolphus the first Emperor of the Austrian Da^rou^^us in Flor. Exemp.
Family was sorely wounded by a careless archer: therefore his subjects in
their most loving respects were forward to punish: they had the Archer in hold,
and their rigor would feign have been doing, and first they will cut off his
hands: stay says Rodolphus, if you had done so before he had shot me, you
had done wisely, but now that I am wounded already, let him go, and take both
his hands with him.

Thus wise Rodolphus reflecting, perchance the Archer had noble friends, whom
the Emperor was loath to lose; with a jest freed himself from the trouble of a
resentment, which edgeth on anger, that does but load a great spirit with the
charge of a revenge. Worthy Aristides, who for his integrity was called the
Senec. de Consol. ad Holviam.
Just, an insolent fellow did spit in his face, to disgrace him; yet he,
though chief Ruler of Athens many years, never stirred to implore revenge;
but smiling said: I pray you, my friend, gape not so wide, yawne not so
undecently: though the fellow did disgorge himself in the chief Justice his
face, yet Aristides his thoughts at that time did hang upon more serious
employments, and therefore he put off the lack with a jest.

If one grow wild with you in choler; Laugh, and say he acts a mad man
prettily, or rather you pity his frenzy. Will he needs draw your blood? say
to him, he is sick of the bloody flux at the wrong end, and wish him rather
to use a Physician, than a weapon.

Tell him, when he comes to himself, you will come to try about with him: if
he continue bandying words, say to your self, he does it but to purchase
honor; and seeing he will buy it of you, he confesses your store, and his
own want: will you be angry with him for honoring you. He feign would get
honor, and therefore would wound you: and why would you be offended with him,
for loving himself better than you? Though it be not according to the tie of
charity, yet I would not make it a breach of worldly amity. Love that lives
with a little, should not dye so easily.

Does some pretended friend wish you to revenge an old quarrel of one of your
Grandsires: tell him you will find better matter to make expression of your
manhood: you will not busy your self with braules past, nor keep so many
little bundles of thorny remembrances in your bosom, you have cast them out
quite, to get quiet by forgetting them: Wisemen have enough to do with things
present and to come, and will not trifle away time in past mistakings, which
cannot be recalled, you would rather go to bury them: by remembrance, you do
but bring your own shame into new acquaintance, and so disgraces, in stead of
dying, does raise a new increase; discredits, the more you water them with
blood, the longer they will continue growing. You may bestow your skill better.

If a drunken Quarreller open himself to you, and rage; answer him, you know
you are now at home in jolly mirth and plenty, and that his frowns are but a
coppie of his countenance, that you will not dream you stand in a Battalion,
where men's hearts must lie upon the best advantage of their weapon: you will
not fall to pell mell amongst good fellows: it is pity the kind company of
Bacchus should decay by grievous wounds, let the companies of Mars dye of that
diet: let that plague fall upon those harsh fellows, that do nothing but
strike and kill, not upon the merry-hearted cup-man that does no harm, but
fill a Swines belly with droppings of drink, he does so sip it: and now and
then bite his fellow Hog by the ear, for standing by; for stood he not there,
they had been good friends ever. Stout men no more regard cup-quarrels, than
wise men do little houses, which children build with sticks.

Oftentimes men have no wrongs at all offered them, and yet they will fall into
quarrels, and kill one another out of a conceit of wrongs. Such men are much
like that tall fellow, who being to be beheaded, laid down his lusty head on
the block, and died with the stroke of a pudding: he certainly believed it
was a faulchion, and it was a puddings end. Why so it is with some, that
conceive themselves sore trampled with a heavy disgrace, and beaten to dust,
sure they think it was a thunderbolt, but there was not as much as a thought:
say you then sometimes, that the wrongs offered you are nothing, that they
deserve not to have a puddings end for their Godfather.

Thus you may jest jars out of countenance, and your own wit in the occasion
may frame you prettier conceits: learn only this from me, to like this
sleight of stepping out of an affronts way. And yet sometimes you may deserve
good commendations, by laying your self open unto affronts, and lying under
them, by hearing them, and wishing they were greater, the more to torture you:

Point. 4.
Antidote. 4. Wrongs happening in base occasions, suffer them to punish your
self.
MEn ought to regard as well the credit of good manners, as of good manhood:
nay one knowing himself bound to preserve both, should more readily punish his
own person, for discrediting his behavior, than punish any other for
disgracing his valor. You go to the Tavern, where wine kindles the veins,
and in a jollitie, men are made bone-fires; so flaming grow all their faces: by
and by happens a Metamorphosis, all the company is turned into an herd of
Swine, some grunt in the corners, others lie in their mire, and nothing but
stench amongst them: Do not you disgrace your self mightily by sitting on
this miskin? Why then do you not think of punishing your self, for this
foul fact of yours in coming thither, before you punish the other fellow for
giving you there ill words, or blows: you will stumble at straw, and leap over
a block. Seeing you have no heart to chastize your self; let this man whom
you term your Injurer, be your Beadle to whip you: and after you have used the
rod, you may throw it into the fire.

Casimirus King of Poland would needs to dice, and for want of company fell to
it with one Conarius a Martin Cromer de rebus Polon. ^^. 6. ann. 1176.
mean man: the game was high, and Conarius quickly began to below in purse;
his money was gone, and by that time his anger was come: Conarius became
furious, and thinking Losers had leave to speak (so it is, when they play with
their fellows) he forgot he played with a King: his money being run out of
his reach, his tongue run after it, and played upon the King, and in the end,
Conarius taking his leave of his coin, up with his fist, and saluted the King
with a buffet.

How does now Casimirus? Does he fret at his abuser? No, with the buffet the
King awakes, as it were, out of a dead sleep, looks upon himself, and
reflects what he is doing. A King, on whom hangs the eyes, the hearts of a
Kingdom, sporting in an unseemely manner: so he abuses the hearts of his
subjects, for their love must follow the King, else the heart is out of his
place: and who can love disorder? Love cannot come herself to what is naught,
she may send her Handmaid, Pity. Well, Casimirus feels now the smart of his
own folly, and thanks Conarius for it: you cannot well tell, whether the
Kings ear glow more with the buffet, or his face with a reflection of his over
sight: and therefore he never thinks upon punishing Conarius, but is pleased
to make Conarius a pun^sher of the King: so when his Nobles stirred to revenge
his wrong; No says Casimirus, not so, Conarius is my Master, he teaches me a
good lesson, let him beat me for being a truant King, and playing at dice with
a fellow so far my inferior.

So if you chance to be carried into an Alehouse, and there fixed in the
Firmament of good Fellows: where the Primum Mobile is brown Ale, that rowleth
all eyes after it: if after a while, like a Phaeton or a Fatuus, you fall
stumbling upon one another, and hang like Bees upon each others backs in a
bundle: then, if you hap to be abused, to be provoked, if one kick you, and
use you very ill, term him not your injurer, but your benefactor: say not he
does you wrong, but that he does you great good in punishing you, in making
your heart ache, for going to so vile a place. Does one belay you with hard
blows? he does but shake you to awake you, that you may see to what place your
idle carriage has brought you: be not therefore angry with him that strikes
you, turn rather your anger upon your self; busy it there, and forgive the
other which did you no harm, but good service.

If casually, you stumble upon a crew of merrily disposed lads, and there meet
the brave ones, with Tobacco pipes in their mouths of a yard long, ietting so
stout, as if they trailed pikes in an army; that burn their lands at the pipes
end, excellent husbandry* and not break up, but burn up house and
housekeeping; maintayning that the chimneyes of the forefathers, ought to be
turned into the noses of their children: When you see all their noses there so
flaming, that you cannot discern at which end the pipe burns with the more
red-hot fire: if one of this sparkling company, will be furious with you,
because you will not drink: if he vow, you are no good fellow (as though
goodness were not got but by good ale) dislike the ill speech, but suffer it:
make it a means to loath the place, for the language: be glad you feel there,
thorns of such words, that they may prick you thence. If one call you Coward:
bear, and say, for beer you want stomach; you have no courage to carouse: he
is the better man at a bottle: wrangle not with him, but chide your self.

Do as the stout Xenophanes did, when casually The French Academy of Pierre de
Primandy.
being at a feast, one upbrayded him, and called him coward, because he would
not play at dice. Xenophanes mightily troubled with the abusive taunt, yet
quarrelled not with the fellow, rather answered to his tune. I am indeed a
coward, fearful to do dishonest things: he would not wrangle for any thing
done there, but grew (doubtless) into a great dislike with the place, where
such virulent discourses were usually uttered. So you, never mark the speaker
of an affront, but put a cross upon the occasion, never to come into it again.

But oh, say you, your occasion wherein you suffer wrongs, is not unworthy: it
has no relation to tobacco, not to Bacchus his Alliance; a spark of war, a
martial man, another wise well-ordered Gentleman, my equal, upon a good
cause, on a real ground, with fury provoked me to Duel: and I shall dwell in
endless disgrace, if he be not answered in the field.

Point. 5.
Antidote 5. Bear with your friends: of your foes you take best revenge, when
you are quiet.
But stay: go not on so suddenly to overthrow him: remember now, perchance he
has been unto you a strong friend, and is but newly broken: See first if you
can recover him, before you cast him and your self both away: you would be
loath to lose a nag, for once stumbling; and will you leave a friend, if you
find him once tripping? esteem better of old friends than so; you may lose
him when you please, but see how you can yet save him: true friends be scarce
found, and in this friend you have had a happy trial of true love: only this
one time, he has failed you, he has greatly wronged you, he has broken
with you foully; yet let his ancient merits defend this breach: Base were the
soldiers, that upon a first breach surrendered up their city; thy friends
deserts are great and worthy, they show themselves now stoutly upon the breach,
and day, thou shall not enter as an enemy to subvert them all, I Will not forget
them. Thus they parley, it is of the first fault, and of a dear friend you
will say, he being your friend which abused you, therefore you took it the
worse; and the rather you will fight to punish one that being your friend,
would wrong you; were he a foe, you could better suffer him. It is true;
Cos^^us, the great Duke of Florence, I believe was of your mind, when he made
that mad observation upon the Gospel; you shall read, says he, that we are
commanded to forgive our enemies: you never read that we are commanded to
forgive our friends; but let a wiser master, fescue that raw scholar that
wringeth blood out of the letter so quickly: shall we, says Job, take good at
Gods (good friends) Job. ^. 10.
hands, and refuse to take a little evil? Say your friends breath is now an
ill blast unto you, but he has blessed you with many good turns; if he now
frown and look back at you, time was, he shined on you, to the growing of
your best fortune; remember the merry hours you past in his company, and now
for his sake, suffer a sad cloud that will pass presently; Post nubila
Phoebus: suffer but a short eclipse, Ovid.
and you shall clippe and love like good friends again; after a little close
weather, a short storm of hayle, of sputtering words, the day will break
again into a hot friendship.

Does your friend thunder, that one would think heaven and earth be going
together by the ears? Videmus horribiliter vexatum. Does the sky C^r^sost.
hom. in Mar.
cast it self down in tempest? does your enemy his eye threaten to fall upon
you with weapons? Oh stand you still: supportamus, says Basil, to be a
friendly Atlas, hold him from falling: amidst Basil hom. de ira*
all the showers in the deluge of anger, be you the dove, hold the branch of
Olive in your mouth: dry you up the Seas of wrath, with your silence: So you
shall begin a new world of happiness: for when the passion is past, cum
amaritudinem deposuerit; when your friend comes again to himself, ubi
convaluerit, you shall not only have him thenceforth your faithful friend,
but for ever your humblest servant; te ut Dominum venerabitur: Here is a pretty
plot of a victory: you wound your enemy without blood, you vanquish him without
spear, and by conquest you make him your slave, te ut Dominum venerabitur:
nay, were there meaner Gods upon earth; by his voice, you should come into
election, for a Godhead, venerabitur. If you tell me, he which offended you is
not your friend, and therefore you owe him no such service, as to suffer him;
nor will you wait the leisure of his mad fits, or stay for his favor, until
the fever of his fury declines.

Say then he be your ancient and bitter enemy: will you go about to be
deeply revenged on him? yet, your next way is to be quiet, to keep your self
still: say nothing, and you shall catch him lying under your feet,
heart-broken. Does he swell with fury? look off him: does he run into your
face? let your ear go by him: does he roar? hearken to something else: does
he madly fret? neglect it: make all, but nothing: that is to break his very
heart strings, Si despexeris, acrius eum vindicabis. Despise him, that is the
cruellest kind of wrong: for it is all one, as to set one a work with his
fists to beat a stone wall, wherein he does but hurt his own fingers: carry
your self like a wall of brass, steadfast against his boisterous fury, and you
shall break the storm only with your suffering: sine illum frustra adlatrare
in seipso disrumpi: he will swell and puff still more, finding he cannot
stir you: do you then but suffer him, sine, and he with his own wind will
swell so fast, that it must burst him, in seipso disrumpi.

Do you know what you do when you fret? you comfort your foe; it is
perturbati animi consolatio: that is your raging enemy his delight, to see his
fury begins to work upon you, to disturb you, to shake you, to make you
reele, so he will hope to fall you: the faster you stand, the giddier your
enemy grows in rage: whiles you keep out of his way, he toils and runs
the more a madding to seek you: as soon as you show your heart disquieted,
with a convulsion of discontents, then you sport and feast your enemy: inimicum
plectere, that is, iram animumque satiare: Do you cry out, as if you were sore
beaten, as if you were outed of your quietness and safety? that is your enemy
his satiety: your plectere is his satiare. Again show your enemy in his rage,
that you are not touched, that he comes not near you: and so you increase his
hunger after you: you make a mere Tantalus of Valor, having it only hanging
on his lips, at his tongues end, and is not able to bring it any further;
Thus only with your quietness, you punish your enemy, so cruelly, that you
show a punishing power, parallel even to the Poets fiction: you can hurt as
much as Poets can faigne.

Wherefore strive to stand steadfast like a rock, and let your enemy strike,
see what he shall get by it; qui lacessat placidum, magis dolet: the more
Nazianz: in oratione de ira.
he rages, the more he suffers: who runs into passion with a man that can
bide still, does all one as wrestle with a tower, which is but to weary ones
arms: or with a phantasme, whereon you can never catch hold, to ease you. Who
is wheeled up and down, desires to fasten upon something, to hold by: when an
arrow coming from a careless Archer, threatened the safeguard of ones person;
to lay hold, but on the arrow, to break it, has been an ease unto the heart
that began to be angered. And so you see, how by being quiet, you may
exceedingly vex such as stir most against you.

If you plead, God has not made you of such a temper; for such pieces of
work, of wonder: you are no Salamandra in human society: you cannot live
amongst flames of fury, and your self not burn: if you come near furious
dispositions, you must grow warm: yet do thus much; scortch not your self
with hasty flames: leisurely, fire gives unto things best season.

Point. 6.
Antidote. 6. Revenge not your wrongs suddenly, least you repent.
DIscreet Antenodorus taught Augustus Caesar, Plutarch. in Apophtheg. Rom
that if in anger he were to act any thing, he should first, for his prologue
recite an Alphabet, and stay so much time before he did begin the Tragedy.

If you be so furious, as that your blind weapon must needs be doing
something: yet let a little time first pass, for Reason to rise and peep in
upon you; nil facias iratus priusquam 24 literas graecas percurreris, said
Antenodorus, stay a while. And certainly, a little time will strongly change
the liking of actions. This is so true, that who best govern on earth,
oft-times reprieve their own private resolutions, till a second meeting;
reason returns again her tale, and then they lead her forth into action with
a safer liking. Therefore let not Passion deny the appeal unto time. When
fear tells you, anger sits on the bench; you are discreetly advised, from
Caesar, to appeal unto Caesar, and give him time for his associate: and will
you go to duel, will you carry a man to execution in a sudden fury? who
gives quickly, you say gives twice; and so I take it, who is hurt quickly,
has ever double measure. In our sons, the first the eldest, by instinct of
nature we love best; but in our thoughts (that be likewise ours by a kind of
generation) it is not so, there the youngest; the last fruit, the latest, that
longest has been a ripening, is of best relish, and wholsomest, Posteriora
consilia saniora.

Theodosius made a Law, inviolably to be kept thorowout Theodoret. in Hist.
sua. lib. 5. c. 17.
his Empire, that sentence of death delivered in anger, should bear no force,
till after thirty days expired: then if after a review by reason, when
passion were out of Court, it went current, it might stand: for so long time
the Emperor would a stay, of whatsoever had been done in anger: if this Law
was laudable in actions civil, where reason has room to look about her: much
more it ought to be in actions martial, where reasons eyes are quite out: who
walks in the dark, must go by leisure.

Therefore do not suddenly yield to enter into a quarrel, lest you repent it;
take first Theodosius his thirty days leisure, and forgive for so long time:
of that that will never repent you: Neminem pepercisse, Tetrarcha.
multos vindicasse poenituit, says Tetrarcha: resolve well first what to do,
else you may have more ado, to undo it again, than you are aware of: you may
at any time punish: It is an easy matter to find a staff to beat a dog: but
if a mischief be once hatched, it will creep out of the nest, and do you a
shrewd turn, when you cannot fence it: you may hurt your enemy so overmuch,
that afterward you must undo your self to make him amends. That is to do
and undo.

Be sure, not to hearken to your choler, when it first breaks forth;
whatsoever satisfaction it bid you then require, believe it not: the first
anger, Prima Senec. lib. 3. de ira.
ira, says Seneca, does never guide well, nor will never be well guided, it
will not hear reason, Surda est and amens, It is wild and virulent: therefore
let it run a while, Dabimus illi spatium: Let the Whale wallow in the waves, in
the deep of discontent, give it lin^ and cord: and take you space before you
speak, before you challenge, before you fight, before you do any hurt; else in
stead of taking satisfaction, you do vengeance.

In the eighth of S. John, the Scribes tell that a Joan 8.
married woman was taken napping in another man's bosom: a shrewd fault. The
husband and his friends must needs be revenged: the Chancellours Court suddenly
censured, that with stones she should be scratcht to death, for having
defiled her marriage bed. Thus in hurly burly they came all unto Jesus, who saw
them then newly acting mad anger: for it was but modo apprehendimus, they were
even then newly entered into the action. And Jesus will act unto them the cure:
first he goes about to look a little time; Jesus must needs stay them,
whilst digito scribebat in terra, whilst he does write; and what does Jesus
write? no man has yet told: let me guess, Jesus did write the four and
twenty letters of Antenodorus: I say Jesus only aimed to get a little time,
for them to think first what they were going about, that they should not go
kill a body so suddenly.

Thus, whilst Jesus was writing his 24. Letters in that little time, the
accusers perchance reflected, they might have done wiser not to have made the
matter so public; before it was only the wives hurt, now it became the
husbands disgrace, the childrens infamy. The witnesses also reflected, such as
be so busy to have others ^ives punished, should think upon their own
faults, for thereby laws may be brought to call upon them with a smart
reckoning: And so with a little pause on the matter, but whilst Jesus writ 24.
Letters, the quarrel was quite ended, those that challenged the woman, put up
their weapons and turned their backs; that when Jesus having ended his
scribebat, lifted up his hand to give order for entering the lists of Justice,
there was no body to go with the woman to the field.

Are you so angry and offended? give me then but a little time, you cannot
loose much by it, you shall get to know whether it be fitting what you go
about; yield me a little stay; your delay at least shall leave your mischiefs
the fewer: it shall show you how to hurt another, with least harm to your
self. And peradventure you may find more: for it is ever true, that Remedia in
remissionibus morborum prosunt; at the Sen. de ira.
declining of the burning ague of anger, Doctor Reason does use to prescribe
her Physic. And so sometime you may chance to forget to quarrel by a little
delay of quarrelling; so it has happened unto many: when anger is going out,
is the best time to cure it.

If no way can help you, if nothing can stay you, but you will to the field
suddenly to a Duel; then fare you well, and call upon the gallows, as you
come home: if you be so happy, as to live, as to come to it.

Point. 7
Antidote. 7. If nothing can serve, there is a tree will serve you.
DElictorum impunitas says the Stoicke, homines facit audaciores ad malum.
Certainly had Law been rightly executed against Duellers, they had never
grown to that head and number as they are now adays. I aim not to draw
Princes to the edge of severity, which ever have in them discreet mercy for
companion. But thus I presume to speak; if ever severitie were to walk alone,
it should be to the house of the Dueller: for the tender love to humane blood
does bid you spill it, for to spare the further spilling of it. Heavens stop
nothing: let then, when the love of Powers on earth, look about them

Democritus maintained, there were two Gods; no more, and cared little for
either; Paena and Praemium, one a Punisher, and another a Rewarder. And
Duellers, I believe, do a little Democratize from the rewarder God, which
inhabites the heavens; the Dueller expects no great Preferment, and so that
God he little regards. As for the other God, the Punisher, who reigns upon
earth, and men commonly call the King, as soon as he is a little out of the
way; the Dueller thinks he can shift, and so he cares not what mischiefs he
does unto mankind: therefore the Punisher, God or his rod, should stir
abroad something the oftener.

If youth were once persuaded, that whenever they make a challenge, their
life is ended, their thread is spunne, and must needs either be cut by the
sword, or cracked on the gallows: their heads must off; either by their enemy,
or by the hangman: certainly youth would never enter into Duels. For life is
sweet, and none will cast away all hopes of keeping it; if one way they hazard
it, yet some way they still hope to save it. Men say, they fight for honor,
but who cares for honor after death? not the Dueller. Let him vaunt his fancy,
I will but smile at it: and think even those that you brag have cast
themselves away for honor, either did it to be rid of loathsome life, or yet
hoped to escape and live to enjoy the glory of their proffer.

It was wittily discoursed by the wisest of the Philosophers; the Bull roareth
and rages against the Mastives: some he worieth, others he kills, and most
he wounds: you stand by and laugh, because whiles the Bull thus lays about
him, the butcher expects, and the combat ended, the Victor Bull is carried
away to the slaughter. Even so, Duellers, they fight, they kill, they keep a
roaring like bulls; the officers laugh, and look about them, and soon after
the fight ended, the Dueller Victor is to be led by a coward to the gallows*
If our times do tell you it is not so, then give humble love leave, to drop a
tear, and whisper: young spirits may sport at bull baiting, but greedy gain
should not do so at duelling: let humane blood rise to a dearer esteem: let
that blood fall like another Nilus, with such noise, such cries for vengeance,
that those which si^ at the banks of Justice (before whom these bloody streams
must come) be ever deafened unto prices and prayers; else time may warrant
vices, to set fury a work, a task for the extirpation of mankind, to rid the
earth of men, for a piece of money.

To talk to you here of things beyond the Moon: of a most great God, of a most
strict Judge; to come near you, and speak of a most severe punishment, an
eternal smart laid on by a hand so heavy, that at one blow, it could strike
all the Devils, from the highest of the Heavens, to the lowest Center of the
earth; were to talk to you Nonsense: (therefore here in a corner, I join
gallows and goodness together as equally pleasing you) they may be pretty
stories to tell women and children; but you will fight with the Devil
himself; nay, God does wisely to stand out of your way, within doors in his
heaven, there you mean not trouble him; nor I my self with you any longer,
rill you learn more wit.

FINIS.

