THE HISTORYE OF The Damnable Life and deserved Death of Doctor John Faustus.

Newly imprinted, and in convenient places, imperfect matter amended: according
to the true Copy printed at Franckfort, and translated into English by P. F.
Gent.

LONDON. Printed by Edw: All-de for Edward White, and are to be sold at his
Shop near the little North door of St. Paul's Church, at the Sign of the Gun.
1618.

A Discourse of the most famous Doctor John Faustus of Wittenberg in Germany
Coniurer, and Necromancer: wherein is declared many strange things that he
himself had seen and done in the earth, and in the air, with his bringing
up, his Travails, Studies, and last end.
Of his Parentage and Birth. Chap. 1.
JOHN Faustus borne in the Town of Rhodes, being in the Province of Weimer in
Germany, his Father a poor husbandman, and not able well to bring him up, but
having an Uncle at Wittenberg a rich man, and without issue, took this Faustus
from his Father and made him his heir: insomuch that his Father was no more
troubled with him, for he remained with his uncle at Wittenberg, where he was
kept at the University in ye same City to study divinity: but Faustus being of
a naughty mind and otherwise adicted, applied not his studies but took
himself to other exercises, the which his uncle oftentimes hearing, rebuked
him for it, as Eli oftentimes rebuked his children for sinning against the
Lord, even so this good man labored to have Faustus apply his study of
divinity, that he might come to the knowledge of God and his Laws, but it is
manifest that many virtuous parents have wicked children, as Caine, Reuben,
Absolon, and such like have been to their Parents, so this Faustus having
godly parents, who seeing him to be of a toward wit were very desirous to bring
him by in those virtuous studies, namly of divinity, but he gave himself
secretly to study Necromancy and Coniuration, insomuch that few or none could
perceive his profession.

But to the purpose: Faustus continued at study in the University, and was by
the Rectors and sixteen Masters afterward examined how he had profited in
his studies, and being found by them that none for his time were able to argue
with him in divinity, or for the excellency of his wisdom to compare with him,
with one consent they made him Doctor of Divinity. But Doctor Faustus within
short time after he had obtained his degree, fell into such fantasies and deep
cogitations, that he was mocked of many, and of the most part of the Students
was called the Speculator: and sometimes he would throw the Scriptures from
him, as though he had no care of his former profession: so that he began a most
ungodly life, as hereafter more at large may appear, for the old proverb
says, who can hold that will away? so who can hold Faustus from the devil
that seeks after him with all his endeavor? For he accompanied himself with
diverse that were seen in those deuillish arts, and that had the Chaldean,
Persian, Hebrew, Arabian, and Greek tongues, using figures, characters,
coniurations, incantations, with many other ceremonies belonging to those
internal arts, as necromancy, charms, sooth^ ayings, witchcraft, enchantment,
being delighted with their books, words, and names so well, that he studied
day and night therein, insomuch, that he could not abide to be called D. of
Divinity, but waxed a worldly man, and named himself an Astrologian, and a
Mathematician, and for shadow, sometimes a Physician, and did great cures,
namely, with herbs, roots, waters, drinks, receipts, and clysters. And without
doubt he was passing wise, and excellent perfect in the holy Scriptures, but he
that knows his masters will and does it not, is worthy to be beaten with
many stripes. It is written, No man can serve two masters: and, Thou shall not
tempt the Lord thy God: but Faustus threw all this in the wind, and made his
soul of no estimation: regarding more his worldly pleasures then the joys to
come: therefore at the day of Judgment there is no hope of his redemption.

How Doctor Faustus began to practice in his deuilish Art, and how he coniured
the devil, making him to appear and meet him on the morrow at his own house.
Chap. 2.
YOU have heard before that all Faustus mind was set to study the Arts of
Necromancy and Coniuration, the which exercise he followed day and night: and
taking to him the wings of an Eagle, thought to fly over the whole world, and
to know the secrets of heaven and earth: for his speculation was so
wonderful, being expert in using his Vocabula, Figures, Characters,
Coniuration, and other Ceremonial actions, that in all haste he put in
practice to bring the Devil before him. And taking his way to a thick Wood
near to Wittenberg, called in the Germane tongue Spisser Walt: that is in
English the Spissers wood: (as Faustus would oftentimes boast of it amongst his
crew b^ing in his iollity) he came into the same wood toward evening into a
cr^sse way, where he made with a wand a Circle in the dust, and within that
many more Circles and Characters: and thus he p^st away the time until it was
nine or ten of the clock in the night, then began Doctor Faustus to call on
Mephostophiles the Spirit* and to charge him in the name of Beelzebub, to
appeace there personally without any long stay: then presently the devil began
so great a rumor in the wood, as if heaven and earth would have come together,
with wind, that trees bowed their tops to the ground: then fell the devil to
bleat as if the whole wood had been full of Lions, and suddenly about the
circle ran the devil, as if a thousand wagons had been running together on
paued stones. After this, at the four corners of the wood it thundered
horribly, with such lightnings, as if the whole world to his seeming had been
on fire. Faustus all this while half amazed at the devils so long tarying, and
doubting whether he were best to abide any more such horrible coniurings,
thought to leave his circle and depart. whereupon the devil made him such
music of all sorts, as if the Nymphs themselves had been in place: whereat
Faustus was revived, and stood stoutly in his Circle aspecting his purpose, and
began again to conjure the Spirit Mephostophiles, in the name of the Prince of
Devils to appear in his likeness: whereat suddenly over his head hung honering
in the air a mighty Dragon: then calls Faustus again after his deuillish
manner, at which there was a monstrous cry in the wood, as if hell had been
open, and all the tormented souls crying to God for mercy: presently not three
fathame above his head fell a flame, in manner of a lightning, and changed it
self into a Globe, yet Faustus feared it not, but did persuade himself that
the devil should give him his request before he would leave. Oftentimes after
to his companions he would boast, that he had the stoutest head under the cope
of heaven at commandment: whereat they answered, they knew none stouter then
the Pope, or Emperor: but Doctor Faustus said, the Head that is my servant is
above all on earth, and repeated certain words out of Saint Paul to the
Ephesians to make his argument good: the Prince of this world is upon earth,
and under heaven. Well, let us come again to his coniuration where we left him
at his fiery Globe. Faustus vexed at his spirits so long tarrying, used his
charms, with full purpose not to depart before he had his intent, and crying
on Mephostophiles the Spirit suddenly the globe opened, and sprung up in
height of a man, so burning a time, in the end it converted to the shape of a
fiery man. This pleasant beast ran about the Circle a great while, and lastly
appeared in the manner of a gray Friar, asking Faustus what was his request?
Faustus commanded that the next morning at twelve of the clock he should
appear to him a^ his house: but ye devil would in no wise grant: Faustus
b^gan again to conjure him in the name of Beelzebub, that he should fulfill his
request* whereupon the Spirit agreed, and so they departed each one his way.

The conference of Doctor Faustus with his Spirit Mephostophiles the morning
following at his own house. Chap. 3.
DOctor Faustus having commanded the Spirit to be with him at his hour
appointed, he came and appeared in his chamber, demanding of Faustus what his
desire was? then began Doctor Faustus anew with him to conjure him that he
should be obedient unto him, and to answer him certain articles, and to
fulfill them in all points.

1. That the Spirit should serve him and be obedient unto him in all things
that he asked of him from that hour till the hour of his death. 2. Further,
any thing that he desired of him he should bring it him. 3. Also that in all
Faustus his demands and interrogations, the spirit should tell him nothing but
that which was true.
Hereupon the Spirit answered, and laid his case forth, that he had no such
power of himself, until he had first given his Prince (that was ruler over
him) to under stand thereof, and to know if he could obtain so much of his
Lord: therefore speak further that and may do thy whole desire to my prince,
for it is not in my power to fulfill without his leave. Show me the cause why
(said Faustus?) the spirit answered Faustus thou shall understand that with us
it is even as well a Kingdom as with you on earth: yea, we have our Rulers and
Servants, as I my self am one, and we name our whole number the Legion: for
although that Lucifer is thrust and fallen out of heaven through his pride and
high mind, yet he has notwithstanding a Legion of Devils at his commandment
that we call the Oriental Princes, for his power is great and infinite. Also
there is a power in Meridie, in Septentrio, in Occidente: and for that Lucifer
has his Kingdom under heaven, we must change and give our selves to men to
serve them at their pleasure. It is also certain we have never as yet opened
unto any man the truth of our dwelling, neither of our ruling, neither what ou^
power is, neither have we given any man any gift, or learned him any thing,
except he promise to be ours.

Doctor Faustus upon this arose where he sat and said, I will have my request,
and yet I will not be damned. The Spirit answered, then shall thou want thy
desire, and yet art thou mine notwithstanding, if any man would detayne thee it
is in vain, for thy infidelity has confounded thee.

Hereupon spoke Faustus, get thee hence from me, and take S. Valentines
farewell and Crisman with thee, yet I conjure thee that thou be here at
evening, and bethink thy self of that I have asked thee, and ask thy Princes
counsel therein. Mephostophiles the spirit thus answered, vanished away,
leaving Faustus in his study, where he sat pondring with himself, how he
might obtain his request of the Devil without loss of his soul: yet fully
was resolved in himself rather then to want his pleasure, to do what the
spirit and his Lord should condition upon.

The second time of the Spirit appearing to Faustus in his house and their
parley. Chap. 4.
FAustus continued in his deuilish cogitations, never moving out of the place
where the spirit left him, such was his fervent lone to the devil: the night
approaching, this swift flying spirit appeared to Faustus, offering himself
with all submission to his service, with full authority from his Prinre to do
whatsoever he would request, if so be Faustus would promise to be his: this
answer I bring thee and an answer must thou make by me again, yet will I
hear what is thy desire, because thou have sworn me to be hear at this time.
D. Faustus gave him this answer, though faintly (for his souls sake) that his
request was none other but to become a Devil, or at the least a limb of him,
and that the spirit should agree unto these articles as follows.

1. That he might be a spirit in shape and quallity. 2. That Mephostophiles
should be his servant at his commandment. 3. That Mephostophiles should bring
him any thing, and do for him whatsoever. 4. That at all times he should be in
his house invisible to all men except only to himself, and at his
commandment to show himself. 5. Lastly, that Mephostophiles should at all
times appear at his command, in what form or shape soever he would.
Upon these points the spirit answered Doctor Faustus, that all this should be
granted him and fulfilled, and more: if he would agree unto him upon certain
articles as follows.

First that Doctor Faustus should give himself to the Lord Lucifer, body and
soul.

Secondly, for confirmation of the same he should make him a writing written
with his own blood.

Thirdly, that he would be an enemy to all Christian people.

Fourthly, that he would deny the Christian belief.

Fifthly, that he let not any man change his opinion, if so be any man should
go about to dissuade or withdraw him from if.

Further, the spirit promised Faustus to give him certain years to live in
health and pleasure, and when such years were expired, that then Faustus
should be fetched away, and if he would hold these articles and conditions,
that then he should have all whatsoever his heart would with or desire, and
that Faustus should quickly perceive himself to be a spirit in all manner of
actions whatsoever. Hereupon Doctor Faustus his mind was so inflamed, that he
forgot his soul, and promised Mephostophiles to hold all things as he had
mentioned them: he thought the Devil was not black as they use to paint him,
nor hell so hot as the people say, etc.

The third parley between Doctor Faustus and Mephostophiles about a
conclusion. Chap. 5.
AFter Doctor Faustus had made his promise to the Devil, in the morning
betimes he called the spirit before him, and commanded him that he should
always come to him like a Friar, after the order of St. Francis, with a bell
in his hand like S. Anthony, and to ring it once or twice before he appeared,
that he might know of his certain commiyg. Then Faustus demanded of his spirit
what was his name. The spirit answered, my name is as thou say,
Mephostophiles, and I am a Prince, but a servant to Lucifer, and all the
circuit from Septentrio to the Meridian I rule under him. Even at these words
was this wicked wretch Faustus inflamed, to hear himself to have gotten so
great a Potentate to serve him, forgetting the Lord his maker and Christ his
Redeemer, became an enemy to all man kind, yea worse then the Giants, whom
the Poets feign to clime the hills to make war with the Gods: not unlike the
enemy of God and his Christ, that for his pride was cast into hell: so likewise
Faustus forgot that high climbers catch the greatest falls, and sweet meats
have often the sowrest sauce.

After a while Faustus promised Mehostophiles to write and make his obligation,
with full assurance of the articles in the chapter before rehearsed. A
pitiful case (Christian Reader) for certainly this letter or obligation was
found in his house after his most lamentable end, with all the rest of his
damnable practices used in his whole life.

Therefore I wish all Christians to take example by this wicked Doctor, and to
be comforted in Christ, contenting themselves with that vocation, whereunto it
has pleased God to call them, and not to esteem the vain delight of this
life, as did this unhappy Faustus in giving his soul to the devil: and to
confirm it the more assuredly, he took a small penknife and pricked a vain in
his left hand, and for certainty thereupon, were seen on his hand these words
written, as if they had been written with blood, O homo fuge, whereat the
spirit vanished, but Faustus continued in his damnable mind.

How Doctor Faustus set his blood in a saucer on warm ashes, and writ as
follows. Chap. 6.
I John Faustus Doctor, do openly acknowledge with mine own hand, to the
greater force and strengthening of this letter, that since thence I began to
study and speculate the course and order of the Elements, I have not found
through the guilt that is given me from above, any such learning and wisdom,
that can bring me to my desires: and for that I find that men are unable to
instruct me any further in the matter, now have I Doctor Faustus, unto the
hellish Prince of Orient, and his messenger Mephostophiles, given both body and
soul, upon such conditions, that they shall learn me, and fulfill my desire
in all things as they have promised and vowed unto me, with due obedience unto
me according to the articles mentioned between us.

Further, I covenant and grant with them by these presents, that at the end of
24. years next ensuing the date of this present letter, they being expired and
I in the mean time, during the said years be served of them at my will, they
accomplishing my desires to the full in all points as we are agreed: that then
I give them all power to do with me at their pleasure, to rule, to send,
fet^h, or carry me or mine, be it either body, soul, flesh, blood, or goods,
into their habitation, be it wheresoever: and hereupon, I defy God and his
Christ, all the host of Heaven, and all living creatures that bear the shape
of God, yea all that lives: and again I say it, and it shall be so. And to the
more strengthening of this writing, I have written it with mine own hand and
blood being in perfect memory: And hereupon, I subscribe to it with my name and
title, calling all the infernal, middle, and supreme powers to witness of this
my Letter and subscription:

John Faustus approved in the Elements and the spiritual Doctor.

How Mephostophiles came for his writing, and in what manner he appeared, and
his sights he showed him: and how he caused him to keep a copy of his own
writings. Chap. 7.
DOctor Faustus sitting pensive, having but one only boy with him, suddenly
there appeared his Spirit Mephostophiles, in likeness of a fiery man, from whom
issued most horrible fiery flames, insomuch that the boy was afraid, but being
hardened by his Master he had him stand still and he should have no harm: the
spirit began to bleare as in a singing manner. This pretty sport pleased Doctor
Faustus well, but he would not call his Spirit into his counting house, until
he had seen more: anon was heard a rushing of armed men, and trampling of
horses: this ceasing, came in a kennell of Hounds, and they chased a great
Heart in the Hall, and there the Heart was slain: Faustus took heart, came
forth, and looked upon the Heart, but presently before him there was a Lion and
a Dragon together fighting so fiercely, that Faustus thought they would have
brought down the house, but the Dragon overcame the Lion and so they vanished.

After this came in a Pea-cocke with a Pea-hen, the cock brusling of his
tail, and turning to the female, beat her and so vanished. Afterward followed
a furious Bull, that with a full fiercenes ran upon Faustus, but coming near
him vanished away. Afterward followed a great old Ape, this Ape offered
Faustus the hand, but he refused: so the Ape ran out of the hall again.
Hereupon fell a mist in the hall, that Faustus saw no light, but it lasted not,
and so soon as it was gone, there lay before Faustus 2. great sackes one full
of gold the other full of silver.

Lastly, was heard by Faustus all manner instruments of music as Organs,
Clarigolds, Lutes, Vialls, Citternes, Waights, Hornpipes, Flutes, Anomes,
Harpes, and all manner other instruments: which so ravished his mind, that he
thought he had bin in another world, forgot both body and soul, insomuch that
he was minded never to change his opinion concerning that which he had done.
Hereat came Mephostophiles into the hall to Faustus, in apparel like unto a
Friar to whom Faustus spoke, thou have done me a wonderful pleasure in showing
me this pastime, if thou continue as thou have begun, thou shall win my heart
and soul, yea and have it. Mephostophiles answered this is nothing, I will
please thee better, yea, that thou may know my power and all, ask what thou will request of me, that shall thou have, conditisnally hold thy promise, and
give me thy handwriting, at which words the wretch thrust forth his hand,
saying hold thee there have thou my promise: Mephostophiles took the writing,
and willed Faustus to take a copy of it: with that the perverse Faustus being
resolute in his damnation, wrote a copy thereof, and gave the Devil the one,
and kept in store the other. Thus the spirit and Faustus were agreed and dwelt
together, no doubt there was a virtuous housekeeping.

The manner how Faustus proceeded in his damnable life and of the diligent
service that Mephostophiles used toward him. Chap. 8.
DOctor Faustus having given his soul to the Devil, renouncing all the powers
of heaven, confirming this lamentable action with his own blood, and having
already delivered his writing, now into the Devils hand, the which so puffed up
his heart, that he forgot the mind of a man, and thought himself to be a
spirit. This Faustus, dwelt at his uncles house at Wittenberg, who dyed, and
bequeathed it in his Testament to his coosen Faustus. Faustus kept a boy with
him, that was his Scholar, and unhappy wag, called Christopher Wagner, to whom
this sport and life that he faw his master follow seemed pleasant. Faustus
leued the boy well, keeping to make him as good or better seen in his deuillish
exercises then himself, and he was fellow with Mephostophiles: otherwise
Faustus had no company in his house but himself, his boy, and his spirit, that
ever was diligent at Faustus command, going about the house clothed like a
Friar, with a little bell in his hand seen of none but Faustus. For his
victuals and other necessaries, Mehostophiles brought him at his pleasure from
the Duke of Saxon, the Duke of Bauaria, and the Bishop of Saltzburg: for they
had many times their best wine stolen out of their sellers by Mephostophiles:
likewise their provision for their own table, such meat as Faustus wished for
his spirit brought him in: besides that, Faustus himself was become so cunning
that when he opened his window, what foul soever he wished for, it came
presently flying into the house, were it never so dainty. Moreover, Faustus,
and his boy went in sumptuous apparel, the which Mephostophiles stole from the
mercers of Norenberg, Auspurg, Franckford and Libtzig: for it was hard for them
to find a lock to keep out such a thief. All their mainteinance was but
stoine and borrowed ware: and thus they lived anodious life in the sight of God
though as yet the world were unacquainted with their wickedness. It must be so,
for their fruits be none other, as Christ faith in John, where he calls the
Devil a thief and a murderer: and that found Faustus, for he stole him away
both body and soul.

How Doctor Faustus would have married, and how the devil had almost killed
him for it. Chap. 9.
DOrtor Faustus continued thus in his Epicurish life day and night and believed
not that there was a God, hell, or devil: he thought that body and soul dyed
together: and had quite forgot Divinity, or the immortality of his soul, but
stood in his damnable heresy day and night. And bethinking himself of a wife,
called Mephostophiles to counsel, which would in no case agree; demanding of
him if he would break the covenant made with him, or if he had forget it?
Have not thou (quoth Mephostophiles) sworn thy self an enemy to God and all
creatures? To this I answer thee thou can not marry, thou can not serve
two masters, God and my Prince: for wedlock is a chief institution ordained
of God, and that thou have promised to desie, as we do all, and that have thou
only done, and moreover thou have confirmed it with thy blood: persuade thy
self that what thou do in contempt of wedlock, it is all to thine own
delight. Therefore Faustus look well about thee, and bethink thy self
better, and I with thee to change thy mind, for if thou kee not what thou have
promised in thy writing, we will tear thee in pieces like the dust under thy
feet: therefore sweet Faustus think with what unquiet life, anger, strife, and
debate thou shall live in when thou take a wife, therefore change thy mind.

Doctor Faustus was with these speeches in despair, and as all that have
forsaken the Lord can build upon no good foundation, so this wretched Doctor
having forsook the rock, fell into despair with himself, fearing if he
should motion Matrimony any more, that the devil would tear him in pieces.
For this time (quoth. he to Mephostophiles) I am not minded to marry. Then do
thou well answeied his spirit. But within two hours after Faustus called
again his spirit, which came in his old manner like a Friar. Then Faustus
said unto him, I am not able to resist or bridle my fancy, I must and will have
a wife, and I pray thee give thy consent to it. Suddenly upon these words came
such a whirle-winde about the place, that Faustus thought the whole house would
have come down, all the doors in the house flew off the hooks: after all
this his house was full of smoke, and the floor covered over with ashes,
which when Doctor Faustus perceived, he would have gone up stairs, and flying
up, he was taken and thrown down into the hall that he was not able to stir
hand nor foot: then round about him ran a monstrous circle of fire, never
standing still, that Faustus fried as he lay, and thought there to have been
burned. Then cried he out to his spirit Mephostophiles for help, promising him
he would live in all things as he had vowed by his handwriting. Hereupon
appeared unto him an ougly devil, so fear full and monstrous to behold, that
Faustus durst not look on him. The devil said, what would thou have
Faustus? how likest thou thy wedding? what mind art thou in now? Faustus
answered, he had forgot his promise, desiring him of pardon, and he would talk
no more of such things. Thou were best so to do, and so vanished from him.

After appeared unto him his friar Mephostophiles, with a bell in his hand, and
spoke to Faustus. It is no jesting with us, hold thou that which thou have
vowed, and we will perform as we have promised, and more then that, thou shall
have thy hearts desire of what woman soever thou will, be she alive or dead,
and so long as thou will thou shall keep her by thee.

These words pleased Faustus wonderful well, and repented himself that he was
so foolish to wish himseife married, that might have any woman in the whole
Cittye brought to him at his command: the which he practiced and perseuered in
a long time.

Questions put forth by Doctor Faustus unto his spirit Mephostophiles. Cap. 10.
DOctor Faustus living in all manner of pleasure that his heart could desire,
continuing in his amorous drifts, his delicate fare, and costly apparel,
called on a time his Mephostophiles to him, who being come, brought with him a
book in his hand of all manner of deuillish and enchanted Arts, the which he
gave Faustus, saying, hold my Faustus, work now thy hearts desire: The copy of
this enchanting book was afterward found by his servant Christopher Wagner.
Well (quoth. Faustus to his spirit) I have called thee to know what thou can do
if I have need of thy help. Then answered Mephostophiles and said, my Lord
Faustus, I am a flying spirit, yea so swift as thought can think to do
whatsoever. Here Faustus said, but how came thy Lord and master Lucifer to
have so great a fall from heaven? Mephostophiles answered: My Lord Lucifer was
a fair Angel, created of God as inmortall, and being placed in Seraphins,
which are above the Cherubins, he would have presumed unto the Throne of God,
with, intent to have thrust God out of his seat. Upon this presumption the
Lord cast him down headlong, and where before he was an Angel of right, now
dwells in darkness, not able to come near his first place, without God send
for him to appear before him, as Raphiel: but unto the lower degree of Angels,
that have their conversation with men, he may come, but not unto the second
degree of heavens that is kept by the Archangels, namely Michaell and
Gabriell, for these are called Angels of Gods wonders: yet are these far
inferior places to that from whence my Lord and Master Lucifer fell: and thus
far Faustus because thou art one of the beloved children of my Lord Lucifer,
following and feeding my mind in manner as he did his, I have shortly resolved
thy request, and more I will do for thee at thy pleasure. I thank thee
Mephostophiles (quoth Faustus) come let us now go rest, for it is night: upon
this they left their communication.

How Doctor Faustus dreamed that he had scene hell in his sleep, and how he
questioned with his spirit of matters concerning hell, with the spirits
answer. Chap. 11.
THe night following after Faustus communication with Mephostophiles, as
concerning the fall of Lucifer, Doctor Faustus dreamed that he had seen part of
hell, but in what manner it was, or in what place, he knew not: whereby he was
much troubled in mind, and called unto him Mephostophiles his spirit: saying
unto him, I pray thee resolve me in this dout: what is hell, what substance is
it of, in what place stands it, and when was it made? Mephostophiles answered:
Faustus, thou shall know, that before the fall of my Lord Lucifer there was no
hell, but even then was hell ordained: it is no substance, but a confused
thing, for I tell thee, that before all Elements were made, or the earth seen,
the spirit of God moved upon the waters, and darkness was over all: but when
God said, let there be light, it was so at his word, and the light was on Gods
right hand, and God praised the light. Judge thou further, God stood in the
middle, the darkness was on his left hand, in the which my Lord was bound in
Chains until the day of Judgment: in this confused hell, is naught to find
but a sulphurish fire, and stinking mist or fog: Further, we devils know not
what substance it is of, but a confused thing: for as a bubble of water flies
before the wind, so does hell before the breath of God. Moreover, we devils
know not how God has laid the foundation of our hell, nor whereof it is, but
to be short Faustus, we know that hell has neither bottom nor end.

The second question put forth by Doctor Faustus to his spirit, what kingdoms
there are in hell, how many, and what were the rulers names? Chap. 12.
FAustus spoke again to his Spirit, saying: thou speak of wonderful
things. I pray thee now tell me what kingdoms is there in your hell, how many
are there, what are they called, and who rules them? the Spirit answered him,
my Faustus, know that hell is, as thou would think with thy self an other
world, in the which we have our being under the earth, even to the heavens:
within the circumference whereof, are contained ten kingdoms, namely:

1 Lacus mortis. 2 Stagnum ignis. 3 Terra tenebrosa. 4 Tartarus. 5 Terra
obliuionis. 6 Gehenna. 7 Herebus. 8 Barathrum. 9 Stix. 10 Acheron.
The which kingdoms are governed by five Kings, that is, Lucifer in the
Orient, Beelzebub in Septentrio, Belial in Meridie, Ascaroth in the Occident,
and Phlegeton in the midst of them all: whose Rule and dominions, have none end
until the day of doom. And thus far Faustus have thou heard of our rule and
Kingdom.

Another question put forth by Doctor Faustus to his spirit concerning his
Lord Lucifer, with the sorrow that Faustus fell afterward into. Chap. 13.
DOctor Faustus began again to reason with Mephostophiles requiring him to
tell him in what form and shape and in what estimation his Lord Lucifer was
when he was in favor with God? whereupon his spirit required of him three
days respite, which Faustus granted. The three days being expired,
Mephostophiles gave him this answer: Faustus, my Lord Lucifer (so called now,
for that he was banished out of the clear light of heaven) was at the first
an Angel of God, yea he was so of God ordained, for shape, pomp, authority,
worthiness, and dwelling, that he far exceeded all the other creatures of God,
yea our gold and precious stones: and so illuminated, that he far surpassed
the brightness of the Sun and all other Stars, where God placed him on the
Cherubins: he had a Kingly office, and was always before Gods seat, to the
end he might be the more perfect in all his beings: But when he began to be
high minded, proud, and so presumptuous that he would usurp the seat of Gods
majesty, then was he banished out from amongst the heavenly powers, separated
from their abiding into the manner of a fiery stone, that no water is able to
quench but continually burns until the end of the world.

Doctor Faustus when he had heard the words of his spirit began to consider
with himself, having diverse and sundry opinions in his head: and very
pensiuely, saying nothing unto his spirit, he went into his chamber, and laid
him on his bed, recording the words of Mephostophiles, which so pierced his
heart, that he fell in sighing and great ^^-mentation, crying out: alas, ah woe
is me what have I done? Even so shall it come to pass with me: am not I also a
creature of Gods making, bearing his own Image and similitude, into whom he
has breathed the spirit of life and immortality, unto whom he has made all
things living subject? but woe is me my haughty mind, proud aspiring
stomach, and filthy flesh, has brought my soul into perpetual damnation,
yea pride has abused my understanding, insomuch that I have forgot my Maker,
the spirit of God is departed from me, I have promised the Devil my soul: and
therefore it is but a folly for me to hope for grace, but it must be even with
me as with Lucifer, thrown into perpetual burning fire: ah woe is me that
ever I was borne. In this perplexity lay this miserable Doctor Faustus, having
quite forgot his faith in Christ, never falling to repentance truly, thereby to
attain the grace and holy spirit of God again, the which would have been
able to have resisted the strong assaults of Satan: for although he had made
him a promise, yet he might have remembered through true repentance, sinners
once come again into the favor of God; which faith the faithful firmly
hold, knowing they that kill the body are not able to hurt the soul: but he
was in all his opinions doubtful without faith or hope, and so he continued.

Another disputation betwixt Doctor Faustus and his Spirit, of the power of the
Devil, and his envy to mankind. Chap. 14.
AFter Doctor Faustus had a while pondred and sorrowed with himself of his
wretched estate, he called again Mephostophiles unto him, commanding him to
tell him the judgment, rule, power, attempts, tyranny, and temptation of the
devil, and why he was moved to such kind of living: whereupon the spirit
answered to his question: that thou demaundst of me will turn thee to no small
coffeehouse, therefore thou should not have desired me of such matters,
for it touches the secrets of our Kingdom, although I cannot deny to resolve
thy request. Therefore know thou Faustus, that so soon as my Lord Lucifer fell
from heaven, he became a mortal enemy both to God and man, and has used (as
now he does) all manner of tyranny to the destruction of man, as is manifest by
diverse examples: one falling suddenly dead, another hangs himself, another
drownes himself, others stab themselves, others unlawfully despair and so
come to utter confusion: The first man Adam that was made perfect to the
similitude of God, was by my L. policy, the whole decay of man, yea Faustus in
him was the beginning and first tyranny of my Lord Lucifer to man: the like did
he with Caine, the same with ye children of Israel, when they worshipped
strange Gods and fell to whordome with strange women: the like with Saul: so
did he by the seven husbands of her that after was the wife of Tobias:
likewise Dagon our fellow brought to destruction 50000. men whereupon the Ark of God was stolen: and Belial made David to number his men, whereupon were
slains 60000. also he deceived King Solomon that worshipped the Gods of the
heathen, and there are such spirits innumerable that can come by men and tempt
them, drive them to sin, and weaken their belief: for we rule the hearts of
Kings and Princes, stirring them up to war and blood shed: and to this intent
do we spread our selves throughout all the world, as the utter enemies of God
and his son Christ, yea, and all that worship them: and that thou know by
thy self Faustus, how we have dealt by thee: To this said Faustus, then thou
did also beguile me: I did what I could to help thee forward: for so soon as
I saw how thy heart did despise thy degree taken in divinity, and did study
to search and know the secrets of our kingdom, then did I enter into thee,
giving thee diverse foul and filthy cogitations, pr^^king thee forward in thine
intent, persuading thee thou could never attain to thy desire, till thou
had the help of some devil: and when thou wast delighted in this, then
took I root in thee, and so firmly, that thou gave thy self to us both
body and soul, which thou can not deny. Hereat answered Faustus, Thou say
true, I cannot deny it: Ah woe is me most miserable Faustus, how have I been
deceived? had I not had a desire to know too much, I had not been in this case:
for having studied the lives of the holy Saints and Prophets, and thereby
thought to understand sufficient heavenly matters, I thought my self not
worthy to be called Doctor Faustus, if I should not also know the secrets of
hell, and be associated with the furious Fiendes thereof: now therefore must I
be rewarded accordingly. Which speeches being vttred, Faustus went very
sorowfully away from his Spirit.

How Doctor Faustus desired again of his Spirit, to know the secrets and
pains of hell: and whether those damned devils and their company might ever
come into the favor and love of God again. Chap. 15.
DOctor Faustus was ever pondering with himself, how he might get loose from
so damnable an end as he had given himself unto both of soul and body: but
his repentance was like to that of Cain and Judas, he thought his sins greater
then God could forgive: hereupo^ resting his mind, he looked up to heaven, but
saw nothing therein, for his heart was so possessed of the devil, that he could
think of naught else but of hell and the pains thereof. Wherefore in all the
haste he calls unto him his Spirit Mephostophiles, desiring him to tell him
some more of the secrets of hell, what pains the damned were in, and how they
were tormented? and whether the damned souls might get again the favor of
God, and so be released out of their torments, or not: whereupon the Spirit
answered, My Faustus, thou may well leave to question any more of such
matters, for they will but disquiet thy mind, I pray thee what meanest thou?
think thou through these thy fantasies, to escape us? No, for if thou
should clime up to heaven, there to hide thy self, yet would I thrust thee
down again: for thou art mine, and thou belongst unto our society: therefore
sweet Faustus, thou will repent this thy foolish demand, except thou be
content that I shall tell thee nothing. Quoth Faustus, ragingly, I will know or
I will not live, wherefore dispatch and tell me: to whom Mephostophiles
answered, Faustus, it is no trouble unto me at all to tell thee, and therefore
since thou forcest me thereto, I will tell thee things to the terror of thy
soul, if thou will abide the hearing. Thou will have me to tell thee of the
secrets of Hell, and of the pains thereof: know Faustus that hell has many
figures, semblances and names, but it cannot be named nor figured in such sort
unto the living that are damned, as it is to those that are dead, and do both
see and feel the torments thereof: for hell is said to be deadly, out of the
which came never any to life again but one, but he is nothing for thee to
reckon upon: hell is blood thirsty, and is never satisfied: hell is a valley
into the which the damned souls fall: for so soon as the soul is out of man's
body, it would gladly go to the place from whence it came, and climeth up
above the highest hills even to the heavens, where being by the Angels of the
first Mobile denied entertainment (in consideration of their evil life spent
on the earth) they fall into the deepest pit or valley which has no bottom,
into a perpetual fire, which shall never be quenched: for like as the Flint
thrown into the water, loses not his virtue, neither is his fire
extinguished, even so the hellish fire is unquenchable: and even as the flint
stone in the fire burned red hot, and consumes not, so likewise the damned
souls in our hellish fire are ever burning, but their pains never
diminishing. Therefore is hell called the everlasting pain, in which is
neither hope nor mercy. So it is called utter darkness, in which we see
neither the light of the Sun, Moon, nor Star: and were our darkness like
the darkness of the night, yet were there hope of mercy, but ours is
perpetual darkness, clean exempt from the face God. Hell has also a place
within it called Chasma, out of the which issues all manner of thunders,
lightnings, with such shrikings, and waylings, that oftentimes the very Devils
themselves stand in fear thereof: for one while it sends forth winds with
exceeding snow, hail, and rain, congraling the water into Ice: with the which
the damned are frozen, gnash their teeth, howl and cry, and yet cannot dye.

Other whiles, it sends forth most horrible hot mistes or fogges with
flashing flames of fire and Brimstone, wherein the sorrowful souls of the
damned lie broiling in their reiterated torments: yea, Faustus hell is called a
prison, wherein the damned lie continually bound: it is called Pernicies and
Exitium, death, destruction, hurtfulnesse, mischief, a mischance, a pitiful
and an evil thing world without and. We have also with us in hell a ladder,
reaching of exceeding height, as though the top of the same would touch the
heavens, on which the damned ascend to seek the blessing of God, but through
their infidelity, when they are at the very highest degree, they fall down
again into their former miseries, complaining of the heat of that
unquenchable fire: yea sweet Faustus, so must thou understand of hell, the
while thou art so desirous to know the secrets of our Kingdom. And mark
Faustus, hell is the nurse of death, the heat of all fire, the sh^dow of
heaven and earth, the oblivion of all goodness, the pains unspeakable, the
griefs vnremouable, the dwelling of devils, Dragons, Serpents, Adders, Toades,
Crocodiles, and all manner of venomo us and noisome creatures: the puddle of
sin, the stinking fogge ascending from the st^gian Lake, brimstome, pitch,
and all manner of unclean metals, the perpetual and unquenchable fire, the
end of whose miseries was never purposed by God: yea, yea, Faustus, thou say
I shall, I must, nay I will tell thee the secrets of our kingdom, for thou
buyest it dearly, and thou must and shall be pertaker of our torments, that
(as the Lord God said) never shall cease: for Hell, the woman's belly, and the
earth, are never satisfied: there shall thou abide horrible torments,
trembling, gnashing of teeth, houling, crying, burning, freezing, melting,
swiming in a laborinth of miseries, scalding, smoking in thine eyes, stinking
in thy nose, horsenes of thy speech, deafenes of thine ears, trembling of
thine hands, biting thine own tongue with pain, thy heart crushed as in a
press, thy bones broken, the devils tossing firebrands upon thee, yea thy
whole carcass tossed upon muck for is, from one devil to another, yea Faustus
then will thou wish for death, and he will fly from thee, thine unspeakable
torments shall be every day augmented more and more, for the greater the sin,
the greater is the punishment: how likest thou this my Faustus? a resolution
answerable to thy request.

Lastly, thou will have me tell thee that which belongs only to God, which
is, if it be possible for the damned to come again in to the favor of God, or
not: why Faustus thou know that this is against thy promise, for what
should thou desire to know that, having already given thy soul to the
devil, to have the pleasure of this world, and to know the secrets of hell:
therefore art thou damned, and how can thou then came again to the favor of
God? Wherefore I directly answer no: for whomsoever GOD has forsaken and
thrown into hell, must there abide his wrath and indignation in that
unquenchable fire, where is no hope nor mercy to be looked for, but abiding in
perpetual pains world without end: for even as much it avails thee Faustus,
to hope for the favor of God again, as Luciser himself, who indeed although
he and we all have a hope, yet it is to small avail, and takes none effect,
for out of that place God will neither hear crying nor sighing: if he do,
thou shall have as little remorse, as Dives, Caine, or Judas had: what hel^eth
the Emperor, King, Prince, Duke, Earl, Baron, Lord, Knight, Squire, or
Gentleman, to cry for mercy being there? Nothing: for if on earth they would
not be tyrants, and self willed, rich with covetousness, proud with pomp,
gluttons, drunkards, whoeremongers, back biters, robbers, murderers,
blasphemers, and such like, then were there some hope to be looked for,
therefore my Faustus, as thou come to hell with these quallities, thou may
say with Caine, My sins are greater then can be forgiven, go hang thy self
with Judas, and lastly, be content to suffer torments with Dives. Therefore
know Faustus that the damned have neither end nor time appointed in the which
they may hope to be released, for if there were any such hope, that they by
throwing one drop of water out of the Sea in a day until it were dry, or if
there were an heap of Sand as high as from the earth to the heavens, that a
bird carrying away but one corn in a day, at ye end of this so long labor,
that yet they might hope at the last God would have mercy on them, they would
be comforted: but now there is no hope that God once thinks upon them, or that
their howlings shall ever be heard, yea so impossible it is for thee to hide
thy self from God, as impossible for thee to remove the Mountains, or to
empty the Sea, or to tell the drops of rain that have fallen from heaven
until this day, or to tell what there is most in the world: yea and for a
Camel to go thorough the eye of a needle, even so impossible it is for thee
Faustus and the rest of the damned, to come again into the favor of God: and
thus Faustus have thou heard my last sentence, and I pray thee how do thou
like it? But know this, that I counsel thee to let me be vnmolested hereafter
with such disputations, or else I will vex thee every limb to thy small
contentment. Doctor Faustus departed from his spirit very pensive and
sorrowful, laying him on his bed altogether doubtful of the grace and favor
of God, wherefore he fell into fantastical cogitations: feign he would have
had his soul at liberty again, but the devil had so blinded him, and taken
such deep root in his heart, that he could never think to crave Gods mercy,
or if by chance he had any good motion, straight ways the devil would thrust
in a fair Lady into his chamber, which fell to kissing and dalliance with him,
through which means, he threw his godly motion in the wind, going forward
still in his wicked practices, to the utter ruin both of his body and soul.

Another question put forth by Doctor Faustus to his Spirit Mephostophiles of
his own estate. Chap. 16.
DOctor Faustus being yet desirous to hear more strange things, called his
spirit unto him saying: By Mephos^ophi^es, I have yet another suit unto thee,
which I pray thee deny me not to resolve me of: Faustus (quoth. the spirit) I am
loath to reason with thee any further, for thou art never satisfied in thy
mind but always bring me anew: Yet I pray thee this once (quoth. Faustus) do
me so much favor, as to tell me the truth in this matter, and hereafter I will
be no more so earnest with thee: the spirit was altogether against it, but yet
once more he would abide him: well (said the spirt to Faustus) what demandest
thou of me? Faustus said, I would gladly know of thee, if thou were a man in
manner and for^e as I am, what would thou do to please both God and man?
whereat the spirit smiled, saying: My Faustus, if I were a man as thou art, and
that God had adorned me with those gifts of nature, as thou once had, even
so long as the breath of God were by, and within me, would I humble my self
unto his Majesty, endeavoring in all that I could to keep his commandments,
praise him and glorify him, that I might continue in his favor, so were I
sure to enjoy the eternal joy and felicity of his kingdom: Faustus said, but
that I have not done, No, thou say true (quoth. Mephostophiles) thou have not
done it, but thou have denied the Lord thy maker, which gave thee the breath of
life, speech, hearing, sight, and all other thy reasonable senses, that thou
might understand his will and pleasure, to live to the glory and honor of
his name, and to the advancement of thy body and soul: him I say being thy
maker have thou denied and defied, yea, wickedly thou have applied that
excellent gift of thy understanding, and given thy soul to the devil:
therefore give none the blame but thine own self, will, thy proud and aspiring
mind, which has brought thee into the wrath of God and utter damnation. This
is most true (quoth. Faustus) but tell me Mephostophiles, would thou be in my
case as I am now? yea says the spirit (and with that fetched a great sigh) for
yet would I so humble my self that I would win the favor of God, Then (said
D. Faustus) it were time enough for me, if I amended. True (said
Mephostophiles) if it were not for thy great sins, which are so odious and
detestable in the sight of God that it is too late for thee, for the wrath of
God rests upon thee. Leave off (quoth. Faustus) and tell me my question to my
greater comfort.

Here follows the second part of Doctor Faustus his life, and practices
until his end. Chap. 17.
DOctor Faustus having received denial of his spirit, to be resolved any more
in such like questions propounded: forgot all good works, and fell to be a
Kalender-maker by the help of his spirit, and also u^ short time to be a good
Astronomeror Astrologian: he had learned so perfectly of his Spirit the course
of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, that he had the most famous name of all the
Mathem atiques that lived in his time, as may well appear by his works
dedicated unto sundry Dukes and Lords: for be did nothing without the advice of
his spirit, which learned him to presage of matters to come, which have come to
pass since his death. The like praise won he with his Kalenders and Almanacks
making, for when he presaged of any thing, operation, and alteration of the
weather or Elements: as wind, rame, fogs, snow, hail, moist, dry, warm,
cold, thunder, lightning it fell so duly out, as if an Angel of heaven had
forewarned it. He did not, like the unskillful Astronomers of our time, that
set in Winter, cold, moist airy, frosty: and in the Dog-dayes, hot, dry,
thunder, fire, and such like, but he set in all his works, day and haure when,
where, and how it should dappen. If any wonderful thing were at hand, as
mortality, famine, plague, or wars, he would set the time and place, in true
and just order, when it should come to pass.

A question put forth by Doctor Faustus to his Spirit, concerning Astronomy.
Chap. 18.
NOw Faustus falling to practice and making his Prognestications, he was
doutfull in many points: wherefore he called unto him mephostophiles his
Spirit, saying: I find the ground of this science very difficult to attain
unto: for when that I confer Astronomia, and Astrologia, as the
Mathematicians, and ancient writers have left in memory, I find them to
barry, and very much to disagree: wherefore I pray thee to teach me the truth
in this matter: to whom his spirit answered, Faustus, thou shall know, that
the practicioners or speculators, or at least the first inuenters of these
Arts, have done nothing of themselves certain, whereupon thou may attain
to the true prognosticating or presaging of things concerning the heavens: or
of the influence of the planets: for if by chance some one Mathematician or
Astronomer has left behind him any thing worthy of memory, they have so
blinded it with Enigmaticall words, blind Characters, and such obscure
s^gures, that it is impossible for an earthly man to attain to the knowledge
thereof, without the aid of some spirit, or else the special gift of God, for
such are the hidden works of God from men, yet do we spirits that die and
fleet in all Elements, know such, and there is nothing to be done, or by the
heavens pretended, but we know it, except only the day of Doom. Wherefore
Faustus learn of me, I will teach thee the course and recourse of. and. the
cause of winter and summer, the exaltation and declination of the Sun, and
Eclipse of the Moon, the distance and height of the Poles, and every fixed
star, the nature and operation of the Elements, fire, air, water and earth,
and all that is contained in them, yea herein there is nothing hidden from me,
but only the filthy essence which once thou had Faustus at liberty, but now
Faustus thou have lost it past recovery: wherefore leaving that which will not
be again had, learn now of me to make thunder, lightning, hail, snow and
rain, the clouds to rent, the earth and craggy rocks to shake and split in
sunder: the Seas to swell and rore, and ouer-run their marks: know not thou
that the deeper the Sun shines the hotter he pierces? so the more thy Art is
famous whilst thou art here, the greater shall be thy name when thou art
gone. Know not thou that the earth is frozen, cold and dry: the water
running, cold, and moist, the air flying, hot and moist: the fire consuming
hot and dry? Yea Faustus, so must thy heart be inflamed like the fire to mount
on high: learn Faustus to fly like my sel^^ as swift as thought from one
kingdom to another, to sit at Princes tables, to eat their dain tiest fare,
to have thy pleasure of their Ladies, wives and concubines, to use all their
jewels and costly robes as things belonging unto thee, and not unto them:
learn of me Faustus to run through walls, doors, and gates of stone and
iron, to creep into the earth like a Worm: to swim in the water like a fish,
to fly in the air like a Bird, and to live and nourish thy self in the fire
like a Salamander, so shall thou be famous, renowned, far spoken of, and
extolled for thy skill: going on knives not hurting thy feet, carrying fire in
thy bosom and not burning thy shirt, seeing through the heavens as through a
Crystal, wherein is placed the planets, with all the rest of the presaging
Comets, the whole circuit of the world from the East to the West, North and
South: there shall thou know Faustus, wherefore the fiery sphere above, and the
signs of yt Zodiac does not burn and consume the whole face of the earth,
being hindered by placing the two moist elements between thein, the airy
clouds and the wavering wanes of water: yea Faustus, I will learn thee the
secrets of nature, what the cause is that the sun in summer being at the
highest, gives all his heat downwards on the earth: and being in Winter at
the lowest, gives all his heat upward into the Heavens, that the snow should
be of so great virtue as the honny, and the Lady Saturnia in Occulto, more
hotter then the Sun in Manifesto. Come on my Faustus, I will make thee as
perfect in these things as my self, I will learn thee to go invisible, to
find out the mines of gold and silver: the fodines of precions stones, as the
Carbuncle, the Diamond, Saphir, Emerald, Ruby, Topas, Iacinet, Granat, Iaspis,
Amachist: use all these at thy pleasure, take thy hearts desire, thy time
Faustus wears away, then why will thou not take thy pleasure of the world?
Come up we will go unto Kings at their own Courts and at their most
sumptuous banquets be their guests: if willingly they inuit us not, then
perforce we will serve our own turn with their best meat, and daintiest
wine: Agreed quoth. Faustus, but let me pause a while upon this thou have even now
declared unto me.

How Doctor Faustus fell into despair with himself, for having put forth a
question unto his spirit, they fell at variance, whereupon the rout of Devils
appeared unto him, threatening him sharply. Chap. 19.
DOctor Faustus reuoluing with himself the speeches of his spirit, he became
so woeful and sorrowful in his cogitations, that he thought himself already
frying in the hottest flames of (...) and lying in this muse, suddenly there
appeared unto him his spirit, de^^unding what thing so grieved and troubled his
conscience? where at Doctor Faustus gave no answer: yet the spirit very
earnestly lay upon him to know the cause, and if it were possible, he would
find remedy for his grief and ease him of his sorrows. To whom Faustus
answered, I have taken thee unto me as a servant to do me service, and thy
service will be very dear unto me: yet I cannot have any diligence of thee
further then thou list thy self, neither do thou in any thing as it
becomes thee. The spirit replied. My Faustus thou know that I was never
against thy commandments as yet, but ready to serve and resolve thy questions,
although I am not bound unto thee in such respects as concern the hurt of our
Kingdom, yet was I always willing to answer thee and so am still: therefore
my Faustus say on boldly, what is thy will and pleasure? At which words the
spirit stole away the heart of Faustus, who spoke in this sort, Mephostophiles,
tell me how and after what sort God made the world, and all the creatures in
them, and why man was made after the Image of God? the spirit hearing this:
answered, Faustus thou know that all this is in vain for thee to ask, I
know that thou art sorry for that thou have done, but it avails thee not, for
I will thousand pieces if thou change not thine opinions, and hereat he
vanished away. Whereat Faustus all sorrowful for that he had put forth such a
question, fell to weeping and to howling bitterly, not for his sins toward
God, but that the Devil was departed from him so suddenly and in such a rage.
And being in this perplexity, he was suddenly taken in such an extreme cold,
as if he should have frozen in the place where he sat, in which the greatest
devil in hell appeared unto him, with certain of his hideous and infernal
company in most vgliest shapes, that it was impossible to think upon, and
traversing the chamber round about where Faustus sat, Faustus thought to
himself, now are they come for me though my time be not come, and that because
I have asked such questions of my servant Mephostophiles: at whose cogitations
the chiefest devil which was the Lord, unto whom he gave his soul, that was
Lucifer, spoke in this sort: Faustus, I have seen thy thoughts, which are not
as thou have vowed unto me, by virtue of this Letter, and showed him the
Obligation which he had written with his own blood, wherefore I am come to
visit thee, and to show thee some of our hellish pastimes, in hope that will
draw and confirm thy mind a little more steadfast unto us. Content quoth
Faustus, go too, let me see what pastime you can make. At which words the
great devil in his likeness sat him down by Faustus, commanding the rest of
the devils to appear in their form, as if they were in hell: First entered
Belial in form of a Bear with curled black hair to the ground, his ears
standing upright: within the ear was as red as blood, out of which issued
flames of fire, his teeth were at least a foot long, as white as snow, with a
tail three else long (at the least) having two wings one behind each arm,
and thus one after another they appeared to Faustus in form as they were in
hell: Lucifer himself sat in manner of a man all hairy, but of a brown
color like a Squirrell curied, and his tail turning upward on his back as
the Squirrels use, I think he could crack nuts too, like a Squirrell. After
him came Beelzebub in curled hair of a horseflesh color, his head like the
head of a Bull, with a mighty pair of horns, and two long ears down to the
ground, and two wings on his back with pricking things like thorns: out of
his wings issued flames of fire, his tail was like a Cowes. Then came Astoroth
in form of a worm going upright on his tail, and had no feet, but a tail
like a Slow-worme: under his chappes grew two short hands, and his bark was
cole-blacke, his belly thick in the middle, yellow like gold, having many
bristles on his back like a Hedge-heg. After him came Chaniagosta, being white
and gray mixed, exceeding curled and hairy, he had a head like the head of an
Ass, and a tail like a Cat, and claws like an Ox, lacking nothing of an ell
broad. Then came Anobis, this devil had a head like a dog, white and black
hair, in shape like a hog, saving that he had but two feet, one under his
threate, the other at his tail, he was four else long, with hanging cares
like a blood-hound. After him came Dithican, he was a short thief, in form of
a Feasant, with shining feathers, and toure feet, his neck was gree^e, his
body re^, and his feet black. The last was called Brachus, with four short
feet like a Hedge hog, yellow and green, the upper side of his body was
brown, and the belly like blew flames of fire: the tail red like the tail of
a Monkey. The rest of the devils were in form of insensible beasts, as Swine,
Hearts Bears, Woolfes, Apes, Buffes, Goats, Antlops, Elephants, Dragons,
Horses, Asses, Lions, Cats, Snakes, Loades, and all manner of ugly odious
Serpents and worms: yet came in such sort, that every one at his entry into
the Hall, made their reverence unto Lucifer and so took their places, standing
in order as they came, until they had filled the whole Hall, wherewith
suddenly fell a most horrible thunderclap, that the house shook as though it
would have fallen to the ground, upon which every monster had a muck forke in
his hand, holding them toward Faustus, as though they would have run at tilt
at him: which when Faustus perceived, he thought upon the words of
Mephostophiles, when he told him how the souls in hell were tormented being
cast from devil to devil upon mucke-forkes, he thought verily to have been
tormented there of them in like sort. But Lucifer perceiving his thought, spoke
to him, My Faustus how likest thou this crew of mine? quoth Faustus why came
not you in another manner of shape? Lucifer replied, we cannot change our
hellish form, we have showed our selves here, as we are there: yet can we
blind men's eyes in such sort, that when we will we repair unto them, as if we
were men or Angels of light, although our dwelling be in darkness. Then said
Faustus, I like not so many of you together, whereupon Lucifer commanded them
to depart, except 7. of the principali, forthwith they presently vanished,
which Faustus perceiving, he was somewhat better comforted, and spoke to
Lucifer, where is my servant Mephostophiles? let me see if he can do the like,
whereupon came a fierce Dragon flying, and spitting fire round about the house,
and coming toward Lucifer, made reverence, and then changed himself to the
form of a Friar saying Faustus what will thou? Faustus said, I will that thou
teach me to transform my self in like sort as thou and the rest have done:
then Lucifer put foo^^h his paw and gave Faustus a book, saying, hold, do
what thou will, which he looking upon, straight ways changed himself into a
hog, then into a Worm, then into a Dragon, and finding this for his purpose,
it liked him well. Quoth he to Lucifer, and how comes it that so many filthy
forms are in the world? Lucifer answered, they are ordained of God as plagues
unto men, and so shall thou be plagued (quoth he) whers upon came Scorpions,
Waspes, Emits, Bees, and Enats, which fell to stinging and b^t^ng him, and all
the whole house was f^^led with a most horrible stinking fogge, insomuch that
Faustus saw nothing, but still was tormented: wherefore he cried for help,
saying, Mephostophiles my faithful servant where art thou? help, help I pray
thee: hereat the spirit answering nothing, but Lucifer himself said, ho, ho,
ho Faustus, how likest thou the creation of the world? and incontinent it was
clear again, and the devils and all the filthy cattle were vanished, only
Faustus was left alone, seeing nothing, but hearing the sweetest music that
ever he heard before, at which he was so ravished with delight, that he forgot
his fears he was in before, and it repented him that he had seen no more of
their pastime.

How Doctor Faustus desired to see hell, and of the manner how he was used
therein. Chap. 20.
DOctor Faustus bethinking how his time went away, and how he had spent eight
years thereof, he meant to spend the rest to his better contentment, intending
quite to forget any such motions as might offend the devil any more: wherefore
on a time he called his Spirit Mephostophiles, and said unto him, bring thou
hither unto me thy Lord Lucifer or Behall: he brought him (notwithstanding)
one that was called Beelzebub, the which asked Faustus his pleasure? Quoth
Faustus, I would know of thoe if I may see hell and take a view thereof? That
thou shall said the devil, and at midnight I will fetch thee. W^ll, night
being come, Doctor Faustus awaited very diligently for the coming of the
devil to fetch him, and thinking that he tarryed all too long, he went to the
window, where he pulled open a cazement, and looking into the Element, he saw a
cloud in the North, more black, darker and obscure, then all the rest of the
sky, from whence the wind blew most horrible right into Faustus his chamber,
and filled the whole house with smoke, that Faustus was almost smothered:
hereat fell an exceeding thunder clap, and withal came a great rugged black
Bear all cu^led and upon his back a chair of beaten gold, and spoke to
Faustus, saying, sit up and away with me: and Doctor Faustus, that had so long
abode the smoke, wished rather to be in hell then there, got on the devil, and
so they went together. But mark how the devil blinded him, and made him
believe they carried him into hell, for he carried him into the air, where
Faustus fell into a sound sleep, as if he had sat in a warm water or bath:
at last they came to a place which burns continually with flashing flames of
fire and brimstone: where aut issued an exceeding mighty clap of thunder, with
so horrible a noise, that Faustus awaked: but the devil went forth on his
way, and carried Faustus thereinto, yet notwithstanding howsoever it burnt. D.
Faustus self no more heat, then as it were the glimps of the Sun in May,
there heard he all manner of music to welcome him, but saw none playing on
them, it pleased him well but he durst not ask, for he was forbidden it
before. To meet the devil and the guest that came with him, came 3. other
ugly devils, the which ran back again before the Bear, to make the way,
against whom there came running an exceeding great Heart which would have
thrust Faustus out of his chair, but being defended by the other three devils,
the Heart was put to the repulse: thence going on their way Faustus looked, and
behold, there was nothing but Snakes and all manner of venomous beasts about
him, which were exceeding great, unto the which Snakes came many Storkes and
swallowed up all the whole multitude of Snakes, that they left not one: which
when Faustus saw, he maruailed greatly, but proceeding further on their hellish
dayage, there came forth of an bollow cliffe an exceeding great flying Bull,
the which with such a force hit Faustus his chair with his head and horns,
that he turned Faustus and his Bear over and over, so that the Bear vanished
away, whereat Faustus began to cry, oh, woe is me that ever I came here: for
he thought there to have been beguiled of the devil, and to make his end
before his time appointed or conditioned of the devil, but shortly after came
unto him amonstrous Ape, kidding Faustus to be of good cheer and said, get
upon me: all the fire in hell seemed to Faustus to have been put out,
whereupon followed a monstrous thick fogge, that he saw nothing, but shortly
it seemed to him to wax clear, where he saw two great Dragons fasined unto a
Wagon, into the which the Ape ascended and set Faustus therein, forth slew
the Dragons into an exceeding dark cloud. where Faustus saw neither Dragon
nor Chariot wherein he sat, and such were the cries of tormented souls, with
mighty thunder claps and flashing lightnings about his ears, that poor
Faustus shook for fear. Upon this came they to a water, stinking and filthy,
thick like mudde, into the which ran the Dragon, sincking under with wagon
and all, but Faustus felt no water, but as it were a small mist, saving that
the waves beat so sore upon him, that he saw nothing under and over him but
only water, in the which he lest his Dragons, Ape, and Wagon: and sinking yet
deeper and deeper, he came at last as it were upon a high Rock, where the
waters parted and left him thereon: but when the water was gone, it seemed to
him he should there have ended his life, for he saw no way but death: the Rock
was as high from the bottom as heaven is from the earth, there sat he, seeing
nor hearing any man, and looked ever upon the Rock: at length he saw a little
hole, out of the which issued ^^re: thought he, how shall I now do? I am
forsaken of the devils, and they that brought me hither, here must I either
fall to the bottom, or burns in the fire, or sit still in despair: with that
in his madness he gave a skip into the fiery hole, saying: hold you infernal
hags, take here this sacrifice as my last end, that which I justly have
deserved: upon this he was entered, and finding himself as yet unburned or
touched of that fire, he was the beter appaied, but there was so great a noise,
as he never heard the like before, it passed all the thunder that ever he had
heard, and coming down further to the bottom of the rock, he saw a fire,
wherein were many worthy and noble personages, as Emperors, Kings, Dukes and
Lords, and many thousands more of tormented souls, at the edge of which fire
ran a most pleasant, clear, and cold water to behold, into the which many
formented souls sprang out of the fire to cool themselves, but being so
freezing cold, they were constrained to return again into the fire, and thus
wearied themselves, and spent their endless torments out of one laborinth into
another, one while in heat, another while in cold: but Faustus standing here
all this while gazing on them that were thus tormented, he saw one leaping out
of the fire and scriching horribly, whom he thought to have known, wherefore
he would feign have spoken unto him, but remembering that he was forbidden, he
refrained speaking. Then this devil that brought him in, came to him again in
likeness of a Bear, with the chair on his back, and bad him sit up for it is
time to depart: so Faustus got up, and the devil carried him out into the
air, where he had so sweet music that he fell a sleep by the way. His boy
Christopher being all this while at home, and missing his master so long,
thought his master would have tarryed and dwelt with the devil forever: but
whilst his boy was in these cogitations, his master came home, for the devil
brought him home fast asleep as he sat in the chair, and threw him on his
bed, where (being thus lest of the devil) he lay until day. When he awaked,
he was amazed, like a man that had been in a dark dungeon: musing with
himself if it were true or false that he had seen Hell, or whether he was
blinded or not, but he rather persuaded himself that he had been there then
otherwise, because he had seen such wonderful things: wherefore he most
carefully took pen and ink, and wrote those things in order as he had seen:
the which writing was afterward found by his boy in his study: which
afterward was published to the whole City of Wittenberg in print, for example
to all Christians.

How Doctor Faustus was carried through the air up to the heaven to see the
whole world, and how the Sky and Planets ruled, after the which he wrote a
letter to his friend of the same to Liptzig, and how he went about the world in
eight days. Chap. 19.
THis Letter was found by a free man and Citizen of Wittenberg, written with
his own hand, and sent to his friend at Liptzig a Physician, named Jove
Victory: the contents of which were as follows: Amongst other things, (my
loving friend and brother) I remember yet the former friendship had together,
when we were school fellows and Students in the University at Wittenberg
whereas you first studied Physic, Astronomy, Astrology, Grometry, and
Cosmographie, I to the contrary (you know) studied Divinity, notwithstanding
now in any of your own studies I am seen (I am persuaded) further then your
self: for sithence I began I have never e^red, for (^ight I speak it without
affecting my own praise) my Kalenders, and other practices have not only the
commendations of the common sort, but also of the chiefest Lords and Nobles of
this our Dutch nation because (which is chiefly to be noted) I write and
presage of matters to come w^ic^ all accord and fall out so right, as if they
had bin already seen before. And for that (my beloved Victory) you write to
know my voyage which I made unto ye heavens, the which (as you certify me you
have had some suspicion of) although you parrly persuaded your self, that it
is a thing impossible, no matter for that, it is as it is, and let it be as it
will, once it was done in such manner as now according unto your request I give
you here to understand.

I being once laid on my bed, and could not sleep for thinking on my Calendar
and practice. I maruailed with my self how it were possible that the Firmament
should be known and so largely written of men, or whether they write true or
false, by their own opinions, or suppositions, or by due observations and true
course of the heavens. Behold, I thought my house would have been blown down,
so that all my doors and chests flew open, whereat I was not a little
astonished, for withal I heard a groaning voice, which said, get up, the desire
of thy heart, mind, and thought shall thou see, at the which I answered, what
my heart desires, that would I feign see, and to make proof, if I shall see I
will away with thee. Why then (quoth he) look out at thy window, their comes
a messenger for thee, that did I, and behold there stood a Wagon, with two
Dragons before it, to draw the same, and all the Wagon was of a light burning
fire, and for that the Moon shone, I was the willinger at that time to depart,
but the voice spoke again* sir up and let us away: I will (said I) go with
thee, but upon this condition, that I may ask after all things that I see,
hear, or think on: the voice answered, I am content for this time. Hereupon I
got me into the Wagon, so that the Dragons carried me upright into the air.

The Wagon had also 4. wheels, the which ratled so, and made such a noise, as
if we had all this while been running on the stones: and round about us flew
out flames of fire, and the higher that I came, the more the earth seemed to be
darkened, so that me thought I came out of a dungeon: and looking down from
heaven, behold Mephostophiles my Spirit and servant was behind me, and when he
perceived that I saw him, he came and sat by me, to whom I said, I pray thee
Mephostophiles whether shall I go now? Let not that trouble thy mind, said he,
and yet they carried us higher up, And now will I tell thee (good friend and
schoole-fellow) what things I have seen and proved, for on the Tuesday went
I out, and on Tuesday seven night following, I came home again, that is eight
days, in which time I slept not, no not one wink came in mine eyes: and we
went innisible of any man: and as the day began to appear, after my first
nights journey, I said to my Spirit Mephostophiles, I pray thee how far have
we now ridden, I am sure thou know: for me thinks that we are ridden
exceeding far, the world seems so little: Mephostophiles answered me, my
Faustus, believe me that from the place from whence thou came, unto this
place where we are now, is already forty seven leagues right in height, and as
the day increased, I looked down upon the world. Asia, Europa, and Africa, I
had a sight of: and being so high, quoth. I to my Spirit, tell me now how these
Kingdoms lie, and what they are called: the which he denied not, saying, see
this on our left hand is Hungaria, this is also Prussia on our left hand, and
Poland, Muscouia, Tartacelesia, Bohemia, Saxony: and here on our right hand,
Spain, Portugal, France, England, and Scotland: then right on before us lie
the kingdoms of Persia India, Arabia, the King of Althar, and the great Cham:
now are we come to Wittenberg, and are right over the town of Weim in Austria,
and ere long will be at Constantinople, Tripolie, and Jerusalem, and after will
we pierce the frozen Zone, and shortly touch the Horizon, and the zenith of
Wittenberg. There looked I on the Ocean Sea, and beheld a great many Ships,
and Gallyes ready to the battle one against another: and thus I spent my
journey: now cast I my eyes here, now there, toward South, North, East, and
West, I have been in one place where it rained and hailed, and in another
where the Sun shone excellent fair, and so I think that I saw most things in
and about the world, with great admiration, that in one place it tained, and in
another hail and snow: on this side, the Sun shone bright, some hills covered
with snow never consuming, other were so hot that grass and trees were burned
and consumed therewith. Then looked I up to the heavens, and behold they went
so swift, that I thought they would have sprung in thousands. Likewise it was
so clear and so hot, that I could not long gaze into it, it so dimmed my
sight: and had not my spirit Mephostophiles covered me as it were with a
shadowing cloud, I had been burnt with the extreme heat thereof: for the
Sky the which we behold here when we look up from the earth, is so fast and
thick as a wall, clear and shining bright as Crystal, in the which is
placed the Sun, which casts forth his rays and beams over the universal
world, to the uttermost confines of the earth. But we think that the sun is
very little: no, it is altogether as big as the world: Indeed the body
substantial is but little in compass, but the rays or streams that it casts
forth, by reason of the thing wherein it is placed, makes him to extend and
show himself over the whole world: and we think that the sun tunneth his
course, and that the heavens stand still: no it is the heavens that move his
course, and the Sun abides perpetually in his place, he is permanent and
fixed in his place, and although we see him beginning to ascend in the Orient
or East, at the higest in the Meridian or South, setting in the occident or
West, yet is he at the lowest in Septentrion or North, and yet he moves not.
It is the axle of the heavens that moves the whole firmrment, being a Chaos
or confused thing, and for that proof, I will show thee this example: like as
thou see a bubble made of water and soap blown forth of a quill, is in form
of a confused mass or Chaos, and being in this form, is moved at pleasure of
the wind which runs round about that Chaos and moves him also round: even
so is the whole firmament or Chaos wherein are placed the sun, and the rest of
the planets turned and carried at the pleasure of the spirit of God, which is
wind: Yea Christian Reader, to the glory of God, and for the profit of thy
soul, I will open unto thee the divine opinion, touching the rule of this
confused Chaos, far more then my rude Germane Author, being possessed with
the devil, was able to utter, and to prove some of my sentences before to be
true, look into Genesis, unto the works of God, at the creation of the world,
there shall thou find, that the spirit of God moved upon the waters, before
heaven and earth were made. Mark how he made it, and how by his word every
element took his place: these were not his works but is words, for all the
words he used before, he concluded afterward in one work, which was in making
man: mark reader with patience, for thy souls health, see into all that was
done by the word and work of God: light and darkness was, the firmament stood,
and there great and little light in it: the most waters were in one place, the
earth was dry, and every element brought forth according to the word of God:
now follows his works, he made man after his own Image, how, out of the
earth? The earth will shape no Image without water: there was one of the
elements. But all this while where was wind? All elements were at the word of
God: Man was made, and in a form by the work of God, yet moved not that
work, before God breathed the spirit of life into his nosthrils, and made him
a living soul: Here was the first wind and spirit of God, out of his own
mouth, which we have likewise from the same seed, which was only planted by
God in Adam, which wind, breath or spirit, when he had received, he was living
and moving on earth, for it was ordained of God for his habitation, but she
heavens are the habitation of the Lord: and like as I showed before of the
hubble, or confused (Chaos made of water and soap) through the wind and breath
of man is turned round, and carried with every wind, even so the Firmament
wherein the Sun and the rest of the planets are fixed, moved, turned, and
carried, with the wind, breath, and spirit of God: for the heavens and
firmaments are mooueable as the Chaos, but the Sun is fixed in the firmament.
And further (my good School-fellow) I was thus nigh the heavens, where me
thought every planet was but as half the earth, and under the firmament ruled
the spirits in the air, and as I came down I looked upon the world and the
heavens, and me thought that the earth was enclosed (in comparison) within the
firmament, as the yolke of an Egg within the white and me thought that the
whole length of the earth was not a span long: and the water was as if it had
bin twice as broad and as long as the earth: even thus at the eight days end
came I home again, and fell asleep, and so I continued sleeping, three days
and three nights together: and the first hour I awaked, I fell fresh again
to my Calendar, and have made them in right ample manner as you know, and to
satisfy your request, for that you writ unto me, I have (in consideration of
our old friendship had at the university of Wittenberge) declared unto you my
heavenly voyage, wishing no worse unto you then unto my self, that is, that
your mind were as mine in all respects. Dixi. Doctor Faustus the Astrologian.

How Doctor Faustus made his journey through the principal and most famous
lands in the world.
DOctor Fau. having ouer-run fifteen years of his appointed time, he took
upon him a journey, with full pretense to see the whole world, and calling his
Spirit Mephostophiles unto him he said: Thou know that thou art bound to me
upon conditions, to perform and fulfill my desire in all things, wherefore my
pretense is to visit the whole face of the earth visible and invisible when it
pleases me, therefore I enjoin and command thee to the same. Whereupon
Mephostophiles answered, I am ready my Lord at thy command, and forthwith the
spirit changed himself into the likeness of a flying horse, saying, Faustus
sit up, I am ready. Doctor Faustus loftily fate upon him, and forwards they
went: Faustus came through many a Land and Province, as Pauonia, Austria,
Germania, Bohemia, Slesia, Saxony, Missene, During, Franckland, Shawblandt,
Byerlandt, Styria, Carinthia, Poland, Litaw, Liesland, Prussia, Denmark,
Muscouia, Tartaria, Turkey, Persia, Cathai, Alexandria, Barbaria, Ginney, Peru,
the straightes Magenelanes, India, all about the frozen Zone, and Terra
Incognita, Nona Hispaniola, the Isles of Terzera, Mederi, Saint Michaels, the
Canaries, and the Tenorifocie, into Spain, the maine land, Portugal, Italy,
Campania, the Kingdom of Naples, the Isles of Sicilia, Malta maioris, minoria,
to the Knights of the Rhodes, Candie, or Creet, Ciprus, Corinthe, Switzerland,
France, Freesland, Westphalia, Zeland, Holland, Brabant, and all the 17
provinces in Netherland, England, Scotland, Ireland, all America and Island,
the out Isles of Scotland, the Orchades, Norway, the Bishopric of Breame, and
so home again: all these kingdoms provinces and countries he passed in 25
days, in which time he saw very little that delighted his mind: wherefore he
took little rest at home, and burning in desire to see more at large, and to
behold the secrets of each Kingdom, he set forwards again on his journey
upon his swift horse Mephostophiles, and came to Trent, for that he chiefly
desired to see this town and the monuments thereof: but there he saw not many
wouders, except one fair palace that belonged unto the Bishop, and also a
mighty large castle that was built of brick, with 3 walls, and 3 great
trenches, so strong that it was impossible for any princes power to win it:
then he saw a Church wherein was buried Simeon, and the Bishop Popo: their
tombs are of most sumptuous Marble stone, closed and joined together with
great bars of iron: from whence he departed to Paris where he liked well the
Academie: and what place or kingdom soever fell to his mind, the same he
visited. He came from Paris to Mentz where the river of Maine falls into the
Rhine, notwithstanding he tarried not long there but went into Campania in the
kingdom of Neapolis in which he saw an innumerable sort of Cloisters. Nunries,
and Churches, great and high houses of stone, the streets fair and large, and
straight forth from one end of the town to the other as a line, and all the
pauement of ye City was of brick, and the more it rayned in the town the
fairer the streets were: there saw he the tomb of Virgill, and the high way
that he cut through the mighty hill of stone in one night, the whole length of
an English mile: when he saw the number of Galleys and Argozis that lay there
at the city head, the windmill that stood in the water, the castle in the
water, and the houses above the water, where under galleys might ride most
safely from rain or wind: then he saw the Castle on the hill ever the town,
and many monuments therein, also that hill called Vesuuius, whereon grows all
the Greekish wine, and most pleasant sweet Olives. From thence he came to
Venice, whereas he wondered not a little, to see a City so famously built
standing in the Sea, where through every street the water came into such
largeness, that great ships and barks might pass from one street to
another, having yet a way on both sides the water whereon men and horse might
pass: He maruailed also how it was possible so much virtuall to be found in
the town, and so good cheap, considering that for a whole league, nothing
grew near the same. He wondered not a little at the fairness of S. Matkes
place, and the sumptuous Church standing thereon, called S. Mark, how all the
pauement was set with colored stones, and all the Roode or loft of the Church
double gilded over. Leaving this, he came to Padua beholding their manner of
their Academie, which is called the mother or nurse of Christendom, there he
heard the Doctors, and saw the most monuments in the Town, entered his name in
the University of the Germane Nation, and wrote himself Doctor Faustus, the
insatiable speculator: then saw he the worthiese monument in the world for a
Church, named S. Anthonies cloister, which for the pinacles thereof, and the
contriuement of the Church, has not the like in Christendom. This town is
fenced about with three mighty walls of stone and earth, betwixt the which
runs goodly ditches of water: twice every 24. hours passes boats betwixt
Padua and Venice with passengers, as they do here betwixt London and
Grauesend, and even so far they differ in distance: Faustus beheld likewise
the counsaile-house and the Castle with no small wonder. Well, forward he went
to Rome, which lay, and does yet lie on the River Tibris, the which deuideth
the City into two parts: over the River are four great stone Bridges, and upon
the one Bridge called Ponte S. Angelo, is the Castle of Saint Angelo, wherein
are so many great, cast Pieces as there are days in the year, and such Pieces
as will shoot seven bullets off with one fire and to this Castle comes a
pring vault from the Church and Palace of Saint Peter, through the which the
Pope, (if any danger be) passes from his Palace to the Castle for safeguard:
the City has eleven Gates, and a hill called Vaticinium, whereon St. Peter's
Church is built: In that Church the holy Fathers will hear no confession,
without the penitent bring money in his hand. Adjoining to this Church, is the
Campo Santo the which Carolus Magnus built: where every day thirteen Pilgrims
have their dinners served of the best: that is to say, Christ and his twelve
Apostles. Hard by this he visited the Churchyard of S. Peter's, where he saw the
Pyramides that Julius Caesar brought forth of Africa: it stood in Faustus his
time leaning against the Church wall of Saint Peter's, but now Pope Sextus has
erected it in the middle of S. Peter's Churchyard, it is 24. fatham long, and at
the lower end six fatham four square, and so forth smaller upwards: on the
top is a Crucifixe of beaten Gold, the stone stands on four Lions of brass.
Then he visited the 7. Churches of Rome that were St. Peter's, S. Paul's, S.
Sebastians, S. John Lateran, S. Laurence, S. Mary Magdalen, and S. Mary Maiora.
Then went he without the town, where he saw the Conduits of water that run
level through hill and dale, bringing water into the Town fifteen Italian
wiles off: other Monuments he saw too many to recits, but amongst the rest he
was desirous to see the Popes Court, and his manner of service at his Table,
wherefore he and his spirit made themselves invisible and came to the Popes
Court, and privy chamber, where he was: there saw he many servants attending on
his holiness, with many a flattering Sycophant carrying of his meat, and there
he marked the Pope and the manner of his service, which he seeing to be so
unmeasurable and sumptuous: Fie (quoth Faustus) why had not the devil made a
Pope of me? Faustus saw there notwithstanding, such as were like to himself,
proud, stout, wilful, gluttons, drunkards, whoremongers, breakers of
wedlock, and followers of all manner of ungodly exercises: wherefore he said
to his spirit, I thought that I had been alone a hog or pork of the Devils,
but he must bear with me yet a little longer, for these hogs of Rome are
already fatted, and fitted to make his roast meat, the devil might do well now
to spit them all, and have them to the fire, and let him summon the Nuns to
turn the spits: for as none must confess the Nun but the Friar, so none
should turn the rosting Friar but the Nun. Thus continued Faustus three days
in the Popes Palace and yet had no lust to his meat, but stood still in the
Popes chamber and saw every thing whatsoever it was: on a time the Pope would
have a feast prepared for the Cardinal of Pauia, and for his first welcome the
Cardinal was bidden to dinner: and as he sat at meat, the Pope would ever be
blessing and crossing over his mouth, Faustus could suffer it no longer, but up
with his fist and smote the Pope on his face, and withal he laughed that the
whole house might hear him, yet none of them saw him nor knew where he was:
the Pope persuaded his company that it was a damned soul, commanding Mass
presently to be said for his delivery out of Purgatory, which was done: the
Pope sat still at meat, but when the latter mess came in to the Popes board D.
Faustus laid hands thereon saying, this is mine, and so he took both dish and
meat and flew unto the Capitol or Campadolia, calling his spirit unto him,
and said, come let us be merry for thou must fetch me some wine and the cup
that the Pope drinks of, and here upon monte caual, we will make good cheer
in spite of the Pope and all his fat Abby-lubbers. His spirit hearing this,
departed toward the Popes chamber, where he found them yet sitting and
quaffing: wherefore he took from before the Pope the fairest piece of plate or
drinking goblet, and a flaggon of wine, and brought it to Faustus: but when the
Pope and the rest of his crew perceived they were robbed, and knew not after
what sort, they persuaded themselves that it was that damned soul that before
had vexed the Pope so, and that smot him on the face, wherefore he sent
commandment through the whole City of Rome, that they should say Mass in
every Church, and ring all the bells for to lay the walking spirit, and to curse
him with bell, book, and candle, that so inuisibly had misused the Popes
holiness, with the Cardinal of Pauia, and the rest of their company: but
Faustus notwithstanding made good cheer with that which he had beguiled the
Pope of, and in the midst of the order of S. Barnards barefooted Friars, as
they were going on procession through the marketplace called campa de fiore, he
let fall his plate, dishes and cup: and with all for a farewell, he made such a
thunderclap and storm of rain, as though Heaven and earth should have met
together, and so left Rome and came to Millaine in Italy, near the Alps or
borders of Switzerland, where he praised much to his spirit the pleasures of
the place, the city being founded in so brave a plain, by the which ran most
pleasant rivers on every side of the same, having besides within the compass
or circuit of seven miles, seven small Seas: He saw also therein many fair
Palaces and goodly buildings, the Dukes palace, and the mighty strong Castle
which is in ma^ne^r half the bigness of the town: Moreover, it liked him well
to see the Hospital of Saint Mary's with diverse other things. He did there
nothing worthy of memory, but he departed back again toward Bolognia, and
from thence to Florence where he was well pleased to see the pleasant walk of
Merchants, the goodly vaults of the City, for that almost the whole City is
vaulted, and the houses themselves are built outwardly, in such sort, that the
people go under them as under a vault: Then he perused the sumptuous Church in
the Dukes castle, called Nostra Dama, our Ladies Church, in which he saw many
Monuments, as a marble door, most huge to look upon: the gates of the castle
are Bel-mottel, wherein are graven the holy Patriarchs, with Christ and his
twelve Apostles, and diverse other Histories, out of the old and new Testament.
Then went he to Sena, where he highly praised the Church and Hospital of Santa
Maria Formosa, with the goodly buildings, and especially the fairenes and
greatness of the City and beautiful women. Then came he to Lions in France,
where he marked the situation of the City, which lay between two hills,
environed with 2. waters: one worthy Monument in the City pleased him well,
that was the great Church with the Image therein: he commended the City
highly for the great resort that it had unto it of strangers. From thence he
went to Cullin, which lies upon the river of Rhine, wherein he saw one of the
auncientest Monuments of the world, the which was the Tomb of three Kings,
that came by the Angel of God, and their knowledge they had in the star, to
worship Christ: which when Faustus saw he spoke in this manner, Ah alas good
men how have you erred, and lost your way? you should have gone to Palestina
and Bethlem in Judea, how came you hither? Or belike after your death you were
thrown into Mare Medeterraneum, about Tripolis in Syria, and so you fleeted
out of the straigts of Gibalterra, into the Ocean sea, and so into the bar of
Portugal, and not finding any rest you were driven along the coast of
Gallicia, Biskay and France, and into the narrow Seas, then from thence unto
Mare Germanicum, and so taken up I think about the town of Dort in Holland,
you were brought to Cullin to be buried, or else I think you came more easily
with a whirl-winde over the Alps, and being thrown into the river of Rhine, it
conuayed you to this place, where you are kept a Monument. There saw he the
Church of S. Vrsula, where remains a Monument of the 1000. Virgins: it pleased
him also to see the beauty of the women. Not far from Cullin lies the town
of Ach, where he saw the gorgeous temple that the Emperor Carolus quartus
built of Marble stone for a remembrance of him, to the end that all his
successors should there be crowned. From Cullin and Ach he went to Geneua, a
city in Sauoy, lying near Switzerland, it is a town of great traffike, the
Lord thereof is a Bishop, whose wine seller Faustus and his spirit visited, for
the love of his good wine. From thence he went to Strasburg, where he beheld
the fairest temple that ever he had seen in his life before, for on every side
thereat he might see through it, even from the covering of the Minster to the
top of the Pinicle, and it is named one of the wonders of the world: wherefore
he demanded why it was called Strasburg? his spirit answered, because it has
so many high ways coming to it on every side, for Stros in Dutch is a high
way, and hereof came the name: yea (said Mephostophiles) the Church which thou
so wonderest at, has more revenues belonging to it then the twelve Duks of
Slesia are worth, for there pertain unto this Church fifty sieve towns, and
four hundredth sixty three Villages, besides many houses in the Town. From
thence went Faustus to Basil in Switzerland, where the river of Rhine runs
through the Town, parting the same as the River of Thames does London: in this
town of Basil he saw many rich monuments, the town walled with brick, and
round about it without it goes a great trench: no Church pleased him but the
Jesuits Church, which was sumptuously builded, and set full of Alablaster
Pillars: Faustus demanded of his Spirit how it took the name of Basil? his
Spirit made answer and said, that before this city was found, there used a
Bafiliscus a kind of Serpent, this Serpent killed as many men, women, and
children as he took a fight of, but there was a Knight that made himself a
cover of crystal to come over his head and so down to the ground, and being
first covered with a black cloth, over that he put the crystal, and so
boldly went to see the Basiliscus, and finding the place where she haunted, he
expecting her coming, even before the mouth of her cave, where standing a
while, the Basiliscus came forth, who when she saw her own venomous shadow
in the Crystal, she split in a thousand pieces: wherefore the Knight was
richly rewarded of the Emperor: after the which the Knight founded this town
upon the place where he had flaine the Serpent, and gave it the name of Basil,
in remembrance of his deed.

From Basil Faustus went to Costuitz in Sweitz at the head of the Rhine, where
is a most sumptuous bridge that goes over the Rhine, even from the gates of
the town, unto the other side of the stream: at the head of the river of
Rhine, is a small Sea, called of the Switzers the black sea, twenty thousand
paces long, and fifty hundred paces broad. The town Costuitz took the name of
this: the Emperor gave it to a Clown, for expounding of his Riddle, wherefore
the Clown named the town Costuitz, that is in English, cost nothing. From
Costuitz he came to Vim, where he saw the sumptuous Townhouse, built by two
and fifty of the ancient Senators of the City, It took the name of Vlm, for
that the whole land there about, are full of Elmes: but Faustus minding to
depart from thence, his spirit said unto him, Faustus, think of the Town as
thou will, it has three Dukdomes belonging to it, the which they have bought
with ready money. From Vlm he came unto Wartzburg, the chiefest Town in
Frankeland, wherein the Bishop altogether keeps his Court, through the which
Town passes the river of Main, that runs into the Rhine: there about grows
strong and pleasant wine, the which Faustus well proved: The Castle stands
on a hill, on the north side of the Town, at the foot whereof runs the
river: this town is full of beggarly Friars, Nuns, priests and Jesuits: for
there are five sorts of begging Friars, besides three Cloisters of Nuns: At
the foot of the Castle stands a Church, in the which there is an Alter, where
are engraven all the four Elements and all the orders and degrees in heaven,
that any man of understanding whosoever that has a sight thereof, may say,
that it is the Artificiallest thing that ever he behold. From thence he went to
Norenberg, whither as he went by the way, his spirit informed him, that the
town was named of Claudius Tiberius, the son of Nero the tyrant. In the town
are two famous Cathedral Churches, the one called S. Sabolt, the other Saint
Laurence: in which Church stands all the Relics of Carolus magnus, that is
to say, his Cloak, his hose and doblet* his Sword and Crown, his Scepter and
his Apple: It has a very glorious guilden Conduit in the Market place of S.
Laurence: in which Conduit is the spear that thrust our Savior into the side,
and a piece of the holy Cross: the wall is called, The fair wall of
Norenberg, and has 528 streets, 160. wells, four great and two small
Clockes, six great Gates, and two small doors, eleven stone Bridges, twelve
small hills, ten fair marketplaces, thirteen common Hot-houses, ten Churches:
within the town are thirty wheels of water-milles: it has 132 tall Ships,
two mighty Town walls of hewn Stone and earth, with very deep trenches: the
walls have 180 Towers about them, and four fair platforms, ten Apothecaries,
ten Doctors of the Common Law, fourteen Doctors of Physic. From Norenburg,
he went to Auspurg where, at the break of the day, he demanded of his spirit,
whereupon the town took his name: this town (quoth he) has had many names,
when it was first built, it was called Vindelica: secondly it was called
Zizaria, the iron bridge: lastly, by the Emperor Octauius Augustus it was
called Augusta, and by the corruption of language, the Germans have named it
Auspurg. Now for because that Faustus had been there before, he departed
without visiting their monuments to Rauenspurg, where his spirit certified him
that the City had seven names: the first Tyberia, the second Quadratis, the
third Heaspalis, the fourth Regionopolis, the fifth Imbripolis, the sixth
Ratisbona, the last Rauenspurg. The situation of this City pleased Faustus
well, also the strong and sumptuous buildings: by the walls thereof runs
the river Danubia, in Dutch called Donow, into the which not far from the
compass of the City, falls near hand threescore other small rivers and
fresh waters: Faustus also liked the sumptuous stone Bridge over the same
water, with the Church standing thereon, the which was founded An. 1115. the
name whereof is called S. Remadian: in this town Faustus went into the Celler
of an Inholder, and let out all the wine and beer that was in the celler.
After the which feate he returned into Mentz in Bauaria a right princely town,
the Town appeared as if it were new, with great streets therein both of
breadth and length from Mentz to Saitburg, where the Bishop is always
resident: here saw he all the commodities that were possible to be seen, for
at the hill he saw the form of a bell made in Crystal, an huge thing to
look upon, that every year grows bigger and bigger, by reason of the
freezing cold. From thence he went to Vienna in Austria, this Town is of so
great antiquity, that it is not possible to find the like. In this town
(said the spirit) is more wine then water, for all under the town are wels,
the which are filled every year with wine, and all the water that they have,
runs by the Town, that is, the river Danubia. From thence he went into
Prage, the chief City in Bohemia: this is divided into three parts, that is,
old Prage, new Prage, and little Prage. Little Prage is the place where the
Emperors court is placed, upon an exceeding high mountain, there is a Castle
where are two fair Churches, in the one he found a monument which might well
have been a mirror for himself, and that was the Sepulcher of a notable
Coniurer, which by his magic had so enchanted his Sepulcher, that whosouer
set foot thereon, should be sure never to dye in their beds. From this Castle
he came down and went ever ye bridge. This bridge has twenty and four
Arches. In the middle of the bridge stands a very fair Monument, being a
cross builded of stone, and most artificially carved. From thence he came into
the old Prage, the which is separated from the new Prage, with an exceeding
deep ditch, and round about enclosed with a well of brick. Unto this is
adjoining the Jews Town, wherein are thirteen thousand men, women and
children, all Jews. There he viewed the College and the Garden where all
manner of savage beasts are kept, and from thence he set a compass round about
the three towns, whereat he wondered greatly, to see so mighty a City stand
all within the walls. From Prage he flew in the air and bethought himself
what he might do, or which way to take, so he looked round about, and behold
be espied a passing fair City which lay not far from Prage, about some
four and twenty miles, and that was Bressaw in Sclefia, in the which when he
was entered, it seemed to him that he had been in Paradise, so neat and clean
was the streets, and so sumptuous was their buildings. In the City he saw not
many wonders, except the brazen Virgin that stands on a bridge over the
water, and under the which stands a mill like a powder mill, which virgin is
made to do execution upon those disobedient town borne children that be so
wild that their parents cannot bridle them: which when any such are found with
some heinous offense turning to the shame of their parents and kindred, they
are brought to kiss this virgin, which opens her arm, the person then to be
executed kisseth her, then does she close her arms together with such
violence, that she crusheth out the breath of the party, breaks his bulk
and so dies, but being dead, she opens her arms again and lets the
party fall into the mill, where he is stamped in small morsels, which the water
carries away* so that no part of him is found again. From Bressaw he went
toward Cracona, in the kingdom of Polonia, where he beheld the Acadamie the
which pleased him wonderful will. In this City the King most commonly holds
his Court at a castle, in which Castle are many famous Monuments. There is a
most sumptuous Church in the same, in which stands a silver Altar gilded, and
set with rich stones, and over it is a conueyance full of all manner of silver
ornaments belonging to the Mass. In the church hangs the iawbones of a huge
dragon that kept the rock before the Castle was edified thereon. It is full of
all manner of munition, and has always virtual for 3. years to serve 2.
thousand men. Through the town runs a river called the Vestual or Wissell,
where over is a fair wooden bridge. This water d^uideth the town and
Casmere, in this Casmere dwells the Jews being a small walled Town by
themselves, to the number of 25000. men, women and children: within one mile of
the town there is a salt mine where they find siones of pure salt of 1000.
pound, 2000. pound, or more in weight, and that in great quantity. This salt is
as black as the Newcastle coals when it comes out of the mines, but being
beaten to powder it is as white as snow. The like they have four mile from
thence at a town called Buchma. From thence Faustus went to Sand^^z, the
captain thereof was called Deu Spiket Jordan: in this town are many monuments,
as the tomb or sepulcher of Christ, in as ample manner as that is at Jerusalem,
at the proper costs of a Gentleman that went thrice to Jerusalem from that
place and returned again. Not far from that town is a new town, wherein is a
Nunry of the order of S. Dioclesian, into which order may none come except they
be Gentlewomen, and well formed, and fair to look upon, the which pleased
Faustus well, but having a will to travail further, and to see more wonders,
mounting up toward the east, over many lands and provinces, as into Hungaria,
Transiluania, Shede, Ingatz, Sardenia, and so into Constantinople, where the
Turkish Emperor kept his court: this city was surnamed by Constantine the
founder thereof, being builded of very fair stone. In the same the great Turk
has three fair palaces, the walls are strong, the pinacles are very huge,
and the streets large, but this liked not Faustus that one man might have so
many wives as he would: the sea runs hard by the City, the wall has 11.
gates: Faustus abode th^re a certain time to see the manner of the Turkish
Emperors service at his table, where he saw his royal service to be such,
that he thought if all the Christian Princes should banquet together, and every
one adorn the feast to the uttermost, they were not able to compare with the
Turk for his table, and the rest of his country service: wherefore it so
spighted Faustus, that he vowed to be revenged on him, for his pomp he thought
was more fit for himself, wherefore as the turk sat at meat Faustus showed
him a little apish play: for round about the privy chamber he sent forth
flashing flames of fire, insomuch that the whole company forsook their meat
and fled, except only the great Turk himself, him Faustus charmed in such
sort, that he could neither rise nor fall, neither could any man pull him up:
With this was the hall so light, as if the Sun had shined in the house, then
came Faustus in form of a Pope to the great Turk, saying, all hail Emperor,
now art thou honored that I so worthily appear unto thee as thy Mahomet was
wont to do, hereupon he vanished, and forthwith it thundered, that the whole
Palace shook: the Turk greatly meruailed what this should be that so vexed
him, and was persuaded by his chiefest counselors that it was Mahomet his
Prophet which had so appeared unto them, whereupon the Turk commanded them to
fall down on their knees, and to give him thanks for doing them so great
honor as to show himself unto them: but the next day Faustus went into the
Castle where he kept his Wives and Concubines, in the which Castle might no man
upon the pain of death come, except those that were appointed by the great
Turk to do them service, and they were all gelded: which when Faustus
perceived, he said to his Spirit Mephostophiles, how likest thou this sport?
are not these fair ladies greatly to be pitied that thus consume their youth
at ye pleasure of one only man? Why (quoth the spirit) may not thou in stead
of the Emperor embrace his fair ladies? do what thy heart desires herein,
and I will aid thee, and what thou wishest thou shall have it performed:
wherefore Faustus (being before this counsel apt enough to put such matters
in practice) caused a great fogge to be round about the Castle, both within and
without, and he himself appeared amongst the Ladies in all points as they use
to paint their Mahomet: at which sight the Ladies fell on their knees and
worshipped him. Then Faustus took the fairest by the hand and led her into a
chamber, where after his manner he fell to dalliance, and thus he continued a
whole day and a night: and when he had delighted himself sufficiently with her
he put her away. and made his spirit bring him another, so likewise he kept
with her 24. hours play, causing his spirit to fetch him most dainty fare, and
so he passed away six days, having each day his pleasure of a sundry Lady,
and that of the fairest: all which time the fog was so thick and so stinking,
that they within the house thought they had been in hell for the time and they
without wondered thereat, in such sort that they went to their prayers, calling
on their God Mahomet, and worshipping of his Image. Wherefore the sixth day
Faustus exalted himself into the air like to a Pope, in sight of the great
Turk and his people. And he had no sooner departed the Castle but the fog
vanished away: whence presently the Turk sent for his Wives and Concubines,
demanding of them if they knew the cause why the Castle was beset with a mist
so long? They said that it was the God Mahomet himself that caused it, and how
he was in the Castle personally full six days: and for more certainty he has
line with six of us six nights one after another. The Turk hearing this,
fell down upon his knees, and gave Mahomet thanks, desiring him to forgive
him for being offended with his visiting his Castle and wives those six days
but the Turk commanded that thost whom Mahomet ha^ line by should be most
carefully looked unto, persuading himself (and so did all ye whole people that
knew of it) that out of them Mahomet should be raised a mighty generation, but
first he demanded of the six Ladies if Mahomet had not actual copulation with
them according as earthly men have? yea my Lord (quoth one) as if you had been
there your self you could not have mended it, for he lay with us stark naked,
kissed and colled us, and so delighted me, that for my part I would he came two
or three times a week to serve me in such sort again. From whence Faustus
went to Alkar, the which before times was called Chairam or Memphis. In this
City the Egyptian Souldan holds his court. From thence the river Nilus has
his first head and spring, it is the greatest fresh water river that is in the
whole world, and always when the Sun is in Cancer it ouerfloweth the whole
land of Egypt: Then he returned again toward the Northeast, and to the Town
of Ofen and Sebata in Hungaria. This Of^n is the chiefest City in Hungaria,
and stands in a fertile soil, wherein grows most excellent wine, and not
far from the Town there is a Well called Zipzar, the water whereof changes
Iron into Copper: there are mines of gold and silver, and all manner of metal:
we Germans call this town Ofen; but in the Hungarian speech it is Start. In
the town stands a very fair Castle and very well fortified. From thence he
went to Austria, and through Slesia into Saxony, unto the towns of Magdeburg
and Lipzig, and Lubeck, Magdeburg is a Bishopric: in this city is one of the
pittchers wherein Christ changed the water into wine at Cana in Gallile. At
Lipzig nothing pleased Faustus so well as the great vessel in the Castle made
of wood, the which is bound about with 24 iron hoopes, and every hoope weighs
200 pound weight: you must go upon a ladder 30 steps high before you can
look into it: he saw also the new churchyard where it is walled, and stands
upon a fair plain, the yard is 200 paces long, and round about the side of
the wall are goodly places separated due from each other to see sepulchers in,
which in the middle of the yard stands very sumptuous: therein stands a
Pulpit of white work and gold. From hence he came to Lubeck and Hamburg, where
he made no abode, but away again to Erford in Duringen, where he visited the
Frescold, and from Erfold he went home to Wittenberg, when he had seen and
visited many a strange place, being from home one year and a half, in which
time he wrought more wonders then are here declared.

How Faustus had a sight of Paradise. Chap. 34.
AFter this Doctor Faustus set forth again to visit the countries of Spain,
Portugal, France, England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden Poland, Muscouy, India,
Cataia, Africa, Persia, and lastly into Barbaria amongst the Blackamoores. And
in all his wandering he was desirous to visit the ancient monuments and mighty
hills: amongst the rest beholding the high hill called the Treno Reife, was
desirous to rest upon it: from thence he went into the I Will of Britanny, wherein
he was greatly delighted to see the fair water, and warm Bathes, the diverse
sorts of metal, with many precious stones, and diverse other comm^^ities, the
which Faustus brought thence with him: He was also at the O^^hades behind
Scotland, where he saw the tree that brings forth fruit, that when it is
ripe opens and falls into the water, wherein engenders a certain kind of
foul or bird, these Islands are in number 23. but ten of them are not
habitable, the other thirteen are inhabited. From hence he went to the Hill
Caucasus, which is the highest in all that Tropic, it lies near the borders
of Scythia: hereon Faustus stood and beheld many lands and Kingdoms, Faustus
being on such an high hill, thought to look over all the world, and beyond,
for he went to see Paradise, but he durst not commune with his Spirit thereof:
and being on the hill of Caucasus he saw the whole land of India and Scytbia,
and as he looked toward the East, he saw a mighty clear strike of fire
coming from heaven upon the earth, even as it had been one of the beams of
the Sun, he saw in the valley four mighty waters springing: one had his
course toward India, the second toward Egypt, the third and fourth toward
Armenia. When he saw these, he would needs know of his spirit what waters they
were, and from whence they came: His spirit gave him gently an answer, saying*
it is Paradise that lies so far in the East, the Garden that God himself
has planted with all manner of pleasure, and the fiery stream that thou
see, is the walls or fence of the garden, but the clear light thou see so
far off, that is the Angel that has the custody thereof with a fiery sword,
and although that thou think thy self to be hard by, thou have yet further
thither from hence then thou have ever been: the water that thou see divided
in four parts is the water that issues out of the well in the middle of
Paradise. The first is called Ganges or Pisson, the second Gihon, the 3.
Tygris, and the 4. Euphrates: also thou see that he stands under Libra and
Aries, right toward the Zenith, and upon this fiery wall stands the Angel
Michaell with his flaming sword to keep the free of life, the which he has in
charge: but the spirit said to Faustus, neither then nor I, nor any after us,
yea all men whosoever are denied to visit it, or to come any nearer then we be.

Of a certain Comet that appeared in Germany, and how Doctor Faustus was
desired by certain friends of his to know the meaning thereof. Chap. 24.
IN Germany, over the Town of St. Eizleben was seen a mighty great Comet,
whereat the people wondered: but Doctor Faustus. being there was asked of
certain of his friends his judgment or opinion in she matter? Whereupon he
answered, it falls out often by the course and change of the sun and moon,
that the sun is under the earth, and the moon above: but when the moon
draws near the change, then is the sun so strong, that it takes away all
the light of the moon, in such sort, that he is as red as blood, and the
contrary, after they have been together, the moon takes her light again
from him, and so increasing in light to the full, she will be as red as the
sun was before, and changes her self into diverse and sundry colors, of the
which springs a prodigious Monster or as you call it a Comet, which is a
figure or token appointed of God as a forewarning of his displeasure: as at one
time, he sends hunger, plague, sword, or such like: being all tokens of his
judgment: the which Comet comes through the conjunction of the sun and
moon begetting a monster, whose father is the Sun, and whose mother is the
Moon and.

A question put forth to D. Faustus concerning the stars. Chap. 25.
THere was a learned man of the town of Holberstat, named N.W. who invited D.
Faustus to his table, but falling into communication before supper was ready,
they looked out of the window, and seeing many stars in the firmament, this man
being a Doctor of Physic and a good Astrologian, said, D Faustus, I have
invited you as my guest, hoping that you will take it in good part with me, and
withal I request you to impart unto me some of your experience in the stars
and planets. And seeing a star fall, he said, I pray you Faustus what is the
condition, quality or greatest of the stars in the firmament? Faustus
answered him: My friend and brother, you see that the stars that fall from
heaven, when they come to the earth they be very small to our thinking as
candels, but being fixed in the firmament, there are many as great as this
City, some as great as a Province or Dukedom, other as great as the whole
earth: other some far greater then the earth: as the length and the breadth of
the heaven is greater then the earth twelve times, and from the height of the
heavens there is scarce and earth to be seen, yea the planets in the heavens
are some so great as this land, some so great as the whole Empire of Rome, some
as Turkey, yea one so great as the whole world.

How Faustus was asked a question concerning the Spirits that vex men. Chap.
26.
THat is most true (says he to Faustus) concerning the Stars and Planets:
but I pray you, in what kind or manner do the spirits use to vex men so
little by day, and so greatly by night? Doctor Faustus answered, because the
Spirits are by God forbidden the light, their dwelling is in darkness, and the
clearer the Sun shines the further the spirits have their abiding from it, but
in the night when it is dark, they have their familiarity and abiding near
unto us men. For although in the night we see not the Sun, yet the brightness
thereof so lightneth the first moving of the firmament, as it does here on
earth in the day, by which reason we are able to see the Stars and Planets in
the night: even so the rays of the Sun piercing upwards into the firmament,
the Spirits abandon the place and so come near us on earth, the darkness
filling our heads with heavy dreams and fond fancies, with schrikng and crying
in many deformed shapes: and some times when men go forth without light,
there falls to them a fear, that their hair stands on end: so many start
in their sleep, thinking there is a spirit by him, gropeth or feels for him,
going round about the house in his sleep, and many such like fancies: and all
this is for because in the night the spirits are more familiarly by us, that we
are desirous of their company, and so they carry us, blinding us, and plaguing
us more then we are able to perceive.

How Doctor Faustus was asked a question cuncerning the Stars that fall from
heaven. Chap. 27.
DOctor Faustus being demanded the cause why the stars fell from heaven, he
answered that it is but our opinion, for if one star fall, it is the great
judgment of God upon us, as a forewarning of some great thing to come, for
when we think that a star falls, it is but a spark that issues from a
candle or a flame of fire, for if it were a substantial thing, we should not
so soon loose the sight of them as we do. And likewise if so be that we see
as it were a stream of fire fall from the firmament as it often happens, yet are
they no stars, but as it were a flame of fire vanishing, but the stars are
substantial, therefore are they firm and not falling: if there fall any, it is
a sign of some great matter to come as a scourge to a people or country, and
then such stars falling, the gates of heaven are opened, and the clouds send
forth floods, or other plagues, to the damage of the whole land and people.

Faustus was asked a question concerning thunder. Chap. 28.
IN the month of August, there was over Wittenberg a mighty great lightning and
thunder, and as Doctor Faustus was jesting merrily in the market place with
certain of his friends and companions being Physicians, they desired him to
tell them the cause of that weather? Faustus answered: It has been commonly
seen heretofore, that before a thunderclap, fell a shower of rain, or a gale
of wind, for commonly after a wind follows a rain, and after a rain a
thunderclap, such things come to pass when the four winds meet together in
the heavens, the ayrie clouds are by force beaten against the fixed Crystal
firmament, but when the ayrie clouds meet with the firmament, they are
congealed, and so strike and rush against the firmament, as great pieces of ye
when they meet on the water, the each other sounds in our ears, and that we
call Thunder, which indeed is none other then you have heard.

The third and last of Doctor Faustus his merry conceits, showing after what
sort he practiced Nicromancie in the Courts of great Princes, and lastly of his
fearful and pittifullend.

How the Emperor Carolus Quintus requested of Faustus to see some of his
cunning, whereunto he agreed. Chap. 29.
THe Emperor Carolus the fifth of that name was personally with the rest of his
Nobles and Gentlemen at the town of Inszburck, where he kept his Court, unto
the which also Doctor Faustus resorted, and being there well known of diverse
Nobles and gentlemen, he was invited into the court to meat, even in the
presence of the Emperor, whom when the Emperor saw, he looked earnestly on him,
thinking him by his looks to be some wonderful fellow: wherefore he asked one
of his Nobles whom he should be? he answered that he was called Doctor Faustus.
Whereupon the Emperor held his peace until he had taken his repast: after
which he called unto him Faustus into his privy chamber: whither being come,
he said unto him: Faustus I have heard much of thee, that thou art excellent in
the black Art, and none like thee in mine Empire, for men say that thou have a
familiar spirit with thee, and that thou can do what thou list: it is
therefore (said the Emperor) my request of thee, that thou let me see a proof
of thine experience, and I vow unto thee by the honor of my Imperial Crown,
none evil shall happen unto thee for so doing. Hereupon Doctor Faustus
answered his Majesty, that upon these conditions he was ready in any thing
that he could, to do his highness commaundment in what service he would appoint
him. Well, hear then what I say (quoth the Emperor.) Being once solitary in my
house, I called to mind mine elders and ancesters, how it was possible for
them to attain unto so great degree of authority, yea so high, that we the
successors of that line are never able to come near. As for example, the
great and mighty Monarch of the world Alexander Magnus, was such a Lantern and
spectacle to all his successors, as the chronicles makes mention of so great
riches, conquering and subduing so many kingdoms, the which I and these that
follow me (I fear) shall never be able to attain unto: wherefore Faustus, my
hearty desire is, that thou would vouchsafe to let me see that Alexander and
his Paramour the which was praised to be so fair, and I pray thee show me
them in such sort that I may see their personages, shape, gesture and apparel,
as they used in their life time, and that here before my face, to the end that
I may say I have my long desire fulfilled, and to praise thee to be a famous
man in thine art and experience. D. Faustus answered: My most excellent Lord, I
am ready to accomplish your request in all things, so far forth as I and my
spirit are able to perform: yet your majesty shall know, that their dead bodies
are not able substantially to be brought before you, but such spirits as have
seen Alexander and his Paramour alive, shall appear unto you in manner and
form as they both lived in their most flourishing time: and herewith I hope to
please your imperial majesty. Then Faustus went a little aside to speak to
his spirit, but he returned again presently, saying: now if it please your
majesty you shall see them, yet upon this condition yt you demand no question
of them, nor speak unto them, which the Emperor agreed unto. Wherewith Doctor
Faustus opened the privy chamber door, where presently entered the great and
mighty Emperor Alexander Magnus, in all things to look upon as if he had bin
gliue, in proportion a strong thick set man, of a middle stature, black
hair, and that both thick and curled, head and beard, red cheeks, and a
broad face, with eyes like a Basilicke, he had a complete harnes burnished and
graven exceeding rich to look upon: and so passing toward the Emperor
Carolus, he made low and reverent courtesy: whereat the Emperor Carolus would
have stood up to receive and greet him with the like reverence: but Faustus
took hold of him, and would not permit him to do it. Shortly after Alexander
made humble reverence and w^nt out again: and coming to the door his paramour
met him, she coming in, made the Emperor likewise reverence: she was clothed
in blew veluer, wrought and imbroidered with Pearls and gold, she was also
excellent fair, like milk and blood mixed, tall and slender, with a face
round as an apple: and thus she passed certain times up and down the house,
which the Emperor marking, said to himself: now have I seen two persons
which my heart has long wished to behold: and sure it cannot otherwise be
(said he to himself) but that the spirits have changed themselves into these
forms, and have not deceived me, calling to mind the woman that raised the
Prophet Samuel: and for that the Emperor would be the more satisfied in the
matter he said I have often heard that behind her neck she had a great wart
or wen, wherefore he took Faustus by the hand without any words, and went to
see if it were also to be seen on her or not: but she perceiving that he came
to her, bowed down her neck, where he saw a great wart, and hereupon she
vanished, leaving the Emperor and the rest well contented.

How Doctor Faustus in the sight of the Emperor, coniured a pair of Hearts
horns upon a Knights head that slept out at a cazement. Chap. 30.
When Doctor Faustus had accomplished the Emperors desire in all things as he
was requested, he went forth into a gallery, and leaning over a rail to look
into the privy garden, he saw many of the Emperors courtiers walking and
talking together, and casting his eyes now this way, now that way, he espied a
Knight leaving out at a window of the great hall, who was fast a sleep (for in
those days it was hot) but the person shall be nameles that slept, for that
he was a knight. Though it was all done to a little disgrace of the Gentleman:
it pleased Doctor Faustus (through the help of his spirit Mephostophiles) to
firm upon his head as he slept an huge pair of Hearts horns, and as the Knight
awaked thinking to pull in his head, he hit his horns against the glass that
the panes thereof flew about his ears. Think here how this good Gentleman was
vexed, for he could neither get backward nor forward, which when the Emperor
heard, all the courtiers laughed, and came forth to see what was happened. The
Emperor also when he beheld the Knight with so fair a head, laughed heartily
thereat, and was therewithal well pleased: at last Faustus made him quit of
his horns again, but the Knight perceived not how they came.

How the above mentioned Knight went about to be revenged of Doctor Faustus.
Chap. 31.
DOctor Faustus took his leave of the Emperor and the rest of the Courtiers,
at whose departure they were sorry, giving him many rewards and gifts* but
being a league and a half from the city, he came into a wood, where he beheld
the Knight that he had i^sted with at the Court, with others in harness,
mounted on fair palfrayes, and running with full charge toward Faustus, but
he seeing their intent, ran toward the bushes, and before he came amongst the
bushes he returned again, running as it were to meet them that chased him,
whereupon suddenly all the bushes were turned into horsemen, which also ran to
encounter with the Knight and his company: and coming to them, they enclosed
the Knight and the rest, and told them that they must pay their ransom before
they departed: whereupon the Knight seeing himself in such distress, besought
Faustus to be good to them, which he deitied not, but let them loose: yet he so
charmed them that every one, Knight and other for the space of a whole month
did wear a pair of Goats horns on their brows, and every Palfray a pair
of Oxchornes on his head, and this was their penance appointed by Faustus,

University requested Faustus to help them at a wish to the town, of Menchen
in Bauaria, there to see the Duke of Bauaria his Sons wedding. Chap. 32.
THree worthy young Dukes, the which are not here to be named, but being
Students all together at the university of Wittenberg, met on a time all
together, where they fell to reasoning concerning the pomp and bravery that
would be at the City of Menchen in Bauaria, at the wedding of the Dukes
Son, wishing themselves there but one half hour to see the manner of their
iollity: to whom one replied saying to the other two Gentlemen, if it please
you to give me the heating I will give you good counsel that we may see the
wedding and be here again to night, and this is my meaning: let us send to
Doctor Faustus, make him a present of some rare thing, and so open our minds
unto him, desiring him to assist us in our enterprise, and assure ye he will
not deny to fulfill our request: hereupon they all concluded, sent for Faustus,
told him their mind, and gave him a gift, and invited him to a sumptuous
banquet, wherewith Faustus was well contented, and promised to further their
journey to the uttermost: and when ye time was come that the Duke his Son
should be married Doctor Faustus called unto him the three young Gentlemen into
his house, commanding them that they should put on their best apparel, and
adorn themselves as richly as they could: he took off his own great large
cloak, went into the garden that was adjoining unto his house, and set the
three young Dukes on his Cloak, and he himself sat in the midst, but he
gave them in charge that in any wise they should not once open their mouths to
speak, or make answer to any man so soon as they were out, not so much as if
the Duke of Bauaria or his Son should speak to them or offer them courtesy
they should give no word or answer again: to the which they all agreed. These
conditions being made, Doctor Faustus began to conjure: and on a sudden arose
a mighty wind, heauing up the cloak, and so carried them away in the air, and
in due time they came unto Menchen to the Dukes Court, where being entered into
the utmost Court the Marshall had espied them, who presently went to the Duke,
showing his grace that all the Lords and Gentlemen were already set at the
table* notwithstanding there were newly come three goodly Gentlemen with one
servant, the which stood without in the Court, wherefore the good old Duke came
out unto them welcomming them, requiring what they were, and whence? but they
made no answer at all, whereat the Duke wondered, thinking they were all four
dumb: notwithstanding for his honor sake he took them into the court and
feasted them. Faustus notwithstanding spoke to them: if any thing happen
otherwise then well when I say sit up, then fall you all on the cloak, and
good enough: well, the water being brought, and that they must wash, one of the
three had so much manners as to desire his friend to wash first: which when
Faustus heard, he said, sit up, and all at once they got on the cloak, but he
that spoke fell off again, the other two with Doctor Faustus were again
presently at Wittenberg, but he that remained was taken and laid in prison,
wherefore the other two Gentlemen were very sorrowful for their friend, but
Faustus comforted them, promising that on the morrow he should also be at
Wittenberg. Now all this while was the Duke taken in great fear, and stricken
into an exceeding dump, wondering with himself that his hap was so hard to be
left behind and not the rest: and now being weked and watched with so many
keepers, there were also certain of the guests that fell to reasoning with him
to know what he was, and also what the other were that were vanished away? but
the poor prisoner thought with himself, if I open what they are, then it will
be evil also with me, whereofore all this while he gave no man any answer, so
that he was there a whole day and gave no man a word: wherefore the old Duke
gave in charge that the next morning they should rack him until he had
confessed: which when the young Duke heard he began to sorrow, and to say with
himself, it may be that to morrow (if Doctor Faustus come not to aid me)
shall I be rached and grievously tormented, insomuch that I shall be
constrained by force to tell more then willingly I would do: but he comforted
himself, with hope that his friends would entreat Doctor Faustus about his
delinerance, as also it came to pass: for before it was day Doctor Faustus was
by him, and he coniured them that watched him into such a heavy sleep, that he
with his charms made open all the locks in the prison, and there withal
brought the young Duke again in safety to the rest of his fellows and
friends, where they presented Faustus with a sumptuous gift, and so departed
one from the other.

How Doctor Faustus borrowed money of a Jew, and laid his own leg to pawn
for it. Chap. 33.
IT is a common Proverb in Germany, that although a coniurer have all things at
commandment the day will come that he shall not be worth a penny: so is it like
to fall out with Doctor Faustus, in promising the devil so largely: and as the
devil is the author of lies, even so he led Faustus his mind in practicing of
things to deceive the people, and blinding them, wherein he took his whole
delight, thereby to bring himself to riches, yet notwithstanding in the end he
was never the richer. And although during four and twenty years of his time
that the devil set him, he wanted nothing, yet was he best pleased when he
might deceive any body: for out of the mightiest Potentates courts in all those
countries he would send his spirit to fetch away their best cheer: And on a
time being in his merriment where he was banqueting with other Students in an
Inn, whereunto resorted many Jews, which when D. Faustus perceived, he was
minded to play some merry jest to deceive a Jew, desiring one of them to lend
him some money for a time, the Jew was content, and lent Faustus threescore
dollers for a month, which time being expired, the Jew came for his money and
intrest, but Doctor Faustus was never minded to pay the Jew again: at length
the Jew coming home to his house, and calling importunately for his money,
doctor Faustus made him this answer: Jew I have no money, nor know I how to pay
thee, but notwithstanding to the end that thou may be contented I will cut
off a limme of my body, be it arm or leg, and the same thou shall have in
pawn of thy money, yet with this condition, that when I shall pay thee thy
money again, then thou shall give me my limb. The Jew that was never friend to
a Christian, thought with himself, this is a fellow right for my purpose, that
will lay his lints to pawn for money, and was therewith very well content:
wherefore doctor Faustus took a saw, and therewith seemed to cut off his leg
(being notwithstanding nothing so) well, he gave it to the Jew, yet upon this
condition, that when he got money to pay, the Jew should deliver him his leg, to
the end he might set it on again. The Jew was with this matter very well
pleased, took his leg and departed: and having far home, he was somewhat weary,
and by the way he thus bethought him: what helps me a knaves leg? if I should
carry it home it would stink, and so infect my house, besides, it is too hard a
piece of work to set it on again, wherefore what an ass was Faustus to lay so
dear a pawn for so small a sum of money: and for my part quoth the Jew to
himself, this will never profit me any thing, and with these words he cast
the leg away from him into a ditch. All this Doctor Faustus knew right well,
therefore within three days after he sent for the Jew to make him payment of
his 60. dollers: the Jew came, and Doctor Faustus demanded his pawn, there was
his money ready for him: the Jew answered, the pawn was not profitable or
necessary for any thing, and he had cast it away: but Faustus threatening,
replied, I will have my leg again, or else one of thine for it. The Jew fell
to entreat, promising him to give him what money he would ask, if he would not
deal straigtly with him, wherefore the Jew was constrained to give him sixty
dollers more to be rid of him, and yet Faustus had his leg on, for he had but
blinded the Jew.

How Doctor Faustus deceived a Horse-courser. Cap. 34.
AFter the like manner he served a Horse courser, at a Frayre called
Pheiffring, for Faustus through his Coniuring, had got an excellent fair
Horse, whereupon he rid to the Fair, where he had many Chapmen that offered him
money: lastly he sold him for forty dollors, willing him that bought him, that
in any wise he should not ride him over any water, but the horse-courser
marvelled with himself that Faustus had him ride him over no water: but (quoth
he) I will prove, and forthwith he rid him into the River* presently the horse
vanished from under him, and he sat on a bottle of straw, insomuch that the
man was almost drowned. The horse-courser knew well where he lay that had sold
him his Horse, wherefore he went angerly to his Inn, where he found Doctor
Faustus fast a sleep^, and snorting on a bed, but the Horse-courser could no
longer for bear him took him by the leg and began to pull him off the bed,
but he pulled him so, that he pulled his leg from his body, insomuch that the
Horse-courser fell backwards in the place, then began Doctor Faustus to cry
with an open throat, he has murdered me: Hereat the Horse-courser was
afraid and gave the slight, thinking none other with himself but that he had
pulled his leg from his body, by this means Doctor Faustus kept his money.

How Doctor Faustus eat a load of Hay. Chap. 35.
DOctor Faustus being in a Town of Germany called Zwickow where he was
accompanied with many Doctors and Ma^s^ers, and going forth to walk after
Supper, they me^te with adowne that drove a load of Hay. Good even good
fellow, said Faustus to the clown, what shall I give thee to let me eat my
belly full of hay? the clown thought with himself, what a mad man is this to
eat hay, thought he with himself, thou will not eat much: they agreed for
three farthings he should eat as much as he could: wherefore Doctor Faustus
began to eat, and that so rauenously, that all the rest of his company fell a
laughing: blinding so the poor clown, that he was sorry at his heart, for he
seemed to have eaten more then the half of his hay: wherefore the clown began
to speak him fair, for feate he should have eaten the other half also,
Faustus made as though he had had pity on the clown, and went his way. When
the clown came in place where he would be, he had his hay again as he had
before, a full load.

How Doctor Faustus served the twelve students. Chap. 36.
AT Wittinberg before Faustus his house, there was a quarrel between seven
students, and five that came to part the rest, one part being stronger then the
other. Wherefore Faustus seeing them to be over matched, coniured them all
blind, insomuch that the one could not see the other, and yet he so dealt with
them, they fought and smote at one another still: whereat all the beholders
fell a laughing: and thus they continued blind beating one another, until the
people parted them and led each one to his own house: where being entered into
their houses, they received their sight perfectly again.

How Doctor Faustus served the drunken clownes. Chap. 37.
DOctor Faustus went into an Inn wherein were many tables full of clownes the
which were tippling can after can of excellent wine: and to be short they were
all drunken: and as they sat they so sung and hollowed, that one could not
hear a man speak for them: this angered Doctor Faustus: wherefore he said to
those that had called him in, mark my masters, I will show you a merry jest:
the clownes continuing still hollowing and singing, he so coniured them, that
their mouths stood as wide open as it was possible for them to hold them, and
never a one of them was able to close his mouth again. By and by the noise was
gone, the clownes notwithstanding looked carnestly one upon another, and wist
not what was happened: one by one they went out, and so soon as they came
without, they were all as well as ever they were: but none of them desired to
go in anymore.

How Doctor Faustus sold five Swine for six Dollers a piece. Chap. 38.
DOctor Faustus began another jest, he made him ready five fat Swine, the
which he sold to one for six dollers a peee, upon this condition, that the
swine driuer should not drive them into the water: Doctor Faustus went home
again, and as the Swine had fyled themselves in the mud, the swine-driuer
drove them into a water, where presently they were changed into so many bundles
of straw swimming upright in the water: the buyer looked wishly about him, and
was sorry in his heart, but he knew not where to find Faustus, so he was
content to let all go, and to loose both money and hogs.

How Doctor Faustus played a merry jest with the Duke of Anholt in his Court.
Chap. 39.
DOctor Faustus on a time came to the Duke of Anholt, who welcomed him very
courteously: this was ye month of January, where sitting at the table, he
perceived the Duchess to be with child, and forbearing himself until the
meat was taken from the table, and that they brought in ye banqueting dishes,
Doctor Faustus said to the Duchess, gracious Lady, I have always heard that
great bellied women do always long for some dainties, I beseech therefore
your grace hide not your mind from me, but tell me what you desire to eat? she
answered him, Doctor Faustus now truly I will not hide from you what my heart
does most desire, namely, that if it were now harvest I would cat my belly full
of grapes, and other dainty fruit: Doctor Faustus answered hereupon, Gracious
Lady, this is a small thing for me to do, for I can do more then this:
wherefore he took a plate, and set open one of the Cazements of the Window,
holding it forth, where incontinent he had his dish full of all manner of
fruit, as red and white Grapes, Pears and Apples, the which came from out of
strange countries: all these he presented the Duchess, saying: Madam I pray
you vouchsafe to taste of this dainty fruit, the which came from a far
country, for there the summer is not yet ended. The Duchess thanked Faustus
highly, and she fell to her fruit with full appetite. The Duke of Anholt
notwithstanding could not withhold to ask Faustus with what reason there were
such young fruit to be had at that time of the year. Doctor Faustus told him,
may it please your grace to understand, that the year is divided into two
circles over the whole world that when with us it is winter, in the contrary
circle it is notwithstanding summer, for in India and Saba there falls or
sets the sun, so that it is so warm that they have twice a year fruit: and
gracious Lord I have a swift spirit, the which can in the twinkling of an eye
fulfill my desire in any thing, wherefore I sent him into those countries, who
has brought this fruit as you see: whereat the Duke was in great admiration.

How Doctor Faustus through his charms made a great Castle in presence of the
Duke of Anholt. Chap. 40.
DOctor Faustus desired the Duke of Anholt to walk a little forth of the Court
with him, wherefore they went together into the field, where Doctor Faustus
(through his ski^l) had placed a mighty Castle, which when the Duke saw^, he
wondered thereat, so did the Duchess, and all the beholders* that on that Hill
which is called the Rohumbuel, should on the sudden be so fair a Castle. At
last, Doctor Faustus desired the Duke and the Duchess to walk with him into
the Castle, which they denied not. This Castle was so wonderful strong, having
about it a great and deep trench of water, the which was full of fish, and all
manner of water-foules, as Swannes, Duckes, Goose, Bitters, and such like.
About the wall, was fine stone do^es, and two other doors: also within, was a
great open Court, wherein were inchaunted, all manner of wild Beasts,
specially such as were not to be found in Germany: as Apes, Bears, Buffes,
Antelops, and many other strange Beasts. Al^o, there were Hearts, Hurdes, Roe
buckes and Does and wild Soome: All manner of land-Fowle that any man could
think on, which flewe from one tree to an other. After all this, he set his
guests to the Table, being the Duke and Duchess, with all their train, for
he had provided them a most sump^uous Fea^t, both of meat, and also of any kind
of drink: for he set nine Mess of meat v^on the board at once, and all this
must his Wagner do, to place all things on the board, the which was brought
unto him by the spirit, invisible, of all things their hearts could desire, as
wild-foule, venison, and all manner of dayntie Fish that could be thought on:
of wine also great plenty, and of diverse sorts, as French wine, Cullen wine,
Crabashir wine, Rhemish wine, Spauish wine, Hungarian wine, Watzburg wine,
Malmesey, and Sack: In the whole, there were a 100 Cans standing round about
the house. This sumptuous banquet, the Duke took thankfully, and afterward he
departed homewards, and to their thinking they had neither eaten or drunk: so
were they blinded while they were in the Castle. But as they were in their
Palace, they looked toward the Castle, and beheld it all on a flame of fire,
and all those which saw it, wondered to hear so strange anoyse, as if it had
been great Ordnance should have been shot off: and thus the Castle burned, and
consumed away cleave. Which done, Doctor Faustus raturned to the Duke, who gave
him great thanks for showing them so great courtesy, and gave him a hundred
dollors, and liberty to depart, or stay there at his own discretion.

How Doctor Faustus with his Company, visited the Bishop of Saltzburgs
Wine-Celler. Chap. 41.
DOctor Faustus having taken leave of the Duke, he went to Wittenberg, near
about Shroue tide, and being in company with certain students, Doctor Faustus
was himself the God of Bacchus, who having well feasted the Students before
with dainty fare, after the manner of Germany, where it is counted no feast
except all the bidden guests be drunk, which Doctor Faustus intanding, said:
Gentlemen, and my guests, will it please you to take a cup of Wine with me in a
place or Celler whereunto I will bring you: they all said willingly we will:
which when Doctor Faustus heard he took them forth, set either of them upon an
Holly wand, and so was coniured into the Bishop of Saltzburg his Celler, for
there about grew excellent pleasant Wine: there fell Faustus and his company to
drinking and swilling, not of the worst but of the best. And as they were merry
in the celler, came down to draw drink the Bishops Butler: which when he
perceived so many persons there, he cried with a loud voice, thieves thieves.
This spited Doctor Faustus wonderfully, wherefore he made every one of his
company to sit on their holly wand, and so vanished away: and in parting D.
Faustus took the butler by the hair of the head, and carried him away with
them until they came to a mighty high lopped tree, and on the top of that huge
tree he set the Butler: where he remained in a most fearful perplexity: D.
Faustus departed to his house, where they took their valete one of another,
drinking the wine the which they had steine in great bottels of glass out of
the Bishops celler. The Butler that had helo himself by the hands upon the
lopped tree all the night, was almost frozen with cold, espying the day, and
seeing the tree of so huge great gighnes, thought with himself it is
impossible to come off this tree without peril of death; at length he espied
certain clownes which were passing by, he cried, for the love of God help me
down, the clownes seeing him so high, wondered what mad man would clime to so
huge a tree, wherefore as a thing most miraculous, they carried tidings to the
bishop of Saltzburg: then was there great running on every side to see him in
the tree, and many devises they practiced so get him down with ropes: and
being demanded by the Bishop how he came there, he said, yt he was brought
thither by the hair of ye head of certain the nes that were robbing of the
wine celler, but what they were he knew not, for (said he) they had faces like
men, but they wrought like Devils.

How Doctor Faustus kept his Chroue-tide. Chap. 42.
THere were seven students and masters that studied Divinity, Iuris prudentia
and medicina, all these having consented, were ag^ad to visit Doctor Faustus,
and to celebrate Shro^^^de with him: who being come to his house, he gave them
their welcome, for they were his dear friends, desiring them to sit down,
where he served them with a very good supper of Men's, fish and other roast, yet
were they but slightly cheered: wherefore Doctor Faustus comforted his guests,
excusing himself that they stole upon him so suddenly, that he had not
leisure to provide for them so well as they were worthy: but my good friends
(quoth he) according to the use of our Country, we must drink all this night
and so a draught of the best wine to bedward is commendable. For you know that
in great Potentates courts they use as this night great feasting, the like will
I do for you: for I have three great flaggens of Wine, the fiest is full of
Hungarian Wine, containing eight gallons, the second of Italian Wine contaning
seven gallons, the third containing six gallons of Spanish wine, all the which
we will tipple out before it be day: besides, we have fifteen dishes of meat,
the which my spirit Mephostophiles has fette so far, that it was cold
before he brought it, and they are all full of the daintiest things that ones
heart can devise, but (says Faustus) I must make them hot again, and you may
believe me Gentlemen, that this is no blinding of you, whereas you think that
it is no natural food, verily it is as good and as pleasant as ever you eat.
And having ended his tale, he commanded his boy to lay the cloth, which done,
he served them with fifteen mess of meat, having three dishes to a mess,
the which were all manner of Venison, and dainty wild foul, and for wine there
was no lack, as Italian wine, Hungarian wine, and Spanish wine: and when they
were all made drunk, and that they had almost eaten all their good cheer,
they began to sing and to dance until it was day, and then they departed every
one to his own habitation at whose parting, Doctor Faustus, desired them to be
his guests again the next day following.

How Doctor Faustus feasted his guests on the Ashwednesday. Chap. 43.
Upon Ash wednesday came unto Doctor Faustus his bidden guests the Students,
whom he feasted very royally, insomuch that they were all full and lusty,
dancing and singing as the night before: and when the high glasses and goblets
were caroused one to another doctor Faustus began to play them some pretty
feats, insomuch that round about the hall was heard most pleasant music, and
that in sundry places: in this corner a Lute in another corner a Cornet, in
another a Cithern, Clarigolds, Harp, Horne-pipe: in fine, all manner of
Music was heard there at that instant, whereat all the glasses and goblets,
cups, and pots, dishes, and all that stoods on the board began to dance: then
Doctor Faustus took ten stone pots, and set them down on the floor where
presently they began to dance, and to smite one against the other that the
shiuers flew round about the whole house, whereat the whole company fell a
laughing. Then he began another jest, he set an instrument on the table, and
caused a monstrous great Ape to come in amongst them, which Ape began to dance
and to skip, showing them many merry conceits. In this and such like pastime
they passed away the whole day, where night being come, Doctor Faustus bad them
all to Supper, which they lightly agreed unto, for Students in these cases are
easily entreated: wherefore he promised to feast them with a banquet of foul,
and afterward they would go all about with a mask: then D. Faustus put forth a
long pole out of ye window, whereupon presently there came innumerable of birds
and wild foul, and so many as came, had not any power to fly away again, but
he took them and flang them to the students, who lightly pulled of the necks
of them, and being roasted they made their supper: which being ended, they made
themselves ready to the mask. Doctor Faustus commanded every one to put on a
clean shirt over his other clothes, which being done, they looked one upon
another, it seemed to each one of them they had no heads, and so they went
forth unto certain of their neighbors, at which sight the people were
wonderfully afraid. And as the use of Germany is, that whersoeuer a mask
enters, the good man of the house must feast them: so when these maskers were
set to their banquet, they seemed again in their former shape with heads,
insomuch that they were all known what they were, and having sat and well
eat and drunk, D. Faustus made that every one had an Asses head on, with
great and long ears, so they fell to dancing and to drine away the time until
it was midnight, and then every man departed home: and as soon as they were out
of the house, each one was in his natural shape again, and so they ended and
went to sleep.

How Doctor Faustus the day following was feasted of the students, and of his
merry jests with them while he was in their company. Chap. 44.
THe last Bacchanal^ was held on Thursday, where insued a great snow, and D.
Faustus was invited unto the Students that were with him the day before, where
they had prepared an excellent banquet for him, which banquet being ended, doctor
Faustus began to play his old pranks, and forthwith were in the place thirteen
Apes, that took hands and danced round in a ring together, then they sell to
tumbling and vauting one ou^r another, that it was most pleasent to beheld,
the^ they leaped out of the window and vanished away: then they set before
Doctor Faustus a roasted calves head, which one of the Students cut a piece of,
and laid it on Doctor Faustus his trencher, which piece being no sooner laid
down, but the Ca^nes head began to cry mainly out like a man, murder,
murder, out alas what do thou to me? whereat they were all amazed, but after
a while, considering of Faustus his testing tucks, they began to laugh, and
then they pulled in sunder the calves head, and cate it up, Whereupon Doctor
Faustus asked lean to depart, but they would in no wise agree to let him go,
except that he would promise to come again presently: then Faustus through his
cunning made a fledge the which was drawn about the house with four fiery
dragons: this was fearful for the students to behold, for they saw Faustus
ride up and down as though he should have fired and slain all them in the
house. This sport continued until midnight, with such a noise that they could
not hear one another, and the heads of the students were so light that they
thought themselves to be in the air all that time,

How Doctor Faustus showed the fair Helena unto the students upon the Sunday
following. Chap. 45.
THe Sunday following came those students home to Doctor Faustus his own
house, and brought their meat and drink with them, these men were right
welcome guests unto Faustus wherefore they all fell to drinking wine smoothly:
and being merry, they began some of them to talk of the beauty of women, and
every one gave forth his verdit what he had seen, and what he had heard: So
one among the rest said, I never was so desirous of any thing in this world, as
to have a sight (if it were possible) of fair Helena of Greece, for whom the
worthy town of Troy was destroyed and razed down to the ground, therefore,
says he, that in all men's judgment she was more then commonly fair, because
that when she was stolen away from her husband, there was for her recovery so
great bloodshed.

Doctor Faustus answered: for that you are all my friends, and are so desirous
to see that stately pearl of Greece, fair Helena, the wife of King Menelaus
and daughter of Tendalus and Leda, sister to Castor and Pollux who was the
fairest Lady in all Greece: I will therefore bring her into your presence
personally and in the same form of attire as she used to go when she was in
her chiefest flowers, and pleasantest pria^e of youth. The like have I done for
the Emperor Carolus Magnus, at his desire I showed him Alexander the great and
his Paramout: but (said Doctor Faustus) I charge you all that upon your perils
you speak not a word, nor rise up from the table so long as she is in your
presence. And so he went out of the hall, returning presently again: after
whom immediately followed the fair and beautiful Helena, whose beauty was such
that the students were all amazed to see her, esteeming her rather to be a
heavenly then an earthly Creature: This Lady appeared before them in a most
rich Gown of purple Velnet, cosily imbroadred: her hair hanged down loose,
as fairs as the beaten gold, and of such length, that it reached down to her
h^mmes, having most amorous colebla^^^ eyes, a sweet and pleasant round ace,
with lips as red as a Cherry, he cheeks of a rose color, her mouth small, her
neck white like a swan, tall and slender of personage In sum, there was no
imperfect place in her: she looked round about with a rolling Hawks eye a
smiling and wanton countenance, which nere hand inflamd the hearts of al
students, but that they persuaded themselves she was a spirit, which made them
lightly pass away such fancyes: and thus faice Helen and Faustus went out
again one with an an other. But the students, at Faustus entering into the Hall
again, requested him to let them see her again the next day, for that they
would bring with them a Painter* to take her Counterfeit: which he denied,
affirming that he could not always raise up her spirit, but only at certain
tunes: yet said he, I will gine you her Counterfeit, which shall be as good to
you, as if your self should see the drawing thereof, which they received
according to his promise, but soon lost it again. The students departed from
Faustus to their several lodgings, but none of them could sleep that night, for
thinking on the beauty of fair Hellen. Therefore a man may see, that the devil
blinds and inflameth the heart often times with lust, that men fall in in love
with harlots, whereby their minds can afterward be hardly removed.

How Doctor Faustus Coniured away the four wheels from a Clownes Wagon.
Chap. 46.
DOctor Faustus was sent for, to come to the Marshall of Brunswick, who was
maruailously troubled with the falling sickness: Now Faustus had this
quality, he sildome rid, but walked on foot, to ease himself when ^e list: And
as he came near unto the Town of Brunswicke, there ouertooke him a Clown
with four horses and an empty Wagon: to whom* Doctor Faustus (iestingly to
try him) said unto him, I pray thee good fellow let mer dea little to ease my
weary legs, which the bussa^dly Ass denies, s^ving, that his horses were all
weary: and he would not let him get up: Doctor Faustus did this but to prove
this Clown if there were any c^rtery to be found in him if need were: But such
churlishnes is commonly found among Clownes but he was well requited by
Faustus, even with the like payment, for pe said unto him. Thou doltish clown,
void of all humility, seeing thou art of so currith disposition I will pay thee
as thou have deserved: for the four wheels of thy Wagon thou shall have taken
from thee, let me see then how thou can shift: hereupon his wheels were
gone, his horses also fell down to the ground as though they had been dead:
whereat the clown was sore afrighted, measuring it a just scourge of God for
his sins and churlishnes, wherefore all trembling and wailing, he humbly
besought Doctor Faustus to be good unto him, confessing he was worthy of it,
notwithstanding if it pleased him to forgive him, he would herafter do better.
Which humility made Faustus his heart to repent, answering him on this manner:
Well do so no more, but when a poor man desires thee, see that thou let him
ride, but yet thou shall not go altogether clear, for although thou have
again thy four wheels, yet shall thou fetch them at the four gates of the
City, so he threw dust on the horses and revived them again, and the Clown
for his churlishnes was feign to fetch his wheels, spending his time with
wearines, whereas before he might have done a good deed, and gone about his
business quietly.

How four Iuglers cut one another head off, and set them on again and how
Doctor Faustus deceived them. Chap. 47.
DOctor Faustus came in the Lent unto Frankford fair, where his Spirit
Mephostophiles gave him to understand that in an Inn were four Iuglers that
cut one another head off, and after their cutting off sent them to the barber
to be trimmed, which many people saw. This angered Faustus, for he meant to have
himself the only Cock in the devils basket, and he went to the place where
they were to behold them. And as these Iuglers were together ready one to cut
off another head, there stood also the barbers ready to trim them, and by them
upon the table stood likewise a glass full of stilled water, and he that was
the chiefest amongst them stood by it. Thus they began, they smote off the bead
of the first, and presently there was a Lilly in the glass of distilled water,
where Faustus perceiving this Lilly as it was springing, and the chief Iugler
named it the tree of life, thus dealt he with the first, making the barber wash
and comb his head, and then he set it on again, presently the Lilly vanished
away out of the water, hereat the man had his head whole and sound again, the
like did they with the other two: and as the turn and lot came to the chief
Iugler that he also should be beheaded, and that this Lilly was most pleasant,
fair, and flourishing green, they smote his head off, and when it came to be
barbed, it troubled Faustus his conscience, insomuch that he could not abide to
see another do any thing, for he thought himself to be the principal Coniurer
in the world: wherefore Doctor Faustus went to the table whereas the other
Iuglers kept that Lilly, and so he took a small knife and cut off the stalk
of the Lilly, saying to himself, none of them should blind Faustus: yet no
man saw Faustus to cut the Lilly, but when the rest of the Iuglers thought to
have set on their masters head, they could not, wherefore they looked on the
Lilly, and found it bleeding, by this means the Iugler was beguiled, and so
dyed in his wickedues, yet not one thought that Doctor Faustus had done it.

How an old man the neighbor of Faustus sought to persuade him to amend his
evil life and to fall unto repentance. Chap. 48.
A Good Christian, an honest and virtuous old man a lover of the ^oly
Scriptures, who was neighbor unto D. Faustus, when he perceived that many
students had their recourse in and out unto Doctor Faustus he suspected his
evil life, wherefore like a friend he invited Doctor Faustus to supper unto
his house, to the which he agreed: and having ended their banquet, the old man
began with these words: My loving friend and neighbor Doctor Faustus, I am to
desire of you a friendly and a hri^^tan request, beseeching you that you will
vouchsafe not to be angry with me, but friendly resolve me in my doubt and take
my poor inuiting in good part. To whom D. Faustus answered: my loving
neighbor, I pray you say your mind. Then began the old Patron to say: My good
neighbor, you know in the beginning how that you have defied God, and all the
host of Heaven, and given your soul to the devil, wherewith you have
incurred Gods high displeasure, and are become from a Christian, far worse then
a heathen person: oh consider what you have done, it is not only the pleasure
of ye body, but that safety of the soul that you must have respect unto: of
which if you be careless, then are you cast away, and shall remain in the
anger of the Almighty God. But yet it is time enough D. Faustus, if you repent
and call unto the Lord for mercy, as we have example in the Acts of the
Apostles the 8. Chap. of Simon in Samaria, who tras^ed out of the way,
affirming that he was Simon homo Sanctus. This m^n was notwithstanding in the
end converted, after that he had ^^a^ the sermon of Philip, for he was baptized
and saw his sin and repented. Likewise I beseech you good bro^her Doctor
Faustus, let my rude sermon be unto you a conuertion: and forget the filthy
life that yet hau^ ledd^: ^ezent, ask mercy, and live: for Christ says, Come
unto me all ye^ that ^e weary, and heavy laden, and I will refresh you. And in
Ezechiel, I desire not the death of a sinner, but rather that he will convert
and live.

Let my words good Brother Faustus, pierce into your Adamant heart, and desire
God for his son Christ his sake to forgive you. Wherefore have you so long lived
in your devilish practices, knowing that in the old and new testament you are
forbidden, and that men should not suffer any such to live, neither have any
conversation with them, for it is an abomination unto the Lord: and that such
persons have no part in the Kingdom of God. All this while Doctor Faustus
heard him very attentively, and replied. Father your persuasions like me
wondrous well, and I thank you with all my heart for your good will and
counsel, pro^ising you as far as I may to allow your discipline: whereupon
he took his leave. And being come home, he lay him very pensive on his bed,
bethinking himself of the words of the old man, and in a manner began to
repent that he had given his soul to the devil, intend^ng to deny all he had
promised to Lucifer. Continuing in these cogitations, suddenly his spirit
appeared unto him clapping him upon the head: and wrung it as though he would
have pulled his head from his shaulders saying unto him: Thou know Faustus
that thou have given thy self, body and soul, to my Lord Lucifer, and thou
have vowed thy self an enemy to God and unto all men, and now thou beginnest
to hearken unto an old doting fool which perswa^eth thee as it were unto good
when indeed it is too lace, for that thou art the Devils, and he has good
power presently to fetch thee: wherefore he has sent me unto thee, to tell
thee, that seeing thou have sorrowed for that thou have done, begin again and
write another writing with thine own blood, if not, then will I tear thee all
to pieces. Hereat Doctor Faustus was sore afraid and said: My Mephostophiles, I
will write again what thou will: wherefore he sat him down, and with his
own blood he wrote as follows: which writing was afterward sent to a dear
friend of the said Doctor Faustus being his kins-man.

How Doctor Faustus, wrote the second time with his own blood and gave it to
the devil. Chap. 49.
I Doctor John Faustus, acknowledge by this my deed and hand writing, that since
my first writing, which is seuenteen years, that I have right willingly held,
and has been an utter enemy unto God and all men, the which I once again
confirm, and give fully and wholly my self unto the devil both body and
soul, even unto the great Lucifer, and that at the end of seven years
ensuing after the date of this letter, he shall have to do with me according
as it pleases him, either to lengthen or shorten my life as pleases him: and
hereupon I renounce all perswaders that seek to withdraw me from my purpose by
the word of God, either ghostly or bodily: and further, I will never give ear
unto any man be he spiritual or temporal, that moves any matter for the
salvation of my soul. Of all this writing, and that therein contained, be
witness my blood, the which with my hands I have begun and ended.

Dated at Wittenberg the 25. of July.
And presently upon the making of this letter, he became so great an enemy to
the poor old man, that he sought his life by all means possible, but this
godly man was strong in the holy Ghost that he could not be vanquished by any
means, for about two days after that he had exhorted Faustus, as the poor
man lay in his bed, suddenly there was a mighty rumbling in the chamber, yt
which he was never wont to hear, and he heard as it had been the groaning of
a Sow, which lasted long: whereupon the good old man began to jest and mock,
and said: oh what Barbarian cry is this: oh fair bird, what soul music is
this? a fair Angel, that could not tarry two days in his place? beginnest
thou now to rim into a poor man's house, where thou have no power, and were not
able to keep thy own two days? With these and such like words the spirit
departed. And when he came home, Faustus asked him how he had sped with the
old man? to whom the spirit answered, the old man was harnessed, and that he
could not once lay hold upon him: but he would not tell how the old man had
mocked him, for the Devils can never abide to hear of their fall. Thus does
God defend the hearts of all honest Christians, that be take themselves under
his tuition.


How Doctor Faustus made a marriage between two lovers. Cap. 50.
IN the City of Wittenberg was a Student, a gallant Gentleman, named N. N.
This Gentleman was far in love with a Gentlewoman, fair and proper of
personage: This Gentlewoman had a knight that was a suter unto her, and many
other Gentlemen the which desired her in marriage, but none could obtain her: so
it was that this N.N. was very well acquainted with Faustus, and by that means
became a suter unto him to assist him in the matter, for he fell so far in
despair with himself, that he pined away to the skin and bones, But when he
had opened the matter unto Doctor Faustus, he asked counsel of his spirit
Mephostophiles, the which told him what to do. Hereupon Doctor Faustus went
home to the Gentleman and bad him be of good cheer, for he should have his
desire, for he would help him to that he wished for, and that this Gentlewoman
should love none other but him only, wherefore D. Faustus so changed the mind
of the damsel by a practice he wrought, that she should do no other thing but
think on him whom before she had hated, neither cared she for any man but him
alone. The device was thus: Faustus commanded the Gentleman that he should
cloth himself in all the best apparel that he had, and that he should go
unto this Gentlewoman, ^^d show himself* giving him a King, commanding him
in any wise that he should dance with her before he departed: who following his
Counsel, went to her, and when they began to dance, they that were suitors
began to take every one his Lady by the hand: this Gentleman took her woo
before had so disdayned him, and in the dance, he put the King into her hand
that Faustus had given him, which she no sooner touched, but she fell presently
in love with him, smiling at him in the dance, and many times winking at him,
rolling her eyes, and in the end she asked him if be could love her, and make
her his wife? he gladly answered, that he was content: whereupon they
concluded, and were married, by the means and help of Faustus, for the which,
the Gentleman will rewarded hun.

How Doctor Faustus, led his friends into his Garden at Christmas, and showed
them many strange sights, in his ninteenth year. Chap. 51.
IN December, about Christmas* in the City of Wittenberg were man^ y^ng
Gentlemen which were come out of the Country to be merry with their friends:
amongst whom, there were certain well acquainted with Doctor Faustus, who
often invited them home unto his houses they being there on a certain time,
after dinner he had them into his Garden, where they beheld all manner of
flowers and fresh herbs, and trees bearing fruit and blossoms of all sorts,
who wondered to see that his garden should so flourish at that time, as in the
midst of Summer: and abroad in the streets and all the country lay full of
snow and ye: Wherefore this was noted of them, as a thing miraculous: every
one gathering and carrying away, all such things as they best liked, and so
departed, delight^d with their sweet smelling flowers.

How Doctor Faustus, gathered together, a great Army of men, in his extremity,
against a Knight that would have miured him on his journey. Chap. 52.
DOctor Faustus trauayld toward Eyzelben, and when he was nigh half the way,
he espied seven horsemen, and the chief of them be knew to be the Knight
with whom he had Iested in the Emperors Court: for he had set a huge pair of
Hearts horns upon his head, and when the Knight now saw that he had fit
opportunity to be revenged of Faustus, he ran upon him (and those that were with
him) to mischief him, intending priuile to slay him: which when Faustus
espied, he vanished away into a wood which was hard by them: But when the
Knight perceived that he was vanished away, he caused his men to stand still,
but where they remained, they heard all manner of warlike Instruments of music,
as Drums, Flutes, Trumpets, and such like, and a certain troop of hors-men
^u^^^ing toward them: then they turned another way, and they were also met on
that side the^ another way, and yet were freshly assaulted, so that which way
so ever they turned themselves, he was incountred, insomuch that when the
Knight perceived that he could escape no way, but that they his enemies laid on
him which way soever he offered to fly, he took a good heart, and ran
amongst the thickest, and thought with himself, better to dye then to live
with so great an infamy. Therefore being at handy blows with them he demanded
the cause why they should so use him? but none of them would give him answer
until Doctor Faustus showed himself unto the Knight, whereupon they enclosed
him round, and Doctor Faustus said unto him sir, yield your weapon, and your
self, other wise it will go hand with you. The Knight knew no other but that
he was environed with an host of men (where indeed they were none other th^n
devils) yielded: then Faustus took away his sword, his piece, and horse, with
all the rest of his companions. And further he said unto him, Sir: the chief
General of our army has commanded to deal with you according to the Law of
Arm^s, you shall depart in peace whither you please, and then he gave the
Knight a horse after the manner, and set him thereon, so he rode, the rest went
on foot, until they came to their Inn, where being alighted, his Page rode
on his horse to the water, and presently the horse vanished away, the Page
being almost sunk and drowned, but he escaped, and coming home, the Knight
perceived his Page so bemyred and on foot, asked where his horse was become:
who answered that he was vanished away: which when the Knight heard, he said,
of a truth this is Faustus his doing, for he serves me now as he did before at
the Court, only to make me a scorn and a laughing stock.

How Doctor Faustus caused Mephostophiles to bring him 7. of the fairest women
he could find in all the Countries he had travailed in, in the 20 year. Chap.
53.
WHen D. Faustus called to mind that his time from day to day drew nigh, he
began to live a swini^h and epicurish life, wherefore he commanded his Spirit
Mephostophiles, to bring him seven of the fairest women that he had seen in
all the time of his travel: which being brought, first one, then another, he
lay with them all, insomuch that he liked them so well, that he continued with
them in all manner of love and made them to travel with him in all his
iourners: These women were 2. Netherlands, 1. Hungarian, 1. English, 2.
Wallons, 1. Francklander: and with these sweet personages he continued long,
yea even to his last and.

How Doctor Faustus found a mass of money, when he had consumed 22. of his
years. Chap. 54.
TO the end that the Devil would make Faustus his only heir, he showed unto
him, where he should go and find a mighty huge mass of money, and that he
should have it in an old Chapel that was fallen down: half a mile distant
from Wittenberg, there he had him to dig, and should find it, the which he
did, and having dug reasonable deep, he saw a mighty huge serpent, the which
lay on the treasure it self, the treasure it self lay like a huge light
burning: but Doctor Faustus charmed the Serpent that he crept into a hole, and
when he dug deeper to get up the treasure, he found nothing but coals of
fire: there also he heard and saw many that were tormented, yet notwithstanding
he brought away the coals, and when he was come home: it was all turned into
silver and gold, and after his death it was found by his servant, the which was
almost about estimation a thousand Gilders.

How Doctor Faustus made the spirit of fair Helena of Greece his own Paramour
and bedfellow in his 23. year. Chap. 55.
TO the end that this miserable Faustus might fill the lust of his flesh, and
live in all manner of voluptuous pleasures, it came in his mind after he had
slept his first sleep, and in the 23. year past of his time, that he had a
great desire to lie with fair Helena of Greece, especially her whom he had
seen and showed unto the students at Wittenberg, wherefore he called unto his
spirit Mephostophiles, commanding him to bring him the fair Helena, which he
also did, whereupon he fell in love with her, and made her his common concubine,
and bedfellow, for she was so beautiful and delightful a piece, that he could
not be one hour from her, if he should therefore have suffered death, she had so
stolue away his heart, and to his seeming in time she was with child, and in
the end brought him a man child, whom Faustus named Iustus Faustus: This child
told D. Faustus many things that were to come, and what strange things were
done in foreign Countries: but in the end when Faustus lost his life, the
mother and the child vanished away both together.

How Doctor Faustus made his will, in which he named his servant Wagner to be
his heir. Chap. 56.
DOctor Faustus was now in this 24. and last year, and he had a pretty
stripling to his servant, the which had studied also at the University of
Wittenberg: this youth was very well acquainted with his knaueries and
sorceries so that he was hated as well for his own knauerie, as also for his
masters: for no man would give him entertainment into his service, because of
his unhappiness, but Faustus: This Wagner was so well brioued with Faustus
that he used him as his son: for do what he would, his master was always
therewith well contented. And when the time drew nigh that Faustus should end,
he called unto him a Notary and certain Masters, the which were his friends,
and often conversant with him, in whose prosence he gave this Wagner his house
and garden. Item he gave him in ready money 16000. Gilders. Item a Farm. Item
a Gold chain, much Plate, and other household stuff. That gave he all to his
servant and the rest of his time he meant to spend in Innes and Students
company, drinking and eating, with other iollitie: and thus he finished his
will for that time.

How Doctor Faustus fell in talk with his servant touching his Testament, and
the covenants thereof. Chap. 57.
NOw when his will was made Doctor Faustus called unto his servant, saying, I
have thought upon thee in my Testament, for that thou have been a trusty
servant unto me, and a faithful, and have not opened my secrets, and yet
further (said he) ask of me before I die what thou will and I will give it
unto thee. His servant rashly answered, I pray you let me have your cunning. To
which Doctor Faustus answered I have given thee all my books, upon this
condition that thou would not let them be common, but use them for thine own
pleasure, and study carefully in them. And do thou also desire my cunning?
That may thou peradventure have, if thou love and peruse my books well.
Further (said Doctor Faustus) seeing that thou desire of me this request, I
will resolve thee: my Spirit Mephostophiles his time is out with me, and I have
naught to command him as touching thee, yet will I help thee to another if thou
like well thereof. And within three days after he called his seruent unto him,
saying, art thou resolved: would thou verily have a spirit: Then tell me in
what manner or form thou would have him: To whom his servant answered, that
he would have him in the form of an Ape: whereupon appeared presently a Spirit
unto him in manner and form of an Ape, the which leaped about the house. Then
said Faustus see, there have thou thy request, but yet he will not obey thee
until I be dead, for when my spirit Mephostophiles shall fetch me away, then
shall thy spirit be bound unto thee, if thou agree: and thy Spirit shall thou
name Abercocke: for so he is called: but all this is upon condition that you
publish my cunning and my merry conceits: with all that I have done (when I am
dead) in an history: and if thou can not remember all, the spirit Abercocke
will help thee: so shall the great acts that I have done be manifest unto the
world.

How Doctor Faustus having but one month of his appointed time to come, fell to
mourning and sorrow with himself, for his diueilish exercise. Chap. 58.
TIme ran away with Faustus, as the houre-glasse, for he had but one month to
come of his 24. years, at the end whereof he had given himself to the devil
body and soul, as it is before specified. Here was the first token for he was
like a taken murderer, or a thief, the which finds himself guilty in
conscience, before the Judge have given sentence, fearing every hour to dye
for he was grieved, and in wayling spent the time, went talking to himself,
wringing of his hands, sobbing and sighing, he fell away from flesh, and was
very lean and kept himself close: neither could he abide to see or hear of
his Mephostophiles any more.

How Doctor Faustus complained that he should in his lusty time and youthful
years dye so miserably. Chap. 59.
THis sorrowful time drawing near so troubled Doctor Faustus, that he began
to write his mind, to the end he might peruse it often, and not forget it, and
which was in manner as follows.

Ah Faustus, thou sorrowful and woeful man now must thou go to the damned
company in unquenchable fire, whereas thou might have had the joyful
immortality of the soul, the which thou now have lost. Ah gross
understanding and wilful will, what seazeth on my limbs, other then a robbing
of my life? Bewail with me my sound and healthful body, and wit and soul:
bewail with me my senses, for you have had your part and pleasure as well as I.
Oh envy and disdain, how have you crept both at once into me, and how for
your sakes, I must suffer all these torments! Ah whither is pity and mercy
fled? Upon what occasion has heaven repayed me with this reward, by sufferance
to suffer me to perish? Wherefore was I created of man? The punishment I see
prepared for me, of my self now must I suffer. Ah miserable wretch, there is
nothing in this world to show me comfort: then woe is me what helps my
wailing?

Another complaint of Doctor Faustus. Chap. 60.
OH poor^, woeful and weary wretch: oh sorrowful soul of Faustus, now art
thou in he number of the damned, for now must I wait for unmeasurable pains
of death, yet far more lamentable then ever yet any creature has suffered.
Ah senceles, wilful, and desperate forgetfulness! Oh cursed and unstable life!
O blind and careless wretch, that so have abused thy body, sense, and soul! O
foolish pleasure, into what a weary laborinth have thou brought me, blinding
mine eyes in the cleerest day? Ah weak heart, Oh troubled soul, where is
become thy knowledge to comfort thee? Oh desperate hope, now shall I never more
be thought upon: Oh care upon carfulness, and sorrows on heaps: Ah grievous
pains, that pierce my panting heart, whom is there now that can deliver me?
Would to God I knew where to hide me, or into what place to creep or fly. Ah,
woe, woe is me, be where I will, yet am I taken. Herewith poor Faustus was so
sorrowfully troubled, that he could not speak or utter his mind any further.

How Doctor Faustus bewailed to think on hell and of the miserable pains
therein provided for him. Chap. 61.
NOw thou Faustus, damned wretch, how happy were thou if as an unreasonable
beast thou might die without soul, so sholdest thou not fale any more
doubts? But now the Devil will take thee away both body and soul, and set
thee in an unspeakable place of darkness: for although others souls have
rest and peace, yet I poor damned wretch must suffer all manner of filthy
stench, pains, cold, hunger, thirst, heat, freezing, burning, hissing,
gnashing and all the wrath and curse of God, yea all the Creatures that God
has created are enemies to me. And now too late I remember that my spirit
Mephostophiles did once tell me there was great difference amongst the damned:
for the greater the sin the greater the torment: for as the twigs of a tree
makes greater flame then the truncke thereof, and yet the truncke continues
longer in burning, even so the more that a man is rooted in sin, the greater
is his punishment. Ah thou perpetual damned wretch, now art thou thrown into
the everlasting fiery lake that never shall be quenched: there must I dwell in
all manner of wailing, sorrow, misery, pain, torment, grief, howling,
sighing, sobbing, running of eyes, stinking at nose, gnashing of feeth, fear
to the ears, horror to the conscience, and shaking both of hand and foot. Ah
that I could carry the heavens upon my shoulders, so that there were time at
last to quit me of this everlasting damnation: Oh who can deliver me out of the
fearful formenting flame, the which I see prepared for me? Oh there is no
help, nor any man that can deliver me, nor any wailing of sins can help me,
neither is there rest to be found for me day or night. Ah woe is me, for there
is no help for me, no shield, no defense, no comfort. Where is my hold?
knowledge dare I not trust: and for a soul to God wards, that have I not, for
I shame to speak unto him: if I do, no answer shall be made me, but he will
hide his face from me, to the end that I should not behold the joys of the
chosen, What mean I then to complain where no help is? No I know no hope
rests in my groanings. I have desired that it should be so, and God has said
Amen to my misdoings: for now I must have shame to comforme in my calamities.

Here follows the miserable and lamentable end of Doctor Faustus, by the
which all Christians may take an example and warning. Chap. 62.
THe full time of Doctor Faustus his 24. years being come, his spirit appeared
unto him giving him his writing again and commanding him to make preparation,
for that the devil would fetch him against a certain time appointed. Doctor
Faustus mourned and sighed wonderfully, and never went to bed, nor slept wink
for sorrow. Wherefore his spirit appeared again comforting him and saying: My
Faustus, be not thou so cowardly minded, for although that thou losest thy
body, it is not long unto the day of Judgment, and thou must dye at the last,
although thou live many thousand years. The Turks, the Jews, and many a
unchristian Emperor are in the same condemnation: therefore my Faustus be of
good courage, and be not discomforted, for the devil has promised that thou
shall not be in pain as the rest of the damned are. This and such like comfort
he gave him, but he told him false, and against the saying of holy Scriptures.
Yet Doctor Faustus that had none other expectation but to pay his debts with
his own skin, went (on the same day that his spirit said the devil would
fetch him) unto his trusty and dearest beloved brethren and companions, as
Masters and Batchelers of Art, and other students more, the which did often
visit him at his house in merriment: these he entreats that they would walk
into the Village called Rimlich, half a mile from Wittenberg, and that they
would there take with him for their repast of a small banquet, the which they
all agreed unto: so they went together: and there held their dinner in a most
sumptuous manner. D. Faustus with them (dissemblingly) was merry but not from
the heart: wherefore he requested them that they would also take part of his
rude supper: the which they agreed unto, for (quoth he) I must tell you what is
the Victulers due: and when they sleeped (for drink was in their heads) then
Doctor Faustus paid and discharged the shot, and bound the students and the
Masters to go with him into another room, for he had many wonderful matters
to tell them, and when they were entered the room as he requested, Doctor
Faustus said unto them as hereafter follows.

An Oration of Faustus to the Students. Chap. 63.
MY trusty and well-beloved friends, the cause why I have invited you into this
place is this: Forasmuch as you have known me this many years in what manner
of life I have lived, practicing all manner of Coniurations and wicked
exercises, the which I obtained through the help of the devil, into whose
deuillish fellowship they have brought me, the which use the like Art and
practice, urged by the detestable prouocations of my flesh, and my stiff-necked
and rebellious will, with my filthy infernal thoughts, the which were ever
before me, pricking me forward so earnestly, that I must perforce have the
consent of the devil to aid me in my devises. And to the end I might the
better bring my purpose to pass, to have the devils aid and furtherance,
which I never have wanted in my actions, I have promised unto him at the end
and accomplishing of 24. years, both body and soul, to do therewith at his
pleasure: and this day, this dismal day, those 24. years are fully expired,
for night beginning, my houre-glasse is at an end, the direful finishing
whereof I carefully expect: for out of all doubt this night he will fetch me,
to whom I have given my self in recompense of his service, both body and
soul, and twice confirmed writings with my proper blood. Now have I called you
my well-beloved Lords, friends, brethren, and fellows, before that fatal hour,
to take my friendly farewell, to the end that my departure may not hereafter
be hidden from you, beseeching you herewith (courteous loving Lords, and
brethren) not to take in evil part any thing done by me, but with friendly
commendations to salute all my friends and companions wheresoever, desiring
both you and them if ever I have trespassed against your minds in any thing
that you would heartily forgive me: and as for those lewd practices the which
is full 24. years I have followed, you shall hereafter find them in writing:
and I beseech you let this my lamentable end to the residue of your lives be a
sufficient warning that you have God always before your eyes, praying unto him
that he would ever defend you from the temptations of the Devil and all his
false deceits, not falling altogether from GOD, as I wretched and ungodly
damned creature have done, having denied and defied Baptism, the Sacraments of
Christ's body, God himself, all heavenly powers, and earthly men: yea, I have
denied such a God that desires not to have one lost. Neither let the evil
fellowship of wicked companions misleade you as it has done me, visit
earnestly and often the Church, war and strive continually against the Devil
with a good and steadfast belief in God, and Jesus Christ, and use your
vocation in holiness. Lastly, to knit up my troubled oration, this is my
friendly request that you would go to rest, and let nothing trouble you* also
if you chance to hear any noise (...) rumbling about the house be not
therewith afraid: for there shall no evil happen unto you: also I pray you
arise not out of your beds. ^at above all things I entreat you, if you
hereafter find my dead earkasse, convey it in the earth, for I dye both a good
and bad Christian, for that I know the devil will have my body, and that
would I willingly give him, so that he would leave my soul in quiet: wherefore
I pray you that you would depart to bed, and so I wish you a quiet night, which
unto me notwithstanding will be horrible and fearful.

This Oration or declaration was made by Doctor Faustus, and that with a hearty
and resolute mind, to the end he might not discomfort them: but the Students
wondered greatly thereat, that he was so blinded for knavery, coniuration, and
such like foolish things, to give his body and soul unto the devil, for they
loved him entirely, and never suspected any such things before he had opened
his mind unto them: wherefore one of them said unto him: Ah friend Faustus, what
have you done to conceal this matter so long from us? we would by the help of
good Divines, and the grace of God have brought you out of this net, and have
torn you out of the bondage and chains of Satan, whereas now we fear it is
too late, to the utter ruin of your body and soul. Doctor Faustus answered, I
durst never do it, although I often minded to settle my self unto godly
people, to desire counsel and help, and once mine old neighbor counseled
me, that I should follow his learning and leave all my coniurations, yet when I
was minded to amend, and to follow that good man's council, then came the
devil and would have had me away, as this night he is like to do, and said,
so soon as I turned again to God he would dispatch me altogether. Thus even
thus, (good gentlemen and dear friends) was I inthralled in that satanicall
band, all good desires drowned, all pity banished, all purpose of amendment
utterly exiled, by the tyrannous threatenings of my deadly enemy. But when the
Students heard his words, they gave him council to do naught else but call
upon God, desiring him for the love of his sweet son Jesus Christ's sake to have
mercy upon him, teaching him this form of prayer: O God be merciful unto me,
poor and miserable sinner, and enter not into judgment with me, for no flesh
is able to stand before thee: although O Lord I must leave my sinful body unto
the Devil, being by him deluded: yet thou in mercy may preserve my soul.

This they repeated unto him, yet it could take no holt, but even as Caine, he
also said his sins were greater then God was able to forgive* for all his
thought was an his writing, he ^^ant he had made it too filthy, in writing with
his own blood. The Students and the other that were there, when they had
prayed for him, they wept, and so went forth, but Faustus tarryed in the Hall:
and when the Gentlemen were laid in bed, none of them could steep, for that
they attended to hear if they might be privy of his end: It happened between
twelve and one a clock at midnight, there blew a mighty storm of wind
against the house, as though it would have blown the foundation thereof out of
his place. Hereupon the students began to fear, and got out of their beds
comforting one another, but they would not stir out of the chamber: and the
Host of the house ran out of doors thinking the house would fall. The
Students lay near unto the hall wherein Doctor Faustus lay, and they heard a
mighty noise and hissing, as if the hall had been full of Snakes and Adders:
with that the hall door stowe open wherein doctor Faustus was, that he began to
cry for help, saying: murder, murder, but it came forth with half a voice,
hollowly: shortly after, they heard him no more. But when it was day, the
Students that had taken no rest that night, arose and went into the hall, in
the which they left doctor Faustus, where notwithstanding they found not
Faustus, but all the hall lay desprinckled with blood, his brains cleaving to
the wall, for the devil had beaten him from one wall against another: In one
corner lay his eyes, in an other his teeth, a pitiful and fearful sight to
behold. Then be^an the Students to wail and weep for him, and sought for his
body in many places: lastly they came into the yard, where they found his body
lying on the horse, dung most monstrously torn, and fearful to behold, for
his head and all his joints were dashed in pieces.

The forenamed Students and Masters that were at his death, have obtained so
much, that they buried him in the village where he was so grievously tormented.
After the which, they returned to Wittenberg, and coming into the house of
Faustus, they found the servant of Faustus very sad, unto whom they opened all
the matter, who took it exceeding heavily. There found they also this history
of Doctor Faustus noted and of him written, as is before declared, all save
only his end, the which was after by the Students thereto annexed: further,
what his servant had noted thereof, was made in another book. And you have
heard that he held by him in his life the spirit of fair Helena: the which had
by him one Son, the which he named Iustus Faustus, even the same day of his
death they vanished away, both mother and son. The house before was so dark,
that scarf any body could abide therein. The same night Doctor Faustus
appeared unto his servant lively, and showed unto him many secret things, the
which he had done and hidden in his life time. Likewise there were certain
which saw Doctor Faustus look out of the window by night as they passed by the
house.

And thus ended the whole history of Doctor Faustus his Coniuration, and other
acts that he did in his life: out of the which example every Christian may
learn, but chiefly the stiff-necked and high minded may thereby learn to
fear God, and to be careful of their vocation, and to be at defiance with all
deuillish works, as God has most precisely forbidden, to the end we should
not inuit the devil as a Guest, nor give him place as that wicked Faustus
has done: for here we have a fearful example of his writing, promise, and
end, that we may remember him: that we go not astray, but take God always
before our eyes, to call alone upon him, and to honor him all the days of our
life, with heart and hearty prayer, and with all our strength and soul to
glorify his holy name, defying the devil and all his works, to the end we
may remain with Christ in all endless joy: Amen, Amen: that wish I unto every
Christian heart, and Gods name to be glorified Amen.

FINIS.

