AN Oration of Ihon Fabritius Montanus. VVherby he teaches that Christian men
cannot resort to the Council of Trent, without committing an heinous offense.
Englyshed by. L. A. ()

Newelye set forth and allowed, according to the order appointed in the Queen's
Maiestyes Injunctions.

Anno. 1. 5. 62. I C



The Preface of the Translatour to the Reader.
JOHN Fabritius Montanus, a man as it appears both learned and zealous, at what
time this last general Counsel was solemly proclaimed and publyshed to be
holden at Trent by thaucthoritie of the Pope, seeing such large placardes and
privileges of safeconduicte, for all nations to resort thither, so formally by
him sent abroad in every quarter, and fearing lest amongst the people of God
some such as were simple, might thereby easelye be entrapped, and under the
glorious name of their privileges, fall into their enemies hands, thought it
good yea to be his duty also being him self a ministre of the Church of
God, not only to publyshe to the christian world, that if they should join
them selves with this den of theefes and Sinagoge of Satan where Antichryst
himself. ^etteth as Judge it should not be only perilous for their own
persons, but also contumeliouse to the majesty of God, hurteful to their
neighbors, yea and iniuriouse to Gods truth. The which thing truly (in my
opinion) he has so fully, so eloquently, so compendiouslye, and so
sufficientelye done in this short oracion, that this only may well suffice
to harness any man again the subtle persuasions of our adversaries, and to
strengthen otherwise the weak consciences of Gods people, who thought it
their bounden duetye, to be present at such assemblyes there to dyspute of
matters of Religion, or at the least wise to propone or make protestacion of
their says. This oracion although it were by John Fabritius Montanus
published in Latin, to all that understood that tongue in due time before the
council was fullye assembled, so that thereby some fruit and commodity was or
might have been taken thereof, yet I thou ghte it not altogether unprofitable
now also to translate the same into our English tongue to thend that such as
are unlearned and ignorant in the other may see the censure and judgment of
this learned man, in this behalf especially seeing even thunlearned of our
adversaries do so much at this day cry out for general Councels, for the
stablishment of religion, and give so much credyte and aucihoritie to them as
to the most holy word of God.

Take this (gentle reader) for the first fruictes of my labor, until such
time as God by his heavenly dew shall multyply and increase the same.

An Oration of Ihon Fabritius Montanus, whereby he teaches that Christien men
can not resort to the Council of Trent, without committing an heinous offense.
Having always wythdrawen my mind from trouble some consultations, in this
so great a broyle both of minds and studies, I thought it good to be in quiet
and at rest until such time as I might freely both in truth and conscience do
the saine, especyally because I knew well enough that men both of excellent
wit and learning have he thereto pleaded and defended this our common cause
mightelye, and with such great force, as was sufficient and able to break
the fearcenes of our adversaries. But this notwithstanding, their malapart and
leude bragges have at the length vanquished and broken of this my long silence.

They are now assembled at Trent whereunto they do call very arrogantly by a
cercayne writing publickely to that end set forth at Venyse, all and every of
us which do profess the Gospel of Christ: which thing truly is not at all
to be meruailed at, seeing they (according to their authority which to
themselves they do chaleng and usurp) do imperiously triumph both over Kings
and Monarchs. But yet they handle this their cause so craftily and subtly
that unless their put poses be prevented it is a great halsard, and to be
feared lest there with they begile such as be simple. Now therefore the time
requires that good men should arm them selfs and join their powers and
force together. In this army or expedicion if I were assigned only to go with
the carriage, truly I would willingly take it upon me. But for so much as we are
set upon and assalted of our enemies by ambusshes, I think it good yt we fight
aloof, the which thing I would the Christian reader (to whom I now speak)
to understand lest any man should sclaunderouslye say yt I did refuse again yt
battle which even now I seemed so hastly to require.

Our enemies have chosen Trent as a place for their am bushes, in my opinion
truly not much unlike to the forkes or Gibettes of Caudis, wherinto when the
Roman hosts had ron hedlong being entrapped by the policy of their
enemies, they made amends for their folly with their old accustomed manhod and
prowess. Those forkes of Caudis, those Dens I mean of Counciles have
sondrye times deceived and endomagid our men. It is time therefore that we
should at the length awake, and with wisdom take head of and foresee those
wyles which once or twyse we have already felt. Yet notwythstandynge in the
mean time such as are simple must be taught, why we seeing our enemies will
not encounter with us in plain batcayle, ought not to goo into their camps
lest we should seem by forsakynge our standinge to forsake also the right of
our cause. If I therefore shall also take upon me to teach this thing, what
teacher of ye gospel ca^ accuse or blame me but he must also accuse and blame
himself of neglecting and lettynge pass his own office and dewety. For how
many soever we be in number, we are called every one unto this Councile,
what marvel is it then if I think that which we al and every one of us are
equal lie carged with, to be also common to me as well as to the rest of the
ministers of the church, (that is to say) to witness and declare to the
Christyan world that there can no just and mete causes be found for us to go
to this Councile, but rather that innumerable and great causes may be showed to
esche we and fiye the same. For there is none so doltishe, who does not see,
that there can be no just cause, why any man should hassarde and cast
himself into open peril which is joined with the damage of the truth, the
contumely of God and the harm of his neighbor. In a matter so plain and
manifest, I neade not long to stand about the proof thereof. The holy men of
God do know that all Chrystian actions, are chyefelye to be referred to
thonely Glory of GOD as to a mark, from the which if they go a wrye it must
neades be that both ye truth must be in hassarde and the health of the soul
also in danger and ieopardye. But here some may doubt whether our going to
Trent (if we minded to goo thither) do bring therewith these discomodities or
not. I therefore have taken in hand in this present Oration to prove that this
journey whenever we should take it upon us (which God almighty of his
clemency defend) shall be not only full of peril and danger, but also
contumeliouse and iniuriouse both against Gods truth, yea God him self, and
also our neighbor. And as touching the greatness of the peril, truly I would
say nothing thereof, if it were such a kind of peril as had in it any profyt
or deutie, for it is manifest that the holy Martyrs of God when need required
have willingly suffered even death. But now where there is a manifest danger
joined with a manifest impiety the matter is not like. Concerning therefore
the peril thereof I will breefely recite that which shall suffyse. And here
first of all I have to speak of the place appointed for the Counsel, for the
which the Christian Princes have long yea and that earnestly travailed but all
in vain that some free City of Germanye should be assigned. But saying that
they cannenot hitherto be gotten forth of the bounds of Italy, no not to
those places which are surely defended with thaucthoritie and faithful promise
both of The Emperor, and also of all the Princes of Germany, who (I beseech you)
shall cause us to go to them which have showed so many lamentable examples both
of breach of faith and also of cruelty. But some peradventure will say, that
thaucthoritie of the princes or of The Emperor will cause these fellows to keep
the^ selves within their bounds. He is deceived truly that so thinks, for
their is no lykelyhode that they who hitherto have made of kings and Princes
a iestinge stock* will now do any thing at their request or for their sakes.
But what saftye or trust can there be reposed in the^ who be persuaded that it
is no sin at al to kill us, who also although against their will they should
abstain from doing us open violence and force, yet can easily find other
slightes, whereof the Romish Court has of long time professed her self to be a
Scolemaistres. This much shall suffice concerning the place: Now let us come
to the^ who have gaged their faith in this matter, and who will seem to have
provided for us, and warrented us by public satisfaction or instrument.
Dimmortal god with what and how vain titles do they bost them selves most
ambiciouslye abroad, A small number of Bishops, yea and among them some
counterfaicte and disguised, and yet al of them being the creatures of the
Bishop of Rome, and such also as be accused of us, both of forsaking of
Religion and also of oppressyng and treading under foot ye truth, dare call
themselves general, holy and Apostoloque, and finally chaleng to themselves al
wholly such things whereof it is euidente they have not one jot. But who will
trust them any whit at all, which stumble so shamefullye even in the very
beginning of their safetye which they promise. Do not they the like (I
beseech you) as though a certain rabble of most wicked raskalles whoo were
themselves accused to be worthy to lose their life and goods should call
Themperoure himself and all the esstates of Thempyre to a general diet and
assemblye promising them a most large safe conduicte and appoynte unto him a
day to answer to his playnte. If then the title of a general Council
cannot iustelye be attributed unto a certain few persons who be accused of
corrupt religion, the^ is it not laweful also for them under the name of a
general Council to give forth any lawefull warrant of safetye. Now therefore
it is not in question of the form of the warrau^te, but whither they have
right or power to make any such warraunte or not. For if some old craftye
fox should give forth pryuilegies were they never in so good a form, yet
for so much as he had no power at all to grant any such, the form thereof
must neades be in danger with the right. It fauleth not therefore in
consideracion only what every one promises, but with what right and
authority he promises. I know well enoughe that they refer all their
doings to the Romyshe Bishop as chief and head who is one all according
to the commen saying. Vbi Papa, ibi vniuerfalis Synodus. Where the Pope is,
there is also the general Council, but how falsely and how wickedly this
Romish Bishop does usurp al these things it is so well known yt there
neadeth no proof thereof. As for me truly, with how much the more
aucthorytye they fornishe this their Bishop and their Counciles, so much the
less hope and confidence I have in their promise. For if the Romish Bishop
may do what he list, and he only may (by his high power which is given
to him) acquyte and set free Kings and Emperors from their others
promises, and covenauntes, what should let him not to use this his right in
his own cause, and to order and measure the rule of his promise according to
his own lust. And who is he that knows not that the Bishops of Rome have
hitherto with their oaths and bulls mocked us and that Scotfree. Moreover that
clause which concerns the penaltye against the breakers of their
ordynaunces seems to be very obscure and full of doubts and ambiguitie. What
if they (such is their good will toward us) shall complain then chiefelye
that we do hurt them when they wyllynglye do wrong and Injury us, who shall
then speak for us, who shall take our matter in hand, who shall defend our
cause in that place which is so noy some to our men with the Bishop of
Romes Garrisons. They bear the name of a general Councile, and of Apostolic
men, but if any man couvince them of a lie doubteles he shall be accused of
breakinge and violating the same. They catch to the^ selves alone ye title of
ye Church, but if any man should take in hand to prove the^ the sworn enemies
of the Church, or reprove their fylthy life and conversation he should be
found faultye of trespasinge against their safeconduicte. There be many other
things like to these, which we cannot keep in silence without doing great
harm, and which they on the other side cannot hear without great rage and
madness. For how meke and how gentle these fathers be, France witnesses.
England bears record, and this execrable bocherye so latelye executed upon
our brethren at Vassye shows forth a good testimonye. These holy Fathers I
say do so thirste for our soul health, that they do even therewyth suppe up
our blood also. This also is not to be let pass, that that form of promise
which was last printed at Brixia, by what Inquisitours license I cannot tell,
does much vary and dissent from that which was printed at Venise. For in that
of Brixia, there is a certain addicion joined thereto entitled Extensio ad
alias naciones, yt is to say a thing touching other nations, which retracteth
and calls back again all that a little before was licenced to al nations in
common, yea and which more is, in the self same addicion, all other nations ar
warraunted by the self same form and the very same words wherewhythe the
Germaynes are, and yet this is added, that this form pertayneth not but unto
such only as will repent their erroures, and come home again into the
bosom of the Church which ought to be open to al men. Who that has any
wit in his head perceives not these gyles and deceyies. The self same form
whereby the people of Germany are warraunted pertayneth indifferentelye and
equallye to alother nations, and yet no safety is granted to the other nations
unless they be minded to return to the Romyshe Church. Therefore
consequently neither to the people of Germany unless they unity the^ selfs to
the Church of Rome. For the public promysse ends with the form wherein it
is coutayned. And thus much I think sufficiently spoken touching the peril
and danger of the Journey, for this matter requires no longer de batynge seeing
that respect must be had not so much to the peril and danger, as to the
truth and the glory of God.

It remains therefore that I should cousequenlye declare, that with this
certain and assured danger, there is also joined a most manifest and plain
abiuring and denying of the truth. And least any man should doubt hereof, let
him think and consider, that al Christian actions ar to be referred to there
determinate ends. And that this is thend of Councels that the faults of
doctrine and manners should be reformed and finallye peace and concord
(reserving always the rule of piety) should be restored in the Church.
Seeing therefore the case stands thus, a Christian manne ought to join him
rashely to no assembles, which he shall understand to be occupied about any
matters repugnant unto this end. If then I shall now plainly declare that
these fathers of Trent, are assembled together not to open and make manifest
the truth, but to hide and darken the same, not to reform and amend the church
but to deforme and deface ye same, I have alsosufficie^tly proved that
Christian men cannot without committing an heinous crime join themselves to
such. And here first of all things consider with me (I pray you) who is he
that has appointed and called together these assemblyes and meetinges, Truly
the Bishop of Rome, who in this business has used all study and diligence,
and spared no labor nor cost. And to what end (I beseech you) does he al these
things? To that end (think you) to overthrow or diminishe him self or his
power? Who so truly can suffie him self to be persuaded in this point,
seems to me to be mad and contrary to reasonne. For it is notlykely that the
Bishop of Rome will wittingly and willinglye procure his own destruction. What
meneth than this great preparation of Councels? Truly to shore up to
establyshe and as long as they can by any means, to restore to his old
dignity and bravery, the Papacye which now meanaceth ruin and decay and has
a good while sense begone to fall thorough the great hewgines and monstrous
byggenes thereof, and also to make the whole Christian world subject to their
laws and statutes.

For if the Germans were subdued then do they think it light.
The rest of Europe for to yoke and bring in bondage quyght.
And so as Lords of mydde earth sea. the rule to claim aryght.
Or at the lest wise if the Bishop of Rome perceived his hope to be frustrate
therein, and power also to fail him to bring that enterprise to pass, yet
notwithstanding he would set Christian men and especially the Germannes at
deadely hatred one with another, and then would he set still in his chair, and
behold this miserable Tragedy. For this seems to him the redieste way to
drive away this Lutheranicall maddenesse (for that is their phrase of speech)
from Italye. And here I call to remembrance certain verses of Virgill feately
seruinge to this purpose.

A Council great he calls, and from the top of stable hye. 7. Aeneid.

The shepardes watch and herdmans blast he blewe with Hellyshe cry.
In cryncled horn, whereat a heap forthwith without delay.
Of Christianes stirted with weapons thick run armed every way.
When he his promise thus performed with blood the war has fylde,
And fynysht eke of battle first the funerals as he wyld.
The fathers of the Council all he proudely says unto.
Behold what discordes I have wrought. with heavy war and woe.
Bid them in frendeship join, in league each one to other bound.
For I with blood of Germans slain have over spread the ground.
This more I add (for your good will. right well now do I know.)
In border towns with rumors blown great battayles will I sow.
And kindle eke there hearts with heat and love of raginge war.
And scatter armoure in each field that aids may come from far.
These things truly would I never have spoken unless they were both
evident and manifest enough. And I neade not to fetch my witnesses far hence
where the thing it self is so apparaunte. For the Bishop of Rome him self
does not hide or dissemble that his only entente is, to bring all men at the
length to the feloweshyppe and society of the Church of Rome, but he
exhorts earnestely al Princes and Kings to be ready to assiste him therein.
And if any manne be yet in doubt of the Popes will and mind, let him read
those things which he proposed by his Ambassadors this last months passed
unto the Common wealth of ye three Leagues, and he shall plainly perceive yt I
have told the truth. Moreover the Pope does not humble himself or acknowledge
him self subject to thaucthoritie of a Council, but has the fathers of the
Council sub iecte unto him and bound also unto him by a most straight oath,
where of I thought good to show here a copy, that al men may the better
understand, that these Romanistes have their minds busely occupied not about
the reforminge of the Church but about thestablishing of their tyrannical
kingdom.

The form of the oath.
I Being elected Bishop, from this hour forewarde will be faithful and
obedient to Saint Peter, and to the holy Apostolic Church of Rome, and
also to our Lord the Pope and his successors which enter that rome
canonicallye. I will be in no Counsel, no consent nor dead, whereby they
should lose their life, or any membre of their body, or yet be taken, or else
that any forte or violence should any manner of wai, by what pretense orcolor
so ever down unto them. But such secrets wherwyth they shall credit me,
either by themselves their messaungers or their letters, I will not open to any
manue to endomage them wystyngelye. I wylhe a helper and an ayder to them
against al men to keep and defend the Papacy of Rome and the royaltyes of
Sayncte Peter. I will honorablye use the Legate of Thapostolique See both
goinge and cominge, and help him in all his necessityes. I will do my
dylygence to keeye, defend, increase and set for ward the ryghtes, honors,
Pryuileges, and aucthoritye of the church of Rome, our Lord the Pope and his
successoures aforesaid, I will be in no councile no fact, nor treaty,
wherein any thing shall be devised sinistre or prejudicial to their persons,
their right, their honor their estate, or their power. And if I shall know
any man to go about or procure any such things, I will to my power hinder
their enterpryses, and so soon as I can conuenientlye I will notifye the
same to our Lord, or to some other by whom it may come to his know ledge. I
will with all industrye and end euor observe and keep the rules of our holy
fathers, thapostolique decrees, their ordinances, their sentences, their
appoint ments, their exceptions, their Prouisos and commandments, and cause
others also to observe and keep the same. I will also to my power persecute and
resist heretyckes, scysmatykes, and such as are re bells against our Lord and
his successors aforesaid, when I am called to a Synod I will come. And this
is the form of the oath, Now therefore seeing that the Bishop of Rome does
call and refer allawes to him self alone, and seeing also yt the fathers of
the Council do frame them felues altogether to his beck and command mente,
as one that bears about with him in ye secrets of his breast the
determinations both of Gods law and man's law (for these and other such
monstrous and execrable sayings are red emonge their lies and inventions) it
might be justly demanded to what end or what need there were of this masking
preparation of Councels, unless ye matter it self seemed to speak and
experience did also teach that Councels are nothing else but a certain form
and manner of declaration of the Popes will, and (as one would say) a short and
compendious way to proceed against the Lutherans. For thus it is red in their
books, that it is not necessary to call Councels to ye intent yt any of those
opinions whereupon the Heritikes desire to dispute (and who knows not that we
are accused of them of heresye) should be defyned, but that it is necessary to
call Councels notwithstanding to thend that such as are Heretics may be
declared made manifest, and condemned. This might be evident enough unto us
even by thactes done in their Councels, although they would speak nothing
thereof. For besides that they have hitherto most despitesully aggrauated our
cause with most unjust sentences, they have also given up our lives and goods
as a pray to the cruelty of others, and they refer this their boocherye to
the right and law of execution, the which they have hitherto used as a thief
engine to weaken and shake us all to pieces. For it has been always a
solemn custom with these good fellows to begin their Councels backward and
preposterously (that is to say) first with execution, so that al men might
easslye perceive yt they did make there reckoninge of war before they thought
of peace. And these latter years past after al their promises so many and so
noble made unto our men, while the Councile was yet dependinge, they began to
rage against the divines of Germanye, and doubtelesse they had showed forth
their madness yet further, had not the troubles of Germanye caused both the
Councile and there enterprises also to end. And yet in the mean time although
it be most apparaunte and manifest that the Church of Rome is foulye and
shamefullye defaced both with corrupt doctrine and manners, and that this
complainte has been ever sythens the memory of man, and from our auncestres
has descended unto us, as though by inheritance yet notwythstandynge in so
great a corrupcion of all things, not so much as the least kind of
reformacion could be optayned or by any means wrested from our adversaries,
yea experience also has taught, that those also, which at any time have been
so bold to present up this request to the fathers, have not only been most
unworthily entreated, but also most despitefully repulsed. And as touching the
life of the cleargye, I will not much dispute, for I may iustlye doubt
whether I may with honesty speak such things as they most shamefully do
commit, and yet notwithstanding albeit the case stands thus and every man
also sees it so to be, yet nevertheless, they do glory of the holy Ghost, as
of some vile slave or bondsman, whom they have made so much thrall unto the^
selfs, that although he would never so feign, yet may he not once be from
their elbowe, whose mark they carrye in their body that never can be put
out. But how far, yea how most farthest of all they have gone astraye from
the doctrine of the Prophets and Thapostles, no man is ignorant, if he have
been but meanly exercised with any right judgment in the wrytynges of the
Prophets and Apostles. These fellows have Heaven, Earth, Hell, and all things
else to sale, so that the saying of the Poet may be iustlye veryfied of the
Church of Rome.

She stands to sale, and like a whore
sits making her gain of her body.
And yet nevertheless they say it is not lawefull to make any enquyrye
against their Doctrine, without committing an heinous ofsence, and therefore in
ye publishinge of their Councile, they spoke of a continuacion thereof and not
of a full and perfect doing. The which they interpret in this wise. That
their former doings must be confirmed ratified and concluded so as they
neither may nor ought hereafter to be called in question. These and such
other like be the things whereby the Chrystian faith is pulled up by the
rotes. The form also whythe they prescrybe to the rest of their treatye does
manifestlye declare what workmen they be and what they frame. That which is
thus.

And to be noted that such matters as are in controversy shall be handled and
entreated of in this foresaid councile of Trente according to the holy
Scriptures, the tradicions of Thapostles, thapproued Counciles, the consent and
agremente of the Catholic Church, and thauctorytyes of the holy Fathers.

By this mean as by a pryuye vndermininge engine the closely proceade to
overthrow the doctrine of Godliness. For from the Scripturs they go about to
send us back to tradicions, from a thing most certain to a thing more
uncertain. But yet they do this very craftelie and with great dissimulacion.
For they spread abroad into the common peoples ears, that al their
disputacion is not about thaucthority of ye Scripture, but about ye manner of
thinterpretacio^ thereof, and therefore yt this appendix or addicion was to be
added, that it might playnelye appear that the true and natural sense of the
Scripture ought not to be taken forth of any man's pryuate brain but of the
consent and agreement of the whole Church. Se how these fellows have al at ones
cast of al shame. We do not refuse thagremente of the pure Church consentyng
with the Scripture, but reuerentlye embrace the same. But our chefest
controversy with our adversaries which abuse the word or name of the
Church, is about the certaynetye and aucthorytye of the Scripturs. For they
when they have once presumed to take the Scripture to be imperfect, they do
forth with infer that it is also uncertain, and therefore they say that it
has neade not only to be supplied with tradicions, but also to be
determined and established by the Church. We on the other side do teach that
the holy Scryptures, the very word of God (I say) comprehended in writing,
does perfectly and sufficiently contain in it self all the chief points of
our salnacio^, and therefore that this is thonlye certain and infallible rule
to examine al doctrynes and opinions. And thus it is plain and manifest upon
what point this controversy depends. For the question is whether the
scripture be of greater perfection certainty, and authority or yt
tradicions, by what name soever they call the^ which notwtsta^ding they have
bou^ded and limited almost with the lively words of Thapostles, ye custom of
the Church, yt answers of ye bishops and ye determinacions of ye fathers, but
by what right or wrong it is not now to be spoken. But if ye Scriptur which
we presently have, be ye voice of yt prophets and apostles left unto us in
writing, If the Church be gathered together, known and preserved by this
doctrine which is the word of God. If Cou^ciles have for ye more part erred,
and may yet erre^ and as it were do kill one another with mutual decrees, If
the Bis^ops of Rome for the space of some hundrethes of years past have done
nothing well, nor from henceforth perchance can do any thing well, so long
as they occupye and enjoy this pestilente See, If finallye the fathers them
selfs, which be of the better sort do send us to the scryptures. Tell me (I
beseech you for Gods sake) what cause can their be any more, why we should
suffer ourselves to be carried and led away from the Scriptures unto
tradicions, from a thing certain to that which is more uncertain. And albeit
the case stands thus as you see, yet these unholy fellows are not ashamed
yet still to sai that there controversy with us is only touching
thinterpretation and not thaucthoritie or certentie of the Scryptures. The
which thing if they will grant unto us, they must neades also confess them
selfs to be driven away from their chefest bulwark. For if we must wholye
rest in thaucthoritie of the Scripture, then away with all other by ways and
startinge holes wherein they put all the whole strength and some of their
disputation. But (you will say) the Scripture has need of interpretacio^. I
agree thereto. Again, it makes much to ye matter what sense every man frames
thereto. True it is in dead. But seeing the Scripture does interpret and
expound it self, we will also use that rule of interpretation which it self
has heretofore taught us, and we will not hereunto bring any other thing,
then faith and love joined with sobre and sincere dexterity. But I am gone
further the^ I purposed, for to entreat hereof requires both an other place
and also time, But this one thing I say. If these fellows take the Scriptures
to be of such authority as they make a show and countenance of. Why do
they not leave that to us as an only rule, why do they restrain it with so
many impedimentes and lettes, why do they call back again with their crafty
trifling, that which they did once grant, finally why do they torn and
chang themselves into so many forms and shapes at once. For if they go about
to bring all the whole controversy to thinterpretacion of the Scripture only,
go to in Gods name, let us have equal judges, let us encountre together, and
let it also be known whither part does follow or refuse thoose laws of
interpretynge which we have received of Christ and his apostles. But seeing
that hitherto we could obtain no such thing of our adversaries, it is
manifest that they do mock us with iouglyng words, and have some other
secret meaning then they seame openly to show. But this is no new or
unaccustomed thing, under ye clock of truth to go about to suppress the
truth. This chances hereof that Satan (who transformeth himself often times
into an Angel of light) has been accustomed to set goodly and glorious titles
before his wickedness. For if all asse^blyes whatsoever they be which are
reckoned under the name of Cou^ciles, had never erred, nor cold at this day
err, then most woorthelye and of most right, the chefest judgment ought to
consist in Counciles, but now seeing yt honorable name of a Councile may also
fall upon the Sinagoge of ye devil, it ought not to be so. But because in all
matters, examples be of great force so that there be an equal and indifferent
respect to the things which be compared together, me seems it shall not be
besides our mattre and purpose, if I should set forth here be fore your eyes, a
show and declaration of that Council, whereof mention is made in this wise in
thistorye of the Gospel.

When Easter was at hand the chief Priests, Scrybes and elders of the People
were gathered together into ye Haule of the high Priest that was called
Cayphas, and they said what shall we do, for this man does many miracles. If we
let him thus alone, al me^ will believe in him and the Romans will come and
take away both our place and the nation.

And so forth as follows in the text of Thistorye.

Here I pray the (Christian reader) first of all to consider well the fathers
of this Council. They be assembled together which excel other both in
authority and also in opinion of holiness, and upon whose shoulders the
Church which was at that time did rest even as though it had been shored up
with pillars. And the high priest him self by whose authority this assembly
is governed would seem so to be touched with Gods glory as he that was most
touched, for he witnessed with the rentyng of his clothes the grief of his
heart which be conceived of the blasphemy. But let us come from the fathers
unto the form it self, and consider the process of the law (as they call
it) Those holy fathers would seem to do nothing unadvisedly or by vyolence.
They call a Council, they lay their heads together, they pretend the safeguard
of their country, which they cry out to be in danger, unless
thenterprises of Christ be quickly stopped, but when they came to the point
of the matter they examine Christ of his religion and Doctrine, the knowledge
whereof they challenged as proper to the^ selfs. And because the law of God
forbids that any man should be punished by death vnlosse he be first
convicted of some heinous crime by sufficient witnesses, they take this charge
also upon the^ and they be very dilligent to take heed that they be not
suspected of any man of breaking justice, they give liberty also to Christ
(lest any man should sclaunderouslye say that he was condemned his cause being
never hard) to answer in his own behalf, yea and more the^ that, they compel
him by words and bind him with an oath so to do. Truly this is a great
liberty, and such a one as is wont to get no small aucthoritye to lawefull
Councelis. At the length after long and earnest canuasyng of the law, they
find Christ gyltye of Heresye, sedicion, and most heinous crimes and worthy to
be punished of the Civil Magistrate. Now if this be not a form of a
Councile well solemnized. I cannot tell truly what other can satisfye these
Lutherane heretics. To go about to call in question thautoritye and credyte of
these Fathers, what other thing is it then to accuse the Church it self, the
which truly thou shalt never separate well from this ordinarye Succession
of Bishops whereunto it cleuethe vnseparablye, unless peradventure thou
mean also utterly to overthrow the same. But here let us stay awhyle and
consider more narowly those which be assembled in this Council, These holy
fathers because they were altogether corrupt with avarice and ambicion were
nothing less in dead then they seemed to be they were taken for the high
priesles of the truth and religion, and yet they wear in dead the sworn
enemies both of the truth and also of religion. They thought it meet
therefore to persecure unto the death as many as were against them. Christ
therefore, which in his sermons unto the people did inuey against their
counterfaycte and cloked holiness provoked their madness and hatred against
himself. What marvel is it then if they which were judges of his cause were
found and proved to be his most cruel enemies. And albeit they had judged
Christ before worthy of death yet because they neaded the civil Magistrate to
this matter they use the form of the law very formallye and solemnly, but
they abuse the law of God contrary to the law and they overthrow justice
under the color of the law. But liberty truly was far from this Councile,
for Christ did answer to his playnte being tied like a prisoner. And
although they did exhort him to speak, yet they wrested his words very
captiouslye, and when he spoke not to their fantasye then they reuyled him and
did also beat him. This is the some of their Councile.

Now under what good Scolemalters our Fathers also have profited, I leave it
to be discussed of men of good consideration. With what kind of Judgment
John Hus, Hierome of Prage, and many other good men were deceived many
years again, it has been approved by the testimonies of many and also by the
blood of our men. Well it is time to leave of this matter and to return
again, to that which properly pertains to us. For eue^ as I think it best
to suffer the Popes adherentes to do what they list because they be incurable,
so also I judge it good for us earnestly and diligently to take heed we defile
not nor pollute our selfs with any spot or blemish gotten by other men's faults.
Forasmuch as therefore it is evident enough, what our adversaries ente^tis, we
must also search what we our selfs have to do, lest peradventure we shall
seem to have been more curious and dilligent in judging others the^ about our
own disciplie. That is rashly taken in hand which is laid a side again without
any deliberatio^. That is also dau^gerously enterprised which is forsaken not
without great shame. If ye Cobbler or ye Deluer can tell thend of his labor, what
think we yt we must do upon who^ ye charge of religion rests, in which
alone both Gods laws and man's laws ar also contained. Let us go to Trent
(some will sai.) But to what end and purpose? That we may be so^e part of that
asse^bly, and debate ma^ters of religion together with the fathers: nothing
truly can be more glorious or profitable the^ this our journey. This
peradventure some will allege. But I pray you good Sir came it never into
your mind once to think yt we (although we would never so feign) ca^ not be
admitted unto any part of that co^sultatio^, nor albeit we were admitted
thereto, yet either could or would be a part of that Council, whose
aucthorytie depends only of the Bishop of Rome ye sworn enemy of Christ and
his Church? You understand (I trow) how hardly we are besette even in the
very door. But where necessitye rules there is no place left for
deliberacion, and it were but vain to ask what one should do when he has
not yet considered what he may do. And so where our adversaries do leave us
no place in their assemblye, they do also unburden vsof the care that we
should have of disputing there. They truly who^ they disdain, do also
likewise disdain them. They despise us, and we set naught by the^. They
forsake us drive us away and reiecte us from their familiaritye, and we
again eschew them, fly from them and voluntarilye abhor them. Blessed is
that man said to be that Psalm.
has not walked in the council of thungodlye, nor stood in the way of the
sinners, nor sat in the chair of skorners. I have not hau^ted (says Dauyd)
with vain persons, neither xv. Psalm
compayned with dissemblers, I have hated thassemblye of the evil, and have
not kept company with the wicked. In this Psalm the holy man of God makes
a declaracion of his life, and shows for the himself to be followed of all
godly persons. But battayles have been diverse time fought indifferentelye
one both parts not without their praise, and their be also which accounpt
it more noble and gloryouse to keep their own, then to invade other men's,
and so we by defendinge our own cause manfullye, shall fight with our
adversaries aloof. But the clause of continuacion does shut us quite from
that liberty, and cast a bank (as it were) against our enterprises. Even so
not many years pass the Ambassadoures and Divines of the most noble Princes
of Germanye, after many large promises, yea and the dayelye intercession of
the most mighty Monarche Charles the v. by ye space of many months cold
hardly at the length be admitted to ye assembly, which not with standing in
despite they termed a congregation, as though a man should call yt a
troublesome or tumultuous company, which is said to be appointed about matters
not very weighty. We may well think how far the divines of Germanye were from
the chief point of disputation, when they were not suffered so much as to enter
into ye door thereof. But grant that we should be better used (which
nevertheless is not credible) what shall be or can be the conditions of this
disputation, so long as these laws which our adversaries prescribe do stand,
Or what certentie ca^ we have, when thonly rule of certain tie is taken away.
But admit yt al things are ready, and that both Gods law and man's law agree to
us yet who shall be our judges, who shall be our vmpires. Truly eue^ they who^
experience has taught long sithe^s to be our deadly and mortal enemies, and
who also have solemnly sworn and expressly co^spired our destruction, what
equity or justice ca^ any man look for at these iudgesha^ds. What if the
Papists, such is their boldenes, do forthwith write thactes of the Council,
what if they feign yt a matter is lawfully discussed, and after diligent
knowledge thereof had, do decree that we should be published for most grievous
heretics, and worthy of most severe and sharp punishment. Truly we shall
never hereafter so well wipe away this crime, but that some suspicion thereof
will for ever remain in the minds of the simple. Here peradventure some of
our men wylbe earnest, and think thus with him self, that although all
other things be denied unto them, yet at the least wise they shall have
liberty to propone and set sorth our doctrine before their eyes, and that this
proposicion shall contain a form of protestacion (as they call it) or rather of
confession. But I truly do not see what it profits to doble repete or
witness one thing so often times to these fellows especially which of the
thing it self have given unto our men the name of Protestants, because they
forsothe often declared by professinge always on thing, of what opinion they
were. We read also yt the holy Martyrs of Christ, have defended their causes
before wicked Judges, but we never read that they have wyllyngly presented
their causes before them. Our Lord also wylleth his to beware of those (...).
Math.
men which shall deliver them up to the Counciles and scourge them in their
Sinagoges. He does not then say, thruste your selves willyngelye into their
Councels, and take them to be Judges of you and your causes, whom you know will
be enemies and Iniuriouse both to you and your cause also. Paul the apostle,
rather then he would commit his cause to the Jews who^ he knew to be his
enemies thought it better to appeal to ye Judgment of The Emperor. This example
followed Athanasius, Cirillus, and Nazianienus, and with al diligence eschewed
the conuenticles of Heritykes. Therefore where so many and so great
difficultyes be, I cannot see what we have to do at Trente, this one thing
except, that is to say to offer again wyllyngelye to our enemies that thing
for thobtayning and gettinge by force whereof we have been at this great and
continual war with them so long. For if the right of Calling Sinodes do not
pertayne to the Popes neither by the law of God nor manne. No more truly
(although some time it had appertained) it is now to be permitted or granted
to them in their own case being called unto Judgment, to be both Judges and
parties. We therefore which are not called to a Cou^cile, but to the dragges and
filth of the Court of Rome, will never so behave our selves, that we shall be
said by our Obedience to have delivered and as it were sealed into their hands,
that power which both the laws of God and also of men have clean taken from
them. But if the obedience of subjects be limited with the power and right of
the Superioure, and yet such as we our selves are do call forth Kings and
Emperors to Counciles, by our presence truly to our power and as much as in
us does lie we should arm the Pope also against Christin Princes and thorough
our most unjust judgment we should not only offend al other Christians which
upon weighty occasions have abstained from this meeting, but also make the^
both hate us and also to be more hated of ye Papists. This ye Princes of
Germany understood well enough who in their last metig at Neoburgh did stoutly
reject ye stinking request of the Pope. They said that they meruayled much to
se him so shameless that he was not a bashed to prescribe things also to them,
of who^ he was him self accused of treadinge religion under foot, who also
had made a violent and unjust title to ye possession of ye Church, wherefore
that he should mock others who knew not as yet the Romish frauds and guiles,
as for the^ selves who knew the^ sufficientelie enoughe they would not seine
only to know them but also to foresee them. Mooreouer this is not to be
omitted, that if at any time we should be admitted to their assemblyes we
must vouchsaufe to term this rabble of mitred fellows by the name of Fathers,
yea and that most holy or at the least wise most reverend Fathers. For it
is not mete that any man should come to speak his mind without some Preface
of dignitye and honor, especially in their presence whose pride and ambicion
will never be satisiied. But with what countenance or conscience shall we
speak unto them reuerentlye, to whom what honor or reverence so ever we
show, we pull that all from Christ and his Church. I have now proved (I
think) sufficientelye, that there be no just causes at all why we should go
to Trent but rather very many and those most wayghty occasions to be against
this Iorneye, and so consequentlye that our men can by no means go to this
Councile without committinge a most heinous crime. And albeit we do condemn
and eschew these Romish Sinagoges, we do not also therefore abhor and
fly from all Christian asse^blyes, but we acknowledge and confess most
plainly that if any excellynge others in Learning Godlynes and Judgment be
dewlye called to a lawful Councile, they cannot refuse this charge laid upon
them without incurringe the grievous indignacion of God and also ye just
displeasure of al estates of me^. But yt there may be a good end of Counciles,
it is also requisite that ye things tending to this end should be well set in
order. If therefore Christian Princes to whom this charge does chiefeli
pertain, do settle their minds earnestelye to reform the church, they will
set to their helping hands al together, so that ye Council may bein very dead
Catholic as it is in name termed. But it as the times be now their godly
enterpryses cannot have good success, then it remains that every one of them
should employe that care and diligence in his one kingdom and country which
they purposed al at once to bestow in general. Let the^ therefore endeavor to
call national or provincial assemblyes, the which not wythstanding I would
not so restrain, but that strangers also should have free access thereto,
so that they were such men by whose presence the company might be adourned
and helped. Let them also provide that the place may be free and void from
al kind of fear and dread, let there also be sufficient Pryuileges and
warrauntes of safe conducte. Let the voices and elections be also free, Let the
ways be also safe, and not perilous thorough Ambushes and wiles. And yet
let all this liberty be bounden and limytted with the laws of equity so
that no man may do any thing more then the rule of piety shall permytte. And
that this may the better be done, this Councile must be Chrystian, which
notwythstanding stretches far and wide. For ye cannot be Chrystian, which
does not refer all his doings to the rule of Christ and his Apostles
comprehended in holy Scriptures, which does not also agree altogether and in all points, which Chrystia^ manners and finallye with the Chrystian examples of
the pure Church. That this Counsel also shuldbe Christian, let ye matters
which are incontrouersy be debated not with hatred, but modestly according to
Christian charity, and by such laws as seem to be appointed for tho pening of
the truth and not for the darkening thereof. But how far am I gone, mine
entente was to teach you ye we ought upon greet consideracions not to go to
Trent. The which thing if I have brought to pass, then have I also fynished
and accomplyshed that which I took in hand. And thus I make an end.

Imprynted at London in Powles Churcheyard by Humfrie Toye, dwelling at the
sign of the Helmet.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


