THE FRVITERERS SECRETS: Containing directions, for the due time, and manner,
of gathering all kinds of fruit, as well stone-fruite as other: and how they
are afterward to be ordered in packing, carrying and conueighing them by land
or by water; then in separating or culling them into diverse sorts; and lastly,
in reserving or laying them up, so, as may be for their best lasting and
continuance.

Enterlaced with diverse other secrets (and their natural causes) touching
trees, and their fruit.

No Treatise, to this purpose, being heretofore published.

AT LONDON, Printed by R.B. and are to be sold by Roger Iackson, at his shop
in Fleete-streete, near the conduit. 1604.

To the right honorable, Charles, Earl of Devonshire, Lo: Mountioye, Lo:
Lieutenant of Ireland, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council;
N. F. wishes long life, with increase of honor.
RIght Honorable, having (long since) often weighed and considered, with my
self, the great care and pains that have been taken, in setting forth sundry
necessary books for planting and grafting of fruit, and finding it (by much
experience) no less needful, that the right order, in gatheting and keeping
thereof, should be made known, and observed: I resolved, at length (for the
general good of the whole kingdom) to lay down, in this small Treatise, the
disorder and abuses of the unskillful in this kind; together with the true and
due course to be taken therein. The work now finished, I have presumed (though
far unworthy) to publish it, to the world (under the shadow of your honorable
protection) as the first fruits of a willing mind, ready to make tender of
his humble service, and acknowledgement of all duty, to your Lordship, to
perform it, in what he may. Not doubting, but that, as your Ho: (next under
his Majesty) has been the protector and preserver of the whole realm of
Ireland, you will also vouchsafe to patronize and protect one Irish-borne, who
(by long experience) has made trial of that which he delivers to others.
Wherefore, humbly craving, that your Honor will be pleased to accept hereof,
and to give it countenance (that so the rather it may have free passage, in
despite of malicious and scornful tongues, into the hands of all such as
desire to eat the fruit of their own vineyards, in their due season): I
conclude with my earnest and fervent prayers to Almighty God, for the
protection and preservation of your good Lordship, in all true honor and
happiness, in this life; and hereafter to make you partaker of that inualuable
and incorruptible fruit of the life eternal, which grows not in orchards of
men's planting, but in the Paradise of God,

November, the 7. Your Honors, in all humbleness, N. F.

The Epistle to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, as there have been diverse books set forth for the good of this
land, and the great increase of fruit; As of planting, setting, proyning and
grafting, also of preserving them, after the order of the Apothecary: so
amongst the rest, bestow the Reading of this little work; wherein you shall
find the true order of gathering, carrying, and keeping of all sorts of
fruits, in their season, and how you shall know what time your several
fruits are ready to be gathered; especially all kind of pippins, and apples,
all kind of pears, wardens, Quinces, and Medlers, also cherries and other
stone fruit whatsoever.

I omit the nominating of all kind of fruits; for they be too many to be
severally named. And commonly every fruit country has their several names,
although one kind of fruit. As, Iohn-apples be, in some places, called
Dewzings or long-lasters: and Gooddings be called old Wives, etc. Yet although
not severally named, you shall by this Treatise know the due course how to
gather all kinds in their prime and season, and afterward to carry or
conueigh them, either by land or by water, and then how to reserve or keep
them, to endure longest. And, before I proceed to the Treatise it self, I
think meet to acquaint thee from whence our great plenty of fruit, in
England, came.

One Richard Harris of London, borne in Ireland, Fruiterer to King Henry the
eight, fetched out of France great store of grafies, especially pippins:
before which time there was no right pippins in England. He fetched also, out
of the Low Countries, Cherrie grafts, and Pear grafts, of diverse sorts: Then
took a piece of ground belonging to the King, in the parrish of Tenham in
Kent, being about the quantity of seven score acres; whereof he made an
Orchard, planting therein all those foraigne grafts. Which Orchard is, and has
been from time to time, the chief Mother of all other orchards for those
kinds of fruits in Kent, and of diverse other places. And before that these
said grafts were fetched out of France, and the Low Countries, although that
there was some store of fruit in England, yet there wanted both rare fruit,
and lasting fine fruit. The Dutch and French, finding it to be so scarce,
especially in these countries near London, commonly plied Billings-gate, and
diverse other places with such kind of fruit. But now (thanks be to God)
diverse Gentlemen and others, taking delight in grafting (being a matter so
necessary and beneficial in a Commonwealth) have planted many Orchards;
fetching their grafts out of that Orchard, which Harris planted called the
Newgarden. And by reason of the great increase that now is growing in diverse
parts of this Land, of such fine and serviceable fruit, there is no need of any
foraigne fruit, but we are able to serve other places.

Now therefore, since it has pleased Almighty God, to give increase and plenty
of fruit in this land, and that diverse have taken pains in the maintenance
thereof, of all degrees: (the better sort for their pleasure, and in that they
do delight to see the work of their own hands prosper, as also to eat the
fruit thereof; the common sort, for profit, and for the better relief of
their family) In regard, I say, of the great pains that have been taken, in
planting, setting, grafting, and proyning, whereby a great deal of ground has
been taken up, which might serve for other good purposes; I thought good to
show what course might be taken, that men's Labors be not lost, nor such great
quantity of ground, wherein fruit does grow, lie in waste (as it were) and
become unprofitable, through ignorance of well handling the fruit, after God
has given it.

For if there be not as great care taken for the well gathering, and good usage
of fruit, as has been for the planting thereof, I account most of the labor
in planting lost, and the grounds wherein they grow to lie partly waste, and
better to be used for some other good purpose. But, the fruit being well
handled and used, the ground can be turned to no better profit. And so
(committing both thy endeavors, and these my labors, to the blessing of God) I
hasten to the Directions themselves.

Thy well-willer, N.F.

THE FRVITERERS SECRETS.
Of Cherries.
CHerries are the first fruit that are to be gathered, especially which here
shall be mentioned: Of which fruit there are four sorts here in England, (that
is to say) Flemish cherries, English cherries, Gascoyne cherries, and black
cherries, whereof two are chiefly to be mentioned, that is the Flemish and the
English.

The Flemish cherries are not so called, in respect that they grow in
Flaunders, but that the first grafts and chief original of them came from
Flaunders, and therefore they are called Flemish cherries: and in what place
soever in England these graftes be, or any trees growing from them, from time
to time since the first beginning of them, they are sooner ripe then they that
are naturally of themselves English Cheries, in some places fourteen days
sooner, in other some three weeks, according to the forewardnes or backwardnes
of the grownds wherein they grow: But whersoeuer they grow, although in one plot
or acre of ground, you shall yet find that the one will be ripe before the
other change their cullor red. And as soon as you see your Cheries to change
their color, and be red (that is, when they beginto ripen) you must have a care
that you set one to keep the^ from the birds, which will be very busy about
them, and especially at the break of day, until eight of the clock in the
forenoone: and so likewise when the heat of the day is past, beginning at
four or five of the clock until nine at night: The keeper must with a piece
shoot, or make some other noise, to fear the birds, or with a sling to throw
at them, being careful to watch at those times. There are two kinds of birds
especially, that hurt cheries most: the one is called a Iay: which must be
narrowly looked unto, or else she will pick the cheries as fast as they ripen.
The other, which is called a Bulfinch, will eat stones and all: but you shall
hear her chirpe before she lights upon the tree.

The order of gathering of Cheries.
NOw for the gathering of your cheries (because all cheries upon a tree cannot
be ripe and ready to be gathered at one time) provide a fine light ladder: and
looking about your tree, where you see most store ripe, there set it up. Be
careful for placing thereof, for fear of breaking any boughs. Also you must
have a fine hook in your hand called a gathering hook, to pull the bough
tenderly unto you, which you cannot reach with your hand.

You must provide you also a chery pot or kibzey to gather your cheries in: and
to the same cherie pot there must be tied with a string a little hook, that
when the gatherer sets to gather, he may hang his chery pot upon and bough
near, as occasion serves, and so to be removed at his pleasure: Always
provided, that the gatherer have a great care that he pull no more but the very
same stalk that the chery hangs by: for the next knot, or brut to the stalk,
is it commonly that yields fruit, the year next ensuing.

At the gathering of your cheries there unist be great heed taken that they be
not roughly handled: only pull them off by the stalk and lay them into your
pot. For much handling of them (being a very tender fruit) will make them
change their color, and turn blackish.

How to carry and convey Cheries.
IF there be any great store of cheries that must be carried any far way, from
whence they be gathered, there must be provided either fine baskets or siues:
into which (when the chery pots be full, you must pour them out. Each of these
siues should have two laths in the bottom on the outside, not crossed, but both
one way: each lath must be about the breadth of two fingers: and about the
breadth of the palm of a man's hand betwixt, or somewhat more asunder. The
reason why I wish these laths to be used in the bottom, is, because that when
they be carried upon ones head, the sieve being weak bottomed of it self, the
carryers head will make a dent therein, the breadth of his head, which would
cause the cheryes, in all that circle of his head, to break and to be bruised:
but the two laths will keep his head from spoiling of the cheryes, and so to
be easily carried, having a wreath or some such thing betwixt him and the
laths, for hurting of his head.

The French men commonly use to carry their cherries in the very same pots that
they gather them in, and never put them out until such times as they are to be
spent. The Dutchmen do turn them out of their cherry pots, into deep
rod-baskets. This latter way is not so good. For, lying so thick one upon
another, it quickly brings them into a heat: and once being in a heat, they
presently rot.

But the Fruiterers of London (whose way I hold to be the best) do first
gather them into kibseis, or little open baskets: and by reason of their great
quantity they pour them out gently into their siues, or broad baskets made
sieve fashion: so filling them that the siues or baskets may be three inches (or
there about) empty at the top. For when they be put into a Ship, Hoy, or
boat, they are often (for want of room) set one upon another: which would
hurt the cherries, if the sieve or basket were full.

But otherwise, they that have no great store to carry or conueigh by land, may
conueigh them on horseback in a pair of panniers, on each side one, lyned
thin both in the bottom and top with fresh fearn. Provided, that your
panniers or baskets be full: or else the fruit will be spoiled with tossing.

The order of gathering all other stone-fruite.
COncerning Apricocks, Peaches, Peare-plums, Damsons, bullase, etc. for the
knowledge of gathering of them, they are al much of a nature or quality. For
although, in each kind of them, some ripen sooner then other some, even upon
one and the same tree, yet as soon as they are ready to be gathered, some will
drop off, and the rest remain hard: yet then are those hard ones also in their
full tune to be gathered. Then must you place your ladder as before is
mentioned, having a special care that you hurt not the tree: also observing
that it be dry weather, and the morning deaw past. For, being gathered wet,
they will both loose their perfect color, and become mildewed. Then take your
kibsey (such as has been showed how to gather cherries withal) and taking
also a hook in your hand to pull those boughs that you cannot reach, have
ready by you a sieve, basket or some such thing, that when your kibsey is full,
you may pour them thereinto. In the bottom whereof, lay nettles newly gathered,
and with the like cover them on the top: which will hasten the ripening of
them, make them keep their color, and cause them to eat as kindly as if they
had been fully ripened upon the tree.

But if you let them hang upon the tree until they be full ripe, they will drop
off, for the most part: and the rest that hang, will quickly rot after that
they be gathered, and do little service, except they be presently used.

Three things to be considered, in gathering of Pears.
THere are diverse ways to be used in gathering of Pears: as follows.
First, it is to be noted whether they grow in a yard, garden, or back side,
being no more then will serve for a man's own spending. Secondly, whether
there be any such that will be sold, and so to be conueighed any far way,
either by land or water. Thirdly, whether they be Pears that will serve for
the Apothecary to preserve, and so to be gathered accordingly.

How to know whether Pears be ready to be gathered.
NOw, for the gathering of such as be for a man's own use, no doubt but every
man having seen the natural ripening of his own fruit, by long experience
knows their time of gathering: but for the better instruction of those that
newly come unto a place, being not acquainted with the natural ripening of the
Pears therein growing, I will here after express how you shall know when their
due time of gathering is.

Some, or rather most men, use not to gather their Pears until they be all
ready to drop off: and, hanging so long upon the tree, as soon as they be
gathered, and laid one upon another, they will be in a great heat, and
presently rot. But if you have Pears that you make any account of, that are
summer Pears, and for your own use, as soon as you see them turn their
color, or any part of them ripe (which will not be al at one time, although
growing upon one tree, and of one sort) still gather the ripest, and so by
degrees at your pleasure.

But, being gathered when they be almost ripe (that is, when only some of them
begin to fall) they will naturally ripen of themselves. And whereas the Pears
that are gathered, being through ripe, do soon rot one another, through
their over great heat: on the other side, the temperate heat of those that be
gathered before they be all full ripe, does cause them to ripen one another.

But for Pears that are to be carried any far way, they must be gathered by
another observation: that is, pull one off the tree, and cut it in the middle,
and if you find that it be hollow about the coare, and the kernel to have
room, as it were loosening within the coare, although none of the Pears on
that tree be so ripe as to drop off, then it has his full grouth, and
(although not then full ripe, and ready to be eaten) may be gathered. And having
laid then upon an heap, or one upon an other, as they must be in the
carriage, they will in a very time ripen, and eat as kindly as if they had been
gathered ripe off the tree: but being gathered before this time, that is,
before the time that they begin to be hollow about the coare, they will wither,
shrink, and eat tough, more like in taste to a piece of the tree, then a
Pear.

Diverse ways used in gathering of Pears.
KNow also that all kind of Pears and Apples are by diverse men, diverse ways
used to be handled, even in the very manner of gathering them. As, some use to
clime up without a ladder, having a basket to gather in, with alyne tied to it,
that thereby it may be let down when it is full, and another upon the grownd
to receive it, he in the tree still holding the one end of the cord or line,
that when the basket is emptied, he may draw it up again: which way is not to
be commended.

Other some with a ladder do get up, having a basket in their hands, and every
time that it is full they bring it down, pouring the fruit into some other
bigger basket, not regarding either how they handle the fruit in the pouring,
nor how rudely and boysterously they place their ladder, to the hurt of the
tree. Other some beat them down with poles, breaking both the tree and fruit.

These two last sort of gatherers have little respect what fruit may grow upon
the trees for the time ensuing, in regard of their rough handling of the tree,
in breaking the boughs, sprigs and bruts whereupon fruit might grow. Only
for the time present is all their care: some being but tenants at will, or
other careless and ignorant persons being put in trust to gather.

But for the setting of your ladder to the tree, the best way is, to place it
easily: For, laying of it hard on, will spoil and fell a great many of the
fruit, as far as the ladder touches. Also being firmly placed, it is both
good for the gatherers own safeguard, and for the safeguard of the tree. But,
being careless and rash in placing thereof upon the weak boughs and
branches, the weight of the gatherer to the treeward, will break the weak
branches and endanger the gatherer.

How to gather apples, and how to know when they are ready to be gathered.
ANd touching ye gathering of apples, beginning first with summer fruit, as
Ieniting apples, Margaret apples, so called in Kent, and others which are too
tedious in this place to be nominated: yet by the rules hereafter, although the
fruits not mentioned, shall you know their due several times of gathering. If
they have their full grouth, some of the ripest will be dropping off the tree,
and commonly the birds will be picking of them. Or else, you may pull off one of
the greenest, cut it, and if you find that it is hollow about the coare, and
the kirnell beginning to be loose (as is showed before in the trial of Pears)
then have they their full grouth, and they are ready to be gathered. And being
gathered either of these ways, they will in the house come to their perfect
color, and ripen kindly of themselves: but if they be gathered before, they
will shrink, wither, and eat tough, and do no service.

Winter fruit, how to be gathered.
VVInter or lasting fruit, should be gathered in the wane of the Moon, the
wind not being in the East: although indeed the Fruiterers of London by reason
of their great quantity do not observe the same. For, when they do once begin
to gather, they give not over, until they have gathered the last, except in
foul or wet weather. For all fruit whatsoever being gathered in wet weather,
or as long as the deaw hangs upon the trees, be they ener so good lasting
fruit, it will cause them in short time to rot. For, being wet or moist when
they be gathered, soon after that they be housed and laid, it will bring
them into a heat, causing them to rot, and be mildeawed.

How to use your gathering hook.
AS concerning the better handling of your fruit in the gathering, the placing
of the ladder has been before specified: you must also be provided of a hook
and a gathering apron or bag. The hook, to pull the bough that you cannot reach
with your hand: The bag or gathering apron, to put in your fruit, as you
gather them.

Of the gathering apron, and the manner how to fasten it about you.
THe gathering apron is commonly every way an Ell: having, at the lower end
thereof, in the midst of the hemme, a strong loope. Set this apron about your
back, knitting both the upper ends before, then take up the loope-end (which
hung down) putting your girdle through the loope: and so having fastened your
girdle about you, tie the two corners of the loope end of your apron, the one
of one side under your girdle, the other on the other side, doubling each of
the corners under your girdle, for fear of slipping: the^ your apron will be
necessary for both your hands, or either of the^, to put in your fruit, as
you gather it. And when your apron is full, loose but one of the ends fastened
under your girdle: and so bowing somewhat down your body on that side, let
fall your fruit very tenderly into your prickell or basket. For, in laying
them down roughly, their own stalks will prick them. And, although then
nothing seen or noted, yet they, that are stalke-prickt, will in time rot,
beginning in the very same place. But if you have not such aprons ready, then
take a bag of a bushel, half a bushel, or thereabout, with a woollen list
or some such like thing so broad, both ends sowed to the bags mouth, in
length as might serve to hang upon your shoulder and reach your girdle.

Fruit to be gathered, without bruts or leaves: and why.
GAther your fruit clean (as near as you can) without leaf or brut: only
gather it with the stalk. For, pulling any more then the stalk, breeds two
discommodities: the one to the tree, the other to the fruit. To the tree,
because that the brut would, the next year, have been grown to be a stalk
whereupon the fruit might grow. To the fruit, because the brut being
gathered, and joined to the fruit with the stalk, will (in the pouring of
them down) break the next unto it, although at that time not much seen:
which will cause it to rot before his time. The leaves likewise, being amongst
them, will in a short time rot the fruit. And as the fruit is not to be
gathered, but with the stalk only, so is it not to be gathered without a
stalk. For, as the brut, as far as it touches, does hurt the fruit: so,
without the stalk, it will not last long, it will rot in the very stalk room.

How to use your fallings.
THey that fall off the tree, which be not gathered with hand, are not to be
laid with the rest. For, commonly they are broken or bruised, with the fall:
by reason whereof they will not last, and, being laid amongst the gathered
fruit, will in time spoil them. Yet are those fallings better, that fall when
the fruit has his full grouth, then they which fall before the time of
gathering, as wind-falles, and such other. For they that fall before their full
grouth will shrink, be withered, and never do service: but they that are taken
up in gathering time, being laid by themselves, will serve to roast or bake,
etc.

Abuses, in gathering of fruit.
IN some great fruit countries, as Worcester shire, and Gloucestershire, they
use to beat down their coorse fruit, where of they make their Perry and
Cider, and likewise carry them in long carts, iogging one against another, by
reason of their loosenes in the cart, also in sackes: which kind of carriage,
does batter and bruise them: yet serve they for that purpose, or to spend or
use out of the way: but the fruit, that is to be reserved for other purposes,
is not so to be used.

How to carry the fruit after the gathering, in what baskets, and how they
shall be shot.
IF your fruit be gathered near the place, where they are to be laid up,
there must be provided certain baskets or prickles, (able to contain two
bushels, or a bushel a piece) each of them having two ears or handles, that
so (being full) they may be carried, between two, holding each of them one of
the handles, in their hands, or betwixt them to be carried upon a coule-staffe,
and so into the place appointed: by which means of carriage, the fruit will
be neither bruised nor battered. Also have a care, that they be poured or shot
down very gently, laying every sort by themselves. But if there be want of
room, having so many sorts, that you cannot well lay them several (for some
have diverse sorts, although very small store of fruit) yet such of
summer-fruite as are nearest, in taste, and color, and of winter fruit, such
as will taste alike, may (if need be) be laid together: and in time they may
be separated, as hereafter shall be expressed. But if the fruit be gathered,
far from whence they are to be laid, and that they must be carried or
conueyghed by cart or wagon (having any good store to carry) there must be
provided great baskets, or (as some call them) Maunds, of quarters or half
quarters. And for the carriage, especially of summer Pears, green fearne must
be used to line them withal, on the inside of the Maunds: And here be
careful to pull the stubborn ends of the fearne, clean through the basket,
that so they may be on the outside. By this means, neither shall the fearne
slip to the bottom, when the fruit is poured out into the maund, neither
shall those hard ends bruise the fruit. Also cover your maund close with
fearne: and with a great packe-needle, bigger then ordinary packe-needles, draw
a line or small cord closing hard the fearne, that the fruit fall not out,
neither be iogged or tossed in carriage. The fearne does not only stand in the
stead aforesaid, but it causes the pears soon to ripen (remaining any time
therein) and to eat as well as if they had been gathered ripe: but if they be
once come to a heat, and not taken out of the fearne in time, they will soon
rot and become black.

When you have brought your pears to the place appointed, if at the loosing of
them out of the maunds you find them not ripe, if you will hasten the ripening
of them, lay them thick upon fearne, and with fearne also cover them close:
for, being kept warm, they will soon ripen and come to their perfect color:
always provided, that when they be near ripe, they be uncovered. For, when
they begin to ripen, being kept close, they will ripen too fast: and being
uncovered, at that time, the air will moderate their heat. But if otherwise,
you mean not to hasten the ripening of them, lay them upon the bare boards,
neither too thick nor too thin, and they will leasurely ripen.

For winter or lasting pears, they may be carried and packed either in fearne
or straw: not to the intent that the fearne should hasten the ripening of
them: but that in the carriage they may not be battered. Also, at their
iourneys end, they must be laid upon fine sweet straw: provided that they be
not laid in too warm a room, least so you bring them into a heat: neither
laid in a windy cold room, for fear of shrinking and riueling them: but in
a room indifferent, where they shall have air, and not too much.

How to gather Wardens.
Wardens are to be carried, packt, and laid, as winter Pears.

How to gather Medlers, and how to keep them.
MEdlers are to be gathered about Michaelmas, after that a frost has touched
them: at which time they are commonly in their full grouth, and will be then
dropping off the tree, but never ripe upon the tree. And after they be
gathered, they are to be laid in a basket, sieve, barrel, or any such like
caske, and wrapped about with woollen clothes, under, over, and on the sides: also
some weight laid upon them, having a board between. For, except that they be
brought into a heat, they will never ripen kindly, nor eat well. And after
they have layen so long as you think, or find, that any of them be ripe, (as
they will not ripen all together) the ripest, still as they ripen, must be
taken from the rest. Therefore pour them out into another sieve, or basket,
leasurely, that so you may well find them, that be ripest: letting the hard
ones fall into this other basket, and those that be ripe laid aside, the other
that be half ripe sever also in a third basket or sieve. For, if they that be
ripe, or half ripe, be not separated from the other, the one will be moldy
before the other be ripe, and so spoil the rest. And still after that the
ripest are taken from the other, they are from time to time to be used as
aforesaid, until that they be all ripe.

How to order Quinces.
QVinces are a fruit, which, if there be any store of them, be not to be laid
in that room, where any other fruit is, by reason of their strong sent. For,
being laid in any close room, near other fruit, it will cause the fruit to
smell of them. The riper also that they be, the stronger their sent is:
especially if they be in a close room: and they will not only be hurtful to
the fruit near them, but noisome also to them that come into the room where
they be. Therefore they are to be laid, in such a room several (upon fine
straw) where they shall have air enough. Also, being to be carried any far
way, they must be packt in straw: and so likewise Medlers. Their time of
gathering also is all one with Medlers.

As the order of packing, and usage of Pears, Medlers, and Quinces is showed:
so likewise shall be declared the manner of packing pippins, and al other
sorts of apples, beginning with the summer fruit.

How to pack or maunde apples.
ALL kind of summer or winter apples must be packt, laid, and carried in
wheat or rather rye straw. And although, for the most part, they are laid in
some room, near where they grow, until they be all gathered and ready to be
carried away: yet the better way for those that are to conueigh their fruit,
from whence they are gathered, is to have maunds, straw, and all ready, lyning
them with straw, that when your baskets or prickels be full, you may presently
pour them into the maunds. For, being first laid in one place, and then taken
up again, to be put into maunds or other casks, does hurt the fruit with too
much tossing: but being presently put into the maunds, well packt, and gently
handled, will cause summer fruit to keep plumpe, and keep their color the
better.

If you have not so many of one kind of fruit, or that there be a remnant (as
of some sorts, there be but a few, in an orchard) so that the maund cannot be
filled: first pour in one sort, and when they be all in, lay some fine sweet
straw upon them, then pour in the other kind of fruit, and so fill your
maunde: and being filled and well packt, the two sorts will not come together
in the stirring or carriage of them.

How to empty maunds, and how to lay the fruit.
AT the emptying of them, see that the fruit be not rashly poured out, least
that the several sorts com together. And although packt and carried in straw,
yet at the emptying let the straw be picked out clean: and, as near as you
can, let every sort be laid several. Now, if there be so many sorts, that,
for want of room, some of them must be mixed, be sure that you mingle none,
but those that will last alike: But if they be near in taste and color,
there needs no separation. But although some sorts do last alike, and be
near of one taste, yet if they be not of a color, they are not to be laid
together. For, it is an unseemly sight to see one heap of apples of several
colors. But if already they be mingled, let them be taken up with a Trey: and
look how many sorts there be in the heap, you must have by you so many
baskets, and so part every sort, several: when they be parted, the ripest to
be first spent, and the rest by degrees in their time.

And although they that be summer fruit, be called rathe fruit, yet are they
not ripe all at one time. Wherefore, no sorts must belayed together, but those
that ripen alike: otherwise, being laid together in a heap, the one will be
rotten before the other be ripe, and cause the hardest amongst them to rot,
before they be kindly ripe.

Also Pippins and other winter fruit, are to be carried and packt in maunds,
lyned with wheat or rye straw: and at the emptying of them, the straw to be
clean picked out. And when your pippins, or other winter fruit, come to be
laid in the house or place appointed, whether they should be conueighed or
carried, unlace your maunds, take off the straw, at the top: when you have
done, whelme down the maunds, emptying them gently, into small baskets,
picking out the straw as clean as you can. Have a great care also in shooting
or pouring the^ out. For, in pouring of them hard, the one will hurt the other:
especially the stalks of the one, will run into the other. And being once
stalk-prickt, they will not last long, although not presently seen.

Also, being battered or bruised, they cannot keep. Only the Pippin has a
quality by it self. For, if it be battered, the skin being not broken, it
will dry up again: so that it be when it is green, and being laid amongst
the rest: for then they will soake away the bruise, and make it plumpe again,
if it be not too much bruised.

Of the difference of fruit, growing in one ground, and on one tree.
YOu must note that there be pippins and other winter fruit, although of one
sort, and grow in one ground or orchard, that will last better then other some:
and of some trees grow greater fruit the^ of other some of the same sort, and
in the very same orchard. For, where the sun has most power or shines
hottest, the fruit is harder grained, bigger, and of a better color, then
they that grow upon the very same tree, upon the lower boughs (which are
called water boughs) or the inner boughs of the tree. For, the rain or
moisture that lights upon the tree, falls to the lower parts: by reason whereof
they never have any good color, but are always green and soft, and eat very
waterish: which causes them, they can never last long, nor eat kindly. But
the other (as I said) that have the warmth of the sun, do grow greater and
better colored: some being red sided, other some russet: also they last long
and eat kindly.

Therefore I wish them, that have fine lasting fruit, that they make great
store of, for the service of their own house, to separate them at the
gathering. But otherwise, if they be such fruit, that no such account is to
be made of them, they may belayed altogether: and after that they have layen,
take them up in a trey, and separate the ripest from the other, and so spend
them as occasion serves.

Also, the largeness, and goodness of the fruit, holds proportion with the age
of the tree. For, while ye tree is in growing to perfection, the fruit grows
every year bigger and bigger, better in taste, and color, and more firm and
hard: but when the tree begins to decay and wax old, the fruit (which it
bears) does also decay in bigness, color, taste and firmenes: and
consequently will not last so long.

How to order fruit, in conueighing them by water.
IF there be any occasion of sending fruit any far way by water, especially
such fine fruit, that will keep well, and worth sending (for summer fruit are
not far to be sent) provide some dry hogsheads, barrels, or some such caske,
and because they may lie the closer (to avoid iogging and tossing, in
remoouing or stirring of the caske) they must be laid in, by hand, one by one:
not poured in. For, being poured in, they will lie hollow, and so be spoiled
with battering, and bruising one against another, in the removing of the caske:
but, being laid in, one by one, and the caske filled up, they will not stir.

Line your caskes at both ends, with the finest and sweetest straw, you can
get: but not the sides of your caske: for too much warmth will hurt them. You
must also pearce holes in both ends, about eight or ten at an end. For, fruit
(let them be ever such good lasting fruit) if they have not air, they will
quickly come in a great heat, and so suddenly rot. Have also a great care that
they be kept dry in the carriage. For, as the want of air does cause them to
rot: so, being wet will rot them likewise.

Also fruit, that are to be carried by sea, may be shot under hatches upon
straw, if there be not caske enough to carry them in. Always provided, that
they be shot in a dry place, and with great care that they be kept dry over
head: now and then opening the hatches to air them.

Unfit times to remove or carry fruit, by land or water: and the reason
thereof.
THe fruit that is stirred, packt, or carried in frosty weather, or in March
(if the wind blow sharp) let the^ be ever so hard at the taking up, yet before
they come to their iourneys end, being carried by land or water, they will then
be so tender (in frosty weather, by reason of the cold air: in March, by
reason of the sharp and bitter wind: and in summer, by reason of heat) that
the most part of them will change black, and a great many of them so shriueld
as if they had been sodden: so that they will not abide to be tossed, nor
carried at that time of the year, by reason of their tenderness. The hardest
and the best lasting fruit, that is, after they have layen long, or especially
if they have layen till March, or near the Spring, and so likewise until
July, the weather growing hotter and hotter, although in the taking up of them
they seem very hard, yet shall you find a great alteration in them, after
their carriage.

Small store of fruit, how to be conueighed by land.
THey that have but small store to carry, or but now and then to carry some, of
what sort soever, they do commonly carry them in dossers, panniers, or
prickles, etc. one, on each side of the horse: always provided, that every or
each one be full, the cherries and pears to be lyned with green fearne, al
kind of apples to be lyned with fine sweet straw, only in the bottom and
top (not on the sides) of the panniers and dossers. But baskets or prickles
(the rods whereof are not so near together) must be lyned, sides and all.

In what kind of rooms, winter-fruite are to be laid, and in what manner.
FOr the better reserving or keeping of winter-fruite, first there must be
great heed taken, what place or room they are laid in: for it must be
neither too hot nor too cold, neither too close nor too open. For, as the
closenes of the room brings the^ in a great heat, so does too much air make
them shrink, and be withered: besides, in time of year, the frost will sore
nip them. You must also have a great care, that they be neither laid upon the
ground, in any low room, or cellar: unless it be either paued or boarded. For,
although they be vnderlayed well with straw, yet the moystnes of the bare
ground will cause the straw to be mustie, and the mustines ascend to the fruit:
which will make them both musty and moldy.

The laying of fruit in a low room or cellar (so that the room be sweet,
and either boorded or paued, being not very close) is good, from Christmas
until the latter end of March: which will both keep them from the frost, and
from the sharpnes of the March wind. Between March and the latter end of May
(being the chief of the spring) the cellars be hot: and, in that time, the
fruit will run out, or rot, more in those rooms, then in other convenient
places. Rooms, that be very open, are neither good for winter nor summer: and
especially such as are near the tyles where no seeling is over them. For, in
winter, the sharp winds and frosts will have access through the chinkes or
creuisses of the windows, although shut: and, betwixt the tiles, the heat of
the sun, in hot weather will pearce likewise. As cellars be hot toward the
spring, they be cold in summer: and are then good to keep fruit in.

Rooms, that be seeled over head, are good for fruit, having air sufficient,
where the windows may be shut and opened, as occasion serves. For, being
seeled it will keep away dust, that might have fallen down, and the heat of
the sun. Always provided, in what room soever, that they be vnderlayed,
with good, clean, and sweet straw, either wheat or rye. Take also the
longest of the straw, and let it be laid to the walls, standing up as far as
the fruit reaches: not thick, but only sufficient to keep the fruit from
the wall. Which, if it be a stone wall, will give, at every change of the
weather. If any other wall, it will be full of dust. Therefore the straw is good,
both to dry up the moystnes before it comes to the fruit, and likewise to keep
away the dust.

But if the room be either wayne-scotted or boarded round, there needs no
straw, between the walls and the fruit.

How winter-fruites, of one sort and kind, are to be culled, and sorted
diversely.
AS it is showed how Summer-fruite (that is, such as be rathe fruit, and to be
spent in summer) are to be ordered: so now shall be showed, how winter or
lasting fruit shall be used, and kept in their kind, for their best lasting.
And as there be diverse kinds of fruit that will not last, but must be used in
summer, some at one time and some at another: so likewise there are diverse
sorts, which will naturally last, some but til Alhollantide, some till
Christmas, some till Landlemas, and other some till Shrouetide, etc. But
especially, Pippins, John apples, or as some call them Dewzins, Pear-maynes,
winter-russettings, and such other lasting serviceable fruit, with good usage,
will last till new fruit come in.

It is the order in Kent, and in most fruit countries in England, when they
have great heaps of fruit, lying in their houses, to take a long rod or
staff, with a nail, or some such sharp poynted thing, in the end thereof,
and with the same to take up those they see rotten, upon the top or side of the
heaps: not regarding how they rot undermost, and in the heart of the heap:
where, is more waste, then in the outward parts. And other some never stir
them, but when they have occasion to use the^, and then taking them up, and
throwing out the rotten ones, do let the rest rot that will.

But if you have any fruit, that you mean to keep or reserve, as long as they
can, by their several natural kinds, they must be used in another sort. When
there is seen any perished fruit, either upon the top or sides of your
heap, then it shows that some are rotten in the inner parts. Therefore,
having a trey, with the same gently take them up, being careful, that you
neither thrust the trey hard to the heap, nor with your nails touch them. And
here know, that although the fruit of your heap be all of one kind, yet at
the turning or taking up of them, they are to be parted into three sorts: for
they will not keep alike, although they grew all upon one tree. Therefore your
trey being filled set it before you, with your prickles or baskets round about
you, and taking them out of the trey, peruse them well, and lay the hardest, or
those that are without spots, which will last longest, in the basket next unto
you, laying them down gently: the other sort that are broken skinned,
stalke-pricked, or vnderrun (that is beginning to perish) will be as good for
the present time to spend, and as sound as the other sort, so that they be
taken in time. For, when they begin once to be spotted, or any way the skin
broken, if it be but the breadth of a pins head, they will not last long. This
second sort you must put into the second prickle or basket. The third sort (for
your third basket) are those that are already perished, or worm eaten: which
must be laid by themselves several, and spent out of hand: and those that are
found thoroughly rotten, to be cast out, which will be but a few, if they be
carefully looked into, shutting or pouring every sort several: and always as
they are turning, to be vnderlayed with fresh and sweet straw. But if they be
not taken up, and looked to in time, you shall have them, that be but
stalk-prickt, or any way broken skind, soon rotten: and the other that be but
a little perished, when these other begin to perish, will be all rotten, and so
spoil them, that would last long.

The times when long lasting fruit, should be stirred and turned.
PIppins, Iohn-apples, Peare-maines, and other such long lasting fruit, need
not to be turned, until the week before Christmas, except that there be
some riper kind of fruit mingled with them (which must be taken out) or that
the fallings have not been taken out at the gathering, or any straw left
amongst them.

The second time, that you should turn these lasting kinds of fruit, is
about Shrouetide, or the latter end of March, or the beginning of April. For,
toward the spring all kinds of fruit will rot, more the^ at other times. And
so until Whitsontide turn them once in the month, and afterward once in a
fortnight. Still, in the turning, lay your heap lower and lower, and your
straw underneath them very thin. Always provided, that you do not touch
your fruit, in any great frost, and especially if they be in an open room.
In a cellar or close room, where the frost cannot come at them, they may be
touched, if there be any occasion of haste (or else not,) so that you keep the
room very close shut too, when they be in turning.

At the thaw, the fruit is wet and moist: and as long as they be so, they must
not be touched, nor any way stirred, until that they be dry again. And so
likewise in rainy weather, they will be danke and moist, and give, according
to the weather: at which times they may not be touched. For, being touched in
any of those times aforesaid, they will turn black: and having once changed
color, they will not last. Therefore in what room soever you lay them, set
open your windows, doors, or other entrances for air (that so the wind may
come in upon them) in winter, betwixt nine in the forenoone, and four in the
afternoon: and in summer you may open at six in the morning until eight at
night. For, before and after these times, the air is too cold. In March open
not your windows at all: for the March wind will cause the fruit to shrink.

When Pippins, and other long lasting fruit, begin to be shriueled: and the
reason.
LAsting fruit, after that the middle of May is past, begin to wither: by
reason that then they wax dryer. And the^, the moisture being gone, which
caused them to keep plumpe, they look withered and become smaller. Also when
nature is decayed in them (do what you can) they will rot. For, in the Spring,
as the tree yields fruit, springing and budding every day more and more: so,
do the kirnels of the old fruit, at that time, begin to swell and sprout
within: and commonly it makes way at the stalk, and there begins for the most
part to rot.

FINIS.
A fault escaped.
Page 8. line 1. For, very time: Read, very short time.


