THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT FROM SEA BY A GENTLEMAN, WHO WAS EMPLOYED in
discovery on the coast of Spain by appointment of the Generals of our English
Fleet, to a worshipful friend of his.

Aduertising him of such things as he came to knowledge of in the same
discovery.

^ANCHORA^ SPEI^
printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by Richard Field dwelling in the Black Friars. 1589.

To the gentle Reader.
Having gotten a Copy of this Letter (gentle Reader) I thought good to make
thee partaker of the same by publishing it in print: that thereby thou, and as
many as vvish well unto the state of England, may according to our duty
thank our God, that has so mercifully delivered us from our proud enemies,
and shevved his judgment upon them beyond our expectation, and further then
we could almost have wished. For of the proud Spanish Fleet appointed for
our overthrow, containing so many ships in number, so well in all respects
furnished, that they could desire nothing that seemed to be vvanting: there
returned very fevve, and those so sore afflicted, that the most of their men
died either before or shortly after their return, utterly disapppointed of
their intent, and having lost the greatest part of their provision. Moreover
we may hereby perceive what great good hope we have to conceive (God giving
assistance) of the intended voyage. There is great hope they will scarce well
brook the coming of the Fleet, since they can hardly abide some one or two
of our English ships.

R. F.

THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT BY A GENTLEMAN FROM SEA TO A WORSHIPFVL FRIEND OF
HIS.
RIGHT worshipful having been employed by my Generals Sir John Norris and Sir
Frauncis Drake upon the coast of Spain for discovery, and now being safely
arrived (thanks unto the Almighty) I thought it my duty to acquaint your
worship with such news as I have learned in my voyage, hoping that as you were
wont, you will excuse my presumption. I sailed the fourth of February last,
and coasting along by Biskay, at the Groine I took a ship of Biskay laden with
stones, for the building of a fort at Vigo within the North Cape. In the which
there came a merchant of Lisbone as passenger from Saint Sebastians, whom I
have brought with me. And as concerning the last Fleet, he says, that of all
the ships and caruels of the Spanish Fleet there are come home but nine and
thirty, whereof four and twenty are riding in a river by Saint Sebastians,
fourteen in the Groine, and one in Lisbone, but most of all the men that came
home died immediately at their landing, and the two chief commanders of the
ships being sent for to the Court, died, as it is thought of poison before they
had passed two days journey from Saint Sebastians. Also the Duke of Medina is
banished the Court for ever and certain customs of his confiscate to the holy
house. Also the King does with all speed fortify the sea coasts, especially
in Portingale, and has erected a bulwark in the market place of Lisbone. He
has made no provision of shipping, but only a Fleet of galleys which are now
in the Straights, and came down for the defense of his own country. He does
grievously take the death of his men, for they were the chief soldiers of all
his forces in Italy and else where. All these I have conferred with others
that have fallen into my hands since, and found it to be a perfect truth. From
the Groine I came to the rock at Lisbone, where I found a bark of Plymouth
and two other Pinnaces chased by four Galleys and a Frenchman of war, who
was consorted with the galleys, who as soon as they saw my ship, the bark
began to fight with them, and had shot the Frenchman twice through, which at
the first discharging of my broad side, sunk down right in the sea, within
one quarter of an hour. The galleys made all the have they could to recover
Cast Cales, being a little within the mouth of the harbor, but we had so fine a
gale of wind, that we made two of them carry the third between them, and
recovered again one Argosie laden with Candie wines, which was the barks prize
but the galleys had recovered her, but now she is in Plymouth and eight and
forty men in her, all Greeks, except two Portingales: she is come but to a
reasonable market. And as concerning our Fleet, I hope we shall be in
Portingale within this month at the furthest, where no doubt (God ayding us)
we shall make a wonderful prosperous voyage, for they tremble at the sight of
three English ships, and are all in a mutenie, not knowing whether it were best
to receive the King again or to withstand our power: but I think they will not
honor us so much as to let us win their country by the sword. Thus meeting
at sea with the Bark Bear, bound for London, and for that I do not know how
soon I shall return, I have thought it my duty to advertise your worship of
these news, to whom I send a dozen of Spanish blades to dispose at your
pleasure, committing your worship to The Almighty.

From sea this twelfth of March. 1588. Your Worships wholy to command, T. F.


