Ancilla Pietatis: OR, THE HANDMAID to Private DEVOTION: Presenting a Manuell
to furnish her with Necessary Principles of Faith. Forcible Motives to a holy
life. Useful Forms of Hymns and Prayers: fitted to The Christian Feasts and
Fasts. The Weeks of the year. The days of the Week.


Christus fide concipitur, confessione nascitur deuotione tenetur S. Leo.

By Daniel Featly, D. Divinity.

At London printed for Nicholas Bourne. Anno Domini 1626

Then another Angel: Re Watch ye in Faith and Hope. and



A ye serpent was lif: Io: 3.14



Loo y3 star: Matt 2.9.



(...): Luk: 2.11



There apeared (...)



Why stand ye (...) Acts ^^^



(...) Mat: 28. ^



Devotion.


Handmaid




(...)in Christo Patris (...) Coll. Emman. Cantab.


TO THE RIGHT Noble and Religious Lady, the Duchess of Buckingam her GRACE.
May it please your Grace:
SAint Jerome in a Funeral Oration, Pretiosissimum de locis sanct^^ monile
per^^idi^^^.
strewing flowers upon the hearst of Fabiola, said concerning her, We have
lost a most precious jewel out of the Church. But since your happy departure
from the Romish Synagogue, and repairing to our true reformed Church, we may
say on the contrary, in regard of you, We have gained a most precious Jewel to
the Church. Such lowliness of mind in such height of fortunes: such Devotion
in such distractions; such constancy in such temptations, we bless God for,
in you; we pray God for, in others of your Sex and rank. If to touch upon
your modesty were not to wound it, and to relate your continual practice of
Devotion were not to interrupt it, I should speak much of it, yet no more then
they know to be most true, who are nearest to you, when you draw near to your
Father in secret. But because it is not the least of your praises, that you
cannot endure praise, Fascinant laudando.
and there are many in England (not only in Africa) who are bewitched by
flattery; I will draw a veil before those eminent parts which my pensill
cannot express. And therefore ceasing farther to blazon your virtues, I humbly
crave leave of you to prefer unto you a servant to attend you in your closet;
I mean THE HANDMAID TO PRIVATE DEVOTION; who upon her knee, tenders to your
Grace some helps to your Devotion, together with the Devotion and prayers of
the Author to God for you, to crown you with the blessings of this life, and
the blessedness of the life to come.

Your Graces humbly devoted, DANIEL FEATLY.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
CHRISTIAN READER,
IN the late dreadful Visitation, when the ways of Sion mourned, because none
passed by them; and the gates of the Sanctuary lamented, because almost none
entered at them; Religion her self for the most, forbearing the Church, and
keeping her closet, and there finding sufficient employment to complain of,
and bewail the danger and desolation of her solemnest assemblies: I fell into
a serious consideration of the use and most urgent necessity of PRIVATE
DEVOTION. And to the end I might accord with my brethren in their groans and
cries, being smitten my self with a dangerous (though not infectious) disease;
I gave over those waters of strife wherein I had met with the Romish Fisher,
entangled in his own Net; and sought after the waters of Shiloah that run
softly, which at that season far better relished with me then the other. Not
that I altered my judgment touching the study of controversies, which
(without all controversy) is not only most needful, but delightful also to
them that are therein exercised.

It is an easy task, and almost every ones labor now a days to gather
flowers of Paradise, and make Posies, or Garlands of them for Christ's Spouse.
But it is not for every hand to meddle with those thornie difficulties, which
yet must be carefully handled by them who will make a strong hedge or sure
fence for the Lord's Vineyard. The more perplexed, and intricate the difficulty
is, the greater is the contentment in beating out the truth in points of no
less consequence then difference. Children are not so much delighted with
smiting flints one against the other to see the sparcles, as me^ of rational
understanding and discourse, by collision of contrary arguments, to strike out
the fire of divine Truth. And this fire as well as that other which the
natural heat of Devotion kindles, yields much warmth to the conscience
even of a dying man. Witness Oecolampadius, whose last words were these: Now I
go cheerfully to the tribunal of Christ, where it shall appear, that I have
not seduced God's people, but have sincerely taught the truth of God. I might
instance likewise in Doctor Whitaker's Cygnea Cantio, his swanlike song before
his death, wherein he warble^h sweetly upon those at this day most Vexed
questions of universal grace and freewill. And his contemporary, the eye of
the other University, Doctor Reynolds, when he lay on his death bed, called
for Doctor Abbots (after the Lord Bishop of Salisbury) Reply to W. Bishop, then
newly come forth, and heard much of it read unto him with great contentment.

But being (as I said even now) out of tune in my body, I listed not, nor in
that shaking weakness could hold fast the peggs to streine and tune the iarring
strings of c^ntrouersed opinions in point of Religion. That which I then most
desired, was to settle my thoughts and affections, and compose my soul to rest
by listening to the sweet songs of Sion, set to David's well-tuned harp, and
runs upon in exquisite division by some of our excellent Asaphs in their pious
Treatises, Soliloquies, Prayers, Meditations, and Contemplations. This heavenly
music so ranished my senses, that I found by experience in the twylight,
betwixt the day of life, and night of death, that enlightened thoughts afford
nothing like comfort to en flamed affections. Now the oil which feeds this
sacred flame (next to the inspired holy Scriptures) flows most abundantly in
Treatises of Devotion. In which kind of writings, the Romanists for the most
part exceed in bulk, but our Divines in weight. The Church of Rome (like
Leah) is more fruitful; but her Devotions (like Leah in this also) are
blea^eeyed with superstition. But the mother of our faith (like Rachel) is not
altogether so fruitful, yet she is more comely, and beautiful, and I hope will
be also here after as fruitful. Verily if ever Private Devotions pouring
the^selus forth in brinish tears, were in season, now they are. Never losses
so great to be bewailed; never judgments so fearful to be auerted; never
hearts so hard to be mollified; never consciences so foul to be rinsed by
tears as now. Nature has provided a sovereign remedy against the sting of
the Scorpion in the oil of the Scorpion. When thou feel the sting, it is
but bruising the Serpent, and rubbing it on the place, and the moisture
presently of the Serpent killed, destroys the venom of that Serpent. I would
to God our souls were as dear to us as our bodies, and that we took as much
care for remedies against sin, as salues against enuenomed wounds. Then would
we, as soon as we feel the sting of sin in our consciences, bruise the
Serpent by true contrition; destroy the sin, and apply the oil of tears
issuing from it, to cure the wound before it festered. But among other just
causes of tears, this is not the least that we misspend our tears, and spill
that heavenly dew, and profane the Font-water of our second baptism (as Saint
Cyprian calls it.) We have tears at our own will in worldly losses; but
none at God's command for the loss of his grace. We take on for the death of
our friends departing from us; but cannot wring out a tear for the spiritual
death of our souls departing from God. Yet all our fretting and vexing, all
our weeping and howling cannot fetch our friend back again, or repair our
worldly losses: whereas on the contrary (as Saint Chrysostom piously notes)
the afflicting of our souls, and serious bewailing of our sins, by God's
grace, shall revive our souls, and recover all our spiritual losses, and that
with advantage. What pity, nay what folly is it, to power costly eye-water
out of a Venice-glasse into a vile pot or basen to wash our feet withal? Do
we not the like, when we turn godly sorrow into worldly, and abuse precious
tears to the bewailing of vile and base losses? have we suchstore of them? or
such want of better employme^t for them? See we not wrath is gone out against
us, and the fire long ago kindled, and not yet quenched by our tears? Lord,
thou have showed thy people terrible things; thou have given us a drink of
deadly wine, and have caused us to suck out the dreggs of it, because we ( Moab
like) are settled upon our Lees. As Pharaoh saw the hugh of his bloody mind in
the waters of Egypt turned all redd as blood: so we may see the crimson color
of our sins in the vialls of thy wrath powered of late upon us. We trade not
spiritually for the pearl of the Gospel, and therefore our Merchant's
returns fail. We would not weep for our sins, and therefore the heavens did
weep for us a long season in continual showers. We have bin hard hearted, and
barren in good works, and therefore thou made heretofore the heaven above us
as brass, and the earth under us as Iron. By drunkenness and gluttony, by
evil persuasions and worse examples, one soul has infected another; and
therefore thou have sent a Plague whereby one body infecteth another. Such a
Plag^* as our ancients never heard of, and our posterity will scarce believe.
The chief of our Cities have been ploughed up, and sowed so thick with dead
corps's that one could scarce lie by another. Against this and all other
judgments which thy law threatens, and our sins provoke, we have no weapons
to contend with thy justice but prayers and tears. We have no means to cleanse
the infected air but our sighs and groans. O Lord remove our sins as a
cloud, and iniquities as a mist, and then this dreadful bloody cloud which
lately powered down, but now only droppeth, will vanish of it self.
Consummate the work of mercy thou have begun, and quite remove this judgment
through thy tender compassion in the bowels of Christ Jesus, we beseech thee.
But remove this judgment in mercy, not in judgment. Take not thy hand off of
us to fetch a greater stroke at us. Deliver us not from one Plague as thou
did Pharoh, to send a worse in steed thereof. Put us not out of thine
hands into which we are fallen, to give us over into the hands of our enemies.
Save us not from the Sword to kill us with Famine; neither preserve us from a
corporal, to starve us with a spiritual. Take not away one plaster, to apply
a smarter in the place; but perfectly heal our wounds. Be absolutely
reconciled unto us in him, upon whom thou have already laid the chastisement
of our peace. O remember not our our old sins, but have mercy upon us, and
that soon, for we are come to great misery. Help us, o God of our salvation,
for the glory of thy name; o deliver us, and be merciful to our sins for thy
names sake. O think upon thy congregation, and Mount Sion wherein thou have
dwelt. Look upon the hands of many thousands that have been lifted up to thee
in Public, and many more in Private, to justify thee in thy Judgments, and
bless thee for thy mercies, and entreat thee for this Land, and thy
disconsolate Spouse yet weeping in tears of blood in diverse places.

To strengthen and support the weaker of these hands, and fill their mouths
with continual Devotions, I have furnished and replenished this Manuel, which
I name THE HANDMAID To PRIVATE DEVOTION, to wait on her in her Chamber, or
Oratorie. The purtraying of her Mistress I leave to the pensill of some Divine
Apelles, whose task will be the harder, because she never comes abroad. All
that my intention aims at, and my endeauours promise, is but to lay open a
private way, and set up certain Stages for thy holy race, and prick thee on
forward in it. Far better helps in this kind the pious charity and zeal
of religious and learned persons has afforded thee; of whom yet I may truly
say, as Tully spoke of the Emperors that dealt with Mithridates before Pompey,
Laudandum quod secerunt, ignoscendum quod reliquerunt: They are to be commended
for that they have done, and pardoned for that they left. What they have left,
I labor to supply; and if I cannot supply it, yet I thought fit to implie and
intimate, that the Authors themselves, or the Publishers of their works, might
add what they find wanting.

Devotion and prayers, Salomon's temple, without the gate called Bewtifull; I
mean, exquisite meditations, and orizons, without an entrance thereunto by
preparation. With that part therefore I begin; and it takes up the more room
in my book, because it has been so scanted for place, or rather quite
excluded in theirs. In it if thou find some tertnesse, I entreat thee
(Courteous Reader) to remember with me the precept of the Lord Jesus, Have salt,
and have peace. If I have salt, have thou peace, the rather, because Hymns,
Prayers, and other religious exercises are spiritual sacrifices; and every
sacrifice by the Law was to be seasoned with salt. Et quoniam mel in Dei
sacrificijs non offertur, nimia dulcedo art mutata est, and quadam piperis
austeritate condita apud Deum nil tantum suaue placet, nisi quod habet in se
aliquid mordacis veritatis. It is S. Ierom's observation upon the legal
sacrifices, that God never appointed honey to be offered unto him. And the
moral truth veiled under that shadow, was that in our spiritual oblations,
nothing pleases God that is only sweet, and has not some smacke (...) it of
biting truth.

de^^tions to several seasons, and special occasions, baulked the Christian
fast and feasts. For albeit the Saints days might fare the worse with them,
because Popish superstition over cloyed them. Which yet is an abuse of arguing
to argue from the abuse to the abolishing the right use. By this means they
might take from us the use of all Gods creatures, because they have been
superstitiously or profanely abused some way or other. But admit there might be
a legal caveat put in against the Saints Plea, what have the feasts of our
Lord and Savior deserved, that they should be struck out of their Callender,
or slightly passed without the honor of a meditation, Hymns, or Prayer on
them? They cannot plead want of president, authority, or direction: for they
have Coppies fair written in golden characters by Chrysostom in his Homilies,
Chrysologus, Leo, Augustine, Bernard, and other devout Fathers in their Sermons
upon these days. If they saw not them, why did they not follow the excellent
pattern in the book of Common Prayer? Which laying before me, I have drawn
forms of exhortations, hymns, and prayers, carrying throughout a manifest
impression of the feast to which they are dedicated. And before them I have
prefixed a Parallel of the Prophecy of the old, and the History of the new
Testament compared together, that thou might have an ocular demonstration of
that which S. Austine writes concerning both. The new Testament is veiled in
the old, and the old is revealed in the new.

After the feasts, or before as festiuals, I nothing marvelled at it that
Christian fastes were utterly unprovided for, and (if I may so speak) fast
with them. Extraordinary fasts of humili^tion to auert some fearful Plague
or im^inent judgment they take notice of, but the ordinary fasts of Devotion,
they mention not at all. Yet certainly the devout soul out of a sympathy
with her Savior cannot (...) weep with him, as well as re^oyce with him, in
some measure. Fast with him on good friday, as well as feast with him, and for
him, on Easter day. If any tears of a sinner are the wine of Angels, I am
persuaded they are those tears of Devotion, which after much fasting, and
Prayer, and meditation, spring out of the serious apprehension of Christ's
infinite love testified to mankind by his fasting, watching, praying,
weeping, bleeding, and dying for us on the Cross. But they will say, these are
the sacred fuel of every days devotion. Yet it is more proper to remember
the ^orke of the day, in the day wherein it was wrought. And albeit the Jews
were bound always to remember Gods wonderful deliverances; yet more stricktly
were they bound on the very day for that end appointed to be kept solemn. What
though we find no express commandment for them? The practice of the ancient
Church, and the religious constitutions of the present, ratified by Supreme
authority, should sway in a matter of this nature, according to that golden
rule of S. Bernard: Obey him as God who is in the place of God, in those things
that are not against God. These fasts therefore should not have been forgotten.

I come now in the last place to the weekly Devotions, wherein I find Prayers
for each several day of the week. Yet as it is noted by the learned of S.
Gregory's Comment upon Job, that It is an excellent Commentary fraught with
rich learning especially in matter of morality. But it might have been wrote
almost, as well upon any parcel of Scripture, as upon Job. So you shall find
that the Prayers for each day may serve for any day as well as that to which
they are entitled. For example, Munday's Prayer well fits Tuesday, and
Tuesday's Wednesday; and all three, Thursday, Friday, and Saturday. No day has
more interest in the Devotion for it then another.

When Timothy found fault with ALEXANDER for striking a stroke amiss upon the
Harp, and Alexander demanded of him; Is it not all one whether I strike it
this way, or that way, with these fingers, or these? True, answered Timothy,
It is all one to an Emperor, but not to a Musician, It is no error in stale to
strike as you do; but it is an error in art.

I confess in like manner, it is no error in Religion ^ set a godly Prayer for
the day which has no interest or relation at all to the day; yet it is an
indecorum and blurre in Art. It is all one as if they should set a mark before
them, and shoot no more toward it then any other white, To avoid this
improprietie, if not incongruitie, in the Morning Hymn and Prayer, I have an
eye to some work of God the Father in the Creation wrought on that day: In the
Evening Hymn and Prayer to some work of God the Son wrought (or by the
Church remembered) on that day in the Passion week.

For the admonitions and exhortations wherewith the Devotions are interlaced, I
took my pattern of them from S. CYPRIAN; S. Cyprian lib. de exhortatione
Martyrij.
De agno per quem redempti and viuificati sumus lanam ipsam, and purpuram misi,
quam cum acceperis to^icam tibi pro voluntate conficies. In exhortatione ^am
necessaria amputandae sunt verborum nostrorum morae, and ambages sermonis
humani s^btrahendae, and ponenda illa sola quae DEVS loquitur. With whose
words, I will not cloathe mine own. I have sent thee cloth (says he) made of
the fleece of that Lamb, by whose blood we are all redeemed. Take as much as
will serve thy turn; and fashion and fit thy garment to thine own mind. All
inferences and discourses of mine own I omit, because in so needful
exhortations the delays and lingering protractions of men's words are to be cut
off, and only Gods own words to be set down.

To sum up all in a word, I have brought thee into the Spouse garden of
flowers and spices; I have gathered some out (almost) of every bed, and laid
by them a thread in the Analysis or Method, to bind them up together. Make
thou thy Posie as thou likest best; and breathe out with me that sweet Prayer
of the Spouse, cut in one of her knots.

Arise o North and blow, o South wind, tha^ ^he sent of our Spices and flowers
may flow, and the beloved may come into his Garden. Cant. 4. 16.


GEntle Reader, the lesser escapes, I entreat thee to mend with thy pen, and to
set some marginall notes at the right place which thou shall find here and
there a little misplaced.

A General Table, representing the Method of this Work.
This Manuell has in it described a plat of holy ground divided into
1 A garden of spiritual flowers, 1 For ornament, to deck and dress up the
inner room, to entertain the Spouse, as pre^parations to religious duties In
general Prayer. Hearing the Word.
In special to Receiving Sacrament.

2. For sent, to make nose-gayes, according to the seasons of the year; as
forms of hymns, prayers, and thanksgiuings Ordinary, for the week days.
Extraordinary, for Christian Feasts. Fasts.

3 For medicine to cure and strengthen; as Admonitions out of Scripture.
Prayers for Men in sickness. Women in childbearing.
Tha^ksgiuing for Recovery of men. Delivery of women.


2 The nursery thereof, which is set with 52. plants of Paradise, agreeable to
the weeks in the year, digested into a Catechism; in which are set down
Rules, according to which Graces, by which -- Blessings, for which -- we ought
to pray and give thaks.


A TABLE OF THE particular Contents.
1. The Preparation to religious exercise in general. p. 1. 1. Of Devotion. p.
2. 2. Of Preparation* and the several kinds thereof. p. 9. 1. Purgation. p.
11. 2. Sequestration of the mind. p. 12. 3. Preconsideration. p. 14.

2. The Preparation to Prayer. p. 18. 1. A preparatory Exhortation. p. 27. 2. A
preparatorie Hymn. p. 56. 3. A preparatorie Prayer. p. 58.
3. The preparation to bearing the Word. p. 59. 1. A preparatory Admonition p.
69. 2. A preparatorie Hymn. p. 74. 3. A preparatorie Prayer. p. 76.
4. The preparation to the receiving of the Sacrament. p. 79. 1. The admonition
before the Communion. p. 85. 2. The Hymn before the Communion. p. 87. 3. The
Prayer before the Communion p 88.
5. Religious Duties to be performed, and affections to be stirred up in the
time of receiving the Communion. p. 91. 6. Short Prayers to be used at the
receiving of the Communion, p. 97. 7. Short Forms of thanksgiving to be used
after the Communion. p. 98. 8 A larger Form of thanks giving after the
Communion p. 102. 9. The practice of private Devotions, both ordinary, and
extraordinary. p. 106. 10. The Mornings Devotion. 1. An admonition for the
Morning. p. 116* 2. A Hymn for the Morning. p. 117. 3. A Prayer for the
Morning. p. 119. The Close out of Scripture. p. 128.
11. The Evening Devotion. 1. An admonition for the Evening. p. 128. 2. An
Hymn for the Evening. 131. 3. A Prayer for the Evening p. 133. The Close out
of Scripture. p. 137.
12. The Christian Sabbath, or Lords day's Devotion. p. 138. 1. The admonition
for the Sabbath Morning. p. 139. 2. The Hymn for the Sabbath Morning. p. 148.
3. The Prayer for the Sabbath Morning. p. 147.
1. The admonition for the Sabbath Evening. p. 153. 2. The Hymn for the
Sabbath Evening. p. 160. 3. The Prayer for the Sabbath Evening. p. 162. The
Close out of Scripture. p. 166*
13. The Feast (...) the Birth of our Lord 1. The ground of the Feast. p. 167.
2. The admonition for it. p. 171. 3. The Hymn for it. p. 174. 4. The Prayer
for it. p. 178.
14. The Feasts of our Lord's circumcision. 1. The ground of it. p. 183. 2. The
admonition for it. p. 184. 3. The Psalm for it. p. 187. 4. The Prayer for it.
p. 190.
15. The Feast of the Epiphanie. 1. The ground of it. p. 197. 2. The admonition
for it. p. 200. 3. The Psalm for it. p. 204. 4 The Prayer for it. p. 206.
16. The Feast of our Lord's resurrection. 1. The ground of it. p. 212. 2. The
Psalm for it. p. 216. 3. The admonition for it. p. 219. 4. The Prayer for it.
p. 222.
17. The Feast of our Lord's Ascension. 1. The ground of it. p. 228. 2. The
Hymn for it. p. 230. 3. The Admonition for it. p. 233. 4. The Prayer for it.
p. 237.
18. The Feast of the coming down of the holy Ghost. 1. The ground of it. p
243. 2. The Hymn for it. p. 245. 3. The exhortation for it. p. 248. 4. The
Prayer for it. p. 252.
19. The Christian fast's Devotion. p. 257. Of the Lent Fast. p. 261. The
ground of it. p. 266. 1. A Psalm for Ash wednesday. p. 270. 2. An admonition
for it. p. 274. 3. A Prayer for it. p. 278.


20. Good Friday's Devotion. p. 284. 1. The ground of this Fast. p. 284. 2. The
admonition for it. p. 288. 3. The Hymn for it. p. 295. 4. The Prayer for it.
p. 300.
21. The Week day's Devotion. p. 310. 1. Munday's Devotion.

The ground of it. p. 311.

1. The Hymn for the Morning. p. 312. 2. The admonition for the Morning. p
317. 3. The Prayer for the Morning. p. 322. The close out of Scripture. p. 325.
1. The Hymn for the Evening. 2. The admonition for the Evening. p. 329. 3.
The Prayer for the Evening. p. 335. The Close out of Scripture. Ibid.
2. Tuesday's Devotion.

The ground of it. p. 339.

1. The Mornings Devotion. 1. The Hymn for the Morning. p. 343. 2. The
admonition for the Morning. p. 346. 3. The Prayer for the Morning. p. 342. The
Close out of Scripture. p. 355.
2. The Euening's Devotion. 1. The Hymn for the Evening. p. 356. 2. The
admonition for Evening. p. 359. 3. The Prayer for the Evening. p. 363. The
Close out of Scripture. p. 368.

3. Wednesday's Devotion.

The ground of it. p. 369.

1. The Morning's Devotion. 1. The Hymn for it. p. 37^. 2. The admonition for
it. p. 376. 3. The Prayer for it. p. 382. The Close out of Scripture. p. 388.
2. The Euenings Devotion. 1. The Hymn for it. p. 389. 2. The admonition for
it. p. 391. 3. The Prayer for it. p. 395. The Close out of Scripture. p 405.

4. Thursday's Devotion.

The ground of it. p. 406.

1. The Mornings Devotion. 1. The Hymn for it. p. 410. 2. The admonition for
it. p. ^14. 3. The Prayer for it. p. 418. The Close out of Scripture. p. 422.
2. The Euening's Devotion. 1. The Hymn for it. p. 423. 2. The admonition for
it. p 427. 3. The Prayer for it. p. 435. The Close out of Scripture. p. 440.

5. Friday's Devotion.

The ground of it. p. 441.

1. The Morning's Devotion. 1. The Hymn for it. p. 444. 2. The admonition for
it. p. 445. 3. The prayer for it. p. 451. The Close out of Scripture. p. 455.
2. Euening's Devotion. 1. The Hymn for it. p 456. 2. The admonition for it.
460. 3. The Prayer for it. 471. The Close out of Scripture. 481.

6. Saturday's Devotion.

The ground of it. 481.

1. The Morning's Devotion. 1. The Hymn for it. 485. 2. The admonition for it.
448. 3. The Prayer for it. 469. The Close out of Scripture. 474.
2. The Euening's Devotion. 1. The H^mne for it, p. 474. 2. The admonition for
it. p. 477. ^. The Prayer for it. p. 487. The Close out of Scripture. p. 491.


22. The Childbearing Woman's Devotion. 1. In her travail 1. The admonition,
493. 2. The Hymn. p. 495. 3. The Prayer. 497.
2. After her travail The admonition, 50^ The Hymn. The Prayer. 510.

The sick man's devotion when there is hope of recovery. p. 515. A Psalm for
the sick. p. 518. An admonition to the sick. p. 523. A Prayer for the sick.
p. 530.
The sick man's devotion after his recovery. p. 537.
The exhortation to thanksgiving. p. 538. A Psalm of thanksgiving. p. 547. A
prayer after recovery. p. 551. The Close out of Scripture. p. 559.
The dying man's devotion. p. 560. The first admonition to the sick being an
admonition to patience. p. ^63. The second admonition against despair. p. 594.
A Psalm for the sick lying at the point of death. p. 594. A Prayer for the
sick. To the Unity. p. 600. To the Trinity. p. 604. To the Lord Jesus. p.
608.


THE PREPARATION TO RELIGIOUS exercises in general.
PAR. I. Of Devotion.
PRemeditation is the preparation to private prayer; private to public;
private, and public to the hearing the word; private, and public prayer,
together with the hearing of the word to the worthy participation of the holy
Sacrament. For the Sacrament receives strength and vigor from the word
preached; the word preached from public prayer; public prayer from private
Devotion; and that from premeditation, and consideration of the nature of
devotion, and necessity of preparation it self to all holy duties, in the
immediate worship of God.

Devotion is the hearts warmth, Of devotion
or rather life's blood of religion: It is a sacred bond knitting the soul unto
God: It is a spiritual muskle moving only upward, and lifting up the hearts,
eyes, and hands continually unto heaven. And because it consists rather in
the fervor of the affections, then light of the thoughts, of blaze, or luster
in the words, it is better felt then understood, and yet better understood then
can be expressed. Especially, private devotion, which is the Saint to whom I
deuote this Treatise. For private devotion (to shun ostenta^ion, and
hypocrisy in heavenly things) always shuts her self up in her closet,
desiring no eye to see her but her Fathers in secret. Math. 6. 6.
Wounded she is (like the spouse in the Canticles) with the darts of divine
love; Greg. in Cant.
and continually bleedeth, but inwardly in tears of compassion, Lachrimae
sanguie animae, August.
compunction, and excessive joy. There appears no external orifez in the
flesh to be seen. She resembles the strange plant in Pliny, Plin. lib. 21.
c. 16.
which buds inwardly, Flos nasc^tur non euidens sed in occulto, and intus
germinatus,
and shoots forth no bud, blossom, or leaf outwardly. For if private
devotion comes once to be known, it cease to be private. The greatest
commendation of it is like to that of the Garamantite, Plin. 37. c. 7.
Garamantitis summa commendatio est, quod velut in translucido stillantes intus
fulgent aur^ae gu^^ae semper in c^^te, non in corpore.
a precious stone, that has no beauty nor luster in the outside, or in the
surface, but within the body of it appears golden drops of divine infusion.
What Cyprian speaks of the w^rke of regeneration may be truly applied to this
virtue. Cypr. epist. l, 2 Sentitur priusquam discitur.
It is felt before it can be spoken of, and it must be kindled in the heart by
the Spirit, before it can be felt. It is the true Vest all fire that should be
still kept burning in the heart; Val. Max. L^u.
but if it go out (like that of the Vestals) it must be kindled from heaven.
To thee therefore o most holy Spirit I address my prayer, to kindle and keep
this fire in my soul by thy heavenly blasts. Heat my heart with the fervor
of true Devotion, and touch my tongue with a coal from thine altar, that the
words of my mouth and meditations of my heart may inflame all that read these
devotions with a love of devotion it self, and true Zeal.

Lev's censure may seem too tart: He that is not more religious in Lent then
at other times has no religion as all. But I have good warrant to suspect the
sincerity of their Devotion altogether, who are not more devout in private
then in public. For fire, the closer it is kept, the hotter it burns; and
the exhalations which are violently detained in cranies under ground, and can
have no vent, are of force to move the earth it self. It cannot be otherwise
but that the penitent, or compassionate eye, which droppeth in public should
run and gush out with rivers of waters in private. The afflicted soul, which
sometimes steals a groan, and fetches a sigh in the Church, offers up often
prayers with strong cries at home. He that is affected and elevated with
spiritual joy in public, is transported when he is alone, and has private
communications with God. S. Paul spoke words of truth and soberness to the
Corinthians, 2. Cor. 5. 13.
Whether we he besides our selves it is to God, or whether we be sober it is to
you. And Saint Jerome confirms it with an oath, Epist. tom 1. and Mar^an.
inuit Ieron. T^stor deum, po^t heudomid^ (...) etc. v^su^ sum mihi versari
inter agmina angelor.
that after many days (nay weeks) spent by him in fasting and prayer, in the
end he was ravished in spirit, and seemed to have private conversation and
familiarity with quires of Angels. My intent is not to detract any thing from
public devotion; but my desire is to add to private. Public is more solemn,
but private ought to be more frequent: Public makes more noise, but private
(for the most part) has a deeper channel. Our Savior divides blessedness
equally between them both; Blessed (says he) is he that hears the word and
keeps it: it is public devotion that hears the word preached, but private
that keeps it: Public gathers Manna in greater abundance; but private is
the golden Omer that preserves it. The Heart does not so pant and bray for the
rivers of waters, as the soul of every religious man longs for the waters of
life, running plentifully out of the golden spoutes of the Temple, the
Ministers of the word; but private devotion it is that breeds this longing
after the public Ministry. Let us take a pattern of Devotion from our
blessed Savior, to whom all devotions are due. What commands he by express
precept? When thou prayest enter into thy closet: Math. 6. 6.
and what commends he most by his own practice? It is true, he calls his
house the house of prayer; and as we read, that he was daily preaching: so I
doubt not but he was daily praying in the Temple; yet ye shall find him
oftener on the Mount, Math. 14. 27.
or in the Garden, Math. 26. 36.
or in some private solitary place praying alone, Ma^ke 1. 35.
then in the Temple; Luke 6. 12.
yea, Luke 9. 8. 28
and continuing longer in prayer, Luke 11. 1.
spending sometimes whole nights in it. Luke 22. 45.
This practice of our Savior has been a president to all those whose names in
the Church of God are, John 17.
and have been as a sweet ointment for daily offering the sweetest incense of
prayer to God. Religious men never are wanting in public assemblies, but they
exceed in private Devotion. Public exercises of religion be their feasts, but
private their ordinary. Where find you Daniel but in his chamber at his
Devotion looking toward Jerusalem? Dan. 6. 10.
Where find you David but in his couch, Psalm. 6. 6.
watering it with his tears, Psalm. 77. 6.
and communing with his own heart in the night? Acts 10. 30.
Where find you Cornelius but in his house in praying? Where find you Saint
John on the Lords day but in the I Will alone by himself in the spirit. Revel. 1.
10.
The pouring out our special complaints to God, our vows to refrain such
company and such occasions of sin; the ripping up of our whole life with a
particular confession of our sins, aggrauated by all circumstances, and all
those parts of repentance, or the souls discipline mentioned by Saint Paul are
most necessary exercises of religion, 2. Cor. 7. 11.
yet cannot be so safely done, nor so decently, nor so effectually in public
as in private. These parts are not to be acted on the stage, but within the
hangings. Commodius ista inter transiguntur. Ex.
He that acts these on the stage will have the person of an hypocrite put upon
him for it. Luke 22. 44.
Where was our Savior in his agony but alone in Gethsemaine? Math 26. 36.
Where was he transfigured in his prayer but on the holy Mount alone? Math.
17. 2.
Moses his face shined after he came from his secret parlie with God* Exodus 34.
29.
and our souls shall shine with all spiritual graces, if we have often
private conference with him by prayer, but always with due reverence and
preparation before.

PARAG. 2. Of Preparation.
Preparation to religious exercises is twofold. 1 Extraordinary, as watching,
fasting and the like, of which see the admonition for Ash Wednesday. 2
Ordinary. which consists in 1 Clensing our conscience from the guilt and
stain of foul sins, especially gross actual sins newly committed. 2
Sequestring our thoughts from worldly cares and businesses. 3 Considering
before hand what the RELIGIOUS work is we are about, and how we ought to
perform it, and carry our selves in it.



Moses put off his shoes, Purgation.
and David washed his hands before he drew near to God. Exodus 3. 5.
The Jews and Turks, Acts 7. 53.
at this day, Psalm. 26. 6.
wash themselves before they enter their Temples; and the ancient Pagans used
many ablutions and lustrations before they durst come in sight of their feigned
gods. Math. 12. 44.
The unclean Spirit in the Gospel had a clean lodging, and shall we
entertain the most pure and holy Spirit of God in an unclean room in our
souls? What Courtier presumes to come into the Kings presence in stinking and
nastie clothes, or with his hands and face all besmeared with dirt, or spotted
with ink? How dare we then appear before God with a foul and nastie
conscience; with a heart full of malice; eyes full of adultery; hands full of
the treasures of wickedness; mouths full of deadly poison of Aspes? When we
have defiled our eyes with unchaste looks, shall we presently cast them up to
heaven, and confidently look God in the face, who is a God of most pure eyes,
and cannot endure the least spot of impuritie? when we have defiled our hands
with blood or uncleanness, or telling our use money, shall we presently lift
them up in supplication to God? when we have defiled our tongues with corrupt
and rotten communication, (...).
shall we presently employ them in divine prayer? when we have defiled our
bodies with beastly lusts, and wallowed in the mire of swinish pleasures, shall
we presently present our selves as a sacrifice unto God in private or public
devotion? God by his holy Prophet teaches us another lesson; Esaias 5. 6.
wash you; make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes; Cease to do evil, learn to do well: Come now let us confer and reason
together.

Secondly, 2. Sequestration.
he that will consecrate his thoughts and affections by private Devotion unto
God, must remove and sequester them from earthly affairs, and worldly
negotiations. For the cares of this life, as they choke the seeds of the
word: so they stifle devout meditation in the womb that conceiueth them. It is
not more difficult to cast up one eye to heaven, and the other down on the
earth at the same instant, then to fix our cogitations and intentions at once,
on God and the world. Holiness in the Greek implies a direct contradiction
to earthlinesse: (...) ab (...) and (...).
Hagios is derived from A: the privative particle, and Ge signifying earth as
if you would say vnearthlinesse. God is a Spirit, and cannot be otherwise seen
of us then in spirit. Math 5. 8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. The soul of man is the
glass most truly representing Gods image. If a glass be furd, or soyled with
dust or dirt, it reflecteth no shape or proportion aright: Bern. de not. dom.
Tergat. speculum, mundet spiritum suum qui scitit videre deum.
but wipe the dust from the glass, and you shall see clearly. So (says Saint
Bernard) rub thy glass, wipe away all dustie earthlinesse from thy mind, and
thou shall see God in thy soul, and conceive clear and divine imaginations of
him.

Thirdly, he that desires that God should have respect to him, 3.
Preconsideration.
and to his spiritual offerings, must be more ready to hear the wise man,
Eccles. 5. 1.
and look to his foot, then to make have to offer the sacrifice of fools.
What is it to offer the sacrifice of fools, but rashly, and unadvisedly, not
to bring and lay down, but to throw his gifts on Gods Altar without
considering what he offers, or (...)* or to whom? He that makes no more of
prayers to God then of speaking with one of his companions, nor of perusing
inspired Scriptures, then reading a piece of Aristotle or Liuie, nor of
participating of the blessed Sacrament, then taking a morsel of bread, or
drinking a cup of wine, can expect no blessing for the use, but rather ought to
fear a curse for the abuse of these means of salvation. These ordinances of
God sanctify not such, but they rather profane them.

Numa Pomphilius forbad any man under a great penalty to salute his gods in
the high way, or to pray, or bow, or to do any reverence to their temples, or
images, as they walked by them in the streets: Wo^erus de polymathia sacris
religiosae debetur.
and Wouer yields a reason of this law better then the law it self, Divine
Majesty (says he) must not be slighted, holy duties must not be suddenly
sl^bbered over, but performed with reverent regard, (...) religious cunctation
or delay to frame and compose the mind unto them. But men have forgotten the
fear of the Lord, even in his presence, and under his eye. The holy name of
God is made so common in men's mouths, and his dreadful Majesty so cheap in
their estimamation, that as they speak of him without reverence, so also they
speak to him without advised premeditation. They are far from David's
modesty, who went step by step, Suspenso gradu.
and fetched a compass to come to Gods altar. Psalm. 26. 6.
I will wash my hands in innocence, and so I will compass thine altar; but
these make but one step to it. They suddenly and rudely rush upon Almighty
God, Heb. 12. 29.
never thinking that he is a consuming fire.

Augustus being invited by a private Gentleman to his house, and entertained
but slenderly, below the majesty of so great an Emperor, in stead of thanking
him, gave him a secret, but smart check for it, I knew not (said he) before
that we were such familiars. Nesci^bam me tibi eam familiarem esse. Eras. Apoth.
But has not the King of heaven and Monarke of the whole world more just cause
to censure in the like manner, or more severely those among us that seem most
forward to inuit and entertain him; who run into his presence without
showing any reverence; speak unto him without bowing their knee; hear him in
the Ministry of the Word without uncovering their heads; participate of the
dreadful Mysteries (as the Fathers call them) of his blessed Body and Blood;
Tremenda mysteria.
sitting at the Communion as they do at their ordinary table, without
expressing any thankful humility, or giving testimony, that they discern the
Lords body from common meat. Is this to serve the Lord Christ with fear? To
rejoice unto him with trembling? To kiss the Son least he be angry? Nay to
fall low before his footstool, because he is holy? But I will speak no more
of Preparation to holy duties in general, least the preludium grow longer then
the lesson I am now to prick.

The Preparation to Prayer.
PARAG. 1.
My heart is indighting of a good matter; Psalm. 45. 1. 2. Psalm. 39 3.
my tongue is the pen of a ready writer, says the Kingly Prophet, and
again, My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned, then
spoke I with my tongue: If this sweet singer of Israel, first pricked the
notes in his heart before he began to sing them; If he who was inspired by the
holy Ghost, framed his Prayers, and Psalms of thanksgiving in his mind,
before he delivered them by his tongue; ought not we who are as far behind
him in his gifts, as we are below him in condition, much more meditate before
we utter any thing to the Lord? I speak not of pious ^iaculations, which must
needs be sudden as their occasions are, and the motions of Gods Spirit within
us; but of a set conceived Prayer, wherein we ought not only well to ponder
the matter, but even weigh (if we have time) every word in the balance, that
they be not found too light, Eccles. 6. 5. 2.
and thereby our Prayers against sin, be turned into sin. Be not rash with
thy mouth and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God.
Senec. Epist.
Seneca observing how bold men made with God, and what strange petitions they
blushed not to prefer unto him, gave this sage advise, So deal with men as
if God saw thee, and so speak with God as if men heard thee. Pers. introrsum
obmurmurat osi ebullet patruij preclarii sumis, and osi etc.
For many men vent such uncharitable, envious, and malicious matters, such
confused, and undigested stuff, such impertinencies, inconsequencies, and
absurdities, especially in their private extemporarie Prayers, as they would be
ashamed that any man of quality or understanding should over hear them. It
would make a profane man laugh, but a Religious man weep to listen, and mark
how sometimes they court Almighty God with idle complements; sometimes they
cast up Prayers with strong lines to heaven, hoping thereby to draw down a
blessing from God; sometimes they expostulate with God in a saucy, and
sometimes pose him in a ridiculous manner. Sometimes they discourse profoundly
in their Prayer, as if they meant in good earnest to teach Almighty God what
he ought to do; Sometimes they are too tedious, cloying his ears with
bablings; and vain repetitions; and sometimes again they are too brief,
curtayling their Orisens, and breaking off in the midst. One while they fly
too high, and meddle with counsels of State; and another while they fall too
low, and tell God a Homely household tale. If they hear a strange Phrase, or
an affected strain of puf-past eloquence, this they cull out carefully, and
insert into their garlands. Peter Moulin justly taxes a Friar for styling
Christ the Dolphin of heaven; and I think he as well deserves blame who
prays to God that he may march to heaven in perfect equipage, or come unto
God, not with the soales of his foot, but the foot of his soul: who lays
open before God his manifold defections, infections, imperfections; his sins
of an higher strain, and deeper stain; and commends to his gracious
goodness all the Ministers of the Church by what titles soever they are
signified, or dignified. Give me leave to tell these men in their own language
that this is playing, not Praying; and that in sending up such prayers they
burn not incense to God, but incense him rather: Or if they will not hear me,
let the grave High Priest among the ancient Romans School them as he did a
Vestall whom he observed to be too curious, Sancte magis quam site.
and neat about her work, which was tending the holy fire. Vergin do your
work holily rather then handsomely; reverently, rather then trimly. There are a
sort of men in direct opposition to these, who affect a kind of Rhetorike
which weedeth out all flowers of Rhetorike. They can away with no Prayer, or
meditation which favors of the lump, though the oil be sacred. Nothing
pleases them in this kind, but that which is spunne with an over course
thread. Coursnes to them is strength; dulnes gravity; dryness judgment;
leanenes health; and pack-staffe plainness the evidence (as they term it) of
the Spirit, Macies illis pro sanitate est, and iud^cij loco infirmitas cedit.
and simplicity of the Gospel. Well may they claim kindred with the old
Egyptians, Qui^^. instit. orator.
who (as Herodotus, and Straboreport) temper mortar with their hands, and
kneade their dow with their feet. Right so these men in all other things like
well of art and wit, where the matter is vile, and base; but in the delivery of
heavenly conceptions, utterly abandon them. But they should have considered
better, that sharpness of wit, and true eloquence are gifts of God, and
therefore best of all to be employed in holy things, as gold and silver are
best bestowed in adorning Gods house, so it be without superstition. Was not
fine linen, and blew silk, and Scarlet of as good* use in the Arc as Camels
hair? Is not the Queen brought into the spiritual Salomans chamber, in
Vesture of gold wrought about with diverse colors? Was not the holy oil, and
precious ointment made by Gods commandment according to the art of the
Apothecary? Exodus 30. 25.
Are there not in the Prophet Esaias, the Psalms of David, and the Epistles of
Saint Paul in the original language, and other parts of Scripture more
exquisite pieces of Artt, and streines of eloquence, then are to be found in
any other writings whatsoever? If they are accursed who do the work of the
Lord negligently, certainly the more diligence we use, the more blessed our
holy labors shall be. For my part, I am resolved with David never to offer
that to God which costeth me nothing. (...)
There remain yet in some places some of the base sect of the Patttalorochita,
who place Religion in nosing their words, and speaking to God in a harsh, and
uncouth sound, and pronuntiation. They will not cry, but howl, and bellow to
him. But these are so few in number, and their error is so contemptible, that I
hold it scarce fit the naming, and no way worthy the refuting. I would there
were no more left of the sect of the Pharisees, Mat. 23. 14.
who under color of long Prayers (...) widows houses; who persume their
cons^^ing, and corrupt dealing with the balm of G^lead; who make Religion, and
Devotion a stalking horse to their ambition, and auaritious purposes, and ends.

O merciful God how is thy patience abused? How is thy Majesty sleightned? How
is thy worship profaned? O what sinful wretches are we, who need a large
pardon, not only for our profane, and carnal, but even for our holy, and
spiritual exercises? Lord be merciful! shall I say to our si^nes? Nay even
to our best works which are not free from imperfections, Even when we pray
against sin, we sin in Praying, both in respect of the form, and manner,
and end of Prayer.

Which that we may not do; or not so frequently; or not so grievously; let us
prepare our selves before hand, with the admonition, ^hyme, and Prayer ensuing.

THE TEXTS.
GOD is in heaven, Prayer must be SHORT.
and thou upon earth; therefore let thy words be few. Eccles. 5. 2.

When we pray, use not vain repetitions as the heathen do: for they think
that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Mat 6. 7.

After this manner Pray ye. Conformable to the pattern, consisting of three
parts. Humble confession.
Verse 9.

He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but who so confesses, and
forsakes them shall have mercy. Pro. 28. 13.

I said I will confess my transgressions to the Lord, Wherein must be
considered.
and thou forgauest the iniquity of my sin. Psalm. 32. 5. God his terrible Name.


Fear this glorious, and dreadful Name The Lord thy God. Deuteronomy. 28. 58.

Let them praise thy great, and terrible Name, for it is holy. Psalm. 99. 3.

Holy, and reverent is his name. Psalm. 3. 9.

I am a great King says the Lord of Hoasts, and my Name is dreadful among the
heathen. Mal.. 1. 14.

O Lord my God thou art become exceeding glorious; Glorious Majesty.
thou art clothed with Majesty, and honor. Psalm. 104. 1.

Thou deckest thy self with light as with a garment, and spreadest the heavens
like a curtain. Verse 2.

The glorious Majesty of the Lord shall endure for ever. Verse 31.

Then a cloud covered the Tent of the Congregation, and the glory of the Lord,
filled the Tabernacle. Exodus 40. 34.

The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels, etc. Psalm.
68. 17.

Who is the King of glory? Even the Lord of Hosts, he is the King of glory.
Psalm. 24. 10.

The Lord, even the most Mighty God has spoken, and called the world from the
rising of the Sun to the going down of the same. Psalm. 50. 1.

Blessed be his glorious Name for ever, and let all the earth be filled with
his Majesty Amen, Amen. Psalm. 72. 18.

Who only has immortality dwelling in the light which no man can approach
unto. 1 Timothy 6. 18.

And Moses was not able to enter into the Tent of the Congregation, because the
cloud aboade therein, and the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle. Exo.
40. 35.

I will reprove thee, His al-seeing eye.
and set thy sins in order before thine eyes. Psalm 50. 21.

O Lord thou have searched me, and known me. Psalm 139. 1.

Thou know my downe-sitting, and mine vp-rising; thou understand my
thoughts long before. v. 2.

The ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord and he pondereth all his
doings. Pro 5. 21.

The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the ^uil, and the good.
Pro. 15. 3.

If thou say, Behold we knew it not, does not he that pondereth the heart
consider it, and he that keeps thy soul, does not he know it? Pro. 24. 12.

Mine eyes are upon all their ways, they are not hid from my face; neither is
their iniquity hid from mine eyes. Ier. 16. 17.

If our hearts condemn us, God is greater then our hearts, and knows all
things. 1. Ioh. 3. 20.

Behold, Infinite purity and holiness.
even to the Moon, and it shines not; yea the Stars are not pure in his
sight; how much less man that is a worm? Job. 23. 9.

Thou art not a God that have pleasure in wickedness; neither shall evil
dwell with thee. Ps. 5. 4.

Thou love righteousness, and hate iniquity, therefore God even thy God,
etc. Psalm. 45. 7.

And one cried to another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts.
Isa. 6. 3.

Then the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed when the Lord of
Hosts shall reign in Mount Sion. Isa. 24. 23.

And they (the four beasts full of eyes) rested not day and night, Strict
justice.
saying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty. Revel. 4. 8.

Does not he that pondereth the heart consider? and he that keeps thy soul,
does he not know it? and shall not he render to every man according to his
works? Pro. 24. 12.

Rejoice o young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days
of thy youth, etc. but know thou that for all these things God will bring thee
to judgment. Eccles. 11. 9.

Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him for the reward of his hands
shall be given him. Isa. 3. 11.

Thine eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give every one
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings. Ier. 32. 19.

I say unto you, that of every (...) word that men shall speak, they shall
give an account in the day of Judgment. Mat. 12. 36.

Then think thou this o man that iudgest them which do such things, and do
the same, that thou shall escape the Judgment of God? Romans 2. 3.

Thou treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath and
revelation of the righteous iudgeme^^ of God. Romans ^. 5.

Who will render to every one according to his deeds. Verse 6.

If ye call on the Father who without respect of persons judges according to
every man's work, pass the time of your soiourning here in fear. 1 Peter 1.
17.

The time is come that judgment must begin at the House of God; and if it
first begin at us, what shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of
God?

And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly, and sinners
appear? Verse ^8.

God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down into hell and
delivered them to chains of darkness to be reserved unto Judgment, etc. 2 Pet.
2. 4.

Serve the Lord with fear, Fierce w^ath against sin, and sinners.
and rejoice with trembling. Psalm. 2. 11

Kiss the Son least he be angry, etc. Verse 12.

Thou even thou art to be feared, and who may stand in thy sight when thou art
angry? Psalm. 76. 7.

Then the earth shook and trembled, the foundations also of the hills moved,
and were shaken because he was wrath. Psalm. 18 7.

The Lion has roared, who will not fear? Amos 3. 8.

It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Hebr. 10. 31.

I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the Earth
and Heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them. Revel 20. 11.

And they said to the Mountains and Rocks fall on us, and hide us from the
face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. Revel.
6. 16.

Dust thou art. Man his vi^enesse.
Genesis 3. 19.

Behold I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord who am but dust and ashes
Genesis 18. 27.

What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou
visitest him? Psalm. 8. 4.

Man is a worm, and the son of man is a worm.

Surely every man living is altogether vanity. Psalm. 39. 11.

All nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less then
nothing, and vanity. Isa. 40. 17.

He knows our frame; he remembers that we are but dust. Psalm. 103. 14.

Man that is borne of a woman has but few days, Wretchedness^.
and is full of misery. Job 14. 1.

Is not man's life a warfare upon earth? Are not his days also as the days of
an hireling? Job 7. 1.

O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Romans 7. 24.

Every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart are only evil continually.
Sinfulness.
Genesis 6. 5.

There is no man that sins not. 1 Kings 8. 46.

Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Job 14. 4.

They are altogether become filthy; there is none that does good, no not one.
Psalm 143.

Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me?
Psalm. 51. 5.

Who knows how often he offends? Cleanse thou me from my secret finnes.
Psalm. 19. 12.

If thou Lord shall mark what is done amiss who may stand? Psalm. 130. 3.

Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified. Ps. 143. 2.

We are al as an unclean thing, and all our righ^eousnesse is as filthy rags.
Isa. 64. 6.

Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Pro. 20. 9.

For the Scripture has concluded all under sin. Gal. 3. 22.

In many things we offend all. James 3. 2.

If we say that we have no sin we deceive our selves, and there is no truth
in us. 1. John 1. 8.

Without me ye can do nothing. Wants and V^abilitie.
Ioh. 15. 5.

Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God. 2. Cor. 3. 5.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him; Consident inuocat^on
wherein to be considered.
yea all such as call upon him faithfully. Psalm. 145. 18.

All things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer believing, ye shall receive.
Math. 21. 22.

Let him ask in faith, nothing wa^ering. James 1. 6.

Thou have been precious in my sight, God his Love.
and I have loved thee. Isa. 43. 4.

God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Ioh. 3. 16.

As the Father has loved me, so I have loved you. Ioh. 15. 9.

After that the kindness, and love of God our Savior toward man appeared,
etc. Tit. 3. 4.

To him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood. Ren. 1. 5.

The Lord, Mercy and long-suffering.
the Lord God merciful, and gracious, long-suffering, abundant in goodness
and truth. Exodus 34. 6.

The Lord your God is gracious, and merciful, and will not turn away his face
from you, if you return to him. 2. Chro. 30. 9

For thy great mercies sake thou did not utterly consume them, nor forsake
them, for thou art a gracious and merciful God. Nehe. 9. 31.

The Lord is merciful, and gracious; slow to anger, and plentiful in mercy.
Psalm. 103. 8. ver. 11. 13. 17.

Who is a God like unto thee, that pard^neth iniquity, and passes by the
transgressions of the remnant of his heritage; he retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in merc^e. Micah 7. 18.

He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us: he will subdue our
iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.
ver. 19.

Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads to repentance.
Romans 2. 4.

God is not slack as some men count slacknesse; but is long-suffering to us
ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance. 2. Pet. 3. 9.

The seed of the woman shall bruise thy head. Gracious promises.
Genesis 3. 15.

He forgiueth all thine iniquities, and heals all thy ^iseases. Psalm. 103. 3.

He will not always chide, nor keeps he his anger for ever. ver. 9.

His anger endures but for a moment, in his favor is life; weeping may endure
for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Psalm. 30. 5.

They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. Psalm. 126. 5.

Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they
be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. Isa. 1. 18.

In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee says the Lord thy redeemer. Isa. 54. 8.

If the wicked will turn from all his sins which he has committed, and keep
all my statutes, and do all that which is lawful and right, he shall surely
live, he shall not d^o. Eze. 18. 21.

Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die, says the Lord God, and
not that he should return from his ways and live? ver. 23.

As I live says the Lord God I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked,
but that the wicked turn from his way and live. Eze. 33, 11.

I will betroth thee unto me forever, yea I will betroth thee unto me in
righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercy. Hos.
2. 19.

A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench.
Math. 12. 20.

Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. Math 11. 28.

There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. 1.

To him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think, Omnipotent goodness.
be glory, etc. Ephesians. 3. 20.

I am God all-sufficient, walk before me, and be thou perfect. Genes. 17. 1.

Abraham being fully persuaded that what God had promised he was able to
perform. Romans 4. 21.

God is able to make all grace abound toward you, that you always having
sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work. 2. Cor. 9. 8.

The same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him. Romans 10. 12.

Thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Christ his perfect
obedience.
Math. 3. 15.

Which of you conui^ceth me of sin? Ioh. 18. 46.

As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one
shall many be made righteous. Romans 5. 19.

He has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him. 2. Cor. 5. 21.

He was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Heb. 4. 15.

Such an high Priest became us who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate
from sinners. Heb. 7. 26.

He did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. 1. Pet. 2. 22.

With the Lord is mercy, Full satisfaction.
and plenteous redemption. Psalm. 130. 7.

The chastisement of our peace was upon him. Isa. 53. 5.

The Son of man came to give his life a ransom for many. Math. 20. 28.

I lay down my life for my sheep. Ioh. 10. 15.

Feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood. Acts 20.
28.

He was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification. Romans 4. 21.

Being justified by his blood we shall be saved from wrath through him. Romans
5. 9.

Who gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time. 1. Tim. 2. 6.

How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge our conscience from dead works.
Heb. 9. 14.

His own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being
dead to sin should live unto righteousness, by whose stripes ye were healed. 1.
Peter 2. 24.

The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. 1. Ioh. 1. 7.

Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood. Reu. 5. 9.

Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek. Perpetual
intercession.
Psalm. 110. 4.

It is Christ that died; yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the
right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Romans 8. 34.

There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.
1. Tim. 2. 5.

He is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for them. Heb. 7. 21.

Christ is entered into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God
for us. Hebrews 9. 24.

If any man sin we have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the
righteous. 1. Ioh. 2. 1.

And he is the propitiation for our sins. ver. 2.

Give thanks o Israel to the Lord from the ground of the heart. Hearty
thanksgiving.
Psalm. 68. 26.

It is a good thing to give thanks to the Lord. Psalm. 92. 1.

O give thanks to the Lord, and call upon his Name. Psalm. 105. 1.

I will give thanks to the Lord with my whole heart secretly among the
faithful, and in the congregation. Psalm. 111. 1.

He fell down on his face at his feet, giving him thanks. Luke 17. 16.

There are not found that returned to give glory to God save this stranger.
ver. 18.

Giving thanks always for all things unto God and the Father. Ephesians. 5. 20.

Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving
thanks to God and the Father, by him we give thanks to God always. 1. These.
1. 2.

In every thing give thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus
concerning you. 1. These. 5. 18.

What shall I render to the Loro for all his benefits? Whereinto be numbered God
his benifits spiritual. Election.
Psalm. 116. 12. (...) Psalm. 10. 7. 8. Psalm. 116. 12.

But ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of him, who has called
you out of darkness into his marvelous light. 1. Pet. 2. 9.

They that are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful. Reu. 17. 14.

Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. Ioh. 15. 16.

Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? Romans 8. 33.

According as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world.
Ephesians. 1. 4.

God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of
the Spirit, etc. 2. These. 2. 13.

God created man in his own image. Creation.
Genes. 1. 27.

Have dominion over the fish ^f the sea, and the fowls of the (...), and over
every living thing that moves upon the earth. ver. 28.

Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me. Psalm. 119. 73.

Thou have fashioned me behind and before, and ^^yed thine hand upon me. Psalm.
139. 4.

Thine eyes did see my substance yet being imperfect, and in thy book all my
members written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was
none of them. Psalm. 139. 16.

Thou art worthy o Lord to receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. Reu. 4. 11.

Thou have redeemed me o Lord God of truth. Redemption.
Psalm. 31. 5.

Blessed be the Lord, for he has visited and redeemed his people. Luke 1. 68.

Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ. Romans 3. 24.

Christ Jesus of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. 1. Cor. 1. 30.

Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a cur^e for us.
^al. 3. 13.

In whom we have redemption through his blood the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his grace. Ephesians. 1. 6. Colos. 1. 14.

By his own blood he entered in once into the holy place having obtained
eternal redemption for us. Heb. 9. 12.

Ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold
from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers. 1. Pet.
1. 18.

But rather the precious blood of Christ as of a lamb without a blemish, and
without spot. v. 19.

Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. Reu. 5. 9.

I will call them my people which were not my people, Vocation.
and her beloved which was not beloved. Hos. 2. 23.

I am not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance. Math. 9. 13.

Among whom also are ye the called of Jesus Christ. Romans 1. 6.

Whom he did predestinate, them he also called. Romans 8. 30.

The gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Romans 11. 29.

Walk worthy the vocation wherewith ye are called. Ephesians. 4. 1.

I press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus. Phil. 3. 14.

God has not called us to un cleanness, but to holiness. 1. These. 4. 7.

Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it. 1. These. 5. 24.

Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, Justification
and her Courts with righteousness. Isa. 1. 27.

By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for he shall bear
their iniquities. Isa. 53. 11.

Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven and sin is covered. Psalm. 32.
1.

Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, ver. 2.

It is one God which shall justify the circumcision by faith, and
uncircumcision through faith. Romans 3. 30.

To him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness. Rom 4. 5.

Whom he has called, them he also justifies. Romans 8. 30.

Being justified by faith we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Romans 5. 1.

Much more being now justified by his blood we shall be saved from wrath
through him. ver. 9.

Being justified by his grace, we shall be made heirs according to the hope of
eternal life. Tit. 3. 7.

Purge me with Hysope and I shall be clean, Sanctification.
wash me and I shall be whiter then snow. Psalm. 51. 7.

I will purge away thy dross, and take away all thy Tinn^. Isa. 1. 25.

For their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified. John
17. 19.

Being sanctified by the holy Ghost. Romans 15. 16.

Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, 1. Cor. 6. 11.

That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word,
Ephesians. 5. 26.

For by one offering he has perfected them for ever that are sanctified, Heb.
10. 14.

To them that are sanctified by God the Father, etc. Jude 1. 1.

I know that my redeemer lives, Hope of glorificaetion.
etc. Job 19. 25.

Though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see
God, ver. 26.

Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory,
Psalm. 73. 24.

Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me be with me where I am,
that they may behold my glory which thou have given me, Ioh. 17. 24.

Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world, Math. 25. 34.

Fear not little flock for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the
kingdom, Luke 12. 32.

If so be we suffer with him we shall also be glorified together with him,
Romans 8. 17.

The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory that shall be revealed in us, ver. 18.

Whom he justifies them also he glorifieth, ver. 30.

Who shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned to his glorious body,
Phil. 3. 21.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
2. Tim. 4. 7.

Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto
them also that love his appearing, ver. 8.

Bless the Lord o my soul, Temporal as
and forget not all his benefits, Psalm. 103. 2.

Which forgiueth all thy sin, and heals all thy diseases, Health.
ver. 3.

O Lord thou have brought up my soul from the grave; thou have kept me alive,
that I should not go down to the pit, Psalm. 30. 3.

The Lord kills and makes alive, etc. 1. Sam. 2* 6.

It is God that girdeth me with strength, Strength.
and makes my way perfect, Psalm. 18. 32.

He teaches my hands to war* so that a bow of steel is broken by mine
arms, ver. 34.

Which satisfies thy mouth with good things, and makes thee young and lusty
as an Eagle, Psalm. 103. 5.

Come and let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn and he will heal us:
he has smitten and he will bind us up, Hos. 6. 1.

I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, Wealth.
and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant: for with my
staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands, Genes. 32. 10.

Also the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before, Job 42. 10.

Charge the rich in this world that they be not high minded, nor trust in
uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to
enjoy, 1. Ti. 6. 17.

Thou have set me at liberty when I was in thrall, Liberty.
Psalm 4. 1.

Cornelius a just man, Good name.
and of good report, Acts 10. 22.

And these all having obtained a good report through faith received not the
promises, Hebrews 11. 39.

Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart; Friends.
so does the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel, Prou. 27^9.

Then came to Job all his brethren, and all his sisters; and all they that had
been of his acquaintance, etc. Job 42. 11.

Thou Lord only make me dwell in safety, Safety.
Psalm. 4. 8.

He that dwells in the secret place of the most High shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty, Psalm. 91. 1.

Behold, he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep. Psalm. 121. 4.

The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul.

A preparatorie Hymn collected out of diverse Psalms
where in the devout soul desires Accessea. Audienceb. Assistancec.
Acceptanced.


a Thou say seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee, thy face Lord will I
seek. Psalm. 27. 8.

Hide not thy face far from me, nor put thy servant away in anger. ver. 9.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me.
Psalm. 51. 11.

b Hear o Lord when I cry unto thee; have mercy also upon me and answer me.
Psalm. 27. 7.

Ponder my words o Lord, consider my meditation. Psalm. 5. 1.

My heart is enditing a good matter; my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
Psalm. 45. 1.

c O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. Psalm.
51. 15.

Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense, and the lifting up of my
hands as an evening sacrifice. Psalm. 141. 2.

Set a watch o Lord before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. ver. 3.

Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart be acceptable in
thy sight o Lord my strength and my redeemer. Psalm. 19. 14.

A preparatorie Prayer, wherein all the conditions requisite in Prayer are
expressed and prayed for.
Heavenly Father, whose gift it is that I can ask any good gift at thy hands,
without whose grace I cannot desire thy healthful and saving grace: Infuse
into my heart the Spirit of supplication, that in an awful reverence of thy
Majesty, out of a true sense and feeling of my wants and infirmities, and a
lively faith in thy promises; I may with cheerfulness of mind, and feruencie
of Devotion, and constant perseverance lift up a pure and plain heart unto
thee at all times: humbly entreating thy sovereign bounty for such things
only as thou in thy eternal wisdom have pre-ordained to give; and calling
upon thee in such order and manner as thou have prescribed me to ask in that
absolute pattern of all prayer set down in the Gospel by my Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. In whose name, mediation, and words I cry Abba, Our Father which
art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name, etc.

A preparation to the hearing of the word.
GOd in his infinite wisdom has so disposed the means of our salvation,
that the sovereign Antidote against sin, and death is conveyed into the
soul through the same passage, whereby the deadly poison first entered. Bern.
sermon. 2. de Penth. vt eadem v^a intraret antidotus q^a v^ nenum intra uerat.
Death stole in at the ear by suggestion of the evil spirit, and now life in
the hearing of the word passes in at the same gate of the soul, by the
operation of the holy Spirit. Have thou an ear (o Christian by thy profession)
for the devil, and none for God? An ear to receive poison dropped in, and not
to receive the oil of grace, and most precious balsame of Gods word instilled
by preaching? If thou art a sheep of Christ, and belongest to his fold, show
his eare-marke: My sheep hear my voice. Heb. 10. 5.
Where we read in the Psalm according to the Septuagint, and in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, Psalm 40. 6.
A body thou have fitted or prepared me, it is in the original according to
the Hebrew, word for word, Mine ears have thou opened; to teach us that God
fits us and prepares us for his service, especially by boaring our ears with
those goades and nails that are fastened by the Masters of the assemblies,
and are given from one sheapheard: I socrates advises Demonicus to employ all
his leisure time in diligently hearing the penned Orations and speeches of
eloquent Orators, and grave Counselors. For so (says he) thou shall get that
with much ease which cost another man much pains. That which a divine Orator,
and heavenly Preacher has been many weeks (perhaps years) in laying
together, he scatters abroad in an hour. Obseruest thou not how the Manna
which he gathers grain by grain, or seed by seed he delivers out to
thee in whole Omers, yea and Ephaes too? Yea but thou art well stored with this
heavenly provision, and food of Angels, thy library is like a rich Granarie,
and why may thou not then as well or better spend thy time, in perusing such
writings then repairing to the Church perhaps a good way from thy house, to
hear a man of meaner gifts then those were or are, whose works thou have in
the last and best editions by thee I perceive by this objection that thou have
heard much against hearing, hear now a little for it.

First, as a great Master of the Law was wont to say, that Courts of justice
must not Clash one against another: so it is most certain that duties of piety
ought not Clash, iustle, or any way cross one the other. Private reading and
public hearing must both have their places, seasons, and turns. If thou art
so straightned in time, or ouerlaid with business that thou can not allow a
fit time for both, let the private, voluntary always give place to the public
necessary duty. The commandments of God, and the Church wherein thou live
ought to ouersway thy private opinion, fancy, or inclination; or perhaps
diabolical tentation. If thy Pastor be so strictly charged to preach unto
thee, certainly thou art necessarily bound to hear him. For these duties are
linked together. Has private reading the like promises to public hearing the
Word? Or is it of like force and efficacy? Where thou can name one that has
been won to the Christian faith and true godliness by bare reading we can
produce many thousands that have been added to the Church by public Sermons:
yea sometimes at one Sermon. The holy Ghost in the day of Pentecost came with
the sound. Acts 2. 41.
Where the sound is of the Word Preached there goes the Spirit ordinarily. Yet
I deny not but that men in private reading the Scriptures and other holy books
may and do feel some soft and sweet blasts of the holy spirit; but in the
public Ministry of the Word, the Spirit comes down like a mighty rushing
wind filling the whole room, we receive then grace in a fuller measure.
Sermons preached are compared to rain and deaw, but printed to snow; which
though it lie longer on the ground, yet it is much colder, and does not in like
sort pierce, moysten, and fatten the ground as the other. Moreover those things
that have passed the press lie by us; we may at any time have, and use them:
but the notes of a Sermon preached are like the Manna that fell on the Saturday
which (if it was not presently gathered) was utterly lost. There is much
difference between those general Receipts you find in Physic books, and a
special potion or Electuary made by a trusty Apothecary, according to the
direction of a Learned Physician, and particularly applied to thy peculiare
disease. Every man has not the skill of the Apothecary to make the confection,
and fewer have the judgment of an experienced physician to direct where and
how it ought to be given. And albeit thy preacher be a man of no very
extraordinary gifts, yet in regard he is an Ambassador sent from God unto thee
if he faithfully (though perhaps not so eloquently) deliver his message unto
thee thou oughtst to hear it; and honor him for his Masters sake. His feet
cannot but seem beautiful to thee if they be sho^d with the Preparation of
the Gospel of Peace.

The diligent Be gathers honey out of Thime, Plut de tranquil auima
one of the driest herbs that is; and certainly if thou be not a drone thy
self, thou may suck from the mouth of the barrenest and (as thou call
him) the dryest Preacher, Doctrine sweeter then the honey or the honey comb.
Although I assent freely to Lactantius that the truth finds easyer-entrance
into the soul when she comes armed, Lactan. instit divine. lib. 1. c. 1.
Potentius inanimos influit. and visua instructa, and luce orationis ornata.
not only with her own strength but also with the best aid, wit, or art can
afford. Yet withal I affirm with Saint Paul that faith stands not in the
entising words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the Spirit, and
the power of God. Art may move affection; but nothing but Gods Word and the
grace of the Spirit can remove corruption. Humane wit and learning may tickle
the ear, and (as Seneca speaks of Chrysippus his acute Sentences) prick, Sen
Epist. 1. ad Lucsliu^. Pungst non penetrat. Heb. 4. 12. Peircing to the
dividing etc.
but never pierce the heart: that is the singular prerogative of the Word of
God. What are Rams-hornes in comparison of silver Trumpets? Yet when God
commands and appoints, the harsh sound of them, shall demolish those strong
holds of Satan which the sweeter and shriller sound of silver Trumpets shall
not do. Be tho^ obedient to him who is set over thee in the Lord, and must
give an account of thy soul. Desire not to have thy ears tickled, but thy
heart pricked, and make then no doubt but that God will bless his ordinance
and thy obedience; and supply to thee by his Spirit what may be deficient in
the Preachers learning or language. But then thou must come prepared to the
hearing of the Word by such directions as are set down in the Word.

THE PREPARATORIE Admonition.
THE ANALYSIS.
The preparation to the hearing of the Word consists in 1 Consideration,
especially of these particulars, viz* that 1 The hearing of the word is a
necessary duty joined by God the Father, Son, Holy Ghost.
2 We must give account to God what, how, and whom we hear. 3 The word we
hear is the word of God, and not of a mortal man. 4 It is the ordinary means
of salvation. 5 If we profit not by it, it will be to our greater damnation.
2 Prayer for 1 The Preacher that God would Direct Assist
him. 2 Our selves; in that he will give us 1 Attention to hear. 2
Understanding to conceive. 3 Wisdom to apply. 4 Judgment to discern. 5 Faith
to believe. 6 Memory to retain. 7 Grace to practice the sincere doctrine of
Gods holy word.




THE TEXTS.
HEarken o Israel unto the ordinances and statutes which I teach you. ^ We are
commanded by the Father.
Deuteronomy. 4. 1.

Hear my Law o my people; incline your ears to the words of my mouth. Psalm.
78. 1.

This is my well-beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him. Mat. 3. 17.

He that hears of me these words, The Son.
etc. Mat. 7. 24.

He that has an ear to hear let him hear. Mat. 11. 15.

Let him that has an ear hear what the Spirit says to the Churches. The
holy Ghost to bear heedfully the Word of the Preacher.
Reu. 2. 7.

Take heed what ye hear. Mar. 4. 24.

Beware of false Prophets that come unto you in sheeps-clothing. Mat. 7. 15.

They searched the Scriptures, whether those things were so. Acts 17. 11.

Prove all things: hold that which is good. 1 T^es. 5. 21.

Try the Spirits whether they be of God or not. 1. Ioh. 4. 1.

They have not rejected thee but they have rejected me. Not as the Word of Man,
but as the Word of God.
1 Samuel 8. 7.

He that hears you hears me, and he that hears me hears him that sent
me. Luke 10. 16.

Blessed is he that hears the Word of God and keeps it. Luke 11. 28.

Ye received the Word not as the Word of men, but as it is indeed the Word of
God. 1 These. 2. 3.

The Word of God is lively and mighty in operation, etc. Heb. 4. 12.

If any man speak let him speak as the Word of God. 1 Pet. 4. 11.

I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; Which will prove the means of our
salvation.
for it is the power of God unto salvation to every believer. Romans 1. 16.

Man lives not by bread only, but by every Word that proceeds from the mouth
of God. Luke 4. 4.

He that hears my words and belieueth in me has life eternal, and shall
not come into condemnation, but is passed from death to life. Ioh. 9. 24.

To whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life. Ioh. 6. 68.

He that refuses me and receives not my words has one that judges him. Or
damnation.
The word which I have spoken it shall judge him at the last day. Ioh. 12. 48.

If I had not come, and spoken unto them they had not had sin. Ioh. 15. 22.

We are the sweet smelling savor of Christ in them that are saved and them
that perish. 2 Cor. 2. 15.

To the one we are the savor of death unto death: and to the other the savor
of life unto life, verse 16.

Continue in Pra^er, 2. We must pray for the Preacher.
and watch in the same with thanksgiving, Colos 4. 2.

Praying for us, that God may open to us the door of utterance to speak the
mysteries of Christ. verse 3.

That I may utter it as it becomes me to speak. For our selves that we may
Attend.
verse 4.

A certain woman named Lydia heard us, whose heart the Lord opened that she
attended to the things that Paul spoke. Acts 16. 14.

Give me understanding and I will keep thy Law. Understand
Psalm. 119. 34.

And this I pray that ye may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in all
judgment. Discern.
Phil. 1. 9.

That ye may discern those things that differ. verse 10.

The Lord give thee a right judgment in all things. 2 Timothy 2. 7.

God that commanded the light to shine out of darkness, is he that has shined
in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the
face of Jesus Christ. 2. Cor. 4. 6.

The Apostles said Lord increase our Faith. Believe.
Luke 17. 5.

For this cause I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
Ephesians. 3. 14.

That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. verse 17.

And his Mother kept all these sayings in her heart. Remember.
Luke 2. 51.

I have hid thy promises in my heart* that I might not sin against thee Psalm.
119. 11.

Whosoever hears of me these words and does the same I will liken him to a
wise man that built his house upon a rock Mat. Practice.
7. 24.

If ye know these things blessed are ye if ye do them, Ioh. 13. 17.

Be ye dooers of the Word and not hearers only deceiving your own souls. Iam.
1. 22.

The Preparatory Hymn,
wherein the devout soul expresses her a High esteem of the Word. b
Continual meditating on it. c Exceeding delight in it. Fervent desire to be d
Instructed in it. e Ruled by it.



a My soul breaks for the longing it has unto thy judgments at all times.
Psalm 119. 20.

The Law of thy mouth is better to me then thousands of gold and silver. verse
72.

The Law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord
is sure making wise the simple. Psalm. 19. 7.

The Statutes of the Lord are right and rejoice the heart: the commandment of
the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. ver. 8

The fear of the Lord is clean enduring for ever: the Judgments of the Lord
are true and righteous altogether. verse 9.

More to be desired are they then gold, yea then much fine gold; sweeter also
then honey, and the honey comb. verse 10.

Moreover by them is thy servant taught: and in keeping of them is great
reward. verse 11.

b I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect to thy ways. Psalm 119. 15.

O how I love thy Law it is my meditation all the day. ver. 97.

Thy words have I hid in mine heart that I might not sin against thee. verse 11.

c I will delight my self in thy statutes: I will not forget thy word verse 16.

Thy testimonies are my delight and my counselors. verse 24.

Thy testimonies have I claimed as mine heritage for ever; for they are the
very joy of mine heart. verse 111.

d Open thou mine eyes that I may behold the wondrous things of thy Law. verse.
18.

Make me to understand the way of thy precepts: so shall I talk of thy
wondrous works. verse 27.

e Order my steps in thy Word: and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.
verse 133.

Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: and teach me thy statutes. verse 135.

The Preparatory Prayer.
Gracious God who have appointed the opening of the Scriptures by preaching to
be the ordinary means of salvation to all thy chosen; bless this thine
ordinance to me, and prepare me for it. Grant that thy Word being mixed with
faith in me may be unto me a savor of life unto life, and not a savor of
death unto death. Direct and assist thy Minister that he may rightly divide
it. Open unto him the door of utterance, that what he has conceived in thy
fear upon thy holy Oracles, he may deliver to thy glory. Fill him with the
holy Ghost that his lips may be full of grace, and that he may speak
instruction to mine ignorance, correction to my errors, comfort to mine
afflictions, and peace to my conscience. Guide the sword of the spirit in his
hand that it may meet with, and smite my special corruptions and bosom sins,
known, or unknown; and give me patience to endure the just reproof of them
by his Ministry, and love him for it, and amend by it. Open my heart that I may
attend to those things that belong to my peace. Endue me with wisdom, and
spiritual understanding that I may descerne those things that differ, and try
all things, and hold that which is good, and apply it to my self for the
subduing of my fleshly members, and affections, and building me up in the most
holy faith of thine Elect. Quicken me with thy spirit that I may cheerfully,
and willingly, and constantly listen to the voice of the heavenly charmer, that
he may kill the venom of sin in my soul. Let the words of thy Preacher
drop as rain, and distill as deaw upon me, and into me to make my barren
heart fruitful in holy affections and desires; my mind in heavenly thoughts
and conceptions; my tongue in wholesome words, and graceful speeches; my hands
in all manner of good works, that I prove not an idle hearer but a doer, of
the Word, and constant practicer of al holy duties to the honor of thy holy
and blessed Name, and the salvation of my soul in the day of the Lord Jesus,
To whom with thee and the holy Ghost, etc.

The Preparation to the receiving of the holy Sacrament.
IT being revealed to aged Simeon that he should see his Savior in the flesh
before he rendered up his own Spirit; Ber. Sermon. de purificatione Hodie
dominus Templi ingressus est Templum Domini.
when he came into the Temple of the Lord and there found the Lord of the
Temple, he was so ouer-ioyed there with that he took the babe into his
arms, embraced it, and began his Swan-like song or Nunc dimittis, saying, Lord
now let thou thy servant depart in peace; for I have seen the Prince of
Peace. Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, and I desire to see no more. Into
thy hands o sweet babe whom I hold in mine arms I commend my fainting Spirit,
Embrace my soul with thine arms of mercy, as I embrace thy body with these
arms of flesh. This singular prerogative of Simeon, (or rather a far greater)
the Lord vouchsafes thee o devout soul, when he bids thee to his holy
Table; even to take into thy hands thy Savior: To see with thine eyes, and
handle with thy hands, yea and taste with thy mouth the Word of life. For by,
and with the sacred elements, (though not in, or under them) thou partakest of
the flesh and blood of the Son of God spiritually, (for his words are spirit
and life) yet truly, and in very deed, for he is the living bread that came
down from heaven; his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed.
As at sumptuous feasts where curious services are, thou see the proportion
and shape of the Dear or Foul set out in gold and colors on the outside or
lidde of those baked meats which are truly contained under it, and to be
eaten: So under the holy forms of bread and wine thou feedest on thy Savior.
That which is represented in the sign to the eye of the body is presented in
the thing signified to the eye of the soul and hand of thy faith; what is
shadowed in the Sacrament is truly also exhibited by it. Qui credit edit: If
thou belieuest that thou eatest, thou eatest that thou belieuest: let no
heretical Harpyes pluck from thee thy heavenly dish or meat as Celaeno did
Aeneas's.

Beware of two sorts of Heretics especially, which seek to beguile thee in
the Sacrament, or rather of it viz the Sacramentaries. Papists.
the one denies the sign, the other the thing signified. The one offers
thee a shadow without the body, the other the body without the shadow, and
consequently neither of them gives thee the true Sacrament which in nature and
substance cosisteth of both. The Sacramentary would robb thee of the Jewel,
the Papist of the Casket. Lay thou thine hands on both, hold both fast as thou
see the verity and substance of the one, so believe that verity and substance
of the other. As thou take the one, receive the other: As thou handlest the
one, apprehend the other: As thou feedest with thy mouth on the one, feed in
thy heart on the other: And as truly as the one nourishes thy body to a
temporal, so the other shall preserve thy soul to eternal life. For it is
the tree of Life which grows in the midst of the Paradise of God, his Church
on earth. The way to the mystical tree in Paradise was guarded by an Angel
wauing a flaming sword: The way to this in like manner is fenced. There stands
an Angel at the Table; Gods Minister brandishing the sword of the Spirit, and
forbidding (under pain of death) any to eat of this fruit, that have their
teeth set on edge with the apples of Sodom and grapes of Gomorrah. Other
fruits and meat are prepared for us; but we must be prepared for this before
we eat it. The bread of the earth cannot feed when thou eatest it, till it be
changed into thy body because thou art more excellent then it: but this bread
which came down from heaven is more excellent then thou art, and therefore
thou must be changed into it before it nourish thee. All other meat is
received as it is in it self, and no otherwise: but this is diverse as it is
received. Other meat affects and alters the taste, but here the taste
alters the meat. For if it be worthily received it is the body and blood of
Christ; if unworthily it is but bare bread and wine. If it meet with a
spiritual taste, and appetite, and stomach purged and prepared, it proves the
food of life, nay of immortality: if otherwise, it turns into deadly poison:
Calvin instit. par. 2. sacram. 1 Cor. 11. 29.
for he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself not discerning the Lords body. A learned Physician that tendreth the
health and life of thy body will never minister strong physic that will amend
or end thee before he prepares thy body accordingly. This Sacrament is not
only food, but also physic to cure thy soul; yea such strong physic as
will work effectually one way or other, to thy health and salvation, or to thy
death and damnation. Be careful therefore before thou take it to prepare
thy self for it; and for thy help peruse the Admonition, Hymn, and Prayer
following.

The admonition before the Communion.
THE ANALYSIS.
The due preparation to the Sacrament is by 1 Examination whether thou have 1 A
fervent desire to partake of this holy table. 2 Competent knowledge in this
high mystery. 3 Faith in Christ's incarnation and death, and affiance in the
merits of both. 4 A conscience cleansed by true repentance. 5 An heart free
from malice and all uncharitableness. He that worthily receives must

2 Prayer


THE TEXTS.
Let a man examine himself, 1. Examine.
and so let him cate of that bread and drink of that cup. 1. Cor. 11. 28.

Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for righteousness sake, 2. Desire.
for they shall be satisfied. Math. 5, 6.

Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters. Isa. 55. 1.

Give us evermore of this bread. Ioh. 6. 34.

For he that eats and drinks unworthily, 3. Know.
eats and dr^nketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body, 1. Corinthians. 11. 29.

I am the bread of life; 4. Believe.
he that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that belieueth in me shall
never thirst, Ioh. 6. 35.

Christ dwells in us by faith. Ephesians. 3. 17.

I will wash mine hands in innocence, 5. Repent.
and so will I go to thine altar o God. Psalm. 26. 6.

To the impure all things are impure. Tit. 1. 15.

If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, 6. Love.
and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee. Math 5. 23.

Leave thou thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift. ver. 24.

We being many are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers of this
one bread. 1. Cor. 10. 17

A preparatory Hymn to be used before, or at the receiving of the blessed
Sacrament;
wherein the devout soul expresses her a Desire of the food of life. b Hope
that she shall obtain it. c Thanks for it.


a As the Heart pants after the water brooks; so pants my soul after thee
o God. Psalm. 42. 1.

My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God. ver. 2.

My soul thirsts for thee: my soul longs for thee as a dry and thirsty
land. Psalm. 63. 1.

I will bless thee while I live; I will lift up my hands in thy Name. ver. 4.

b My soul shall be satisfied with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall
praise thee with joyful lips. ver. 5.

Thou preparest a table before me, and my cup runs over. Ps. 23. 5.

The Lord is the portion of my inheritance, and of my cup. Psalm 16. 5.

I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord, Psalm.
116. 13.

c I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now in the presence of all his people.
ver. 14.

I will offer unto thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the
name of the Lord, ver. 17. saying

The Prayer before the Communion.
GRacious Redeemer, who out of thy pierced side openedst to all that thirst for
thy grace a double fountain for sin and uncleanness, the one of water, the
other of blood; the one to purge the guilt, the other the filth of sin, and
have sealed these inestimable benefits of sanctification and redemption unto
all believers by the Sacraments of Baptism and of thy holy Supper, assist me
by thy Spirit in the sanctified use of these holy Mysteries and Symholls of thy
most blessed body and blood. Most loving and bountiful Lord, who have
prepared such a table for me, give me a mouth and stomach according, that I
may worthily receive these heavenly dainties to the glory of thine infinite
goodness, and the everlasting comfort of my soul. Clear the eyes of mine
understanding from all mists of heretical fancies and carnal imaginations,
that I may rightly distinguish the signs from the things signified by them,
and also discern thy body from common meat. Sharpen my appetite that I may
hungrily feed upon this bread, of which whosoever eats shall never hunger;
and stily drink of this cup, of which whosoever drinks shall never thirst, O
thou true food of my soul, receive me who am now to receive thee. Quicken me
with thy Spirit, who wilt feed me with thy flesh, vouchsafe me thy grace, who
communicatest to me thy nature, that as in and by these holy Mysteries, I
receive life from thee: so I may also receive by them grace to live to thee:
not seeking mine own pleasure, nor doing mine own will, but deuoting the
remainder of my life to thy service, and yielding my self wholly to the power
of thy sanctifying grace, to work in me always that which is pleasing in thy
sight. So be it. Amen.

Religious duties to be performed at the time of the receiving the Communion.
1. Prepare thy body by a decent gesture. 2. Recollect thy mind, and fix thy
thoughts wholly upon this most sacred action stir up in thee. 3. Stir up in
thee. 1 An holy fear out of this consideration, that God is there present in a
special manner, and his Angels attending on him, and observing thee.

Say to thy self in the words of Iacoh.

O how fearful is this place; it is no other then the house of God, and gate
of heaven.

2 An holy astonishment or admiration, out of this consideration that the Lord
thy Maker and Redeemer, and the high possessour of heaven and earth, so far
humbles himself as to be thy guest.

Say to thy self in the words of Solomon.

Is it true indeed that God will dwell on the earth? Behold the heaven, and
heaven of heavens cannot contain him; how much less the narrow room of my
soul? 1. King 8. 27.

3 An holy abashment or confusion, out of this consideration, that so vile a
worm, and sinful wretch as thou art should have so infinite a Majesty, and
holy God to come and sup with thee.

Say to thy self in the words of the Centurion.

Lord I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof: or with S.
Peter, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man.

4 An holy sorrow out of this consideration, y^ thy sins did put thy Savior to
these torments, which are signified, and lively represented in this Sacrament.

Say to thy self in the words of Jeremiah.

O that mine eyes were a fountain of tears to bewail those sins which drew
so much blood from my Savior.

5 An holy joy, out of this consideration, that the infinite debt of thy sins
is discharged, and the acquittance delivered into thy hands.

Say to thy self in the words spoken of Zacheus.

This day salvation is come into mine house.

6 An holy desire of expressing some kind of thankfulness to God, out of this
consideration, that together with the Sacrament thou receiuest Christ himself,
and all the benefits of his passion.

Say to thy self in the words of David.

What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits that he has done unto
me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.



4 Join the signs with the things signified. Take Feed on bodily Bread Wine
ghostly Body. Blood.



5 Observe and meditate upon the resemblances between them.

1 Bread and wine, true, and in substance, not in appearance only.

Christ's body a true body; his blood true blood, not in show only as some
Heretics have imagined.

2 Bread one body or lump made of many grains: wine one liquor or drink of
many grapes.

Christ his body one of many members united together.

3 Bread and wine an entire repast.

Christ's body and blood the perfect refection of the soul.

4 Bread and wine strengthen and comfort the heart.

Christ's body and blood est ablisheth the heart and comfort the conscience.

5 Bread and wine the common food of men, not children.

Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament no food for children, but men in
riper years that can examine themselves.

6 Bread and wine are designed and set apart for the holy Communion.

Christ's body and blood designed and appointed by God for man his redemption,
and satisfaction.

7 Bread and wine laid upon the Communion table.

Christ's body and blood laid upon the Altar of the cross.

8 Bread and wine consecrated by the Priest, and exhibited to the Communicants.

Christ's body and blood consecrated by the eternal Spirit, and offered to his
Father.

9 Bread broken, wine poured out.

Christ's body bruised and torn, and his blood poured out.

10 Bread and wine given by the Minister.

Christ's body and blood given by the Father.

11 Bread and wine taken into the hands of the faithful Communicant.

Christ's body and blood received by faith, and applied.

12 Bread and wine eaten and drunk with the mouth.

Christ's body and blood fed upon in the heart.

13 Bread and wine united to the substance of our body, and made one with us.

Christ's body and blood united to us and made one with us by an unspeakable and
inseparable conjunction.

14 Bread and wine sustain and nourish the body to a temporal life.

Christ's body and blood nourish and preserve body and soul to eternal life.

15 Bread and wine increase the substance of one body.

Christ's body and blood worthily received, increase faith and all spiritual
graces in the soul.

Short pravers to be used in the very act of receiving, or a little before.
Lord make me a worthy partaker of these most holy mysteries: Prepare me before
Assist me in Comfort and confirm me after
the receiving of this heavenly food.

Lord 1 Renew my repentance. 2 Confirm my faith. 3 Perfect my charity. 4
Increase my knowledge. 5 Fasten my intention. 6 Quicken my devotion.


Lord give me I humbly beseech thee; 1 Sorrow for my sin. 2 Thirst of thy
grace. 3 Knowledge in thy mysteries. 4 Faith in thy promises. 5 Love to thy
members. 6 Thankfulness for this inestimable favor thou vouchsafest me
inbidding me to thine own Table.


A short thanksgiving after the Communion, to be used in the seat or at the
Lords Table.
GRacious Redeemer, I most heartily thank thee for these pledges of thy love,
and tokens of thy favor, and seals of the general pardon for all my sins.
And I vow by the help of thy strengthening grace from henceforth ever to
abstain even from all appearance of evil, and never willingly to offend thee
in thought, word, or deed. How shou^^^ sin against thee who have died for me,
and washed my sins in thy blood, which I have now received to my unspeakable
comfort? Another.

Affect me with a taste of this heavenly food, and continue the relish of it
in the mouth of my soul; and make me for ever hereafter loath the worlds
delicacies, the fleshes baits, and the devils morsels; especially the
forbidden fruit of, etc. Here name thy secret and bosom sins, which thou
have been last or most overtaken with. Another.

Welcome blessed and heavenly guest, my dearest Lord and bountiful Savior. I
bow the knees of my heart unto thee; I put my hands under thy sacred feet
pierced with nails for me; I lay down before thee the keys of my everlasting
door: Enter high Lord of heaven and earth; take possession of all my inner
rooms: Com^^nd and rule all the faculties of my soul, and members of my body,
especially the hidden room of my heart: Live and dwell with me here below by
faith, till I come to dwell with thee for ever above in heaven. So be it.

How is it that my Lord is come himself to visit me. Use also this form.
Can a sinful man expect of God such grace? much less deserve it. Will thou
converse with Publicans and such sinners as I am? Nay will thou not only eat
with them, but suffer thy self to be eaten of them? I am astonished at this
thy wonderful humility, and inconceivable love, Lord make me for ever
mindful of it, and thankful for it. Amen.

Glory be to God on high, Or this.
on earth peace, and eternal comfort in my conscience. I am fed now with thy
body, and my heart is cheared with the cup of the new Testament in thy blood
Now I am incorporated into thy mystical body, and am made flesh of thy flesh,
bone of thy bone. Lord let nothing be ever able to separate me from this; but
since all things work for the good of thy chosen, let all things more and more
unite me to thee, that I may grow from grace to grace, and strength to
strength, till I come to the fuu measure of thy perfect age. Amen.

I have now eaten of this bread and drunk of this cup, Or this.
according to thine holy ordinance: Lord grant that I may feel in my soul the
effect of this spiritual refection, by the confirming of my faith, assurance
of my hope, enlargement of my love, and my increase in spiritual strength
against all tentations.

At my conception and birth thou gave me my self o Lord, Or this.
and now according to thy promise in the Sacrament thou have given me thy
self, and by faith I have received thee. I can do no less, and I would I
could do more then give my self wholly unto thee. Refuse me not who have given
thy self for me, and unto me. Take me into thy favor and service. Keep me
in thy Church which is thy house continually, and protect me against all my
bodily and ghostly enemies.

A larger form of Thanksgiving after thou returnest to thy house or chamber
from receiving the Communion.
I Yield unto thee, o most bountiful, gracious, and everliving Lord and
Savior, the greatest thanks my heart can conceive, or tongue express, for
this inestimable favor, that thou vouchsafest to bid me to thine own Table,
and there have feasted my soul with the true Manna that came down from
heaven, the food of Angels, thine own blessed body and blood. O knit my
heart, and affections for ever unto thee, who have substantially and
inseparably united thy self unto mankind, by taking flesh from us in thine
incarnation, and giving us thy flesh in this sacred institution. What shall be
able to separate me from thee, or from thy members, who by thy Spirit and
virtue of this Sacrament, am truly incorporated into thee, and made a member of
thy mystical body? How can I question thy love, who have given me this pledge
of thy favor? How can I forget thy bitter death and passion, whereof thou have
instituted so lively a memorial? How can I doubt of thy promises, whereof thou
have given such a seal? How should I distrust my future inheritance, whereof
thou have given me this earnest? I know thou will deny me no good thing, who
have given me thy self. I know that I shall live eternally and blessedly,
because by thy faith working in and through this Sacrament, I receive the seed
of immortality; I am truly made partaker of thy natural, yea and a lively
part of thy mystical body; and when the head reigns in eternal glory, the
members must needs participate of glorious eternity. What shall I offer unto
thee for these so singular benefits, which I receive by the Sacrament? My body
is vile, my soul sinful, and worse then nothing in respect of thy glorious
and sacred flesh and blood. One drop of thy blood is more to be valued, then a
thousand worlds; which yet to testify the abundance of thy love, thou
pouredst out, and offeredst plentifully for me upon the cross, and now
affordest to me in the cup. Shall I not spend my dearest hearts blood in thy
service, who have shed thine for me? Shall I not willingly seal thy truth (if
need be) with my blood, who have now received the pardon of all my sins,
signed with it? What shall I render to thee for all thy loving mercies
contained in this conduit of thy grace? I will take this cup of salvation, and
I will not refuse the cup of trembling for thy sake, by the help of thy grace
I will more strictly keep my holy vows which I have heretofore made, and now
renew. I will seek to carry my self as a guest of so holy a table. Having
eaten Angels meat, I will endeavor my self to lead an Angels life. Having
supped with thee, I will rest with thee, and have my conversation in heaven,
and dwell with thee for ever. Amen.

THE PRACTICE OF PRIVATE DEVOtion, both ordinary and extraordinary, in health
and sickness, and at the hour of death.
The scope of the Author and reason of his method and order.
CHRISTIAN READER,
IN these Devotions which I first offered (for the greater part) to God for my
self, and now offer to the press for thy use, all that I intend, affect, and
labor for is, to expres^e in the matter pious affection; in the form
Scripture phrase and elocution. For it seems to me most agreeable to speak
to God as near as we can in the same language he speaks to us, which is the
sanctified language of the Bible. As for affected humane eloquence (consisting
instreined conceits of wit, and swelling words of vanity) which, as it is
puffed up it self, so it puffs up those that use it; I hold it altogether
unfit for a Minister of the Gospel, especially in meditations, or exercises of
this nature. For in these we ought most of all to deny our selves, and to
captiuate, not only our thoughts to the conceptions, but our tongs to the
words and phrases of the inspired Oracles of God. As Menander said of women,
that they were fairest who were not painted at all, and Tullie of Atticus his
book, that the gravity of the style, and neglect of light ornaments was a
gra^e and ornament unto it: So it may be most truly avouched of holy vows,
meditations, and prayers, that sincerity is best art, and simplicity their
garb, modesty their trimming, and zeal their glory, when they are so
conceived and uttered, that they show most affection and least affectation of
art, wit, or language. Sighs are the figures that move Almighty God, and
tears the fluent and most current Rhetoric before him; for he that made the
mouth is not taken with words, unless they be such as proceed from his own
mouth, and are warranted by his word: such as carry in them a manifest print
of that pattern of sound or wholesome words set before us by the Apostles. Now
a swelling member is not sound, Quint instit Orat. Tumor licet grandis
contrarius est sanitati.
neither is blown meat wholesome. The wisest among the heathen could
distinguish between a Matrons and a Curtizans attire and ornaments; a lofty
and a turgent style; the Asiaticke Superfluity, and Attick knife and modesty
which pruned the luxuriancy of pregnant wits, and flourishing styles running
out into superfluous stemmes, that the presses of eloquence might abound, not
with leaves of words, but juice and sap of Sentences, as it were grapes pressed
together. Thus eloquently Saint Ierom declares that Athenian eloquence, Ierom.
ad Rusticum. Luxuriantes flagellis vineas falcibus reprimebant, vt eloquent^^
torcularia non verbori^ pampinis, sed sensu^^ quasi vuarum expressionibus
redumdarent.
and singularly approved it: to whose judgment I submit; only I would add
this, that even this iuycie kind of sententious eloquence, relisheth not of a
devout soul, unless it have in it the taste and tincture of the vines of
Engaddy.

Draw me says the Spowse, we will run after thee, say her honorable
attendants, because of the sweet savor of thy ointments. The spowse of Christ
delights not in exoticall perfumes though never so costly, because howsoever
they please thy smell, yet they corrupt the brain, and oftentimes poison the
spirits. But the smell of Christ's ointments, who was anointed with the oil of
gladness above all his brethren, is the savor of life unto life. Therefore
both the Spowse her self, and all her maids of honor ( i. e. Virgins and
chaste souls) run after it: Origin in Cant.
And this my handmaid also follows after them, yet as Peter followed Christ,
a far off. The path in which she treads is this.

From the general she passes to particular, from extraordinary to ordinary,
from the chamber and Closet, to the sick and death-bedds Devotion.

Haec erit admissa met a terendarota.
1 BEcause the morning and evening were every day in the week I begin with
the days Devotion in general, and for morning and evening I frame such
Admonitions, Hymns, and Prayers, as may serve for any day, Sabbath, or week
day, festival or common.

2. Next I furnish the Christian Sabbath, because (as Ignatius styleth it) it
is the chief and sovereign day, and the Queen of all days, and may rightly
challenge the precedence of all festiualls, both in regard of Gods strict
command for the religious observing it, and for that it is the sampler of them,
they being cut as it were out of the days of the week, otherwise days of
labor, according to the pattern of the Sabboths rest.

3. The feasts peculiarly dedicated to our Savior and the holy Ghost succeed
the Sabbath, and precede the week days. For whatsoever scruple has bin made
of Saints days, the whole world as far as it is, or ever was Christian, has
observed religiously, these feasts as Monuments and a kind of Sacraments to
refresh the memory of the chief works of our Lord, and mysteries of our
faith, to check and control whose universal and uniform practice,
especially in a matter of this nature is most insolent madness. Aug. Epist. ad
Ianuarium.
God (says Paulinus) has garnished the Church Calender with festival days,
as the heaven with Stars, or a garla^d with roses. Is not Christ the rose of
Sharon, and the bright morning Star? Doubtless then the festiualls in special
consecrated to him, ought to be as the fairest flowrs in the round garland of
the year, and brightest Stars in the Church- firmament. We never read of
any (says Calvin) that were blamed for drawing too much water out of the well
of life: Neither can we possibly give too much honor to the King of glory.
Bern. Sermon. de. Pent.
Saint Bernards consequence is as sound as it is pious. If we celebrate the
Saints solemnities, how much more ought we to keep his who made them Saints?

In the Devotion fitted to these days, first I lay the ground out of
Scripture, and then descant upon it in the Admonition, Hymn, and Prayer; all
which allude to the History of that feast.

4. After these feasts, the weekdayes come in their order. The Saints, Martyrs,
and Archangels days I have purposely omitted: not that I dislike the keeping
of them; for I have ever, and will justify, and maintain the observation of
them, according to that godly institution, and practice of our Church. But I
desired to keep my book within the compass of the title, which is a Manuell.
And albeit we honor Saints, and Martyrs, yet religious Devotion which is my
Theme is restrained to God by holy David. Whom have I in heaven but thee o
Lord. In the Church of Rome there are many Deuotion^ to Saints, and more to our
Lady then to Christ, but we acknowledge no religious Devotions, but to him who
charmed the old Serpent, with that voice of his Father! Him only shall thou
serve.

In the week days Devotion, those words of our Savior were my loadestarre.
My father works, and I work: For all the morning prayers have relation to
some work of God the Father, in the six days of Creation: and all the
evening to some work of God the Son, in the six days, immediately before
his glorious resurrection. The admonitions for morning and evening, contain 12
beatitudes, or blessedness; 8 mentioned by our Savior, Matthew 5. and the rest
out of other choice Texts of Scripture. All which blessednesses I wish thee
from my heart, desiring thee to afford me one Prayer, who have stored thee with
many.

Thine in the Lord Jesus D. F.

THE MORNINGS DEVOTION.
An admonition for the Morning.
WE have a more sure word of Prophecy whereunto ye do well that ye take
heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and
the day star arise in your hearts. 1 Pet. 1. 19.

I am the root, and the offspring of David (says Christ) and I am the bright
morning Star. Reu. 22. 16.

Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light. Ephesians. 5. 14.

It is now time to awake out of sleep, for now our salvation is nearer then
when we believed. Romans 13. 11.

The night is past, the day is at hand, therefore cast off the works of
darkness, and put on the armor of light. verse 12.

See that ye walk circumspectly, redeeming the time, because the days are
evil Ephesians 5. 15.

Walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting, and drunkenness, not in
chambering, and wantonness, not in strife and envying, but put on the Lord
Jesus, and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. Romans
13. 13. 14.

A Hymn for the Morning.
O Lord thou art my God, early will I seek thee; my soul thirsts for thee;
I will sing alowd of thy power, and mercy in the morning. Psalm. 63. 1. 2. Psalm.
59. 10.

My tongue shall speak of thy righteousness, and thy praise all the day long.
Psalm. 35. 28.

I laid me down, and slept, for thou Lord sustainedst me. Psalm. 3. 5.

I have dwelt in the secret place of the most High, and abode under the shadow
of the Almighty. Psalm. 91. 1.

4 He shall cover me with his feathers, and under his wings will I trust; his
faithfulness and truth shall be my shield, and buckler. ver. 4.

Lord arise and lift up the light of thy countenance upon me. Ps. 4. 7.

Teach me to number my days that I may apply my heart unto wisdom; Instruct
me in the way which I shall go, and guide me with thine eye. Psalm. 90. 12.
Psalm. 32. 9.

Teach me thy way o Lord, and I will walk in thy truth, o knit my heart to
thee, that I may fear thy Name! Psalm. 86. 11.

Hold up my goings in thy path, that my footsteps slip not. Psalm. 17 5.

O satisfy me early with thy mercy, and that soon that I may rejoice, and
be glad al my days! Psalm. 143. 8.

Let the beauty of the Lord my God be upon me; establish thou the work of my
hands upon me; o prosper thou my handie work. Psalm. 90. 17.

A Prayer for the Morning.
GRacious Father, rich in mercy to all thy children that call upon thee, accept
I beseech thee this my morning Sacrifice of praise, and thanks giving, which
with a willing heart, and devout affection I offer unto thee in confidence of
thy sons infinite merits, and acknowledgement of thine everlasting love, and
those inestimable benefits which by him, and for him, and with him thou
conferredst upon me, and all thine Elect in him. How dear are the thoughts of
thy mercies unto me how great is the ^umme of them? Who can value the precious
Pearl of thy Word, and treasure of thy grace? Who can raise his thoughts, and
desires to the high price of our ^aling, an incorrupt^ble crown of glory laid
up for us in heaven? Lord fit me with thy grace, that I may abound in
thanksgiving, and praises for it. Enlarge my heart with thy love, that I may in
some sort comprehend with all Saints the measure of thine infinite ^oue
m^nifested to me in the faith of Jesus Christ, and abundantly testified by
writing my name in the book of life before I was; and engrauing me as a signet
with thine own image at my creation; and when I had defaced* and in a manner
quite raced it out, by renewing it in me again, and redeeming me that had sold
my self as a bondslaue under sin, and death, not with corruptible things, as
gold, silver or precious stones, but with the inualuable, and incorruptible
blood of thine only begotten son, who gave his life for my ransom, and by his
suffering, and death has purchased for me a crown of life. To whom therefore
with thee, and thy spirit which seals all thy mercies unto me, and me unto
the day of redemption, be ascribed the whole glory of my creation, redemption,
sanctification, and salvation. For unto me nothing belongs but shame, and
confusion, who insteede of embracing any mercy, and answering thy love, provoke
thy justice, and incense thy wrath, and grieve thy spirit, and despite thy
grace, and as much as in me lies, crucify again to my self the Lord of
life, and trample the blood of the New Testament under foot. Such is my
perverse nature, and ungracious disposition, that the better thou art to me,
the worse I prove to thee. What could thou have done unto me that thou have
not done? Thou have planted me in a fruitful country; thou have fenced me
with thy providence; watered me with the former, and latter rain of thy Word,
pruned me with mild, and seasonable afflictions; and thou castest continually
the hot and bright beams of thy favor upon me; and thou look for grapes,
but behold nothing but wild grapes. What remains therefore but that thou
should root me out of thy vineard, and plant another in my place that
might bring forth better fruits? Yet thou sparest me and striuest to overcome
my evil nature with thy goodness? Mine eyes gush out like rivers of waters
for my sin and the sin of this nation. Does not the land even groan under
the heavy burden of our transgressions? Have not our infectious sins long
ago deserved an infectious disease, and our rebellions against thee the sword;
and our barrenness in good works a dearth; and our want of penitent, and
compassionate tears a drouth; our ouerflowing luxury a deluge, and our burning
lusts fire from heaven; and our loathing the Manna of our soul a famine of the
Word? Notwithstanding thy mercy triumphs over justice, and contrary to mine
and all our deserts, and above hope of any of us thou sendest blessings for
curses; peace for trouble; plenty for want; beauty for ashes; and the oil of
gladness for the spirit of heaviness. Who is a God like unto thee that
pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his
heritage? who considerest not the evil that we do, but the goodness which
thou art. This last night past for the sins of the former day, thou might
most justly have taken me away in the dark, and east me unto utter darkness.
But thou coueredst my sins, and hiddest me safe under the shadow of thy wings,
and I have taken quiet, and comfortable rest; and with joy, and cheerfulness,
I behold the day spring from on high come to visit me. Lord let not these thy
mercies, because they are ordinary, diminish, but rather because they are
continual, increase my thankful duties, and religious obsequies unto thee! As
thou heapest blessing upon blessing, so still add grace to grace, that thy
goodness continued to me, may make me continually better. And since now thou
have given me a day more to my life, grant that I may give, and consecrate it
to thee, by spending it wholly in thy service, and the necessary duties of my
calling. Which that I may more cheerfully perform, open thy hand to fit me
with all those good things I need; and stretch out thine arm to turn from me
all the evils I fear. Above all things keep me from the unprofitable works
of darkness, that my sins turn not day into night, since thy goodness has
turned night into day. Awake my soul from carnal security, as thou have my
body from sleep, that I may stand up from the dead, and Christ may give me
light, to walk honestly, uprightly and circumspectly; as becomes the child
of the day. And that I be not ashamed to walk naked in the light, put upon me
the true wedding garment, and cover me with the robes of thy sons
righteousness. And as the light of the Sun shines before me, so grant that
my light may shine before men, that they may see my good works, and glorify
thee my heavenly Father. And because thou art the light which enlightneth every
man that comes into the world, cast I beseech thee the bright beams of thy
favor upon thy whole Church: Propagate thy Gospel through the whole world,
and by the preaching of thy Word, add those daily to the Church that shall be
saved. Say to the North Give, and to the South Restore, and speedily accomplish
the number of thine Elect, and so Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. More
particularly I pray thee for the prosperous, and flourishing estate of the
Churches of great Britain, and Ireland. Crown the Kings Majesty with all
royal graces befitting his high calling. Establish his Throne that he may
advance thy Kingdom. Bless our Queen, that she may be a nursing Mother to
thy Spowse. Bless the Prince and Princess Palatine, and all the royal Issue,
that in their stock the root of Iesse may spring up and flourish over the
whole earth. Bless the Nobles, and Peers of this Realm, that they may
maintain thine Honor, and support thy Gospel. Bless the Bishops, and
Ministers, that they may preserve thy worship, and carefully feed thy flock.
Bless the Judges, and Magistrates, that they may execute thy judgments, and
keep thy peace. Bless the Captains and Soldiers, that they may fight thy
wars, and defend thy Church. Finally, bless all thy people, that they may
obey thy Gospel, and enlarge thy Kingdom. And give me grace in this my day
to learn, and follow the things that belong to my peace; to accept the
salvation now offered unto me, and bring forth fruits worthy of amendment of
life. So be it, dear Father for the merits and Passion of thy Son, by the
powerful operation of the holy Ghost with whose assistance I sum up all my
requests, and tender them unto thee in that form of Prayer which thy Son has
taught me, saying, Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

The close out of Scripture.
THe Lord bless me, and keep me: The Lord make his face shine upon me, and be
gracious unto me! The Lord lift up his countenance upon me, and give me peace.

The Admonition for the Evening.
IF any man walk in the day he stumbleth not, because he sees the light of
this world. Ioh 11. 9.

But if a man walk in the night he stumbleth, because there is no light in
him. verse 10.

Walk while ye have the light* least darkness come upon you; for he that
walks in darkness knows not whither he goes. Ioh. 12. 35.

While ye have the light believe in the light, that ye may be the children of
the light. verse 36.

Work while it is day; the night comes when no man can work. Ioh. 9. 4.

This is the condemnation, that light, is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather then light because their deeds were evil Ioh. 3. 19.

For every one that does evil hates the light; neither comes to the light
least his deeds should be reproved. verse 20.

He that hates his brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and
knows not whither he goes, because darkness has blinded his eyes. 1 Ioh.
2. 11.

Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath. Ephesians 4. 26.

And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness but reprove them
rather. Ephesians. 5. 11.

For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of them in
secret. verse 12.

Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day; ye are not of
the night, nor of darkness. 1 These. 5. 5.

Therefore sleep not (in sin, and carnal security,) as do others, but
watch. verse 6.

Watch ye, for ye know not when the Master of the house comes, at even, or
at midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or in the morning, least coming suddenly
he find you sleeping. Mar. 13. 35.

A Hymn for the Evening.
IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy
Name O thou most high. Psalm. 92. 1.

To show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every
night. ver. 2.

For day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge.
Psalm. 19. 2.

Let the Saints be joyful in glory, let them sing alowd upon their beds.
Psalm. 149. 5.

Behold he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber, nor sleep. Psalm. 121. 4.

The Lord is my keeper, the Lord is my shade on my right hand. verse 5.

The Sun shall not smite me by day, nor the Moon by night. verse 6.

The Lord shall preserve me from all evil; he shall preserve my soul. verse
7.

I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for thou Lord make me dwell
in safety. Psalm. 4. 9.

Lighten mine eyes that I sleep not the sleep of Death. Psalm. 13. 3.

With thee is the fountain of life; In thy light shall I see light. Psalm. 36.
9.

Thou will light my candle, and wilt make my darkness to be light. Psalm. 18.
28.

A Prayer for the Evening.
GLorious Creator, eternal, infinite, and incomprehensible God, whose face
obscureth the Sun, and darkeneth the Moon, and shadoweth the Stars, and
dazeleth the eyes of the Cherubims, to whom the light it self (if it be
compared) is but a dark shadow, and the darkness is no darkness, but the
darkness and light to thee are both alike, Enlighten the darkness of mine
understanding that I wander not in the night of error, and ignorance; but
continually walk, as becomes the child of the day, in the light of thy
truth, and the ways of thy Commandments. And though the Sun has withdrawn
his comfortable light from my bodily eyes, yet let the light of thy
countenance, and the bright beams of thy favor still shine upon my soul in
the midst of thickest darkness, and the shadow of death. Save me o Father
of lights from the powers of darkness. Receive me into thy gracious tuition,
and give thine holy Angels charge to pitch their tents about me, that being
secured on every side from all dangers, and fear, I may quietly rest in thee
in whom I live, and move. And whilst my bodily senses are surprised with
sleep, keep my soul still awake, that I may be always ready to meet the
Bridegroom with my lamp in my hand* Let the last trump sound shrill in mine
ears to drive away from me the spirit of slumber, and carnal security. O
thou the keeper of thine Israel, who do never slumber nor sleep, watch over
me this night. Behold, into thy hands I commend my soul and body, and all
things else wherewith thou have blessed me, being assured that the thing cannot
perish thou vouchsafest to take into thy custody. Grant me I beseech thee,
safe, quiet, and comfortable rest, void of cares and fears, free from
distempers and diseases, as also all dangers, dreams, fancies, pollutions, and
temptations. And make it I pray thee as profitable to my soul, as it is
necessary to my body, that it may not only refresh, and strengthen my body
to the better performance of my daily labors and travels in my calling, but
also settle and quiet my soul in the remembrance, and continual expectation
of that sweet repose, and blessed rest which they enjoy that die in thee. Let
my sleep put me in mind of my death, my bed of my grave, my lying down of
my burial, my vncloathing of putting off this tabernacle of flesh, my rising
again of my resurrection, my apparelling of putting on the Lord Jesus. Like as
the night covers and hides all things from the eyes of men; so let thy mercy
cover and hide my sins, that they never come to light, either to confound me
in this life, or condemn me in the life to come. Finally, as it is the nature
of sleep to tie the outward senses, and make fast, and shut up the organs of
my body: so let thy grace restrain my inward senses, and bar up all the
passages of my soul, that the devil may find no place to enter into me.
Close up the eyes of my mind, that they behold not vanity: stop my ears that
they hear not folly, and my spiritual smell that it let not in the savor of
death. Set a watch before my mouth, and seal up the closet of my heart, that
nothing enter into the one, or go out at the other, that may defile me. Thus
keep me, and guard me from my bodily and ghostly enemies this night, and as
long as I abide in the dark prison of my body; and when thou deliuerest me
out of it by death, make me partaker of the glorious inheritance of thy Saints
in light in the heavenly Jerusalem, which needs neither Sun, nor Moon, nor
Stars to shine in it, for the glory of God enlighteneth it, and the Lamb is
the light thereof. To whom with the everlasting Father, and most sacred and
blessed Spirit be rendered thanks, and praise now and for ever. Amen.

The close out of Scripture.
Remember me o Lord with the favor thou bear thy people o visit me with
thy salvation, that I may see the felicity of thy chosen, and rejoice in the
gladness of thy people, and glory with thine inheritance.

THE CHRISTIAN Sabbaths or Lords days Devotion.
Thou who intendest to sanctify the Christian Sabbath to thy Creator and
Redeemer, must advisedly consider, that the fourth Commandment which enioyneth
this duty with a special Memento, has in it somewhat 1 Ceremonial, not now
in force, as 1 Keeping the precise seventh day on which God rested. 2 The
strict rest according to the rigor of the letter. 3 The legal manner of
hallowing it by sacrifices and ceremonial rites.
2 Moral, now and for ever in force as 1 The dedicating of a certain day to
the true and essential worship of God. 2 The keeping holy of a seventh day:
i.e. one at the least in seven. 3 The hallowing that day of the seven which
God appoints, that was Under the Law, the seventh from the Creation. Under
grace, now the first day of the week.




See the ensuing Admonition.

THE ADMONITION for the Sabbath.
THE ANALYSIS.
To stir up thy self to sanctify the Christian Sabbath, meditate upon* 1
GOD 1 The Father, his Precepts for it. Promises to it. 2 The Son his
resurrection on this day. 3 The holy Ghost his coming down on this day.
2 The Apostle's (guided by the Spirit) Iniunction. Practice.



For the hallowing the Christian Sabbath.
REmember the Sabbath day to keep it holy; 1 Grounds in the Law.
six days shall thou labor, etc. Exodus 2^. 8.

Ye shall keep the Sabbath therefore, Precepts.
for it is holy unto you: Every one that despises it shall be surely put to
death. Exodus 31. 14.

Ye shall keep my Sabbath and reverence my Sanctuary, I am the Lord. Leuit.
26. 2.

Hallow my Sabbaths, and they shall be as signs between me and you, that ye
may know that I am the Lord your God. Eze. 20. 20.

Blessed is the man that keeps the Sabbath from polluting, Promises.
and keeps his hands from doing any evil. Isaiah 56. 2.

If thou turn away thy soote from the Sabbath from doing thy pleasure on the
Holy Day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and
shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure,
nor speaking thine own words. Isa. 58. 13.

Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride
upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob
thy father; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, ver. 14.

When the first day of the week began Marie Magdalen, 2 Grounds in the Gospel.
and the other Marie came to the sepulcher. Math. Christ's resurrection on this
day.
28. 1. Mark 16. 1. John 20. 1.

And behold there was a great earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord descended
from heaven, and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it: Math.
28. 2.

And the Angel answered and said to the woman, Fear ye not, for I know that
ye seek Jesus that was crucified, Math. 28. 6.

He is not here, for he is risen. ver. 7.

And when the day of Pentecost was come, The spirits coming down on this day.
they were all with one accord in one place. Acts 2. 1.

And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and
it filled all the house where they were sitting. ver. 2.

And they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak with other
tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. ver. 4.

Every first day of the week let every one lay aside as God has prospered
him, The Apostles iniunction.
etc. 1. Corinthians. 16. 2.

And the first day of the week the disciples being met together Practice.
to break bread, Paul preached unto them. Acts 20. 7.

And I was in the spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind me a great voice,
as it had been of a trumpet. Reu. 1. 10.

THE MORNING HYMN for the Sabbath, or the Lords day:
Wherein the devout soul expresses her performance (at least in desire) of
all holy duties requisite. on the Sabbath, which are 1 Private, as a 1.
Premeditation. b 2. Early rising, or watchfulness. c 3. The souls examination
of her self. d 4. Prayer at home consisting of 1. Confession of sin e
Original. f Actual.
g 2. Profession of faith. 3. Supplication for h 1. The Church. i 2. The King.
k 3. The Minister. l 4. Our selves.


2 Public, as m 1. Going to the Church. n 2. Joining in public prayers and
thanksgiving with the congregation. o 3. Hearing the word. p 4. Contributing
to the poor.



a I have thought upon thy Name in the night season, and have kept thy Law.
Psalm. 119. 55.

b Early in the morning do I cry unto thee, for in thy word is my trust. ver.
147.

c I called mine own ways to remembrance, and turned my foot to thy
testimonies. ver. 59.

d I will make my supplication in thy presence with my whole heart; be
merciful unto me according to thy word. ver. 58.

e Behold I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me.
Psalm. 51. 3.

f Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret
faults. Psalm. 19. 12.

g I said I will confess my sin, and so thou forgauest the wickedness of my
sin. Psalm. 32. 6.

h O be favorable and gracious unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem.
Psalm. 51. 19.

Thou shall arise o Lord, and have mercy upon Sion, for it is time that thou
have mercy upon her, yea the time is come. Psalm. 102. 13.

For why, thy servants think upon her stones, and it grieueth them to see her
in the dust. ver. 14.

i Give the King thy judgments o Lord, and thy righteousness to the Kings
son. Psalm. 72. 1.

Then shall he judge the people according unto right, and defend the poor.
ver. 2.

He shall keep the simple by the right, and punish the wrong doer. ver. 4.

k Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thy Saints sing
with ioyfulnesse. Psalm. 132. 9.

l O send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me, and bring me
to thy holy hill, and to thy dwelling. Psalm. 43. 3.

m I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord.

Open me the gates of righteousness, that I may go in, and give thanks to the
Lord. Psalm. 118. 19.

n O magnify the Lord our God, and let us fall down before his footestoole,
for he is holy. Psalm. 99. 5.

o The Lord gave the word; great was the company of the Preachers. Psalm. 68.
11.

I will hearken what the Lord God will say concerning me, for he shall speak
peace unto his people, and to his Saints that they turn not again. Psalm. 85.
8.

For his salvation is nigh them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our
land. ver. 9.

p O my soul thou have said unto the Lord, Thou art my God, my goods are
nothing unto thee. Psalm. 16. 2.

All my delight is upon the Saints, and such as excel in virtue. ver. 3.

An offering of a free heart will I give thee, and praise thy name, because it
is so comfortable. Psalm. 58. 7.

A Prayer for the Sabbath Morning.
BLessed Creator, and Author, and finisher of the salvation of mankind; who in
memory of thy glorious rest from both thy noble works have blessed and
sanctified a day of holy rest unto thy self, sanctify me for it, that laying
aside my accustomed business, and sequestring my thoughts from all worldly
cares, I may keep it, and my self holy to thee, by dedicating it and deuoting
my self wholly to thy peculiar worship, and immediate service. And to the end
that this my religious service may be more acceptable to thee, quicken me with
thy Spirit, that I may perform it with all alacrity and cheerfulness, and
may make thy Sabbath my delight. Touch my heart and tongue with a coal from
thine Altar, that from the sweet incense of my meditations, hymns, prayers,
and thanksgiving thou may smell a savor of rest. O holy Lord God of Sabbath
sanctify thy rest unto me, and let thy Spirit rest in me, that I may find rest
to my soul from all tentations, troubles, and fears, and may rest from my
own works, which are painful and sinful travels, and may employ this day
all the powers and faculties of my soul and body in doing and considering thy
works, in adoring thy Majesty, and admiring thy wisdom, and acknowledgeing
thy power, and embracing thy love, and magnifying thy goodness, and rejoicing
in thy mercies, and trembling at thy judgments: In visiting thy holy Temple,
and praising thee with thy Saints, and offering up the calves of my lips: In
diligently reading thy Scriptures, attentively hearing thy word, reverently
celebrating thy mysteries, charitably relieuing thy members, and zealously
practicing all holy duties both public and private. O let me this whole day
walk with thee as Enoch did, and talk with thee as Moses did, and seek thy
face as David did: And grant that beholding thine image in thine holy word, as
in a clear and cristall mirror I may be changed into the same image even
from glory to glory. Let this Sabbath put me in mind of thy rest from thy
works, and assure me thereby of an everlasting Sabbath in heaven from my
works. Into which rest that I may enter, stir up my good desires in me; raise
my thoughts and affections to the things that are ab^ue. Renew me according to
the Image of thy Son, and frame my life to a heavenly conversation. Enlighten
my understanding, sanctify my will, moderate my desires, govern my
affections, mortify my fleshly members, and destroy the man of sin in me,
and deliver me from this body of death. Work in me a fear of thy power, and
love of thy goodness, and zeal of thy glory, and thirst of thy grace, and an
earnest desire, and constant resolution as (much as in me lies) to approve my
self to thee in all things, and frame all my actions to the rule of thy word.
Hear me I beseech thee for my self and for thy Church, and thy Church for me,
and Christ for us all, etc. saying: Righteous Father keep them from evil,
sanctify them with thy truth, thy word is truth.

The close out of Scripture.
The glory which thou have given me, give them, that they may be one, as thou
and I are one. So be it, heavenly Father for thy Sonn's sake, by the grace of
thy holy Spirit: To whom be all honor, praise, glory, and thanksgiving from
everlasting to everlasting.

Amen.
AN ADMONITION for the Sabbath Evening.
THE ANALYSIS.
The fittest subject of contemplation on the Sabbath, is the meditation on the
eternal Sabbath in heaven, of which the Sabbath on earth is a type. Consider
it two ways. Privately there is No sin. No tempter or temptation. No
thraldom or servitude. No labor or toil. No sorrow or grief. No pain or
torment. No night or darkness. No death. No curse. No fear.
Positiuely there are Everlasting habitations. Indefiezable estates of
inheritance. Royal honors and dignities. Inualuable wealth and riches.
Unspeakable joys and pleasures in the Sight and fruition of God. Society with
Christ Company with all Saints and Angels. Glorification of our bodies.
Perfection of our souls in Knowledge. Righteousness Love and union with God.





THE TEXTS.
WE look for a new heaven and a new earth, In heaven no sin.
according to his promises in which dwells righteousness. 2. Pet. 3. 13.

The Dragon fought with his Angels. Reu. 12. 7.

But they preuitled not, No tempter
neither was their place found any more in heaven. ver. 8.

And the Dragon that old Serpent called the Devil, and Satan was cast out,
etc. ver. 9.

Rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them.

The creature shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God. No thraldom.
Romans 8. 21.

There remains a rest for the people of God. No labor.
Heb. 4 9.

Bessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors.
Reu. 14. 13.

God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. No sorrow.
Reu. 7. 17.

They shall hunger no more, No pain.
nor thirst any more, neither shall the Sun-light on them, nor any heat Reu.
7. 16.

And there shall be no night there, No night.
and they shall need no candle, nor the light of the Sun, for the Lord God
gives them light, etc. Reu. 22. 5.

There shall be no more death, No death.
neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the
first things are passed. Reu. 21. 4.

And there shall be no more curse, No curse.
but the Throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it. Reu. 22. 3.

Your joy shall no man take away from you. No fear.
Ioh. 16. 22.

That they may receive you into everlasting habitations. Luke 16. 9.

For we know that if our earthly house of this. Tabernacle be destroyed, we
have a building given of God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the
heavens. 2. Cor. 5. 1.

An inheritance immortal, Indesiezable estate of inheritance
and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you. 1. Pet 1. 4.

They strive for a corruptible, but we for an incorruptible crown. 1. Cor. 9.
25.

When the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive an incorruptible
crown of glory. 1. Pet. 5. 4.

Take inheritance of the kingdom prepared for you. Royal honors and
dignities.
Mat. 25. 34.

It is your Fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom. Luke 12. 32

They shall reign for evermore. Reu. 22. 5.

And the building of the wall was of Jasper, Inualuable wealth and riches.
and the City was pure gold like to clear glass. Reu. 21. 18.

And the foundations of the walls were garnished with all manner of precious
stones. ver. 19.

And the gates were twelve pearls. ver. 21.

The things which eye has not Inspeakable loyes and pl^asures.
seen, neither ear has heard, neither can enter into man's heart to conceive
are, which God has prepared for them that love him. 1. Cor. 2. 9.

In thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 16. 12.

They shall be satisfied with the fullness of thy house, and thou shall give
them drink out of the river of thy pleasures. Psalm. 36. 8.

For with thee is the well of life, etc. verse 9.

I know that my redeemer lives, and I shall see God in my flesh, Ioh. 19. 25.

Now we see in a glass, darkly, but then we shall see face to face. 1 Cor.
13. 12.

And they shall see his face, In the light and fruitio^ of God.
and his name shall be in their foreheads. Reu. 22. 4.

As for me, I will behold thy presence in righteousness, and when I awake up
after thy likeness, I shall be satisfied with it. Ps. 17. 16.

Father I will that they which thou have given may be where I am, that they
may behold my glory which thou have given me. Ioh. 17. 24.

These follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes. Revelation 14. 4.

We are come to the Mount Sion, and to the City of the living God, and to the
celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels. Heb. 12. 22.

And to the Congregation of the firstborn which are written in heaven etc.
verse 23.

This corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on
immortality. 1 Cor. 15. 13.

The glory of the earthly is one, and the glory of the heavenly is another.
verse 40.

There is one glory of the Sun, and another of the Moon, and another glory of
the Stars, for one star differs from another star in glory. verse 41.

So also is the resurrection of the dead, etc. verse 42.

He shall change our vile body, and make it fashioned like unto his glorious
body. Philippians 3. 21.

They that be wise shall shine as the firmament, and they that turn many to
righteousness as the stars for ever. Daniel 12. 3.

Now I know but in part, but then I shall know as I am known. 1 Cor. 13. 12.

We are come to the congregation of the firstborn which are written in
heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect
men. Heb. 12. 23.

When that which is perfect shall come, then that which is in part shall be
abolished. 1 Cor. 13. 10.

Love does never fall away, though that prophesying be abolished, or that
tongues cease, etc. ver. 8.

I pray that they all may be one, as thou O Father art in me and I in thee,
even that they may be also one in us, etc. Ioh. 17. 21.

An Hymn for the Sabbath Evening.
Return to thy rest O my soul, for the Lord has dealt graciously with thee.
Psalm. 116. 7.

In Gods Word will I rejoice; in the Lords Word will I comfort me. Psalm. 56. 10.

The words of the Lord are pure words, like as silver which from the earth is
tried, and purified seven times in the fire.

Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, they will be always praising thee.

They will go from strength to strength, and to the God of Gods appears
every one of them in Sion. Psalm. 84. 47.

I will give thanks to the Lord in the Congregation from the ground of the
heart. Psalm. 68 26.

Unto thee o God I will pay my vows, unto thee will I give thanks. Psalm. 56.
12.

Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant, and teach me thy Statutes.
Psalm 119.

An Evening Prayer for the Sabbath.
HOly, holy, holy Lord God Almighty which was, which art, and which art to
come, hallow my nature, that I may hallow thy Name. As thou impartest thy
goodness to me whereby I live and move in thee: so I beseech thee communicate to
me some measure of thy holiness, that I may live and move to thee. Let thy
Spirit of grace possess my body and soul, that the desires of my mind, and
thoughts of my heart, and words of my lips, may be holiness unto thee.
Sanctify me that I may glorify thee. And first with joy and thankfulness I
acknowledge it a special testimony of thy love, that thou have given me liberty
and means to keep a holy Sabbath unto thee, to meet in thy House, to offer
up my ioynt-prayers and thanksgiving with thy holy congregation, to confess
my sins, to profess my faith, to lay open my wants, to cheer up my self by
singing the sweet songs of Sion, to hear thy sacred Word read and Preached;
whereby my faith has been strengthened in the mysteries of salvation, my hope
established in the promises of thy Gospel, and my life set forward in a settled
course of holiness and righteousness, whereby the Kingdom of sin and Satan
is beat down and destroyed, and the Kingdom of Christ built up in me, By this
thy Word, the careless sinner is admonished, the ignorant instructed, the
presumptuous terrified, and the penitent comforted, the power of sin is
abated, the force of temptations weakened, the motions of the spirit quickened,
grace reuined, and my Election assured by these insallible Marks, and tokens
thereof set before me in holy Scriptures. Blessed be thy Name for it, this day
thy Word has dwelt with me richly in all wisdom. The dispenser of thy
mysteries has scattered many Doctrines like so many pearls among thy people.
Here thou may insert the principale Doctrine which thou have heard from thy
Pastors mouth.
Lord grant that with Mary I keep these, and all thy sayings in my heart, and
make use of them in my life, and receive comfort from them at my death. And
here I would proceed to entreat at thy hands the continuance and increase of
thy spiritual and temporal blessings upon me, but my sins lie at the door
of my conscience and affright me. My heart smites me for my failings in the
performance of the duties of thy Sabbath. My devout Meditations have bin
stefled in the womb that bare them: my prayers have not been without
distractions, my hearing without wearisomenesse, nor my almsdeeds without
grudging. Pardon dear Father my want of preparation before I come to thine
house, of intention and Zeal at thy service, and want of Meditation and
Application of those things which I heard there since I came thence. Bury I
beseech thee these slips and all other my sins, especially of this week and
day, in the night of eternal oblivion. Ease me of the burden of them, that I
may more securely repose my body and soul upon thy gracious protection, to
take their natural refreshing by sleep, whereby I may be enabled and
strengthened to do thee better service the next day in walking carefully,
diligently, conscionably, and constantly in the ways of thy commandments, and
the duties of my calling.

The close out of Scripture.
Now the very God of peace sanctify me throughout, and I pray God that my
whole spirit and soul, and body, may be kept blameless unto the coming of
the Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

THE PRACTICE of Extraordinary DEVOTION:

In the Religious observation

of Christian Feasts, as namely -- our Lords Birth. Circumcision. Epiphanie.
Resurrection. Ascension. Sending down the -- Holy Ghost.

Fasts, as namely, Ashwednesday. Good friday.


By Daniel Featly, Doctor in Divinity.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. and R. B. for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at
his shop, at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and Religious Lady the Countess of DENBIGH.
May it please your Honor:
YOur conference with me, about my conference with the Jesuits, and your
gracious acceptance of the relation and defense thereof, left in me such an
impression of the Character of your Noble and Religious disposition, that I
ever since desired the advantage of some good opportunity to testify my
dutiful respect to your Honor. The truth of God receives not only support,
but great honor from the patronage and countenance of great Personages; and
she much glories in finding so strong a Champion, even in the weaker sex.
Albeit the Sunbeams are always most bright in themselves, yet they never
appear so glorious to us as when they fall upon crystal glass, or precious
stones: In like sort Religion and virtue (the rays of divine light in the
soul) although they shine always brightly in themselves, yet they never seem
so conspicuous and resplendent, as when they receive some luster from the
subject; when Nobility of birth and mind concur; when ornaments of body
and soul meet; when eminency of grace and eminency of conditions toyne in
one, and reflect mutually each on the other. And verily if your more then or
dinarie favor and respect to the Ministers of the Gospel, and to my self in
particular, had not made this my voluntary oblation a necessary obligation to
your Ladyship; yet your constancy in the truth, and love to Sion and her
solemn and sacred assemblies, might justly challenge to your Honor the
Dedication of this part of my HAND-MAIDES Task, which is to furnish Christian
fastes and feasts with proper MEDITATIONS, HYMNS and PRAYERS. As our body
lives to the soul, by which it lives; so our soul should live to God by whom
it lives. And no otherwise is the life of the body preserved by heat and
moisture, then the life of the soul is maintained and kept by the heat of
divine love, and radical moisture of tears bedewing the heart root of a true
penitent. To kindle the one and feed the other, I Dedicate and deuote the
DEVOTION of this part of my HAND-MAIDE to your Honor. For the feasts
representing to your Religious thoughts what Christ has done for you, will
(through the blasts of Gods Spirit) inflame the heat of heavenly love in you:
and the fasts admonishing you what Christ has suffered for you, must needs
yield abundant matter to supply the springs of godly sorrow. In heaven joy
takes up all times and parts; in hell sorrow; on earth they divide. In heaven
there is joy without sorrow; in hell, sorrow without joy; on earth sorrow and
joy act their parts; fasts and feasts have their courses; mirth and mourning
their turns; and at every turn my HAND-MAIDE is ready to attend you, either
with sackcloth for the one, or the wedding garment for the other. S. Bernard
taking his ground from those words of the Prophet Joel, Rent your hearts etc.
and return to the Lord with your whole heart; thus pleasantly descanteth
thereupon: Non est ad Deum to^o cord redite, nisiscisso cord.
We cannot return unto the Lord with our whole heart unless it be broken
first with true contrition. There is no whole heart, but a rent heart; no sound
heart, but a broken; and S. Jerome according in the same note, summeth up the
whole practice of a devout soul in her private carriage with God in these
words Dolet, and de dolor gaudet.
She sorroweth after a godly manner, and rejoices for that sorrow. Godly
sorrow for sin, and holy joy for that sorrow, is the whole Devout man.
Madame, if my Meditations upon the fasting, suffering, and death of our Savior
make you sad and sorrowful, remember out of S. Jerome that you ought to be
joyful for such sorrow. If the piercing Texts of holy Seripture in the
ADMONITIONS and HYMNS appointed for the Christian fasts, divide between your
soul and spirit, and bruise if not break your heart with an holy sympathy,
remember out of S. Bernard, that There is no returning to God with a whole
heart, but by breaking it. And if you find in the whole Devotion of Fasts,
matter of pensiveness and grief; in the Christian feasts, you shall have
store of oil to make you a cheerful countenance, and revive your deaded
thoughts. The heart of a man is in continual motion; it always either
dilateth it self, or contracteth: and the hidden man of the heart in like
manner has his Systole and Diastole, (as the Anatomists speak:) his heart
continually either enlarges it self by joy, or contracteth it self by
sorrow. And no doubt, when God bespeaks our hearts for himself, he especially
expects and respects these motions thereof and affections producing them. He
will have us joy in him, and sorrow and long after him. Joy in his favor, and
sorrow in his displeasure. Joy in his promise, and sorrow at his threats. Joy
in the holy Ghost, and sorrow in our own spirits. Feast to him in a thankful
profession of his gracious goodness, and fast to him in an humble confession
of sinful wickedness. Like the Heliotropium, turn always to the Sun; open
when he sheddeth abroad his beams, and shut when he draws them in: Enlarge
our hearts with joy at his gracious presence, and sorrowfully shut and contract
them when he is, or seems to be absent from us. Thus if our joy be the
interpreter of our love to him, and our sorrow of our desire of him; if our joy
be holy, and our sorrow holy; if our feasts be feasts of Devotion, and our
fasts be fasts of contrition, our gracious Redeemer will vouchsafe to be
present at both: he will feast and fast with us. At our fasts he will weep for
our spiritual, as he did for Lazarus his corporal death. At our feasts he
will turn our water into wine, and ravish our souls with heavenly melody.
Our feasts shall be as temperate and holy as fasts, and our fasts as
comfortable as feasts. A good conscience shall be unto us a continual feast
here, and the Marriage supper of the Lamb an everlasting feast hereafter. To
both which feasts, God by his Spirit, which bids you, bring you for his
sake, who by his fasts and sorrows on earth has purchased for us everlasting
feasts and joys in heaven; In whom I rest,

Your Honor's to dispose of DANIEL FEATLY.

PART 1. SVPPART 3. The Festiuall's Devotion. The Feast of the Birth of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST.
The ground of this feast Prophecies in the old Testament. Histories in the New.
of the Incarnation of the Son of God.

PARALLEL.
Prophecy.
The Seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head.

History.
He took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham.
Heb. 2. 16.

In the fulness of time God sent his Son made of a woman. Gal. 4. 4.

The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiuer from between his
feet, until SHILOH come, Genesis 49. 10. Christ is called Shiloh from an Hebrew
word signifying to send, or to save, or secundinam, to intimate Christ's virgin
birth, quasifilium secundinoe.

When JESUS was borne in Bethlem of Judea, in the days of Herod the king, who
reigned when Christ was born, was a stranger and so the Scepter was then
departed from Judah. Mat. 2. 1.

The Lord himself shall give you a sign. Be hold a Virgin shall conceive, and
bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. Isa. 7. 14.

Joseph being raised from sleep, did as the Angel of the LORD had bidden him,
and took unto him his wife, Mat. 1. 24.

But knew her not till she had brought forth her first begotten Son, and he
called his name JESUS, ver. 25.

For unto us a child is borne, unto us a son is given. Isa. 9. 6.

The Angel said Unto you is borne this day in the City of David, a Savior,
which is CHRIST the Lord. Luke 2. 11.

But thou Bethlem EPHRATA though thou be little among the thousands of Judah,
yet out of thee shall he come forth to me, that is to be Ruler in Israel,
whose goings forth have bin from old and from everlasting. Mich. 5. 2.

When Jesus was borne in Bethlem, etc. Mat. 2. 1.

Joseph went to the City of David called Bethlem. Luke 2. 4.

And the days were accomplished that she should be delivered. verse 6.

And she brought forth her first borne son. verse 7.

For thine instruction meditate on Christ's birth. For thy comfort apply the
benefits to thy self. For thy correction examine thy new birth and life, and
quicken Thine obedience by the exhortation. Thy thankfulness by the Hymn. Thy
Zeal and Devotion by the prayer.

AN EXHORTATION TO STRIVE AND PRAY for the state of grace and regeneration.
THE ANALISIS.
We must defire and pray that we may be regenerated, and borne anew, because
by it we obtain. 1 Entrance into the Kingdom of Grace Glory.
2 Knowledge. 3 Liberty from Corruption. Reigning sin.
4 Adoption, and the title of the Sons of God. 5 The preheminency of the
first borne. 6 The spirit of supplication, and access to God with confidence.
7 The guidance of the spirit. 8 An incorruptible inheritance.

THE TEXTS.
EXcept a man be borne again, By regeneration we obtain
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Ioh. 3. 3. 1 Entrance into the
kingdom of God.


Except a man be borne of water and the spirit etc. verse 5.

Ye were darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord. 2 Knowledge
Ephesians. 5. 9.

The creature shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, 3 Liberty
from our corruption.
into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. Romans 5. 21.

Whosoever is borne of God sins not, From our reigning sin
for his seed remains in him, neither can he sin because he is borne of
God 1 Ioh. 3. 9.

Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not vnd^^ the Law, but
under grace. (...) 6. 14.

As many as received (...) them, he gave power to (...) Sons of God, even to
them that believe on his name. Ioh. 1. 12.

Which are borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God. verse 13.

That he might redeem them that are under the Law, 5 The preheminencie of the
first borne.
and that we might receive the adoption of sons. Gal. 4. 5.

And to the congregation of the firstborn. Heb. 12. 23.

Of his own will begat he us with the Word of truth, that we should be the
first fruits of his creatures. Iam. 1. 18.

We have received the spirit of Adoption whereby we cry Abba Father. 6 Spirit
of supplication
Rom 8. 11.

As many as are led by the spirit of God, (...)
they are the sons of God. Romans 8. 14.

Blessed be God the Father of (...) Lord Jesus Christ, which (...) to his
abundant mercy (...) us again unto a (...) ^pe. 1 Pet. 1. 3.

To an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in heaven for you. verse 4.

The same spirit testifies to our spirits that we are the children of God. Rom
8. 6.

If we be children then heirs, even the heirs of God, and coheirs annexed
with Christ's. verse. 17.

A Hymn for the Nativity of our Lord,
consisting of four parts, 1. God the Fathers. 2. Christ's. 3. The Prophets. 4.
The Churches.


Glory be to God on High, in earth peace, good will to men.

THe Lord even the most mighty God has spoken, The Prophet speaks in his own
person.
and called the world from the rising up of the Sun to the going down
thereof. Ps. 50. 1.

Out of Sion has God appeared in perfect beauty. verse 2.

Salvation is nigh them that fear him, that glory may dwell on the earth.
Psalm. 85. 9.

Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed each
other. verse 10.

Truth shall flourish on the earth, and righteousness has looked down from
heaven. ver. 11.

Thou art fairer then the children of men, full of grace are thy lips, because
God has blessed thee for ever. Psalm. 45. 3.

Thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity, wherefore God even thy God
has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. verse 8.

O Lord my God great are thy wondrous works which thou have done, like as be
also thy thoughts, which are to us ward, yet there is no man that orders them
unto thee. Psalm. 40. 6.

If I would declare or speak of them, 2 In the person of Christ.
they should be more in number then I am able to express. verse 7.

Sacrifice and meat offerings thou would not have, but mine ears have thou
opened. verse 8.

Burnt offerings and sacrifice for sin have thou not required, then said I, Lo
I come. verse 9.

In the volume of thy book, it is written of me that I should fulfill thy
will, O my God I am content to do it, yea thy law is in my heart. verse 10.

I have declared thy righteousness in the great congregation; Lo I will not
refrain my lips o Lord, and that thou know. verse 11.

I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart; my talking has been of
thy truth and of thy salvation. verse 12.

I will preach the law whereof the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son,
this day have I bogotten thee. Psalm. 2. 7.

He shall call me, 3 In the person of God the Father.
Thou art my Father, my God, and my strong salvation. Psalm. 89. 27.

And I will make him my first borne higher then the Kings of the earth. verse
28.

Show us thy mercy o Lord, 4 Of the Church.
and grant us thy salvation. Psalm. 85. 7.

Lord save us now! Lord send us now prosperity.

Through thy tender mercy, whereby this day spring from on high has visited us.

To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and
to guide our feet into the way of peace. Cant. Zach.

The Prayer.
Gracious Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God and Savior of man, the joy of
Angels, and dread of devils, the Jews Messiah, the Gentiles star, the hope
of the living, and resurrection of the dead, the way to all that come unto
thee, the truth to all them that know thee, and the life to all them that
believe in thee: Make good all thy glorious and gracious titles to me. Lord
protect me, Jesus save me, Christ my anointed King rule me, my anointed Priest
sanctify me, my anointed Prophet reveal unto me the secrets of thy Kingdom.
O Christ whose name is an ointment powered out, anoint me with the oil of
gladness, this day above others. This is the day which the Lord has made, I
will rejoice and be glad in it; nay I dare take the note higher, This is the day
in which the Lord was made, I will exult and triumph in it. Thou which made
all days, were this day made of a woman, and made under the Law. From all
eternity it was never heard, that eternity entered into the Calendar of time,
supreme Majesty descended into the womb; immensity was comprehended; infinity
bounded; vbiquity enclosed, and the Deity incarnated: Yet this day it was
seen; for this day the Word became flesh; God became man, and to effect this
wonderful mystery, a Virgin became a Mother. One deep calls upon another;
one miracle begets another: The Sun brings forth all other days, but
this day brought thee forth the Son of righteousness. If we set our voices,
and instruments, and heart strings to the highest strain of joy at the birth
of great Kings and Princes; What ought I to do this day, on which thou the
king of heaven wast born upon the earth. At the marriage of great Personages,
men give full scope to all manner of expressions of carnal joy even oftentimes
to the very surfeit of the senses with pleasure: How then should I be ravished
with spiritual joy at this time when heaven and earth, the divine nature and
humane were married? The contract was in heaven before all times, but the
marriage was this day consummated in the undefiled bed of the Virgin. Lord
who this day cammest down to me, draw me up to thee, and give me access with
more confidence and boldness; for now thou art become my brother and ally by
blood. The rays of thy divine Majesty will not dazzle the eyes of my soul,
they being now veiled with thy flesh. This day thou did unite thy self to
me naturally, and substantially and becamest truly flesh of my flesh, and bone
of my bone. Unite me to thee this day spiritually, and make me a true member of
thy mystical body, that I may be flesh of thy flesh, and bone of thy bone.
Lord thou did this day participate of my humane nature, make me this day
participate by grace of thy divine, as far as I am capable thereof; and
impart and communicate unto me the merit of all thy actions, and benefit of
all thy sufferings in this thy nature. O my Lord and my God who by assuming
flesh unto thy divine person, have sanctified it, and highly advanced it far
above all creatures, keep me from defiling my flesh with sinful pollutions,
or abasing and inthralling it to Satan. O Son of God, who by thy incarnate
nature, becamest the Son of Man, make me the sinful son of man, by grace
and adoption to become the Son of God. And as thou this day according to the
words of thine Angel were borne to me, be borne also in me that from hence
forth I live not, but thou in me. Let thy spirit quicken me, thy flesh nourish
me, thy wisdom guide me, thy grace sanctify me, and thy Word instruct me. Let
the holy Ghost of whom thou wast conceived beget thee in me, by the immortal
seed of thy Word. Let my faith conceive thee, my profession bring thee forth,
my love embrace thee, and Devotion entertain and continually keep thee with
me till thy second coming. So come unto me Lord Jesus, come quickly.

THE Feast of our Lord's Circumcision: OR, New-yeares days Devotion.
The ground of this Feast are The type thereof in the old The acco^plishme^t in
the new Testament.


PARALLEL.
The Type.
And Abraham circumcised Isaak when he was eight days old, as God commanded
him Genesis 21. 4.

The accomplishment.
And when the eight days were accomplished that they should circumcise the
child; his name was then called JESUS Luke 2. 21.

Meditate o devout Christian, 1 For thine instruction upon the circumcision of
thy Savior. 2 For thy comfort, apply to thy self the 3 For thy correction
examine the circumcision of thy heart, and quicken thine 1 Obedience by the
exhortation. 2 Thankfulness by the hymn. 3 Zeal and devotion by the prayer.



THE ADMONITION for New-yeeres day.
THE ANALYSIS.
we ought to desire, strive, and pray for the circumcision of the heart 1 In
respect of GOD who Desires it.a Commands it.b Loves it.c Observes it.d
Praises it.e Rewards it.f Brandeth the contrary.g
2 In respect of man's heart which needs it, 1 Because it is most corrupt and
impure. 2 Because it is most deceitful.



THE TEXTS.
a MY son give me thy heart. God desires the circumcision of the heart
Commands it.
Prou. 23. 16. vid. Ier. 4. 4.

b Circumcise the fore-skinne of your hearts. Deuteronomy. 10. 16.

O Jerusalem cleanse thy heart. Ier. 4. 4.

c Cleanse your hearts ye sinners. Loves.
James 4. 8.

Behold thou love truth in the inward parts. Psalm. 51. 6.

d God sees not as man sees, Observes.
for man looks upon the outward appearance; but God sees the heart. 1 Samuel
16. 7.

e The circumcision is of the heart in the spirit, Praises.
not in the letter, whose praise is not of man, but of God. Romans 2. 29.

In whom ye are circumcised with circumcision made without hands, by putting
off the sinful body of the flesh through the circumcision of the flesh. Col.
2. 11.

Beware of the concision: For we are the circumcision which worship God in the
spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus and have no confidence in the flesh.
Philippians 3. 3.

f The good Lord be merciful to him that prepares his whole heart to seek
the Lord his God. Rewards.
1 Chronicles. 30. 19.

He will do good to such as be good and true of heart. Psalm. 125. 4.

There is sprung up a light for the righteous, and joyful gladness to such as
be true hearted. Psalm. 99. 12.

g The eyes of the Lord behold the earth to show himself strong with them that
are of perfect heart toward him. Brandeth the contrary.
1 Chronicles. 16. 9.

Ye of uncircumcised ears and hearts, have always resisted etc. Acts. 7.

The perverse in heart are an abomination to the Lord. Pro. 11. 20.

All the imaginations of man's heart are only evil continually. Genesis 6.

The heart of man is deceitful above all things. Ier. 17. 9.

The Psalm for New-yeeres day.
OSing unto the Lord a new song; sing unto the Lord all the whole earth. Psalm.
96. 1.

Sing unto the Lord and praise his name; be telling of his salvation from day
to day. verse 2.

The heauent declare the glory of God; and the firmament shows his handy
work. Psalm. 19. 1.

One day tells another, and one night certifieth another. v. 2.

There is neither speech nor language, but their voice is heard among them.
verse 3.

Their sound is gone out into all lands, and their words unto the end of the
world. verse 4.

In them has he set a Tabernacle for the sun which comes forth as a
bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoices as a giant to run his course.
verse 5.

He appoints the Moon for certain seasons; and the Sun knows his going
down. Psalm. 104. 19.

O Lord how manifold are thy works? In wisdom have thou made them all; the
earth is full of thy riches. verse 24.

So is the great and wide, etc. verse 25. vsque ad (...).

When thou let thy breath go forth they are made; and thou shall renew the
face of the earth. verse 30.

The glorious Majesty of the Lord shall endure for ever; the Lord shall rejoice
in his works. verse 31.

Thou crownest the earth with thy goodness; and thy clouds drop fatness.
Psalm. 65. 12.

They shall drop upon the dwellings of the wilderness; and the little hills
shall rejoice of every side. verse 13.

The flocks also shall be full of sheep; the valleys also shall stand so
thick with corn that they shall laugh and sing. verse 14.

The day is thine, and the night is thine: thou have prepared the light of the
sun. Psalm. 74. 17.

Thou have set all the borders of the earth; thou have made summer and winter.
verse 18.

The Prayer for New-yeeres day.
MOst tender and compassionate Lord, now first known by thy name Jesus, who
being the true vine which yeeldest the wine that gladdeth the heart, wast
pruned this day with the sharp knife of circumcision, and bleddest for me;
have pity and compassion on me, who with weeping eyes and a bleeding heart
come unto thee, beseeching thee that those drops of blood which fell from thee
this day may satisfy for the sin of my birth, and the whole stream that
ran from all the parts of thy body in the Garden, and on the Cross may
expiate all my numberless actual sins; whether they be sins of lighter
tincture, or of a Scarlet dye: Sins like beams or sins like moates: Sins
conceived in the heart only, or sins brought forth into act: Sins in my
belief, or sins in my life: Sins once committed, or often repeated: Sins
before, or after my calling: Sins of impiety against thee, or sins of
iniquity against my neighbor, or sins of impurity against mine own flesh: for
of all these I have a great load. They are more in number then the hairs of
my head, they are a burden too heavy for me to bear. They lie upon my
conscience like so many Talents of lead, and would press me down to hell,
did not thy mercy take hold of the hand of my faith to support me in hope even
above hope. How should I hope if I think upon thy greatness? How should I not
hope if I think upon thy goodness? How should I hope if I weigh my sins? How
should I not hope, if I weigh thy merits? How should I hope, if I consider my
actions? How should I not hope, if I consider thy passions? How should I hope
if I number my transgressions? How should I not hope, if I number thy blessings
and favors toward me? How should I hope if I remember how often I have refused
grace after it has bin offered to me? How can I but hope if I remember how
often grace has bin offered me after I refused it? And still hope I will, as
long as thou reteinest thy name Jesus, which this day thou receiuedst when thou
offeredst the first fruits of thy blood for my sin, without which thou could
not have bin my Jesus. For so foul and festered were my soars, that nothing
could heal them but a bloody knife. But why should this bloody instrument be
applied to thy purest, tenderest, immaculate flesh made all of Virgins blood?
There was no superfluity to be pared off in thee; no rank* blood to be let
out. The superfluous skin was on me, yet the knife is on thee: The festered
sores were in my body, yet the Lance is in thy flesh. Thou have the pain, I
the ease; thou the smart, I the cure. O wonderful cure! O more wonderful
love! Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings as thou have ordained, so may
thou justly challenge praise, who in thy infancy made such an assay of my
redemption, and tendered the earnest of thy blood for me. Not nine days old
thou sheddest dropps of blood for me, far more precious then so many drops of
the richest balsamom to cure my wounds. Let all flesh praise thee who healedst
it by thy wounds. Eternal thanks be given to thee for thy circumcision,
whereby thou have abolished circumcision it self, and provided me an easier
remedy of original sin the sacred lauer of regeneration. Water now serves
insteede of blood, and a gentle rubbing of the flesh for cutting and wounding
it. By the circumcision of thy flesh thou have also merited for me the
fulfilling of thy fathers promise and condition of his covenant to circumcise
the foreskinne of our hearts. By this thy razor thou have fitted the tables of
my heart: now write thy laws and love in them: By receiving this seal of the
covenant in thy flesh thou have sealed to me thy care of me in thy nonage.
First o Lord I am everlastingly to praise thee for taking my flesh up on thee;
and next for leaving part of it with me as a pledge of thy love, thou bearedst
for me from thy mothers womb. In thy infancy thou bleddest for me; in thy
twelfth year, thou arguedst for me, in thy youth thou obeyedst for me, and in
thy ripe and perfect age thou sufferedst and dyedst for me. To thee therefore
as it is my bounden duty I offer the budds of my childe-hood, the blossoms of
my youth, and the fruits of my age. As thou betimes did set to the work of
my redemption, and and on those terms acceptedst the name Jesus: so let me
betimes give my name to thee, and enter into thy service: Let me bear thy
yoke even from my youth. Lord, who this day were circumcised in the flesh,
circumcise me in the heart, that I may in purity, sincerity, and uprightness
of heart walk before thee all the days of my life. Neither circumcise my
heart only but my ears, eyes, hands, heart, and feet, that no superfluity of
maliciousness nor impurity remain in me.

Now thou have renewed the face of the earth, renew this day and repair thy
decayed Image in me. Thou have begun a new year, begin in me a new
reformation. Make me I beseech thee a clean heart, and renew a right spirit
within me. The year like the serpent has cast off his old skin, and put on
a new; let me also cast off my old man, and put on the new man; and from this
day to my old age and death walk in newness of life, that I may be a fit
guest to be admitted into the new heaven, where dwells righteousness, and to
be entertained at thy table, and drink new wine with thee in thy heavenly
Kingdom for evermore Amen.

THE FEAST OF EPIPHANY OR, TWELFE-DAYE'S DEVOTION.
The ground of this feast Prophecy in the old History in the new
Testament of our Lords manifestation to the gentiles.

PARALLEL.
Prophecy.
There shall come a star out of Jacob, and a scepter shall rise out of
Israel. Number. 24. 17.

History.
Lo the star which they saw in the east went before them, till it came to the
place where the child was. Mat. 2. 9. When they saw the star, they were
exceeding glad, and went into the house, and found the child with Mary his
mother. verse 10.

The daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift, like as the rich also among
the people shall do homage before thy face with presents. Psalm. 45. 12.

They fell down and worshipped him. Mat. 2. 11.

Kings shall bring presents unto thee. Psalm. 68 29.

The kings of Arabia and Saba shall bring gifts. Psalm. 72. 10.

And opened their treasures, and presented to him etc. Mat. 2. 11.

All thy garments smell of Mirrh, Aloes, and Cassia. Psalm. 45. 9.

To him shall be given of the gould of Arabia, etc. Psalm. 72. 15.

Gold, and incense, and Mirrh. Mat. 2. 11.

For thy instruction meditate on the Prophecy History
of Christ's manifestatio^.

For thy comfort apply to thy self the benefits thereof.

For thy correction reprove thy backwardness in coming to Christ, and
honoring him with thy substance.

Quicken Thy Charity by the admonition. Thy FAITH by the Psalm. Thy Zeal and
devotion by the prayer.


THE ADMONITION for Twelfe-day.
THE ANALYSIS.
We ought freely and liberally to offer to God and his Church; because we have
in Scriptures Precepts in the old.
Commandments for it. Examples of it. Promises unto it. Threats to the
contrary.


THE TEXTS.
TAke from among you an offering to the Lord: Whosoever is of a willing heart
let him bring it, an offering of the Lord, etc. Exodus 35. 5.

Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thine
increase. Prou. 3. 9.

Be reconciled to thy brother, In the new.
and then come and offer thy gift. Mat. 5. 24.

Yea tithe Mint and Rue, etc. These things ye ought to have done, and not left
the other undone. Luke 11. 42.

Let him that is taught in the word, make him that taught him partaker of all
his goods. Gal. 6. 6.

If we have sowed to you spiritual things, is it much if we reap of you
carnal things. 2 Cor. 9. 11.

Abraham gave him Tithe of all that he had. Examples Abraham
Genesis 14. 10.

Of all that thou shall give me will I give the tenth unto thee. Jacob.
Gen, 28. 2.

Then David said behold I dwell in Cedar trees, David.
but the Ark of the Lord remains under the curtains. 2 Samuel 7. 2.

Then every one whose spirit made him willing, Israelites.
came and brought an offering to the Lord for the work of the Tabernacle.
Exodus 35. 21.

I will not come within the Tabernacle of mine house, nor climb up into my
bed. Psalm. 132 3.

I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eye lidds to slumber, nor the
Temples of my head to take any rest. verse 4.

Till I have found out a place for the Temple of the Lord; an habitation for
the mighty God of Jacob. verse 5.

I give Tithe of all that I possess. Pharisee.
Luke 18. 12.

So should thy barnes be filled with abundance, Promises
and thy presses shall burst with new wine. Prou. 3. 10.

Bring all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine
house, and prove me heerewith says the Lord. Mal. 3. 10.

He will, Threats and curses to the contrary.
multiply your seed, and increase the fruits of your benevolence. 2 Cor. 9. 10.

You looked for much, and lo it came to little; and when ye brought it home,
I did blow upon it: Why, says the Lord of Hosts? Because of mine house that is
waste, and ye run every man to his own house. Hag. 1. 9.

Therefore the heaven over you is stayed from dew, and the earth is stayed from
her fruit. verse 10.

Ye say wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. Mal. 3. 8.

Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation.
verse 9.

He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly. 2 Cor. 9. 6.

Be not deceived, God is not mocked; Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
reap. Gal. 6. 7.

A Psalm for Twelfe-day.
O Praise the Lord of heaven; praise him in the height. Psalm. 148 1.

Praise him all ye his Angels; praise him all his host. verse 2.

Praise him Sun and Moon; praise him all ye stars and light. verse 3.

Thy seat o God endures for ever; the scepter of thy kingdom is a right
scepter. Psalm 45. 7.

The Lord shall send the rod of thy power out of Sion: be thou ruler even in
the midst among thine enemies. Psalm. 110. 2.

In the day of thy power shall the people offer thee free will offerings with
an holy worship: the dew of thy birth is of the womb of the morning. verse 3.

Thy dominion shall be from one sea to the other; and from the floods unto the
worlds end. Psalm. 72. 8.

They that dwell in the wilderness shall kneel before thee: thine enemies
shall lick the dust. verse 9.

All Kings shall fall down before thee, all nations shall do thee service.
verse 11.

Thy name shall endure for ever; thy name shall remain under the sun among all
posterities, which shall be blessed through thee, and all the heathen shall
praise thee. verse 17.

Blessed be the name of thy Majesty for ever; and all the earth shall be
filled with his Majesty. Amen. Amen.

A Prayer for Twelfe-day.
FAther of lights, who did guide the heathen Sages by a star to seek
after, and find thy son, the true light which enlighteneth every man that
comes into the world; give me grace to give ear to the more sure Word of
Prophecy in the Scriptures til the day dawne, and the day star arise in my
heart. As thou calledst the wise men obseruers of the stars by a star, the
sheepheards lying abroad by an apparition in the fields, Zachary the Priest by
a Vision in the Temple, Peter the fisher by a draught of fishes, Matthew the
Publican at the receipt of custom, and Saint Austin enamourd with eloquence by
the luster of Saint Ambroses style and enticing eloquence. I beseech thee take
the advantage of such seasons, and apply such means for my unfeigned
conversion unto thee as are most agreeable to my inclination, disposition, and
condition. So will I come unto thee and fall down before thee, and present
unto thee gold, frankincense and mirrh; gold in acknowledgement of thy
kingdom, frankincense of thy Priesthood; and mirrh of thy death. I will offer
willingly and freely unto thee incense of praise and thanksgiving for thy
benefits; the mirrh of bitter tears for* my sins; and gold (according to my
ability) for the maintenance of thy service, and adorning thy Temple. Lord who
by this rich present prouidedst for the virgins wants to supply them in her
journey to Egypt, extend thy goodness to me in all necessities; and establish
my faith and confidence in thee in all dangers and difficulties whatsoever, For
thou have promised never to leave nor forsake them that trust in thee. The
stony rock shall yield a fountain of water; and a dry cr^re a spring of oil:
the loaves shall multiply by spending; nay, the Clouds shall be Storehouses of
Bread, and the wind serve in Foul, and the Ravens bring in provision; the
Fishes pay tribute of money, and Heathen Sages from the East, (by the conduct
of a Star) bring in costly presents and New yeeres-gifts before thy children
shall want their necessary maintenance or sustenance.

Blessed Babe, who at thy birth did presage thy death, and assayedst the
Cross in thy Cratch, and being excluded (as it were) from all men, wast
constrained to take up thy lodging with beasts in a Stable, teach me what I am
to look for in this world: If it give me course, and base, and beastly
entertainment, it gave thee worse; and the servant is not to expect better
respect then the Master. O King of glory, who had no Palace in this world,
but an Inn; no Chamber of Presence, but a Stable; no Tapestry, but Straw; no
Chair of estate, but a Cratch; no Scepter, but a Reed; and no Crown, but a
wreath of thorns; work in me an holy high-mindednesse to despise this world
which so despised thee. Make the worldly greatness seem small, honor base,
estimation vile, and pomp vain unto me. Let not the glittering show of gold,
silver, or precious stones, or the luster of eminent conditions dazell the eyes
of my mind, but let the beams of this star, light and guide me rather to
honor thee in a Stable, then leave thee to follow Herod in his Palace upon any
hopes whatsoever. The wise men, after they had seen thee, never returned back
to Herod, but went another way to their own home: so let me, after thou have
called me to the knowledge of the truth, and redeemed me from my vain
conuersations, never return back to my worldly courses, but take another way
to my true home in heaven. The wise men when they saw thy star in the air
were exceeding glad; I see thy star in the Scriptures, nay I see the bright
morning star in my heart; O let my joy exceed theirs as my knowledge does.
The star still lighted them till they came to the place where thou layest,
and entered into thy bedchamber: So o Lord let the light of faith guide me all
the way of this life even till I come to see thee, not in a stable on earth
strawed with litter and dung, but in a palace in heaven built with Saphyrs,
and founded upon pearls; not receiving a present of gold from men, but wearing
a crown of gold put upon thee by thy Father; not having a quantity of
frankincense or mirrh in thy hand, but a golden censor full of sweet odours
which are the prayers of Saints. Among which I beseech thee offer up the
prayers of me a sinner, that I may be a Saint after thou have purged me from
all my fill thynesse in the royal bath of thy blood Amen.

THE FEAST OF OUR LORD'S RESVRRECTION, OR, Easter-dayes Devotion.
The ground of this Feast
In the old Testament Prophecies. Types.
In the new, the History of our Lords rising from the dead.


PARALLEL.
Prophecy.
Thou shall not leave my soul in hell or (grave) nor suffer thine holy One to
see corruption, Psalm. 16. 11.

He spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, that his soul should not be left in
grave, neither his flesh see corruption, Acts 2. 31.

History.
The Angel said to the women Fear ye not, for I know that ye seek Jesus
that was crucified. Mat. 28. 5.

He is not here for he is risen, as he said come see the place where the Lord
lay. verse 6.

Thy dead men shall live: with my body shall they rise: The Prophet speaks in
the person of Christ.
Awake and sing ye that dwell in dust, for thy dew is the dew of herbs, and
the earth shall cast out her dead. Isa. 26. 19.

And the graus did open themselves, and many bodies of the Saints which slept,
arose. Mat. 27* 52.

And came out of their graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy
City, and appeared to many. v. 53.

O death I will be thy death: o grave I will be thy destruction. Hos. 13. 14.

Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more; death has no more dominion
over him. Romans 6. 9.

Death is swallowed up into victory. 1. Cor. 11. 14.

O Death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? ver. 55.

Type.
And the Priest shall shake the sheafe of the first fruits before the Lord,
that it may be acceptable to you the morrow after the Sabbath, Leu. 23. 11.

Accomplishment.
Now in the end of the Sabbath, when the first day of the week began to dawn,
MARY MAGDALEN came to see the Sepulcher Mat. 28.

And behold there was a great Earthquake: for the Angel of the Lord descended
from heaven, and came and rolled away the stone from the door and sat upon it,
etc. ver. 2.

He is not here, for he is risen, etc. 6.

Christ is risen from the dead, the first fruits of them that sleep, 1. Cor.
11. 20.

The first fruits is Christ, ver. 23.

And Jonah was in the belly of the Fish three days and three nights, Ion. 1.
17.

The Son of man, three days and three nights in the heart of the earth; Mat.
12. 4.

The third day, God spoke unto the Fish, and it cast out Jonah on the dry
land. Ion: 2. 10.

Destroy this temple, and in three days I will rear it up again. Ioh. 2. 19.

He spoke of the temple of his body; ver. 21.

As soon as he was risen from the dead, his disciples remembered, and believed
the Scriptures, and the word which he spoke unto them. ver. 22.

For thine instruction meditate on the Prophecy. Types. Story.
of Christ's resurrection

For thy comfort apply to thy self the benefit thereof.

For thy correction examine thy spiritual resurrection from dead works.

Quicken Thy faith by the Hymn. Thy repentance by the exhortation. Thy Zeal
and Devotion by the prayer ensuing.


An Hymn for Easter day.
OPen me the gates of righteousness, that I may go into them, and give
thanks unto the Lord. Psalm. 119. 19.

This is the gate of the Lord; the righteous shall enter into it. verse 20.

I will thank thee, for thou have heard me, and art become my salvation. verse
21.

Thou will show me the paths of life, in thy presence is the fullness of joy:
and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 16. 11.

The same stone which the builders refused, is become the head Stone in the
corner. v. 22

This is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes. v. 23

This is the day which the Lord has made; we will rejoice and be glad in it.
ver. 24.

Why do the heathen rage continually, and the people imagine a vain thing.
Psalm. 2. 1.

Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure saying,

Even I have set my king upon Zion mine holy Mountain. verse 5. 6.

The Lord upon thy right hand shall wound even kings in the day of his wrath.
Ps. 110. 5.

He shall judge among the heathen; he shall fill their places with the dead
bodies, and smite in sunder heads over diverse countries. verse 6.

He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall he lift up his
head. verse 7:

Be wise now therefore o ye kings; be learned ye that are judges of the
earth. Ps. 2. 10.

Serve the Lord with fear; and rejoice unto him with reverence. verse 11.

Kiss the son least he be angry, and so ye perish from the right way: if
his wrath be kindled, yea but a little, blessed are all they that put their
trust in him. verse 12.

THE ADMONITION for Easter Day.
THE ANALYSIS.
We must pray and strive for repentance from dead works and newnes of life
because a 1. It is God's commandment. b 2. It is the Saint's practice. c 3. It
is the evidence of our new birth. d 4. It is the end of our resurrection. e 5.
It is the end of our redemption. f 6. It obtains remission of sins. g 7. It
auoideth GOD'S temporal judgments. h 8. It is the only means to shun eternal
death. i 9. It makes us blessed even in this life.


THE TEXTS.
a CAst off concerning the conversation in times past that old man which is
corrupt through deceaueable lusts. Ephesians. 4. 24.

And be renewed in the spirit of your minds. verse 23.

And put on the new man which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness ver. 24.

b Ye have put of the old man with his works. Colos. 3 9.

And have put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of
him that created him. verse 10.

c Being borne anew, not of mortal seed, but of immortal 1 Pet. 12. 2.

As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby. 1 Pet. 2. 2.

New wine must be put into new bottells. Mat. 9. 17.

d As Christ was raised from the dead to the glory of the father: So also we
should walk in newness of life. Romans 6. 4.

e We are delivered from the Law being dead to it, wherewith we were holden
that we should serve in newness of spirit. Romans 7. 6.

Purge out the old leven, that ye may be a new lump. 1 Cor. 5. 7

If any man be in Christ let him be a new creature. Old things are passed
away; behold all things are become new. 1 Cor. 5. 17.

In Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a
new creature. Gal. 6. 15.

According to his mercy he has saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and
renewing of the holy Ghost. Tit. 3. 5.

f Return and live. Eze. 19.

Cease to do evil, learn to do well, etc. Isa. 1. 16.

Though your sins were as crimson they shall be made white as snow. verse 18.

g Unless ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Luke 12. 3.

h Repent and do the first works. Reu. 2. 5. Repentance unto life. Acts 11.
18.

i Blessed is he that has part in the first resurrection, for the second death
shall have no power over him. Reu. 10. 5.

A Prayer for Easter Day.
GLorious Son of righteousness who this morning did prevent the dawning of
the day, by sending forth the beams of thy glorified body out of the pit^ of
darkness and A shadow of death, shine upon my soul by the light of thy grace.
Inlighten my dark apprehension of the mysteries of thy resurrection: Inflame
my cold affections and revive my heart even deaded with pensive thoughts upon
thy bitter passion. O how did the surest ground of faith shake the fastest
Anchor of hope, loosen' at the earthquake at thy death? what smiting together of
knees, what wringing of hands, what knocking of breasts, what fainting of
hearts, what hanging down of heads, were there at giving up of the Ghost when
thy head hung down on the Cross? with thee the faith, with thee the hope,
with thee the joy, with thee the life of thy dearest Disciples expired. What
should or could the prisoners of death ever expect, when they saw him, whom
they thought to have bin their redeemer, the Lord of life arrested by death,
and kept close prisoner in the grave so long? O death how sharp was then thy
sting? O grave how fearful was thy seeming victory? But blessed be the
angel which removed the stone, and thereby made way that the stone which the
builders refused might be preferred to be the head stone in the corner.
Blessed be the right hand of thy Father, who in raising thee out of the grave,
raised our hope out of the dust. For where is our hope? Our hope is even in
thee o Christ, and thy resurrection. Thou art the life and the resurrection of
all that believe in thee. Death (like a Hornet) by stinging thee has lost his
sting, and now may make a buzzing noise to affright me; but can thrust out no
sting to hurt me. The grave by thy lying in it is turned to a bed, and a
withdrawing room to retire my self a while, to put off this ragged flesh, and
attire my self with robes of glory. Now I dare insult over death and hell,
since thy triumph over them. O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy
victory? O my soul where is all thy comfort? If in this life, thou art most
miserable; if thy life be hid with Christ in God, then when Christ which is
thy life shall appear, thou shall also appear in glory. What though I mourn
here? I shall be comforted. What though I fast here? I shall be satisfied.
What though I am disgraced here? I shall be glorified. What though I am here
trampled under feet? I shall there be crowned. What though my flesh be eaten
with worms, and these worms turned into dust, and that dust blowed by the
wind over the face of the earth? Yet after thou turnedst man to destruction;
again thou say: Come again ye children of men, I know thou my Redeemer
live, and shall stand up at the last day, and I shall see them in my flesh
with these eyes, and no other. Lord establish this belief in me: beat down
all the forts that natural reason reareth against it. Grant that I may every
day more and more feel as the power of thy birth in my regeneration, and of
thy death in my mortification; so also of thy resurrection in my rising from
the death of sin to the life of Grace. Lord thou restoredst life to three
men: to one in his bed, to another on the bear, to the third in the grave.
They who conceive sin in their hearts, are like him that was dead in his bed;
they who bring it forth into action, are like him that was brought forth dead
on his bear; but they that continue in sin and all impurity and putrify in
the custom thereof, are like him that was four days dead and stanke in the
grave. Such a one, or worse am I; for I have layen not four days, but scores
of years in this loathsome grave, and am even devoured of the worm of
conscience. Yet Lord this day of thy glorious resurrection, say unto me as
thou did to him, Come forth, awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the
dead, and I will give thee light. Make this day of thy resurrection from the
death of nature, the day of my rising from the death of sin and corruption
first to the life of grace, and after to the life of glory Amen.

THE FEAST OF OUR LORD'S ASCENSION OR, Holy-Thurs-dayes Devotion.
The ground of this Feast In the old Testament Prophecies. Types.
In the new, the History of our Saviors going in triumph into Heaven.


PARALLEL.
Prophecy.
Thou have ascended up on high, thou have led captivity captive, Psalm. 68.
18.

History.
And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld him he was taken up,
Act. 1. 9.

He rod upon the Che^ubims, and did fly; yea he did fly upon the wings of
the wind, Psa. 18. 10.

For a Clowd took him out of their sight, Act. 1. 9.

Sit thou on my right hand, Psalm. 110. 1.

He was carried up into heaven, and he sat on the right hand of God. Mar. 16.
19.

Type.
Eliah was taken up with a fiery Charet. 2. King. 2. 11.

Accomplishment.
While he blessed them he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven,
Luke 24. 51.

For thine instruction meditate upon Prophecy. Types. Story.
of Christ's Ascension.

For thy comfort apply the benefit thereof to thy self.

For thy correction examine thy desires and affections, and check thy
earthlinesse and worldliness.

Thy faith and joy by the Psalm. Thy love and hope by the exhortation. Thy
Zeal and Devotion by the prayer ensuing.


The Hymn for Ascension-day.
Wherein all parts of Christ his glorious return in triumph into heaven, are
prophetically expressed: as 1 His liftinga up himself from the earth. 2 The
clouds receiuingb and carrying him. 3 The Angelsc meeting him. 4 The heauensd
opening to him. 5 God the Father's enthronizing him into his everlasting
kingdom.


GOD is gone up with a merry noise; and the Lord in the sound of the Trumpe,
Psalm. 47. 5.

Be thou exalted Lord in thine own strength; So will we sing and praise thy
power, Psalm 21. 13.

Set up thy self, o God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all the earth.
Ps. 108. 5

b O sing unto God; sing praises unto his Name: magnify him that rides upon
the heavens (or clouds) by his name IAH, and rejoice before him, Psalm. 68. 4.

In thy Majesty ride prosperously because of truth, meeknes, and righteousness;
and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things. Psalm. 45. 4.

The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels: the Lord
is among them as in Sinai in the holy place, Psalm. 68. 17.

d Lift up your heads, o ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors,
and the King of glory shall come in, Psalm. 24. 7.

Who is the King of glory? It is the Lord strong and mighty, even the Lord
mighty in battle. ver. 8.

Lift up your heads, o ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and
the King of glory shall come in. ver. 9.

Who is the King of glory? Even the Lord of Hosts; he is the King of glory.
ver. 10.

e I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion, Psalm. 2. 6.

Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth, for thy possession. ver. 8.

The Lord shall send the rod of thy power out of Sion; be thou Ruler in the
midst among thine enemies.

Thou shall bruise them with a rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces like a
Potters vessel.

The exhortation for Ascension DAY.
We ought to set our affections on things above; 1 Because there is the source
of our Soul which is of a heavenly and divine nature. 2 Because there is our
Head. 3 Because there is the nobler and better part of our body. 4 Because
there is our abiding City. 5 Because there is our mansion house. 6 Because
there is our hope and inheritance. 7 Because there are no true joys nor
durable riches but there.


GOD created man in his own Image, Genesis 1. 27. In heaven is,


God formed him of the dust of the earth, 1 The source of our souls created
according to God's Image.
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, Genesis

Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was. Eccles. 12. 7.

The spirit-returneth to God that gave it. Ibid.

We had fathers of our flesh which corrected us; shall we not be much more in
subjection to the Father of spirits, and live. Heb. 12. 9.

Exceeding great and precious promises are given to us, 2 Our heads
that by these we might be partakers of the divine nature having escaped the
corruption that is in the world. 2 Pet. 1. 4.

He was carried up into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God. Mat. 16. 19.

Whom the heavens must contain. Acts 3. 21.

I saw the ^eauen opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of
the Father. Acts 7. 56.

I go out of the world to the Father. Ioh. 13. 1.

Go to my Father. Ioh. 15. 10.

Our conversation is in heaven from whence also we look for the Savior the
Lord Jesus. Phil. 3. 20.

If ye be risen with Christ seek the things that are above where Christ sits
on the right hand of God. Col. 3. 1.

Set your affections on things that are above, and not on things on the earth.
ver. 3.

Ye are come to the general assembly, 3 The nobler parts of the Church.
and Church of the firstborn which are written in heaven, and to the spirits
of just men-made perfect. Hebrews 12. 23.

Now ye are no more strangers and forreiners, 4 Our country.
but fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God. Ephesians 2.
19.

For here we have no continuing City, but we seek one to come. Heb. 13. 23.

For this we groan earnestly desiring to be clothed with our house, 1. Cor.
5. 2.

Arise and depart for this is no rest for you, Mic. 2. 10.

They confessed that they were strangers, and sought a City whose builder and
maker is God, Heb. 11. 13.

I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts. 1. Pet.
2. 11.

I am a stranger and soiournet as all my fathers were, Ps. 39. 14.

In my Fathers house there are many mansions; 5 Our mansion house.
I go to prepare a place for you, Io. 14. 2.

If our hope were in this life only, 6 Hope and inheritance
we were of all men most miserable, 1. Cor.

To an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that sadeth not away,
reserved in heaven for you, 1. Pet. 1. 4.

Lay up your treasure in heaven, etc. Mat. 6. 19.

Look not on things which are seen, but on things which are not seen; for the
things etc. 2. Cor. 4. 18.

Vanity of vanities, etc, Eccles. 1. 2.

Whom have I in heaven but thee? etc. Psalm. 73. 24.

The Prayer for Ascension Day.
GLorious and gracious Redeemer, Lord Jesus Christ, who humbledst thy self,
and did become obedient to death, even the death of the Cross, and therefore
thy Father highly exalted thee above the grave in the resurrection, above the
earth in thy Ascension, above the heavens in thy session at his right hand, and
then he gave thee a name above al names that at the name of Iaesus every knee
shall bow, both of things in heaven, and in earth, and of things under the
earth. I humbly bow the knees not only of my body, but of my heart and soul
unto thee. I never hear of thee, or remember; never think, or speak of thee
but with greatest reverence, and love that heart can conceive, or tongue
express. I admire the mystery of thine incarnation; I tremble at the horror of
thy passion; I adore the power of thy resurrection; and I triumph in the glory
of thine Ascension. My God and my Lord make me wholly thine as thou art mine.
Thy birth was my life; thy life my merit; thy death my ransom; thy
resurrection my delivery out of the prison of death (when thy father laid thee
up for my debt) thy Ascension my assurance and takingp ossessio^ of an
incorruptible and undefiled inheritance reserved in the heavens. O Savior if
thou had not been born, I had never been borne anew, if thou had not dyed
for my sins I had dyed in my sins: If thou had not risen from the dead, my
soul might have bin with thee in Paradise, but my body should not have rested
in hope, neither should I have ever seen God in my flesh: if thou had not
ascended I might have bin freed from hell, but I should never have had a place
prepared for me in heaven. O Lord when thou came to us on earth, John was
thy forerunner, but thou were my forerunner in thy return into heaven. John
prepared the way before thee on earth: but thou preparedst away before me into
heaven. That way and those regions in the air which Lucifer defiled and cursed
by his fall through them from heaven thou have cleansed and blessed by the
marching tryumphantly through them into heaven. O blessed Creator and repairer
of nature, in thee not only all the kindreds of the earth, but all creatures
under the cope of heaven are blessed, and therefore they sigh and groan
together with us; desiring fervently thy second coming. The earth was blessed
and sanctified by thy birth, and thy treading upon it; The water, by thy
descending into the river Jordan at thy baptism, and walking on the Seas. Now
the air, likewise, and fire expected an honor and a blessing from thee, and
both received it: the air by thy ascending through it; the fire by sending
down the Holy Ghost in the likeness of fiery Cloven Tonguer. O Lord my
Redeemer, how excellent is thy Name in all the world!

Creatures without voice praise thee, as the heavens and earth: without
understanding know thee, as the star that lighted the Sages to thee: without
will obey thee, as winds and Seas: without ears hearken to thee, as the
figtree which thou cursedst, and it withered: without natural affection bemoan
thee, as the stones that claue, the vale that rent, the earth that quaked at
thy passion: without will voluntarily offer thee service, the Foale to bear
thee, the Dove to manifest thee, the Fish to discharge thee, the Sun to hide
thine ignominy among men, and here the cloud to veil thee from mortal eye,
and transport thee into heaven. O Lord my Redeemer how excellent is thy name in all the world, who make the light thy garment, the Angel thy messenger, the
air thy race, the clouds thy chariot, and flyest upon the wings of the wind
into heaven? Thou art ascended upon high, thou have led captivity captive. In
thy Passion thou wast Death's death, and killedst it. In thy burial thou wast
the Graue's grave and destroyedst destruction; Victoria^ vicisti.
and now in thy Ascension thou conquerdst conquest it self, and ledst
captivity captive, and receiuedst gifts for men, for the whole Church and every
Belieuer. O Lord bestow these gifts liberally upon me, that I may grow in
grace, and the knowledge and love of thee. This day thou liftedst up thy body
from the earth; lift up my heart from it. This day thou transportedst thy body
to heaven; transport my desires thither. This day thou setledst thy self in
thy Throne at the right hand of thy Father, fix my thoughts, and settle mine
affections on thee in heaven, and on heaven for thee. Amen.

The Feast of the coming down of the Holy Ghost, or, Whitsun-daye's Devotion.
The ground of this Feast In the old Testament Prophecies. Types.
In the new, the Promises, Performance of sending the holy Spirit.



PARALLEL.
Prophecy.
I will power out of my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and daughters
shall prophecy, etc. Joel 2. 28.

History.
These are not drunken as ye suppose, Act. 2. 15. This is that which was spoken
by the Prophet, Joel ver. 16.

And it shall come to pass in the last days that I will power out my Spirit
upon all flesh, ver. 17.

Type.
He took up the mantell of Eliah that fell from him, and when the sons of the
Prophets saw him, they said, The Spirit of Eliah does rest on Elishah, 2. King.
13. 5.

Accomplishment.
And they were filled with the Holy Ghost, etc. Acts 2. 4.

God sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, Gal. 4. 6.

Promise.
Ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost within these few days. Acts 1. 5.

Performance.
They were filled with the holy Ghost, etc. Acts 2. 4.

He shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire. Mat. 3. 11.

There appeared to them cloue^ tongs like fire and it fate upon each of them
Acts 2. 3.

These signs shall shall follow them that believe, They shall speak with new
tongues. Mar. 16. 17.

And they began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance.
Act. 2. 4

THE HYMN FOR Whitsunday.
Wherein is expressed the holy Ghost's a 1 Sending. b 2 Coming down. 3
Works. In general c Creation. d Renouation.
In special. e Inhabitation. f Inspiring Ministers. Inclining the minds and
wills of the people.




O Lord how manifold are thy works? In wisdom have thou made them all, the
earth is full of thy riches. Psalm. 104. 24.

So is the great and wide sea also, wherein are things creeping innun^erable'
both small and great beasts. verse 25.

These wait all upon thee, and thou give them their meat in due season.
verse 27.

a Thou sendest forth thy Spirit: they are c created, and thou d renewest the
face of the earth. verse 30.

Thou have asended up on high: thou have led captivity captive, and received
gifts for men: yea even for the rebellious, that the Lord God might ed well
among them. Psalm. 68. 18.

He bowed the heavens and b came down. Psalm 18. 9.

He rod upon the Cherubins and did fly: he did even fly upon the wings of
the b wind. verse. 10.

The Lord gave the Word: great f was the company of the Preachers or of them
that published it Psalm. 68. 11.

The people shall come g willingly in the day of thy power (or at the time of
thy Assemblies) in the bewty of holiness from the womb of the morning: thou
have the dew of thy youth. Psalm. 110. 3.

AN EXHORTATION to obey the motions of God's holy Spirit.
THE ANALYSIS.
The motives to obey the motions of the Spirit are 1 Gods strict Commandment.
2 The Saints continual practice. 3 The Spirit's excellency, who is the 1
Fountain of grace. 2 Lord of life. 3 Comforter of the Elect. 4 Teacher of the
Church.
4 The benefits of obeying them. 5 The danger of resisting them.


Walk in the Spirit. Gal. 5. 16. If we live in the Spirit, Precepts of God.
let us walk in the Spirit. verse 23.

Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed to the day of
redemption. Ephesians. 4. 30.

Quench not the Spirit of God. 1 These. 5. 19.

Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist
the holy Ghost.

There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit. Romans 8. 1.

That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, 2 Practice of
Saints.
who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. verse 4.

Ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if the Spirit of God dwell in you.
verse 9.

As many as are led by the spirit of God are the Sons of God. Reasons.
verse 14.

Declared to be the Son of God according to the Spirit of Holiness.
Holiness. Romans 1. 4.

The Law of the Spirit of Life.
Life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of sin, and of death.
Romans 8. 2.

Ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again to fear; but the Spirit of
Liberty.
Adoption whereby we cry Abba Father. verse 15.

They despite the Spirit of Grace.
Grace Heb. 10. 29.

The Spirit makes Prayer.
Intercession for us with sighs and groans that cannot be expressed. Romans 9.
29.

To one is given the Spirit of the Word of Wisdom
Wisdom; to another the Word of Knowledge by the same Spirit, 1 Corinthians
12. 8.

All these works one and the same Spirit. verse 11.

The Father of Glory give unto us the Spirit of Wisdom and revelation in the
Knowledge of him. Ephesians. 1. 17.

The Spirit of Glory.
Glory and of GOD rests in us. 1 Peter 4. 14.

When the Spirit of Truth.
Truth is come, he will lead you into all Truth. Ioh. 16. 13.

Now the Lord is that Spirit; and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty. 1 Corinthians 3. 17.

He that sows to the Spirit, Benefits of obeying the Spirit.
shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. Gal. 6. 8.

Walk in the Spirit and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. Gal. 5.
16.

The fruits of the Spirit are love, peace, joy, etc. verse 17.

If ye be led by the Spirit ye are not under the Law. verse 18.

Whosoever speaks against the holy Ghost, Danger of resisting.
it shall not be forgiven him neither in this world, nor in the world to come.
Mat. 12. 32.

Of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy who has trodden
under foot the Son of GOD, and has accounted the blood of the covenant
(wherewith he was sanctified) an unholy thing, and has done despite to the
Spirit of God. Hebrews 10. 29.

A Prayer for Whit sunday.
INcomprehe^sible Spirit the third Person in the blessed and glorious Trinity,
who after the Father had manifested himself to the world in the works of
Creation, and the Son in the works of Redemption, finished in the flesh:
did manifest thy self on this day in a wonderful manner by the sound of a
rushing wind, and the light of fiery tongues. Manifest thy self most
powerfully and gloriously in the universal Church, by enlarging her bounds,
and making up her breaches and hallowing her Assemblies, and furnishing her
Pastors, and knitting the hearts of all her members in true love the bond of
perfection. Perfect the work of sanctification in all thine Elect; manifest thy
self also graciously this day, and declare thy gifts in the tongues of the
Preachers, and ears of the hearers, and the hearts of all the Congregation.
Direct the mouths of the Preachers, that they may skilfully sow the Seed,
and open the ears, and mollify the hearts of the hearers, that they may
receive it profitably, and bring forth the fruits of the Spirit abundantly,
which are love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance, etc. O Eternal and infinite holy Ghost, the love of the
Father and the Son, who did descend upon our Savior in the likeness of
a Dove without gall, purge out of my conscience all gall of malice and
bitterness, and grant that with meekness I may receive the ingraffed Word
which is able to save my soul. O holiest Spirit, eternal breath of the Father
and the Son, and former of the Word in the womb, who came with a sound, come
down upon me in the sound of thy Word Preached; though not in the extraordinary
gifts of Prophecy, tongues, and healing, yet in the ordinary graces of faith,
hope, and charity, the Spirit of supplication and Prayer, of wisdom and
spiritual understanding, of power and ghostly comfort. O heavenly Spirit
proceeding from the Father and the Son, who descendedst from heaven like a
mighty rushing wind, throw me down to the ground in humility, and prostrate
my heart and soul before thee: Beat down all strong holds of carnal
imaginations and worldly thoughts resisting thy grace. Chase away all clouds
of error out of my understanding: clear my will of all foggs of noisome
desires; cool and refresh me in the heat of persecution, fill the sails of
my affections, and drive me speedily into the fair haven where I would be. O
divine fire burning continually in the hearts of the faithful, and consuming
all our spiritual sacrifices, who this day did descend and appear in the
likeness of fiery tongues, be a fire in my heart and tongue, that I may be
fervent in my Meditations and Prayers, and Zealous in the profession and
defense of thy Truth. Inlighten the darkness of my understanding, inflame the
coldness of my affections, purge out the dross of my corruptions, direct me
in all the affairs of this life, assist me in all the exercises of Devotion,
strengthen me in all the assaults of temptation, comfort me in all the miseries
and afflictions, seal all thy gracious promises of thy Gospel unto me, and
seal me to the day of redemption. So be it. Amen.

Into my mind descend o Dove
Purge gall clean out of me,
With silver wings raise me above
My Savior Christ to see.
PART 1. SVPPART. 4. The Christian FAST'S Devotion.
Of FAST'S in general.
There is a 3-old fast 1 Fast from sin. 2 Fast for sin. 3 Fast against sin.


THe fast from sin ought to be perpetual. The fast for sin is
extraordinary, upon special occasions to auert some dreadful judgment, or
avoid some imminent danger. The fasts against sin ought to be more frequent,
and according to the customs of the ancient Church; and the present practice
of the Church of England,

They are -- Weekly on the Fridaies. Monthly, on the Holyday Eeues. Quarterly,
in the Ember weeks. Yearly in the Lent.


THe Doctrine of fasting has met with errors and superstitions on both hands:
Some ascribing too much to it, and placing the immediate and principal worship
of God in it: some ascribing too little, and making it no matter of Religion at
all: Some superstitiously observing; and others out of a contrary superstition
scrupulously declining the observation of all Fasts appointed by the Church. To
steer the judgment in a middle course between these rocks on both sides,
conceive thus of the nature of Religious acts, the several kinds of Fasts,
and the use thereof.

A Religious act or work may be taken:

1 In a larger sense for any work commanded by Christian Religion, in which
sense all the duties of the second Table may be called Religious acts, or
works, as well as the first. 2 In a more restrained acception, for such works
and acts in which Religion properly taken for the worship of God consists: And
these are of two sorts: 1 Principal as Believing in God, Praying and the like
2 Accessarie serving as helps or preparations to the princi -- pall as,
Watching, Fasting and the like.


FAsting is not to be esteemed such an act of religion, as wherein principally
and immediately we worship God; for the Kingdom of God (as the Apostle
reaches) consists not in meats and drinks, neither in feasting or fasting:
and Tertullian's censure is obseruable. Qui Deum per escas colit prope est vt
Deum ventrem habeat.
He that worshippeth God by meats, or places worship in them, is not far
off from making his belly his god; yet it may be truly called not only a good
work, but also a religious, i. e. a work commanded by religion, and tending to
religion, as a preparation and help thereunto.

(...) to two- 1 The Spiritual or metaphorical fast of the soul, which is
the abstinence from the forbidden fruit of sin; and this Fast although it may
truly be so termed, in regard of the restraint of our carnal appetites, which
as greedily desire sinful objects, as our stomach does meat, yet it is indeed
a Feast, as Solomon calls it, A good conscience is a continual Feast. 2
Corporal, when we abstain from bodily sustenance: and this is also 2 fold 1
Constrained and inuoluntary, when Either we want meat to our stomach, as in
famine. Or stomach to our meat; as in sickness.
2 Voluntary, undertaken deliberately, when we abstain from meat, though we
could and might eat: and this is 3 fold 1 Medicinal, when we forbear either
certain meats* or all meat for a while, for the preventing of sickness, or
recovering health. 2 Civil, when some kind of meat is forborne for the
profit of the Commonwealth. 3 Religious, when our abstinence is for the
mortifying of our flesh, and fitting and preparing us to religious duties. This
also is either 1 Private, in which every man's conscience guided by Scripture
and discretion must be his law. 2 Public, for which there must be a command
from lawful authority. These public fasts are either- 1 Extraordinary, as in
time of war, plague or the like. 2 Ordinary, as the holiday Eues, Embers, an^
Lent Fasts.






Place this first and second Table of Fasting in M btween fol. 260 and 261.

Of the Lent Fast.
THe Lent Fast is a mixed constitution; partly civil, appointed by the King or
State, to preserve young cattle, spend fish, and encourage fishermen: partly
Ecclesiastical ordered by the Church for religious ends. As those that have a
care of their bodily health vsualy purge in the Spring: so the Church of God
has thought fit to prescribe this physic of fasting for the soul in the same
season of the year, for these ends especially,

1. To beat down the flesh at that season when (by reason of the heat of the
blood) it usually waxes most wanton. The ancient Romans used to hallow a
spring to God, Ver sacrum facere.
and the Primitive Church disdaining to be outstripped by the heathen in any
thing that sauored of Devotion, likewise consecrated the spring to the more
strickt Service of God by fasting and prayer then at other times. 2. To
conform the members to the Head. In this season of the year our Lord's Agony
and bitter Passion were endured, and are remembered: and therefore most fit it
is that by fasting, watching, and tears, we express true remorse and sorrow
for those our sins which were the causes of those his sufferings. Godfrey of
Bulloigne after he had conquered the holy land, and regained it from the
Saracens, yet would never be crowned there, saying That it was not fit that
the servant should were a crown of gold there where the Lord and Master ware a
crown of thorns. Neither would Christ's dearest Spowse at that time of the
year crown her self with rose-budds in which Christ ware that crown of
thorns: nor lie in beds of down when he lay on the hard bed of his Cross:
nor fare deliciously, or drink liberally when he had nothing but gall given
him to eat, and viniger to drink.

3 To prepare us to the celebration of the Feast of Easter, and the
participation of the Blessed Sacrament. What time fitter to call our selves to
an account for the whole year, then at, or before the time which the Church
has appointed, and is in it self most proper for the most general and
solemn communion of the Lords Body and Blood. 4 To celebrate, and (as far
as we are able (to imitate our Lord's fast of forty days, at least by some
kind of abstinence during that whole time to imprint that miraculous fast of
our Savior for us deeper in our memories.
Question.
Does the Church of England keep the Lent fast as religious, or a mere civil
constitution?

Answer.
Not as a mere civil, but also a religious sanction: for (as it appears in
the book of Common Prayer) special Collects, Epistles, and Gospells, with a
Commination are appointed for diverse days in Lent.

Objection.
Is it not Popery to keep strictly the Lent fast as a religious institution.
An. It is not: for First, The religious observation of Lent is far more
ancient then popery. There are such evident prints and footsteps of it in the
Authentical Records of the Primitive Church, that he is altogether ignorant in
the writings of the Fathers, or blind that sees them not.

Secondly, we keep not Lent as the Papists do, but as the ancient Christians
did before Popery was hatched. As in other things: so in this we purge away the
dross* we retain the gold; we remove the abuse; we preserve the use. 1.
We place not Religion, or the substance of Gods worship in abstaining from any
kind of meat. 2. We renounce all merit by fasting. 3. We abstain not from
flesh as being any way conceived by us to be more unholy then fish. 4. We do
not equalize humane constitutions Ecclesiastical or Civil to Divine Laws. The
one we teach directly and immediately to bind the conscience, the other but
indirectly and i^mediately. 5. We keep it not by virtue of any papal
constitution, but in conformity to the ancient Church, and obedience to his
Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws.

THE LENT'S DEVOTION beginning on Ashwednesday. (*)
The ground (or at least the occasion, of this Fast. In the Old Testament;
TYPES. In the New, an example in our LORD'S Fast.


The Type.
Moses was with the LORD forty days, and forty nights; he did neither eat
bread, nor drink water. Exodus 34. 28.

He went in the strength of that meat forty days and forty nights, till
he came to Horeb the Mount of God, 1. Kings 19. 8.

Example.
Then Jesus, etc. Mat. 4. 1.

And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, afterward he was an
hungry, ver. 2.

Being 40 days tempted of the devil, and in those days he did eat nothing,
Luke 4. 2.

And the devil took him up into an high mountain, ver. 5.

IVdicious Calvin, Object.
Videlius, and other excellent learned Doctors of the reformed church teach,
that this Fast of Christ was miraculous, and so no pattern for our imitation:
and they put Saint Chrysostom upon it also, whose words are: Hom. 49. in Mat.
Christ said, Learn of me, not that I fast, although he could have said so,
for he fasted forty days; yet he says not that, but Learn of me that I am
meek and lowly in heart.

The solution is not difficult, Answ.
for Christ's Fast may be considered two ways,

First, 1
as a miraculous demonstration of his Divinity, or an evidence that he was the
true Messiah, because he accomplished the Types foregoing in Moses and Eliah;
and in this regard it is to be admired of us, but no way to be imitated: And
in this sense, Videl exercitat, in Ignat.
Calvin and Videlius's words may^passe, and Saint Chrysostom must be taken,
unless thy will have him contradict himself.

Secondly, as a moral remedy against tentation, or rather a spiritual Armor
which Christ took upon him when he was to buckle with the Devil: and thus we
may and ought to imitate Christ's Fast in the kind, Pro modulo nostro.
though not in the degree. As we cannot fast as Christ fasted, so neither can
we pray as Christ prayed, whole nights and with strong cries, and a bloody
sweat: yet no Christians ever doubted but that we may and must follow Christ in
all religious exercises, though not with even paces, yet as we are able. And
because they appeal to S. Chrysostom, let him be the Vmpire. Hom. 1. in genesis
(...).
Our Lord Jesus Christ when he entered into the lists with Satan, fasted forty
days, giving us an example how we ought to arm our selves against the Devil.
Certainly if the Learned Bishops, (afterward Martyrs) that penned our Book
of Common Prayers had thought Christ's Fast of forty days no way to belong to
our Fast, they would never have appointed the Story of Christ's Fast for the
Gospel, the first Sunday in Lent, nor touched upon it in the Collects.

For thine instruction meditate on Christ's Fast.

For thy comfort apply the benefit of it to thy soul.

For thy correction condemn thy luxury, and consider what great cause thou
have to humble thy soul with fasting.

Quicken Thy repentance by the Psalm. Thy fasting by the exhortation. Thy
Devotion by the prayer ensuing.


The Psalm for Ash Wednesday.
PVt me not to rebuke o Lord in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure. Psalm 38. 1.

For thine arrows stick fast in me: and thy hand presses me sore. verse 2.

There is no life in my flesh because of thy displeasure; neither any rest in
my bones by reason of my sin. verse 3.

For my wickednesses are gone over my head: they are like a sore burden too
heavy for me to bear. verse 4.

Lord thou know all my desires: and my groaning is not hid from thee. verse
9.

Hear my Prayer, o Lord, and consider my desire: o hearken unto me for thy
Truth and righteousness sake. Psalm. 43. 1.

And enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified. verse 2.

My spirit is vexed within me; and my heart within me is desolate. verse. 4.

I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul gaspeth unto thee as a thirsty
land. verse 6.

Lord be merciful unto me: heal my soul for I have sinned against thee.
Psalm. 41. 9.

O remember not the sins and offenses of my youth; but according to thy mercy
think upon me, o Lord, for thy goodness. Psalm. 21. 6.

I have eaten ashes as it were bread, and mingled my drink with weeping. Psalm.
102. 9.

And that because of thine indignation and wrath, for thou have taken me up and
cast me down. verse 10.

My days are gone like a shadow, and I am withered like grass. verse 11.

When thou with rebuke do chasten man for sin, thou make his beauty to
consume away like as it were a moth fretting a garment: every man therefore is
but vanity. Psalm. 39 12.

What man is he that lives and shall not see death, and shall deliver his soul
from the hand of the grave? Psalm. 89. 47.

When the breath of man goes forth he shall turn again to his earth, and
then all his thoughts perish. Psalm. 146. 3.

What profit is there in my blood when I go down to the pit? Psalm. 30. 9.

Shall the dust give thanks to thee? Or shall it declare thy Truth? verse 10.

Hear Lord and have mercy upon me: Lord be thou my help. verse 11.

Here my Prayer, o Lord, and let thine ears consider my colling; hold not thy
peace at, my tears. Psalm. 39. 13.

For I am a stranger upon earth and a soiourner as all my Fathers were. verse
14.

O spare me a little that I may recover my strength before I go hence, and be
no more seen. verse 15.

AN ADMONITION FOR ASH WEDNESDAY OR, Exhortation to Fasting.
THE ANALSYS.
A devout Christian ought to Fast because 1 God commands it. 2 Christ
commends it by Precept. Example.
3 The Saints practiced it Under the Law. Under the Gospel.
4 It expels the Devil. 5 It quickens Prayer. 6 It humbles the Spirit. 7
It tameth the flesh. 8 It auerteth God's Judgments. 9 It obtains blessings
Temporal. Spiritual.



THE TEXTS.
BLow the Trumpet in Zion, 1 Precepts for Fasting.
sanctify a Fast, call a solemn Assembly. Ioh. 2. 16.

Is this the Fast which the Lord requires. etc. Isa. 58. 5.

The Bridegroom shall be taken away, and then they shall Fast. Mat. 9. 15.

When ye Fast, be not as the hypocrites, etc. Mat. 6. 16.

Give your selves to Fasting. 1 Cor. 7. 5.

And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights afterward he was an
hungry. 2 Examples of it.
Mat. 5. 2.

Moses fasted. Exodus 34 28.

Fliah Fasted. 1 King. 19. 8.

I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth. Dan. 10. 3.

Hanna served God with Fasting and Prayer. Luke 2. 37.

About this hour I Fasted. Acts 10. 30.

As they Ministered to the Lord and Fasted. Acts 13. 2.

Then Fasted they and Prayed. verse 3.

In Fasting often. 2 Cor. 11. 27.

And Prayed and Fasted. Acts 14. 23.

This kind (of Devil) goes not out but by Fasting and Prayer. It expels
Devils.
Mat. 17. 21.

I humbled my soul with Fasting. Benefits.
Psalm. 35. 13.

I beat down my body. It tameth the flesh.
1 Cor. 9. 27.

And he proclaimed through Nineueh, Let neither man nor beast, taste any
thing, neither feed, nor drink water. Jonah 3. 7.

And God saw their works, It auerteth Judgments
and God repented him of the evil which he said he would do unto them, and
he did it not. verse 10.

Go and assemble all the Jews that are found in Shushan, It obtains
temporal blessings
and Fast ye for me, and eat not, nor drink in three days: I also and my
Maids will Fast likewise, Ester 4. 16.

And the Posts went forth with speed to exe cute the Kings decrees. Ester 8.
14.

Mordecay went out in a crown of gold, and to the Jews was come Joy and
gladness. verse 15.

I Fasted. and spiritual.
Acts 10. 30.

Peter said, Of a truth I see, etc. ver. 34.

The holy Ghost fell on them. verse 4. 4.

A Prayer for Ash Wednesday.
O Let not my Lord be angry that I who am but dust and ashes dare speak unto
him: for my sins cry for vengeance, and shall I be silent for pardon?
Gracious God either silence them, or hear me. If thou will not hear the
voice of my words, hear the voice of my tears: if thou will not hear them,
hear the voice of thy sons blood which speaks better things then the blood
of Abel. I confess I have sorely displeased thee, but it troubles me that I
have so incensed thee. I have grieved thy spirit, but it grieueth me that I
should be so graceless as to grieve that Spirit of grace, which seals thy
chosen to salvation. I deserve that thou should even abhor me for my
sins; but I ab^orre my self for them in dust and ashes. I have offended thee
in gluttony, but I now fast for it: in pride, but I humble my self; in
laughter and sports, but I weep for it: in sinful joys, but I mourn for it:
I have wallowed in filthy pleasures, but I^wallow for it in dust and ashes:
have broken all thy commandments, but I have broken my heart in true
contrition for it. Thou did not break a bruised reed, will thou grind to
powder a broken heart? What profit is in my blood O Lord, when I go down into
the pit? Nay, what profit is in thy blood O blessed Redeemer if they for whom
it was shed god down into the pit of destruction? Shall the dust give thanks
unto thee O Lord, or the ashes and cinders of hell praise the God of heaven?
H^are O Lord, and have mercy upon me, thou that healest those that are broken
in heart, and give medicine to cure their sickness; raise up my prostrate
and dejected soul. Why did thou hunger O Lord, but to satisfy for my
gluttony? Why did thou thirst, but to satisfy for my drunkenness? Why did
thou weep, but to satisfy for my sinful joys? Why did thou endure
unspeakable torments, but to satisfy for my Iewd pleasures? Why did thou
dye an ignominious death, but to satisfy for my shameful life? Why did thou
shed thy blood, but to satisfy for my crimson sins? Adam our first Parent
did eat the forbidden fruit, and all our teeth are set on edge, but thy fasting
forty days has fully satisfied for his eating. But I renew my sins daily,
and thou renewest thy mercies, The guilt of my sin is great, but the price of
thy blood is greater. I have offended an infinite Majesty, but satisfaction
has been made by an infinite Majesty. My wickedness cannot exceed thy
goodness: for my power of sinning is finite, but thy faculty of pardoning is
infinite. Wherefore since my sins (be they never so many, never so weighty)
fall within the measure of thy mercy, and compass of thy goodness. And since
it is all one with thee to give what I ask, and to ineite me to ask, to
heal my wounds, and to make me feel the smart of them: Lord who have given
me the one, deny me not the other: Rebuke the surges of temptations, and
quiet my soul. Thou who in the days of thy flesh offeredst up prayers with
strong cries, hear the strong loud cries of a penitent sinner. Thou who
tookest upon thee our infirmities, take pity upon them: thou were in thine
agony stricken with horror, and unutterable grief, allay the troubles of my
affrighted conscience. Thou who fastedst forty days, accept of my humiliation
these forty days; and grant that my stomach may not only fast from
accustomed meats but all my senses from their usual delights, and most of all,
my heart from worldly comforts and contentments. Let no fight delight me, till
I see my sins removed like a mist and thy countenance shine upon me. Let no
sound or voice delight me, till I hear thee by thy Spirit to speak peace to
my conscience, and say to my soul, I am thy salvation. Let no pleasant fields
and gardens delight me, til I have gathered red flowers out of that garden
which was watered with thy blood. Let no fruit delight me till I have fully
tasted the fruit of the tree of thy Cross. Let no meat delight me, till with
the sower herbs of sorrow and anguish of heart for my sin. I have eaten the
Christian Passover, the flesh of thee, that immaculate Lamb, slain from the
beginning of the world. Hear me blessed Redeemer, and as thou wroughtest in
dust when thou tookest the woman in adultery: So I beseech thee write my sins
in dust, and bury them all in the ashes of oblivion. So be it.

Amen.
GOOD FRIDAY'S DEVOTION. OR, The Christian Fast on the Passion of our Lord.
The ground of this Fast: In the Old Testament Prophecies. Types geuerall,
special.

In the new, History, Sacrament of Christ's death: of which before in the
preparation



PARALLEL.
Prophecy.
Thou shall bruise his heel, etc. Genesis 3. 15.

He was cut out of the land of the living, Isa. 53. 8.

He shall make his soul an offering for sin. ver. 10. And after threescore
and two weeks, M^ssiah shall be slain. Dan. 9. 26.

They shall look upon him whom they have pierced. Zac. 12. 10.

History.
This is your hour and the Power of darkness. Luke 22. 53.

Then Jesus cried with a loud voice, and yielded up the Ghost. Mat. 27. 50.

Him have ye crucified and slain. Acts. 2. 22. Christ dyed for our sins. 1
Cor. 15. 3.

He offered himself by the eternal Spirit. Heb. 9. 14.

One of the Soldiers with a Spear peirced his side. John 19. 34.

Type.
Besides all sacrifices of the old Law which foreshewed Christ's death, there
are 2. special types.

1 Abraham builded an Altar, and bound Isaak his son, Genesis 22. 9.

And stretched out his hand, and took the knife to kill his son, ver. 10.

Accomplishment.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten. Io. 3. 16.

He became obedient to death, even the death of the cross, Phil. 2. 8.

So Moses made a Serpent of brass, and set it up for a sign: and when a
Serpent had bitten a man, then he looked to the Serpent of brass, and lived.
Numb. 21. 9.

They crucified him.

Luke 23. 33.

Jesus who^ ye have crucified. Act. 2. 36.

He was crucified concerning his infirmity. 2. Cor. 13. 4 I, if I were lift up
from the earth will draw all men to me. Io. 12. 32.

This he spoke, signifying what death he should die. v. 33.

IOH. 14. As Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness: so must the Son of
Man be lift up.
For thine instruction meditate upon Prophecy. Tipes. Story.
of Christ's Passion.

For thy comfort apply to thy self the benefits of his death.

For thy correction remember and bewail thy sins, for which Christ suffered
and dyed.

Quicken thy Faith by the Psalm. Obedience and patience by the admonition.
Zeal and Devotion by the Prayer ensuing.


THE ADMONITION for good friday.
THE ANALYSIS.
We must suffer afflictions because 1.a By them we are made conformable to our
Head Christ Jesus. 2.b They are the Chastisements of our heavenly Father. 3.c
They proceed from love. 4.d They are moderated and mitigated by his mercy. 5.e
They are sweetened, with many comforts. 6.f They are the common lot of all Gods
dearest children. 7.g They are medicinable to the soul. 8.h They bring us to a
sense of our sins, and remorse for them. 9.i They quicken our Zeal and
Devotion. 10.k They tryour says, hope, and love. 11.l They are means to weane
us from the love of this world. 12.m They preserve and free us from everlasting
torments. 13.n If we patiently endure them, our reward shall be plentiful in
heaven. 14 o They teach us to compassionate our brethren, and comfort them in
their adversities.


THE TEXTS.
a IT became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, seeing
that he brought many children unto glory, to consecrate their Prince of their
salvation by efflictions. Heb. 2. 10.

For in that he suffered and was tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted. verse 18.

Christ suffered for us. leaving us an example that we should follow his steps.
1 Pet. 2 21.

Whom he knew before to be made like to the Image of his Son. Romans 8. 29.

b The Lord has chastened and corrected me. Psalm. 118. 18.

O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, nor chasten me in thy displeasure. Psalm.
6. 1.

When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, etc. Psalm. 39. 12.

c My son despise not the the chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou
art rebuked of him. Prou. 3. 11.

Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son that he
receives. Heb. 12. 6.

As many as I love I rebuke and chasten. Reu. 3. 19.

d The Lord has severely corrected me, but he has not given me over unto
death. Psalm. 118. 18.

Great are the troubles of the Righteous, but the Lord deliver him out of all.
Psalm. 34. 18.

From them all the Lord delivered me. 2. Tim. 3. 11.

God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are
able, but will even give the issue to the tentation, that ye may be able to
hear it. 1 Cor. 10. 13.

Blessed be God the Father of mercy, and God of all comfort. 2. Cor. 1. 3.

Who comfort us in all our tribulations, that we may be able to comfort
them that are in any affliction. ver. 4.

e For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us: so our consolation abounds
through Christ. v. 5.

f What son is he whom the father chastneth not? Heb. 12. 7.

If therefore ye be without correction, whereof all are partakers, then are
ye bastards and not sons. ver. 8.

In the world ye shall have afflictions. John. 16. 33.

Which of the Prophets have not your fathers persecuted? Act. 7. 52.

All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecutions. 2 Timothy 3.
12.

g It is good for me that I have been in trouble, that I might learn thy
Statutes. Psalm. 119.

No chastisement for the present seems joyous but grievous; but afterward it
brings the quiet fruit of righteousness to them which are thereby exercised,
Heb. 12. 11.

He chastneth for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.
ver. 10.

We know that all things work for the best to them that love God. Romans 8. 28.

Count it exceeding joy when ye fall into diverse temptations. Iam. 1. 2.

Before I was troubled I went wrong: but now have I kept thy Word. Psalm. 119.
67.

It is good for me that I have been in trouble, that I might learn thy
Statutes. ver. 71.

h And they said, We have verily sinned against our brother, because we saw
the anguish of his soul when he besought us, and we wonld not hear him,
therefore is this trouble come upon us. Genesis 42. 21.

All that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and our great transgoessions.
Ez. 9. 13.

Jerusalem has greatly sinned, therefore she is in derision. La. 1. 8.

The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against him. v. 18.

There is no rest in my bones by reason of my sin. Psalm. 38. 3.

My wickednesses are gone over my head, and are like a sore burden too heavy
for me to bear. ver. 4.

i In their afflictions they will seek me diligently.

Then he came to himself, etc. Luke 15. 17.

Every night wash I my bed, etc. Psalm. 6. 6.

Behold how I mourn in my Prayer, and am vexed.

When he was tried he was found faithful. Heb. 11. 17.

Others were tried by scourgings, etc. ver. 36.

k Knowing that the trial of your faith, brings forth patience Iam. 1. 3.

That the trial of your faith being much more precious then fine gold that
perishes, might be found to your glory. 1 Pet. 1. 7.

Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I will deliver thee from the
hour of tentation which shall come to all the world, to try them that dwell on
the earth. Romans 3. 10.

Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech, etc. Psalm. 120. 4.

O that I had wings like a Dove, etc. Psalm. 55. 6.

Let me dye, for I am no better then my fathers. Jonah 4. 3.

m For when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we be not
condemned with the world. 1 Cor. 11. 31.

n If we suffer with him, we shall be also glorified with him. Romans 8. 17.

For I account the momentary afflictions are not worthy the glory that shall be
showed to us. ver. 18.

For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far
more excellent and an eternal weight of glory. 2. Cor. 4. 17.

He suffered and was tempted, that he might succor them that are tempted. Heb.
2. 18.

God comfort us in all our tribulations, that we might be able to comfort
them which are in any affliction, by the comfort wherewith our selves are
comforted of God. 2 Cor. 1. 4.

The Hymn for Good Friday:
Wherein is expressed the manner of Christ's sufferings, death, and burial,
with the remarkable circumstances thereof.

In particular: 1 The Antecedents. 1 CHRIST'S Agony. 2 Herod's, Pilats, and the
Rulers of the Jews conspiracy against him. 3 Judas betraying him. 4 The
Disciples forsaking him. 5 The Jews false accusing him. 6 His silence before
the Judge. 7 The Soldiers blaspheming and deriding him.
2 The Passion it self. 1 The enduring his Fathers wrath. 2 The racking his
ioints. 3 The piercing his flesh. 4 His thirst, and the drink given him. 5 His
last cry upon the Cross. 6 His giving up his spirit, the piercing his side,
and not breaking a bone. Psalm. 34. 20.
3 The consequents. 1 The gushing of water out of his heart. 2 The casting Lots
upon his Vesture. 3 His burial, and lying no small time in the grave.



THE TEXTS.
O Lord God of my salvation, 1 The antecedents wherein, 1 Christ's Agony.
I have cried day and night before thee. Psalm. 88. 1.

Mine eye mourns by reason of afflliction: I have called daily upon thee, I
have stretched out my hands unto thee, ver. 9.

For my soul is full of trouble, and my life draws nigh unto the grave.
Psalm. 88. 2.

My heart is smitten and withered like grass, Psalm. 102. 4.

By reason of the voice of my groaning my bones cleave to my skin. ver. 5.

The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me: I
found trouble and sorrow, 2 Herod's, Pil^ts, and the Rulers of the Jews
conspiracy against him.
Psalm. 116. 3.

The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take council together
against the Lord* and against his Christ. Psalm. 2. 2.

Mine enemies whisper together against me, against me do they devise hurt.
Psalm. 41. 7.

l Yea, 3 Judas betraying him.
mine own familiar friends in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread has
lift up his heel against me. ver. 9.

I am like a Pelican in the Wilderness, and an Owl in the Desert. Psalm. 102.
6.

I watch and am alone, as a Sparrow on the house top. ver. 7.

My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my stroke, 4 The Disciples
forsaking him.
and my Kinsmen stand a far off. Psalm. 38. 11.

Mine enemies reproach me all the day long, 5 The Jews false accusing him.
and they that are mad upon me are sworn against me, Psalm. 102. 8.

But I as a deaf man heard not, 6 His mecks silence.
and as a dumb man that opens not his mouth. Psalm. 39. 13.

I am as a worm and no man, 7 The Soldiers and people blaspheming and
deriding him.
a reproach to men, and despised of the people. Psalm. 22. 6.

All they that see me laugh me to scorn, they shout out their lips, and shake
their heads, saying. ver. 7.

He trusted in the Lord that he would deliver him: let him deliver him, seeing
he delighted in him, Psalm. 22. 8.

Many Oxen came about me: strong Bulls of Basan have beset me round. ver. 12.

They gaped upon me with their mouths, 2 The Passion it self, wherein 1 The
enduring Gods wrath.
as it were a ramping and roaring Lion. ver. 13.

Thy wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy waves.
Psalm. 88. 7.

I am powered out like water, all my bones are out of joint. 2 The racking of
his ioints.
Psalm. 22. 14.

They pierced my hands and my feet. 3 The piercing his flesh.
Psalm. 22. 16.

My strength is dried up like a Pot-sheard, and my tongue cleueth to my gums. 4
His thirst.
ver. 15.

Reproach has broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness: I looked for some
to have pity on me, but there was none: for comforters, but I found none.
Psalm. 69. 20.

They gave me gall to eat; His drink.
and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. ver. 21.

My God, 5 His last cry.
my God, Why have thou forsaken me! Psalm. 22. 1.

Into thy hands I commend my spirit, 6 His giu^ng up the ghost.
Psalm. 31. 5.

Thou keep all my bones, so that not one of them is broken. Psalm. 3 The
consequents.
34. 20.

My heart is like wax: 1 Water gushing out of his strength.
it is melted in the midst of my bowels. Psalm. 22. 14.

They part my garments among them, 2 Casting Lots.
and on my vesture do they cast lots. Psalm. 22. 18.

Thou have laid me in the lowest pit; 3 His burial.
in a place of darkness, and in the deep. Psalm. 88. 5.

Free among the dead, like to them that be wounded, and lie in the grave,
which be out of remembrance, and are cut away from thine hand.

The close out of Jeremiah.
IS it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? Behold and see, if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in the day of his wrath, Lam. 1. 12.

A Prayer for Good Friday.
DEarest Redeemer, the Mediator of Heaven and Earth, who this day werest
placed on the Cross between them both, with thine arms stretched abroad to
embrace, and thy head bowed down, as it were, to kiss all that come unto
thee; I humbly prostrate my self at thy feet, desiring in unfeigned repentance,
with my tears to wash those thy wounds that bled for my sin; and in a lively
faith to touch the print of thy nails, and thrust my finger into the hole of
thy side, thereby to take real and corporal possession of thee, that I may
with Thomas truly call thee, My Lord, and my God; my dread, and my love; my
surety, and my ransom; my Sacrifice, and my Priest; my Advocate, and my Judge;
my desire, and my contentment; the life of my hope here, and hope of my life
hereafter. Before, I was thine (for thy hands have made me and fashioned me:)
but now since thou have offered thy self to be my pledge, and thy blood for my
ransom, thou art truly mine, My Lord and my God. O let the Spear which ran
thee through, fasten my heart to thy Cross: Let the nails which printed thy
flesh, imprint thy love in my soul: let the thorns which pricked thy temples
not suffer the temples of mine head to take any rest in sin: let the vinegar
which was given thee, melt my adamantine heart into sorrow: let the Sponge
which was offered thee on the Cross, wipe out all my debts out of thy Fathers
Tables. Let others go on forward if they please; I will stay still at the
Cross, and take no other Lesson. for I desire no other Pulpit then that tree;
no other Preacher then thy crucified body; no other Text then thy death and
passion; no other parts then thy wounds; no other amplification then thy
extension; no other notes then thy marks; no other points then thy nails; no
other book then thy opened side. The first Adam did eat the fruit of the
forbidden tree; therefore thou, the second Adam hangedst upon a Tree. By his
fall all mankind were so sorely wounded, that the whole head was sick, and
the whole heart faint; from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot,
there was nothing but wounds, and bruses, and sores, full of corruption:
therefore thy whole head was pained, thy whole heart wounded: from the sole of
thy foot, which was gored with nails to the crown of the head, which was
pricked with thorns there was nothing but cuts, and stripes, and marks, and
skars, and sores, and wounds in thy whole body. Because our heads plotted and
devised wickedness, on thy head was platted a Crown of thorns. Because our
eyes burned with lust, thy eyes were bedewed with tears. Because we belched
out blasphemies against God, thy face was spit upon. Because our bodies have
been stretched want only upon our soft beds, thy body was stretched upon the
hard Cross. O Lord, our ears have offended thee by listening to want on
Music, profane speeches and songs, therefore thou suffredst in thine ear by
hearing scoffs and blasphemous taunts. We have offended God in our smell by
luxurious perfumes, and sweet odours, therefore thou sufferedst in thy smell
by the stench of Golgotha. Our taste had offended in gluttony and drunkenness,
therefore thou sufferedst in thy taste by gall and vinegar. Because our feet
were swift to shed blood, thy feet were nailed to the cross. Because our hands
were defiled, thy hands were bathed in blood. Because all parts of our bodies
offended, thou wast punished in all parts; in thy temples with thorns, on thy
cheeks with buffets, in thy ioints with strains, in thy flesh with stripes.
Lastly, because our hearts most grievously offended in unchaste, malicious,
covetous, ambitious thoughts, desires, and affections, and piercing our selves
with worldly cares; therefore thou wast most grievously punished in thy heart
which was run through with the Spear. If all the sufferings of Martyrs since
the worlds beginning were put in one skale, and thine in the other, thy Passion
would bear them all down, for thou barest the full weight of thy Father's
heauiest hand. Never were there sufferings like thy sufferings, because never
such a Sufferer, the torments being infinitely improued by the Bearer. Never
sweat like thy sweat, because never any had a burden like to thine. Never
tears like thy tears, because shed for them who thirsted for thy blood. Never
torments like thy torments, because never flesh so pure and tender as thy
flesh. Never horror like to thy horror, being forsaken of thy Father, because
never love like to thy love of him. Never sorrow like to thy sorrow, because
never sense and apprehension like to thy sense and apprehension of the infinite
displeasure of God, for the sins of mankind. O my most bountiful Redeemer,
who bestowedst largely, and wast bestowed liberally for me, it concerns me
to know how much I stood thee in. For how should I estimate thy love, if I
cannot cast the total of the Debt thou did discharge for me? But no heart
can conceive what sorrow thou conceiuedst: no tongue can express what grief
thou did express by thy bloody tears, and those thy strong cries when
thou complainedst that thy soul was heavy unto death, and prayedst thy Father
(if it were possible) to let this (...) pass from thee. I am appaled at thine
agony, I am astonished or thy fear, I am amazed at thy patience, I am ravished
at thy love. My heart rises, my veins swell, my blood boiles within me
against thy Persecuters. If it were in my power, I would put them all to
millions of torments; I would inflict a thousand deaths upon Judas that
betrayed thee, and Pilat that condemned thee, and the envious Scribes and
Pharisees that laid snares for thee, and the perjured witnesses that gave
false evidence against thee, and that execrable rout that preferred a murderer
before thee, and the barbarous Soldiers that spit upon thee and buffeted thee,
and the bloody executioners of the Jewish malice and Roman cruelty that
hanged, and nailed, and goared thee. But when I diue deep into thy bloody
passion, I find my self as deep in the guilt of thy bloud-shedding as they.
They were in that but accessaries, but I by my sins was a principal in the
death of the Lord of Life. My sins by their tongues and hands did all this
villainy and outrage upon thee. Their nails and spears pierced but the flesh,
but my sins pierced thy very soul. My sins, my sins, O Lord by their
hands crucified thee; wherefore I condemn mine eyes to continual tears, my
heart to perpetual sighs, and my thoughts to everlasting pensiveness. What
shall I do to wash away the guilt of thy blood which alone can take away the
guilt of my sins? Verily I should be utterly swallowed up in this gulf, but
that the price of thy blood has satisfied (as for all other sins: so) for the
guilt of spilling it self. And now my anger, and fear, and trouble, and
anguish are all turned into joy, and comfort, and love, and admiration of the
infinite wisdom of thy Father in providing such a remedy, and his justice in
requiring such a satisfaction; but most of all thy infinite love, making so
full payment of the infinite debt of my sins. What can I do, what can I
suffer enough for thee? Gracious God to all the rest of thy blessings
spiritual and temporal conferred upon me, purchased by thy sufferings, add
this one above the rest, the special gift of the remembrance of these thy
sufferings, that wheresoever I am, whatsoever I do, I may have thy passion in
my heart and thy wounds bleeding afresh in my mind, with an infinite hatred of
sin that procured them, and love of thy goodness who induredst them for me.
Thy Church, since thou leftest her is a widow, and I am as one of her dead
children, not (as the Samaritan was) half dead, but whole dead in my sins
and transgressions. Thou Lord art the true Elias, who raisedst and do raise
from death this Widows children to life, by stretching thy body over them. O
my gracious Lord, apply thy Body stretched this day on the Cross to me. Lay
thy head to my head, thy hands to my hands, thy feet to my feet, and thy heart
to my heart, that I may receive warmth from thy blood, and ease from thy
stripes, and health from thy wounds, and spirit from thy breath, and strength
from thy grace to stand up from the dead, and walk with thee from hence forth
in newness of life. So be it, Amen.

The week days Devotions.
THe first day being the Christian Sabbath preceded the Festiualls, whither I
refer thee. The others here follow in their order.

Munday's Devotion, being the second day from the Creation.
The Father works. The work of Creation on this day.
Again God said, Let there be a Firmament in the midst of the waters, and
let it separate the waters from the waters Genesis 1. 3. Then God made the
Firmament, and separated the waters that were under the Firmament from the
waters that were above the Firmament, and it was so; and God called the
Firmament Heaven, ver. 7. So the evening and the morning were the 2. day. ver.
8. And I work. THe work of redemption this day prophesied of in the Epistle,
Isa. 50. 6. I gave my back unto the smiters, and my cheeks to the nippers: I
hid not my face from shame and spitting, etc. Related in the Gospel, Mat. 27.
1, 2. When the morning was come, all the chief Priests and the Elders of the
People took counsel against Jesus to put him to death.

For thine instruction meditate In the morning upon the work of Creation. In
the evening upon the work of Redemption.


For thy comfort apply the Use of the one. Benefit of the other.


For thy corrction reprove thy Abuse of the one. Unthankfulness for the other.


Quicken Thy thanks by the Hymn. Thine obedience by the admonition. Thy zeal
and devotion by the prayer ensuing.


THE HYMN.
Have I not remembered thee in my bed, and thought upon thee when I was waking.
Psalm 63. 7.

Because thou have been my helper, therefore under the shadow of thy wings
will I rejoice. ver. 8.

My soul hangs upon thee, thy right hand has vpholden me. ver. 9.

Save me, O God, for the waters are come in, even to my soul. Psalm. 69. 1.

I stick fast in the deep mire where no ground is: I am come into deep
waters, so that the floods run over me. ver. 2.

My misdeeds prevail against me; O be thou merciful unto my sins. Psalm. 65.
3.

Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and receiuest unto thee, he shall dwell
in thy Courts, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thine House, even
of thy holy Temple. ver. 4.

Thou shall show us wonderful things in thy righteousness, O God of our
salvation, thou that art the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them
that remain in the broad Sea. ver. 5.

Thou stillest the raging of the Sea, and the noise of the waves, and the
madness of his people. ver. 7.

They that dwell in the uttermost parts of the earth shall be afraid of thy
tokens, thou that make the our goings of the Morning and Evening to praise
thee. ver. 8.

Thou visitest the earth and blessest it; thou make it very plenteous. ver. 9.

Thou waterest her furrows, thou sendest rain into the little Valleys
thereof: thou make it sofi with the drops of rain, and blessest the increase
of it. ver. 11.

Thou crownest thy years with thy goodness, and thy clouds drop fatness.
ver. 12.

They shall drop upon the dwellings of the wilderness, and the little hills
shall rejoice on every side ver. 13.

He gathers the waters of the Sea together, and lays up the deep as in a
Treasure-house. Psalm. 33. 7.

O praise the Lord of Heaven: praise him in the height. Psalm. 148. 1.

Praise him all ye Heavens, and ye waters that be above the Heavens. ver. 4.

Praise the Lord upon earth ye Dragons and all deepes. ver. 7.

Fire and Hail, Snow and vapors, wind and storm fulfilling his Word, ver. 8.

Sing unto God, o ye Kingdoms of the earth: o sing praises unto the Lord,
Psalm. 68. 32.

Which sits in the Heavens over all from the beginning: lo he does send out
his voice; yea, and that a mighty voice. ver. 33.

Ascribe ye power unto God: his worship and strength are in the Clouds. ver. 34.

The Admonition for Monday, being an Exhortation to humility or poverty in
Spirit, Whereunto our Savior ascribes the first. BEATITVDE.
THE ANALYSIS.
The special motives to humility set down in the Scriptures are; 1 God's
infinite Majesty, purity, perfection. 2 Man's vileness, sinfulness,
wretchedness, wants; of which before: See the Preparation to Prayer. 3 Divine
Precepts. 4 Holy patterns of this virtue in God the Father. Christ. The Saints
under the -- Law. Gospel.

5 Gracious promises made to the humble, of 1 Neerenesse and society with God.
2 Saving knowledge. 3 Sanctifying grace. 4 Honor and preferment. 5 Eternal
blessedness in heaven.



THE TEXTS.
TAke my Yoke upon you, Divine precepts.
and learn of me, that I am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest
to your souls, Mat. 11. 29.

Unless ye become as one of these little ones ye cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God, Mat. 18. 23.

Cast down your selves before the Lord, and he will lift you up, Iam. 4. 10.

Deck your selves inwardly with lowliness of mind, 1. Pet. 5. 5.

Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may raise you in due
time, verse 6.

Who is like to the Lord our God that has his dwelling, Holy examples.
on high, and yet, humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven
and in earth, Psalm. 113. 5.

I am among you as he that ministers, Christ
Luke 22. 17.

And he began to wash his Disciples feet, and to wipe them with the towell
wherewith he was girded, John 13. 5.

He emptied himself, or made himself of no reputation, Phil. 2. 7.

He humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the
Cross, Phil. 2. 8.

I will speak unto the Lord who am but dust and ashes, Abraham.
Genesis 18. 17.

I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and of all thy truth which
thou have showed to thy servant, Genesis 32. 10.

And he said, Gedcon.
wherewith shall I save Israel? Behold my Father is poor in Manasseth, and I
am the least in my fathers house, Jude 6. 15.

Lord I am not high-minded, etc. Psalm. 131. 1.

And David said unto Saul, David.
who am I, and what is my life, and my father's family in Israel that I shall
be son in Law to a King, 1. Sam. 18. 18.

And now, Solomon.
O Lord my God, thou have made thy servant King, in stead of David my father;
and I am but a little child, I know not how to go in and out, 1. King. 3. 7.

Notwithstanding, Ezekiah.
Ezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, both he and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of the Lord came not up them, 2.
Chron. 32. 20.

Then Job arose and rent his Mantle, Job.
and shaued his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped, Job 1. 20.

O Lord God, Daniel.
righteousness belongs to thee, but to us confusion of face at this day,
Dan. 9. 7.

He that comes after me is greater then I, John Baptist
whose shoo-latchet I am not worthy to unloose, Math. 3. 11.

When he was not far from the house, the Centurian sent unto him, The
Centurian.
saying; Master trouble not thy self, I am not worthy that thou should come
under the roof of my house, Luke 7. 6.

When Simon Peter saw it, Peter.
he fell down on his knees, saying; Go from me, Lord for I am a sinful man,
Luke 5. 8.

The Publicane standing a far off would not lift up his eyes to heaven, The
Publicane.
but striking his breast said; Lord be merciful to me a sinner, Luke ^8. 15.

I am the least of the Apostles not worthy to be called an Apostle, Paul.
etc. 1. Cor. 11. 9.

Jesus Christ came to save sinners, whereof I am chief, 1. Tim. 1. 15.

I am the Rose of the field, Promises to the humble of the favor with God.
and the Lilly of the valleys, Cant. 2. 1.

I dwell in the high and holy place with him also that is of an humble and
contrite heart, to revive the spirit of the humble, Is. 57. 15

To this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit,
and trembles at my word, Isa. 66. 2.

When pride comes, Wisdom.
then comes shame: but with the lowly is wisdom, Prou. 11. 2.

Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto
babes, Math. 11. 21.

He gives more grace, Sanctifying grace.
wherefore he says, God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble,
Iam. 4. 6.

Before destruction the heart of man is haughty; Preferment
but before honor is humility Pro. 18. 1^.

He that humbles, himself shall be exalted, Luke 14. 11.

He raises the poor out of the mire, and lifts the needy out of the
dunghill, Psalm. 113. 7.

That he may set him with Princes, even with the Princes of his people, verse 8.

Blessed are the poor in spirit* for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven,
Blessedness*
Mat. 5. 3.

THE PRAYER FOR Monday morning
composed of 1. Petitions suitable to the work of the day. 2. Motives to
humility agreeable to the precedent exhortation.


The Prayer it self.
The second days Devotion.
FAther Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, who createdst the Evening and the
Morning the second day as well as the first, Continue, I beseech thee, unto me
as well the comfortable rest of the Evening to refresh me after my labor and
travail, as the most needful light of the Morning to manage my affairs and
businesses. But especially perpetuatt unto me the repose of a quie^
conscience, and the clear light of the Gospel; to guide my feet into the way
of peace. This light conuinceth the errors of my understanding, the
deprauation of my will, the disorder of my affections, the impurity of my
thoghts, the vanity of my desires, the deceitfulness of my heart, and the
wickedness of all my ways. This light shows me what I was in my birth, slime
and filthiness; what in my life, vanity and folly; and what in my death,
stench and rottenness. This light discovers unto me that I have nothing
which I have not received; that without Christ I can do nothing; that in me
(that is in my body) dwells no good; that I am not able of my self, as of my
self; think a good thought: that I cannot desire to think, nor have will to
desire; nor grace to will any good. My comforts are rare; my crosses frequent;
my pleasures momentary; my pains permanent; my gifts small; my wants and
infirmities great; my helps weak; my assaults strong; my good deeds few, and
they tainted with imperfections, my sins infinite. Let these considerations,
O Lord, humble me in my self, that Christ may raise me, wound me in my self,
that Christ may heal me; burden me in my self, that Christ may ease me; kill
me in my own conceits that Christ may quicken me; make me most vile in mine
own eyes that I may be most dear and precious in his. O Lord which as upon
this day createdst the clouds to rain upon the earth; shower down thy graces
abundantly into my heart to mollify it, that the seed of the Word may take
deep root downward in humility, and spring upward in hope, and spread abroad
by charity, and fructify in all kinds of good works. Lord who this day
separatedst the waters from the waters, separate, I beseech thee, and
distinguish between the waters of tears which I shed for my sins, and those
others which I shed for worldly crosses and calamities. Cast away the one, and
put the the other into thy bottle. Lord who this day made the heavens (or
air) without which I cannot live naturally, no not for a moment; infuse into
my heart the Spirit of grace, without which spiritually I cannot breathe in my
prayers, nor sigh, nor so much as move any faculty or part of soul or body
unto thee. As often as I take in, or let out the air which I breathe, let me
receive in grace from thee, and breathe out praise unto thee. Amen.

The close out of Scripture.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with me, 2. Cor. 13. vlt.

The Euening's Devotion for Monday.
THE HYMN.
Hear me, O Lord, in the multitude of thy mercies; even in the truth of thy
salvation, Psalm. 69. 14.

Let not the water floods drown me, nor the deep swallow me up: and let not
the pit shut her mouth upon me, verse 16.

Thou did divide the sea through thy power, and brakest the heads of the
Dragons in the waters, Psalm. 74. 14.

Thou smoest the heads of Leuiathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat for
the people in the wilderness, verse 15.

Thou broughtest out fountains and waters out of the hard Rocks; thou driedst
up mighty waters, verse 16.

Thou art the God that does wonders, and have declared thy power among the
people, Psalm. 77. 14.

The waters saw thee O God, the waters saw thee and were afraid, the depths
also were troubled, verse 16.

The clouds powered out water; the air thundered, and thine arrows went
abroad, verse 17.

The voice of thy thunder was heard round about; the lightnings shone upon the
ground; the earth was moved, verse 18.

Thou bring forth clouds from the ends of the world, and sendest forth
Lightnings with the rain, bringing the winds out of his treasures, Psalm. 135.

The springs of water were seen, and the foundations of the round world were
discovered at thy chiding, O Lord; at the blasting of the breath of thy
displeasure, Psalm. 18. 15.

Thy way is in the Sea, and thy paths in the great waters, and thy footsteps
are not known, Psalm. 77. 19.

THE ADMONITION for Munday's Evening, being an exhortation to meeknes.
THE ANALYSIS.
The special Arguments to persuade meeknes, set down in Scripture, are drawn
from 1. The causes Impulsive 1 Divine precepts. 2 humane frailty.
Exemplary: God the Father. Son. H. Ghost.
The Saints. The creatures in Which nature has patern'd this virtue.

2 The effects 1 Peace With God. With men.
2 Wealth. 3 Wisdom and spiritual understanding. 4 Sanctifying graces, the
fruits of the Spirit. 5 Blessedness.



THE TEXTS.
PVt them in mind, God commands meekness.
etc. Tit. 3. 1.

That they be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness to all men, verse
2.

If any man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a
one in the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6. 1.

I beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called,
with lowliness, and meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one another in
love, Ephesians. 4. 2.

Put on therefore, as the Elect of God, holy and beloved, the bowels of mercy,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, Col. 3. 12.

Forbearing one another, forgiving one another; if any man have a quarrel
against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye, verse 13.

But thou, O man of God, fly these things, and follow after righteousness,
godliness, faith, patience, meekness, 1. Tim. 6. 11.

Dearly beloved avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath; For
it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord, Romans 12. 19.

Wherefore, my beloved Brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to
speak, and slow to wrath, Iam. 1. 19.

For the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, verse 20.

Look diligently, least any man fail of the grace of God; least any root of
bitterness spring up and trouble you, and thereby many be defiled. Heb 12. 15.

Consider thy self, Our condition requires it.
least thou also be tempted, Gal. 6. 1.

Let him among you that is without sin, cast the first stone, Ioh. 8. 7.

He shall have judgment without mercy that has showed no mercy; Examples of
mecknes.
and mercy rejoices against judgment, Iam. 3. 13.

And they heard the voice of the Lord in the cool of the day, God the Father.
walking in the garden, etc. Genesis 3. 8.

And after the earthquake there was a fire, but God was not in the fire; and
after the fire a still small voice, verse 12. (in which voice God was)* And it
was so when Eliah heard it. etc. verse 13.

Nevertheless, for thy great mercies sake, thou did not utterly consume
them, nor forsake them, for thou art a gracious and merciful God, Nehem. 9. 31.

God said to Jonah, Do thou well to be angry for thy Gourd? Ion. 4. 9.

Thou have pity on the Gourd for which thou have not labored, which came in a
night, and perished in a night, verse 10.

And should not I spare Nineueh that great City, wherein are more then
sixscore thousand persons that cannot discern between their right hand and
their left; and also much cattle, verse 11.

Tell the daughter of Soon Behold the King comes unto thee, The Son.
meek, Mat. 21. 5.

He shall not strive nor cry; neither shall any man hear his voice in the
streets, Mat. 1^. 19.

A bruised reed shall he not break, nor smoking flax shall he not quench,
verse 20.

I beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, 2. Cor. 10. 1.

The said, The Spirit.
Lord will thou command that we call for fire from heaven, etc. Luke 9. 54.

But he turned and rebuked them, and said, ye know not of what spirit ye are
made, verse 55.

Lo the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit descending like a
Dove, and lightening upon him, Math. 3. 16.

The Saints. Moses.
Now Moses was a very meek man above all the men that were upon the face of
the earth, Number. 12. 3.

Let him curse, David.
seeing the Lord has said unto me, Curse David: who shall then say; wherefore
have thou done so? 2. Sam. 16. 10.

My soul is even as a weaned child, Psalm. 131. 3.

But I was like a Lamb, Jeremiah.
or an Ox that is brought to the slaughter; and I knew not that they had
devised devises against me, Ier. 11. 19.

Jesus said, it is not meet to take the childrens bread, and cast it to Dogs,
Mar. 7. 27.

And she said unto him, The woman of Canaan.
Yes Lord; yet the dogs under the table eat of the childrens crumbs, verse 28.

But we were gentle among you; Saint Paul.
even as a nurse cherishes her children, 1. These. 2. 7.

Thy name is as an ointment powered out, Resemblances in the creatures.
Cant. 1.

The anointment which ye have received of him abides in you, 1. Ioh. 2. 27.

I will give them hearts of flesh. Ezekiel. 11. 19.

I send you as Lambs among wolves, Luke 10. 3.

Behold the Lamb of God, etc. Ioh. 1. 29.

He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and like a Lamb dumb before the
shearer, so opened he not his mouth, Acts 8. 32.

Be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves, Mat 10. 16.

Learn that I am meek, Meekness brings peace.
and ye shall find rest unto your souls, Math 11. 29.

The meek shall prosper in the earth, Wealth.
and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace, Psalm. 37. 11.

The Lord lifts up the meek, Honor.
Psalm. 147. 6.

The meek shall he guide in judgment, Wisdom.
and the meek will he teach his way, Psalm. 25. 9.

Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge among you, let him show out of a
good conversation his works in meekness of wisdom, Iam. 3. 13.

Receive with meekness the word ingraffed in you, which is able to save your
souls, Iam. 1. 21.

The wisdom which is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, Iam. 3. 17.

And the fruits of righteousness are sown in peace of them that make peace,
The fruits of the spirit.
verse 18.

Blessed are the meek, Blessedness
for they shall inherit the earth, Mat. 5. 5.

The Prayer for Munday-Euening. Composed of 1 Petitions suitable to the work of
the day. 2 Motives to meekness, agreeable to the precedent exhortation.

O Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, who as upon this day
were led as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a Lamb before thy Shearers,
openedst not thy mouth; who gave thy back to the smiters, and thy cheeks to
the nippers, and thine arms to the binders, and thy face to the spitters;
apply, I beseech thee, unto me these thy meek sufferings. Make that
profitable to me which thou enduredst for me. Let thy bonds, O meek Redeemer
set me free; let thy silence plead for me, let thy spittle cure my blindness,
let thy stripes heal me, let thy nakedness cloth me, and let thy meekness
in all discipline me. If thou who in the form of God thoughtest it no robbery
to be equal with God, yet humbledst thy self, and did become obedient to
death, even the death of the Cross, shall not I meekely submit my neck to the
yoke? If thou who art God did empty thy self and become of no reputation,
shall I that am but a worm of the earth fill my self, and swell with pride?
If thou suff^redst blows, shall not I an affront? If thou, the Beauty of
Heaven, enduredst spitting upon, shall not I endure the foam of a loose tongue?
Shall I for a word of disgrace venture my own life and assault the life of my
brother? Do I value the life of my body and soul so low, that I will pawn it
for a toy, a triflle, a mock, a word? God forbid. Thy Law, O God, commands
meekness; thine example (my Lord) persuades meekness; my condition requires
meekness; my frame and temper (after a sort) preaches meekness. Why have
thou given me a soft skin, but to pattern in my body this virtue of the
mind? Why have thou given me a tender heart, but to receive deep the
impression of compassionate grief? Why have thou given me melting eyes but to
weep for mine own infirmities, and my brethrens calamities? Why am I brought
into the world disarmed, without any offensive Weapon, but to teach me that I
should not fight with, nor hurt any? Thou, O Lord, have created me a Lamb,
shall I by rage and cruelty make my self a Tiger? Thou made me as a soft
rose of Sharon* and Lilly of the Vallie, shall I turn my self into a thorn
and thistle? I know Anger dis-figureth the body, much more the soul. It
hurts and endangereth others, much more my self. It is very offensive to
man, much more to thee. Wherefore I beseech thee, let thy peace always rule in
my heart, and quell and subdue all my rebellious affections, especially this of
wrath, the most violent and impetuous of all the rest. Weed out of my heart
all accursed Thorns and Thistles, that the seeds of thy Word may bring forth
the fruits of righteousness, which are sown in peace of them that love peace.
O let not the Sun go down on thy wrath against me, or my wrath against my
brethren, but grant that having made my peace with thee, by faith in thy blood,
with my brethren by forgiving them from my heart, and reconciling my self to
them, I may lay me down in peace and take my rest. And let thy hand, O
Savior, which shall protect me this night from all perils and dangers, raise
me the next morning to serve thee in my calling, and magnify thy goodness for
all thy mercies and favors vouchsafed unto me. So be it. Amen. I

The close out of Scripture.
BLessing, honor, glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb for ever and over, Amen. Revel. 5. vlt.

Tuesday's Devotion, being the third day from the Creation.
The Father works. Ioh. 5. 17. The work of Creation.
GOd said again, Let the waters under the Heaven be gathered* into one place,
and let the dry land appear: and it was so. Genesis 1. 9.

And God called the dry land earth; and he called the gathering together of the
waters Seas: and God saw that it was good, v. 10.

Then God said, Let the earth bud forth the bud of the herb that seedeth seed
the fruitful tree, which bears fruit according to his kind, which has his
seed in it self upon the earth: and it was so. ver. 11.

And the earth brought forth the bud of the herb, that seedeth seed according
to his kind; also the tree that bears fruit, which has his seed in it self
according to his kind: and God saw that it was good. ver. 12.

So the Evening and the Morning were the third day, ver. 13.

And I work. Ioh. 5. 17. The work of Redemption.
WHo is this that comes from Edom, with red garments from Bozrah? He is
glorious in his apparel, and walks in his great strength; I speak in
righteousness, and am mighty to save. Isa. 63. 1.

I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of all people there was none with me:
for I will tread them in mine anger, and tread them under foot in my wrath, and
their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my
raiment. ver. 3.

And two days after followed the Feast of the Passover, and of unleavened
bread: and the high Priests and Scribes sought how they might take him by
craft, and put him to death. Mar. 14. 1.

But they said, Not on the feast day, least there be a tumult among the
people. ver. 2.

And when he was in Bethania, in the house of Simon the Leper, as he sat at
Table, there came a woman, having a box of Ointment of Spikenard, very costly,
and she brake the Box and powered it on his head, ver. 3.

For thine instruction meditate In the Morning, upon the work of Creation. In
the Evening, upon the work of Redemption.


For thy comfort apply the Use of the one. Benefit of the other.


For thy correction reprove thy Abuse of the one. Unthankfulness for the other.


Quicken Thy thanksgiving by the Hymn. Thine obedience by the admonition. Thy
zeal and devotion by the prayer ensuing.


The Hymn for Tuesday-morning.
SIng unto the Lord a new song; sing cheerfully with a loud voice, Psalm. 33. 3.

For the Word of the Lord is true, and all his works are faithful, ver. 4.

He loves righteousness and judgment; all the earth is full of the goodness
of the Lord, ver. 5.

He gathers the waters of the Sea together, as it were upon an heap, and
lays up the deep, as in a Treasure-house, ver. 7.

Let the Earth fear the Lord; stand in awe of him all ye that dwell in the
world, ver. 8.

For he spoke and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast, ver. 9.

He so laid the Foundations, that it should not move at any time, Psalm. 104. 5.

He waters the hills from above; the earth is filled with the fruits of his
works, ver. 3.

He brings forth grass for the Cattle, and green herbs for the use of
men, ver. 14.

That he may bring food out of the Earth, and Wine that makes glad the heart
of man, and Oil to make him a cheerful countenance, and Bread to strengthen
man's heart, ver. 15.

The Trees of the Lord also are full of sap, even as the Cedars of Lebanon
which he has planted, ver. 16.

He covers the Heavens with Clouds, and prepares rain for the earth, and
makes the grass to grow upon the mountains, Psalm. 147. 8.

Which gives to the beasts their food, and to the young Ravens that cry, ver.
9.

Praise the Lord upon earth ye Dragons and all deepes, Psalm. 148. 7.

Mountains and all Hills, fruitful Trees and all Cedars, ver. 9.

Every day will I give thanks unto the Lord, and praise his Name for ever,
Psalm. 145. 2.

Thou have given me more joy of heart, then they whose Corn and Wine, and Oil
increased, Psalm. 4. 8.

The Admonition for Tuesday morning: being an exhortation to godly sorrow.
THE ANALYSIS.
We must desire and pray for godly sorrow, because it is 1 A special duty
required in the Law. Gospel.
2 The Saints continual practice. 3 A necessary disposition to make us capable
of the Gospel. 4 A Sacrifice well pleasing to God. 5 An effect of true
conversion. 6 An efficient cause of many divine virtues. 7 An assurance of
eternal joy and comfort. 8 The want of it, a fearful sign of a reprobate
sense.


THE TEXTS.
TVrne ye unto me with all your heart, 1 Gods Commandment.
with fasting, weeping and mourning, Joel 2. 12.

And rent your hearts and not your garments, etc. ver. 13.

And in that day did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping and mourning, and to
baldness, and girding with Sackcloth, Isa. 22. 12.

Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to
repentance, 2 Cor. 7. 9.

For ye were made sorry after a godly manner, that ye might receive damage in
nothing.

Weep not for me, but weep for your selves, Luke 23. 28.

Ye shall weep and lament, etc. Io. 16. 20.

Howl and lament, etc. James 5. 1.

I abhor my self, 2 The Saints practice.
and repent in dust and ashes, Job. 42. 6.

I fainted in my mourning; I cause my bed every night to swim, and water my
couch with my tears, Psalm. 6. 6.

I will confess my wickedness, and be sorry for my sin Ps. 38. 18. Hezekiah.


Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, he and the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, and therefore the wrath of the Lord came not in the days of
Hezekiah, Manasses.
2 Cro. 33. 12.

And when he was in affliction he besought the Lord his God, and humbled
himself greatly before the God of his fathers, 2 Cr. 33. 12

And prayed unto him, and was entreated of him, ver. 13.

Now when Ezra had prayed, Ezra.
and had confessed weeping and casting himself down before the house of God,
there assembled unto him, out of Israel, a very great congregation of men, and
women, and children; for the people wept very sore, Ezr. 10. 1.

And Peter remembered the words which Jesus said unto him, Peter.
Before the Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice; and he went out, and
wept bitterly, Mat. 26. 75.

Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, 3 A preparation to the Gospel.
and I will ease you, Mat. 11. 28.

He has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent me to
heal the broken hearted, Luke 4. 18.

The Sacrifice of God is a contrite spirit; 4 Acceptable to God.
a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. Psalm. 51. 17.

Put my tears in thy bottle; are not these things noted in thy book? Psalm.
56. 8.

The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping, Psalm. 6. 8.

Tell Hezekiah, the Captain of my people, saying; I have heard thy prayer, I
have seen thy tears, I will heal thee, 2 Kings 30. 5.

And when they heard these things, 5 The effect of true conversion.
they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, Men and Brethren, what
shall we do? Act. 2. 37.

Godly sorrow causes repentance not to be repented of; 6 A cause of many
divine virtues.
but worldly sorrow causes death, 2. Cor. 7. 10.

For behold this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what
carfulness it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves, yea what
indignation, yea what fear, yea what vehement desire, yea what zeal, yea what
revenge, ver. 11.

They that sow in tears, 7 Brings joy and comfort.
shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126. 7.

I dwell with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit
of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite, Isa. 57. 15.

Ye shall be sorrowful but your sorrow shall be turned into joy; Ioh. 16. 20.

Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5. 4.

We have mourned unto you, 8 The want of it fearful.
and ye have not wept, Luke 7. 32.

And ye are puffed up, and have not sorrowed, 1 Cor. 5. 2.

Woe be unto thee Corazin, woe unto thee Rethsaida, etc. for they, etc. in
sack cloth, Mat. 11. 21.

And I gave her time to repent, and she would not repent, Revel. 2. 21.

After thy hard and impenitent heart treasurest up to thy self wrath in the
day of wrath, Romans 2. 3.

THE PRAYER FOR Tuesday morning; composed of 1. Petitions suitable to the work
of the day. 2. Motives to godly sorrow, agreeable to the precedent exhortation.

O That my head were water, and mine eyes were a spring of tears, that I might
weep day and night, for the deluge of sin ouerflowing the whole world; but
especially, for the inundation thereof in this our I^^nd. We are overwhelmed in
this Torrent, and should be drowned, but that the gales of thy Spirit drive it
somewhat back, and thy restraining Grace with the public discipline of our
Laws and Canons set some bounds to it. What hearts can vent sight enough, what
eyes yield sufficient tears to bewail those public sins, under the burden
whereof the Land sinketh; besides those private which lie as heavy on each of
us in particular? Sins of omission, sins of commission; sins of birth,
sins of life; sins of youth, sins of age; sins of frailty, sins of
^ilfulnesse; sins of act sins of habit and custom; sins of secret taint,
sins of open st^in^; Sins of infirmity committed against the power of the
Father; sins of ignoranc^ against the wisdom of the Son; and sins of
malice against the grace of thy holy Spirit. If I should go about to extenuate
my sinne^, even that would aggrauate them: if to excuse them, my conscience
would condemn me. For I must confess to thy glory, and my own shame, that by
my Original and Actual, secret and open, sudden and advised, ignorant an^
^^^icious sins, I have dishonored thy Name, profaned thy Word, defaced
thine Image, grieved thy* Spirit, despighted thy Grace, wounded my own
conscience, stained my good name, scandalized my profession* deprived my self
of the comforts of the Gospel, of the protection of Angels, of the sweet
fellowship of thy Spirit, and drawn upon m^e many heavy judgments, and
treasured up wrath against the day of wrath. Yet because I mourn (with David)
in my prayers, I weep bitterly with Peter, I abhor my self in dust and
ashes with Job, I am ashamed and confounded with Ezra, Lord let thy mercy
prevail against thy justice; my sighs and tears against my sinful joys, and
thy Sons blood even against my crimson sins. Lord who on this day made
dry Land, and firm ground to appear, dry up my ^^^res with the beams of thy
mercy, and give me firm ground of comfort in thy Word. Lord, who on this day
createdst all kind of seeds, sow in my heart the incorruptible seed of thy
Word, that I may thereby be regenerated to a lively hope. Lord, who on this day
createdst all kinds of fruitful Trees, make me like a good Tree to bring
forth good fruit here, that I may hereafter eat of the Tree of Life which is
in the midst of the Paradise of God. So be it. Amen.

The close out of Scripture.
GOd, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, grant me, according to the riches
of his glory, that I may be strengthened by his spirit in the inner man, Ephesians.
3. 16. That Christ may dwell in my heart by faith, that I being rooted and
grounded in love, ver. 17.

May be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height, v. 8.

And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, that I may be filled
with the fullness of God, verse 19.

The Devotions for Tuesdayes Evening.
THE HYMN alluding to the work of God on this day in the Allegory.
OVT of the deep have I called unto thee, O Lord; Lord hear my voice, Psalm.
130. 1.

O let thine ears consider well the voice of my complaint, verse 2.

If thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who can
abide it? ver. 3.

But there is mercy with thee, therefore thou shall be feared, verse 4.

I look for the Lord; my soul does wait for him; in his word is my trust,
verse 5.

My soul flies to the Lord before the Morning watch, I say before the Morning
watch, verse 6.

I have watched, and am even as a Sparrow that sits alone on the house top*
Psalm. 102. 7.

My heart is smitten down and withered like grass, so that I forget to eat my
bread, verse 4.

Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and instructest him in thy
Law.

They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126. 7.

He that now goes on his way weeping, and bears forth good seed, shall
doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaues with him, verse. 8.

The righteous shall flourish like a Palm Tree, and shall spread abroad like a
Cedar in Lebanon, Psalm. 92. 11.

He shall be like a tree planted by the Riuer's side, which brings forth her
fruit in due season, Psalm. 1. 3.

Whose leaf shall not fall, and what soever he does it shall prosper. verse 4.

Such as be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of
the house of our God, Psalm. 92. 12.

They also shall bring forth more fruit in their age, and shall befat and well
liking, ver. 13.

THE ADMONITION for Tuesday Evening; being an exhortation to hunger and thirst
for righteousness; whereunto our Savior ascribes the fourth Beatitude.
THE ANALYSIS.
We must diligently and earnestly seek after the means of our salvation
because thereby -- 1 We obey God. 2 We imitate his Saints. 3 We obtain
blessings Temporal. Spiritual. 1 Favor. 2 Delight. 3 Peace. 4 Life. 5
Co^tentment. 6 The Kingdom of heaven.




THE TEXTS.
SEek the Lord and his strength, seek his face evermore, Precepts for seeking
the means of salvation.
Psalm. 105. 4.

Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that meat which endures to
everlasting life, Ioh. 6. 27.

Receive mine instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather then fine gold,
Prou. 5. 10.

For wisdom is better then precious stones; and all pleasures are not to be
compared unto her, verse 11.

Follow after love, and covet spiritual things, 1. Cor. 14. 1.

Follow peace with all men and holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord; Heb. 12. 14.

Set your affections on things which are above, Examples.
and not on things which are in the earth, Col. 3. 2.

My soul breaks out for the very fervent desire that it has always to thy
judgments, Psalm. 119. 26.

My soul is a thirst, David.
for God, even for the living God, Psalm. 42. 1, 2.

One thing is needful, Mary.
and Mary has chosen that good part which shall not be taken away from her,
Luke 10. 41.

From the time of John Baptist, The bearers of John Baptist.
hitherto the Kingdom of heaven has suffered viclence, and the violent take
it by force, Math. 1. 12.

Length of days is in her right hand, Promises of life.
and in her left hand riches and glory, Prou. 3. 16.

Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, All things needful.
and his righteousness, and all other things shall be added unto you Mat. 6.
33.

Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now
is, and that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4. 8.

If from thence thou seek the Lord, Gods favor.
thou shall find him. Deuteronomy. 4. 29.

Her ways are the ways as pleasure. Delight. Peace.
and all her paths are peace, Pro. 3. 17.

She is a Tree of life to them that lay hold upon her; Life.
and happy is every one that reteineth her, verse 18.

Your heart shall live that seek good, Blessed content.
Psalm. 69. 33.

Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for righteousness: The kingdom of
heaven.
for they shall be satisfied, Mat. 5. 6.

The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a Merchant man that seeks good pearls,
Mat. 3. 45.

Who having found a Pearl of great price, went and fold all that he had, and
bought it, verse 46.

The Prayer for Tuesday Evening: composed of Petitions suitable to the the
sufferings of Christ on this day. Motives to seek after the means of our
salvation, agreeable to the precedent exhortation.

BLessed Redeemer, who trodest the wine press of thy father's wrath alone,
reconcile me to thy Father, and of a child of wrath make me a child of grace,
and son of desires. Thou who trodest the wine press alone, no Arch-angell,
or Angel, or any creature in heaven or in earth, being joined with thee in that
work. Give me a taste of the new wine of thy Gospel, to cheer up and revive
my drooping spirits, and comfort my heavy and sorrowful heart. Thou which
came with thy garments red from Bozra; yea, as red as blood. Cloth me with
thy red garment died in thine own blood. Cover my nakedness, deformities,
wounds, and sores from the sight of thy Father. Thy garment is no narrow nor
scanty garment; it is large enough to cover thee, and all thine Elect. It is
the wedding garment, without which none shall ever be admitted into the Kings
Supper, but be bound hand and foot, and cast into outward darkness; where
shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth. And this doom we all deserved; for
we were borne naked and void of all good, and we lay a long time wallowing in
our own blood and filth, and no eye pitied us, till it pleased thee of mere
love and compassion to take upon thee a nature of infirmities, to cure all the
infirmities of our nature, and to cloth thy self with flesh, that thou
might bear off our blows, and receive the strokes of divine justice that
we should have endured, and deadded them in thine own body. O what shall I
return unto thee, by way of thankful acknowledgement of such thy love? I can
render thee nothing but that which thou have given me. I can render thee
nothing that is not thy due before. I can render thee nothing but that which
thou put into my heart to render it to thee. Wherefore I humbly beseech
thee, by thy grace to inflame my heart with thy love, to incite me to
perpetual praise and thanksgiving: to kindle in me an everlasting desire to
approve my self unto thee, and more and more tie thy love unto me. O let
nothing be so precious to me as thy favor, nothing so fearful as thy
displeasure; nothing so hateful as sin; nothing so desirable as thy grace. Let
me not now like a little child run in the dirt, and soil my clothes, and take
many a fall in pursuit of a Butter-fly, or a bubble of Soap appearing glorious
in the air, but suddenly vanishing to nothing. Let me not be so foolish as to
lay the foundation of my happiness in sinking sands, or go about to chase a
vanishing shadow. Let me enter into a serious consideration of the vanity of
the world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and shame of pleasures, and folly
of sports, and leuity of honors, and danger of greatness, and account of all.
Persuade me by thy Spirit out of thy Word that I have here no abiding City,
but seek for one hereafter. That I am a stranger and pilgrim here upon earth;
and therefore howsoever I have heretofore misspent my time, and mis-placed my
affections, and spilt my labors, and lost my self in following earthly
vanities; yet let me now take the right way to true contentment. Let all my
travails be toward heaven, all my trade for spiritual merchandise, all my
labor for the meat that perishes not, all my searching for the pearl of the
Gospel, all my seeking for the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof.
Let me desire temporal blessings only for spiritual ends; wealth, that I
may he rich in good works; preferment, to advance the honor of the Gospel;
health and strength, the better to enable me to do thee service; length of
days, that I may praise thee in the Land of the living. Lord, whose life was
sought this day to destroy it, seek thou mine to save it. Lord who this day
w^rt anointed to thy death and burial, anoint me with thy Spirit to eternal
life. Save me from the hands of all mine enemies, that I may serve thee
without fear, in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life. Guard
me by thy providence, that securely reposing my soul on thy mercy for my
absolution from sin, and my body on thy power for deliverance from all
dangers, I may so by rest and sleep refresh and strengthen both, that I may
rise the next morning more cheerfully to travail in the ways of thy laws,
and works of thy commandments. So be it. Amen.

The close out of Scripture.
Unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that I ask or
think, according to the power that works in me, be glory in the Church, by
Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end, Ephesians. 3. 20, 21.

(...)

enemies; for I fly to thee to help me, verse 9.

Be merciful unto me, and bless me, and show the light of thy countenance
upon me, and be merciful unto me, Psalm. 67. 1.

God is the Lord who has showed us light; bind the sacrifice with cords to
the horns of the Altar, Psalm. 118. 27.

There is sprung up a light for the righteous, and joyful gladness for such
as be true of heart, Psalm. 97. 11.

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye Righteous, and give thanks for a remembrance of
his holiness, verse 12.

I will consider the heavens, even the work of thy fingers; the Moon, the
Stars which thou have ordained, Psalm. 8. 3.

The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy
work, Psalm. 19. 1.

In them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which comes forth as a
Bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoices as a Giant to run his course,
verse 5.

It goes forth from the uttermost part of heaven, and runs about to the end
of it again, and nothing is hid from the heat thereof, verse 6.

The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? The Lord is
the strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid? Psalm. 27. 1.

Though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of death I will fear
no evil, for thou art with me; thy Rod and thy Staff they comfort me, Psalm.
23. 4.

Surely kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life; and I
shall remain a long season in the house of the Lord, verse 6.

The admonition for Wednesday morning, being an exhortation to mercy, whereunto
our Savior ascribes the fifth Beatitude.
THE ANALYSIS.
Mercy is a virtue highly to be esteemed, and carefully to be practiced,
because it is 1 Our onley plea and hope. 2 The sovereign attribute of God. 3
His strickt charge to us. 4 That upon which he proceeds in the last
Judgment. 5 A choice fruit of the Spirit. 6 The Saints constant practice. 7
The Touchstone of true Religion. 8 The assurance of our salvation. 9 The
means to obtain manifold blessings in this life, and in the life to come.

THE TEXTS.
ENter not into judgment with thy servants, Salvation by Mercy.
O Lord, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified, Psalm. 143. 2.

The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day, 2 Timothy 1. 18.

That he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy,
Romans 9. 23.

For God has concluded all under unbelief, that he might have mercy upon
all, Romans 10. 31.

And the Lord passed by before him, It is the most eminent attribute to God.
and proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long
suffering, and abundant in goodness and in truth, Exodus 34. 6.

Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, ver.
7.

God is rich in mercy, Ephesians 2. 4.

Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the Heavens, and thy faithfulness reaches to the
Clouds, Psalm 36. 5.

For thou, Lord, art good and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy to all
them that call upon thee, Psalm. 86. 5.

The Lord is gracious and full of compassion; slow to anger, and of great
mercy, Psalm. 145. 8.

The Lord is good unto all, and his tender mercies are over all his works,
ver. 9.

Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercy, and
God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 3.

He has showed thee, Precepts of mercy.
O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do
justly, and love mercy, etc. Micah 6. 8.

Thus speaks the Lord, Execute true judgment, and show mercy and compassion
every man to his brother, Zach. 7 9.

Be ye merciful as your father also is merciful, Luke 6. 36.

Give Alms of those things which are within, and behold all things shall be
clean to you, Luke 11. 41.

Sell that ye have, and give Alms, Luke 12. 13.

Be ye kind one to another; tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as
God, for Christ's sake, has forgiven you, Ephesians. 4. 32.

I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, Hos. 6. 6 Mat. 9. 13.

Put on therefore, as the Elect of God, bowels of mercy, etc. Col. 3. 12.

To do good and communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased, Hebr. 3. 16.

Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as
brethren; be pitiful, be courteous, 1 Pet. 3. 8.

Remember those that are in bonds, as though ye were bound with them, Heb. 13.
3.

Come ye blessed of my Father; The last judgment proceeds upon works of mercy.
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundations of the world, Mat.
25. 34.

For I was hungry, and ye gave me meat, ver. 35.

I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, etc.

In that ye did it to the least of my brethren, ye did it unto me, ver. 40.

But the fruits of the Spirit are joy, Mercy, the fruit of the Spirit.
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, etc. Gal. 5. 22.

The fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth
Ephesians. 5. 9.

If I have withheld the poor from their desire; The Saints practice.
if I have caused the eye of the widow to fail; if I have eaten my morsel
alone, and the fatherless has not eaten thereof, Job. 31. 17.

If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, Jobs.
or any poor without covering, ver. 19.

If his bones have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with the fleece
of my sheep, ver. 20.

Now there was in Ioppa a certain woman, a Disciple called Tabitha, Tabithas.
which by interpretation is called Dorcas; this woman was full of good works
and almesdeeds which she did, Act 9. 36.

There was a certain man in Cesaria called Cornelius, Cornelius.
of the band, called the Italian band, Act. 10. 1.

A devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, which gave much
alms to the people, ver. 2.

There came a certain Samaritane also that way, The good Samaritans
and when he saw him, he had compassion on him, Luke 10. 33.

And went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in Oil and Wine, etc. ver.
34.

He said, He was his Neighbor that showed mercy on him; then said Jesus to
him, Go thou, and do likewise, ver. 37.

Now I have all: Philippians.
I abound, I am full, having received from Epaphroditus the things that were
sent from you, an ointment of a sweet smelling sacrifice acceptable and
pleasing to God, Phil. 4. 18.

The Lord give mercy to Onesiphorus his house, Onesiphorus
for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chains, 2 Timothy 1. 16.

We have great joy and consolation in thy love, Philemons.
because the bowels of the Saints are refreshed by thee, brother, Phil. 7.

Pure Religion, Works of mercy, a certain note of pure Religion.
and undefiled before God, even the Father, is this; to to visit the
fatherless and widows in their adversities, and to keep himself unspotted
of the world, Iam. 1. 27.

There shall be judgment merciless to him that shows no mercy; In assurance
of salvation, and means of obtaining mercy* at Gods hand.
and mercy rejoices against justice, Iam. 2. 13.

Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, Mat 5. 7.

The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters shall be watered
also himself, Prou. 11. 25.

Give, and it shall be given unto you good measure, pressed down, and running
over, Luke 6. 38.

Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold
water, only in the name of a Disciple, verily he shall not lose his reward.

THE PRAYER FOR Wednesday morning;
composed of 1. Petitions suitable to the work of the day. 2. Motives to works
of mercy, agreeable to the precedent exhortation.


O Lord, what is man that thou art so mindful of him, or the son of man,
that thou so regardest him? Thou made so much of him, that thou made all
creatures for him; the Fowls of the Air, Fish in the Sea, and Beasts of the
Field to furnish his Table, and clothe his nakedness, and serve his use. The
earth thou createdst to sustain him, the water to wash and cool him, the air
to breath him, the fire to warm him, the Flowers to refresh him, the Herbs to
cure him, the Fruits and Grains to nourish him, the Mines to enrich him, the
precious Stones to adorn him; yea, the glorious Lamps of Heaven, The Sun and
Moon, to light him, the one in the Day, the other in the Night, and both to
measure his time, to direct his husbandry, to recreate him in his trauells, to
ripen his fruits and increase his store. Nay, (which far surpasses the
glorious beams of the Sun, and his comfortable light) thou gave him a sure
light of prophecy before the day dawne, and the daystarre arose in the
Firmament of the Church, and afterward causedst the Sun of righteousness to
arise upon him, to shine in his heart in this life by grace, and in Heaven by
glory for evermore. Shall I not rejoice in this light? Shall I not open all the
Casements of my soul to let it in? Shall I not account their feet beautiful,
and the ground happy on which they tread, who bring me tidings of this
wonderful Light? Shall I not love thee above all things, who have preferred
me above all things? Shall I not serve thee with all the faculties of my body
and soul, who make all thy Creatures serve me? What pretext can I have for
my ingratitude and disobedience to thee, so gracious a Lord and Master? I
cannot plead ignorance of thy Deity, for the Heavens declare thy glory, and
the Firmament shows thy handy-worke. I cannot pretend ignorance of thy Law,
for thou have put thy Word into my mouth, and written thy Law in my heart. I
cannot allege that I never heard of, or saw the Light of thy Gospel, for the
light came into the world, and shined in the darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not. Never had any Nation a more bright Sunshine of the
Gospel then ours. But we love darkness more then light, because our deeds
are evil. And because we love darkness more then light, thou might most
justly have already cast us into outward darkness. But there is mercy with
thee, that thou may be feared; there is Balm in Gilead to cure cur deadly
wounds; there is Vnctim in Christ; there is salvation in Jesus; there is
redemption in his blood; there is satisfaction in his death; there is merit in
his perfect obedience; there is hope in his resurrection and ascension; and
everlasting comfort in his sitting at the right hand of his Father, to make
intercession for us. O Eternal Advocate, plead my muse. Thou, who out of thy
pierced side openedst to all the inhabitants of the earth a Fountain for sin
and uncleanness, wash me from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin:
grant me thy peace which thou promisest thy chosen, that my heart be not
troubled. Make an atonement for me, and bring me into favor, with thy Father,
and my Father, thy God, and my God. And because all my hope is in thy mercy,
Lord let me imitate that virtue in thee which I implore. Let me pattern that
grace in my life, which saves my life. Let me from my heart forgive my
brethren their trespasses, compassionate their infirmities, relieve their
necessities, ease their crosses, and bear their burdens. Let the hungry have
never a just action against me at thy Bar, for not giving them meat, nor the
thirsty for not giving them drink; nor the naked, for not clothing them; nor
the sick and imprisoned, for not visiting them; nor the fatherless and
widows for not protecting and defending them. Let me, who need abundant mercy,
show abundant mercy. Let me mete such measure to my brethren as I expect from
thee. As a good child, let me follow the example of my heavenly Father, who
(as on this day) caused the Sun to rise upon the Just and the unjust. So let
the light of my knowledge, and heat of my love be extended to all, but
especially to those of the household of faith. And as the Sun shines upon my
body, so make thy countenance shine upon my soul. As the Sun draws up
exhalations from the earth, so raise thou my thoughts and desires from earthy
comforts to heavenly objects. As the Sun melts Snow and Ice: so melt thou
my heart frozen in the dregs of sin. As the Snnne dispelleth all mists of
darkness, and cleereth the Air from all Fogs and noisome Vapors: so let thy
Spirit disped all errors of my understanding, and clear my will from all fogs
and fumes of noisome lusts. Give me grace to keep a regular, constant, and
unwearied course upon earth, as the Sun does in Heaven; and to grow in grace,
and increase in heavenly wisdom, as the Sun ascends higher, and shines
still brighter till it be high Noone. Lastly, the Sun rejoices as a Giant
to run his course: So grant that I may cheerfully run and finish my race,
and after I have finished it, receive the reward of the Righteous, who shall
shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of the Father for evermore. Amen.

The close out of Scripture.
Grant, Lord, that I may be filled with the knowledge of thy Will in all
wisdom and spiritual understanding, Col. 1. 9.

That I may walk worthy of thee, and please thee in all things, being
fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of thee, ver. 10.

Strengthened with all might through thy glorious power unto all patience, and
long suffering, with ioyfulnesse, ver. 11.

The Devotion for Wednesdayes Evening.
THE HYMN.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures for
ever, Psalm. 136. 1.

Which only does wonders; for his mercy indureth for ever, ver. 4.

Which by his excellent wisdom made the Heavens; for his mercy endures for
ever, ver. 5.

Which made great lights, for his mercy endures for ever, ver. 7.

The Sun to rule the day; for his mercy endures for ever, ver. 8.

The Moon and the Stars to govern the night; for his mercy endures for ever,
ver. 9.

He tells the number of the Stars, and calls them by their names, Psalm.
147. 4.

He appointed the Moon for certain seasons; and the Sun knows his going
down, Psalm. 104. 19.

Thou make darkness that it may be night, wherein all the beasts of the
Forest do move, ver. 20.

The Sun arises, and they get them away together; and lay them down in
their dens, ver. 22.

Man goes forth unto his work and to his labor until the Evening, ver. 23.

O Lord, our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in all the world, Psalm. 8. 9.

The Admonition for Wednesday Evening, being an Exhortation to purity in heart,
answerable to the sixth Beatitude.
THE ANALYSIS.
Purity, especially in heart, is to be prayed for, and sought after in regard
of God his 1. Special command for it. 2. Particular taking notice of it. 3.
High esteem and approbation thereof. 4. Gracious promises to it, of 1 Life. 2
Favor of Kings 3 Sight of himself. 4 His favor and bounty. 5 Profit by the
Word. 6 Abode in Heaven.


THE TEXTS.
NOw therefore serve the Lord, 1. Precepts for it.
and serve him in sincerity of heart, and in truth, Ios. 24. 14.

Prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only, 1. Sam. 7. 3.

They that are of a forward heart are an abomination to the Lord, but such as
are upright in the way are his delight, Prou. 11. 20.

My son give me thy heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways, Pro. 23. 26.

Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye double-minded, Iam.
4. 8.

Serve God with a perfect heart, 2. God takes notice of it.
and with a willing mind; for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands
all imaginations of the thoughts, 1. Chron. 28. 9.

O Jerusalem wash thine heart, Ier 4. 4.

God sees not as man sees; for man looks on the outward appearance; but God
judges the heart, 1. Sam. 16. 7.

Thou know the hearts of all men, Acts 1.

He will lighten things hid in darkness, and make the counsels of thy heart
manifest, 1. Cor. 4. 5.

Thou love truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51. 6.

We speak not as pleasing men but as pleasing God who tries the hearts, 2.
These. 2. 4.

Let it be the hidden man of the heart in that which is not corruptible, 3.
God highly esteems it.
the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit; which is in the sight of God of
great price, 1. Per. 3. 4.

Keep the heart with all diligence; 4. Promises of 1. Life.
for out of it are the issues of life, Prou. 4. 23.

He that loves pureness in heart, the King shall be his friend, 2. Favor of
Kings.
Prou. 22. 11.

Blessed are the pure in heart, 3. Sight of God.
for they shall see God, Math. 5. 8.

Truly God is good unto Israel, 4. Gods favors.
even to him that is of a clean heart, 5. Profiting by the Word.
Psalm. 73. 1.

That which fell on good ground, are they which with an honest and good heart
hear the Word, and keep it, and bring forth fruits with patience, Luke 18. 15.

Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord; 6. Abode in heaven.
or who shall stand in his Holy place? Psalm. 24. 3.

He that has clean hands, and a pure heart, verse 4.

He that walks uprightly, and speaks uprightly, etc. Isai. 33. 15.

He shall dwell on high, etc.

The Prayer for Wednesday-Euening.
Composed of 1 Petitions suitable to the sufferings of Christ on this day. 2
Motives to persuade purity in heart, and sincerity, agreeable to the precedent
exhortation.


MOst holy, blessed, and glorious God, who dwell in light which none may
approach, I miserable and sinful creature, by nature a child of the night, and
of darkness; nay, very darkness it self, am ashamed and confounded to lift
up mine eyes to heaven, or look toward the place where thine honor dwells.
For, I have sinned against heaven and against thee, and deserve to be cast out
for ever from the sight of thy face, and presence of thy glorious Majesty into
utter darkness which the devil the Prince of darkness, and his Angels that
are reserved in chains of darkness, till the great and terrible Day of thy
wrath. For that heavenly light which thou have kindled in my heart (though I
seek to smother it never so much) clearly conuinceth my conscience, that I
prefer the pleasures of sin which are the works of darkness, before the
glorious inheritance of thy Saints in light, having my very understanding, the
only light which is in me, much darkened through the ignorance that is in me,
by reason of the hardness of my heart. And notwithstanding thou have called
me early and late, and stretched thy hands all the day long unto me, yet I
have walked still in the vanity of my mind, and wearied my self in the ways
of wickedness, and have not hearkened to thy voice whereby I might walk in
thy laws which thou have appointed for me. Or if for a short time I have
rejoiced in the light of the Gospel, yet soon after I have quenched thy Spirt,
and have given my self to wantonness, to work filthiness with greediness.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified. Though thou should drown all my former sins in
the bottomless sea of thy mercy; yet the sins of this day alone give
sufficient evidence against me, to condemn me. My unsanctified desires, and
impure thoughts, and vain imaginations, and idle words, and unfruitful works
make me inexcusable before thee. I cannot answer for my abuse of the
creatures, mis-spending my time which is most precious, and ouerstipping many
occasions of doing good. How negligent have I been in the duties of my
calling? How cold and dull in my exercises of Religion? How defective in the
confession of my sins? How careless in applying the sovereign remedies of
the Word? My very prayers which I make unto thee for the supplying of all my
wants, and healing of all my infirmities, are accompanied with so many wants
and infirmities, that I have need to ask pardon for these my imperfect
prayers. Lord give me a sense of my stupidity and senselessness, and a fervent
desire of more feruency and zeal, and true remorse and sorrow for want of
remorse and sorrow for these my sins. And because that I know not how to pray
as I ought, let thy Spirit make intercession for me with sighs and groans which
cannot be expressed, and let the blood of thy Son speak better things for
me then the blood of Abel. O let not the glorious light of Heaven go down
upon thy displeasure against me, but for thy decre Son, Jesus Christ his
sake, who is the pr^pitiation for my sins, be reconciled unto me while it is
called to day, that I may find rest unto my soul this night, together with
the comfortable refreshing of my body by sleep. So shall I never cease with a
joyful heart, and a cheerful voice, to praise thee for thine unspeakable
love in electing me to eternal life in Heaven, before thou had laid the
foundations of the earth: Thy goodness in creating me after thine own Image;
thy mercy in redeeming me with the blood of thine only begotton Son; thy
grace in calling me to the knowledge of thy truth; and thy fatherly care in
safely protecting me, mercifully correcting, and liberally providing for me
ever since the day thou breathedst into me the breath of life. Give me yet
more, O Lord. What will thou give me? Give me a thankful heart for all these
inestimable favors of thine infinite love, that I may continually bless thee
for thy continual blessings, with the dew of thy grace descending upon me,
always beginning the day with thy mercy, and ending it with thy praise.
Blessed Redeemer, who were this day sold for thirty pieces of Silver, redeem
me from the thraldom of sin, and never suffer me with Ahab, to sell my
self to work wickedness against thee. Let the heinousness of Judas his
sin, and the horror of his punishment deter me from betraying thy truth
for any worldly advantage whatsoever. O Bread of Life, which hungredst for my
sake; O Source of the Springs of Libanon, who thirstedst for my sake; O Joy of
all mankind, which sorrowedst for me; O Truth it self and fidelity, which
wast by false treachery betrayed for my sake; O the true Wedding garment which
wast stripped for me; O the Redemption and ransom of the world, who were sold
for my sake; O the Life and Resurrection of all that hope in thee, who dyedst
for me; imprint thy love so deep into my heart, that neither hunger, nor
thirst, nor sorrow, nor nakedness, nor treachery, nor thraldom, nor hope of
reward, nor fear of persecution, nor life, nor death may race it out. Was it
not enough, O Lord, to become man for me, but thou must become a servant? Was
it not enough as a servant to be scourged for me, but must thou also, like a
bondslaue, be sold for me, that am a bond-slaue of Satan, sold under sin?
Was it not too much to be sold, but must thou be sold at so vile a price as
thirty pieces of silver? Was no means thought mean enough to abase thee? The
cheaper thou were sold, the dearer I cost thee; for thou gave not only thy
liberty and life, but thy estimation also for me. The lower thou were abased,
the higher thou have exalted me. The less was given for thee, the more I owe
thee, who were content to be prized solow, and made of no reputation for me. O
strange ransom! The Redeemer is sold, that the sold bond-slaue may be
redeemed. O admirable judgment! The righteous is condemned, that the
unrighteous may righteously be acquitted. O wonderful cure! The Physician is
sick, and dies, that the Patient may live. Me^ke Savior, thou foresawest
that the Devil would enter into Judas before he entered. Thou knew that
he would betray thee, yet thou chosest him: that he would lift up his foot
against thee, yet thou shoddest him with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace: that he would sell thee, yet thou trustedst him with thy Purse: that
the poison of Aspes was under his lip, yet thou sufferedst him to touch thy
Lips in which there was no guile, and seal them with a kiss; and gently
vnsealing them, thou said no more to him but, Friend, how came thou hither?
Do thou betray the Son of man with a kiss? Sweet Savior, how will thou
entertain thy friends, when thou thus intreatedst thy treacherous servant? Thou
who were so good to him, that was so bad, as worse never was; how will thy
grace and goodness abound to them that excel in virtue. If thou sufferedst a
Traitor to kiss thee, thou will never resuse to cheer up the drooping
countenance of a penitent sinner with a kiss. Thy Espouse emboldneth me to beg
that kindness of thee which she did. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
lips. Kiss thou me with a kiss of love, but let me never kiss thee with the
kiss of Judas. Let me never draw near to thee with my lips, and be far
from thee in my heart, but first draw ^y heart, and then my body and soul unto
thee. Thou requirest the heart, and searchest the heart, and (...) the heart,
and acceptest of no service or sacrifice without it; Lord, give me a clean
heart, and (...) a right Spirit within me, that I may give thee such a heart as
thou requirest. Cleanse the thoughts, and affections, and intentions of my heart
from all impurity, impiety, iniquity, in-sincerity, fraud, and hypocrisy. Let
all the thoughts of my heart be pure, the desires holy, the intentions
sincere, the affections unfeigned, and let all my words and works be hearty. O
let my heart be always fixed upon thee; possessed with thee; established in
thee; true unto thee; upright toward thee; and sincere for thee; that in the
great Day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be manifested, my heart may
not condemn me, but thou approve it, and accept it, and fill it with such
joys as never entered into the heart of man. So be it. Amen.

The close out of Scripture.
Thanks be given to the Father, which has made me meet to be partaker of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1. 12.

Who has delivered me from the power of darkness, and has translated me
into the Kingdom of his dear Son, ver. 13.

In whom I have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins,
ver. 14.

Thursday's Devotion, being the fifth day from the Creation.
The Father works. Ioh. 5. 17. The work of Creation on this day.
SO afterward God said, Let the waters bring forth in abundance every creeping
thing that has life: and let the Foul fly upon the earth in the open
Firmament of the Heaven Genesis 1. ^0.

Then God created the great Whales, and every thing living and moving, which
the waters brought forth in abundance, according to their kind, and every
feathered Foul, according to his kind; and God saw that it was good, ver. 21.

Then God blessed them, saying; Bring forth fruit and multiply, and fill the
waters in the Seas, and let the Fowls multiply in the earth, v. 2^.

So the Evening and the Morning were the fifth day.

And I work, Ioh. 5. 17. The work of Redemption on this day.
THen came the Day of unleavened bread, when the Passover must be sacrificed,
Luke 22. 7.

And be sent Peter and John, saying; Go and prepare us the Passover, that we
may eat it, ver. 8.

And they said, etc. v. 9. Then he said unto them, Behold, etc. v. 10.

And say to the goood man of the house, The Master says unto thee, Where is
the lodging where I shall eat my Passover with my Disciples, ver. 11.

Then he shall show you a great high Chamber, etc. ver. 12.

So they went, and found as he had said unto them, and neade ready the
Passover, ver. 13.

And he took Bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave to
them, saying; This is my Body which is given for you, do this in remembrance
of me, ver. 19.

Likewise also, after Supper he took the Cup, saying; This Cup is the new
Testament in my blood, which is shed for you, ver. 20.

And he came out, and went (as he was wont) to the Mount of Olives, and his
Disciples also followed him, ver. 39.

And when he came to the place, he said to them, Pray, lest ye enter into
temptation, ver. 40.

And he gate himself from them about a stones cast, and kneeled down, and
prayed, ver. 41.

Saying, Father, if thou will, take away this Cup from me: nevertheless not my
will, but thine be done, ver. 42.

And there appeared an Angel unto him from Heaven, comforting him, ver. 43.

But being in an Agony, he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was like drops
of blood, trickling down the ground, ver. 44.

For thine instruction meditate In the Morning, on the creation of Fish and
Fow^e. In the Evening, on thy Saviors Agony. Last Passover. Supper.



For thy comfort apply to thy self the Benefits Corporal of the one.
Spiritual of the other.


For thy correction reprove thy Abuse of the one. Unthankfulness for the other.


Quicken Thy thanksgiving by the Hymn. Thine obedience by the admonition. Thy
zeal and patience by the prayer ensuing.


The Hymn for Thursday-morning.
O Lord, how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all; the
earth is full of thy riches, Psalm. 104. 24.

So is the great and wide Sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both
small and great beasts, ver. 25.

There go the Ships, and there is that Leuiathan, whom thou have made to take
his pastime therein, ver. 26.

These wait all upon thee, that thou may give them their meat in due
season, ver. 27.

That thou give, they gather, thou openest thy hand, and they are filled with
good, ver. 28.

Thou hidest thy face and they are troubled; thou take away their breath and
they dye, and return again to their dust, ver. 29.

They that go down to the Sea in ships, that do their business in great
waters, Psalm. 107. 23.

These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep, ver. 24.

For he commands, and raises up the stormy wind, which lifts up the waves
thereof. ver. 25.

They mount up to the Heavens, they go down again to the depth; their heart
is melted because of trouble, ver. 26.

They reele to and fro, and stagger like, a drunken man, and are even at their
wits end, ver. 27.

Then cry they to the Lord in trouble, and he brings them out of their
distress, v. 28.

He makes the storms to cease, so that the waves thereof are still, ver. 29.

Then are they glad because they are quiet; so he brings them to their
desired Haven, ver. 30.

Praise the Lord upon earth ye Dragons and all deepes, Psalm. 148. 7.

Beasts and all Cattle; worms, and fethered Fowls, ver. 10.

He sends the Springs into the Valleys, which run between the mountains,
Psalm. 104. 10.

By these Springs shall the Fowls of the Heaven dwell, and sing among the
branches, ver. 12.

Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord; Praise ye the Lord, Psalm.
150. 6.

The Admonition for Thursday Morning being an Exhortation to peacemaking or
the seventh Beatitude.
THE ANALYSIS.
The devout soul must labor to make peace, and have peace with all, as far as
it is possible in 1 Obedience To the LAW. To the GOSPEL.
2 Conformity to 1 God the Father. Son. H. Ghost.
2 The Saints.
3 In hope and expectation of blessings. 1 Temporal as 1 Good days. 2 A good
name or honor
2 Spiritual, as 1 The glad tidings of the Gospel. 2 Wisdom. 3
Righteousness. 4 The guidance of Gods Spirit. 5 The unity of the Spirit, or
communion of saints. 6 The Beatifical vision, or sight of God in Heaven.




THE TEXTS.
Seek peace and ensue it, Precepts.
Psalm. 34. 14.

Execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates, Zach. 8. 16.

Let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against your Neighbor, ver. 17.

Have Salt, and have peace one with another, Mar. 9. 50.

Into what house soever ye enter, first say; Peace be to this house, Luke 10.
5.

If it be possible, have peace with all men, Romans 12. 18.

Let us therefore follow after the things that make for peace, and things
wherewith we may edify one another, Romans 14 19.

God has called us to peace, 1 Cor. 7. 15.

Be of one mind; live in peace, 2 Cor. 13. 12.

Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which all ye are called in
one body, Col. 3. 15

Follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord
out of a pure heart, 2 Timothy 2. 22.

Follow peace with all men, God the Father, God of peace.
etc. Heb. 12. 14.

God is not the God of confusision, but of peace, 1 Cor. 14. 33.

The God of peace shall be with you, Phil. 4. 19.

To us a Son is given, The Son, Prince of peace.
and the government shall be upon his shoulders, and his Name shall be called,
Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of
peace, Isa. 9. 6.

Melchi^sedec* first being by interpretation, King of Righteousness; and after
that, also, King of Salem, which is King of peace, Heb. 7. 2.

That he might be like to the Son of God, who abides our Priest continually,
ver. 3.

The fruit of the Spirit is love, The holy Ghost, the Spirit of peace. Examples.
joy, peace, etc. Gal. 5. 22.

Abraham said, Let there be no strife between me and thee, and my Herdsmen
and thy Herdsmen, for we are brethren, Genesis 13. 8.

I labor for peace, The Saints, children of peace.
Psalm. 1 20 6.

Though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self servant unto all,
that I might gain the more, etc. 1 Cor. 9. 19.

Why suffer ye not rather wrong? 1 Cor. 6. 7.

Being reviled, we bless; being persecuted we suffer it. 1 Cor. 4. 12.

Being defamed, The f^uits of peace are Prosperity.
we entreat, ver. 13.

What man is he that desires life and loves many days, that he may see good,
Psalm. 34. 12.

Seek peace, etc. ver. 14.

Blessed are the Peacemakers, Honor.
for they shall be called, The children of the most High, Mat. 5. 9.

If the Son of peace be there, Benediction
your peace shall rest upon it; if not, it shall turn to you again, Luke 10.
6.

The Wisdom from above is first pure, Wisdom.
then peaceable, Iam. 3. 17.

The fruits of righteousness are sown in peace of them that make peace,
Righteousness.
Iam. 3. 18.

The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace, and
joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17.

Live in peace, The special presence of God.
and the God of love and peace shall be with you, 2 Cor. 13. 12.

Keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Unity.
Ephesians. 4. 3.

Follow peace, Beatificall vision.
etc. without which no man shall see God, Heb. 12. 14.

The Prayer for Thursday Morning:
composed of Petitions suitable to the work of the day. Motives to
peaceablenesse agreeable to the precedent exhortation.


ONe depth calls upon another; the depth of my ignorance upon the depth of
thy Wisdom; the depth of my wickedness, upon the depth of thy goodness; the
depth of my misery, upon the depth of thy mercy. O Lord, in the depth of thy
Wisdom find means to help my ignorance; in the depth of thy goodness, to
overcome my wickedness; in the depth of thy mercy to relieve my misery.
Inlighten mine understanding, that I may know mine ignorance; rectify my will,
that I may detest my wickedness; and mollify my heart, that I may bewail my
misery: and by faith incorporate me into thy Son, Jesus Christ, that I may be
partaker of his knowledge, righteousness, and happiness. As he made my
ignorance his ignorance, and my sin his sin, and my misery his misery* by
taking upon him my guilt, and satisfying for my punishment: so make thou (I
beseech thee) his Wisdom my instruction, his Righteousness my sanctification,
and his Glory my happiness. Consider me, I beseech thee, not as I am in my
self, defiled; but as I am in him, washed; not as I am in my self naked, but
as I am in him, clothed; not as I am in my self wounded, but as I am in him,
healed; not as in my self, a child of wrath, but as in him reconciled and at
peace with thee. And having my peace made with thee by his chastisement; grant
that I may have peace, as far as it is possible, with all men; especially,
with all the children of peace. Let me ever remember and consider, that thou,
my Father, art the God of peace; and thy Son, my Savior, the Prince of
peace; and his Law, the Gospel of peace; and his Servants, the Children of
peace; whose duty is the study of peace, and the mark they principally aim
at, as the end of their faith, the peace of God which passes all
understanding. O let me strive and contend against strife and contention, as a
thing most hateful to thee, hurtful to my neighbor, and most of all
prejudicial to my self, by endangering my person and state, disturbing the
quietness of my mind, hindering me in the prosecution of my business, and
(which is worst of all) making me indisposed, and altogether unfit for the
performance of divine duties. Teach me of what spirit I am or should be, even
of that which descended upon thy Son in the likeness of a Dove without Gall:
By this spirit mortify in me the lusts and affections of the flesh, as envy,
wrath, revenge, and the like. By the still voice, in which thou spakest to
Elias, let me learn that thou art not in the fire of my rage, nor in the
storm of my passion, but in the saft gale of grace. Lord, who on this day
replenishedst the Sea and Rivers with fish, and Air with Fowls in shapes
admirably various, and in number almost infinite; stir me up by the
consideration thereof, to admire thy power and wisdom in thus storing, and (as
it were) peopling this vaste and fearful seeming solitude; and much more to
magnify thy goodness in thus richly and daintily furnishing the tables of
men. Blessed Lord, who this day made the waters fruitful, let thy Spirit
move upon the waters of my tears, that they may abound in the fruits of
repentance, and be blessed in the increase of spiritual consolatious. Lord,
who this day command the Fowls to fly through the air, lift up my soul
from the earth with the wings of faith and hope, that she may fly up toward
Heaven. Make me light and cheerful after my heavy sorrows and grievous
afflictions, that though I have been as black and sad in my heart and
countenance, as if I had layen among the pots, yet I may be, by the grace of
thy Spirit, which descended in the likeness of a Dove, like that Dove, whose
wings are silver, and her feathers like gold. So be it. Amen.

The close out of Scripture.
God grant that my love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in all
judgment, Phil. 1 9.

That I may discern things that differ one from another, that I may be pure,
and without offense, until the day of Christ, ver. 10.

Filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Chirst, unto the
glory and praise of God, ver. 11.

The Devotion for Thursday Evening.
THE HYMN.
Wherein the devout soul expresses her desire of prayer for peace Public.
Private.


THE TEXTS.
BEhold how good and pleasant a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in
unity, Ps. 133. 1.

It is like the precious Ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the
Beard, even Aarons Beard, and went down to the skirts of his clothing, v. 2.

As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the Mountain of
Sion; for there the Lord promises his blessings, and life for evermore, ver. 3.

Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell with Meseck, and to have my
habitation in the tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120. 4.

My soul has long dwelt among them that be enemies unto peace, ver. 5.

I labor for peace; but when I speak to them thereof they make themselves
ready to battle, v. 6.

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper that love thee, Psalm. 122
6.

Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces, ver. 7.

For my brethren and companions sake, I will now say, Peace be within thee,
ver. 8.

Because of the house of the Lord my God, I will seek thy good, ver. 9.

The Admonition for Thursday Evening, being an Exhortation to Patience, the
eightth BEATITVDE.
THE ANALYSIS.
All true Christians must valiantly and cheerfully endure troubles for the
Gospel in respect of 1 God his Will. Power. Ordinance.
2 Christ his Love. Example. Sympathy with us.
3 The Saints Practice. Encouragement.
4 The enemies Conversion or Conviction.
5 Our selves who thereby receive 1 Trial. 2 Joy. 3 Assurance of God's love. 4
Quiet fruit of Righteousness. 5 Holiness and perfection. 6 Life. 7 Protection.
8 Honor before God. 9 Inestimable rewards: 1 In this life. 2 In the life to
come.




THE TEXTS.
IN the world ye shall have afflictions, Job 6. 33.

I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou, Lord, had done it, Psalm.
39. 9.

Let them that suffer according to the Will of God, God his Will.
commit their souls to him in well doing, as their faithful Creator, 1 Pet.
4. vlt.

Who has ever resisted his Will? Romans 9. 19.

He is able to subdue all things to himself, Power.
Phil. 3. 21.

We must through many afflictions enter into the Kingdom of God, Ordinance.
Act. 14. 22.

All that live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecutions, 2 Timothy 3. 12.

Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ 1 Timothy 2.
3.

You shall be hated of all men for my Names sake, Luke 21. 17.

The love of Christ constrains us, Christ his love.
because we thus judge, that if One dyed for all, then all were dead, 2 Cor.
5. 14.

Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or anguish,
or distress, or persecution, or famine, or sword? Romans 8. 35.

Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus, our Lord, Romans 8. 39.

Be not therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord Jesus, Example.
nor of me his prisoner, but be partakers of the afflictions of the Gospel,
2 Timothy 1. 8.

As the sufferings of Christ abound in us so our consolation abounds through
Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 5.

Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his
steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21.

Whom he fore-knew, he predestined to be conformed to the Image of his Son,
Romans 8. 29.

I was hungry, Sympathy.
and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, etc. Mat.
25. 43.

In as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not unto
me, ver. 45.

He that despises you, despises me, Luke 10. 16.

Saul, The Saints continual practice.
Saul, Why persecutest thou me? Act. 9. 4.

Joseph said, Joseph.
Fear not: for am not I under God? Genesis 50. 19.

Naked came I out of my Mothers womb, Job.
and naked shall I return thither again; the Lord gave, and the Lord has
taken away, and blessed be the Name of the Lord, Job. 1. 21.

Shall we receive good at the hands of the Lord, and shall we not receive
evil? In all this did not Job sin with his lips, Job 2. 10.

But I was a man that hears not, Daniel.
and in whose mouth are no reproves, Psalm. 38. 14.

For thy sake are we killed all the day long, etc. Psalm. 44. 22.

It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth. Jeremiah.
Ier. 3. 27.

He sits alone and keeps silence, because he has borne it upon him. ver.
28.

He puts his mouth to the dust if so be there may be hope, ver. 29.

He gives his cheek to him that smites him; he is filled full with reproach.

Others were tortured, The Apostls and Saints of the Primitive Church.
and would not be delivered, that they might receive a better resurrection,
Heb. 11. 35.

And others have been tried by mockings and scourgings, yea moreover, by bands
and imprisonment, ver. 36.

They were stoned, they were hewn in sunder, they were tempted, etc. verse 37,
38.

And they departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name, Act. 5. 41.

Then Paul answered, Paul.
What mean you to weep, and to break mine heart, for I am ready, not only
to be bound, but to dye also at Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus, Acts
21. 13.

In labors more abundant, The Thesa louians.
in stripes above measure, in prison more frequent, in death often, 2. Cor. 11
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, verses.

Remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labor of love, and
patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, 1. These. 13.

God has set forth us the last Apostles, as it were approved to death; for we
are made a spectacle to the world, and to Angels, and to men, 1. Cor. 4. 9.

Ye endured a great fight of afflictions, Heb. 10. 32.

Partly while ye were made a gazing stock, The Hebrews.
both by reproaches and afflictions, and partly while ye became companions of
them that were so used, ver. 33.

I know thy works, Thyatyra.
and thy labor, and thy patience, Reave. 2. 2.

I know thy faith, and thy patience, and thy works, ver. 19.

My bonds in Christ are manifest in that place, and all other places, Phil. 1.
13.

And many of the brethren in the Lord waxing confident by my bonds,
Encouragements.
are made more bold to speak the Word without fear, Phil. 1. 14.

And they cast Stephen out of the City, Couuersion of enemies.
and stoned him; and the Witnesses laid down their clothes at the young man's
feet, whose name was Saul, Act. 1. 58.

And they stoned Stephen calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my
Spirit, ver. 59.

And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord lay not this sin to
their charge; and when he had said this, he fell asleep, ver. 60.

Saul's conversion, Act. 9.

They shall lay their hands on you, Conviction.
and persecute you, delivering you up to their Synagogues, and into prison,
being brought before Kings and Rulers for my Names sake, Luke 21. 12.

And this shall turn to you for a testimony against them, ver. 13.

And you shall be brought before Governors and Kings for my Names sake, for a
testimony against them, and against the Gentiles, Trial.
Mat. 10. 18.

Others had trials of cruel mockings and scourges, yea moreover of bonds and
imprisonment, Heb. 11. 36.

The trying of your faith works patience, Iam. 1. 3.

Ye are in heaviness through manifold tentations, 1 Pet. 1. 6.

That the trial of your faith being much more precious then Gold (though it
be tried with fire) might be found unto praise, and honor, and glory at the
appearing of Jesus Christ, ver. 7.

Brethren account it exceeding great joy when ye fall into diverse tentations,
Joy.
Iam. 1. 2.

I rejoice in my sufferings, Col. 1. 24.

Your sorrow shall be turned into joy, Assurance of Gods love.
10. 16. 20.

As many as I love I rebuke and ch^sten, Reu. 3. 19.

Whom the Lord loves he chasteueth; and he scourges every son that he
receives, Heb. 12. 6.

No chastening, for the time seems to be joyous but grievous. Fruit of
righteousness.
Nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to
them that are exercised thereby, Holiness.
ver. 11.

He chasteneth us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.
ver. 10.

Let patience have her perfect work, Perfection.
that ye may be perfect and entire lacking nothing, James. 1. 4.

By patience ye shall inherit the promises, The promises.
Heb. 6. 12.

By your patience possess your souls, Luke 21. 19.

Because thou have kept the world of my patience, Life.
I will keep thee from the hour of tentation, Reu. 3. 10.

Whosoever confesses me before men, Honor in in heaven.
I will confess him before my Father which is in he^uen Luke 12. 8.

Verily I say unto you, Rewards in this life.
that no man that has forsaken house, or lands for my sake, but he shall
receive an hundred fold, and in the world to come life everlasting, Mark. 10.
29.

If ye suffer for righteousness sake, blessed are ye: yea fear not their
fear neither be troubled, 1. Pet. 3. 14.

But sanctify the Lord in your hearts, ver. 5.

If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him, Romans 8. 17.

The afflictions of this present life are not worthy the glory that shall be
revealed, ver. 18.

Blessed are they that suffer for righteousness sake, for their is the
Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5. 10.

THE PRAYER FOR Thursday evening
consisting, of Petitions suitable to the works of redemption on this day.
Motives to patience agreeable to the precedent exhortation.


GRacious Lord and Savior who this day did eat the Passover, and went
eating in thy Supper; Suppe with me in the Evening of this life, and grant that
I may Dine with thee in thy day of eternity. Gracious Redeemer, who this day
gave thy self to me in the Sacrament, first instituted by thee; and the day
following gave thy self for me on the Cross; give me a special says to
receive thee, and retain thee, and apply continually thy fear to embolden
me, thine Agony to comfort me, thy nakedness to cloathe me, thy co^demning to
quit me, thy blood to cleanse me, thy wounds to heal me, and thy death to
quicken me. O let not the work of thy hands be plucked out of thy hands. Let
not the purchase of thy blood be morgaged to the devil. Let not thy tears and
blood be shed in vain. Let not thy sighs and groans be breathed out to no
purpose. Let not thine agony and sweat, let not thy taking and binding; let
not thy arraigning and condemning; let not thy stripping and scourging; let not
thy buffetting and being spit upon; let not thy pricking and goaring; let not
thy crucifying and dying want their effects in me. What should I not do or
suffer for thee, who were martired in all parts of thy body and faculties of
thy soul for me: In thy mind by apprehension of thy Fathers wrath, in thy
affections by fear and sorrow even unto death; in thy inward parts by thine
agony: in thy outward by thy torments: in thy head by thorns: in thy cheeks
by buffets: in thy face by spettle: in thy ears by blasphemies: in thy smell
by the stench of Golgotha: in thy taste by gall and vinegar: in thy hands and
feet by nails: in thy body by stripes: in thy side by the lance: and in thy
joints by the cross. O Lord, who have called me to the knowledge of thy truth,
and by thy Spirit imprinted thy love in my heart by those nails which fastened
thee to the Cross. Let nothing ever be able to separate me from thy love, not
tribulation, nor anguish, nor persecution, nor height, nor depth, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor life, nor death: for I know that all things
work for the best to them that love thee. I cannot suffer the thousandth part
of that for thee, which thou have suffered for me. I cannot suffer the least
part of that which I deserve for my sins. I cannot suffer any thing which the
Apostles and Prophets have not suffered before me. I cannot suffer so much as
may any way counter-ballance the massy crown of glory prepared for me: for my
light and momentarie afflictions are no way worthy the glory that shall be
revealed upon me hereafter. And for the present, what are afflictions, or
crosses, or persecutions, or mockes, or disgraces? but the common lot of thy
children, the discipline of thy school, the physic for my soul, the pledge
of thy love, the badge for my profession, the incentiues of my devotion, the
trial of my faith, the exercise of my patience, the testimony of my
constancy, the mark of my conformity with thee. When I am thus chastened I
am judged of thee that I be not condemned of the world. Shall tribulation
therefore, or anguish, or bands, or imprisonment, or stripes, or banishment,
separate me from thy love? Nay, since I know they befall me by thy providence,
and are mitigated by thy mercy, and directed by thy love for my greater good;
they shall rather unite me faster to thee. How shall I deny thee who art the
Lord that bought me^ How should I grieve thy Spirit which comfort me in all
my griefs? How should I set that blood at naught which was the price of my
redemption? How should I ever willingly offend thee who art my peace, and have
reconciled me to thy Father, and paid my ransom with thy dearest hearts
blood? How can I ever forget thee who remembrest me at all times in all places;
in my iournies by thy conduct; at home by thy safeguard; in my prayers by thy
assistance; in my afflictions by thy comforts, in my board by thy bounty; in
my bed by thy protection; and in all my ways by thy support. To this thy
gracious providence and care which continually watches over all thine Elect: I
commend my sleep and rest this night, beseeching thee so to order it and me
that whether I sleep or wake, whether I labor or rest, whether I lie down or
rise up, all may be done under thy protection, in thy fear, to thy glory. So
be it, Amen.

The close out of Scripture.
TO him that is able to keep me that I fall not, and to present me faultlesse,
before the presence of his glory with joy Iud, 24.

That is, to God only wise my Savior, be glory, and majesty, and dominion,
and power. etc. ver. 24.

The Devotion for Friday:
The Father works. The work of creation on this day
Moreover God said, Let the earth bring forth the living thing, according to
his kind, cattle, and that which creeps, and the beast of the earth,
according to his kind, and it was so, Genesis 1. 24.

And God made the beast of the earth according to his kind, and the cattle
according to his kind, and every creeping thing of the earth according to his
kind: and God saw that it was good, ver. 25.

Furthermore, God said; Let us make man in our own Image according to our
likeness, and let him rule over the fish of the Sea, and over the Foul of the
Heaven, and over the beasts, and over all the earth, and over every thing that
crcepeth, and moves on the earth, ver. 26.

Thus God created the man in his Image: In the Image of God created he him;
he created them male and female, ver. 27.

And God blessed them, and God said to them: Bring forth fruit, and multiply,
and fill the earth, and subdue it, and rule over the fish of the Sea, and over
the foul of the heaven, and over every beast that moves upon the earth, ver.
28.

And God said, Behold, I have given to you every herb bearing seed which is
upon all the earth, and every tree wherein is the fruit of a tree bearing seed
that shall be to you for meat, ver. 29.

Likewise, to every beast of the earth, and to every soul of the heaven, and
every thing that moves upon the earth which has life in it self, every
green herb shall be for meat; and it was so, ver. 30.

And God saw all that he had made, and lo it was very good. So the Evening and
the Morning were the sixth day, ver. 31.

AND I WORK The work of Redemption on this day.
Matthew. 27. the whole Chap. as also Luke 23. Mar. 15. Ioh. 19. When he was
reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteously.

Who his own self bore our sins, in his own body on the tree, ver. 24.

For thine instruction meditate In the Morning, on the work of thy Creation.
In the Evening, on the work of thy Redemption, wrought on this day.


For thy comfort apply to thy self the benefit of both.

For thy correction check thy self for thy Defacing Gods Image stamped in thee
at thy Creation. Trampling under foot Christ's blood the price of thy
Redemption.


Quicken Thy thanksgiving by the Hymn. Thy sanctity and faith by the
exhortation. Thy zeal and devotion by the prayer ensuing.


The Hymn for Friday Morning, being the sixth day from the CREATION.
O Come let us worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker,
Psalm. 95. 6.

For he is the Lord our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands, v. 7.

What is man, Lord, that thou art so mindful of him, or the son of man that
thou visitest him? Psalm. 8. 4.

Thou made him little lower then the angels to crown him with glory and
worship, v. 5.

Thou made him to have dominion over thy works, and thou have put all things
in subjection under his feet, v. 6.

All Sheep and Oxen; yea, and the beasts of the field, v. 7.

The Fowls of the air and the Fishes of the Sea, and whatsoever walks
through the paths of the seas, ver. 8.

O Lord our governor, how excellent, etc. v. 9.

The Admonition for Friday Morning, being an Exhortation to Holiness of life
and conversation, the ninth BEATITVDE.
THE ANALYSIS.
We are in holy Scriptures invited and persuaded to Holiness by 1 Precepts in
the Law. Gospel.
2 The pattern of sanctity in God the Father. Son. Spirit.
3 The Ti^les and Attributes of the Church. 4 The state of Creation at the
first. 5 The nature of our Vocation. 6 The end of our Redemption. 7 The effect
of Sanctification. 8 The condition of Glorification. 9 The fruits of holiness
which are* 1 Joy. 2 Peace. 3 Prosperity. 4 Dignity. 5 Everlasting happiness.



THE TEXTS.
BE ye holy, For holiness.
for I the Lord your God am holy, Revel. 11. 44.

Give your members servants unto righteousness in holiness, Romans 6. 19.

Follow peace with all men and holiness, Heb. 12. 14.

Put on the new man which after God is created in true holiness. Ephesians. 4. 24.

Be in behavior as becomes holiness, 1. Precepts. 2. Paterens. so fit in God
the Father.
Tit. 2. 3.

As he that called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation, 1.
Pet. 1. 15.

Thou will not suffer thy holy one to see corruption, The Son. The Spirit.
Act. 2. 27.

But ye denied the holy one, and the just, Acts 3. 14.

Holy men spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1. 21.

She was found with child of the holy Ghost, Mat. 1. 18.

He will baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire, Mat. 3. 11.

The Spirit of sanctification, Romans 1. 4.

The Temple of God is holy; which Temple ye are, 1. Cor. 3. 17.

That he might present to himself a glorious Church, The church
not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy, and
without blemish, Ephesians. 5. 27.

Created after the Image of God in righteousness and true holiness, Reasons
drawn from the Creation.
Ephesians. 4. 24.

God has not called us to uncleanness, Our Vocation.
but to holiness, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7.

Let your conversation be such as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1. 21.

Walk worthy of the Lord, Col. 1. 10.

I beseech you that ye walk worthy the calling whereunto ye are called.

He has visited and redeemed his people etc. Redemption.


That we might serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness all the
days of our life, Sanctification.
Luke 1. 71.

Being freed from sin and made servants to God, Glorification.
ye have your fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting life, Romans 6. 21.

Holiness without which no man shall see the Lord, Fruits of holiness
Heb. 12. 4.

Rejoice in the Lord always, Joy.
and again I say rejoice, Phil. 34.

Rejoice in the Lord, o ye righteous, and be glad all ye that are true of
heart, Psalm. 31. 12. Psalm. 32. 1.

Ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1. Pet. 1. 8.

The Kingdom of God is righteousness, Peace.
and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost Romans 14. 17.

Blessed: is he that has not walked in the ways etc. Prosperity.
Psalm. 1. 2.

But his delight is in the law of God. etc. Psalm. 1. 3.

His leaf shall not wither, and whatsoever he does it shall prosper, Psalm. 1.
4.

Those that honor me, Dignity.
I will honor.

If thou call the Sabbath thy delight, the holy of tho Lord, and shall honor
him.

I will cause thee to possess the high places of the earth, Isa. 56. 23. 24.

Blessed are all those that are undefiled in the way, and walk in the Law of
the Lord, Psalm. 119. 1.

We look for a new heaven and a new earth, in which dwells righteousness, 2
Pet. 3. 13.

Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection, on such the
second death has no power; but they shall be Priests of God, and of Christ,
and shall reign with him, Reu. 20 6.

And I John saw the holy City new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of
heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband, Reu. 21. 2.

He showed me that great City new Jerusalem Verse 10.

The way to the (...) all was not yet made manifest, Heb. 9. 8.

By his own blood he entered in once to the holy place having obtained eternal
Redemption for us, verse 12.

The Prayer for Friday Morning, being the sixth day from the Creation.
Composed of Petitions suitable to the work of the day Motives to (...)
agreeable to the precedent exhortation.


GLOrious Creator and gracious Savior of mankind, I lift up mine eyes and
hands to thee, whose hands this day made and fashioned me. I lift up my heart
unto thee, who^e heart was this day pierced for my transgressions. I lift up my
body and soul to thee, who this day wast lifted upon the Cross to offer an
infinite sacrifice for the expiation of the sins of the whole world. Let thy
hands which fashioned and formed me, sustain and support me: let thine arms
which thou stretchedst on the Cross embrace me and hold me fast to thee that
nothing may sever me from thee, Almighty and most wise Creator who have made
me of nothing, suffer me not to make my self worse then nothing. Gracious
Redeemer, who have saved that which was lost, loose not that which thou have
saved. Though the malice of Satan be great, yet thy goodness is greater.
Though my sins be exceeding many, yet thy mercies exceed them, though my
corruptions be strong, yet thy grace is stronger. Let it not be in my power or
the power of any creature, either in heaven or in earth to mar thy best
work; to deface thine Image which first thou stampedst in me; and after I had
slurried and almost raced it out, thou have by grace renewed it, according to
the first pattern, in holiness and righteousness. When thou made me light,
I made my self darkness, but thou have turned my darkness into light. When
I was freed, I enthralled my self, but thou have freed me: when I was
straight, I crooked my will, but thou have rectified it: when I was whole I
maimed my self, but thou have healed me: when I was happy I made my self
miserable, but thou have rest^red me to my former bliss. Nay I have gained by
my losses, and am raised higher by my fall, through thy infinite mercy, which
has not only ransomed me from death, but purchased me an eternal
inheritance, and crown of life in thi^e heavenly kingdom. Since thou have done
so great things for me whereat I rejoice; since thou have prepared such things
for me as neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor ever entered into the
heart of man to conceive; what manner of man ought I to be in all holy
conversation? How clear ought those eyes to be which shall see God? How clean
those ears, which shall hear words that cannot be uttered How pure that heart
which shall be filled with those joys which never entered into the heart of
man? Thou, o Father, which have created me art the holy one of Israel. Thou o
Son, who redeemedst me art the Holy one of God. Thou, o Spirit, which
sanctifiest me art the holy Ghost. Thou, o Father, have created me according to
thine Image in holiness and righteousness: thou, o Son, have redeemed me to
serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life: thou, o
Spirit, have freed me from sin and made me servant to God that I might have
my fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting life. Our vocation is a holy
calling, our societies a holy communion, our style a holy Priesthood, our
assemblies holy congregations, our Country the holy land of Promise, our City
the holy Jerusalem, our Charter the holy Scriptures, our immunities holy
privileges, our seals, which confirm them, holy Sacraments. All our
happiness here is holiness, and holiness hereafter shall be our happiness.
Lord make me therefore to be so happy here, as to be holy, and so holy here,
that I may be hereafter happy, Amen.

The close out of Scripture.
The God of Peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great
Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 2.
20.

Make me perfect in all good works to do his will, working in me that which
is pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ. ver. 21.

The Hymn for Friday Evening.
Wherein the devout soul Prayseth God for her Creation. Redemption.
Prays for Preservation. Glorification.



THE TEXTS.
THy hands have made me and fashioned me; o give me understanding that I may
learn thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.

Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me thou God of
Truth.

O let me hear thy loving kindness betimes in the morning, for in thee is my
trust.

Show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto thee,
Psalm. 41. 8.

Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God: let thy
loving Spirit lead me into the land of righteousness, verse 10.

Set a watch o Lord before my mouth; and keep the door of my lips, Psalm. 41.

O let not mine heart be inclined to any wicked thing; let me not be occupied
in ungodly works with the men that work wickedness, verse 4.

O Lord thou have searched me out and known me; thou know my downe-sitting
and mine vp-rising; thou understand my thoughts long before, Psalm. 139. 1, 2.

For lo, there is not a word in my tongue, but thou o Lord know it
altogether, verse 3.

Thou have fashioned me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me.
verse 4.

Such knowledge is too wonderful and excellent for me, I cannot attain unto
it. verse 5.

I will give thanks unto thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made;
marvelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well, verse 13.

My bones are not hid from thee, though I be made secretly, and fashioned
beneath in the earth. verse 14.

Thine eyes did see me when I was without form: for in thy book were all
things written which in continuance were fashioned, when there was none of them
before. verse 15.

O how dear are thy counsels to me, (...) God? O how great is the sum of
them? verse 16.

If I tell them, they are more in number then the sands of the sea: when I
awake up, I am present with thee. verse 17.

Lord guide me with thy counsel, and after that receive me with glory.

Keep me as the Apple of thine eye: hide me under the shadow of thy wings.
Psalm. 17. 8.

I will behold thy presence in righteousness; and when I awake up after thy
likeness, I shall be satisfied with it. ver. 16.

The Admonition for Friday Evening, being an Exhortation to Faith in CHRIST.
The principal inducements to stir us up to faith in Christ, are the 1
Necessity of this virtue in respect of 1 The Commandment of God in general,
to which faith is requisite. 2 All other duties in Special, Praying. Hearing.
Communicating.


2 The excellency of it, for it is Precious. Holy. The faith of the Elect.

3 The certainty of it, for it is grounded on God, The Father his Word. Oath.
The Son his Promises. Prayer.
The Spirit his Earnest. Seal.


4 Efficacy 1 Extraordinary, as working miracles. 2 Ordinary, as Victory over
the World. Devil.
Justification. Salvation.




THE TEXTS.
YE believe in God; Faith commanded.
believe also in me, Ioh. 14. 1.

This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he: has sent, Ioh. 6.
29.

Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved and all thine house, Act.
16. 31.

This is his commandment, that we should believe in the name of his Son
Jesus Christ, 1. Ioh. 3. 23.

Earnestly contend for the says, Iud. 13.

Repent ye and believe the Gospel, Mar. 1. 15.

Follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, etc. 2. Tim. 2. 22.

Without faith it is impossible to please God, As necessary to all religious
duties, as Prayer.
Heb. 11. 6.

Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14. 23.

How shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? Romans 10. 14.

He that prays, let him pray in faith, nothing doubting, Iam. 1. 6.

All things whatsoever ye ask for in prayer, beleiuing, ye shall receive, Mat.
21. 21.

The word preached did not profit them, Hearing the word.
not being mixed with faith in them that heard it, Heb. 4. 2.

Christ dwells in us by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17.

I am the Bread of life: The Sacrament.
whosoever believes in me shall never thirst. Ioh. 6. 35.

He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him,
ver. 56.

He that believes in me has everlasting life, ver. 47.

I am the Bread of life, ver. 48.

To them that have received like precious faith with us, It is Precious.
grace and peace be multiplied, 2. Pet. 1. ^.

But ye beloved, building your selves in your most holy faith, Holy.
pray to the holy Ghost, Iud, 20.

Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ according to the faith of Gods Elect, Proper
to the Elect.
Tit. 1.

As many as were ordained to salvation believed, Act. 13. 48.

This is my well-beloved Son, Grounded on God the Father his Word.
hear him, Mat. 3. vlt.

So God loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, Ioh. 3. 15.

The Father has committed all judgment to the Son, that all men should
honor the Son as the Father, Ioh. 5. 23.

There is another that bears witness of me, and I know that the witness he
witnesses of me is true, Ioh. 5. 32.

The Father who has sent me, himself bears witness of me, Ioh. 5. 37.

The Lord swear, Oath.
and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedeck, Psalm. 110. 4.

God willing more abundantly to show to the heirs of promise the
immutabilitie of his counsel, confirmed it with an oath, Heb. 6. 17.

That by two immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we
might have a strong consolation who have flied for refuge to lay hold upon the
hope set before us, ver. 18.

Go into all the world he that believes and is baptized shall be saved; The
Son his promise.
he that believes not shall be damned, Mar. 16. 16.

Verily I say unto you, if any man keep my sayings, he shall never see death,
Ioh 8. 51.

I am the resurrection and the life; he that believes in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live, Ioh. 11. 25.

And whosoever lives and believes in me shall never die, v. 26.

For their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also might be sanctified
through the truth, Ioh. 17. 19.

Neither pray I for these alone, Pray.
but for them also which shall believe in me through their word, ver. 20.

The Spirit it self bears witness to our spirits that we are the children
of God, The Spirits earnest.
Romans 8. 16.

He which stablisheth us with Christ, and has anointed us, 2. Cor. 1. 21.

Who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of his Spirit in our hearts,
ver. 22.

He that wrought us for the self same thing is God, who also has given unto
us the earnest of the Spirit.

After that ye believed ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, Seal.
Ephesians. 1. 13.

Which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased
possession, unto the praise of his glory, ver. 14.

He that received his testimony has set to his seal, that God is true, Ioh.
3. 33.

He received the seal of righteousness, Romans 4. 11.

Grieve not the holy Spirit of God whereby ye are sealed to the day of
redemption, Ephesians. 4. ^0.

If ye have faith and doubt not, Faith works miracles.
ye shall not only do this which is done to the fig tree, but also if ye say
to this mountain: Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea, it shall be
done, Mat. 21. 21.

If I had all faith, so that I could remove mountains, etc. 1. Cor. 1^. 2.

These signs shall follow them that believe in my Name, they shall cast out
devils; they shall speak with new tongues, Mar. 16* 17.

They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not
hurt them: they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover, ver. 18.

Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believes on me, the works which I do
shall he do also, and greater works then these shall he do. Ioh. 14. 12.

See Heb. 11 from the 14. verse to the 35.

Above all, Overcomes the (...).
take the shield of faith whereby ye shall be able to quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked, Ephesians. 6. 16.

Your adversary the devil as a roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he may
devour, 1. Pet. 5. 8.

Whom resist, steadfast in the faith ver. 9.

This is the victory that ouer-commeth the world even our faith, The world.
1. Ioh. 5. 4.

Who is he that ouercometh the world? He that believes etc. ver. 5.

For ye are the children of God by faith in Jesus Christ, Makes sons of God.
Gal. 3. 26.

God who knows the heart bore them witness, giving them the holy Ghost as he
did unto us, Acts, 15. 8.

And put no difference between us and them, Purifieth the heart.
purifying their hearts by faith, Acts, 15. 9.

Whosoever believes in me shall not be ashamed, Romans 9. 33.

Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, and precious; and he that
believes on him shall not be confounded, Keeps from confusion.
1. Pet. 2. 6. See Isa. 28. 16. Psalm. 118. 22. Mat. 21. 42. Acts, 4. 12.

Jesus seeing his faith, Justifies.
said, Son be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee, Mat. 9. 2.

Daughter be of good comfort: thy faith has made thee whole, ver. 21.

Behold, his soul which is lifted up in him is not upright; but the Just shall
live by his faith, Heb. 2. 4.

And Abraham believed in the Lord, and it was counted to him for
righteousness, Genesis 15. 6.

And by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could
not be justified by the Law of Moses Acts, 13. 39.

The righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by
the Law and the Prophets, Romans 3. 21.

Even the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ to all that
believe, ver. 22.

Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith, in his blood,
ver. 25.

It is one God which justifies circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision
through faith, ver. 30.

To him that works not, but believes* on him that justifies the ungodly,
his faith is counted for righteousness, Romans 4. 5. 6 7. 8. verses.

Being justified by faith we have peace with God, Romans 5. 1.

With the heart man believes to righteousness, Rom, 10. 10.

Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ, that (...) justified by the faith of Christ and not by the
works of the law, Gal. 2. 16.

Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, Saves.
1. Pet. 1. 5.

For by grace ye are saved, through faith, Ephesians, 2. 8.

Receiving the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls, 1. Pet. 1. 9.

I have finished my course; I have kept the faith, 2. Tim. 4. 7.

From hence forth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, Crowns with
everlasting blessings.
which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day, and not to me
only, but to all them that love his coming, ver. 8.

Be faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a crown of life, Revel. 2.
10.

Blessed are all they that put their trust in him Psalm. 2. vlt.

Verily I say unto you, whosoever hears my word, and believes him that sent
me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed
from death to life, Ioh. 5. 24.

THE PRAYER FOR Friday Evening
composed, of Petitions suitable to the work of the day. Motives to faith in
Christ, agreeable to the precedent exhortation.


MOst bountiful and merciful Lord God, who this day createdst man and
redeemedst him; formedst and reformedst him, inspiredst him with the breath of
life, and expiredst and diedst for him, upon the Cross; show thy self a
faithful Creator in preserving thine own works, and a faithful Redeemer in
houlding thy dear purchase. O let not thy hate of sin extinguish thy love to
thy creature. Let not any thing that I have done prejudice thee in the merit of
that which thou have suffered for me. My sins deserved eternal wrath of thy
Father, but thou have borne it. My wonton delights and impure pleasures
deserved stripes and wounds, but thou have received them. My heinous crimes
deserved death, but thou have suffered it for me. This day my first parent Adam
was made a living soul; and this day thou the second Adam were made a
quickening Spirit. This day he sinned in a garden, and this day thou sorrowedst
in the garden. This day he took the fruit of the forbidden tree, and this day
thou were hung upon the accursed tree. This day he was cast into a dead sleep,
and his side opened, and his wite Eve formed of his ribbe, was flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone: this day also thou were cast into a deadly sleep,
and thy side opened and thy Spouse the Catholic Church brought forth, not by
water only, but by water and blood, the water of regeneration* and blood of
explation and sanctification.

This day Adam brought the curse upon himself and all his posterity; this day
thou prouidedst an everlasting blessing for thy self and all thy members. That
which he lost thou have regayned with advantage: that which he did, thou have
suffered for: that which I owed, thou have discharged on the very day, by
taking all his and our debts upon thee, and laying down an all-sufficient price
to satisfy for them. O give me an hand of faith to receive so much of this
infinite sum as may discharge my debt, and strengthen this my hand, that I may
hold it fast, and tender it to thy Father, and receive from him an absolute and
general acquittance signed with thy blood, and sealed with thy Cross, bearing
date the very day of thy consummation of all things at thy death. If thou
bad'st required a greater thing we should have done it: for what will not a man
do for his life? How much more when thou ^arest believe, and live; cast your
selves upon me, and I will save you from drowning in everlasting perdition:
receive the price of your ransom, and be freed. When thou hold out the
golden Scapter of thy grace, if we will not take hold on it, we deserve
double d^mnation for refusing so easy a means of salvation. Adam believed Eve,
and Eve the Serpent, to her and our ruin: why should not I much rather believe
thy Church thy Spouse, and thy Spouse thy Word to salvation* What should
withold my faith from apprehending, my hope from ex^ecting the promises of
thy Gospel, confirmed by so many miracles, test^fied by the Church in all
Ages, signed with the blood of so many Martyrs, and (...) to my soul and
conscience by the holy Spirit? Does it shake and stagger my faith that thy
works recorded in holy Scriptures so far transcend nature, and the mysteries
of saving truth soar above humane reason? But this demonstrateth rather faith
to be faith, and thee, o God to be true God Faith is not faith if reason
comprehend it. God cannot be God if nature limit him. Am I the more auerse from
embracing thy Gospel, because it crosses and checketh my natural
dispositions and in clinations? But the cause is most evident: thy Law is just,
holy, and pure; but I am wicked, profane, and impure. The physic is for the
most part the better which the patient likes worst, because it exasperateth
the pain for the time. Have I the less love and liking to the most holy
faith, because it restrains my carnal liberty and abridgeth me, or
altogether depriueth me of worldly comforts and contentments* But am I not
spirit as wel^ as flesh? Have I not a Law in my mind controlling the Law of my
members? Is it not much better to sow unto the Spirit that I may reap peace,
joy, and life everlasting, then sow to the flesh, and of the flesh reap
nothing but corruption? Thy Gospel, o gracious God, restrains my carnal,
but enlarges my spiritual liberty: it denies me sinful, but it promises
me holy delights and pleasures: it moderateth the desire and use of temporary
comforts and joys, but assures me that my heart shall be filled with
eternal. Am I ready to be beaten off from my holy profession and belief by
blows, and strokes, persecutions, losses, imprisonment, banishment, scorn of
the world and disgrace? This should make me hold it the faster; for the
Gospel foretells that these things should befall true b^lieuers: and it is
an honor to me to bear the ^adge of m^^profession and to drink with thee my
Savior in thine own Cup. It is my profession to be thy Soldier; and he is no
Soldier that endures not hardness. I can expect no crown without a
Conquest, no Conquest without a battle, no battle without blows and
wounds: and what are these light and momentary afflictions to an eternal
weight of glory? Thus does the Word conquer my reason, and yet it will not
yield. I resolve to believe: Lord strengthen my resolution. I do believe, Lord
help mine unbelief* All things past have so come to pass as the Oracles of
thy truth fore-shewed they should, and how then can I doubt of things future
revealed in them? The deluge was foretold 120 years before; and at the
prefixed time it ouerranne the whole world. Thy peoples bondage in Egypt for
400 years, and their after delivery is no otherwise described by Moses, then
it was in a dream many Ages before delivered to Abraham. Thou calledst thy
Shepherd Cyrus, and thine anointed Josias by name, to their functions long
before either of them, or their forefathers, were conceived. The 4 famous
Monarchs pictured out in Nebuchadnezzars Image, succeeded in their order. The
Assyrian represented by the golden head, the Persian by the silver arms and
shoulders; the Grecian by the thighs of brass; and the Roman by the legs of
iron. And do we not see at this day, the stumpe of that Image, and the feet,
partly iron in the Turkish, and partly of clay in the Germane Empire? Thy Birth
and Death, o Savior, was fore shadowed in Types, and fore-spoken of by
Prophets, ever since the world began; and since thy coming into the flesh, and
finishing all things at thy death in Jerusalem: Not a syllable, or one jot of
any of thy words have passed without their accomplishment. Jerusalem is
destroyed; the Temple made even with the ground, and never could be built
again. The Jews are dispersed into all nations. The Gospel is preached
through the whole world: the man of sin is every day more and more
discovered; and why should I not then believe as certainly that the heavens
shall pass away shortly with heat, and the elements melt with fire, and thy
sign be seen in the clouds; and those that are in their graves be awaked
with the sound of the last Trumpe, and meet thee in the air? I believe, Lord
help my unbelief. Is it not as easy for thee to raise me out of ashes, as at
the first to rear me out of the dust? to send back my Spirit into my body, as
at the first to breathe it in? I see the seed in the ground, the plants in the
garden, dye before they rise and spring up. I see worms, and flies, and
diverse other creatures that spend the winter season in a kind of death,
revive in the Spring. I see my self dead every night, and alive in the
morning. Why then should I call in question this Article of my belief, of all
most comfortable? Lord who this evening did cast Adam into a dead sleep, and
thy self fellest asleep on the bed of thy Cross, and awakedst him again,
and raisedst thy self out of thy sleep of death; sanctify my rest and sleep
this night unto me, that I may by it not only be strengthened in my body, and
revived from my bed of slumber to rise to my labor and travel the next
morning, but also more confirmed in my faith touching the resurrection of this
my body out of the bed of the grave at the last day, So be it, Amen.

The close out of Scripture.
To him that loved us, and washed our sins in his blood, and made us Kings
and Priests to God even his Father, be glory and dominion for evermore. Amen.
Reu. 1. 5, 6.

Saturdayes Devotion.
The Father rests from the works of Creation.
IN the seventh day God ended his work which he had made, and the seventh
day he rested from all his work which he had made. Genesis 2. 2.

So God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, because that in it he had
rested from all his work which God had created and made. verse 3.

The Son rests in the Sepulcher.
ANd when the even was come, there came a rich man of Arimathea, named Joseph,
who had also himself bin Iesus's Disciple. Mat. 27. 57.

He went to Pilate and asked the body of Jesus. And Pilate commanded the body
to be delivered. verse 58.

So Joseph took the body, and wrapped it in a clean linen cloth. verse 59.

And put it in his new Tomb which he had hewn out in a Rock, and rolled a
great stone to the door of the Sepulcher, and departed. verse 60.

And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary sitting over against the
Sepulcher, verse 61.

Now the next day that followed, the day of the preparation, the chief Priests
and Pharisees came together to Pilate, verse 62.

Saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiuer said while he was yet alive,
After three days I will rise again, verse 63.

Command therefore that the Sepulcher be made sure until the third day, left
his Disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say unto the people, He
is risen from the dead; so the last error will be worse then the first, verse
64.

Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch, go your way, make it as sure as you
can, verse 65.

So they went, and made the Sepulcher sure, sealing the stone, and setting a
watch, verse 66.

For thine instruction meditate In the morning, on the Father's rest from works
of Creation. In the evening on the Sonn's works of Redemption.


For thy comfort apply the benefits of both to thy self, which are A holy rest
here. and happy rest hereafter. Everlasting

For thy correction reprove thy profaning God's holy Sabbath by First,
Worldly business. Secondly, Carnal pleasures. Thirdly, Omitting holy duties.
Fourthly, Performing them Negligently. Unwillingly.



Quicken thy Preparation to holy duties by the Psalm. Constancy in life and
death by the Admonition. Zeal, Devotion, and resolution by the Prayer ensuing


The Hymn for Saturday Morning.
I Have remembered thy Name o Lord in the night season, and have kept thy Law,
Psalm. 119. 57.

I thought on my ways, and turned my feet to thy testimonies, verse 59.

I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried; I hoped in thy Word, v. 147.

Hear my voice according to thy loving kindness o Lord: quicken me according
to thy judgments, verse 149.

Seven times a day do I praise thee according to thy righteous judgment. v.
164.

Great peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them, verse
165.

I have longed for thy salvation o Lord; and thy Law is my delight, verse 174.

Deliver me o Lord from the wicked, which is a sword of thine, Psalm. 17. 13.

From men which are thy hand, o Lord, from men of the world which have their
portion in this life, and whose bellies thou fillest with thy hid treasures,
verse 14.

My heart is pained within me, and the terrors of death are fallen upon me.
Psalm. 55. 4.

Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me; and horror has overwhelmed me.
v. 5.

O that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away, and be at rest. v.
6.

I would hasten my escape from the windy storm, and tempest. v. 8.

An Admonition for Saturday Morning, being an exhortation to perseverance, the
twelfth BEATITVDE.
All that expect the reward of Piety must strive and pray for perseverance and
abhor and shun falling away from grace because in Scripture, The one is
Commanded by God. Commended in his Saints. Encouraged unto by promises of
Certain reward. Salvation. Assured comfort. An incorruptible Crown of glory.

The other is Vehemently dissuaded. Severely censured. Dreadfully threatened.
Eternally punished.



THE TEXTS.
VVAtch ye therefore, Precepts for perseverance.
and pray continually, Luke 21. 36.

Continue ye in love, Ioh 15. 9.

Take heed to thy self, and to thy Doctrine; continue in them, 1 Timothy 4. 16.

But continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have bin assured
of, 2 Timothy 3. 14.

Let us hold fast our profession Heb. 4. 14.

Hold fast till I come, Reu. 2. 25.

Rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation, continuing instant in prayer, Romans
12. 12.

Dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, stand fast in the Lord,
Phil. 4. 1.

Paul and Barnabas persuaded them to continue in the grace of God, Acts 13. 43.

Confirming the souls of the disciple^, and exhorting them to continue in
aith, Act. 14. 22.

But ye brethren be not weary in well doing, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 13.

Let brotherly love continue, Heb. 13. 1.

Stand fast in one spirit with one mind, striving together for the faith of
the Gospel, Phil. 1. 17.

Therefore my brethren be ye steadfast, immovable, always abou^ding in the
work of the Lord, 1. Cor. 15. 28.

Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, acquit you like men, 1. Cor. 16. 13.

Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, Gal.
5. 1.

Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God that ye may be able to stand
in the evil day; and having done all stand fast. Ephesians. 6. 13.

Brethren stand fast: hold the traditions which ye have been taught, 2 Thessalonians.
2. 13.

Whom resist steadfast in the faith, 1. Pet. 5. 9.

Ye therefore seeing ye know these things, beware lest ye also being led away
with the error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness. 2. Pet. 3. 17.

He spoke a parable, that we ought always to pray, and not to faint, Luke 18.
1.

Shall not God avenge his Elect which cry unto him day and night, Examples.
though he bear long with them? ver. 7.

He, Abraham.
after he had patiently endured, obtained the promise, Heb. 6. 15.

O Lord God of my salvation, David.
I have cried day and night before thee, Psalm. 88. 1.

I have called daily upon thee; I have stretched forth my hands unto thee,
ver. 9.

He kneeled upon his knees, Daniel.
and prayed three times a day Dan. 6. 10.

And they which went before rebuked the blind man that he should hold his
peace; The blind man.
but he cried so much the more, Son of David have mercy on me, Luke 18. 39.

And behold a woman of Caanan cried unto him saying, The Cananitsh woman.
Have mercy on me, etc. Mat. 15. 22.

But he answered her not a word; and his disciples besought him, saying; Send
her away, for she cries after us, ver. 23.

He answered, I am not sent, etc. ver. 24.

Then came she, and worshipped, saying, Lord help me, ver. 25.

But he answered, It is not meet, etc. ver. 26.

And she said, Truth Lord; yet the dogs eat the crummes, etc. ver. 27.

Then Jesus said, Woman, be it to thee as thou will, ver. 28.

Ye are they which have continued with me in my tentations, Luke 22. 28.

These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplications, with Marie
the Mother of Jesus, Act. 1. 14.

We will give our selves continually to prayer, etc. Act. 6. 4.

There were added to them about three thousand souls, Peter's conuerts.
etc. Act. 2, 41.

And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and
breaking of bread, and prayer, ver. 42.

By the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day
with tears, Paul.
Act. 20. 31

Since the day we heard, we ceased not to pray for you, Col. 1. 9.

For this cause, we thank God without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.

A devout man, Cornelius.
which gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God always, Act. 10 2.

And the four beasts The beasts full of eyes.
had each of them six wings upon them, and they were full of eyes within, and
they ceased not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God almighty,
which was, and is, and is to come, Reu. 4. 8.

I declare unto you the Gospel which ye have received, The Corinthians.
and wherein ye stand, Continuance is a note of Truth.
or continue, 1. Cor. 15. 1.

Then said Jesus to those Jews that believed on him, If ye continue in my
word, then are ye indeed my disciples, Ioh. 8. 31.

Who so looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, he
being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer, shall be blessed in his deed, James
1. 25.

They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us,
they would no doubt have continued with us, 1. Ioh. 2. 19.

Whosoever abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God, Ioh. 2. 9.

So run that ye may obtain, 1. Cor. 9. 26.

Let us not be weatie in well doing; Has certain promises of reward.
for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not, Gal. 6. 9.

Hold that thou have, that no man take thy crown, Reu. 3. 11.

For we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our
confidence steadfast to the end, Heb. 3. 14.

He that endures to the end shall be saved, Salvation.
Mat. 10. 22.

Continue therein; for in doing this, thou shall save thy self, and them that
hear thee, 1. Tim, 3. 8.

Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 4. 12.

Show the same diligence to the full assurance of hope to the end, Comfortable
assurance.
Heb. 6. 11.

To him that ouercometh I will give to eat of the tree of life, which is in
the midst of the garden of God, Revel. 2. 7.

Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after that
same example, Heb. 4. 11.

Let us fear lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of
you should seem to come short of it, Heb. 4. 1.

Ye have continued with me, etc. Luke 22. 28.

And I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me, ver.
29.

Be faithful unto death, A crown of life.
and I will give thee the crown of life. Revel. 2. 10.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc. 1. Tim. 4. 7.

Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but to
them also that love his appearing, ver. 8.

Take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in
departing away from the living God, Apostasy and backsliding vehemently
dissuaded.
Heb. 3. 12.

If after they have escaped the pollution of the world through the knowledge of
the Lord and Sauiou^ Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein and
overcome; Severely censured.
the latter end is worse then the beginning, 2 Pet. 2. 20.

For it had been better for them never to have known the way of
righteousness, then after they have known it to turn from the holy
commandment delivered unto them, ver. 21.

But it is happened unto them according to the true Proverb; The dog is
turned to his vomit again, and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in
the mire, ver. 22.

When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, etc. Mat. 12. 44.

He takes to himself seven other spirits, and they dwell there, and the last
state of that man is worse then the first, ver. 45.

Let him that stands take heed lest he fall, Fearfully thr^a^ned with loss
of reward
1. Cor. 10. 12.

Are ye so foolish, having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect with
the flesh? Gal. 3. 3.

Have ye suffered so many things in vain? it it be yet in vain, ver. 4.

Cast not away therefore your confidence which has great recompense of reward,
Heb. 10. 35.

If any withdraw himself, Of Gods favor.
my soul shall have no pleasure in him, ver. 38.

We are not of them which draw back unto perdition, ver. 38.

In the latter days some shall depart from the faith, 1. Tim. 4. 1.

Having their conscience seared with a hot iron, With a reprobate sense.
ver. 2.

Holding faith and a good conscience, Infamy.
which some having put away, concerning faith have made shipwreck, 1. Tim. 1.
19.

Of whom is Hymenaeus, and Alexander, whom I have delivered to Satan, ver. 20.

Having forsaken the right way, they are gone astray, following the ways of
Balaam the son of Bozor etc. 2. Pet. 2. 15.

But when the righteous turns away from his righteousness, Death.
and commits iniquity, etc. All the righteousness that he has done shall
not be mentioned; in his trespass that he trespasseth, and in his sin that
he has sinned, in them shall he die, Eze. 18. 24.

It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted the
heavenly gift, Eternally punished.
and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, Heb. 6. 4:

It they shall fall away, to renew them to repentance, etc. ver. 5.

The Angels which kept not their first estate, he has reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day, Iud 6.

THE PRAYER FOR Saturday Morning
composed of Petitions suitable to the rest, of the Father and the Son on this
day. Motives to perseuera^ce, agreeable to the subsequent exhortation.


Almighty Creator of heaven and earth, and all things therein; who this day
restedst from all thy works, and blessedst it: grant to me (after the
painful labors and travails of this life are ended) a sweet, blessed, and
comfortable rest with thee in heaven, where I may keep a continual Sabbath,
hold a perpetual feast, sing an everlasting song, wear an incorruptible
crown, possess an eternal inheritance, and fully enjoy thee in all things,
and all things in thee, in endless quietness, joy content, and rest. This
rest is the mark at which all my desires aim; this is the price for which all
my endeauou^s run; this is the haven to which (by the gales of thy spirit) my
christian course drives. For in this rest there is perfect tranquillity, and
in this tranquillity contentment; and in this contentment, joy and pleasure,
and in this joy and pleasure, variety, and in this variety security, and in
this security eternity. This is the end without end, to which all my labors
in thy service, and sufferings for thee through my whole life, tend unto. Here
I have labor without rest, there shall be rest without labor; here
perturbations without tranquillity, there tranquillity without perturbations;
here desire without content, there content without desire; here pain and
sorrows, without sincere pleasures and joy; there joys and pleasures without
all pain and sorrows: here satiety of delights without variety, there
variety without satiety; here fear without safety, there safety without fear;
here a sudden end without joy, there joys without end. Wherefore I beseech
thee heavenly Father, loosen my desires and affections from the things that are
below, and knit them to the things that are above Break and dissolve the
unlawful contracts between my soul and the creatures, and marrte her to thee
in righteousness. Breed in me more and more the loathing of the forbidden
fruit; and a longing for the fruits of the tree of life. Let me not lean upon
the reeds of Egypt which will break under me, and the splinters run into my
body. Let me not repose my self under Ion^s's worme-eaten gourd, but the
sollid wood of Christ's Cross. Let me not set up my rest on this side of
Jordan, but pass over into the celestial Canaan. And because death is the
narrow passage between this life and the life to come, let me not so much
fear this cut as I do; for on this side, I leave labor, sorrow, sin,
shame, vexation, anxiety, pain, and mortality; and on the other side, I find
rest, righteousness, glory, contentment, pleasure, and immortality. It is but
a short passage, and my Savior has made it safe. All thy Saints either have,
or shall pass it over. I lose nothing in this passage; my soul is presently
transported, and though my body stay a while here, yet it shall follow in due
time. And no sooner this dark world and the shadow of it goes out of sight,
but the glorious light of heaven shines upon me; I see streets of gold, and
gates of pearl, and foundations garnished with all sorts of precious stones. I
shall behold thee the Father in thy Majesty, Christ thy Son in his glory, the
Spirit in his sanctity, the Archangels and Angels in their excellency, and the
Saints in their felicity. I shall then hunger no more, I shall labor no more,
I shall travel no more, I shall fear no more, I shall grieve no more, I shall
desire no more. I shall need no more any house, for the heaven and heaven of
heavens shall be my habitation; nor Temple, for God shall be my Temple: nor
light, for the Lamb shall be my light. O Lord let the hope and expectation of
this everlasting rest and happiness, sweeten all my labors, and ease my
torment, and mittigate my sorrows, and comfort my heart, that I fail not in
my labor, nor tire in my travel, nor sink under my burdens, nor fall under
my crosses, nor die for sorrow of my wounds received in the Lord's battles;
but hold on cheerfully, strenuously, and valiantly, till I ariue at the land
of promise, and there receive the lot of mine inheritance with the Saints in
light. So be it, Amen.

The close out of Scripture.
The peace of God which passes all understanding, preserve my heart and mind
through Jesus Christ, Phil 4. 7.

The Devotion for Saturday Evening.
THE HYMN.
I Will bless the Lord at all times, his praise shall be in my mouth
continually, Psalm. 34. 1.

O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee! which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of
men? Psalm. 31. 19.

Blessed be the Lord, for he has showed me marvelous kindness. v. 21.

Blessed be the Lord who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the God of our
salvation, Psalm. 68. 19.

What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits? Psalm. 116. 12.

O love the Lord all ye his Saints, for the Lord preserves the faithful, and
plenteously rewards the proud doer. Ps. 31. 23.

Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that
hope in his mercy, Ps. 33. 18.

To deliver their soul from death, and to keep the^ alive in famine, v. 19.

Though I have layen among the pots, yet shall I be as the wings of a Dove
covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold, Psalm. 68. 13.

Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of
all, Psalm. 34. 19.

He keeps all his bones, so that not one of them is broken, v. 20.

Why art thou cast down o my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me?

Hope thou in God, for I will yet praise him who is the health of my
countenance, and my God, Psalm. 42. 11.

THE TEXTS.
IN. Adam all dye, 1 Death is common to all men.
Cor. 15. 22.

It is appointed to men once to dye, Heb. 9. 27.

Death went over all, Romans 5. 12.

Man that is borne of a woman is but of few days, Job. 14. 1.

He comes forth like a flower, and is cut down; he flies away as a shadow,
and continues not, verse 2.

And where is he? verse 10.

When the breath of man goes forth, he shall turn again to his earth, and
then all his thoughts perish, Psalm. 146. 3.

Man lies down and rises not, till the heavens be no more. Job 14. verse 14.

They shall not be awaked, nor raised out of their sleep, v. 14.

Thou have made my days as it were a span long, Psalm. 39. 6.

We are but as yesterday; our days on earth are a shadow, Job 8. 9.

What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? Psalm 89. 47.

All flesh is grass; and the glory of it as the flower, 1 Pet 1. 24.

As the flower of grass he shall pass away, Iam. 1. 10.

What is our life? It is a Vapor that appears for a little time, and
vanishes away, Iam. 4. 14.

Man his days are determined; The time and hour is by God prefixed.
the number of his months are with thee; thou have appointed him his bounds
that he cannot pass, Job. 14. 5.

Lord let me know mine end, and the number of my days, Psalm. 39. 5.

I will add unto thy days fifteen years, Isa 38. 5.

O teach us to number our days etc. Psalm. 90. 12.

Whether we dye or live, we are the Lords, Romans 14. 8.

The right use of Fasting consists in the 1 Manner, that it be sincere, not
hypocritical. 2 Measure, that it be not immoderate. 3 Cause or end, which must
be either 1 To tame and subdue the flesh: such was Paul's fast, I beat down
my body. 2 To testify our humiliation, and sorrow for our sins; such was
Ezra's and the Nineuites fast. 3 To quicken zeal and devotion: such was
Hanna's fast Luke 2.



The abuse of Fast likewise is seen in the 1 Manner, if we abstain from one
kind of meat, and feed daintily on another: forbear one meal, and glut our
selves another. 2 Measure, if we continue or fast so long, that we much impair
our strength, or endanger our health. 3 Cause or end- 1 If we abstain from any
kind of meat out of an opinion and erroneous scruple of conscience, that it is
of it self unclean, as the Tatians and Encratites did; or, as being now
forbidden us under the Gospel, as some Iudaising Christians at this day. 2 If
we abstain from all or any kind of meat to merit, or satisfy thereby; as
Papists do. 3 If we keep a Fast to color any ungodly or malicious purpose;
as Iezebel did.



The second Table of Fasting.
The Lord is faithful, God is an omnipotent and faithful Creator
who shall keep you from evil. 2 These. 3. 3.

Commit the keeping of their souls to him who is a faithful Creator, 1 Pet.
4. 19.

I know whom I have trusted, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that
which I have committed unto him against that day, 2 Timothy 1. 12.

For this end Christ dyed and rose, Christ himself died, and by death entered
into his glory.
and revived, that he might be Lord both of the living, and the dead, Romans 14.
9.

In that he dyed, he dyed to sin once; but in that he lives, he lives
to God, Romans 6. 10.

If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him,
verse 8.

I was dead, And destroyed death.
I am alive, and I live for ever; and I have the keys of death and of hell,
Reu. 1. 18.

I am the resurrection and the life: He that believes in me, though he were
dead yet shall he live, Ioh. 11. 25.

Christ has abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light by the
Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10.

Death is swallowed up into victory, 1 Cor. 15. 54.

O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? v. 55.

The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, verse 56.

But thanks be to God who has given us victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ, verse 57.

He also took part of the same, And changed it in
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, even the
devil, Heb. ^. 14.

Our friend Lazarus sleeps, Name.
Ioh 11. 11.

And when he had thus spoken, he fell asleep, Acts 7. 60.

And many are fallen asleep, 1 Cor. 11. 10.

Which are asleep in Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 18.

Christ is risen from the dead, the first fruits of them that sleep, verse 20.

Christ to me is life, Nature.
and to die is gain, Of a loss it is made a gain.
Phil. 1. 21.

Whosoever loses his life for my sake shall save it, Mar. 8. 35.

Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, Of a curse, a blessing and a
d^scharge from Labor.
Reu. 14. 13.

For they rest from their labors, verse. 16.

There remains a rest for the people of God, Heb. 4. 9.

God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, Sorrow.
Reu. 1. 17.

They shall hunger no more, nor thirst no more, Pain.
neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat, Reu. 7. 16.

He that is dead is free from sin, Sin.
Romans 6. 7.

We look for a new heaven, in which dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13.

And there shall in no wise enter any thing that defiles, Free from evil
company.
neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie, Reu. 21. 27.

For, without shall be dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers,
and idolaters, and whosoever loves, or makes a lie, Reu. 22. 15.

The creature shall be delivered from bondage, Bondage.
Romans 8. 21.

His (the tempters) place was no more found, Temptation.
Reu. 12. 8.

Your joy shall no man take away from you, Ioh. 16. 22.

Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, Fear the Saints desire
Death.
according to thy word, Luke 2. ^9.

I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, for that is best of all,
Phil. 1. 23.

For we know that if the house of this earthly Tabernacle were dissolved, we
should have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal, in the
heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1.

For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house
which is from heaven, verse 2.

We are willing rather to be absent from the body, Are comforted in death by
Faith.
and present with the Lord, v. 7.

So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life, Ioh. 3. 16.

He that believes on him is not condemned, v. 18.

Faith is the substance of things hoped for; and the evidence of things not
seen, Heb. 11. 1.

There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, To. 8. 1.

I am persuaded that neither life nor death, By Love.
etc. shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord, v. vlt.

We know that we are passed from death to life, because we oue the brethren,
1 John 3. 14.

Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 20.

Hope makes not ashamed, By Hope.
Romans 5. 5.

If we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it, Romans
8. 25.

Rejoicing in hope. Romans 12. 22

I would not have you ignorant concerning them which are fallen asleep, that
ye sorrow not as they which have no hope, 1 These. 4. 13.

The full assurance of hope unto the end, Heb. 6. 11.

Let us hold fast the profession of our hope unto the end, for he is faithful
that promises, Heb. 10 23.

Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast and which
enters to that within the veil, Heb. 6. 19.

A good conscience By a good conscience.
is a continual feast, Proverbs 15. 15.

For our rejoicing is this; the testimony of a good conscience, 2. Cor. 1. 12.

We trust we have a good conscience in all things, Heb. 13. 18.

If our hearts condemn us not, we have confidence toward God, 1. Ioh. 3. 31.

Who shall change our vile bodies, The body rests in hope of a glorious
resurrection.
and make them like unto his glorious body, Phil, 3. 20. See 1. Cor. 15.
Entire.

If we believe that Jesus Christ was dead, and is risen; even so them which are
asleep in Jesus, God shall bring with him, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14.

To the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12. 23.

The beggar died, The soul immediately enjoys bliss.
and was carried into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22.

This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23. 43.

We know that if our earthly tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building not
made with hands, eternal, in the heavens, 2. Cor. 5. 1.

We would not be unclothed but clothed upon, that mortality may be swallowed
up of life, ver. 4.

While we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord, ver. 6.

We are confident, that when we are absent from the body, we are present with
the Lord, ver. 8. vid. supra, Phil. 1. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ.

There is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, Body and sonle shall be
crowned at the last day.
which the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but
to all that look for his coming, 2. Tim. 4. 8.

Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in
the clouds to meet the Lord in the air; so shall we be always with the
Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.

Then the righteous shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of my Father, Mat.
13. 43.

THE PRAYER FOR Saturday Evening,
composed of Petitions suitable to the rest of Christ in the grave. Motives to
perseverance agreeable to the precedent exhortation in the Morning.


I Bless and magnify thy glorious Majesty, wisdom, and omnipotency, o
Lord, high possessor of heaven and earth, as for all thy wonderful works in
the six days, so also for thy holy rest on this day, whereby thou assurest me
of eternal rest in heaven. And I beseech thee of thy goodness which answers
thy greatness, to distill the dew of thy blessings as upon my daily labors,
so upon my rest in the night, that it may recover my spirits, and refresh my
faculties, and repair my strength, and put me in mind of that comfortable
rest which they enjoy, who lie in the bosom of Abraham, and sleep in Jesus,
who this day lay in his sepulcher, yet saw there no corruption. For thy promise
thou made good, not to leave his soul in hell, nor to suffer thine holy one
to see corruption. O Lord I entirely desire thee to bury all my sins,
especially those (which this day and week has added to the total sum) in
his grave; and teach me by it to bury in the pit of eternal oblivion. not
only my brethrens trespasses against me, but also all those sinful baits
which have heretofore allured me to any kind of vicious lewdness. Grant that
I may more and more feel the power, as of Christ's death in the mortification
of my fleshly members; and so of his burial in the co^quering of the horror of
the grave. For as thou have threatened death saying, O death I will be thy
death; so thou have threatened the grave also, saying, O grave, or corruption, I
will be thy corruption, or destruction And what though my flesh be all consumed
to bones, yet thy spirit blowing upon dead bones can revive them, and couple
them again with sinnewes, and cloathe them with flesh. What though these bones
be resolved into dust, yet thou which made it of nothing, can as easily
restore it, and rear it out of that which is as lirtle or next neighbor to
nothing. Thou which raisedst thy Son from death, sha^t raise and change my
vile body, and make it like unto his glorious body, by that power whereby
thou art able to subdue all things unto thy self. Make my heart hewn out of a
harder rock them thy Sons sepulcher was, a fit receptacle, not for dead, but
for living Jesus. As that sepulcher never received any but Jesus; so let my
heart entertain nothing but thee. Make me a pure and chaste soul, that as thy
Son was borne of a Virgins womb, and lay buried in a virgin tomb: so he
may abide in my virgin and undefiled soul. Remove the heavy stone from my
heart, as thou did that great stone from his sepulcher. As he never
returned to his sepulcher after he came out of it: so grant that when thou have
perfectly raised me out of the grave of sin, I may never return to it again.
And as he kept Sabbath in his grave, and observed thy statutes in life and in
death, and fulfilled all righteousness: so grant I may both in life and death
accomplish thy holy will. And as he never rested till he had cried out, All is
finished: so grant that I may not be weary of well-doing, nor give over my
heavenly race of godliness, till I may say, It is finished. Endue me with
power from above, and gird about me thy whole armor, that I may fight a good
fight against the world, the flesh, and the devil, and finish my course in the
full discharge of my calling, and keep the faith to the end; and in the end
receive that incorruptible crown of glory which thou the righteous Judge wilt
give to all that love the second coming of thy Son. And behold thou come
with the clouds, and all eyes shall see, even they that nailed thee; and all
kindreds of the earth shall mourn before th^e, yea, and Amen. So be it.

The close out of Scripture.
Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory, and honor, and power; for thou have
created all things, and for thy wills sake they are and have been created,
Reu. ^. 11.

Worthy is the Lamb that was killed to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise, Reu. 5. 12

The Childe-bearing Woman's Devotion In her traueile. After her traueile.

THE ADMONITION.
THE ANALYSIS.
Religious women ought patiently and comfortably to endure the pains of
childebirth, considering 1. That fruitfulness is a special blessing and
honor to a woman. 2. That these pains were the punishments, and are the
memorials of Eue's transgression. 3. That the hope of children who may be
members of Christ, and heirs of salvation, asswageth the pains for the
present, and the joy for them afterward extinguisheth the memory of them. 4.
That they have daily experiments of God's strange deliverances; especially in
this kind. 5. That childe-bearing has a promise annexed unto it of a blessing
Temporal. Spiritual.
if the mothers be faithful, and so continue.


THE TEXTS.
O Lord God of Hoasts, Fruitfulnes is a spiritual blessing.
if thou will indeed look upon the affliction of thine Handmaid, and wilt
not forget her, but wilt give her a man-child, I will give him to the Lord all
the days of his life, 1 Samuel ^. 11.

Lo children, and the fruit of the womb, are an heritage, and gift that
comes of the Lord, Psalm. 127. 4.

Like as arrows in the hand of a giant: even so are young children, v. 5.

Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them: they shall not be ashamed
when they speak with their enemies in the gate, v. 6.

Thou fillest their belly with thy hid treasure, Psalm. 17. 14.

Elizabeth said, Thus has the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he
looked on me, The pains are deserved by the sin of Eve.
to take away my reproach among men, Luke 1. 25.

Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, and thy
conception; In sorrow shall thou bring forth children, Genesis 3. 16.

Adam was not deceived; but the woman being deceived was in the transgression,
1 Timothy 2. 14.

A woman, Sweetened with hop of a child.
when she is in traueile, has sorrow, because her hour is come; but as soon
as she is delivered of a child, she remembers no more her anguish for joy
that a man is borne into the world, Ioh. 16. 21.

Be fruitful, And promises of blessings Temporal,
and multiply, and replenish the earth, Genesis 1. 28.

Be ye fruitful and multiply, and bring forth abundantly, on the earth,
Spiritual.
Genesis 9. 7.

Notwithstanding she shall be saved in child bearing, if they continue in
faith, and charity, and holiness, and sobriety, 1 Timothy* ^ 15.

A Psalm for women in their travail.
IN thee o Lord do I put my trust: let me never be put to confusion, Psalm. 71.
1.

Deliver me in thy righteousness, and cause me to escape: incline thine ear
unto me, and save me, v. 2.

Lord strengthen me upon the bed of languishing: make all my bed in my
sickness, Psalm. 41. 3.

Lord be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee, v.
4.

Make haste o God to deliver me: make haste o Lord to help me, Psalm. 70. 1.

For thou art my hope o Lord God: thou art my trust from my youth, Psalm. 71. 5.

By thee have I bin holden up ever since I was borne: thou art he that took
me out of my mothers womb: my praise shall be continually of thee, v. 6.

I am feeble, and sore broken: I have roared by reason of the disquietnesse of
my heart, Psalm. 38. 8.

Lord, all my desire is before thee: and my groaning is not hid from thee, v. 9.

My soul is bowed down to the dust; my belly cleaves to the earth, Psalm. 44.
21.

Make haste to help me o Lord my salvation, Psalm. 38. 22.

Lord hear me in this day of my trouble; thy name o God of Jacob defend me,
Psalm. 20. 1.

Send me help from the Sanctuary; and strengthen me out of Sion. v. 2.

Bless me Lord, and bless the fruit of my womb.

A Prayer for a woman in time of her travail.
O Most righteous and merciful God who have justly inflicted the sorrows upon
me, which I now endure for the transgressions of Eve, the Mother of the living;
and yet in judgment remembering mercy have sanctified them to the propagation
of thy Church; and do graciously and wonderfully strengthen and help thy
servants in them both, to overcome the pains, and escape the danger. Have
pity upon the feeble estate of thy poor Hand maid, unable without thy
special assistance to go through this great work of patience and labor. My
first parent did eat the sour grapes, and my teeth are set on edge; and I now
taste the bitterness of that forbidden fruit, and from my heart loathe and
detest it. I confess, gracious Lord, that both my self and my child yet
unborn have deserved to perish in our sin, original or actual; and I humbly
submit it and my self to thy gracious will and pleasure: yet my hope is in
that blessed seed of the woman that brake the Serpent's head, that thou have a
blessing in store for me, and that I bear in my womb; of which I am as much
in travail in my soul to bring it forth to thee, and make it thine, as I am
in labor in my body to bring it forth to me and make it mine. Bless me dear
Father in both works, that of nature, and this of grace. Lord, punish not the
child for the parents sake, but preserve the parent for the child's sake, that
both may live, and praise thy Name. Sanctify unto me these pains and
throws, that they may serve not only as a corasiue for sins past, but also
as a preservative against sin to come. Bless me in the use of all ordinary
means for my sake, bearing and bringing forth my child. Comfort my fainting
heart, and strengthen my weak body, and assuage my bitter pangs and sorrows,
and sweeten them with an assured hope of a happy and speedy exchange of them
into comfort and joy that a child is borne into the world. Lord, who were
present with me at my conception, be present with me in the safe delivery of
that I have conceived. Let thy hand which formed and fashioned my babe in my
womb, keep all the parts and members of it in due shape, substance, and
proportion, that the notes of the parent's sin be not seen in the marks,
maimes, and defects of the child. It is my labor, but it is thy work, o Lord,
to make it a living instrument of thy glory. Perfect, I beseech thee, the work
thou have begun and wrought in me thine unworthy worke-house. Make it like
all the works of the creation; to which thine own mouth gave testimony, that
they were perfect good. Deal not with me according to my wickedness, but
according to thy gracious goodness. Carry such a hand over me in all time of
my labor and grievous pains, and after my delivery also, that I may ever
praise and magnify thee for the effects of thy grace in my patience, of thy
power in my strength, of thy providence in my timely delivery, and thy great
mercy in my safety, and the preservation of my fruit; for which I humbly beg a
blessing from thee, and both dedicate it and my self to thee. Receive both in
and for thy holy child Iesus's sake, to whom with thee, and the blessed
Spirit, be all honor, praise, and thanksgiving now and for ever, Amen.

The Childbearing woman's Devotion after her Delivery.
The Admonition to confidence in God.
THE ANALYSIS.
For confidence in God in greatest and imminent dangers we have in Scripture 1
Precepts. 2 Presidents in -- ABRAHAM. SARAH. DAVID. MOSES. ELIAH. HESTER. JOB.
SHADRACH, MESECH, and ABEDNEGO. JONAH PETER.
3 Reasons drawn from God his -- Names of Faithful Creator. Preserver of men.
Mighty deliverer. Savior.
Attributes Omnipotency. Goodness.
Promises. Works or performances.



THE TEXTS.
OFFER the Sacrifice of righteousness, Confidence in God commanded.
and put your trust in the Lord, Psalm. 4. 5.

Put thou thy trust in the Lord, and be doing good, Psalm. 37. 3.

Commit thy way unto the Lord, and put thy trust in him, v. 5.

Charge the rich that they trust not, in uncertain riches, but in the living
God, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 17.

In him shall the Gentiles trust, Romans 15. 12.

God will provide a Lamb for a burnt offering, Genesis 22. 8.

Abraham above hope believed under hope, Practiced by Abraham.
that he should be the Father of many Nations, Romans 4. 15.

Through faith Sarah received strength to conceive Seed, Saraah.
and was delivered when she was past age, because she judged him faithful
which had promised, Heb. 11. 11.

Moses said, Moses.
Fear not, stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord which he will
show you this day, Exodus 14. 13.

David said, David.
the Lord that delivered me out of the pawe of the Lion, and out of the pawe of
the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine, 1 Samuel 17.
37.

Eliah said, Eliah.
As the Lord lives before whom I stand, I will surely show my self unto Ahab
this day, 1 Kings 18. 15.

I also, and my Maids will fast, and so I will go to the King, Hester.
which is not according to the Law; and if I perish, I perish, Hester 4. 16.

I am sure that my Reedemer lives, Job.
etc. Mine eyes shall behold him, though my reins be consumed within me, Job
19. 25. see Job. 13. 15.

Shadrach, The three children.
Meshach, and Abednego answered: We are not careful to answer thee in this
matter, Daniel 3. 16.

Behold, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the hot fiery
Furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hands o King, v. 17.

Jonah prayed to the Lord out of the fishes belly, Jonah.
Jonah 2. 1.

I said, I am cast away out of thy sight, yet will I look again toward thine
holy Temple, v. 4.

Commit their souls to him in well doing, Reasons drawn from God. His
Attributes.
as a faithful, Creator. 1 Pet. 4. 19.

God is faithful, Faithfulness.
which will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will
even give the issue with the tentation, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

God is faithful, that our words to you were Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 18.

All the promises of God in him, are Yea and Amen, v. 20.

God is the Savior of all men, especially of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10.

The Lord is my strength, Providence
my stony rock, my Savior, my might, my buckler, etc. Psalm. 18. 1.

Casting all your care upon God, for he cares for you, 1 Pet. 5. 7.

To him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask,
Omnipotency.
or think, Ephesians. 3. 20.

He is able to subdue all things unto himself, Phil. 3. 21.

We received the Sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in
our selves, but in God which raises the dead, 2 Cor. 1. 9.

Who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver us; in whom we trust
that he also will deliver us, v. 10.

God is able to make all grace to abound toward you, that ye always having
all sufficiency in all things, may abound in every good work, 2 Corinthians 9.
8.

With God all things are possible, Mat. 19. 16.

Who is able to keep that which is committed to him till that day, 2 Timothy 1.
12.

God is good unto all men, Goodness.
and his mercy is over all his works, Psalm. 145. 9.

Who so dwells under the defense of the most High, shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty, Psalm. 91. 1.

A thousand shall fall beside thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it
shall not come nigh thee, v. 7.

God is faithful, and will establish us, and keep us from evil, 2. These. 3.
3.

Blessed are all they that put their trust in him, Gracious promises.
Psalm. 2. vlt.

Trust thou in the Lord, and verily thou shall be fed, Psalm. 37. 3.

Put thy trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass, ver. 5.

Hungry and thirsty their soul fainted in them, Psalm. 107. 5.

So they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of
their distress, Performances to men in distress, as Lot,
ver. 6. vide 13. 19. 28.

The men put forth their hands, and they pulled Lot into the house Genesis 19. 20.

And smote the men that were at the door with blindness, v. 21.

And the children of Israel went into the midst of the Sea as on the ground,
The children of Israel.
ver. 23.

And the Ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, Eliah.
and bread and flesh in the evening, etc. 1. King. 17. 6.

The Captain of fifty said; Thus says the man of GOD: Come down, 2. King. 1.
9.

And there came down fire from Heaven, and consumed him and his fifty, ver.
10.

There was a great famine in Samaria, Citizens of Samaria.
and they besieged it till an Asses head was sold for eight pieces of silver,
and the fourth part of a kab of doves dung for five pieces of silver, 2. King.
6. 25.

Elisha said, To morrow about this time shall a measure of fine flower be sold
for a shekell, and two measures of barlie for a shekell, and it came to pass,
chap. 7. ver. 16.

So Shadrach, The 3 children (as they are called.)
Meshech and Abednego came forth of the fiery furnace, Dan. 3. 26.

There was not a hair of their heads singed, neither were their coats
changed, neither had the smell of fire passed on them, verse 27.

Daniel said, Daniel.
My God has sent his angel, and shut the Lions mouth that they have not hurt
me, etc. Dan. 6. 22.

And the Lord spoke to the fish, Jonah.
and the fish vomited out Jonah on the dry land, Jonah 2. 10.

And behold, the Angel of the Lord came to Peter, Peter.
and a light shined in the prison, and he smote Peter on the side, and raised
him, saying, Arise up quickly. And his chains fell from his hands, Acts 12. 20.

When they passed the first and second watch, they came to the iron gate which
opened to them of its own accord, etc.

A THANKSGIVING for safe Delivery.
AETernall praises and thanks be rendered to thee o Lord of my health and
strength, in whose hands are the ways of life, and issues of death. I looked
for extreme danger, and behold safety; I looked for outcries of sorrow, but
behold shoutes of joy; I looked for sudden death, and behold present life to
me, and my sweet babe. O that my heart were a skillful inditer, and my tongue
as the pen of a ready scribe, to write down thy praises, and record the
wondrous things thou have done for my soul. Thou have delivered my life from
death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. Thou have dealt
graciously with me above my desert, enabled me above my strength, delivered me
above my hope, and therefore I will rejoice in thee above measure, and magnify
thee without end. Thou have shut the mouth of the pit which would have
swallowed me, therefore will I open my mouth in thy praises. Thou have made
good thy promises unto me, therefore I will make good my vows unto thee. Thou
have given me the fruit of my womb, therefore will I return unto thee the
fruit of my lips. Now I have felt thy strength in my greatest weakness, I
have tasted thy goodness in my bitter pangs, I will therefore call upon thee in
my troubles, and will praise thee in my deliverances, and depend upon thee as
well in want as in plenty, in sickness as in health, in death as in life.
Thou might most justly have deprived me of the benefit, and my infant of the
hope of life. Thou might deservedly have cut off the root and the branch in
the same moment, for both were at thy mercy, and liable to a curse; But thy
mercy is over all thy works: thou art good to them that are bad; gracious to
them that are ungracious; merciful to them that are most sinful. Thou
desire not the death of a sinner, but of sin. Thou would that all should
live, and here sow the seeds, and in heaven reap the fruit of immortality.
For to this end thou breathedst into us the life of nature to make us capable
of the life of grace, that thereby we may attain the life of glory. Therefore
do thou bring us into the light of this world, and set us in the way: that
walking the paths of thy Commandments we might in the end ariue at our country
in heaven. This life of nature thou have now given to my child, and continued
to me; add now, I beseech thee, grace to nature, and glory to grace hereafter,
that as we now live in thee by nature, so we may live to thee by grace, and
hereafter for ever live with thee in glory. Thou have ordained strength out of
the mouths of babes and sucklings, and justly may expect praise from them.
Gracious Lord, first give my infant strength, and then receive praises from it.
The hidden treasure which for many months thou layedst up in me, is now safely
taken out of me, and delivered me, therefore I now offer it to thee in thy holy
Temple. Accept that from me which thou have given to me. Receive that into thy
hands which thou have put into mine arms. Wash it in the Font of Baptism;
regenerate it by thy holy Spirit; feed it with the sincere milk of thy Word,
till it have knowledge to choose the good and refuse the evil. As it grows
in years, and stature, and strength; so grant that it may grow in thy grace
and favor, and increase in wisdom and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. So be it, Amen.

The close out of Scripture.
NOw unto the King immortal, everlasting, invisible, unto God only wise, be
honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen, 1 Timothy 1. 17.

The Sicke-mans Devotion (when there is yet hope of recovery In his Sickness.
After his Recovery.

When thou art smitten with sickness o devout Christian, 1 ENter into thy
private Chamber and commune with thine own heart, and search out diligently
the cause of thy Fathers displeasure, Psalm. 4. ^. 2 Confess the particular sin
or sins, for which thy heart smites thee most with sighs and tears, Psalm.
32. 5, 6. 3 Promise, and fully purpose amendment through the assistance of
grace, Psalm. 39. 1. 4 Advise with the Physician of thy soul, and follow his
godly direction, and desire him to pray for thee, and minister a word of
comfort unto thee, and if thou find thy self fit for it in the beginning of
thy sickness, when thou art in perfect sense and memory, participate of the
blessed, Sacrament, rather then when thy faculties are more enfeebled, Job. 33.
23. Iam. 5. 14. 5 Use carefully all good means of Physic and diet for thy
recovery; yet rely not upon the means, or instrument, but upon God, Eccl. 38.
1. 2. Chr. 16. 12. 6 Pray to God instantly and continually, First and
absolutely for the health and salvation of thy soul. Secondly, and
conditionally, for the health of thy body.
7 Settle thine estate, and make thy Will, that thou may be more free for
holy and heavenly meditations, Isa. 38. 1. 8 Submit thy self wholly and
absolutely to God's good will and pleasure concerning thee, whether for life or
death, 1. Pet. 4. 19 9 Read (if thou be able) or appoint to be read unto thee,
at seasonable times, select Chapters of Scripture, and devout Sermons, and
Prayers: Romans 8. Philippians 1. 1. Corinthians. 15. 1. These. 4. 2. Cor. 5. Ioh. 5.
6. 17. H^b. 12. Job. 19. Reu. 2. 3. 21. 22. Job 14. Isa. 38. 40.


Among other helps in this kind Open thy sorrow and grief by the Hymn.
Strengthen thy faith and patience by the exhortation. Quicken thy Zeal and
Devotion by the Prayer ensuing.


A PSALM FOR the sick,
wherein The devout Soul Expresses her Malady and affection. Hope in God.
Experience and remembrance of his former goodness. Meek patience.
Prays for Ease. Help. Recovery. Quickening grace. Pardon for sin.
Wisdom to make good use of sickness.



THE TEXTS.
Have mercy upon me o Lord, The sick soul expresses her malady.
for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones are vexed, Psalm. 6. 2.

My soul also is sore troubled: But Lord, how long will thou punish me! v. 3

My Spirit vexes within me: and my heart within me is desolate, Psalm. 143. 4.

Yet I do remember the time past; I muse upon all thy works; yea, I exercise
my self in the work of thy hands, verse ^5.

I stretch forth my hands unto thee: Remembrance and experience of Gods
goodness.
my soul gaspeth unto thee as a thirsty land, v. 6.

Hear me O Lord, and that soon, for my Spirit waxes faint:

Hide not thy face from me, ^est I be like unto them that go down into the
pit, v. 7.

Thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb: thou wast my hope when I
hanged yet upon my mothers breast, Psalm. 22. 9.

I have bin left unto thee ever since I was borne: Thou art my God even from my
mothers womb, v. 10.

Though I walk in the shadow of death, Hope in God.
I will fear no evil: thy rod and thy staff comfort me, Psalm. 23. 4.

Lord what is my hope? Truly my hope is even in thee, Psalm. 39. 5.

I became dumb, and opened not my mouth; for it was thy doing, v. 10.

I will patiently abide always: Meek patience.
and praise thy name more, and more, Psalm. 71. 12.

O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, Prays for ease.
nor chasten me in thy heavy displeasure, Psalm. 6. 1.

The sorrows of my heart are enlarged; O bring me out of my trouble, Psalm. 25.
16.

Hear o Lord, Help.
and have mercy upon me; Lord be thou my helper, Psalm. 30. 11.

Turn thee o Lord, and deliver my soul: Recovery.
o save me for thy mercies sake, Psalm. 6. 4.

For in death no man remembers thee: and who will give thee thanks in the
pit? v. 5.

What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? Psalm. 30. 9.

Shall the dust give thanks unto thee? Or shall it declare thy truth? v. 10.

Take thy Plague away from me: I am even consumed by the means of thy heavy
hand, Psalm. 39. 11.

Quicken me o Lord for thy names sake; Quickening grace.
and for thy righteousness sake, bring my soul out of trouble, Psalm. 143. 11.

Enter not into judgment with thy servant; Pardon for sin.
for in thy sight shall no man living be justified, v. 2.

O remember not the sins and offenses of my youth; but according to thy mercy
think upon me, o Lord, for thy goodness, Psalm. 25. 6.

Deliver me from all mine offenses; and make me not a rebuke to the foolish,
Psalm. 39. 9.

O teach me to number my days, Wisdom.
that I may apply my heart unto wisdom, Psalm. 90. 12.

An Admonition to the Sick.
THE ANALYSIS.
Every good Christian ought to struggle with his infirmities, and labor to
compass his mind to meet patience in sickness; especially considering that
sickness is -- 1 His heavenly Fathers visitation, whose 1 Power cannot be
resisted. 2 Will must be obeyed. 3 Goodness must be acknowledged in sending
us good as well as evil.
2 A deserved scourge for his sin. 3 Seat in love to him for his good 1 To
weane him from the love of the world. 2 To strengthen the spirit in him, and
tame the flesh. 3 To breed in him a loathing and detestation of sin in
general, the cause of all afflictions. 4 To call him home, and bring him to a
sense and acknowledgement of his particular sin. 5 To prove the truth and
sincerity of his faith and love. 6 To save him from eternal punishment for his
sin. 7 To make him seek more earnestly to God, who will be found of him, and
(if his appointed time be not come) manifest his glory in delivering him from
the very jaws of death.



THE TEXTS.
We have had Fathers of our flesh which corrected us, Sickness is God's
visitation: who is the Father of our Spirits, and cannot be resisted.
and we gave them reverence, shall we not much rather be in subjection to the
Father of Spirits, and live? Heb. 12. 9.

Who has ever resisted his will? Romans 9. 19.

He is able to subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3. 21.

He draws the mighty with his power; he rises up, and no man is sure of
life, Job 24. 21.

Will he plead against me with his great power? Job 23. 6.

God is greater then man, Job 33. 12.

Why do thou strive against him? for he gives not account of any of his
matters. v. 13.

Thy will be done, Must be obeyed.
etc. Mat. 6. 10.

Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me, Mat 26. 39.

Yet not as I will, but as thou will, v. 16.

I held my peace, because it was thy doing, Psalm. 39. 10.

Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, etc. 1 Pet. 3. 11.

Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their
souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful creator, 1 Pet. 3. 19.

We have received good at the hands of God, From who^ we receive good.
and shall we not receive evil? Job 2. 10.

Affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does travail come forth of
the ground, Job 5. 6.

I will make thee sick in smiting thee, because of thy sin, Micha 6. 13.

Man suffers for his sin, It is a scourge for our sins.
Lam. 3. 39.

We know that all things work together for good to them that love God, It is
sent for our good
Romans 8. 28.

The heat beat upon the head of JONAS that he fainted, To weane us from the
world.
and wished in himself to dye, and said, It is better for me to die then to
live, Jonah 4. 8.

And ELIAH requested that he might die: It is enough Lord, take away my life; I
am no better then my Fathers, 1 Kings 19. 4.

We that are in this Tabernacle do groan being burdened, 2 Cor. 5. 4.

That I should not be exalted above measure, To tame the flesh, and
strengthening the Spirit.
there was given me a Thorn in the flesh, 2 Cor. 12.

Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions, in distresses; for when I am weak, then am I strong, v. 10

Though our outward man decay, To make us loath sin.
our inward man is renewed, etc. 2 Cor. 4. 16.

My wounds stink, and are corrupt through my foolishness, Psalm. 38. 5. vid.
Psalm. 38. 4.

Let us search, To bring us to acknowledgement of our sins in special.
and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord, Lam. 3. 40.

I truly am set in the Plague; and my heaviness is ever in my sight, Psalm. 38.
17.

I will confess my wickedness, and be sorry for my sin, verse 18.

The people turns not to him that smites them, Isa 9. 13. see Ezra 9. 13.

The thing that I so greatly feared is fallen upon me, Job 3. 25.

We have transgressed, and rebelled, and thou have not pardoned, Lam. 3. 42.

Though he slay me, To prove sincerity of our faith and love.
yet will I trust in him, Job 13. 15.

He shall also be my salvation, for an hypocrite shall not stand before him, v.
16.

And though all this be come upon us, yet do we not forget thee, nor behave
our selves frowardly in thy covenant, Psalm. 44. 18.

Our heart is not turned back; neither our steps gone out of the way, v. 19.

No not when thou have smitten us into the place of dragons, and covered us
with the shadow of death, v. 20.

We are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world,
To keep us from everlasting torments.
1 Cor. 11. 32.

I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, To make us seek more earnestly to God.
and as a roaring Lion to the house of Judah; I will tear, and go away, Hosea
5. 14.

I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offenses, and
seek my face: In their affliction they will seek me early, v. 15.

He would have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat and
no man gave unto him, Luke 15. 16.

And when he came to himself he said, How many hired servants in my Father's
house have meat enough, and I perish with hunger? v. 17.

I will arise and go to my Father, etc. v. 18.

When in their trouble they turned to the Lord God of Israel, Who will be found
of us.
and sought him, he was found of them, 2 Chronicles. 15. 4.

In wrath, or, in the midst of judgment thou remembrest mercy, Abak. 3. 2.

Ikill, And show his glory in our recovery.
and make alive; I wound, and I heal, Deuteronomy. 32. 39.

The Lord brings down to the grave, and brings up, 1 Samuel 2. 6.

This man was borne blind, that the work of God might be showed in him, Ioh.
9. 8.

This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of
God might be glorified thereby, Ioh. 11. 4.

For we had the Sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in
our selves, but in God that raises the dead, 2. Cor. 1. 9, 10.

Who has delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver: in whom we
trust that he will yet deliver us, ver. 11.

A Prayer for the Sick.
Faithful Creator, and preserver of all men, especially of thine Elect, whom
thou smitest in mercy, and chastenest in love, and correctest in tender
compassion, and wounding and healing again, killing and reviving, bringing
down to the gates of hell, and raising up from thence again: Look down, I
beseech thee, upon thy poor prostrated servant grievously punished, and
afflicted in body with the smart of my pain, and much more troubled and
terrified in mind with the sense of my sin, and fear of thy heavy
displeasure. My pains and pangs of my sickness, O Lord, are bitter, yet the
remembrance of my sin is more bitter unto me, and the apprehension of thy
wrath far exceeds both. Whilst I enjoyed health and prosperity, the joy of
all my joys was in thy love; and so now in my misery and sickness, the sorrow
of all my sorrows, and anguish of all my pains, is in the feeling of thy
wrath. This is the very venom of the arrow that sticks in me. It is gall to
my taste, and wormwood to my mouth, and the sharpest vinegar in my festered
sores, and a burning fire in my bones. I confess to thy glory and my shame,
that of very faithfulness and goodness to me, thou have laid this scourge
upon me, to the end, that by the stripes of my flesh, my spirit might be
healed, and saved in the day of my Lord IESV. I fostered snakes secretly in my
bosom; I cherished private sin in my conscience, and now they have stung me. I
took too much delight in worldly comforts, and therefore thou have sawced them
with sorrows. My wanton flesh pampered up with ease and dainty fare, spurned
at thy word, and grew headstrong against thy Spirit, and therefore thou have
tamed it with the sharp whip. I was in a kind of a spiritual Lethargy, till
thou did awake me with the stroke of thy hand. There grew a Call over my
conscience, which this thy chastisement has plucked away. I felt an Itch of
impure lusts and desires in all parts of my soul, but thy Rod has killed it.
I valued not the benefit of health as I should have done; and therefore thou
have taught me it by my pain. In my prosperity, I remembered not the
afflictions of my brethren, and therefore thou have afflicted me like unto
them. I wept not for the calamities of thy people, I shed no tears for the
public ruins of the Church, and therefore thou have drawn from me abundance
of them for my private griefs. I put from me still the evil day, and
therefore thou have brought it near unto me. All this have I done, and
therefore most justly all this do I suffer. And because I know that it is good
for me thus to be disciplined by thee; I humble my self under thy mighty
hand, and kiss this thy Rod which imprints in my flesh a sense of my sin,
and a mark of thy love, and makes my body black and blew; but I trust
(through thy grace) shall make my soul appear fair and beautiful in thine
eyes. Oh that I could frame my self to perfect patience, that my abiding thy
will might as well please thee, as my disobeying thy will has displeased thee.
My spirit is willing, but my flesh is weak. I strive with the rebellions of my
heart and corruptions, but they are too strong for me.

Feign would I silence all clamorous passions, and let patience have her full
work upon me; but the loathsomenesse, and painfulnesse, and tediousness of my
disease drown all my ghostly comforts, and make me even rore for the
disquietnes of my heart. O Lord thou know all my desires, and my groans are
not hid from thee. Thou know whereof I am made, thou understand that I am
but dust; and will thou contend with dust and ashes? O Father of mercy, and God
of all consolation, lay no more upon me then thou will give me ability to
bear. Either assuage and diminish my pain, or increase my strength: either
shorten my sickness, or lengthen (I beseech thee) my patience. I acknowledge
my many sins deserve many strokes, and grievous sins smart strokes; but my
flesh is not of iron, nor my sinews of brass, nor my heart of Oak, to endure
so many blows and re-iterated cuts of thy axe. Neither could my sufferings (if
I could endure as much for sin as any of thy blessed Saints and Martyrs have
suffered for righteousness) thereby satisfy for the least of my sins. For thy
Majesty is infinite, and my offenses therefore infinite; thy mercy toward me is
infinite, and my ingratitude toward thee thereby made infinite. Thy law
eternal, and my gilt consequently, for the breach thereof, eternal. But thy
Son a person of infinite dignity, out of his infinite love to mankind has
laid down his life, a price of infinite value, to discharge the infinite debt
of my sins. Wherefore, I beseech thee, look not upon my sin, but upon thy Son:
weigh not my transgressions, but his merits. Thy justice is fully satisfied by
him; O confirm thy mercies unto me. As I have, in the cup of trembling, tasted
thy justice and my sins: so grant that in the cup of salvation I may taste thy
mercy, and my Sauiour's merits. Bless all the meats, and drinks, and
medicines, which I shall receive from the hand of the Physician to the repair
and recovery of my bodily health; and sanctify all the bitter potions which
thou have, and shall minister unto me to the restoring of my soul's health.
Comfort my fainting Spirit, and strengthen my feeble knees, and support my
weak hands, and revive my deaded heart; and so powerfully assist me with thy
Spirit of strength, that I may with confidence call upon thee, with patience
endure this trial, with hope expect thy good pleasure, with wisdom make use
of this thy visitation, and with thankfulness ever praise thy goodness and
mercy for my safe recovery, if it may stand with thy blessed will; whereunto I
fully submit, and wholly resign my self now and for ever, Amen.

The Sicke-mans Devotion after his Recovery.
The Admonition or Exhortation to Thanksgiving.
THE ANALYSIS.
For perpetual Thanksgiving, and a grateful acknowledgement of God's
blessing, we have in Scripture* 1 Examples of CHRIST. The Angels. The Saints In
heaven. On earth.

2 Reasons drawn from the consideration of God his -- Precepts. Promises.
Benefits Past. Present. To come.




THE TEXTS.
I Thank thee, For thankfulness.
o Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes, Mat. 11. 25.

And he took the seven loaves, Examples of Christ.
and the fishes, and gave thanks, and brake them, Mar. 5. 36.

And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, Mat.
26. 27.

And when he had given thanks, he took bread and brake it, Luke 22. 19.

And all the Angels that stood round about the Throne, The Angels
and about the Elders, and the four beasts, fell down on their faces, before
the Throne, and worshipped God, saying, (Revel. 7. 11.) Amen: Blessing, and
glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be
unto God for ever, v. ^2.

Glory be to God on high, The Saints in heaven.
on earth peace, and good will toward men.

Those beasts gave glory, The Saints on earth.
and honor, and thanks, to him that sat on the Throne, who lives for ever,
Revel. 4. 9.

And he blessed him, Melchizedeck.
and said, Blessed be Abraham of the most high God possessor of heaven and
earth, Genesis 14. 19:

And blessed be the most high God who has delivered thine enemies into thy
hand, ver. 20.

I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, Jacob.
and of all the truth which thou have showed to thy servant. For with my staff
I passed over this Jordan; and now I am become two bands, Genesis 32. 10.

And when they heard that the Lord had visited the children of Israel, The
people of Israel in Moses time
and that he looked upon their afflictions, they bowed their heads, and
worshipped, Exodus 4. 31.

Then sang Moses Moses.
and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord, saying. I will sing unto
the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously; the horse and the rider has he
thrown in the Sea, Exo. 15. 1.

Then sang Debora, Deborah. Barak.
and Barak, etc. Iud 5. 12. and sequ.

And Anna prayed unto the Lord and said; Anna.
My heart rejoices in the Lord, my horn is exalted in the Lord, 1. Sam. 21.
and sequ. vsq. ^d 11.

And David spoke unto the Lord the words of this Song, David.
in the days that the Lord had delivered him out of the hand of all his
enemies etc. 2. Sam. 22. 1. and sequ. See Psalm. 8. 9. 18. 21. 27. 30. 34. 45.
46. 47. 48. 65. 66. 68. 75. 77. 81. 85. 89. 92. 95. 96. 98. 99. 100. 103. 104.
105. 107. 108. 111. 113. 115. 117. 118. 124. 134. 135. 136. 138. 144. 145. 146.
147. 148. 149. 150.

Blessed be the Lord God that has given rest unto his people Solomon.
Israel, according to all that he had promised, and has not failed one word of
all his good promises which he promised by the hand of Moses his servant, 1.
Kin 8. 5.

Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers who has put such a thing as this in
the Kings heart, Ezra.
Ezr. 7. 27.

O Lord thou art my God, Isaiah.
I will exalt thee, I will praise thy Name, for thou have done wonderful
things; thy counsels of old are faithfulness and truth, Isay 25. 5.

The writing of Ezekiah king of Judah, Ezekias.
when he had been sick, and was recovered of his sickness, I said, etc. Isa.
38. 9. 10. vsq. ad 21.

Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision; then Daniel
blessed the God of heaven, Daniel.
Dan. 2. 19.

Blessed be the Name of God for ever and ever, for wisdom, and might are his,
verse 20.

I thank thee and praise thee o thou God of my fathers, who have given me
wisdom, and might, and have made known unto me what we have desired of thee,
v. 23.

I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving; Jonah.
I will pay that I have vowed: Salvation is of the Lord, Jonah 2. 9.

MARIE said; My soul does magnify the Lord, Marie.
etc. Luke 1. 46.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, Zacharias.
etc. v. 68.

And the shepherds returned, The Shepherds.
glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen,
Luke 2. 20.

And immediately he rose up, The man taken with a Palsy.
and departed to his own house, glorifying God, Luke 5. 25.

And there came fear on all, The people.
and they glorified God saying, A great Prophet is risen among us, and God has
visited his people, Luke 7, 16.

When he had laid hands on her, The woman that had a Spirit of infirmity.
immediately she was made straight, and glorified God, Luke 13. 13.

And one of them (when he saw that he was ^ealed) turned back, One of the
Lepers.
and with a loud voice glorified God, Luke 17. 15.

And immediately he received his sight, The blind man.
and followed him, glorifying God; and all the people when they saw it, gave
praise unto God, Luke 18 45.

And he leaping up, The (...).
stood and walked, and entered with them into the Temple, walking, and leaping,
and praising God, Acts 3. 8.

Paul, Paul.
when he saw the brethren, thanked God, and took courage, Act. 18. 15.

I thank God always etc. Romans 7. 21. See 1. Cor. 14. 14. 10. 30. 14. 18. 15.
57. 2. Cor. 9. 15. Ephesians. 1. 16. Phil 1. 3. Col. 1. 12. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 2. 2. 13. 2.
Tim. 1. 3. Phil. 4.

To him be glory, Peter.
and dominion for ever. 1. Peter 5. 11.

To the only wise God our Savior be glory and majesty, Jude.
dominion and power, now and for ever, Iud 25.

To him that has loved us etc. John.
be glory, and dominion for ever and ever, Revel. 1. 5. 6.

Offer unto God thanksgiving, Precepts.
and pay thy vows to the most High, Psalm. 50. 14.

Turn to the Lord; say unto him, Take away all iniquity and receive us
graciously; so we will render the calves of our lips, Hos. 14. 2.

Let no uncleanness etc. be once named amongst you: neither jesting, which is
not convenient; but rather giving of thanks. Ephesians. 5. 3, 4.

In every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests
be made known unto God, Phil. 4. 6.

Giving thanks to the Father, which has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1. 12.

Being rooted and built up in him, and established in the faith, as ye have bin
taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving, Col. 2. 7.

Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus,
giving thanks to God and the Father by him, Col. 3. 17.

Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving, Col. 4. 2.

In every thing give thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus
concerning you, 1 These. 5. 18.

We are bound to thank God for you always brethren, 2 These. 1. 3. 2. 13.

I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions,
and giving of thanks be made for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 1.

Commanding to abstain from meats, which God has created to be received
with thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 4. 3.

By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that
is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name.

See more at the end of the preparatory Admonition to Prayer.

A PSALM OF Thanksgiving for recovery.
I Will magnify thee o Lord, for thou have set me up; and not made my (
spiritual) foes to triumph over me, Psalm. 30. 1.

O Lord my God, I cried unto thee, and thou heardest me, v. 2.

Thou Lord have brought my soul out of hell; thou have kept my life from them
that go down into the pit, v. 3.

Sing praises unto the Lord o ye Saints, and give thanks unto him for a
remembrance of his holiness, v. 4.

For his wrath endures but for the twinkling of an eye, and in his pleasure is
life: heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning, v. 5.

O what great troubles and adversities have thou showed me! Psalm. 71. 18.

Yet did thou turn and refresh me; and broughtest me from the deep of the
earth again.

Thou have turned my heaviness into joy; thou have put off sackloth, and
girded me with gladness, Psalm. 30. 11.

Praise the Lord o my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy Name,
Psalm. 103. 1.

Praise the Lord o my soul, and forget not all his benefits, v. 2.

Which forgiueth all thy sin, and heals all thine infirmities, v. 3.

Which saves thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with mercy, and
loving kindness, v. 4.

Which satisfies thy mouth with good things, and makes thee young, and lusty
as an Eagle, v. 5.

The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, long suffering, and of great
goodness, v. 8.

O taste, and see how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusts in
him, Psalm. 34. 8.

The Lord is my strength, and my song, and is become my salvation, Psalm. 118.
14.

The voice of joy and health is in my dwellings: the right hand of the Lord
brings mighty things to pass, v. 15.

The right hand of the Lord has the pre-eminence: the right hand of the Lord
brings mighty things to pass, v. 16.

I will not dye, but live, and declare the works of the Lord, v. 17.

The Lord has chastened, and corrected me, but he has not given me over unto
death, v. 18.

Open me the gates of righteousness, that I may go in, and give thanks to
the Lord, v. 19

A Thanksgiving for recovery.
O Lord God of my health and salvation, who have known my soul in trouble,
and did make my bed in my painful and dangerous sickness, and have now
raised me out of it to stand before thee: I offer now unto thee the calves of
my lips, and the sacrifice of my body and soul, which thou first gave, and
now have restored unto me. Because I employed not the faculties of my soul,
and members of my body, as I should have done; thou bereauedst me of the
strength, and vigor, and use of them for a season. But now, because thy
compassion fails not, thou have returned them to me again. Wherefore I
consecrate and deuote them perpetually to thy service; no longer desiring the
use of them, then they may be servants unto me of righteousness unto
holiness. What I vowed in my sickness, by the help I will carefully perform
in my health. As I am in the state of my body, so by the power of thy renewing
grace, I will become in the estate of my soul, a new man. My broken heart
which thou have healed, shall now entirely love thee; my feeble knees and loose
bones which thou have settled, shall day and night bow unto thee: My enthralld
members which thou have set free, shall cheerfully serve thee: My weak hands
which thou have stre^gthened, shall continually be lifted up unto thee: My tied
tongue which thou have loosened, shall unfold thy mercies: My deaf ears which
thou have opened, shall hear thy voice: My harsh, and hoarse, and faint voice
which thou have cleared, shall sing alowde, a song of mercy and judgment. For
in thy former mercies thou forgottest not judgment to make me know mine evil;
and in the latter judgment, thou remembredst mercy, to make me know thy
goodness. By thy judgment, thou have taught me to know my self, and by thy
mercies to know thee. Before I was troubled I went wrong; but now, since thou
have set me right, I will run the way of thy Commandments. I will perpetually
renew and refresh the memory of this singular benefit, whereby thou have
renewed and restored me, and by the smart of my pain made me understand
wisdom secretly. Thy rod and thy staff as they have comforted and supported
me, so they have beat many profitable instructions into me. By thy scourge
which peirceth the flesh, and enters into the heart and bowels, I learn
that thou requirest truth in the inward parts, and searchest the reins and the
heart. By thy rod which at once strikes all the parts of my body, though it
fall heauiest upon one particular, I learn, that though sin reigns and
rages in one kind more then another, yet that my whole soul is diseased. The
whole head is sick, and the whole heart is faint. My fits were many, because
my sins were multiplied. My pain increased, because my sins were aggrauated.
My wounds stanke, and were corrupt through my foolishness: the insufferable
anguish whereof, as it gave me a quick touch of my sin, so also a lively sense
of the benefit of health. By my confining to my chamber, thou taughtest me what
is the benefit of liberty; by the weakness of my limbs, what is the benefit
of strength; by my want of appetite, what the benefit of a stomach is; by the
missing my friends: what the benefit of society is; by my continual watching,
what the benefit of rest, and repose is; by the stupidity and deadness of al
my parts, what the benefit of the senses is. Alas, what is a crown beset with
rubies, to a man that has a carbuncle in his head? What is a chain of pearls
to one that has a squinsie in his neck? Or a collar of Esss to him that has
an impostume on his breast? Or a diamond ring to him that has the gowte in his
finger? Or the golden garter to him that has the crampe in his leg? What are
melodious songs to the deafe^^ Beautiful pictures to a blind man? Dainty
dishes to a man that has lost his taste? What are large revenues to him that
possesses nothing but his bed? What are all to him that is tormented in body
with the pangs of death, or troubled in mind with the horror of hell? I
confess unto thee o Lord, that in my health I often read in the Scriptures,
and heard this note from the sweet singers of Israel, that worldly delights
and comforts were vain, and much like flaggs and bulrushes which men in danger
of drowning catch to bear them up, but they sink down under water with them.
I cannot deny but the golden bells of Aaron in thy Sanctuary, have often rung
this lesson in mine ears, that the true Heart's ease grows only in thy
Paradise; that the contents of the large volume of this world is nothing but
vanity: that one little fit of an ague can dispossess the happiest man alive
of his temporal felicity. Yet till I learned by that which I suffered; till
thy rod had imprinted it even in my flesh, I never deeply thought of it, nor
so thoroughly assented thereunto, but I held the world (though not in
admiration, yet) in too great esteem. I secretly repined at the wealth of the
covetous, and honor of the ambitious, and pleasure of the voluptuous, and
accounted the lives of thy Saints, miserable in comparison of them: so foolish
was I, and ignorant; and even as it were a beast before thee: But in this
school of my sickness I have perfectly gotten by heart that which I did but
slubber over before and learned by rote. In my fearful visitation, finding by
mine own experience, that all earthly delights and comforts, leave us in our
extremities, and cannot steed us when we most need; nay they rather increase
then assuage our pains: I began to distaste them all; I grew out of love
with this life, and entertained death in my most serious thoughts; and I
persuaded my self, that those thoughts of death shall never dye in me, but
still live in my memory, and upon every good occasion be stirred up and
revived, to prepare and dispose me to my last end, that so I may see that
Basyliske first, and kill it, before it see and kill me. O death, how bitter
is thy remembrance in the pride of health? O life how bitter is thy remembrance
in the misery of sickness? Verily I had utterly fainted under my Cross, and
my soul had bin put to silence: I had sowned, and given up, not only my
Ghost, but thy holy Spirit of comfort, if thou had not stayed me with
flagons, and comforted me with apples, and in my hottest fits cooled me with
the sweet gales of thy grace. I had fallen not only with Job, to curse the
day of my birth, but to question the truth of thy Promises. But everlasting
thanks be unto thee, who gave me victory over that fearful tentation; and
by thy holy Spirit did call to my mind all those sweet promises of thy
Gospel, whereby I received comfort, and recovered strength. And now I am
assured, and more then ever before, persuaded, that neither height nor depth,
nor principality, nor power, nor pain, nor pleasure, nor sickness, nor health,
nor life, nor death, nor things present, nor things to come, shall ever be able
to separate me from thy love in CHRIST JESUS.

The close out of Scripture.
I Said in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the gate of the grave, I
am deprived of the residue of my years, Isa. 38. 10.

I said, I shall not see the Lord in the land of the living; I shall behold man
no more with the Inhabitants of the world, ver, 11.

Behold, for peace I had great bitterness; but thou have in love to my soul
delivered it from the pit of corruption, for thou have cast my sins behind thy
back, ver. 17.

For the grave cannot praise thee, death cannot confess thee; they that go
down to the pit, cannot hope for thy truth, ver. 18.

The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day, verse 19.

The dying-mans devotion. Suppart. vlt.
The Admonitions.
The man that is breathing out his last gasp needeth^ 1 Meek patience to
endure God's good pleasure: Of which see the Admonitions for Good-Fridaie; for
Thursday Evening, and for the sick before. 2 Godly sorrow for all the sins
of his life, whereby he has grievously displeased his heavenly Father: Of which
see the Admonition for Tuesday morning. 3 Assured confidence to commit his
Soul to God as a faithful Creator. Of which, see the Admonition for the
Childbearing woman after her delivery. 4 Constant perseverance to hold on to
the end. Of which, see the Admonition for Saturday morning. 5 Lively
apprehension of the joys of heaven, and powers of the world to come. Of which,
see the Meditation for the Sabbath Evening. 6 Christian resolution, cheerfully
to lay down his Tabernacle, and go willingly to the Father of spirits. Of
which, see the Admonition for Saturday Evening. 7 A peaceable disposition to
forgive all his enemies, and depart in peace, as with God, so also with all
men. Of which, see the Admonition for Thursday Morning. 8 A charitable, and
compassionate aflection to consider the poor and destitute, according to his
estate and wealth to help and succor them, that so by their prayers he may be
received into everlasting habitations. Of which, see the Exhortation for
Wednesday morning.


In the extremity of bitter pangs consider o devout Christian: 1 Thy sins
deserve a sharper scourge yet. 2 All thou suffer is nothing to what Christ
endured for thee. 3 Other Saints and holy Martyrs have abided a harder trial,
and more grievous afflictions, and many more terrible conflicts, and yet have
been more then Conquerours through Christ. 4 It is a thousand times better to
be corrected here (though never so severely) then eternally tormented in hell.
5 God will not lay more upon thee the^ he will give thee ability to bear, and
therefore will undoubtedly assuage thy pain or increase thy patience. 6 The
extremity of thy pains will be but a short time; for God will either take them
from thee, by recovering thee; or thee from them, by delivering thee out of the
body. 7 The more grievous thy pains are, the greater thy reward shall be, if
thou patiently endure them.


THE TEXTS.
IT is the Lords mercy that we are not utterly consumed, In thy extremest fit,
meditate upon,
because his compassion fails not, Lam. 3. 20.

If thou Lord shall mark iniquities, 1 The heinousnes of thy sin deserving a
sharper scourge.
O Lord, who shall stand, (or who may abide it?) Psalm. 130. 3.

He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us after our
iniquities, Psalm. 103. 10.

Like as a Father pittieth his children: so the Lord pittieth them that fear
him, ver. 13.

For he knows our frame; he remembers that we are but dust ver. 14.

The sinners in Sion are afraid; 2 The insufferable torments of hell, which by
these te^porall chastisements ^re preuen^ed.
fearfulnes has surprised the hypocrites, who shall dwell with the devouring
fire; who among us shall dwell with everlasting burning? I^. 33.

Topheth is ordained of old; yea for the King it is prepared. He has made it
deep and large; the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the LORD,
like a stream of Brimstone does kindle it, Isa. 30. 33.

A fire is kindled in mine anger, and it shall burn to the lowest hell, Deuteronomy.
32. 22.

The Son of man shall send his Angels, and they shall gather out of his
Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity, Mat. 13. 41.

And shall cast them into a furnace of fire; there shall be weeping, and
gnashing of teeth, verse 42.

Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather
his wheat into his garner, but burn up the chafe with unquenchable fire, Mat.
3. 12.

Suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, Iud. 7.

Send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue, for I am tormented in this flame, Luke 16. 24.

Where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched, Mar. 9. 44. 46.

In flaming fire, taking vengeance of them that know not God, 2. These. 1. 8.

Bind him hand and foot, cast him into utter darkness, there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 22. 13.

To whom the mist of darkness, is reserved for ever, 2. Pet. 2.

He has reserved in everlasting chains of darkness unto the judgment of the
great day, Iud. 6.

(...) same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God which is powered out
without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with
fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of
the Lamb, Reu. 14. 10.

And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever, and ever, ver. 12.

These both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone, R^u.
19. 20.

Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his
angels, Mat. 25 41.

And they have no rest day nor night, Reu. 14 12.

And the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone,
3 The inconceivable pains and sorrows which Christ endured for thee.
where the beast and false Prophets are, and shall be tormented day and night
for ever and ever, Reu. 20. 10.

How much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment
and sorrow give her, Reu. 18. 7.

He began to be sorrowful, and very heavy, Mat, 26. 37.

Then said he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death,
Mat. 26. 38.

And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly; and his sweat was as it were
great drops of blood falling down to the ground, Luke 22. 44.

There stood by the Cross of Jesus his Mother, and his Mother's sister, etc,
Ioh. 19. 25.

And Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying; My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me! Mar. 15. v. 34.

Pilate released Barabbas; and delivered Jesus unto them, when he had scourged
him, to be crucified, Mar. 15. 15.

The Soldiers plotted a crown of thorns, and put it on his head, Ioh. 19. 2.

And he bearing his cross, went forth into a place called, The place of a
skull, ver. 17.

Where they crucified him, etc. ver. 18.

One of the Soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came there
out water and blood, ver. 34.

In the days of his flesh when he had offered up prayers and supplications,
with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death,
and was heard in that he feared, Heb. 5. 7.

Though he were a son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he
suffered, v. 8.

Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his
steps, 1. Pet. 2. 21.

There has no such tentation taken you, but such as is common to men, 1. Cor.
10. 13.

The same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world,
4 The afflictions of Gods Saints equalizing and far surpassing thine Job.
1. Pet, 5. 9.

Satan smote Job with sore biles from the sole of his foot to the crown of
his head, Job. 2. 7.

And he took him a potsheard to scrape him withal; and he sat down in the
ashes, ver. 8.

I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, o thou Preserver of men? why have
thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my self? Job. 7.
20.

Let the day perish wherein I was borne, and the night in which it was said:
There is a man-child conceived, Job. 3. 3.

Let that day be darkness, let not God regard it from above, neither let the
light shine upon it, ver. 4. and seq.

I am troubled, David.
I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long, Psalm. 38. 6.

My loins are filled with a loathsome disease, and there is no soundness in
my bones, v. 7.

I am feeble and sore-smitten; I have roared by reason of the disquietnes of my
heart, v. 8.

Lord, all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee, ver.
9. See Psalm. 6. Psalm. 22. Psalm. 102. Ps. 30. ps. 142. psalm. 143.

I am the man that have seen affliction by the rod of his wrath, Jeremiah.
Lam. 3. 1.

He has filled me with bitterness, and made me drunk with wormwood, ver. 15.

I think God has set forth the last Apostles as it were appointed to death;
The Apostles and first Disciples.
for we are made a spectacle to the world, and to Angels, and to men, 1. Cor.
4. 9.

In iournying often, Paul.
in perils of Waters, in perils of Robbers, in perils by mine own Countrymen,
in perils by the Heathen, in perils in the City, in perils in the Wilderness,
in perils in the Sea, in perils among false brethren, 2. Cor. 11. 26.

In weariness and painfulnes, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness, 2. Cor. 11. 27.

For thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for
the slaughter, Romans 8. 36.

If in this life only we have hope in Christ, then are we of all men most
miserable, 1. Cor. 15. 19.

Others were tried with mockings and scourgings, yea moreover with bonds and
imprisonment, Heb. 11. 36.

They were stoned, they were sawed asunder, they were slain with the sword,
they wandered about in sheepskins and goateskins, being destitute, afflicted,
and tormented, v. 37.

Of whom the world was not worthy. They wandered in deserts, and mountains, and
in dens, and in Caves of the earth, verse 38.

These are they that came out of great tribulation, and have washed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, Reu. 7 14.

I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire, and them that had gotten
the victory over the Beast, and over his image, and over his name, etc. Reu.
15. 2.

And they sang the Song of Moses and of the Lamb, v. 3.

God is faithful, 5 The faithfulness and goodness of God, who will not tempt
us above our strength.
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with
the tentation also make a way to escape, that we may be able to escape, 1. Cor.
10. 14.

The God of all grace, who has called us to his eternal glory by Christ
Jesus, will (after that you have suffered a while) make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you, 1. Pet. 5. 10.

For a small moment have I forsaken thee, 6 The short continuance of these
pains and sorrows.
but with great mercy will I gather thee, Isa. 54. 7.

In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord, thy Redeemer, ver. 8.

His anger endures but a moment, in his favor is life; weeping may endure for
a night, but joy comes in the morning, ps. 30. 5.

The devil shall cast some of you in prison that ye may be tried, and ye shall
have tribulation ten days, Reu. 2. 10.

And it was said unto them, that they should rest yet a little season, until
their fellow servants also, and their brethren which should be killed (as they
were) should be fulfilled, Reu. 6. 11.

The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory which shall be revealed in us, 7 The incomparable reward of our patience
Romans 8. 18.

The light affliction which is but for a moment, See the Admoni^ion for
good-Fryday.
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.
17.

No chastening for the time seems to be joyous, but grievous; nevertheless,
afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them which
are exercised thereby, Heb. 12. 11.

If thou art terrified in conscience with the gilt of thy sins, and
fearfully tempted to despair, support thy self with these helps 1 Most
earnest prayer of thy self of others for thee.
2 Bitter tears in abundance for thy particular sins. 3 Restitution. 4
Reconciliation. 5 Alms deeds. 6 The comfort of thy Pastor. 7 The absolution
of the Church. 8 Meditation upon these heads especially, 1 The infiniteness of
God's mercy. 2 The price and value of Christ's blood. 3 The efficacy of his
intercession. 4 The virtue of the Sacraments. 5 The universality and
certainty of Gods promises to the penitent. 6 Exampls of mercy showed to most
grievous sinners.



THE TEXTS.
ANd being in an Agony, Pray instantly and fervently.
he prayed more earnestly, Luke 22. 44.

Pray always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching
thereunto with all perseverance, Ephesians. 6. 18.

Be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12. 11.

Rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation, continuing instant in prayer, ver.
12.

Pray one for another, Desire others to pray. ^
that ye may be healed: the effectual seruent prayer of a righteous man
avails much, I am. 5. 16.

What prayer, (...) open thy sins and grief in particular.
or what supplication shall be made of any man, or of all thy people Israel,
when every one shall know his own grief, and his own sore, and shall spread
forth his hands unto thee, 2. Cron. 6. 29.

Then hear thou from heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, ver. 30.

Then David's heart smote him after he had numbered the people; and David said
unto the Lord, I have sinned greatly in this I have done; and now, I beseech
thee, o Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very
foolishly, 2. Sam. 2^. 10.

I make my bed to swim, Weep abundantly.
I water my couch with my tears. Psalm. 6. 6.

And he went out, and wept bitterly, Mat. 26. 75.

He shall restore that which he took violently away, Restore.
or the thing which he has deceitfully gotten, or that which was delivered to
him to keep, or the lost thing which he found, Leu. 6. 4.

Or all that about which he has sworn falsely; he shall restore it in the
principal, and shall add a fifth part more thereto, v. 5.

If I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him
four fold, Luke 19. 8.

Go thy way, Reconcile.
be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift, Mat. 5. 24.

Agree with thine adversary quickly, while thou art in the way with him, ver.
25.

Forgive, Forgive freely.
and ye shall be forgiven, Luke 6. 37.

If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will my heavenly Father
forgive you, Mat. 6. 15.

If thy brother trespass against thee seven times a day, and seven times a
day, do return unto thee saying; I repent, thou shall forgive him, Luke 17. 4.

Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as
God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Ephesians. 4. 32.

And his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors til he should pay
all that was due unto him, Mat. 18. 34.

So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, from the heart.
if ye from your heart forgive not every man his brother their trespasses, v.
35.

O King, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by
righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, Dan. 4. 27.

Many sins are forgiven her, for she loved much, Luke 7. 47.

Give alms of such things as ye have, Give as thou art able liberally.
and behold all things are clean unto you, Luke 11. 41.

Sell that ye have, give alms, provide your selves baggs that wax not old,
and a treasure in the heavens which fails not, Luke 12. 33.

Lay not up for your selves treasures on earth, where rust and moths do
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal, Mat. 6. 19.

But lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust
does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through, nor steal, v. 20.

And I say unto you, make unto your selves friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that when ye fail they may receive you into everlasting
habitations, Luke 16. 9.

While ye have time, do good unto all men, but especially to them of the
household of faith, Gal. 6. 10.

Charge the rich in this world, 1 Timothy 6. 17.

That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate, v. 18:

Laying up for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they
may lay hold on eternal life, v. 19.

To do good, Seek to thy Pastor, and desire comfort from him, and the Church
absolution.
and to communicate forget not; for with such sacrifice God is well pleased,
Heb. 13. 16.

His soul draws nigh to the grave, and his life to the destroyer, Job. 33.
22.

If there be a messenger with him, or an interpreter one of a thousand to show
unto him his uprightness, ver. 23.

Then he is gracious unto him, and says; Deliver him from going down to the
pit. I have found a ransom, ver. 24.

He will pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto him, he shall see his
face with joy, v. 26.

Is any man sick among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let
them pray over him, I am. 5. 14.

And the prayer of the Faithful shall save the sick, etc, and if he have
committed sins, they shall be forgiven him, ver, 15.

Verily I say vuto you, whatsoever ye shall bind in earth shall be bound in
heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed ia Heaven,
Matthew. 18. 18.

And when he had said thus, he breathed on them, and said unto the^, Receive
the holy Ghost, Ioh. 20. 22.

Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted, unto them; and whosoeuers sins
ye retain, they are retained verse 23.

Thy mercy is great above the heavens, Medit at upon, and by faith, apply to
thy self Gods infinite mercy.
and thy truth reaches to the clouds, Psalm. 108. 4.

The Lord is gracious and full of compassion, slow to anger, and of great
mercy, Psalm. 145. 8.

The Lord is good unto all, and his tender mercy is over all his works, Psalm.
145. 9.

Thou Lord art good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy to all them
that call upon thee, Psalm. 86. 5,

Thou O Lord art a God full of compassion, and gracious, long suffering,
plenteous in mercy and truth, ver. 15.

O give thanks unto the Lord for he is good, and his mercy endures for ever,
Psalm. 136. 1. 116. 1. 107. 1. 118. 1.

In whom we have redemption through his blood, according to the riches of his
grace, Ephesians. 1. 6.

By his own blood he entered once into the holy place, having obtained
eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12.

The precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, 1 Pet. 1. 19.

This is the Cup of the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you, Luke
22. 10.

The Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood, Act 20. 28.

Much more, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him, Romans 5. 9.

Ye are made nigh by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 13.

For he is our peace, v. 14.

If the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer, sprinkling
the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh, Heb. 9. 13.

How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit
offered himself to God without spot, purge our consciences from dead works?
verse 14.

The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from al sin, 1 Ioh. 1. 7.

If any man sin, we have an Aduecate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, 1 John. 2. 1.

And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for
the sins of the whole world, v. 3.

These have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb,
Reu. 7. 14.

Thou have redeemed us by thy blood to God, Reu. 5. 9.

I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou
should keep them from the evil, Ioh. 17. 15.

Sanctify them through thy truth; thy Word is truth, v. 17.

Neither pray I for these alone, but for them which shall believe on me through
the word, v. 20.

I have prayed for thee that thy faith may not fail, Luke 22. 32.

In that day ye shall ask in my name, and I say not unto you that I will pray
the Father for you, Ioh. 16. 26.

For the Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, v. 27.

Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us, Romans 8. 34.

He is able to save them evermore that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7. 25.

JOHN did baptize in the wilderness, The virtue of the Sacraments.
and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, Mar. 1. 4.

According to his mercy he saved us by the lauer of regeneration, and renewing
of the holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5.

The like figure whereunto even baptism, does now save us by the resurrection
of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the name of the Lord Jesus, for
the remission of sins, Act. 2. 38.

This is the Blood of the New Testament, The universality of promises to
penitent sinners.
which is shed for many, for the remission of sins, Mat. 26. 28.

Seek the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near,
Isa. 55. 6.

Let the wicked for sake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let
him return to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, and
he will abundantly pardon, v. 7.

For my thoughts are not your thoughts, nor my ways your ways, says the
Lord, v 8.

As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked,
but that the wicked turn from his way and live, Ezekiel 18. 22.

Turn you, turn you from your evil ways, for why will ye dye o ye house
of Israel? Ezekiel. 33. 11.

I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God:
wherefore turn your selves, and live, Ezekiel. 18. 32.

They shall know me from the least to the greatest, says the Lord, and I will
forgive their iniquity, and remember their sin no more, Ier. 31. 34.

Thou shall find the Lord, if thou seek him with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul, Deuteronomy. 4. 29.

For the Lord thy God is a merciful God, he will not forsake thee, nor destroy
thee, v. 31.

If my people shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn
from their wicked ways, then I will hear from heaven, and will forgive their
sin, 2 Chro. 7. 14.

If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up, Job 22. 23.

I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions and as a cloud thy
sins: return unto me, for I have redeemed thee, Isa. 44. 22.

Cease to do evil; learn to do well, Isa. 1. 17.

Come now, let us reason together, says the Lord: though your sins be as
skarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they
shall be as wool, Isa. 1. 18.

Go, proclaim these words to the North, and say, Return thou backsliding
Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I
am merciful, says the Lord, and will not keep anger for ever, Ier. 3, 12.

Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have transgressed the Lord thy
God, verse 13.

Come, let us return to the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us; he
has smitten, and he will bind us up, Hosea 6. 1.

I will heal their backslidings, I will love them freely, Hosea 14. 4.

Seek the Lord, and ye shall live, Amos 5. 6.

Turn ye unto me, says the Lord of Hosts, and I will turn unto you, Zac.
1. 3.

Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you, Mat. 11. 28.

Likewise I say unto you, There is joy in the presence of the Angels of God
over one sinner that repents, Luke 15. 10.

The Son of Man came to save that which was lost, Luke 19. 10.

I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Luke 5. 32.

That repentance, and remission of sins should be preached in his name among
all Nations, Luke 24. 47.

Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out
when the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3.
19.

The Lord is not slack as some men account slacknesse, but is long suffering
to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9.

If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just, to forgive us our sins,
and cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 Ioh. 1. 9.

Manasses built altars for all the Host of heaven, The example of Gods mercy in
pardoning heinous and grieueus sinners.
2 Chronicles. 33. 5.

And he caused his children to pass by the fire in the valley of Hinnon; also
he used Witchcraft, and dealt with familiar Spirits, etc. v. 67.

But when he was in his affliction, he besought the Lord his God and humbled
himself greatly before the Lord of his Fathers, v. 12.

And prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him, and he heard his
supplication, v. 13.

He denied before them al, Peter.
saying, I know not what thou say, Mat. 26. 70.

And again he denied him, v. 72.

Then he began to curse, and to swear, saying, I know not the man, v. 74.

And the Lord turned, and looked upon PETER, and PETER remembered the words of
the Lord, Luke 22. 61.

And PETER went out and wept bitterly, v. 62.

And behold a woman in the City which was a sinner, Mary Magdalen.
brought an al abaster box of ointment, etc. Luke 7 37.

Her sins which are many, are forgiven her, for she loved much, v. 47.

A woman which had bin healed of evil Spirits and infirmities, Mary Magdalene,
out of whom went seven devils, Luke 8. 2.

The younger took his journey into a far country, The prodigal.
and wasted his substance with riotous living, Luke 15. 13.

When he came to himself, he said, etc. v. 18.

I will arise, and go to my Father, and say, Father, I have sinned against
heaven, and against thee, etc. v. 20.

And he arose, and went to his Father; but when he was yet a great way off, his
Father saw him, and had compassion, and came, and fell on his neck, The thief
on the Cross.
and kissed him, v. 20.

And he said to Jesus, Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom,
Luke 23. 41.

And Jesus said unto him, Vetily I say unto thee; This day shall thou be with
me in Paradise, v. 43.

Him ye have taken, The Jews that crucified, or consented to the crucifying of
JESUS.
and by wicked hands have crucified and slain, Act. 2. 23.

Let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus
whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ, v. 36.

Now when they heard this, they were pricked in heart, and said to Peter, and
the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? verse 37.

Then Peter said, Repent, and be baptized for the remission of sins, v. 38.

Then they that gladly received the Word were baptized; and the same day were
added unto them about three thousand souls, verse 41.

This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief, 1 Timothy 1. 15.

Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me Jesus Christ might first
show forth all long suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter
believe on him to eternal life, v. 16.

A Psalm for the sick lying at the point of death;
wherein The humble and faithful Christian 1 Lays open his affliction In
body. In mind.
2 Confesses his many and grievous sins. 3 Earnestly prays for Audience.
Sense of Gods favor. Pardon for his sin.
4 Acknowledges God's great mercies through his whole life. 5 Professes his
Trust in God. Joy in the holy Ghost Peace of conscience. Desire of Death.
Assured hope of eternal bliss.
6 Commends his soul to God.


O Lord God of my salvation, Lays open his afflictions in body and soul.
I have cried day and night before thee, o let my prayer enter into thy
presence, Psalm. 88. 1.

For my soul is full of trouble, and my life draws nigh unto hell, v. 2.

I am weary of my groaning; every night wash I my bed, and water my couch with
my tears, Psalm. 6. 6.

I am accounted as one that goes down to the pit; I have bin as a man that
has no strength, Psalm. 88. 3.

Free among the dead like unto them that be wounded, and that lie in the
grave, which be out of remembrance, and cut away from thine hand, v. 4.

Thine indignation lies hard upon me, and thou have vexed me with all thy
storms, v. 6.

I am powered out like water, and all my bones are out of joint; my heart also
in the midst of my bowels is like melted wax, Psalm. 22. 14.

My strength is dried up like a potsheard, and my tongue cleaves to my gummes,
and thou shall bring me into the dust of death, v. 13.

The sorrows of death compass me, and the ouerflowings of ungodliness make me
afraid, Psalm. 18. 3.

The pains of hell come about me; the Snares of death overtake me, v. 4.

Thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore, Psalm. 38. 2.

There is no health in my flesh because of thy displeasure; Confesses.
neither any rest in my bones by reason of my sin, v. 3.

For my wickednesses are gone over my head, and are like a sore burden too
heavy for me to bear, v. 4.

If thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, o Lord, who may
abide it? Psalm. 130. 3.

Out of the deep have I called unto thee o Lord, Lord hear my voice. v. 1.

O let thine ears consider well the voice of my complaint, Prays for
audience.
v. 2.

Lord, Sense of Gods favor.
why abhorrest thou my soul, and hidest thy face from me? Psalm. 88. 14.

I am in misery, and like to him that is at the point to dye: from my youth up
thy terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind, v. 15.

Thy wrathful displeasure goes over me; and the fear of thee has undone me,
v. 16.

Have mercy upon me o God after thy great goodness; Pardon for his sin.
according to the multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses, Psalm. 51. 1.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin, v. 2.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me, v.
11.

O give me the comfort of thy help again, and stablish me with thy free
Spirit, v. 12.

Nevertheless I am always with thee, 4 Acknowledges Gods mercies.
for thou have holden me up by thy right hand, Psalm. 73. 23.

Thou shall guide me by thy counsel, 5 Professes trust.
and after that receive me with glory, v. 24.

Whom have I in heaven but thee o Lord? and I desire none in earth in
comparison of thee, v. 23.

Return to thy rest o my soul, Desire of death.
for the Lord has rewarded thee, Psalm. 116. 7.

Thou have put gladness in my heart more then theirs, Joy in the holy Ghost.
whose corn, and wine, and oil increases, Psalm. 4. 8.

I will lay me down, Peace of conscience.
and take my rest; for it is thou Lord only that make me dwell in safety,
v. 9.

I will behold thy presence, Assured hope of Eternal bliss.
and when I awake up after thy likeness, I will be satisfied with it, Psalm.
17. 16.

I shall be satisfied with the plenteousnesse of thine house, and thou shall
give me drink of thy pleasures as of the rivers, Psalm. 36. 8.

For with thee is the well of life; and in thy light shall I see light, v. 9.

Thou shall show me the path of life, in thy presence is fulness of joy; and at
thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore, Psalm. 16. 12.

Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, 6 Commends his soul to God.
for thou have redeemed me o Lord, thou God of truth, Psalm. 31. 6.

A Prayer for the sick lying at the mercy of God, and ready to depart.
AETernall, and omnipotent, infinite, and incomprehensible God, Lord of my
life, and determiner of my days: My body now is resolving into dust, and my
soul returning to thee that gave it. O Lord most holy, o God most mighty,
draw near unto me, who make have to come unto thee. Give me a cleerer sight
of thee, by how much the nearer I am out of the dark prison of my body. Give
me also a quicker taste of the powers of the life to come, that I may more
comfortably pass over these last troubles of this present life* O Lord, my
soul is heavy even unto death; for the weight of al my sins aggrauated by the
devil is at once upon me; and I sink and faint under this burdon which is too
heavy for me to bear. Neither is there any means under heaven to ease me of
it, but by laying it upon him that has borne our infirmities and carried our
sorrows. O Father of mercy, and God of all consolation, let not the guilt of
my sins or horror of thy judgments, or Satan's suggestions, or the fear of
death, or terrors of hell drive me to desperation. I confess that for my
vnmindfulnesse of thee, and ungratefulness to thee all my life, I deserve that
thou should utterly abandon and forsake me now at my death. But thy thoughts
are not like our thoughts, nor thy affections like mine. Though a woman could
forget the fruit of her womb, yet thou will not nor can not forget those
that trust in thee. Thy gifts and graces are without repentance; and whom thou
love, thou love to the end. Thou will not break a bruised reed, nor
quench the smoking ^lax. Though thou have severely corrected me in this thy
fearful visitation; yet thou have not, and I know wilt not give me over to
eternal death. Dear Father, show thy strength in my greatest weakness;
confirm thy mercy to me in my greatest misery; apply thy comfort to me in this
my last extremity. Assuage the pains of my body with ghostly comforts; and
diminish the fear of death, by the assured hope of a better life. Call to my
mind (whilst yet I breathe) all the errors of my understanding, that I may
timely revoke them; all the sins of my will, that I may heartily bewail them;
all the testimonies of thy love, that I may gratefully acknowledge them; all
the promises of thy Gospel, that I may comfortably embrace them; all my holy
vows and purposes, that I may finally confirm them; and gracious Lord accept
the will for the deed. O let me that am now returning to dust, and ashes,
speak but this once to my Lord and maker. With all my heart, soul, and
strength, I beseech thee, by all that my Savior Jesus Christ has* done and
suffered for me, I entreat thee, speak peace to my soul at her departing,
and say unto her, I am thy salvation. Make my election sure by my true
repentance, perfect charity, assured confidence, constant patience, comfortable
perseverance unto the end, and in the end.

To the TRINITY.
GLorious Creator, gracious Redeemer, everlasting comforter, Lord God Almighty,
send me aid and help from heaven in this my last and most dreadful conflict
with all the powers of hell and darkness. Arm me with thy complete armor, and
endue me with power from above to vanquish Satan and his infernal bands, and
to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked in the blood of my Redeemer. I am
thine, o God the Father, by the right of creation; I am thine, o God the Son,
by the right of thy purchase; I am thine, o God the Holy Ghost, by the right of
thine inhabitation, and possession. Save me, Father, by thy power: save me,
Son, by thy merits: save me holy Spirit, by thy grace. O holy, blessed and
glorious Trinity, whose power no creature is able to resist: Rebuke and
confound thine enemy that goes about to deface thine Image in me; to spoil
thy creature; to destroy him for whom thou, o Son, offeredst thy self on the
Cross by the eternal Spirit to the Father. O Father, be now to me a father in
my greatest need. O Jesus, be to me a Jesus in my greatest danger. O Comforter,
be to me a Comforter in my greatest afflictions. Holy and Righteous Judge
eternal, Satan takes advantage of thy fatherly chastising me; he grows
strong against me by this my great weakness. Now he rages most furiously,
because his time is short. He assaulteth me every way, by subtle suggestions,
by fearful visions and apparitions. He terrifieth my flesh with the ugly
shape of death; he affrighteth my conscience with the horror of the last
judgment, and scorcheth my soul even with flashes of hell fire. O Father of
spirits, deliver not the soul of thy Turtle Dove (that mourns to thee day
and night) as a prey unto him. Though never so deformed, yet I am thy work, O
God my Father; though never so vile, yet I am thy purchase, o God my Redeemer:
though never so polluted, yet I am thy Temple, O God my sanctifier. Faithful
Creator, preserve the work of thine hand; faithful Redeemer, preserve the
purchase of thy blood; faithful Sanctifier, preserve the Temple of thine
honor. I abhor my self in dust and ashes, and I conceive more grief then I
am able to express for abusing thy works, o Father, thy Word and Sacraments,
o Son, thy gifts and graces, o Spirit Father forgive me all sins of
infirmity against thy power: Son forgive me all sins of ignorance against
thy wisdom; Holy Ghost forgive me all sins of malice against thy grace.
Most mighty Father, give me thy protection; Most merciful Son, give me thy
peace; Most gracious holy Spirit, give me thy comfort, that I may safely,
peaceably and cheerfully leave this vale of tears. Father, possess me of the
kingdom which thou, O Son have purchased, and thou, O Spirit, have sealed
unto me. Into thy hands, O Father, who breathedst into me the Spirit of life;
Into thy hands, O Son, who breathedst out thy Spirit for me; Into thy hand,
o Holy Spirit, who renewedst a right spirit within me, and have comforted my
spirit to the last gasp, I now commend my spirit, Amen.

To the Lord JESUS, at the hour of death.
Welcome blessed hour, the period of my pilgrimage, the term of my bondage,
the end of my cares, the close of my sighs, the bound of my travels, the gole
of my race, and the haven of my hopes. I have fought a long fight in much
weakness; I have finished my course, though in great faintness; and the crown
of my joy is, that, through the strength of thy grace, I have kept the true
faith, and now I dye in it. I willingly resign my flesh, I despise the world,
and I defy the devil who has no part nor share in me. And now, what is my
hope? My hope, Lord Jesus, is even in thee. For I know that thou my Redeemer
live, and thou will immediately receive my soul, and raise up my body also at
the last day, and I shall see thee in my flesh with these eyes, and none other.
My heart faints, my strength fails, my tongue faltereth. Lord let thy
Spirit of comfort help mine infirmities, and make supplication for me with
sighs and groans that cannot be expressed. I submit my self wholly to thy
will. I commit my soul to thee as my faithful REDEEMER, who have bought me
with thy most precious blood. I profess to all the world, I know no name under
heaven, by which I may be saved, but thine my IESV, my Savior. I renounce all
confidence in merits save thine; I thankfully acknowledge all thy blessings; I
unfeignedly bewail all my sins; I steadfastly believe all thy promises; I
heartily forgive all mine enemies; I willingly leave all my friends; I utterly
loath all earthly comforts; I entirely long for thy coming.

Come Lord Jesus; come quickly. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

The Hand-Maide's Posie, written in the end of her Manuell.
Birth is a brag; Glory a blaze;
Honor's earths pomp; Riches a gaze;
Fame is but wind; Beauty a flower;
Pleasure a dance; the world a bower.
In heaven with thee, Lord let me be;
On earth my heauen's alone in thee.
FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 3. in marg. germinatus, read germinans. p. 9. l 8 r. his private prayer.
l. 9. dele alone. p. 19. in marg patrij r. patrui. p. 24 in marg r. (...). p.
58. l. 22. pure and plain heart. r. pure hearts and hands. p. 63. l. 9. bare,
r. private. p 64. l. 13. Saturday. r* Sabbath eve p 68. l. 5. joined, r.
enjoined. p. 97 l. 5 one, r. our. p. 100. l. 6. room. r. man. p. 109 l 1.
knife r. thrift l 11. approved, r. approves. p 120 l 9. fit, r sill l. 15.
faith, r. face p. 150. l. 19 dele my. p. 151. l. 16. insert the close out of
Scripture p. 163 l, 27 these, r. the p. 167. l. 11. add Genesis 3. 15. p. 185. l.
2. d Ier. 44. p. 194 l. 16. d. for. p. 195. l. 14. heart. r. head. p. 235. l.
^. Ioh. 15. 10. r. Ioh 16. 28. p. 265. l. 27. immediately, r. mediately. p.
281. l. 18. thou were, r. thou who were p. 299. in marg. strength, r out of his
side. p. 320. in mar. which God, r. of God, p. 328. l. 1. his, r thy. p 331. l
22. dele made. p. 361. l. 15. Mat. 1 12 r. Mat. 11. 1 p, 365. deaded, r dead p.
371 l 22 to, r. for. p. 380. in marg, in, r. an p. 388. l. 6. the, r as the* p
435. l. 23. eating, 1. eaten p. 439. l. 2. for, r. of. p. 443 l 10. add 1 Pet.
2. 23. p. 446. l 21. add in marg the Spirit. p. 449. l. 13. add in marg.
happiness. p. 453 the prayers are false quoted. p. 458. l. 17. things, r. my
members. p. 460. l. 5. dele to which faith is requisite* p. 465. in marg. pray,
r. prayer. p 477. l. 24. them, r therein p 481. l. 20. in marg. dele peace p.
4. 82. in marg. dele here p. 488 l 26 dele and p. 490. l. 12. from, r. to. p.
524. l. 21. were yea and amen, r. were not yea and nay. p 518. l. 3. affection,
r. affliction. p 523. compass. r. compose. p. 530. l. 13. dele and. p. 531. l.
8. dele. so. p. 532. l. 9 the, r thy.

THE HANDMAID TO PRIVATE DEVOTION: THE SECOND PART; Delivering the sum of
SAVING KNOWLEDGE, in 52 Sections, answerable to the number of the Sundays
throughout the Year.

IOH. 17. 3. This is life eternal, to know thee to be the only true God, and
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. AUGUST. Confess. Quid prodest in caeteris
disciplinis peritum esse, and fine doctrina pietatis periturum. LONDON, Printed
by G. M. and R. B. for Nicholas Boorne, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
South Entrance of the Rojall Exchange. 1625.

A Table representing the general Method of this Part.
Blessedness is obtained by true Religion, reueiled by God in holy SCRIPTVRES
which instruct us in the 1. Knowledge of 1 God his Nature Attributes Works of
CREATION. Providence general. special.


2 CHRIST his Person, Estates, Offices of -- King. Priest. Prophet.


2. Worship of GOD in CHRIST Immediate, which consists in performing all
holy duties commanded in the first Table. Mediate, which consists in
performing all duties to our neighbors and our selves commanded in the second
Table, which are of a sorts -- 1 General, and common duties of all Christians
one to another. 2 Special, proper to men in certain. Estates. Callings.





A Table of the particular Contents.
OF Catechism, the parts and proper ends thereof. Sect. 1. Of blessedness,
and the means of obtaining it. Sect. 2. Of Religion, and the parts thereof.
Sect. 3. Of the nature of God. Sect. 4. Of the principal attributes of God.
Sect. 5. Of the works of God in general. Sect. 6. Of Gods decrees. Sect. 7.
Of the Creation. Sect. 8. Of Gods general providence. Sect. 9. Of the
Predestination of Angels. Sect. 10. Of the Predestination of men. Sect. 11. Of
Christ his person, Sect. 12. Of Christ his estate of humiliation. Sect. 13. Of
Christ his estate of exaltation. Sect. 14. Of Christ his Prophetical function.
Sect. 15. Of Christ his Priestly function. Sect. 16. Of Christ his Kingly
function. Sect. 17. Of the Church, and the parts thereof. Sect. 18. Of the
notes of the true Church. Sect. 19. Of the twofold worship of God; and of
faith in particular. Sect. 20. Of humility, and honoring God, and how they are
the fruits of faith. Sect. 21. Of reverence, obedience, and patience; and how
they are the fruits of faith. Sect. 22. Of love, fear, repentance, gratitude,
and zeal; and how they are the fruits of faith. Sect. 23. Of hope, confidence,
and magnanimity; and how they are the fruits of faith. Sect. 24. Of the outward
worship of God in general. Sect. 25. Of keeping the Sabbath. Sect. 26. Of
hearing the Word. Sect. 27. Of Prayer, and the parts thereof. Sect. 28. Of
receiving the Sacrament, and necessary preparation thereunto. Sect. 29. Of
oaths, vows and profession of our faith. Sect. 30. Of the Christian duties
we owe to our selves. Sect. 31. Of the common duties were owe to our
neighbors. Sect. 32. Of the special works of humility. Sect. 33. Of the
special works of meekness. Sect. 34. Of the special works of friendship.
Sect. 35. Of the special works of Christian zeal. Sect. 36. Of the duties of
Superiors toward inferiors. Sect. 37. Of the duties of inferiors toward
their Superiors. Sect. 38. Of the duties of equals. Sect. 39. Of the
Christian duties of Kings toward their Subjects. Sect. 40. Of the special
duties of Subjects to their King. Sect. 41. Of the duties of Christian parents.
Sect. 42. Of the special duties of children. Sect. 43. Of the special duties
of Masters. Sect. 44. Of the special duties of Servants. Sect. 45. Of the
duties of married folk. Sect. 46. Of the duties of the Husband. Sect. 47. Of
the duties of the wife. Sect. 48 Of the duties of Pastors. Sect. 49 Of the
duties of the flock toward their Pastor. Sect. 50. Of the special duties of
men in respect of their personal callings. Sect. 51. Of the special
antidotes, or preservatives against sin. Sect. 52.
THE PRAYER BEFORE THE Catechism.
GRacious Father, who have provided the sincere milk of the Word for Newborn
babes in Christ; as thou have strong meat for them that are of riper years,
and judgment, and have commended to the dispensers of thy holy mysteries, as
well the care of feeding thy tender Lambs, as thy well grown, and stronger
sheep: Guide me by thy holy spirit, that I may guide them in the paths of
righteousness, and lead them to the waters of comfort, flowing from the
fountain of thy most pure and holy Word. Season their tender years with true
Religion; and power into these new vessels the new wine of thy Gospel, that
they savor not of the caske of the old Man. Open their hearts as thou
openedst the heart of Lydia, that they may attend to those things that concern
their eternal salvation. Sit thou in the midst of us here assembled, as thou
satest in the midst of the Doctors in the Temple, opposing, and answering
them. Propound such Questions by me, and return such Answers by them, as may
clearly express to our understanding, and imprint in our memories the
necessary points of saving Truth, and foundations of Christian Doctrine; and
may serve for the instruction of the ignorant, admonition of the learned, and
the building up of us all in our most holy faith; So be it, Amen.

PARS PRIMA: THE SVMME of saving Knowledge.
SECT. Prim. DOMIN. Prim. Of Catechism; the parts, and proper ends thereof.
Q. WHAT is Catechism?

A. The sum of Christian religion revealed by God, in holy Scriptures, for
man's perfect instruction in the mysteries of eternal salvation.

Q. What does Christian Doctrine contain in it?

A. The true knowledge, and worship of God in Christ.

Q. Where find you the sum of this Doctrine?

A. 1. In the Decalogue, written by God the Father. 2. In the Lords Prayer,
conceived by God the Son. 3. In the Creed, set down by the Apostles inspired by
the Holy Ghost.


Q. What contains the Decalogue?

A. All duties to be performed by us to God, and our neighbors.

Q. What contains the Lords Prayer?

A. All benefits to be desired of God.

Q. What contains the Creed?

A. All things the ^are to be believed concerning God, and his Church.

Q. What is the use and proper end of Catechism?

A. To instruct the ignorant and confirm the learned in the principles of
Religion; and prepare both to the profitable use of the special means of
their salvation, which are Hearing the Word preached. Receiving the Sacraments.
Public and private Prayer


SECT. 2. DOMIN. 2. Of blessedness, and the means of obtaining it.
Q. What are the chiefest things to be desired of all men?

A. Gods favor, blessings, and grace in this present life, and eternal
blessedness in the vision, and fruition of him in the life to come.

Q. How may we attain hereunto?

A. By true Religion, or godliness; which has the promise of this life, and
the life to come.

Q. What is godliness?

A. The true worship, and service of the true God.

Q. Where is this true God's worship, and service to be learned, and known,
and how?

A. Obscurely, and imperfectly it may be learned in the book of the creatures,
by the light of nature: but clearly, and perfectly by the light of the Spirit
in the Canonical books of the old and new Testament.

SECT. 3. DOMIN. 3. Of Religion, and the parts thereof.
Q. What do the Scriptures teach in general, concerning the true God, and his
worship?

A. That we ought to know, and acknowledge the true God his Nature Attributes
Works
as far forth as God has made himself known to us.

2. That we ought to know, and acknowledge Jesus Christ (the Mediator between
God, and man) his Person. State. Office.


3 That we ought to worship God in Christ, and serve him both Immediately, by
religiously adoring him, and performing all such holy rites unto him as he
requires in the first Table. Mediately, by readily obeying him, and performing
all such duties to our selves, and our neighbors as he requires in the
second Table.

SECT. 4. DOMIN. 4. Of the Nature of God.
Q. What do the Scriptures teach concerning the nature of God?

A. That he is One, true, eternal, simple, all-sufficient, immutable,
infinite, incomprehensible spirit; having being of himself; distinguished into
three persons of the same nature, dignity, and power.

The Father begetting. The Son begotten. The Holy Ghost proceeding from them
both.
SECT. 5. DOMIN. 5. Of the principle attributes of God.
Q. What do the Scriptures teach concerning the attributes of God?

A. That he is a living, blessed, and glorious God; the great, high, and mighty
Lord, and possessor of heaven and earth, and our most gracious and loving
Father, most holy, wise, just, faithful, and good.

SECT. 6. DOMIN. 6. Of the works of God in general.
Q. What do the Scriptures teach concerning the works of God?

A. That he decrees, and executes al things for his glory, according to the
counsel of his own will; powerfully working all the good of nature, and grace
in all things, and wisely disposing of all the evil, both of sin and
punishment.

SECT. 7. DOMIN. 7. Of God's Decrees.
Q. What decrees of God are registered in holy Scriptures for our instruction,
and comfort?

A. Two Especially 1. His decree of creation of all things. 2. His decree of
providence over all, which is twofold, 1. General, concerning the present
state of all things in this world. 2. Special, concerning the eternal state
of Angels, and men in the world to come.



Q. What is this special decree properly called?

A. Predestination.

Q. What are the parts of it?

A. Two Election Reprobation, or reiection.


Q. What is Election?

A. Gods eternal counsel, and purpose of choosing certain Angels, and men,
and bringing them to everlasting happiness, for the declaration of his
infinite mercy.

Q. What is Reprobation?

A. Gods eternal counsel, and purpose of rejecting others, and reserving them
to everlasting misery, and torments, for the manifestation of his justice.

SECT. 8. DOMIN. 8. Of the Creation.
Q. What learn you out of Scripture, concerning the execution of Gods decree
of Creation?

A. That in six days, he made all things visible, and invisible, of nothing,
by his word, to the glory of his infinite power.

SECT. 9. DOMIN. 9. Of Gods general Providence.
Q. What learn you concerning the execution of God his decree of general
Providence?

A. That he preserves al things in their state, and kind; and governs them
after an excellent manner, to the glory of his manifold wisdom, and goodness.

SECT. 10. DOMIN. 10. Of the Predestination of Angels.
Q. What is revealed in Scripture, concerning the execution of Gods decree of
Predestination; and first of Angels?

A. That he suffered the reprobate Angels voluntarily, without any temptation,
to fall into the unpardonable sin of Apostasy; and that he reserueth them
in chains of darkness, ti^ the judgment of the great day. But contrarily,
that he has confirmed the Elect Angels in their holy, and blessed estate.

SECT. 11. DOMIN. 11. Of the Predestination of men.
Q. What is revealed in Scripture concerning the Predestination of men?

A. That he gave all men in Adam and Eve a Law, and free will to keep it, or
break it: and after they abused their free will, and brake that Law, and
thereby brought a curse upon them, and all their posterit: y that of his mercy
and grace, he chose and chooses some out of the estate of misery, and
corruption; makes them his sons by adoption, calls them to the knowledge
of the truth, regenerateth them by his spirit, justifies them by faith, and in
the end crowns them with everlasting glory. Others he left and leaves in the
state of misery and corruption, offers them some outward means which make
them inexcusable, and for their refusal, or abuse of them hardens them,
casting them into a reprobate sense; and in the end after many judgments, and
Plagues in this life, condemns them to everlasting torments in hell.

PARS II.
SECT. 12. DOMIN. 12. Of Christ his Person.
Q. WHat are we to know and acknowledge concerning Christ the Mediator?

A. His Person. State. Office.


Q. What ought we to believe touching his Person?

A. That he is God, and man, in one person, conceived by the Holy Ghost,
incarnate of the Virgin Marie.

SECT. 13. DOMIN. 13. Of Christ's estate of humiliation.
Q. In what state, or states does the Scripture describe him to us?

A. In two states, 1. Of humiliation. 2. Of exaltation.


Q. What suffered he in the state of humiliation?

A. He bare all our infirmities; became subject to the Law, and was obedient to
death, even the death of the Cross, was buried, and descended into hell.

SECT. 14. DOMIN. 14. Of Christ his estate of exaltation.
Q. What did Christ in the state of exaltation?

A. He laid down all our infirmities, arose from the dead, ascended into
heaven, sits at the right hand of God, and shall come in the clouds with
great glory to judge the quick and the dead.

SECT. 15. DOMIN. 15. Of Christ his Prophetical function.
Q. What office did the Son of God take upon him for the salvation of man?

A. The Office of a Mediator, betwixt God, and man.

Q. How performs he this office?

A. By executing the functions of a Prophet. Priest. King.


Q. What appertains to Christ's Prophetical function?

A. To reveal the hidden wisdom of his Father.

Q. How has he heretofore executed this function?

A. Before his Incarnation, by the Priests and Prophets of the old Law. In the
days of his flesh he executed it in his own person, preaching the Gospel,
which is the covenant of grace, and instituting Sacraments, as seals theroof
viz. Baptism; which is the seal of regeneration, and our entrance into the
Church. The Lords Supper, which is the seal of our spiritual growth, and
nourishment in the Church.


Q. How does he yet execute this function?

A. By the Ministers of the Word, whom he furnishes with gifts answerable; and
assisteth them in the holy works of their sacred calling with his spirit,
enlightening the understanding, and opening the hearts of all belieuers, to
make their Ministry effectual.

Q. What benefits reap we by Christ's Prophetical function?

A. Vocation, and the Effects thereof; incorporation into Christ's mystical
body; faith, spiritual wisdom and understanding, with other sanctifying
graces of the holy. Ghost.

SECT. 16. DOMIN. 16. Of Christ his Priestly function.
Q. What appertains to Christ's Priestly function?

A. To cleanse us from our sins, and reconcile us to God his Father.

Q. How did he execute this function?

A. By fulfilling the Law, and offering up himself upon the Altar of the
Cross, for a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins.

Q. How does he yet execute this office?

A. By appearing at the right hand of God, to make intercession for us.

Q. What benefits reap we by his Priesthood?

A. Justification, with the fruits thereof; free access unto God, with
confidence; settled peace of conscience, and unspeakable joy in the Holy Ghost.

SECT. 17. DOMIN. 17. Of Christ his Kingly function.
Q. What appertains to Christ's Kingly function?

A. To rule and govern his Church.

Q. How has he executed this function?

A. By making laws for the whole company of the faithful, and establishing a
perpetual government in his Church.

Q. How does he yet execute this royal function?

A. First, by his spirit ruling in our hearts, and subduing the flesh to the
Spirit.

2. By protecting us against all our ghostly and bodily enemies.

3. By inflicting judgments upon the enemies of his Church.

4. By advancing his Elect to a Kingdom in heaven.

Q. What benefits reap we by his Kingdom?

A. Glorification, with the parts thereof; victory, safety, eternal glory.

SECT. 18. DOMIN. 18. Of the Church, and the parts thereof.
Q. For whom did Christ take our nature upon him, and discharge his threefold
office?

A. For his Mystical body, the Catholic Church.

Q. What mean you by the Catholic Church?

A, The whole company of the Elect, called already, or to be called, by the
Word, and Spirit out of the estate of corruption, and servitude of sin, into
the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, to be co-heires with Christ in his
Kingdom.

Q. Where is this company to be found?

A. It is partly triumphant in heaven with Christ their Head; partly militant
under the cross, dispersed over the face of the whole earth, where Christian
Religion is professed, and believed.

SECT. 19. DOMIN. 19. Of the notes of the true Church.
Q. Is the Catholic Church a visible company, that we may know whither to
repair for the means of salvation; or is it altogether invisible?

A. It is visible in respect of the outward badge of profession; and it may be
discerned by two notes especially, viz. the sincere preaching of the Word, and
right and due administration of the Sacraments, agreeable to the holy
Scriptures. But it is invisible in respect of the inward seal of Gods
Election, who alone knows who are his.

Q. How then may a man know that he belongs to the number of the Elect, and
is a living member of Christ?

A. 1. By the testimony of the spirit which witnesses to our spirits that we
are the Sons of God.

2. By conformity of our belief to the holy Scriptures in all points
necessary to salvation.

3. By a particular assurance of our own salvation, grounded upon the promises
of God in Christ and applied to us by faith.

4. By the diverse remarkable effects of a justifying faith, and sanctifying
grace, which are especially these, 1. True humility. 2. Unfeigned repentance.
3. Sonne-like fear. 4. Uniuersall and absolute submission to Gods will. 5.
Comfortable patience in all afflictions. 6. Proficiencie and perseverance in
godliness. 7. Settled peace of conscience. 8. Unspeakable joy in the Holy Ghost.


PARS III.
SECT. 20. DOMIN. 20. Of the twofold worship of God, and of faith.
THis may suffice concerning the knowledge of God, and him whom he has sent
Jesus Christ to discharge the Office of a Prophet, Priest, and King for his
Church.

Q. Now how ought we to worship, and serve God?

A. Both immediately, and mediately, as before I said.

Q. How immediately?

A. Both inwardly, and outwardly.

Q. How inwardly?

A. By faith, and other divine graces that issue of faith.

Q. What is faith?

A. An infused habit, or spiritual grace, whereby we steadfastly believe all
things contained in holy Scriptures, and particularly apprehend, and apply unto
our selves the promises of God in Christ, wholly relying upon him for our
salvation.

SECT. 21. DOMN. 21. Of humility, and honoring God, and how they are the
fruits of faith.
Q. What divine virtues are the special issues of faith?

A. Humility, honor, reverence, obedience, patience, love, fear, repentance,
zeal, hope, and confidence.

Q. What is humility?

A. A divine virtue, or grace, whereby we wholly deny our selves, and carry
our selves lowly before God and men.

Q. What is honor?

A. A divine grace, or virtue, whereby we admire, and advance Gods
super-excellent Majesty, and yield him all glory, and praise.

Q. How does faith beget these virtues?

A. As it apprehends Gods infinite perfections.

SECT. 22. DOMIN. 22. Of reverence, obedience, and patience; and how they are
the fruits of faith.
Q. What is reverence?

A. A divine grace, or virtue, whereby we stand continually in awe of the
divine Majesty, and never speak, or think of God, without a trembling
astonishment.

Q. What is obedience?

A. A divine grace, whereby we apply our selves wholly to God, and endeavor to
fulfill all his Commandments.

Q. What is patience?

A. A divine grace, or virtue, whereby we submit our selves under the mighty
hand of God, and without grudging, or repining, endure whatsoever he lays
upon us.

Q. How does faith beget these virtues?

A. As it fixes the eye of the soul upon the omnipotent power, all-seeing
wisdom, and sovereign Majesty of God.

SECT. 23. DOMIN. 23. Of love, fear, repentance, gratitude, and zeal; and how
they are the fruits of faith.
Q. What is divine love?

A. A spiritual grace, whereby we prefer God before all things, and set our
hearts, and whole delights on him.

Q. What is filial fear?

A. A spiritual grace, whereby we are careful to shun, and avoid any thing
that may offend our heavenly Father.

Q. What is repentance?

A. A spiritual grace, whereby we are heartily sorry, as often as we offend, and
earnestly desire to amend.

Q. What is gratitude to God?

A. A spiritual grace, or virtue, whereby both in word, and deed we endeavor
to express our thankfulness to God, lauding him for his benefits, and
contributing to the maintenance of his service.

Q. What is Zeal?

A. A divine virtue, whereby we are continually enflamed with a desire to
promote Gods glory.

Q. How does faith beget these virtues?

A. By fixing the eye of the soul, and apprehending Gods infinite bounty, and
goodness.

SECT. 24. DOMIN. 24. Of hope, confidence, and magnanimity, and how they are
the fruits of faith.
Q. What is hope?

A. A divine, or theological verture, whereby we exspect the performance of
all God's promises touching our salvation.

Q. What is confidence?

A. A divine virtue, whereby we continually depend upon God, and trust in him,
in all difficulties and dangers.

Q. What is magnanimity, or spiritual courage?

A. A divine virtue, or spiritual grace, whereby we valiantly attempt, and
atchieue matters of greatest difficulty, in Gods cause, and for the
maintenance, and advancing of Religion.

Q. How does faith produce these divine virtues?

A. As it apprehends Gods Truth, and faithfulness in his promises, and
applies them to us in particular.

SECT. 25. DOMIN. 25. Of the outward worship of God in general.
Q. Thus much of the inward worship: How ought we to worship God outwardly?

A. By hearing the Word; receiving the Sacraments, Prayer, profession of our
faith, keeping his Sabbath, and the religious use of oaths, and vows.

SECT. 26. DOMIN. 26. Of Keeping the Sabbath.
Q. How worship we God in keeping the Sabbath?

A. By sequestring it from our accustomed business, and dedicating it to the
immediate worship of God, and his peculiar service.

SECT. 27. DOMIN. 27. Of hearing the Word.
Q. How ought we to worship God by hearing the Word?

A. By repairing frequently to the Church; there reverently, attending to the
Word read, or preached, seriously meditating upon it, and endeavoring to
practice it in our lives and conuersations.

SECT. 28. DOMIN. 28. Of Prayer, and the parts thereof.
Q. How ought we to worship God by Prayer?

A. By calling upon the Name of God through Christ, out of a true sense, and
feeling of our wants and infirmities; and a lively faith in his promises
fervently, and constantly, both publkely, and privately, for such things as are
agreeable to his holy will.

Q. What are the parts of Prayer?

A. First, an humble confession of our sins.

Secondly, a hearty thanksgiving to God for his benefits.

Thirdly, a fervent desire, and asking such things as we need.

SECT. 29. DOMIN. 29. Of receiving the Sacrament, and necessary preparation
thereunto.
Q. How are we to worship God by receiving the Sacraments?

A. By Preparation, before we receive. Reverent intention in the receiving.
Thanksgiving after it.


Q. How ought we to prepare our selves before we come to the Communion?

A. By special Prayer. Examination.


Q. What special Prayer is requisite?

A. A Prayer to God, to assist us in this holy exercise, and make us worthy
receivers; and to confer on us those graces that are promised to all that
communicate worthily: And lastly, to give us a sense and feeling of them in our
selves.

Q. Wherein stands our special examination?

A. In four points principally.

First, whether we have a true sense, and remorse of conscience for our sins
past; and a vehement desire, and constant purpose of amendment; whence arises
a hungring, and thirsting for grace.

Secondly, whether we have a competent measure of knowledge in the grounds of
Christian religion in general, and in particular of the Sacraments.

Thirdly, whether we have a particular affiance in Christ, and grounded
persuasion of our salvation by his death and passion.

Fourthly, whether our hearts are free from malice, and hatred; and whether we
bear true, and sincere affection to all Christ's members.

SECT. 30. DOMIN. 30. Of Oaths, Vows, and profession of our faith.
Q. How ought we to worship God by Oaths, Vows, and profession of our faith?

A.

1. By swearing by God In truth, not falsely. In Judgment, not rashly, nor upon
any slight occasion. In justice, not maliciously, to a wicked end.


2. By making holy vows unto God, and religiously performing them.

3. By publicly testifying the truth of the holy Gospel, and sealing it with
our blood, if it be required of us.

PARS IIII.
SECT. 31. DOMIN. 31. Of the Christian duties we owe to our selves.
Q. BBy your answers I understand what you mean by the immediate worship of
God, both inward and outward: Now tell me wherein consists the mediate
worship of God, or rather service, or obedience to him?

A. In such duties as, by Gods command, we owe to our selves, and our brethren.

Q. What duties owe we to our selves?

A. 1. To provide for the good of our Souls, improuing our natural faculties
by Art and Industry: but especially by seeking after the gifts of God's
Spirit, and using all means to increase them in us.

2. To provide for the good of our bodies, by sobriety, wholesome diet, comely
raiment, moderate exercise and physic.

3. To provide for our good name, by taking virtuous and honest courses, and
following after such things as are prayse-worthy, and eschewing the contrary.

4. To provide for our estate; by first, Careful getting; secondly, Frugall
saving; thirdly, wisely using the goods of this life, and discreetly managing
our private affairs.

SECT. 32. DOMIN. 32. Of the common duties we owe to our Neighbors.
Q. What duties, by Gods commandment, are we to perform to others?

A. They are either General and common duties of al christians one toward
another: Or, Special duties proper to certain estates, callings of me^.


Q. What are the general duties of all men (especially Christians) one
toward another?

A. They are comprised in these two Virtues Innocence, Charity.


Q. What does innocence require?

A. That we hurt not, nor wrong any man in Person, Goods, Name.


Q. What does charity require?

A. That we do all the good we can to our brother; abounding in good works,
which may be reduced to four heads; vz. works of Humanity. Meekness.
Friendship. Zeal.


SECT. 33. DOMIN. 33. Of the special works of Humanity.
Q. What are the special works of Humanity?

A. To be compassionate toward our brother; feed the hungry; cloth the
naked; harbor the stranger; relieve the oppressed; redeem the captive; defend
the fatherless and widow; visit the sick; and bury the dead.

SECT. 34. DOMIN. 34. Of the special works of meekness.
Quest. What are the special works of meekness?

A. To bear one another burdens; forgive one another all private injuries,
and wrongs; to endeavor to make peace between others, and (if it be possible)
to have peace our selves with all men.

SECT. 35. DOMIN. 35. Of the special works of friendship.
Q. What are the special works of friendship?

A. 1. To preserve (as much as in us lies) the life of our brother, by
counsel, aid, and assistance.

2. To endeavor to preserve his good name, and credit, by affording him our
true testimony and just defense; commendation of his good parts, and covering
his infirmities.

3. To endeavor to preserve, and better his estate, by dealing truly with him
in all bargains, and contracts, lending him freely, and contributing liberally
to his necessities, according to our means and ability.

SECT. 36. DOMIN. 36. Of the special works Christian of Zeal.
Q. What are the special works of Zeal, or holy and Christian love toward
our brother?

A. To seek to win him to Christ; and to labor his eternal salvation.

1. By instructing him in the Truth. 2. Conuincing his errors. 3. Admonishing
him of his duty. 4. Reproving his faults. 5. Compassionating his falls. 6.
Rejoicing at his recovery. 7. Comforting him in all temptations and
afflictions. 8. Avoiding all scandalous carriage before him. 9. Giving him good
example.
SECT. 37. DOMIN. 37. Of the duties of Superiors toward inferiors.
Q. Besides these general duties, you mentioned special duties to men in
respect of certain estates, and callings. What mean you by states?

A. The condition, quality and degree of men. who are in a 3-fold respect, and
order, or rank 1 Superiors In general, over inferiors. To special 1 Kings
over their Subjects. 2 Fathers over their children. 3 Husbands over their
Wives. 4 Masters our their servants. 5 Pastors over their flock.

2 Inferiors In general to Superiors. In special 1 Subjects to their
Prince. 2 Children to their Fathers. 3 Wives to their husbands. 4 Servants
their Masters. 5 Flocks to their Pastors.

3 Equals in all respects.


Q. What are the duties of superiors in general toward their inferiors?

A. 1. To carry themselves with that gravity and discretion toward them,
that they may deserve respect and reverence from them.

2. To respect them in their place; not despising their advised admonitions,
nor sleighting their just exceptions and complaints.

3. To employ their eminent gifts, (in what kind soever they are) to the glory
of God, and good of them.

4. To countenance and encourage them in good courses, and discourage them in
the contrary.

5. To shine before them in good example of life and conversation; which is a
duty of all Christians, but more especially concerns superiors, because
their example prevails most either way.

SECT. 38. DOMIN. 38. Of the duties of inferiors toward their superiors.
Q. What are the duties of inferiors in general toward their superiors?

A. 1. To yield them that reverence which is any way due to their persons or
places.

2. To hearken to their sage counsels and admonitions.

3. To make use of their gifts, and benefit themselves by them.

4. To recompense them for the good they receive by them, at least by a
thankful acknowledgement.

5. To imitate their virtues, and follow their good example.

SECT. 39. DOMIN. 39. Of the duties of equals.
Q. What are the duties of equals?

A. To converse friendly, ciuilly, and courteously one with another Friendly, in
mutual office of love. Ciuilly, in saluting, taking leave and the like
commendable complement. Courteously, in honor, one going before another.


SECT. 40. DOMIN. 40. Of the Christian duties of Kings toward their Subjects.
Q. What are the duties of superiors in special, and first of Kings toward
their Subjects?

A. 1. To make wholesome and godly Laws and Edicts for the 1. Establishing of
Religion. 2. Execution of justice. 3. Preservation of peace. 4. Welfare of
Church. Commonwealth.



2. To appoint officers under them; men fearing God, and hating covetousness.

3. To call assemblies (as often as it is needful) ecclesiastical, and civil,
for the better ordering of the affairs of Church and Commonwealth.

4. To see (as much as in them lies) that all the subjects, in their places
discharge their duty.

5. To prefer, and reward those that deserve well in Church, or Commonwealth.

6. To punish all sorts of delinquents with indifferency, and equity.

7. To defend their Subjects against violence, and wrong both by Law. Sword.


8. To provide the best they can for their subjects after their death, by
taking care for their successor.

SECT. 41. DOMIN. 41. Of the special duties of Subjects to their King.
Q. What are the special duties of Subjects?

A. 1. To make supplication in special for their Prince.

2. To honor his Person.

3. To obey his Laws.

4. To fear his power, and submit themselves to it.

5. To bear arms for him in time of war, if their age, and sex permit.

6. To do him faithful service in their several place, and office; seeking
by all means to preserve his Life. State. Honor.


7. To pay willingly all dues unto him.

8. To obey his inferior Officers, and Ministers.

SECT. 42. DOMIN. 42. Of the duties of Christian Parents.
Q. What are the duties of Christian Parents?

A. 1. To bless their children.

2. To instruct them in the grounds of Religion.

3. To excite them to virtue by Praises. Promises. Rewards.


4. To deter and reclaim them from vice by -- Rebukes, Threats, Moderate
chastenings.


5. To bring them up in good nurture, and fit them for some calling.

6. To allow them competent maintenance, by their life time.

7. To provide for them after their death, as they are able by leaving their
substance, and goods to them.

8. To defend them from injury.

9. To have a care of disposing them in marriage, if they are thereunto
inclined.

SECT. 43. DOMIN. 43. Of the special duties of children.
Q. What are the special duties of children?

A. 1. To pray in special for their Parents safety, and happiness.

2. To hearken to their counsels, and instructions.

3. To yield them all reverent respect.

4. To obey them in the Lord.

5. To endure their rebukes, and moderate chastenings.

6. To cover their infirmities.

7. To comfort them by their virtuous disposition, and towardliness.

8. To aid them (according to their power) if they stand in need of their
help, or relief.

SECT. 44. DOMIN. 44. Of the special duties of Masters.
Q. What are the special duties of Masters?

A. 1. To take special care that their servant serve God, and live in good
order.

2. To provide for them (as parts of their family,) such things as are
needful, and fit.

3. To use their power over them moderately, knowing that they also have a
Master in heaven.

4. To reward them agreeably to their deserts, paying them their wages in due
season, and otherwise gratifying, them as it shall seem fit, and they deserve.

SECT. 45. DOMIN. 45. Of the special duties of Servants.
Q. What are the special duties of Servants?

A. 1. To do their Masters true, and faithful service.

2. To obey them; and submit themselves unto them, though they are froward.

3. To pray for their Masters safety, wealth, and happiness.

SECT. 46. DOMIN. 46. Of the duties of married folk.
Q. What are the duties of married folk?

A. They are of two sorts, Common to both. Proper.


Q. What are the common duties?

A. 1. To dwell together.

2. To express all entire, and loyal affection one to another.

3. To bend their endeavors to help each other; and both to join for the good
of the family.

SECT. 47. DOMIN. 47. Of the duties of the Husband.
Q. What are the proper duties of the Husband?

A. 1. Wisely to govern his Wife, as being her head.

2. To nourish and cherish her, as his own flesh.

3. To instruct her in the points of Religion.

4. To protect, and defend her from injury and wrong.

SECT. 48. DOMIN. 48. Of the duties of the Wife.
Q. What are the proper duties of the Wife?

A. 1. To yield reverent respect to her Husband, of what condition soever he be.

2. To obey (as a Wife) in all things submitting her self to her Husband.

SECT. 49. DOMIN. 49. Of the duties of Pastors.
Q. What are the duties of godly Pastors?

A. 1. To increase their Talent of knowledge by the study of the holy
Scriptures, that they may the more sufficiently discharge their duty to their
Flock.

2. To conceive and deliver holy forms of Prayers, and thanksgiving in the
name of the whole Congregation.

3. To preach the Word of God Sincerely. Faithfully. Diligently. Discreetly.
Zealously


4. To administer the Sacraments rightly, and duly.

5. To exercise such ecclesiastical discipline as appertains to them
according to Gods Word, and the Canons of the Church.

6. To conform themselu^^ to the holy and decent orders of the Church,
performing all rites, and ceremonies enjoined by it; as reading the Litturgie,
marrying, burying, etc.

7. To lead^ a strickt, and exemplary life.

SECT. 50. DOMIN. 50. Of the duties of the flock toward their Pastor.
Q. What are the duties of the flock toward their Pastor?

A. 1. To pray with, and for their Pastor, that his Ministry may be
effectual among them.

2. To hear their own Pastor diligently.

3. To obey him in the Lord.

4. To have him in reverent account, and estimation for his works sake.

5. To yield him sufficient and comfortable maintenance by paying duly, and
willingly their Tithes, and offerings where the Church has so well provided;
according to Gods Law and where it has not, to supply the defect by voluntary
contributions.

6. To aid and assist him against such as oppose his Ministry.

SECT. 51. DOMIN. 51. Of the special duties of men in respect of personal
callings.
Q. What are the special duties of men, in respect of their personal callings?

A. 1. To prepare, and fit themselves for some lawful calling, most agreeable
to their gifts, means, and inclinations.

2. To enter into it lawfully, and discreetly, not unadvisedly, nor by indirect
means.

3. To walk in it worthily viz: 1. Religiously, in all works of their
calling, having a reference to God. 2. Wisely spending their time in necessary
and profitable works of their calling; not curious or superfluous. 3.
Diligently, and assiduously; not living idely, upon other men's labors. 4.
Uprightly, using no unlawful means of gaining. 5. Ingenuously; free from
covetousness, and baseness. 6. Decently, within the compass of their
calling, not exceeding in apparel, retinue their table, or other expense. 7.
In-offensiuely, giving no scandal to their calling by their vicious life, and
conversation.


4. To leave if willingly when either God calls them to an higher, or more
necessary, or profitable calling; or disableth them for this; or authority
remoues them: Otherwise to hold it constantly, to the end.

SECT. 52. DOMIN. 52. Of the special Antidotes, or preservatives against sin.
Q. What are the special preservatives against sin, and means to increase
sanctifying grace?

A. 1. Frequent, and fervent Prayer, with thanksgiving.

2. The exercising our selves in reading, and hearing the holy Scriptures, and
meditating upon them day and night.

3. Often receiving the blessed Sacrament, with due preparation before, and
holy vows, after.

4. Conferring with godly Pastors, and other Religious Divines, touching our
spiritual estate and following their holy counsels, and directions.

5. Conuersing with the best sort of Christians, and imitating them in the best
things.

6. Often visiting the sick lying upon their death beds, and making use of
their godly speeches, and behavior at their departure.

7. Reading; or if we are not able to read, hearing read devout Treatises, or
discourses Sermons. Meditations. Histories, etc.


8. Every night examining Our faith by the Creed. Our desires, by the Lords
Prayer. Our thoughts, words, and deeds by the Decalogue.


9. Observing what temptations we are most subject to; and arming our selves
against them.

10. Avoiding all occasions of sin; especially flying cuill company.

11. Resisting the first motions to sin, and killing the Cockatrice in the
egg.

12. Employing our selves continually about some lawful work, that the Devil
find us not idle.

13. The consideration of the dreadful Majesty of GOD in whose presence and
eye we are always.

14. The consideration of the infinite goodness of God whom we grievously
offend by the least sin.

15. The consideration of God's fearful judgments upon sinners in former
times, and in our memory.

16. The pricking our conscience with the remembrance of our former sins;
especially such as have layen heauiest upon us, saying to our selves in the
words of the Apostle, or the like. What fruit had we in those things whereof
we are now ashamed?

17. The consideration of the certainty of our death, and the uncertainty of
the time.

18. The consideration of the strickt account we are to make at the day of
Judgment.

19. The consideration of the everlasting, and insufferable torments of the
wicked in hell.

20. The consideration of the eternal, and inconceivable joys of the godly
in heaven.

Who so does these things shall never fall. HEB. 13. VERSE 20. 21. 20. The God
of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd
of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,

21. Make you perfect in all good works, to do his will, working in you that
which is pleasant in his sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for ever
and ever, Amen.

(...).

FINIS.

