THE Copy of a Letter, sent by an English Gentleman out of France, to a friend
of his in England, concerning the great victory which the French King obtained
against the Duke de Maine, and the Romish rebels in his Kingdom, upon the
fourth day of March last past. 1589.

Wherein is particularly expressed the names of sundry noble men, with the
number of horsemen and footmen which were drowned, slain, hurt, and taken
prisoners in the said Battle.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed for William Wright. 1590.

THE COPY OF A LETter, sent by an English Gentleman forth of France, to a
friend of his in England, concerning the great victory which the French King
obtained against the Duke de Maine, and the Romish rebels in his Kingdom, upon
the fourth day of March last past. 1589.
MY good Friend,
the manifold courtesies by me sundry ways received at your hands, makes me
not to be unmindful of you, and the rather for that I find you not slack to
signify unto me from time to time, such news as England affords, I thought
it good therefore to make requital of some part of your pains by certefieng
unto you, the most happy and joyful news now generally known for truth
throughout the whole Realm of France. The circumstance whereof at large
deserves a stately style, a large volume, and to be regestred in letters of
gold, such and so rare an event the Almighty has brought to pass, to the
great comfort of the Kings Majesty (whom God preserve and prosper) to the
great benefit and joy of all his dutiful and loiall subjects, which now by the
providence of God does daily increase: and to the great discouragement of all
the enemies to Christian religion, which to record or discourse by
circumstance at large, I leave to those of deep skill and sufficient learning,
to enroll amongst the noble acts of the most renowned and valiantest of our
age. Only to you I do hear send a brief particular of his Majesty's good
fortune happened upon the fourth day of March last past. A matter containing
so great certainty, and yet so incredible (for that the enemy was three to
one in the field) as does make men wonder at the same, and hardly believe it.
But there is nothing impossible to compass or obtain where God is the guide,
nor nothing prospers or prevails where Gods assistance wants, as I could
prove by many examples: What power can prevail to fight against Gods truth,
then the which, nothing is of more force, as appears by that which ensues.

It is not unknown unto you by our last conference together at your lodging,
where conferring with a Gentleman that had traveled into France upon the
present state of that Country, he declared that then the state was very
dangerous, and the land was divided into three several factions, which is
since altered into two, the one very lawful, being under the conduct of the
lawful King: the other a greater and of more danger, for that they are
Traitors to their King, stirred up in the life time of the bloudthirstie Duke
of Guize, who became the only capital enemy against Christian religion, and
the professors thereof throughout all Christendom, as appeared by the great
murder, massacre and slaughter of many thousands by him and his associates
inflicted and committed at Paris in his life time upon the professors of the
reformed Religion: who as he lived, died: he slaughtered innocents, and
bathed in their blood, till other requited him with the like death.

After which, (...) in the right of the Guize for the succession to the Crowue
and Kingdom of France, (who had no right at all thereunto) the Duke de Maine,
a man supported and maintained by the Pope and all the sworn enemies to the
Gospel, was found by them the fittest champion in that Country, to rebel and
rise up in arms against the King, being no loyal subject, but a rebellious
Traitor to the Crown of France. For after the death of the French King, he
took upon him the title of the King, and in most disloiall sort repugned
against the lawful and Christian King Henry of Navarre, now since proclaimed
and reputed the lawful successor to the crown and kingdom. All which
notwithstanding the Duke de Maine resisted his authority, by means of the
great forces sent him by the Popish enemies, and to the intent to displace and
depose him unlawfully, has with his power sundry times set upon the Kings
Forces, and taken his chiefest Cities and walled Towns, and does withhold
them unlawfully from the King, contrary to the duty of a natural subject, so
that after many late battles and skirmishes, one only battle was fought
upon the fourth day of March aforesaid, where the enemy was thirty thousand
strong in the field, the King not having above ten thousand in all: besides
there was newly come forth of the low Countries five thousand foote-men, and
fourteen Coronets of Horsemen, all which were taken, slain, and put to the
sword, twelve hundred of the Horses were drowned, and the rest taken by the
Kings Soldiers. Before the Battle began, for that the enemy was more then
three to one, (the King then being in such a place where he must fight it out
or die) took courage and comforted his Soldiers, showing them that the cause
was a just cause, and did repose therefore his trust in God only: in whose
quarrel he fought, and he would defend him from the fury of his enemies, as
he had sundry times before delivered him from the like dangers: willing his
Soldiers not to be daunted with the multitude which came toward them: for
said he, I will be the foremost, and will spend my dearest blood before any
of you shall perish: which words did so encourage the Soldiers that they fell
to it, and got to a firm and fair piece of ground, being of great compass,
and kept that ground still and would not give back, whereby the enemy might
have any advantage: who for want of ground to fight and stir themselves, the
multitude pestered one an other, so that their great multitude and want of
room was the greatest cause of their overthrow, which the King perceived, and
encouraged his men to fight, who very fiercely laid upon the enemy, and broke
their rank and disordered their Battle, whereupon the King to the great
discomfort of the enemy, stepped to the Standard bearer of the enemies Army, he
took away the Standard with his own hands, and slew the bearer thereof,
which did so encourage his Soldiers, that they fell to it so fiercely, as that
they constrained the Duke to fly, when he saw his own brother slain before
his face, and was almost taken in the flight. The King had the enemy in the
Chase seven Leagues, wherein there were a thousand men of name and account
taken prisoners. The Counti^ Egmont was slain in this Battle, and Mounsieur
de la Mount, was taken prisoner. Four hundredth golden Chains and more, were
found in the rifling of the Waggins, and seven hundred Chosts of pillage taken
by the King, besides the Dukes Casket, wherein was enclosed his chiefest
Letters of priuitie. All the Switzers have surrendered themselves to the
subjection and obedience of the King: And the enemies chiefest field Pieces
were taken.

Thus was the enemies Forces, greatly weakened and scattered, so that it is
very likely Parris and the chiefest Towns and places now repugnant against
him, will not long hold out, but yield themselves speedily to his Majesty's
mercy. God be blessed, he has wonderfully preserved this godly and christian
Prince from dan^ger, being still the most forwardest in the fight, and chased
them almost eight hours together. The God of heaven prosper him and all the
favorers of the Christian Religion, that they may beat down such as seek
the confusion thereof, and give his enemies grace to see their own folly and
leave their blind ignorance, that either their conversion may be speedily
seen, with repentance of their former follies, or else their destruction
presently come upon them, which God grant speedily, for his mercies sake, Amen.

This sixth of March. Your loving friend, T. B.

Another letter the 6. of March.
THe kings Majesty sent for the governor and the Nobility, and for provision
of powder to give battle to the Duke de Maine. The Duke pressed upon the King,
by reason of his Wallons, being four thousand foot and one thousand horse.
The governor in the way met with two companyes of footmen and discomforted
them: and took their Captayn prisoners to Font delarche, upon his arrival the
King gave battayl to the Duke, and put him to the worse. The Duke fled, most of
the Burgonians were slain, his ordinance lost: and four thousand Switzers
were received to mercy and the service of the King. Mounsier Mountpensier did
very valiantly, he was a little hurt in the head, the Cownt Egmont Conductor of
the Spaniards and Wallons, was slain and their standard taken: the King was
forced to the battayl by the Duke, and therefore could not refuse it. The Duke
was moved thereto by the Popes legate, through discontemnent grown among them of
Paris, by reason of the charges they had ^e put unto by the Duke and no ser^e
done, and therefore grew to a ^tation, whether better to yield to the King, or
to those of the league: Sundry of the cheifest murmured at the motion of Spayn,
which being observed, were the night following apprehended and committed to
prison. This division was the chief cause that the leggat made ^e of battle,
whereas the Duke was obedient. To conclude, the enemy was three to one, and yet
God be praised few on the Kings side were hurt and the most part of the
enemies were drowned, slain, hurt, and taken prisoners in the battle.

The names of such chief persons as were slain and hurt on the enemies side.
Slain.
The County Egmont The Duke Brunswicke general of the Reisters.

FINIS.

