The right way to go to Work: OR, A SERMON SEASONABLE AND VSEFVLL IN these
Stirring Times: Containing matter of direction in all Actions, AND Presenting
means of supportation under the weight either of public or private, dangerous
or difficult services and employments. Upon PROVERBS 16.3.

PSALM. 57.1, 2. In the shadow of thy wings (O God) will I make my refuge,
until these calamities be ouerpast. I will cry unto God most high, unto God
that performs all things for me.



LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for William Bladen, and are to be sold at his
shop at the great North door of PAVLS. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, THE MASTER, WARDENS, and ASSISTANTS, of the Company
of Carpenters in London, with others his late Bountiful BENEFACTORS.
SOlomon gives this prudent advice to all builders: Prou. 24 27*
Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for thy self in the field, and
afterward build thine house. To me therefore, amongst others, as to one having
manumission and freedom of that Society, is it directed. But how is it by me
followed? Now that you see me building me thinks I hear you questioning,
whether my work be well prepared, and fitted before hand? Yea, or I my self
well prepared, and fitted for this work? First, for my self, I answer (and
should so continue answering yet a while, were I left to my self) as Plutarch
reports Pericles and Demosthenes used to do in sleighter cases, (...), I am
not ready; for if they ( so eloquent) thought themselves unready to speak in
any weighty matters, how then can I ( so rude) with modesty be so ready to
speak (and in print too) about more weighty matters than any whereof they
could speak? Again, for my provision before hand, I answer as the wise
Virgins did, by way of confession, (...)
(...), There will not be enough for us and you. For if they ( so prudent)
feared they had not oil in such plenty as they might gratify others with a
portion, how then can I ( so ignorant) with humility think, I have such store
of stuff by me, as to proffer matter of light unto others, already better
furnished? If I have prepared any work without, (inter syluas Academiae, in
the field, I mean of the University) surely I have fitted it, as yet, only
for my self (according to the letter of that advice) and not to build an house
in the City, or (as it were) in the common road, obuious to the eyes of all
passengers. But you may quickly reply, If your privy wants of preparation be
such, why take you this public way of edification? I will tell you ingenuously
how the case stands with me. My reverend father desirous of some trial of my
Theology, required me to make this Discourse, and when he had heard it, was
as desirous that your Worships, and other my worthy Benefactors might be
partakers thereof, in token of thankfulness for your exhibition to me, whiles
I was at Cambridge; and this desire cooled not presently, but continued with
instant importunity, and increased out of diverse considerations of grateful
equity. Now how could I cross him whose desires are commands? Or what could I
oppose against his reasonable persuasions? I might have said some I fear will
say) that this seems not to be the right way to go to work, to fall into
the Press as soon as to stand in the Pulpit. Might I have said thus? Nay, I
did say so, and so long withstood his pleasure, till I perceived the gathering
clouds of his discontent. But then I yielded, (though by yielding I run my
self upon the pikes of many sharp censures) calling to mind that of the
Poet, (...)
In vitium ducit culpae fuga: by shunning the fault of Vain glory, I must
needs fall on the vice of disobedience: and being confident that (what ever
others think or speak) ye will conceive (as the truth is) that my
willingness to do my duty, overcame much unwillingness to be in print.
Wherefore (Right Worshipful) in imitation of my Reverend Father, who many
years since, dedicated a Catechism to the Company, out of like respects, I
here present you with this poor model, my first in this kind, wishing it
were worthy to be an encouragement unto that pious charity which ye not only
extended to me, but to my Father before me, and to others with me, and will (I
doubt not) to many after me; That so ye may help to train up such as may be
able not only to show you the right way, but also to point out to you the
right work, and to comfort and strengthen you in it, till ye receive the
glorious reward of it. But in mean time, how do I show the way? I confess I
have not reared so fair a structure, as the large foundation would have borne
up, yet shall you find (I hope) firmness joined with plainness in this
little Frame. Which plainness I use, both to show what I am, (a Carpenter, not
a Caruer,) and what I should be too in this kind of building; subscribing to
Cyprians judgment, as consonant to Gods will, which is to this effect, In
iudic^^s in concione pro rostr^^ ^pulenta facundi^ volubili ambitu^^ iactetu^*
cum de Dumino Deo vox est, vocis para synceritas non eloquentiae veribus
nit^t^^ ad fidei argumenta sed rebus, etc. (...) 1. ep. ad Donatu^.
Volubility of eloquence is requisite in legal pleadings, and civil orations;
but in speeches concerning God and his matters, it becomes us to use only
purity of words with simplicity of truth, as most powerful to beget faith. His
mind and meaning will be more fully exemplified in the following discourse;
which I leave to your favorable construction, and kind acceptance: your
selves also to Gods more abundant retribution, my self ever remaining,

Your Worships in all grateful Observance, S. B.

THE RIGHT WAY to go to Work.
PROVERBS 16.3. Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be
established.


THese words as they proceed out of the mouth of the wise man, so they come
unto us clad in the habit (as it were) of a grave advice, or counsel; which,
to the best of mine apprehension, suteth with all circumstances. I need not
tell you the conueniencie between this place, and my Text. Is not this the
house of God? are not his Oracles here unfolded? are we not here made
acquainted with his Will? Now where else should we receive direction for our
proceedings than where we meet with resolution for our enterprises? where
should we make that resignation (which my Text imports) but where we received
our Commission? For the time, surely, as it cannot but be always useful to
those that are doing, and desirous to speed in their doings: so, more
especially at this time when we have so great cause to commit the common
public affairs of the Churches of God (whose actions, and agitations are, in
some sort, our own) and all their designs in behalf of the Gospel, unto the
Lord. But to come nearer. When can we more seasonably learn than when we are
presently to practice? And when have we more instant need to practice, and
follow this counsel in my Text than when we are about so sacred a business?
If ever, Beloved, we commit our work unto the Lord, let us now when we are
conversant in the Lords work. As for Persons, I hope here are none but will
yield to the necessity of this duty. Who has not this speech commonly in his
mouth? By Gods help I will do this or that; Thereby acknowledging (as there
is cause) a disability to do any thing without Gods help. How much more
assistance then, need we to crave of God in these matters? For which (says
the Apostle) who is sufficient? 2. Cor. 2.16. We see then all of us, the
speaker, especially, who is now to enter upon so weighty an employment, how
much it stands us upon to commit our several works unto the Lord, that our
thoughts may be established. But lest my preface should seem to usurp
Application before Doctrine be delivered, I draw toward my Text.

For the explication of the words, it is not requisite here, as in other
places of Scripture, to have recourse unto the context, and to consider the
dependence upon former, or the coherence with following verses; For that part
of the will and wisdom of God which is revealed in this book, is laid down
for the most part (especially from the tenth chapter to the end) in sentences
perfect, and entire, there being no continued series or process of matter
closely hanging together, but each axiom absolute in it self, and
independent. So that these Proverbs may be not unfitly compared, Peret* id est
(...)
me thinks to those (...) those single grapes (according to the Hebrews
exposition Leuit. 19.10.) which were not to be gathered and impropriated by the
owners, but left in common for the poor. They are, first, as grapes that
pleasant and heart-chearing fruit, and therefore called mingled wine, Prou.
9.5. and said to be life to those that find them, and health to all their
flesh, Proverb. 4.22. Then they are single grapes (which is to our purpose) in
that they are not joined one upon another in sense, but disseuered, whilst
other parts of Scripture are like clusters of grapes compacted together, and
linked in Logical argument. But if any will be curious to search out a
dependency of these words upon the former, somewhat may be said according to
the opinion of some judicious, who hold this verse to be an instruction, or
document inferred, and deduced from both the former verses, as from arguments
urging, and pressing it.

In the first verse, Solomon tells us that the preparations of the heart are in
man, but the answer of the tongue is from the Lord, that is, Howsoever man
has powers of mind to premeditate, and consult, yet he cannot express what
he has thought without Gods direction and assistance. Whence the wiseman
concludes; If we cannot so much as utter with our tongues what we have
premeditated, without Gods aid, then we ought to commit our more weighty
works unto the Lord: But we cannot do the former; Ergo etc. The argument is
thus drawn from the less to the greater: otherwise it may be thus framed,
taking in our speeches into the number of our works (as they may well be:) If
all our actions, even the least, as our speeches, be from God, then are they to
be committed to God; but they are from God: Ergo. So we see how this third
verse hangs upon the first. In the second verse his meaning (I take it) is
this, that howsoever we are naturally so ready to flatter and sooth up our
selves in our own doings, that we imagine all to be right, and as it should
be, which we go about, especially if it have but a spice or appearance of
good in it: Yet God is not always pleased with that wherein we so please our
selves; he many times either allows not of the matter, or manner of those
performances which we so applaud, and magnify: why? Because he looks not
only on the outside of the action, but takes notice out of what grounds we do
it, and unto what ends, weighing and discerning the secret working of our
spirits. Hereupon he inferrs in my Text, that because God does so, therefore
we should commit our works unto him, that is, lay them to the rule of his
word, for the approbation and warrant of them, and then so do them as we may
confidently put our selves, and our manner of performing them to Gods scanning,
and judgment: Thus working upon a sure ground we shall have them established.
And so I come to the words read.

The parts whereof appear at the first view to be two, and but two; having
only one term of connection [ And] The first we may either call A counsel and
advice (as I said in the beginning:) and the second answerably, A promise or
success in following it: Or else we may conceive the latter to be an end
proposed by every man to himself; and the former as the way and means by
which it may be attained unto. Of these as they lie in order. For our better
proceeding, the words are to be explained before any point be observed; and
the only word which needs opening is [ Commit] We are therefore to know that
in the original it is (...) Col
coming from a root signifying To route or turn, etc. so that according to
strict translation the words are to be read, Roll thy works to, or upon
Jehovah. The speech is metaphorical, and imports thus much, that even as men
when they cannot lift or weild a thing well, tumble it to another that can
better, or as when they have lifted it, if it be so burden some that they
cannot undergo the weight, they will seek help, and lay it upon another
shoulders: so we being unable of our selves to manage our affairs, are to
turn them over unto God, and being pressed with the weight of any charge, or
duty lying upon us, are to expect aid from him and look that he should
sustain either it for us, or us under it. In a word, we are advised here to
do no other thing, than what men do in those cases, wherein they alone are
insufficient. What do they? They go to some body, of whose sufficiency and
faithfulness they are assured, and tell them that they know not what to do
themselves, they cannot go through with the business, and therefore they
rely and depend wholly upon him, committing it to his ordering and disposing.
Me thinks Pharaohs carriage toward Joseph, shadoweth out our duty toward God
in this point: He having weighed the interpretation of his dreams, and the
necessity of taking some course for preservation of himself and his people,
casts himself upon Joseph (whose sufficiency he had well proved) and left the
whole business to his wisdom and providence. Thus ought we confidently to
entrust God with all our works, and much rather than any man. This is enough
for the discovery of the Metaphor: the fuller meaning we shall have afterward.
In the other words there is no obscurity. Under [ Workes] we are to comprehend
Words, being one kind of our operations, though wrought only with the tongue:
as also our Intentions and resolutions are here to be understood, and taken
in: By [ Thoughts] then in the second part of the verse we are to understand,
both our Act of deliberation, and the Object or thing whereon we think, and
whereabout we deliberate and resolve. In sum, Commit thy works, is as if he
had said, Commit the choice, the ordering, and the success of thy works to
Jehovah; and so the last word [ established] intimates, signifying (in the
original (...).
(...)) as well aptabuntur, as firmabuntur; prepared and fitted, as well as
confirmed, established.

The words thus, in some sort, unfolded, I come to the point of instruction
taught plainly in the words, viz: ^o^t.
Every one ought to commit their works unto the Lord. It may not be amiss,
first generally to prove it, and then to lay out the particulars comprised in
the general. For proof we have sundry parallel places to this. David gives
the same counsel, Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way unto the Lord, etc. And what
counsel he gives to others, we find recorded he took himself, Psalm. 22.9.
He trusted in the Lord, etc. said his very enemies. The same word for Rouling
is used in both those places which is here. We find the same kind of
Metaphor for sense in other places, though the words be somewhat different, as
Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, etc. And 1. Pet. 5.7. Cast all your
care upon God. etc. Where the words translated [ Cast] though they note
properly another motion from Rouling, which we know by that name; yet do they
as clearly illustrate this duty in my Text, which chiefly imports a
transferring, or removing from our selves our weighty works, or burdens, or
cares, upon another that is stronger than we are. For more full explication of
which duty so manifestly and straightly enjoined us, descend we to the
particulars therein contained. There are three things which seem to take up the
whole nature of this Committing: 1. A sense, and acknowledgement of
selfe-insufficiencie for the work. 2. A faithful dependency on God for the
appointing and effecting of it. 3. An actual recommending of it unto God in
prayer. These three, were this an assembly of Scholars, I would liken unto
those three principles of natural things which Philosophers tell us of,
Privation, Matter, and Form. The denial of our own abilities, I may call in
some sort a Privation. for unless we confess our want of them, and strip our
selves naked (as it were) out of all conceits of our own sufficiency, we shall
never be disposed to look unto God in our actions. Yet is not this (indeed)
essential to this duty, though necessarily preceding, and making way for it.
Secondly, our faithful dependency upon God, and imposing the weight upon him,
may be termed the matter, of which this duty consists. Thirdly, our actual
recommending of our works unto God in prayer, is as it were, the form of this
duty, by which it is complete in the e^^e, or being of it: Now for the
explanation of these seuerals.

First we must find our selves unable to undergo the burden, and acknowledge
our weakness; And this in a threefold respect, 1. of Judgment, 2. of Wisdom,
3 of Power. We must deny our own Judgment to direct in matter of resolution
what to do. For how great cause have we to confess our folly, and our
blindness in choosing? True it is which the wise man speaks, Verse. 2. All the
ways of a man are clean in his own eyes, and (cap. 21.2.) right in his own
eyes. Yet see what good judges our eyes are, Verse. 25. There is a way that
seems right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death. And,
indeed, not one only, but every way, every work that is of our own finding
out, of our own devising, is sinful, and tends to death, unless we have
warrant for it elsewhere, from God. Fearful is that Irony of the Preacher,
Eccles. 11. verse. 9, 10. Walk o young man in the ways of thine heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes, but know, etc. I need not tell you how sharply God
reproved the people by his Prophets, for walking in the perverse and crooked
ways of their own hearts. Doubtless no greater judgment could befall even
the best of us, than to eat the fruit of our own ways, and be filled with our
own devices, Proverb. 1.31. But to lay aside these more weighty
considerations, let us examine our actions, by the mere grounds of morality;
and (alas!) how sottish, how blind are we when we are our own Counselors!
What gross mistakings, what silly choises make we? How great failing in
judgment do we bewray in civil actions? Was it not a foolish project to
think to perpetuate ones name by a building, as they did at Babel? Genesis 11.4.
No better projects many times do we lay, but such as will end in confusion: At
the best, we study, and employ our selves, for the most part, but about toys,
and trifles, and things that profit not. We rather choose Marthaes encombrance,
than Mary's better part. So that we have great cause to renounce our own
judgment in choosing.

Again, in the second place, for wisdom in managing and disposing of a matter
resolved on, suppose the resolution be good, we lack that too. There are but
two ways (we use to say) a right and a wrong, and do not we generally take
the wrong? In spiritual matters, we would worship God: but how? Our own
wisdom would feign intermeddle too far in the manner, and intermingle the
inventions of our brains, which are very lovely and decent in our own eyes,
how contrary soever to Gods word: when in the mean time we mar all,
corrupting our services, and making them odious to God. It was certainly a
godly mind in David and the Israelites, that moved them to bring the Arc out
of the house of Abinadab, and their solemnity in making a new Cart for it, made
a fair show for the time, of discretion, and wisdom; but afterward they
found their folly to their grief, and that they had not sought the Lord in due
order, 1. Chron. 15.13. why? Because they thought themselves wise enough to
manage that action, without following and observing Gods order. In worldly
matters also we sail either in not using right means or not in a right
manner: We either lean on a Reed which will break, and pierce our hands (as
Egypt is called, Esa. 36.6.) or else we take the wrong end of a good staff.
Either we take those courses which will hinder, and prejudice our intentions,
or we work so preposterously, so unseasonably, that we are not a whit the
nearer, to that which we would effect. Surely, unless an higher providence
lead, and guide us, we may all use the words of Eliphaz, Job. 5.13, 14. Our
counsels are carried headlong; we meet with darkness in the day time, and
groape at noone day as in the night. Especially in a case of extremity, and in
distress we are so distracted that we are at our wits end, and know not which
way to turn our selves. So that in this respect we have good reason to take
Salomons counsel, Lean not unto thine own understanding, Prou. 5.5. And let
us ingeniously acknowledge unto God with Jeremy (cap. 10 23.) O Lord I know
that the way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that walks to direct
his own steps.

In the third place we are to deny our own Power to accomplish any work
though never so well conceived, though means are never so well ordered, and
the business in very great forwardness. Who is he (says Jeremy, Lamen.
3.37.) that says, and it comes to pass when the Lord commands it not? I
may add; when he assisteth not, prospers not; For, poor impotent creatures
that we are, if we look unto spiritual actions, we cannot so much as will to
do good of our selves, much less can we carry our selves through any holy
duty with comfort, and success: Without me (says Christ) ye can do nothing,
Ioh. 15.5. which is true also if we look to temporal affairs, and
emploiments. For what can we say we will do? God can interpose when he will,
and stay our proceedings a thousand ways. He can either suddenly crush us, and
turn us into dust: or blow upon our labors, or suffer others to cross and
clean overthrow our enterprises. So that, in matter of profit no man can say,
my power, my labor, the might of my hand has gotten me this wealth, Deuteronomy.
8.17. Nor in point of honor, By my policy I have builded my nest on high: by
the strength of mine arm I have gotten the victory, Psalm. 44.3. Therefore
(to shut up this first preparatiue act to into duty) we are in every action to
take notice of our weakness, and to groan under every imploiment, as under a
burden insupportable, should we have no help: We may be in continual motion,
rouling and tumbling our actions up and down, but shall never find rest, and
firm settling of them, before we lay them upon God: seeing before we come to
him, it is with us as Mathematicians tell us it is with a Globe upon a plain,
impossible to stand still, and as impossible to stir to any purpose. If then
we set upon spiritual duties, say with the Apostle Paul, We are not sufficient
of our selves to think (much less to do) any thing as of our selves but our
sufficiency is of God, 2. Cor. 3.5. And neither is he that planteth, any thing;
nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase, 1. Cor. 3 7. If we go
about any work of our worldly callings, humbly acknowledge with David, Except
the Lord build the house they labor in vain that build it, Psalm. 127. 1. So,
except he prosper other our handy-workes, in vain do we think in our own
strength to bring them to a wished end: especially when any more important
affair is in hand; as when preparations are made for war, and public
service is to be done for the Church of God; then let us be most sensible of
our own weakness, and confess with Iehoshaphat, That we have no might
against our enemies, nor know we what to do, 2. Chron. 20.12. But had not
Iehoshaphat a great Army, and valiant men? Yes, yet in them was no might. Did
not he know that he had no way but to lead out his forces? yes, and yet he knew
not what to do. Only this, Our eyes (said he) are toward thee, that is,
seeing we cannot work effectually for our selves, we roll (not our eyes only,
but) our work upon thee o Lord, etc.

preparatiue, unto the second, an essential act of this duty: from the act of
acknowledgement in humility of our selfe-insufficiencie, to the act of Faith
in dependencie on God, and his efficiencie. Now in this resting and relying
upon God consists principally this deuoluing or committing our work unto
God, and this is manifested in so many acts as there were particulars wherein
we discovered our own weakness. First then, he that commits his work to
God, must depend as well on his will and allowance before he begins it, as on
his help and assistance afterward; he must out of that suspicion he is to have
of his own judgment in choice, refer his determinations to God, consult
with him, and as he wills, and prescribes, so do, and not otherwise. This
was the course which Gods people took of old; they would never attempt any
matter, especially of moment, without a warrant, Thus the Israelites, when
Joshua their General was dead, before they stirred to elect another, asked of
the Lord, who should go up first for them, etc. Judge. 11. They consulted
again with God before they would take arms against the children of Benjamin,
Judge. 11.18, 23, 28. Thus did David sundry times, 1 Samuel 23.12. and 30 8. Thus
did many others of Gods servants in such like cases, and all in obedience to
Gods ordinance, Numb. 27.21. that the Priests should ask counsel for them
after the judgment of Vrim before the Lord, and at his word they should go
out, and come in, etc. But what tell I you of this extraordinary course of
taking resolution? We in these times can have no recourse unto a vocal Oracle,
yet notwithstanding we must look that all our actions be lawful, and
warranted by that written Oracle which is among us; Why else has God left us
his word? Why are we called To the Law and to the Testimony, Esa. 8.20.
Whatsoever we commit to the determination of that word, we commit to God
himself. Object. But the Scripture (some will say) does not mention thousands
of particular actions, about which men are employed. Answer. True, yet it gives
such rules and directions, as may be applied to every action that we can
possibly fall upon, and are able to satisfy him that rightly applies them. If
therefore we intend any holy work or service, let us commit it to God, and
examine we our selves whether he has licenced us to meddle thus, or thus in
his holy things, whether he has called us, and sent us, and set us about them.
If we go about any other civil actions, put each of them likewise to the
question, Is it lawful? have I any ground for it? and be resolved from God
before we adventure on it. Wherefore we are to take David's course in
submmitting our selves to God, and waiting on him continually to know the way
wherein we should walk, Psalm. 143.8. So that this is the sum; we are not to
be our own caruers, but leave it to God to chalk out our way, and appoint our
work; otherwise we cannot work in faith; and whatsoever is not of faith, is
sin, Romans 14.23.

Will is the rule, and pattern of holiness, and justice, and therefore are
our actions holy and just, and good, because agreeable to his will: From which
if we swerve, and do that which never came into his mind, though it may seem
glorious, it is abominable.

viz. A resting on God for the disposing, and ordering of our actions, the
warrantablenesse whereof (let be supposed) we are persuaded of, and are now
entered upon them: And here is seen a strong work of faith, and confidence on
God, in attributing so much unto him as to put over all our businesses into his
hands (as it were) and in a manner out of our own. For we must trust to him for
the provision of means, for the disposition of them; yea though all means
seem to fail, yea further, though all seem to make against our proceedings,
still rest upon him. Fit for our strengthening in this (...) are those
prescripts of Christ, one in Matt. 6.25. Take no thought for your life, what
ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body, what ye shall
put on: For (as it follows in that place) your heavenly father will feed and
cloth you. etc. The other in Mat. 10.19. where Christ foretelling his
Disciples of their ensuing troubles, he bids them, when they are delivered
up to Councels, and Governors, not to take thought how, or what they should
speak; for it shall be given you (says he) in that hour what (...) all
speak. As if he had said, when we are called to confess my name, do not lay
the task upon your natural parts, as your wit, your learning, your eloquence,
and fluency of speech, thinking they must save your credit, and be the means
to do that work as it should be done; no, rather cast your selves upon me,
and expect fit matter and words, of my provision, and suggestion.

But here (before we go on further) a scruple must be resolved, and taken
away, both for the clea^ing of these places, and of my Text; for some may be
ready to gather from thence, this conclusion: If I must ^^ule my work on God,
and take no thought for any thing, then need not I stir, but may sit still,
and let God do all. We are therefore to know that this doctrine is far from
ministering my plea to any supine laziness, or careless idlene^s^; it only
shows us the way how our actions may become both lawful, and succesfull: it
gives no exemption from employing our own industry, and endeavor. For the
better clearing of the point I lay down two propositions; 1. That we are so to
commit our works to God, as that yet they may remain our works. 2. We are so
to do our works, as not to busy our selves with Gods work. First, I say, we
are so to roll our works upon God, as yet to undergo somewhat our selves.
Otherwise, how could the Text say [ thy worke] if we had no finger in it? How
other where could it be called [ our way] if we never stirred a foot in it?
Again, for the last alleged places; Can any dream that Christ forbids all
premeditation, and convenient preparation before hand, when a man is (perhaps)
to speak in public, and there where are both curious, and captious hearers?
Would not such boldness be presumption? Or can any imagine that he forbids
all providence, and provision of necessaries, when in other places we are
commanded to labor, that we may eat, and to be painful in our callings? Would
not such idleness be Satan's illusion? Yes surely; for no precept rightly
understood, contradicts another. God that works for us, will yet have us work
with him. We must be like Pilots at Sea, who though their eyes are lifted
upward, observing the stars, yet hold their hand on the Helm to direct the
Stern: And we must imitate Nehemiah and his people, who as they made their
prayer to their God, so they set a watch day and night to defend themselves,
and their work, Nehe. 4 9.

The second proposition will make the point plainer, viz. That God would have
us so to do our own work, as not to busy our selves with his work: What
now is our work? To be industrious and diligent in using the means which God
offers us, and employ those talents which he has given us, after the best
sort we can. What is Gods work then? To dispose of all things according to his
own counsel, and to give the success of the action according to his will: So
that, if we either vex, and disquiet our selves with needless fears, or
torment our selves with solicitude and excessive cares about the accomplishment
of our business, we incroach upon Gods work, and that only is there forbidden.

This now being cleared, it is apparent that our diligence, and our repose on
Gods providence may stand together; of which repose we now speak, and it is to
be practiced in two respects: 1. In regard of our selves; 2. of other means.
First, for our selves, we must yield as instruments to be fitted, and prepared
for the work, and to be directed, and guided in it, by him. Our eyes must be
toward him that he may instruct, and guide us with his eye, Psa. 32.8. And we
find that the eye of God was upon the Elders of the Jews in their work of
building, so that their enemies could not make them to cease, Ezra 5.5. If our
business be in speech* we are to believe that God who made our mouths, will
be with our mouths, and teach us what to say, as he did Moses, Exodus 4.11, 12.
If it be in action otherwise, consider that God gives abilities, and a spirit
fit for the work, as he did Gideon, Judge. 6.16. Again, for other means we
must rest on him to be borne upon the wings of his providence, and to have
such means ministered as may most advance our designs and desires. David, when
it was told him that Ahithophel was among the conspirators with Absalom^, Lord
(said he) I pray thee turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness, 2.
Sam. 15.31. When he prayed thus, going up the hill, he knew no means how God
would effect it, only he referred it to him who could either infatuate
Ahithophel, or confound his counsel, as pleased him; but we find how that God
presently as soon as he was gotten to the top of the hill, presented unto him
a mean whereby it was possible Ahithophels counsel might be rejected, viz.
The sending of Hushai unto Absalom to mate Ahithophel with his wisdom, and
that proved effectual. Gideon, when God had called him to fight against the
Midianites, and had caused him to send home the greater part of his Army, and
afterward of the remnant, chose only 300. men, knew not (questionless) how
God would work with those men, or after what manner they should assault the
enemy, yet believed he that God would some way employ them: and we find that
God taught him, at length, how they should be armed, how appointed, not with
weapons, but with Trumpets, and firebrarnds, and pitchers, Judge. 7.16. Very
pertinent to this point, is that worthy example of Abraham's servant going to
get a wife for his young master Isaak, Genesis 24.13, 14. He not only trusted God
with the success of his journey, but committed to his disposing the means
also, as the coming forth of the damosel, her speech to him, etc.

Many instances might be given to show the dependence of Gods children on him
to carry them through their employments; and there are good grounds why they
should do so.

wisdom is so exact, so infinite, that he knows what means will be fit to
be used now, and what not, both for his glory, and the establishing of the
thing in hand: He knows what may hinder, and can either prevent, or frustrate
it. He both know how to open a door for Paul to do good in his ministry;
and for Peter to escape imminent danger. In a word, he knows how to knit
secondary causes, one unto another, and to make them conspire together in an
admirable harmony, which we our selves cannot do. Therefore, rely on him, and
in faith make use of that speech of the Apostle, Romans 8.28* which though he
speaks to another purpose, yet may be applied to ours in hand, viz. God will
make all things work together for the best.

providence is in every particular thing that falls out; he is not such a God
as some of the heathen make their Jupiter; of whom they say, Non vacat exiguis
etc. Jupiter is not at leisure to attend petty matters: But the truth is, he
has a stroke in minimis, even the least matters. Not a Sparrow falls to the
ground but by his will. He feeds the fowls of the arre, and clothes the
flowers of the field. How can we then think but that he disposes of every
thing that concerns us, or our affairs? Man's goings are of the Lord (says
Solomon) Prou. 20.24. how then can he vnerstand his own way? And, A man's heart
deuiseth his way, but the Lord directs his steps, verse. 9. of this chapter.
Yea God numbreth our steps, Job. 14.16. Great reason then have we, Beloved, to
commit our works to his managing, and ordering, etc.

viz. A resting, and waiting on God for the success of our businesses, and
endeavors. Which is so necessary, that the promises annexed to these precepts
seem more especially to aim at it. Commit (says my Text) thy works unto the
Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established: what does this sound else, but,
Commit the establishment of thy works to God? So is that, Psalm 37.5. to be
resolved: this we are taught to do, when we are in any holy work, or
service, by Paul, and Barnabas, Acts 14.23. They commended the Elders unto the
Lord, etc. that is, the Ministry and success of the Ministry of the Elders,
chiefly. Likewise by the Prophet Isaiahs own example ( Isay 49.4.) who though
he feared his labor was in vain, yet herein finds comfort, that his work
was with his God, that is, the success of it, etc. When we are upon other
affairs, this duty is also commended unto us. Ioab when he went out against
the Ammonites and Syrians, and had marshalled his Army, and set his troops in
the best order he could, for greatest advantage; and omitted no part of a wise
and discreet General; what says he to Abishai his brother? Be of good
courage, and let us play the men, and the Lord do that which seems him good,
2 Samuel 10.12. He thought his part was only to play the man: it was Gods part to
incline the day, and give the victory to this or that side, and to him he left
it. Nehemiah when he had resolved to speak to the king his Master, in behalf
of his people, troubles not himself what answer he should have, but leaves
that to God; Prosper I pray thee (said he, cap. 1.11.) thy servant this day,
and grant him mercy in the sight of this man. So Hester, etc. Hester 4.16.

But what do I heaping up known examples? Call to mind with me but one
more, namely, that of Abraham; God had called him to do a work, a seeming
unnatural work, of slaying and sacrificing his only son, (Genesis 22.) What
does he? He goes about it presently, without questioning the nature of the fact
or Gods promise, and had done it if God had not stayed him. O wonderful
strength of faith! O matchless confidence! We may well think that this father
of the faithful, as he told his dear Isaak (verse 8.) that God would provide
a Lamb, so was persuaded that God would provide in other respects that the
success and consequent of this act should be such, as might stand both with
Gods mercy, and faithfulness, and also the encouragement of his own Faith in
assurance of posterity. But to leave examples, consider with me what strong
grounds we have whereon to build this dependence for success on God.

Power requires thus much at our hands; He is both Omnipotent, able to do all
things; and also Soli-potent, only able to do what him pleases in heaven and
in earth. Who has not found that true which the Preacher found true, Eccles.
9.11. The race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong,
neither yet bread to the wise, etc. And what else are we to conclude thence,
but that there is another supreme Ruler, and Governor over man who gives the
issue, not according to the seeming abilities of the persons, or likelihood of
means used, but according to the good pleasure of his own will. The three
children therefore, though it was a sore burden of care, and fear, and
doubting, that lay on their necks when they were either to be cast into the
fiery furnace, or to worship an Idol (call it what you will, a work or a
suffering) committed the event to God; and upon what ground? The power of God;
Our God (said they) is able to deliver us, etc. Dan. 3.16. So did Asa, 2 Chronicles.
14.11. Lord it is nothing with thee to help whether with many, or with them
that have no power; help us, O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, etc.

Decree of God is a maine prop and pillar of this confidence. He has
fore-determined, and appointed whatsoever comes to pass; All our times are
in his hand, and all the actions and motions in those times. Whatsoever we do
therefore, let us wait in silence, and patience, for that event which God has
decreed. Many devices are in a man's heart (says Solomon) nevertheless the
counsel of the Lord that shall stand, Prou. 19.21. Hence that faithful
speech, Isay 26.12. Lord thou will ordain peace for us, etc.

Now, because flesh and blood finds this an hard task, to depend thus on God,
though there be very many think it an easy lesson, and will say that they
hope in God, and now they have done what they can, will not trouble themselves
further, therefore let us examine how the case stands with us, by a sign or
two, taken from the nature of this act.

carnal fear, and distracting care. These two, Fear and Care, I may not
unfitly compare unto those two brethren Rechab and Baanah (of whom we read, 2 Samuel 4.5, 6.) For as they slew Ishbosheth while he lay on his bed in his house;
so these will take away the life of our Faith, if once they get into the house
of our hearts, while we think it rests it self securely on God. So that,
first, the faithful man fears not; (I will trust and not be afraid, Isay
12.2.) though he find many wants in himself, no succors from others, yea
though there arise impossibilities in his conceit, yet he is like Abraham,
Romans 4.18, 19, 20. He believes in hope, above hope, not staggering at the
promises of God, etc. And thus he gives glory to God, even the glory of his
power and omnipotency, as is there testified of Abraham.

determined shall be effected, though he cast about never so many ways to
fulfill his own desires, and therefore he answers either his own soul or
others, as the three children did the king, Dan. 3. We are not careful to
answer thee, that is, we are not solicitous to find out shifts, or ways about
to escape, that which is our duty we will do: let God alone for the
conclusion. Sure it is, that Rouling our burden upon God, and loading our
selves still with a burden of cares and fears, cannot well meet together.

cheerfulness, and causes a man to encourage himself in God. So we find
David affected, 1. Sam. 30.6. While he was in danger of being stoned by his
own people, and had all the disheartnings that (almost) could be, yet even
then he encouraged himself (says the text) in the Lord his God. And therefore
in Psalm. 37.4, 5. Delighting our selves in the Lord, and committing our way
unto him, are joined together as companions, having the same promise in effect
made to both.

viz. Prayer. For, as we must deny our selves, and depend on God for a warrant
when we are in consultation, for assistance, and means when we come to
resolution, and for success when the business is to be ripened, and brought
to perfection: So we must make a solemn recommendation of our work to God, in
Prayer, which I called the formal act (that is, the set manner) of Commission,
because whereas by faith and dependence we do, indeed, really, and truly roll
our burden upon God, by this prayer that faith (as many other graces besides)
is acted forth, and clearly manifested.

I explain my meaning by an ordinary course in Law (as I take it) viz. When a
man puts over his estate to another, or estates another in any thing, there
must be, besides the writings drawn, a formal delivery of them to the party:
To these writings, wherein is contained the substance of the conueiance, I
liken Faith: to the delivery of these writings, in the manner of conueiance, I
liken Prayer. Now for prayer, that it is included in this duty, is without
question. Some would have it only, or at least principally, meant in the text,
and therefore translate it (in stead of Roll thy works) Reveal thy works
unto the Lord. But that they are mistaken, both the proper signification of the
Hebrew word shows, and the nature of the thing.

For, will my bare telling another that I am burdened, ease me any whit, or
keep my burden from falling? No, unless I lay it upon him, and he help to
support it: Will my fair words to another, how I will entrust him with such an
estate of mine, either better mine estate, or keep it from decaying? No,
unless by a due legal proceeding I resign it over unto him, and so give
proof that I trust him. No more will a bare acquainting God with mine
intentions, or actions, or griefs, further my designs, or ratify my desires,
unless I repose my confidence in him.

Yet must we take in Prayer within the compass of this Rouling, though not
shut out the other for its sake: But what shall I, or need I now speak of it?
If we look back to the examples of those before mentioned, we shall find
diverse of them discovering their faith in the prayer of Faith. It was in prayer
that Iehoshaphat confessed his weakness and committed his work of warfare
unto God: It was in prayer that David asked God what he should do, and in
what way he should walk: It was in prayer also that he be trusted God with
the means to be fool Ahithophel; as did Abraham's servant to find out a wife
for his young master. Lastly, it was in prayer that Nehemiah commended his
speeding with the king his Master unto the Lord. What need I add any instances
to these? I will only commend to your general imitation that act of Hezekiah,
Isa. 37.14. He went to God, and spread the letter of Sennacherib before the
Lord: So let us in all our occasions, whether ordinary, or extraordinary,
when we are to do any work, when we would be eased of any burden, go unto
God, lay open our case, offer up our petitions, and in faithful prayer, pour
out our souls before him. O what marvelous encouragements and forcible
motives have we so to do!

All the grounds for each of the former points serve jointly to bear up this
too. Prou. 18.10. But I cannot insist on these, but must hasten toward an end.

viz. The consideration of Gods Love and mercy to us, and readiness to put
forth himself for us. This is that argument which is used in my Text and like
places by way of promise: Cast all your care upon God (says the Apostle Peter)
why? For he cares for you, 1. Pet. 5.7 Yea, God tendereth us as a father does
his children. Psalm. 103.13. And will a father let his child sink under a
burden when he entreats his help? No, he will either bear it for him, or
sustain him under it. If earthly parents do for their children, shall not our
heavenly father do for us? Much more surely, as Christ concludes, Matt. 7.
And therefore will David call upon God, because he is the God that performs
all things for him, Psalm. 57.2. I conclude then with the words of the Apostle,
Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer, and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God.

The Doctrinall part of this counsel being explained; see we in brief what
may be thence collected.

Exhortation, that we would all take this course, and follow this counsel.
But his may be spared (in respect of our private works) because the doctrine
it self was exhortatorie, and many exhortations were intermixed among the
explanations of it. Yet let us all be persuaded to cast an eye upon the
Churches of God, I mean especially the distressed parts of it, and commend
their works and designs for their own safety, together with the works of
others in their behalf, unto the Lord. We may in charity, suppose that they
have committed the choice of their enterprises unto him, and have a warrant for
them: Let us now commit the means and the success unto God. Howsoever matters
go hard in many places, means fail, the case seem almost desperate, God
gives successes to the enemy, suffers his children to be cruelly and
injuriously handled, scattered, slaughtered; (So that we may take up for them
that complaint of those, Psalm 44.10, 11. Thou make us turn back from the
enemy, etc.) yet let us so carry our selves that we may say with them there,
Verse 17 all this is come upon us, yet have not we forgotten thee, etc.

rebuke to as many as will not be advised by the wise man: And they are of
diverse sorts.

own sufficiencies the fundamental base, and prop of their actions. As
Papists, who make the strength of nature able to work diverse good actions: And
generally, all proud persons, who pride themselves in their own might and
power, as if they could do what they list, and God not able to hinder them.
The carriage of many, though happily not their speeches, bewray such arrogant
thoughts.

2. They who will not endure to commit the choice of their actions to God, nor
stay for a warrant, but run on upon their own heads: such as they, Deuteronomy. 1.
who would needs fight when God forbade them, so far were they from demanding
leave of him: Or as they, Ierem. 42.20. who would seem to commit their journey
to God, but in hypocrisy, having resolved what to do before hand, let Gods
command be what it will.

They that dare not depend upon God for means. Such are they that faint in
themselves, and make themselves more unfit for the work than God has made
them, by their diffidence of ever being enabled for it. Herein was Moses
faulty, Exodus 4.10. Secondly, they that distrust God if such and such means
do not take, and at such a time. Such were the Israelites who are said to
limit the holy one of Israel, Psalm. 78.41. Thirdly, they that rely upon their
own procurement of means, as they that trusted on the strength of Egypt,
Isa. 31.1, 2. Against whom both a woe is denounced, and Gods Wisdom opposed:
yet (says the Prophet) he is wise; i. though you so lean to your own wisdom
in contriuing means, and to Egypt in affording them, God will outreach you.
Of this sort we find many who will think to make all so sure, and order every
thing so wisely, that Gods providence shall be (in seeming) clean shut out, as
if he could not make a change, etc. Fourthly, they are most to blame who use
indirect means, and so by consequence commit their works to the Devil. Saul
did so palpably, in consulting with the Witch at Endor, 1 Samuel 28.8. Others do
it covertly, etc.

trust not God with the event and success of their business; but peremptorily
conclude what their fear suggesteth. So Moses, Exodus 4 1. Behold (said he)
they will not believe me etc. And David, 1 Samuel 27.1. I shall one day perish
by the hand of Saul, etc. But we must know that howsoever God allows us to be
Historians, or recorders of those works which he has done for us: yet he will
not have us be Prognosticators of future events, so as to determine what he
will do, especially when we conclude against our selves, and the glory of his
mercy.

Thus much for the Counsel, or precept in the Text.

And thy thoughts shall be established.
THese words appear plainly to be a Promise subioyned to that counsel which
the Wise man gave in the former part of the Verse; and contain that end which
is aimed at by all agents, and easily obtained by taking that course, and
following that way which was premised. Here, for our orderly proceeding, we
are first to sever the words in explication, and then join them again in a
general observation, which when we have branched forth into particulars, and
fenced from objections, we will shut up with application.

Two words are to be opened [ Thoughts] and [ Established.] Thoughts in the
soul of man are properly the inward agitations, or workings thereof, beating
as it were, upon an object fomerly apprehended; and we shall find the greatest
use of them in matters either of weight or difficulty, and the more we are
possessed, or pressed with any thing, the more they are multiplied. O what a
world of them, in such cases, throng in one upon the neck of another to the
disquieting of our spirits* The best men of the best tempers are subject unto
them; even David himself is heard to complain of the multitude of his
thoughts within him, Psalm. 94.19. And indeed, this swarming of thoughts is a
marvelous grieuance unto a man, for they hinder and interrupt the clear
discourse of reason, and raise as it were, such a mist in a man's mind, that
he is not able to discern one truth from another. This noted by the way, I
pass on to other acceptions of thoughts: For in Scripture they are often put
for the effect of thoughts, that is, for counsels, and resolutions taken after
the working of the thoughts; and so Ierem. 11.19. They have thought a thought,
or devised a device against me. etc. The word is the same which is used here.
Which acception bordereth very near upon another, viz. when thoughts are put
for the object of thoughts, or the matter it self devised and purposed,
whether outward, or other; so Exodus 35.35. Bezaleel and Ahol^ab are said to be
filled with the wisdom of those that devise cunning work, or (according to
the Hebrew) that think thoughts; the word is the same likewise with this in
the Text. Now in both these latter acceptions, I think the word is to be taken
here, and so the meaning of this promise is, Thy counsels, devices, or work
thought on shall be established.

Before we pass further, it will be neither impertinent, nor unprofitable, to
clear a scruple which may arise from the change of the word [ Workes] used in
the forepart of the text, into this word [ Thoughts] in the latter part of it.
One would think the promise would have better answered the precept if he had
said, Commit thy works unto the Lord, and they (i. thy works) shall be
established.

Verse the ninth of this chapter; A man's heart deuiseth his way, but the Lord
directs his steps: Which seems to intimate that we have power of our selves
to will, though not to work.

shadows are no good couerlets for errors. I will not drench my self into the
bottom of Free Will, no nor wade into it, seeing I may keep my self on the
bank and resolve this doubt. This then I take to be the truth in a word: We
cannot think or devise any thing merely of our selves; for even in natural
operations of the mind and heart about natural and civil things, there is a
general concourse of Gods providence. In God we live, and move Acts 17.28.
, not our feet only, but our hearts also; He it is by whose leave and license
we will every thing, and who puts this or that into our hearts, when we will
or affect any good thing. Thoughts are likened to conceptions: Words and works
to births; and as births usually are not, so conceptions cannot be without
others help. To this purpose the first verse of this chapter runs thus in
the last translation; The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of
the tongue is from the Lord. We question not now whether the will has freedom
in natural, and civil actions, nor deny it, but this is certain, that the
actual exercise of this freedom is governed by God, who can make us either
suspe^d our act of willing, or divert our thoughts from one thing to another,
or incline us to think upon this or that, now or then, at his pleasure. For
instance; we find God promising the Israelites that whilst they went up thrice
in the year to appear before him, no man should so much as desire their land,
Exodus 34.24. What? was it not in the power of the heathen borderers to have
invaded that dispeopled country at such a time? Yes in some sense it was, and
had not God hindered, it is likely they would soon have been tampering with
Gods inheritance: But we see that though they supposed they had stated
themselves, (perhaps out of some politic respects) yet it was God indeed that
stayed them. Again, we find Isa. 7.18. that God would hiss for a fly from
Egypt, and a Be from Assyria: and Judges 4.7. that he would draw out Sisera
to fight, etc. But did the Egyptians hear any such hissing? Did Sisera feel
any such drawing? No surely, they thought they had by their own mere advice
put themselves into those iourneys. So that we see when man thinks he
resolves of himself, then God has his stroke in that resolution. Now to
answer this question; why it is said (notwithstanding all this) that man
deuiseth his way? I answer;

1. It is so said to show that though God in his counsel has determined, and
moderated our counsels, yet our natural liberty in consulting is not taken
away.

2. The first thoughts, and purposes of the heart may be attributed to man,
rather than other acts comparatively; for thoughts and meditations, being the
first productions, and the most simple acts of the faculties in man, his work
is most sensible therein, and less of Gods work is discerned. Whereas the
more our operations are compounded, the more are the acts and joint workings of
divine providence manifold, and doubled. I express my self more clearly
thus: In the motions of the will or mind, there God works only upon the will
or mind, and that inwardly, and very closely: but when we come to execute our
designs, there God must not only concur with the soul, but with the parts
of the body likewise, as with the tongue in speaking, with the hand in working,
with the feet in walking, and that more palpably: And hence it is that in
special manner the answer of the tongue is from the Lord, and our steps
directed by him. And now I hope, we may proceed without stumbling block unto
the last word.

Established] is in the vulgar Latin read [ directed.] But the word in the
Original (as I formerly noted) is more full, signifying both to be prepared,
or fitted, and to be confirmed or accomplished; and therefore a translation
into another language, French S^^ont ^gencee^
renders it excellently by a word importing to be accommodated, dressed, fitly
disposed, rightly matched, or justly applied, etc. So that more is aimed at
than the bare effecting what we would have done, and our guidance what to do,
and how to do it, must needs also be understood. Briefly, this establishment
is opposed to that breaking off of thoughts, and purposes, Job 17.11. as it
were a rooting of them up, and plucking them asunder, when as, namely, there is
distraction, and perplexity, and infelicity of success.

He who commits his works unto the Lord, shall have his thoughts established.
For general proof we are to look again unto like places, Psalm. 37.5.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, and he shall bring it to pass; and Psalm. 55.22.
Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee. Prou. 3.6. In all
thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. See how God is all in
all to them that commit themselves unto him. Suppose we can go lightly away
with a charge of business, yet we may have rubs, and fall in our passage; why
then, if we trust him, he will address our way, and bring us prosperously to
our journies end. Yea, suppose that we are heavily burdened in the way, why
then he will graciously ease us, if we lay it upon him. But now left any
should think we are advised to any fruitless, or hopeless performance, and
that we may perceive the extent of this promise, we will branch it forth into
particulars, and lay them side by side (as it were) unto those duties formerly
commended unto us. Observe therefore, that as we are bound to commit our
resolutions, and our proceedings, and the success of all to God; so here are
encouraging promises answering to each of these.

instructed in the best course and the safest he can take. If we ask for the
old way, which is the good way, Ierem. 6.16. and if we ask where we ought,
viz. at Gods Oracle, the Law, and Testimony, Isa. 8. then shall that be
verified to us which is promised, Isa. 30.21. Thine ears shall hear a voice
behind thee, saying, this is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the
right hand or to the left. If we hearken unto the commands of God, and attend
on him, then our peace shall be as a River, for God teaches us to profit, and
leads us by the way that we should go, Isa. 48.17, 18. He is the best
counselor (we heard before) and the wise man tells us, that by counsel ( Gods
counsel then especially) every purpose is established, Prou. 20.18.

Now that this is so, we find both his people laying hold on these promises,
and him also fulfilling them to his people. David beseeches God to order his
steps in his word, being confident that he should not be ashamed when he had
respect unto Gods commandments, Psalm. 119.6. By not being ashamed, he means
that he should not be led into error, nor be deluded, or frustrated of his
hope: for what causes shame, but to be seen to have foolishly, and idly
enterprised a business? Again, Psalm. 25.9, 10. he tells us the Lord will teach
the meek his way, that is, those who humbly yield themselves to his teaching,
and are not presumptuously puffed-vp in self-conceit. And what way is it which
he will teach? His ways are mercy, and truth. As for experiences of the
fulfilling of this promise, first take his (namely, David's) at Keilah once, at
Ziglag another time. 1 Samuel 13.12. and 10.8.
So that no marvel he was with God continually, and said it was good for him
to draw near unto God, Psalm. 73.28. The like experience we read Vzziah the
king had, who so long as he sought the Lord (viz. by way of inquiry what to
do) be prospered, 2. Chron. 26.5.

means, shall have them fitted, and ordered for the best. Take but one, or two
experiences, wherein this has been made good. Abraham, committed his servants
journey to God, and his servant also, the disposition, and prospering of the
means, Genesis 24. Now see there how admirably those means were applied, which
he referred to God. Jacob in faith made vows to God, on condition that he
would be with him in his way, Genesis 28. and see how God provided the means of
his kind entertainment by his Uncle, as that he should come to the Well, and
Rachel about the same time, that he should so opportunely do her a courtesy,
etc. Genesis 29. See this again in the same Jacob, Ge. 33.10, 11. where God put
into his head that most politic course of sending presents to his brother.
Who sees not there an evident fulfilling of this gracious promise? Nay (to
appeal to our selves) who is there of us that walks with God, and
acknowledges him in his ways, who has not found it fulfilled upon himself?
Many ways does God manifest his assistance in our working, as, 1. By giving us
wisdom to go the right way to work. 2. By blessing the instruments which we
employ. 3. By making times and seasons and all occurrences to suit with our
desires. We are certainly either blind, or very forgetful, if we cannot say
thus much out of experience. Yea, many times is not that true of us, which is
but fained of Timotheus the Athenian Captain? Are not we little better than
asleep (as is said he was) when all things are brought into our net which we
fish for? Do not our businesses thrive well under our hands, we cannot tell
how, but only that providence will have it to be so? How then should this
hearten us, to wait on God, and trust in him? seeing that the steps of a good
man are ordered by the Lord, Psalm. 37.28.

success of his actions to God, shall have a good issue of them. They shall
not only be ordered but perfected. The Scripture is plentiful in giving
assurances of this promise. Many examples formerly alleged might be here
repeated. Abraham's servant trusted God would establish his thought, and God did
so. Ioab committed the success of the battle to God, 2. Sam. 19.12. and
obtained the victory. Hester depended upon God, for her finding of favor with
king Ahashuerosh, and found it. (...)
What should I say more? David and others in cases of difficulty and danger,
have found the proof hereof: I waited patiently for the Lord, and he set my
feet upon a Rock, and stablished my goings, Psalm. 40.1, 2. Again, when the
Psalmist had asked this question; Who will rise up for me against the evil
doers? (a question subordinate to this, Unto whom shall I commit my work?) he
answers, Unless the Lord had been mine help, my soul had almost dwelt in
silence; but when I said, my foot slippeth, thy mercy O Lord held me up, Psalm.
94.16, 17, 18. And yet somewhat more plainly: Because thou have made the Lord,
even the most High, thine habitation, therefore no evil shall befall thee, for
he shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways, Psalm.
91.9, 10, 11. How many such probates of this truth might we find in this
book! I will insist no more upon any of them, but will only propound the
experience of Peter as a clear confirmation of this promise, laid down Luke
5.5, 6. Peter and others of his fellows had been toyling all night at their
fishing work, and had caught nothing: Christ bid him cast out his net for a
draught; at Christ his word (though otherwise he had little hope) he did it;
thus committing his work to Christ for the success of it, (yea another time
even for the ordering of the means, as casting on the right side of the ship,
John 21.6.) and what wonderful success he had both times we may there read.
As it was with Peter in the work of his fishing, so shall it be with Ministers
in their spiritual fishing, and with all of us, in our several emploiments,
if we do as he did, let God have the managing of our work, and believe him.
Faith well grounded may wax bold, for it cannot but be welcome to God. O then
let us delight our selves in the Lord so shall we be sure to have our hearts
desire, Psalm. 37.4.

faith, is apparent: It is a^ sure looking to Prayer made in faith. Iehoshaphat
commended his work to God in prayer, 2 Chronicles. 20. Nehemiah also his work: and
Ezra his, and the Jews their way toward Jerusalem, Ezra 8.22, 23. And all of
them had their thoughts established, as a multitude of Gods Saints besides,
whose well-speeding should be our spur to their imitation. I need not speak
more largely of this, because it is but an expression of our dependence on God.

Now, by this time I doubt not, we have drawn in the sweetness of this
promise: yet for further satisfaction, search we out the grounds why such a
promise of establishment should be annexed to our faithful dependence on God:
and surely as the reasons why we should trust in, and pray to God, were taken
from the Properties of God: so the reasons why faith and prayer have this power
with God may be taken from the nature of faith and Prayer.

glory, that is the best means to bring back to man the assured grant of a
blessing: But it is faith whereby we most of all glorify God ( Abraham, being
strong in faith, gave glory to God, Romans 4.20.) And the glory it gives him is
manifold, viz. the glory of mercy, the glory of wisdom, the glory of
omnipotency, and the glory of truth.

1. It ascribes Mercy to him; otherwise durst we be so bold with him, as to
roll our burdens upon him, did he not pity our weakness?

2. It attributes wisdom to him; otherwise, would we put over difficult, and
intricate affairs to him, did we not think he knew how to wind us out of
them?

3. It builds upon his omnipotency; how else durst we trust our weightiest
enterprises in his hand, did we not rely on his strength?

4. It celebrates his Truth, and sets to its seal that God is true in this
promise of establishment. Now then Faith glorifying God so many ways, he who
above all things tendereth his own glory, cannot but make that good unto us
wherein we thus honor him. Whereas on the other side God should lose much of
his glory from us and others, by giving repulse to our confidence; for those
attributes of his would soon be questioned, yea much eclipsed. But shall it
ever be said that the merciful Lord shakes him off that depends upon him?
shall it ever be said that the most wise Jehovah misleads a man that follows
him? Shall the ungodly have cause to say that our God, who called Egypt, and
all humane strengths, Ezekiel. 29.6, 7.
broken reeds, himself deceives him that leaned on him? Shall it be suspected
that he who commits a business to God, is as he that sends a message by
that foolish messenger ( Prou. 26.6.) Who cutteth off the feet, and drinks
damage? Or shall it be feared that he, who is called the fountain of
goodness, and a ready help at all assaies, should become, as waters Job 6.15.
that fail? Or he who is a man of war, a rock immovable Psalm. 18.2.31, 32.
, should bow under those burdens we roll upon him? No; far be it from him:
As his name is, so shall be ever his praise. He will not lose a whit of his
honor; And for that his honors sake we may claspe with his promise, and apply
David's words, Psalm. 56.9. unto our Text, When I commit my works to God my
thoughts shall be established; this I know, for God is with me.

I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50.15. So, I will
finish thine affairs for thee, and thou shall glorify me. Shall men of
ability take a faithful care of orphans, and other impotent creatures who
cast themselves upon them, and make suit for their tuition? and will God reject
our suits? If it was Augustus his praise that none came at any time
discontented out of his presence, shall it not be Iehouahs much more? Never was
any Petition put back where Christ is Master of requests to present it: never
any cause cast out of that Court where he is Advocate to plead it.

Before any application can be made, the doctrine must here be cleared of
some exceptions taken against this indefinite propounding of it.

that commission be made to God, and yet this establishment not follow upon it?
2. May not this establishment be found where no such commission went before it?
The first of these questioneth the generality of this point; the second, the
peculiarity of it. To each of these a word.

First, whether all that practice this duty are partakers of this promise. It
seems not. For did not the Israelites consult with God in that important
affair of theirs ( Judges 20.) and were they not twice discomfited; and almost
disheartened? Again, do not the people of God profess their boasting in God
all day long, that is, their confidence in him (Psalm. 44.8.) and yet complain
in the next verse that God had cast them off, and went not forth with their
armies? Besides, how many faithful prayers have been made in other particular
cases, and yet not this ordering, and accomplishment ensued?

answer: The promise may be sure, and yet the time of fulfilling it uncertain.
God does not limit himself when to bring to pass our desires, nor must we
limit him. And many times indeed, he suffers our lawful actions, and those
wherein we depend on him, to be interrupted, and crossed for a long time. But
what then? Shall we suspect his faithfulness? By no means. If we do so, it
is a sign we do not trust him with our business as we should: for will not
he that thinks any one able, and wise enough to do the thing it self, leave
the time of doing it to him also? Doubtless if we cannot effect what we would
presently, it is either because in the ordinary dispensation of Gods
providence, it cannot be done so soon, or if it could, it would not be so good
for us.

Now for the Beniamites, we see that at length their work prospered, and why
it did not sooner we may well guess. For (say our Divines) it is probable,
that they had not thoroughly denied themselves, but something was defective, in
their humiliation; and therefore we find that whereas the first time they but
inquired, the second time, inquired and lamented, the third time they more
solemnly fasted, and thereupon got the victory. Again, it is not unlikely that
their enemies being so few, they were too confident in their strength: God
therefore, to let them know that all preparations without him are but vain,
let them a while see their weakness. So that we may rather gather a lesson of
continual dependence upon God from them, than a cavil to infringe a promise.
And as for the other instance, we see that for all Gods hiding himself a long
time, yet they forgot him not, but stuck close to him, in their confident
dependence.

Object. Yea, but sometimes men's counsels are utterly disappointed, and this
promise never made good. I answer, this promise never fails if men fail not
in any part, or circumstance of their former duty. But here is use of a
distinction. Promises are either general, or particular. General promises,
made to all persons; of which number this is one: but now some of these do not
hold in all cases, for in some they are absolute, in others conditional. This
in some cases is but a conditional promise, as namely when our works, or
affairs are such as touch not our spiritual estate in the maine hold of it,
but only this or that civil employment; and all conditional promises have
their fulfilling reserved to the pleasure of God.

To the point then, whether it be uncertain I shall prosper in this work or
no, I say this, suppose I do not prosper in it, yet the text remains good in
these respects: 1. If we commit our works to God, we must look to the
nature of them. If they be not such as are absolutely promised, we ought not
absolutely to believe the accomplishment of them. Now to apply this by turning
of it: Then only shall our thoughts be established absolutely, when we can
absolutely commit our works to God without doubting. 2. If we fully roll our
works upon God, our thoughts shall be established, if not in the forenamed,
yet, at least, in another sense, viz. our after thoughts and counsels; for if
Gods working for us be not according to our first thoughts, yet our second
thoughts shall be conformed, and fitted to his working, that is, he will so
satisfy us in that particular that our thoughts shall be settled and we
contented.

To the second doubt, whether none but these resigners shall have their
thoughts established, I answer, yes, and that ordinarily. We find it a
scandal to the godly that the wicked do so prosper in their way, Ierem. 12.1.
And they who are so far from trusting God with their works, that they ask
what God can do for them, yet have their houses filled with good things, Job
22.17, 18. But what of all this? The promise only belongs to the faithful,
and none but they can presume, or with any reason look to have their thoughts
established. 2. The establishment of thoughts, is vouchsafed in mercy only to
them: to others, in judgment. The wicked are thereby more puffed up in conceit
of their own power, and prudence, and policy: but the godly have their eyes
opened to see God the better, and the rather to acknowledge his providence. 3.
They that work without God, have not their counsels and thoughts fully
established: for first they cannot be so established when they are troubled,
and distracted with cares, and fears; but so troubled they must needs be, when
they want faith, which is it that setleth and composeth them. Secondly, how can
their thoughts be properly said to be confirmed, when the Scripture tells us,
their expectation is suddenly cut off, and themselves soon cut down, yea gone
in a moment? We find their estates called slippery, Psalm. 73.18, 19 Job 8.14.
Psalm. 37.38.
their works, Spiders webbs, soon blasted, soon ouerturned, soon vanished,
yea their name, and their posterity, and the inheritances which they leave
behind for others, soon worn out, and scattered. Judge we now whether their
portion be in this promise. Thus I hope, the doctrine is cleared.

(...)
(...) application then. As we formerly found out wha^ (...) were, that did not
commit their works to (...), i^ here we may descry their folly, for they that
(...) the duty, cannot have the comfort of this (...). Again, committing our
works to God, (...) commended unto us as the best way, and surest course for
the attaining to those ends which we had in our thoughts, and therefore they
must needs be deemed unwise, and foolish, who dream of establishment by other
means, or without using these means. Discover we their folly in particulars.

First, how can they look for establishment who deny not themselves, but are
confident in their own strength, and ability to carry their own burden? God
has pronounced, that he resists the proud, (...)
and certainly their actions can never prosper whom God resists.

As it is one point of his omnipotency to be able to do what he will without
let or hinderance: so it is another, to be able to hinder whatsoever he is not
pleased with. Now if they be not proud (and so of the number of those whom he
will hinder) who hold themselves able to move without him, in whom they both
live, and move, and who acknowledge no powerful concurrence, or providence of
him in their work, who indeed, sustaines both them, and it, if, I say, these
be not proud, I know not who are.

Yet more particularly, how can they look for establishment who enterprise any
work without Gods warrant, and approbation? Gods promises are made to
obedience, not to heady presumption. He that asks not Gods leave, nor has
his consent, has none of his company. So he told them that would needs go
upon a piece of service without his command, Deuteronomy. 1.42. I am not among you,
etc. And he who is without God, and left alone to himself, is likely to have
such success as they had in that action.

Again, what a folly is it for a man to presume that his affairs can be well
managed or disposed of when he runs upon his own head, and never has any
respect unto God nor his guidance? It is not a sufficient ground that such an
enterprise shall be effected, to be assured that it is warranted or approved:
He that gives us leave, unless he set us in a right course and direct us, we
cannot but fail and falter in the manner of doing it. And will not he (think
we) let us alone when we think our selves able enough to contriue the only
course, and devise the best way to compass it? Surely, we may look that he
will either infatuate our counsels, and besot our minds, or else cross those
means which might otherwise, with his blessing, have been effectual: Either
we shall go the wrong way to work, as Absalom, in rejecting Ahithophels, and
embracing Hushai's counsel 2 Samuel 17.14.
: or lean upon poor tottering props, as the Philistims, committing their
work to Goliath who deceived them, and could not make good his undertakings 1 Samuel 1^. ^.
: Or if we use good means (without dependence on Gods blessing) and at length
obtain our desires, yet we are commonly like the children of Israel, going
that journey forty years, which perhaps might have been dispatched in forty
days.

Lastly, who can expect establishment, that think themselves sufficient to
make an end of their business, and depend not upon God for the success of it?
Will God suffer himself to be robbed of the praise of his wisdom and power?
He will not, but will lay open the weakness of these men by scattering their
devices, and confounding their purposes, that they may learn, that with him
only are power, and strength, and wisdom, to establish man's thoughts, and
that though they take counsel together, it shall not stand but come to naught,
Isa. 8.10.

Now if they cannot prosper who wait not on God, what shall we think of them
that are angry both with God and others, when their actions are but a little
crossed? We read of Xerxes King of Persia, who hearing that his bridge over
Hellespont was broken down with the waves of the Sea, caused three hundred
stripes to be given to the Ocean in way of revenge. It may be all will wonder
at this madness of his; and yet they are as mad who when their actions are
crossed, fall out with the instruments of their grieuance; For what do they
but behave themselves frowardly toward God? and therefore may fear that he will
be froward to them, and even set his face against them for evil.

set to our seal that God is true. He loves to be trusted, and those that
trust in him, knowing (as the Apostle says) whom they have trusted 2 Timothy 1 1^.
shall never be ashamed of their confidence. Whether therefore our affairs be
public or private, let us commit them to God. Commit we our trades unto him,
our studies unto him, the administration of every office and function unto him,
especially businesses of greater either difficulty or danger unto him. And
because I cannot stand to instance in particular cases, let us all as members
together of one and the same body, commit the common affairs of the whole
Church unto God, and our joint desires touching them, persuading our selves
that in so doing, the thoughts of our hearts shall be established.

What though many designs and services for the Church, are not for the present
successful? Yet expect Gods work. And the rather because it is his usual
course in these cases, not to be seen till the last. Even as the Roman Tria^ij
(who were the strength of the Army) never fought till the victory seemed to be
hazarded: So the Trinity (in whom is the strength of the Church Militant) make
our extremity their opportunity. Now then cum ad Triada deuentum fuerit: when
it is time for God to work; as, Psalm. 119.126. no question the wheel shall
turn and the enemies of the truth shall be undermost.

Suppose the enemies get the better for a time, and many times foil the Lords
host, yet they may say as Pyrrhus once did when he had conquered the Romans,
Etiamsi deinceps etc. Though we* again and again overcome ( the Protestants)
yet the final ruin and downfall shall be our own. In a word, David has no
cause of fearing he shall fall one day by the hand of Saul: but Saul may be
assured he shall fall before David; and when the time of establishment
comes, then they that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion which cannot
be removed, Psalm. 125.1.

committing them to God, then forget not to be thankful, and to acknowledge by
whom our works were wrought. And not only so, but let our experience teach us
so much the more confidently to depend upon him for after times. Observe this
in Gods people, Isay 26.12. Lord thou will ordain peace for us, for thou have
wrought all our works for us: Faith here draws an argument of assurance for
time to come from time past.

FINIS.

