THE GRAND SACRILEGE OF THE CHVRCH OF ROME, In taking away the sacred Cup from
the Laiety at the Lords Table: Detected, and convinced by the evidence of holy
Scripture, and Testimonies of all Ages successively from the first propagation
of the Catholic Christian Faith to this present: Together with two
Conferences; the former at Paris with D. Smith, now styled by the Romanists B
of Calcedon; the later at London with M Euerard, Priest: By DAN. FEATLY, Doctor
in Divinity.

Gelasius de consecrat. did 2. cap. comperim^s.

Aut integra percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur: diuisio enim vnius
eiusdemque mystery sine grandi sacrilegio non potest prouenire.

LONDON, Printed by Felix Kyngston for Robert Milbourne, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Greyhound. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM, EARL OF Pembroke, Lord high Steward of his
Majesty's Household, and of his most Honorable privy Council, Chancellor of
the University of Oxford, Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter.
ALthough I can challenge no interest in your Lordships favor: yet your
Lordsh, may challenge your interest in those fruits of my studies, which grew
under the shade of your Honors protection in the famous Nursery of Religion
and Learning, the Uniuersity of Oxford: which the more it flourishes by the
sweet influence of your Lordships wise and mild government, the fairer and
fresher Garlands of fame it still presents to your Honor. Since the Muses of
Sion and Helicon chose you their Patron, their Revenues have been so enlarged,
the Libraries furnished, the number of Professors increased, the Buildings
raised and beautified, that you may rightly use the Apothegme of Augustus:
Vrbem lateritiam inveni, relinquam marmoream; or rather in the sacred phrase of
the Scripture we may say of you, You found the Uniuersity built with Sycamores,
you willieaue it built with Cedars: you found the foundations laid with Bricks,
you will leave them laid with Saphyrs. Yet the rearing of these high and
stately buildings does not erect so lasting a monument of your praise, as the
repairing the collapsed discipline, and reviving of our ancient Statutes, the
Characters whereof were more worn out in some men's manners, then in our
books. But above all, the safe custody of that precious depositum of saving
Truth, no way clipped by schism, nor adulterated by Popish heresy, nor embased
by any semipelagian alloy, is to be accounted the Crown of your glory, and our
joys. This is that Palladium, which if we lose, we are all lost: but if we
keep it (notwithstanding the treacheries of Jesuitical Sinons, and Wodden
engines of Antichristian Rome) Troia stabit Priamique arx alta manebit. Of this
our most holy and orthodox ^aith, because your self, and your Noble House have
been always, and are at this day under his Majesty, a principal defender and
protector, I make bold to dedicate to your Honor this polemicall Tractate,
wherein I charge the Church of Rome deeply with no less a crime then Grand
Sacrilege, and to demonstrate (...), I call in for witnesses against her of the
best rank and note from the Apostles times downwara through all centuries, even
to this sixtenth now current. That which the Jesuits have so long clamored
for; and many, in regard of the razing out, and defacing, and burning ancient
records of truth, under the tyranny of Antichrist, have thought infecible, I
have produced a catalogue of visible professors and eminent propugners of a
maine Article of our reformed Religion in all Ages. And if my travel herein,
through many difficult, and unbeaten paths, may be thought profitable to the
Church of God; I will proceed by the same line in other controversies, as God
shall enable, and your Lordship encourage.

Your Lordships humbly devoted, D. F.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THe people of Germany (as Illyricus writes of them) above an hundred years
ago, complained, that Catal. Test. ver. lib. 19. page 1912. olim fuerunt
lignei calices, and aurei sacerdotes, nunc contra sunt aurei calices, and
lignei sacerdotes.
in old time there were in the Church wooden Chalices, but golden Priests, but
now, say they, we have golden Chalices, but wooden Priests. A just complaint
against the ignorant Clergy of Rome, in the latter Ages, especially before
the happy Reformacion of late in our time. Yet the ignorance of Priests was
not so blameable, as their sacrilege was damnable. For these wooden Priests
took away from the peoples use those golden Chalices, and robbed them of that,
which is far more precious, the heavenly liquor contained in them, which is
sacramentally (as we say, but as they believe substantially) the blood of our
Savior, the inualuable price of man's Redemption. The Heathen Strobilus in the
Poet used not his Goddess, Fides, worse, then they do the devout Laietie.
Plaut. in Au^i Sireperco, Fides, mulsi congial^m ple^am tibi faciam fideliam:
id adeo tibi faciam, sed ego mihi bibam vid. Eras A^g. Delphis sacrisicans ipse
comedit carnes.
If I find my treasure, says he, I will offer unto thee a gallon of sweet
wine. Trust me, Faith, I will offer it to thee, but I will drink it every drop
my self. In like sort the Romish Mass Priests upon a thousand Altars offer
many flagons of wine, as they pretend, for the people, as well as themselves:
but they drink it all themselves. And yet I know not whether more impiously,
or ridiculously in their private Masses, and public Communions they rehearse
the words, Bibite Missale Romans in Can. Miss.
ex hoc omnes, Drink ye all of this, that is, in their sense and practice,
Drink ye none of this, but we only, that are Priests. Verily of all the
abuses in the Mass, which is nothing else but a huge heap, and mass of
idolatrous, and superstitious rites, there is none more gross in the doctrine,
or impious in the practice, or absurd in the defense, then this of halfing the
Communion, by withholding the Cup from the people. For it is an open violence
offered to our Lords last Will and Testament, a violation of the words of the
Institution, a mutilation of the blessed Sacrament, a sacrilegious detention of
an holy Legacy from the Sons of God. In other points of difference, our
adversaries lay Council. Constan. s^ss 13. Though Christ did in s^tute in both
^ds, and the (...) ^ch did so ^minister, etc.
claim to the Primitive Church: but in this they yield it us. Against other of
their errors we have frequent testimonies in the former and purer Ages, for
five, or six hundred years after Christ: but few in the later. Against this
insufferable enormity we abound in passages of good Writers in all Ages. In
other controversies, the Romanists, like Sampsons Foxes, are tied fast by the
tails: in this they are loose, and parted asunder, and they take direct
contrary courses. They disprove their own proofs and approve our disproofes
of them. Penelopes telam texunt, and retexunt, they do and undo. There is no
argument of ours against them, which is not confirmed by some of them, no
objection of theirs against us, which is not solued by some of their own side;
as thou may see through the whole, but especially in the last Chapter of this
Discourse. Into which I Embarked my studies the rather upon this occasion.

About two years since I was desired by a person of quality, to confer with
a L. a little before that time seduced by deceitful guides, who first lead the
party out of the right way into the Arminian tract, and afterward into the high
rode of Popery lying not far off. Upon the first motion, I made some
difficulty of giving the party a meeting: because I suspected there might be
shifted into the company, after their manner, some disguized Priest lying in
subsidijs, or in Ambush as it were, that he might suddenly rush in upon the
least show of advantage. Yet after the messenger had assured me, that there
were none in the Ls company, but such as sincerely affected the truth of the
Gospel, I made then no scruple, but presently accompanied him to the Honorable
personages house. Where I found, notwithstanding that the L. was provided of a
second, and that the L. mouth was used only as a trunk to shoot out those
poisoned bullets, which M. Euerard the Priest, and Confessor to this person,
had chammed before with his teeth. Aspis a vipera sumit venenum: the Aspe,
according to the Proverb, borrowed poison of the Viper. The Priest, in a few
passages of speech unawares discovered himself, tanquam sorex suo iudicio;
whereupon I drew back, and was very desirous to break of further conference,
because I expected nothing less, then sincere dealing in a meeting, that was
contrived by fraud, and began to be acted in a masking manner. Yet when I
observed, that M. Euerard grew very insolent, and audacious upon my withdrawing
my self, and diverse Knights and Gentlemen there present, religiously devoted
to the Truth, both advised, and entreated me not to be wanting to the
necessary defense thereof: (Cassium enim hunc sufflaminandum esse) at their
instance, I undertook Master Euerard, and for many hours sometimes opposed,
and sometimes answered in diverse points, but especially in the question most
desired by both parties to be particularly debated, touching the necessity of
Communicating in both kinds. The conference ended, I thought to have heard no
more of it, because it being on my part casual, and extemporall; I conceived
it of little importance either way. But being since informed by an ho nourable
Lord, that M. Euerard after that encounter had not only with his tongue licked
all his wounds whole, but also with a venomous tooth fastened many slanders upon
me, I thought fit to send him the ensewing relation of the Conference,
requiring him to add, or alter, what he thought convenient in his own
arguments, and answers, and then to consigne it with his subscription, as I
meant to do the rest with mine also. Upon the receipt hereof, he promised to
return me an answer with speed: but after many months failing thereof, being
urged again and again, and vpbrayded with his tergiuersations, in the end he
sent me a flat denial by S. P. L. and therein showed himself to be of the
nature of the Crocodile, or of those barbarous soldiers, of whom Muretus
observed, that they Plin. not. hist. l. 8. c. 25. Terribilis haec contra
fugaces bellua, fugax contra insequentes. Muret. Orat. Barbari cedentibus
instant, instantibus cedeunt.
furiously charge them that yield, but presently yield unto them that charge
them: pursuing hard upon a retiring enemy, but flying with all speed from a
pursuing. Now, lest that this my Antagonist should take D. Weston, and M.
Fisher, for two Enfant perdues, or forelorne hopes, for his presidents; who,
when they ought mederi capiti, and answer to the maine, touching the
visibilitie of a Church, professing the Trent Faith 500. years after Christ,
reduuiam curarunt, and leaving quit the matter of Faith, shaped some colorable
answer to impertinent circumstances of fact, and that of no great consequence
either way: I have therefore premised a Challenge to M. Euerard, as also to M.
Fisher, to deal with me in this principal Controversy; and I have set down
the state thereof, and added thereunto such proofs for the truth, as the holy
Scriptures, and the prime Authors in all ages have offered unto me. All which I
submit to thy diligent examination, and judicious censure.

TO MASTER EVERARD, ROMISH PRIEST.
SIr, I doubt not, but that you have heard, or read of the famous Leaper of
Rhodes; who having bragged in the hearing of many, what an incredible leap he
had leapt at Rhodes, was by some there present taken tardie in his tale, and
short in his leap; they bidding him forthwith to leap that great leap
again; (...). Hic Rhodus, hic saltus: See, here is Rhodes, let us, say they, see
the leap. This plat of ground for leaping is all one with Rhodes. In the
Schedule which I sent you two years since by S. P. L. I discribed as it were
our stand at Rhodes, where we took our rise. The question in hand, and the
large scope we had to take our feeze in, the whole Scripture, and the
perpetual practice of the Church. Now if you, (as either your self, or your
Proselytes have reported) at our encounter in Noble-street, so far out-leapt,
not me only, but all the Romish Priests, and Jesuits, that have met with me
upon the like terms: let me entreat you to leap that your great leap
again; That the print of your feet may remain to be viewed of all men by the
Characters of the Press. Had you learned from the holy Apostle, (...), and
ballast Romans 12. 13. Not to think of your self more highly, then you ought to
think, but to be wise. unto sobriety.
your vessel with modest ingenuitie, you could not so lightly with a puff of
vain glory bin driven on those Rocks, at which now you must needs make
shipwreck of your Faith, or of your fame; of your Creed, or of your Credit; of
your Creed, if you stand to the defense of your assertions in the Conference;
of your Credit, if you flinch from them. For mine own part, I profess
sincerely, I would have let your manifold escapes and slips in that
extemporarie dispute slip out of memory; your Solecismes in Logic, as well as
Divinity; your ignorance of your own Romish tenets; your contradicting your
self; your lame distinctions, and crude expressions, which cannot endure the
light, should never have been brought by me to it, had you not been your
self, in the audience of some persons of quality, your own Herald, and
Trumpeter. Had you not like one of those Captains of Alexander, mentioned in
the first book of Maccabees, put a Crown upon your own head, Macc. l. 1. c. 1.
v. 9. After his death, they all put Crowns upon themselves, and so did their
sons after them.
for your noble exploytes that day. Nay, had not you, or some of your
disciples, voiced a miracle upon it, that the places which you alleged against
me out of the Council of Trent, and Cardinal Bellarmine, turned to of
themselves; no sooner had you taken the book in your hands, but presently they
fell open at the chapter and pages, which you were to make use of against me.
Just like as the flattering Senators at Tiberius his table, Asud. I^u. Saty. 4.
Ipse capi voluit, quid apertius* et tamen illi Surgebant cristae.
spoke of the great Turbet ferued in; That the Fish in honor to the Emperor,
offered himself to be taken, as being for many ages preserved for him. If you
had then, M. E. so glorious a day, why do you now make a night of it, by
shaddowing, and vail^ng it in obscurity and silence? why do you not put forth
that Conference your self, or put your hand to the true Relation thereof long
ago sent you. Nihil veritas erubescit, nisi solumodo abscondi; Truth never
blusheth, but when she is hid. She fears nothing, but not to be brought to
her trial. He who knows his coin is pure gold, will never refuse to offer
it to the Goldsmiths Test: because he can loose nothing by it, but shall have
allowance for it. Besides your friends boasting at the Conference, your own
promise in the Conference deeply ingageth you to assoyle the arguments then
urged against your half Communion; whereunto at the present you returned not
so much as half an answer; pleading for your self the short scantling of time,
which gave you not space to wield yonr Catholic buckler. Scitum est enim,
culpam conijcere intempus, cum vltra addere, si maximevelis, non possis. The
Roman Orator told you, it is a handsome put-off, to lay the blame upon the
time, when an advocate has never a word more to say for his Clyent. But
veritas temporis filia, Truth is Times Daughter, and she will justify her
Mother. If in so long a tract of time, as has run since our meeting in
Noble-street, you had fully and punctually satisfied those arguments then left
untouched, you had salued your cause and credit, and made it appear, you were
not wanting to time, but time then to you. But now, since you have broken so
often day after day, and month after month, and by this time year after
year, being fo often challenged of your promise, yea and vpbraided also by S. P.
L. and the Lord T. and others, and in fine, your resolution is, to give no
resolution of those doubts: I will be bold to tell you, that time will now no
more bear your blame, but you and your cause must bear it off with head and
shoulders. You cannot now go back: Lis contestata est, praelium condictum;
The field is pitched, the weapons are chosen: The question agreed upon, is the
Communion in one kind: the proofs must be Scripture, and the perpetual
custom of the Church. If by both your Romish practice be convinced to be
sacrilege in the highest degree, then write hereafter your braggs In su^reption
of the Cup from the Laiety.
in redinke, and let your lines blush for shame, and do you your self
ingeniously confess concerning sacrilege, as Papinian did concerning
fatricide: that it is as difficult and dangerous a matter to defend the murder
of a brother, as to commit it. But on the contrary, if by the evidence of
Scripture, and coustant practice of the Catholic Christian Church, you can
justify your Romish dry communions, you shall not only gain your pretended
Catholic cause, but me also your Proselyte.

D. F.

THE PARTICVLAR CONTENTS OF THE SEVERAL Chapters of this Book.
Chap. 1. THe state of the question concerning the Communion in both kinds, is
set down out of the Harmony of Protestant Confessions on the one sida, and out
of the Canons of the Councels of Constance, Basil, and Trent on the otherside.
Chap. 2. The first Argument for the Tenent of the Reformed Churches, drawn
from Christ's Precept and example in the celebration of the Sacrament, confirmed
by the testimony of Pope Julius the first. Chap. 3. The second Argument for the
Communion in both kinds, drawn from the essence and perfection of this
Sacrament, confirmed by Vasquez the Jesuit. Chap 4. The third argument, drawn
from the Analogy of the sign to the thing signified, confirmed by Gratian the
Canonist. Chap. 5. The fourth argument, drawn from the nature of a banquet or
supper, confirmed by Aquinas, and Vasquez. Chap. 6. The fifth argument, drawn
from the express precept of drinking at the Lords Table, confirmed by the
testimony of Pope Innocen. the 3. Chap. 7. The sixth argument, drawn a Pari
confirmed by Bonauenture the School Divine, and others. Chap. 8. The seventh
argument drawn from the condition and propriety of a Will or Legacy,
confirmed by Iansonius, etc. Chap. 9. The eight argument drawn from the end of
the Sacrament, confirmed by Iac. Rehing. being then a Jesuit. Chap. 10. The
ninth argument drawn from the example of Saint Paul and the Corinthians,
confirmed by Becanus the Jesuit. Chap. 11. The tenth argument drawn from the
uniform and constant practice of the Christian Catholic Church in all Ages.
Sect. 1. The testimonies of the practice of the Church from Christ's assention
to 100. years. Sect. 2. Testimonies in the second Age from 100. to 200. Sect.
3. Testimonies in the third age from 200. to 300. Sect. 4. Testimonies in the
fourth Age from 300. to 400. Sect. 5. Testimonies in the fifth Age from 400. to
500. Sect. 6. Testimonies in the sixth Age from 500. to 600. Sect. 7.
Testimonies in the seventh Age from 600. to 700. Sect. 8. Testimonies in the
eighth Age from 700. to 800. Sect. 9. Testimonies in the ninth Age from 800. to
900. Sect. 10. Testimonies in the tenth Age from 900. to 1000. Sect. 11.
Testimonies in the eleventh Age from 1000. to 1100. Sect. 12. Testimonies in
the tewelfth Age from 1100. to 1200. Sect. 13. Testimonies in the thirteenth
Age from 1200. to 1300. Sect. 14. Testimonies in the fourteenth Age from 1300.
to 1400. Sect. 15. Testimonies in the fifteenth Age from 1400. to 1500. Sect.
16. Testimonies in the sixteenth Age from 1500. to 1600. Sect. vltima. The
confirmation of this argument by the confession of Papists of eminent learning
and worth. Thom. Aquin. Dionysius Carthousianus, Ioh. Eccius, Cassander, Soto,
Ioh. Arborius, Ruardus Tapperus, Alsonsus a Castro, Slotanus, Salmeron,
Gregory de Valentia, and Suarez. Chap. 12. Papists objections for their half
communion from Scripture answered, and retorted. Chap. 13. Papists objections
from Councels answered, and retorted. Chap. 14. Papists objections from sundry
pretended rites and customs of the Church answered, and retorted. Chap. 15.
Papists objections from reason answered, and retorted. Chap. 16. The
Contradictions of Papists in this question noted, and the whole truth for us
delivered out of their own mouths.
The Contens of the Conference.
Of the necessity of Episcopal government. Of ordination by Presbyters, or
Priests in case of necessity. Of the distinction of Bishops, and Priests iure
diuino. Of differences amongst Papists in matter of faith. Of the immaculate
conception of the Virgin Marie. Of the authority of General Councels above
the Pope and econt. Of prayer for the dead. Of the authority of original
Scripture. Of the Communion in both kinds Of the Popes Supremacy. Of mingling
water with wine in the Sacrament. Of the perfection of Scripture.
AN ADVERTISEMENT to the Reader.
IT falls out often with Students in controversies, as with people in the
market: who taking money with them at their going from home, and espying in the
fair some Merchandise they like, when they have driven the Price, and are
drawing out their purse, they find it either picked, or the strings cut: In like
manner, these Students meeting with some pregna^t testimonies alleged out of
the ancient Fathers, or later Writers in Apologies for the Truth, and laying
them up in their memory, or treasury of written notes, when they are to draw
them out, and make use of them against an adversary, turning to the Authors
themselves, out of which those testimonies are quoted, they find either the
whole book, or chapter cut away, or at least, that passage they most spoke
for, rased out by a trick of the Romish Inquisitors Legerdemain. That thou
might not be so served, or have any trick put upon thee in the perusal of
this book, I have here in a Tablet set before thee, all the Authors of note,
with the Editions which I follow: where thou shall undoubtedly find the parcel
of truth thou seek for, and not the empty shells only, wherewith thou
may be abused in other Editions, castrated by the Romanists.

A TABLE OF THE AVTHORS CITED IN THIS BOOK, WITH THE Editions of their Works,
and the time when they are accounted to have flourished.
The first figure notes the Age, the second the Names of the Authors, the
third the Edition.
A.
An. Dom. 920. ABbas Prumiensis vide Regino. 1215. Abbas Vrspergensis. Basil.
1569. 1590. Aegidius de Coninck. Antwerp. 1615. 995. Aelfricus Arch. Episcop.
Cantuariens. Land. 1580. 1241. Albertus magnus. Basil. 1507. 1530. Albertus
Pighius. Colon. 1598. 780. Alcuinus. Lutetiae. 1618. 1240. Alexander de Hales.
Venetijs. 1575. 1543. Alfonsus a Castro. Antw. 1556. 1135. Algerus
Scholasticus. In bib. pat. tom. 12. Col. 1618. 370. Ambros. Mediolanens. Frob.
Basil. 1555. 830. Amalarius Fortunatus. Bib. pat. tom. 9. Col. 1618. 1600.
Andrews Episc. Winton. Land. 1610. 1080. Anselmus Cantuariens. Col. 1533. 340.
Athanas. Alexandrinus. Ex officina Comelin. 1601. 410. August. Hipponens.
Episc. Paris. 1586.
B.
1180. BAlsamon annot. in Council. Lutet. 1620. 1600. Baronius Card. Col. 1621.
370. Basilius Mag. Paris. 1618. 1610. Becanus. Mogunt. 1610. 720. Beda
Presbyter. Basil. 1563. 1580. Bellarminus Card. Ingolstad. ex offici. Sartorij.
1590. 1130. Bernard. Clareual. Basil. 1566. 1014. Berno Abbas Augrinsis. Bib.
pat. tom. 11. Col. 1618. 875. Bertram Presbyt. Land. 1623. 1580. Bilson. Land.
1586. 1260. Bonauentura. Mogunt. 1609.
C.
1520. CAietanus Card. Antwerp. 1612. 1530. Caluinus. Geneuae 1595. 1564.
Cassander. Lugduni. 1608. 80^. Carolus Magnus. Edit. 1549. 92. Clemens Roman.
Antwerp. 1578. 190. Clemens Alexand. Lugdu. Batauoru^. 161^. 400. Chrysostom. Gr.
Etonae. 1613. 1530. Cochlaeus. Mogunt. 1596. 1430. Council. Basilien. Editio
Binij Col. Agrip. 1618. 314. C. Ancyranum. Editio Binnij. Col. Agrip. 1618.
675. C. Bracharens. 3. 691 Caesar-Augustanum. 398. Carthaginens. 813.
Cabilonense 2. 450. Chalcedonens. 1414. Constantiense. 524. I^erdense. 588.
Matiscon. 2. 325. Nicenum primum. 829. Parisiense. 589. Tolet. 2. 599. Tolet.
3. 633. Tolet. 4. 675. Tolet. 11. 1563. Trident. 868. Wormatiens. 1530.
Confess. August. Gene. apud Petr. S. Andr. 1591. 1562. Anglica. 1579. Belgica.
1559. Gallica. 1536. Heluetica. 1551. Saxonica. 1580. Cornel. Iansen. Lugd.
1606. 1450. Cusanus Card. Basil. 1565. 250. Cyprianus. Edit. Pamel. Ant. 1589.
400. Cyrill. Alex. Antw. 1618. 365. Cyrill. Hierosol. Bib. pat. tom. 4. Col.
1616.
D.
1600. DAniel Chamierus. Genesis 1626. 1580. Didacus Nugnus. Venetijs. 1592. 1580.
Didacus de Tapia. Salmant. 1589. 70. Dionysius Areopagit. Ludg. 1570. 1480.
Dionys. Carthus. Paris. 1539. 1563. Dom. Soto. Lugd. 1569. 1564. Dudith. Quinq.
eccles. Land. edit. cum council. Trid. 1620. 1236. Durand. Lugd. 1595.
E
1520. Eckius. Ingolstad. 1535. 1580. Edmund. Camp. Edit. cum Whitak. respon.
Genesis 1610. 1530. Erasmus. Antw. 1540. 1532. Estius. Duaci. 1616. 453. Eucherius
Lugdun. Bibl. Patr. tom. 5. Col. 1618. 420. Eusebius. Emise. Bib. pat. tom. 5.
Col. 1618. 328. Eusebius Cesariensis. Colon. Allobrogum. 1612. 1080. Euthynius.
Pans. 1560.
F
1600. FErdinand. Quir. de Sal. Complut. 1618. 1600. Field. Land. 1606. 1618.
Fisher Ies. Land. 1624. 1570. Fox martyr, log. Land. 1580. 1002. Fulbert
Carnotens. Bib. pat. to. Col. 11. 1618. 1590. Fulk. Land. 1617.
G
1530. GEorg. Cassand. Paris. 1616. 1541. Gerard Lorich. auctoris impensis
edit. 1536. 130. Gratian. Paris. 1507. 600. Greg. mag. Papa. Froben. bas. 1564.
726. Greg 2. Papa. Tom. Council. Bin. Col. 1618. 731. Greg. 3. Tom. Council. 3.
Bin. Col. 1618. 580. Greg. Turonens. bib. pat. tom. 6. Col. 1618. 1590. Greg.
Valent. Lutetiae. 1614. 1060. Guitmund. Bib. pat. tom. 11. Col. 1618.
H.
1591. HArmonia Confessionum. Geneu. apud Pet. S. Andr. 1591. 1564. Harding.
Impress. cum Iuello. Land. 1611. 840. Haymo. Halbarstad. Argent. 1519. 1590.
Hesselius. Louan. 8. 1564. 390. Hieronymus Stridon. Antw. 1579. 1090.
Hildebert. Cenomanens. Bib. pat. tom. 12. Col. 1618. 355. Hilarious Pictauiens.
Paris. 1605. 1554. Hosius Stanis. Col. 1584. 1262. Hugo. Card. Bas. 1600. 1136.
Hugo de Sanct. Vict. Mogunt. 1617. 1054. Humbert de Sylua Card. Bib. pat. tom.
11. Col. 1618.
I.
1410. IAcobellus Misno. Citat. a Dd. de Tap. Salmant. 1589. 100. Ignatius
Graecolat. Geneuae. 1623. 1580. Illyricus, vide M. 1216. Innocent. 3. Pontifex.
Louan. 1566. 1540. Ioh. Benedict. Paris. 1552. 1530. Ioh. Arboreus. Paris.
1540. 1530. Ioh. Calvin. vid. C. 1411. Ioh. Gerson. Paris. 1514. 1414. Ioh.
Hus. Noremberg. 1584. 1596. Ioh. Maldonat. Mogunt. 1602. 1560. Ioh. Iuellus.
Land. 1611. 1604. Ioh. Munster in Wecleg. Francofurt. 1621. 180. Irenaeus Lugd.
Epis. Col. Agrip. 1596. 630. Isodorus Hispal. Paris. 1601. 150. Justin Martyr
Graecolat. Lutetiae. 1615. Justinian. Ies. Lugd. 1612.
L.
1580. LAurent. Humf. Land. 1582. 1061. Lanfranc. de Euch. Bib. Pat. tom. 11.
Col. 1618. 450. Leo Mag. Bib. pat. tom. 5. Col. 1618. 1600. Lorinus Jesuit.
Col. Agrip. 1617. 1570. Lucas Brugens. Antw. 1612. 1520. Lutherus. Basil. 1540.
1320. Lyranus. Venetijs. 1604.
M.
370. MAcarius Egypt. Bib. pat. tom. 4. Col. 1618. 80. Martialis Lemou. Lug.
1572. 1540. Marcus Flac. Illyric. Ex offici. Jacob. Stoer. 1608. M. T. Cicero.
Colon. Allobr. 1616. 1520. Mart. Luther, vide L. 1565. Mart. Chemnis. Francof.
ad Moen. 1574. 1077. Micrologus. Bib. pat. tom. 11. Col. 1618. 1600. Morton.
Land. 1606. 1610. Mockettus. Land. 1617.
N.
375. NAzianzenus. Gr. Lat. Lutet. 1609. Nugnus, vid. D.
O.
1110. ODo Cameracens. Bib. pat. tom. 12. Col. 1618. 1080. Occumenius. Gr.
Veronae. 1532. 230. Origenes Adamant. Basil. 1570. 1530. Orthuinus Gratius.
Dauen. 1535.
P.
820. PAscasius Rudbertus. Bib. pat. tom. 9. Col. Agrip. 1618. 1150. Petrus
Cluniacens. Bib. pat. tom. 12. part. 2. Col. 1618. 1320. Petrus de Palude.
Paris. 1530. 1140. Petrus Lombard. Sub praelo Ascensiano. 1535. 1610. Pet.
Molinaeus. Land. 1620. 1590. Pet. Su^. Polanus. Author. Hist. Conc. Trid.
August. Trinob. 1620. 100. Plinius Mayor. Franco. ad Maenum. 1599. 1530.
Philippus Melancthon. Wittebergae. 1623.
Q.
90. QVintilianus. Lugd. 1560. Quinque Eccles. vide Dudith.
R.
835. RAbanus Maurus. Lutet. 1534. 620. Rehing Jacob. Tubingae. 1621. 869.
Regino Abb. Prumiens. Argent. 1609. 560. Rhemigius Rhemens. Bib. pat. tom. 10.
Col. 1618. 1280. Ricard. de Med. vil. Brixiae. 1591. 1360. Ricard. Armacanus.
1600. Riuetus Andr. Saumur. 1616. 910. Rodulphus Flauiacens. Bib. pat. tom. 10.
Col. 1618. 1530. Ruardus Tapperus. Louan. 1555. 1119. Rupertus Abbas Tuitie.
Col. 1528.
S.
1580. SAlmeron Jesuit. Col. 1902. 1590. Suarez Jesuit. Venetijs. 1597. 950.
Steph. Eduensis. Bib. pat. tom. 10. Col. 1618.
T.
200. TErtullianus. Antwerp. 1584. 440. Theodoretus. Col. 1612. 1430. Thomas
Waldensis. Venetijs. 1571. Thom. Aquin. vide A. Thom. Mort. vide M. 1070.
Theophilact. Basil. 1525. 1580. Tolet. Card. Col. 1569. 1590. Theodo. Beza.
Geneuae. 1598. 390. Tripartita historia. Basil. 1528.
V.
1572. VAdianus Aphoris. Euch. 1536. 1600. Vasquez. Antwerp. 1621. 1240.
Vincentius Histor. Venetijs. 1591.
W.
1430. WAldensis, vide T. 849. Walafridus Strabo. Bib. pat. tom. 9. Col. 1618.
1380. Widford contra Wiclif. Dauen. 1535. Edit. ab Orthuino Gratio.
Z.
1105. ZAcharias Chrysopol. Bib. pat. tom. 12. Col. 1618.
FINIS.
I entreat the Gentle Reader, before the reading hereof, to correct these few
faults in some copies, which alter the sense; the lesser escapes are annexed at
the end.
Page 21. lin. 22. add, his body. 24. l. 23. for they, read, l. 36. l. 15.
add, to be spurious, and therefore ought, 44. l. 7. and therefore they cannot
be se^ed from the Communion. 67. l. 15 r. infundatur. 107. l. penult. r. for it
is that, which w^. 121. l. penult. r. now, for, na^. 128. l. 7 r. both, for
one, 146. l. 28. r. and, for or. 147. l. 15. r. 190. for 90. 176. l. 13. r.
repealed. 2^0. l. 17. r. no error. 226. l. 6. r. to me, for some. 230. l. 25.
dele, Etym. fill. dextr. 271. l. 9. r. Bishops at Carthage. 278. l. (...) r. she
for he, 298. l 11. add quoth M. Featly. l. 23. r. then for this. 302. l. 19.
r. Testament of blood, or blood a Testament.

THE GRAND SACRILEGE OF THE CHVRCH OF ROME.
CHAP. I. The state of the question, touching the necessity of Communicating
in both kinds.
Pliny Plin. (...). 8. c. 18. Cameli implentur, cum bibendi occasio est and in
praeteritum and in futurum obturbata proculcatione prius aqua, aliter potu non
gaudent. Apoc. 18. v. 12.
writes of the Camels, that they like not clear water, but usually foul and
trouble the stream, wherein they are to drink. Such is the manner of our
muddie Popish writers, who are sent to us from Rome and Rhemes, laden like
Camels with Babylonish merchandise: they trouble the waters of strife, and for
the most part confound the states of all the questions, which they enter into,
or mainely contend for; and as in other Controversies, so in this of entire
Communicating, they begin their doubling and falsifying at the very setting
down of the point of difference between us.

Lib. 4. De sacra. Euch. c. 20.
Bellarmine and Hom. de sacramento. 33.
Eccius state the question thus; whether it be necessary for all men to
Communicate in both kinds: De sacr. Euch. c. 40.
Hosius and Artic. 15. de commun. sub vtraque specie. Papists iugling in the
state of the question.
Tapperus add, to salvation; as if we affirmed, that Communicating in both
kinds were simply necessary to salvation: this is not the true hinge, upon
which this question turns. For we doubt not, but that the children of the
faithful, especially dying baptized, as also that abstemij, such as cannot
drink wine, and other believers that are prevented by death before they
participate of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, if they prepare themselves
for it, and desire it, may be saved without actual Communicating in both, or
either kind. The wilful contempt, not the inevitable defect of the Sacrament
is damnable. We conceive no more necessity of drinking of the cup of
blessing, then of eating the sacramental bread, which is not absolutely
necessary to salvation, no not to those which are in riper years. The
spiritual eating of Christ's blessed body and blood, is simply and absolutely
necessary to salvation; but not the sacramental, without which many blessed
Martyrs and Saints have been saved. The term necessary, is seldom, or never
used by Protestants in this argument, or if they use it, they mean necessary,
ratione praecepti, not medij: They enquire not how necessary a means
communicating in both kinds is to salvation: but how necessary a command Christ
has laid upon all Communicants, to receive the Sacrament in both kinds.

They should have propounded the question thus: Whether the people are not
bound by The true state of the question.
Christ's precept to Communicate in both kinds? or, if they will needs retain
the word, necessary, in unfolding this controversy; whether it be not as
necessary for the people to drink of the Cup, as to eat of the Bread? or
whether it be not as necessary, in regard of Christ's institution, that the
people communicate in both kinds, as that the Priest, the minister, or as they
speak, the Conficient; or maker of this sacrament? Or whether the administering
of this sacrament in both kinds to the people, and priests also, none
Conficients be not so necessary, that it cannot be otherwise administered
without sin and violation of our Lords most holy Institution?

The Romish tenent, to which all Papists, under pain of a curse, are bound to
subscribe, is plainly and expressly set down in the Canons of three
Councels: at Constance, Basil, and Trent. In the Decernit, and declarat
superista materia reuerendissi. in Christo patribus, and Dominis Patriarchis,
Primatibus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, and eorum in spiritualibus vicarijs
vbilibet constitutis processus esse dirigendos, in quibus in ijs committatur,
and mandetur auctoritate huius sacri concilij, sub poena excommunicationis, vt
effectualiter puniat eos qui ad communicandum populum sub vtraque specie, panis
and vini exhortati fuerint, and sic faciendum esse docuerint.
Council of Constance, sess. 13. This Synod does decree and declare concerning
this matter, that process be directed to the most reverend Fathers in Christ,
the Lord Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops and Bishops, and their vicars in
spirituals, wheresoever by them appointed. In which process, by the authority
of the holy Council, let them be enjoined and commanded effectually to punish
those that observe not this Decree: viz. Who exhort the people to Communicate
in both kinds, or teach that they ought so to do. In the Council of Decernit
and declarat quod fideles Laici, sieve Clerici Communicantes and non
conficientes non astringuntur ex praecepto Domini ad suscipiendum sub vtraque
specie panis and vini sacrosanctu^ Eucharistiae sacramentum.
Basile, sess. 30. This Synod does decree and declare, that the faithful
Laics or Clarks communicants, and not conficients, are not bound by our Lords
command to receive the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist under both forms or
kinds, viz. of Bread and Wine. In the Council of Declarat and docet nullo
diuino precepto laicos, and cl^ricos non conficientes obligari ad Eucharistiae
sacramentu^ sub vtraque specie sumendum. Et siquis dixerit, Dei praecepto,
omnes and singu^ Christi fideles ^ramque spe^iem sanctae Eu^haristiae
sacramenti sumere debere, anathe^a sit.
Trent, sess. 21. c. 1. The Synod declares and teaches, that Laics and
Clarks non conficient, are by no divine precept bound to receive this most holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist in both kinds, and if any say that all and every of
the faithful by Gods command ought to receive the Sacrament in both kinds; let
them be accursed.

The doctrine of the Reformed Churches cannot be more certainly gathered, then
out of the harmony of their orthodoxall confessions, which were penned by most
judicious Divines at the first, and are at this day subscribed by those that
are admitted to any degree of function in each particular Church.

To begin with the Church of England, to whose Articles of Religion all
Graduats, and Ministers of the Word profess their assent and consent, even by
interposing an oath. In the 30. Article thus we read; Doctrina Eccl.
Anglicanae. p. 132. artic. 30. Calix domini non est denegandus laicis, vtraque
enim pars Dominici sacramenti, ex Christi institutione and praecepto, omnibus
Christianis ex aquo adminstrari debet.
The cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the Lay people, for both the parts
of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's ordinance and commandment, ought to be
ministered to all Christian men alike.

In the Datur laicis vtraque pars sacramenti in coena Domini, quia sacramentum
institutu^ est non solum pro part Ecclesiae sc. pro presbyteris: sed etiam pro
reliqua ecclesia. Igitur and populus vtitur sacramento, sicut Christus
instituit, and quid Christus inquit, Mat. 26. bibite ex hoc omnes, vbi
manifest ait de poculo, vt omnes bibant: and nequis cauilari possit, quod id
tantum ad sacerdotes pertineat, Pauli ordinatio ad Corinthios testatur, totam
ecclesiam communiter vsam esse vtraque part.
Confession of Auspurg, Article 2. both parts of the Sacraments are given to
the Laiety in the Lords Supper, because the Sacrament was instituted not for a
part of the Church only, viz. the Priests: but for the rest of the Church
also: and truly Christ says, Math. 26. Drink you all of this: where he
expressly commands, all to drink of the Cup; and lest any man might cavil,
saying, that that precept belonged only to Priests, Saint Paul's ordinance to
the Corinthians testifies; That the whole Church ordinarily, or in common, used
both kinds. In the Norunt omnes, coe^am Domini ita institutam esse, vt detur
populo integrum sacramentum, sicut scriptum est; bibite ex hoc omnes; n^ta est
and consuetudo veteris ecclesiae Latinae and Graecae ideo fatendum est,
prohibitionem vnius partis iniustam esse, legitima hominum testamenta violare
iniustum est; cur filij Dei testamentum sanguine ipsius ob signatum episcopi
violent?
Saxonik Article 15. All men know, that the Lords Supper was so instituted at
the first, that the whole Sacrament was given to the people, as it is written,
Drink you all of this. The custom of the ancient Churches both Greek and
Latin are well known; therefore we must confess, that the prohibiting of one
part thereof is unjust. It is unlawful to violate the last will and Testament
of men, if it be lawfully made; why then do the Bishops violate the Testament
of the Son of God, sealed with his blood? In the Bohemian, c. 14. Christus
disertis verbis dixit, accipite, edite, and rursus cum similiter separatim, and
distinct poculum porrexit, dicens, accipite, bibite ex hoc omnes; hic est
sanguis meus. Ita igitur secundum hoc mandatum, corpus and sanguis Domini
nostri Jesus Christi distribui. and a fidelibus, seu credentibus Christianis
communiter percipi debet.
Christ said in express words, Take, eat, this is my body: and in like manner
when he gave them the Cup by it self, and distinctly said, Take, Drink ye all
of this, this is my blood: therefore according to this Commandment, the body
and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ ought to be distributed and received by all
believers in common.

In the latter Improbamus illos, qui alteram speciem poculum inquam Domini
fidelibus subtraxerunt. Grauiter enim peccant contra institutione^ Dom.
dicentis bibite ex hoc omnes, id quod ad panem non ita express dixit.
Heluetian confession, cap. 21. we dislike these, who have taken away one part
of the Sacrament, viz. the Cup of the Lord from the faithful, for they
grieuouslly offend against the Lords institution, who said, Drink ye all of
this, which he spoke not in so express words of the bread.

The Doctrine and practice of the reformed Churches, as it is expressed in
these Confessions, is solidly and learnedly justified against the Romish
adversaries by De captiui. babyl.
Luther, Apol. confess. August.
Melancton, Lib. 4. instit. c. 1. par. 41. and deinceps ad 50.
Calvin, Contra Hard. art. 2.
Jewel, Chem. par. 2. ad 5. sessio. Council. Triden.
Chemsius, De Eucharistia lib. 1. cap. 10. 11. 12.
Plessis, Supremi part. 4. page 496.
Bilson, Cath. orthod. tract. 3. quaest. 21.
Riuet, Buck. of faith, part. 2. sect. 35. 36. and apol. coen. Dom. 22.
Moulin, Tom. 4. resp. ad. Bellar. 1.
Chamierus, Humfr. resp. ad. camp. rat. 3.
Humfrey, and others: from whose Hiues I have taken much honey, yet not upon
trust, nor without trying it, but tracing the diligent Bees in the Paradise of
God, the holy Scripture, and the Garden of Ecclesiastical Writers, even to
each flower, whence they gathered it.

CHAP. II. The first Argument, drawn from Christ's Precept and example in the
celebration of this Sacrament.
Whatsoever Christ commanded and did in the first celebration of this Supper,
ought continually to be observed and practiced in the Church:

But Christ in the first celebration of the Supper, gave the Cup, and commanded
it to be given to all there present, that before had received, the bread:

Therefore the giving of the Cup to all Communicants at the Supper, ought
perpetually to be observed, and practiced in the Church.

The proposition is gathered out of Luke 22. 19. This do ye in remembrance of
me: and 1. Cor. 11. 25. This do ye as often as you drink in remembrance of me:
and ver. 26. as often as you eat of this bread, and drink this Cup, you show
the Lords death till he come. In which words, the Apostle evidently implies,
that the Commandment, this do in remembrance of me, extends even to Christ's
second coming. And verily, if Christ's precepts and actions in the first
celebration of this Sacrament, were not a law binding the Church to do the
like in all succeeding ages; neither the Apostles themselves, nor the Church
after them should have had any warrant at all to celebrate the Lords Supper
after his death. Which to affirm were absurd impiety, or as Saint Augustine
speaks in a case of far less importance, most insolent madness.

The assumption is set down in the very letter, totidem verbis, Mat. 26. 27. He
took the Cup, and gave it to them, saying; Drink you all of this. Mark. 14.
23: And he took the Cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it them, and
they all drank of it. Certainly, I persuade my self, that our Savior
expressed the note of universality, viz. in delivering the Cup to all, saying:
Drink you all of this, and not so in giving the bread, of set purpose, to
prevent that abuse, which the Romish Church of late has brought in, by taking
away the Cup. As in like manner the Apostle says of marriage: It is honorable
in, or amongst all men. Heb. 13. 4. and he says not so of virginity, or single
life; although it be most true, that single life, or virginity is, (...), that
is, precious, or honorable; because the holy Ghost foresaw, that some heretics
would deny marriage to be honorable amongst all, and prohibit it to some
men, viz. the Clergy. Which two texts of Scripture the Romanists lewdly
pervert, and ridiculously contradict themselves in the interpretation of them,
extending all to the Laietie in the one, and excluding the Clergy; and
extending all to the Clergy in the other, and excluding the laietie. Marriage
is honorable among all, say they, that is, all, save Priests; Drink you all of
this, that is, all, save the people. In restraining all in both places, they
make of omnes, non omnes, and so contradict the text, and by expounding all
sometimes of the people, not Priests, sometimes of Priests, and not people,
they contradict themselves. For the restriction of all in this place to Priests
administering only, I forbear the further refuting of it; because all the
arguments, that follow in general, overthrow it, and in particular, and
expressly it is refelled in the Conference annexed hereunto.

This whole argument is confirmed by the testimony of Pope Julius, set down
in the Canon Iul.
Law, and therefore delivered Magister veritatis etc. nulli lac, sed panem
tantum, and calicem sub hoc sacramento cognoscitur dedisse. Ab ips^ sonte
veritatis probabi^ a quo ordinata ipsa sacramentorum mysteria precesse^ant.
ex Cathedra. De consecrat. did. 2. There he proves, that bread and wine
only ought to be given in the Sacrament, and not milk; because Christ the
master of Truth, when he commended the Sacrament unto his Disciples at his last
Sup^er, gave milk to none, but bread and the cup only. The contrary practice
viz. of them that give milk in the Sacrament, how repugnant it is to the
Evangelical, and Apostolical Doctrine and custom of the Church, will easily
be proved from the fountain of truth; from whom the ordination of these
mysteries did proceed. The Pope in this place draws an argument from Christ's
institution, and practice at his last Supper both affirmatively, and
negatiuely. Christ gave bread and wine to his Disciples, therefore we ought so
to do, he gave not milk, therefore we ought not. Christ is the Fountain of
truth, he is the Master of truth, he is the Author of the Sacrament; therefore
infers the Pope, and in this particular infallibly; nothing must be done in
the administration of this Sacrament, otherwise then Christ did, and commanded
at his last Supper. The Romanists cannot confirm the Popes argument, but they
must needs confirm ours in this point, they cannot infirm, or weaken ours,
but they must needs weaken his, and not his only, but that renowned Doctor,
and glorious Martyr, Saint Cyprians also; who fights with the same weapon
against the heretics called Epist. 63. Nec ab eo, quod Christus magister and
praecepit, and gessit, humana and nouella institutione discedere.
Aquarij, wherewith we do against the papists: No man may under color of new,
or humane constitutions depart from that which Christ our Master did and
taught: and a little after: If in the Sacrifice which Christ offered, Christ
alone is to be followed, it behooves us to obey and do that, which Christ
did, and commanded to be done, seeing he himself says, in the Gospel, if ye
do that which I command you, I will not say, that you are servants, but
friends, etc. Yet some out of ignorance, or simplicity in sanctifying the Lords
Cup, and ministering to the people, do not that which Jesus Christ the Author
and Teacher of this sacrifice did and taught. If any Cavil, against this
argument, that Christ sat, or leaned at his last Supper, gave the Sacrament
after supper, and that unto 12, and those men, and no women, and yet we are not
bound so to do; and consequently, that the argument from Christ's example is
not of absolute necessity for us to follow, but may be dispensed with by the
Church:

I answer; first, that the argument proceeds upon substantial acts, and not
circumstances, such as are the time, and the place, and the number of
communicants. Now that the Cup is a substantial part of the Sacrament,
appears both by Christ's blessing, and consecrating it, and the words of the
institution: This Cup is the new Testament in my blood: neither can the
adversaries deny it, who account it no less then See infra. c. 7.
sacrilege in a Priest to consecrate, or receive the Sacrament in one kind
only. 2. Our argument is not grounded only upon that which Christ did, but
upon that which Christ did, and taught, or commanded should be done. Now as
Christ took the bread, and broke it, and said; Do this: so in like manner he
took the Cup, and said: Drink ye all of this, but Christ said not in like
manner, sit you down, or lie, when you take the sacrament, or receive it late
at night, or administer it to such a number of men only. What he did and
taught, as Saint Cyprian soundly collects, must be perpetually observed in the
Church; the circumstances used at his last Supper he did not command us to
use; but the substantial acts of administering the Sacrament in both kinds.
Fecitet Docuit, he both did, and taught us to do. Wherefore as Saint Confess.
lib. 9. c. 2. Contradictionibus flatus inflammare acrius possit, non extinguere.
August: speaks in a like kind. All the contradictions of our adversaries
cauilling breath serves rather to kindle more, then blow out or quench the
fire of truth in this argument burning up the stubble of Popish Canons and
constitutions, repugnant to Christ's Doctrine and practice at his last Supper.

CHAP. III. The second Argument drawn from the essence and perfection of this
Sacrament.
THe Sacrament of the Eucharist is not entire, and perfect without the Cup.

The faithful people capable of it, and prepared for it ought to receive the
Sacrament entire and perfect:

Therefore the faithful people capable of the Sacrament, and prepared for it,
ought to receive the Cup.

The proposition is evident, by the institution of this Sacrament, and the
confession of our adversaries: for this Sacrament was instituted in two kinds,
bread and wine: as Christ blessed the one Element, so the other; as he
commanded the one to be taken and eaten: so likewise or in like manner Luke 22.
20. he commanded the other to be taken, and drunk. As a man that has but one
eye, or one ear, or one arm, or leg, is not a perfect man, but a maimed,
because nature intend all those organs to be double; and the operation is
more complete and perfect in both organs, then it can be in one only: In like
manner he cannot be said to receive the Sacrament entire, and perfect who
receives it but in one kind only: because Christ instituted it in two kinds,
and ordained the full significancie and efficacy to be complete in both, and
not in one only. Wherefore Ideo ad sacramenti huius integritatem duo
concurrunt; sc. spiritualis cibus, and potus. and part. 3. q. 80. ar. 12. ex
part ipsius sacramenti conuenit, quod vtrumque sumatur. scil. corpus and sang.
quia in vtroque consistit perfectio sacramenti.
Aquinas part. 3. q. 63. art. 1. concludes. Therefore two things concur to
the integrity of this Sacrament; viz. sprituall meat and drink. And Perfecta
refectio non est in pane tantum sed in vtroque. ideo non in vno tantum perfect
signatur, Christo vt reficiens, sed in vtroque. Et post: vt perfecta esset, and
signaretur redemptio, and ex hoc perfecta refectio, debuit signari corpus in
pane, and anima, cuius seeds est in sanguine, in vino. g Sacramentum non nifi
in vtraque specie, quantum ad integram significationem perficitur. item Soto in
sent. distinct. 8. artic. 2. Negatur, dum sumitur solum corpus, sumi totum
sacramentum, quo ad integrum eius repraes^ntationem. h Hesiod. l. 1. (...). *
This is not to ^eceiue the Lords Suppe^.
Bonauenture in 4. sententiarum. Distinct. 11. part. 2. art. 1. quest. 2. A
perfect refection or repast is not in bread only, but in bread and drink;
therefore Christ is not perfectly signified, as feeding our souls in one
kind, but in both. And (...) Soto art. 12. quest. 1. in 12. distinct. The
Sacrament, as concerning the entire signification thereof, is not perfect, but
in both kinds. Doubtless half a man is not a man, nor half an eye an eye,
nor half a ship a ship. Neither can that which is half to one, be the whole
to another. Wherefore since the Papists confess, that this Sacrament is not
entire, or whole to a Priest receiving it in one kind only, neither can it be
whole to the Laietie, unless we take Hesiods riddle for sound divinity,
(...), The half is not then the whole.

The assumption cannot be denied by any Christian. Saint Paul implies, 1. Cor.
11. That they which receive the Sacrament otherwise then they ought, receive
not the Lords Supper. And S. Ambr. says Indignum esse dicit Domino, qui aliter
mysterium celebrat, quam ab eo traditum est. Non enim potest deuotus esse, qui
aliter praesumit, quam datum est ab authore.
expressly: comment. in 11. cap. 1. ad Corint. The Apostle says he is
unworthy of the Lord, who celebrates this mystery otherwise, then it was
delivered by him: for he cannot be religious, who presumes to receive it
otherwise, then it was given by the author.

This whole argument is confirmed by the testimony of their accomplished
Jesuit Vnaquaeque species huius sacramenti, quatenus sacramenti pars est, suam
habet significationem diuersam, cum vt supposuimus, significationem in
sacramento nouae legis consequatur efficacitas: quia id efficient quod
significant hinc sequitur, vnamquamque speciem in hoc sacramento suum effectum
per se operari.
Vasques, who, t. 3. in 3. disp. 215. c. 2. reasons thus: each kind in this
sacrament, as it is apart of the sacrament, has a diverse signification by it
self; and since, according to our former suppositions, in the Sacraments of the
new law the efficacy follows the signification; for they effect that which
they signify: it ensues thereupon, that each kind in this Sacrament does
produce, or work its own effect by it self. Upon which inferences of his, I
collect that, which peradventure he little expected, but can never with all his
sophistical slights avoid, that the Church of Rome robs the Laiety of, or
to speak more properly, detaineth unjustly from them an invaluable Jewel, viz.
some measure, or degree at lest But Vasq. in. 3. disp. 215. cap. 3. comes off
with a poor shift, saying: Concedimus Laicos, quibus alteraspecies negatur,
aliqua quidem grati^ def^audari, non tamen necessaria ad salutem: We grant that
the Laypeople, to who^ the one kind is denied, are def^auded of some grace, but
not a grace necessary to salvation, by which reason they may take away the
bread also from them; because the grace ^btained by receiving it, is no more
necessary to salvation, then that which is obtained by receiving the Cup.
of sanctifying grace. And what amends can they make for so insufferable wrong
done unto them? If each part of this Sacrament, have a signification a part,
and an operation a part in the soul, the Roman Church by taking away one part
of the Sacrament, depriueth them of the signification and operation thereof.
How Vasques position can stand with their doctrine of concomitancie, let him
look to it. It is no small advantage, that the truth gains by her enemies,
falling foul one upon another.

CHAP. IIII. Argument 3. drawn from the Analogy of the thing signified to the
sign.
THe sign, viz. the Cup ought to be denied to none, upon whom God conferreth
the grace signified by the sign:

Upon all faithful Christians God conferreth the grace signified by that sign:

Therefore that sign, viz. the Cup ought to be denied to no faithful
Christian.

The proposition is deduced from the words of Acts 10. 47.
S. Peter, Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which
have received the holy Ghost as well as we? Surely to whom God intends the
end, he intends the use of the means. Lor. in hac verba.
Lorinus out of the ordinary gloss conceiues the Apostle to use an argument a
minori, which he thus reduces to form.

If God has given that which is greater, no man ought to forbid the lesser:

But God has given them the holy Ghost, which is the greater;

Therefore none ought to deny them the baptism of water, which is the less.

This is all one, as if when the Pope has bestowed an Archbishopric upon any
Bishop, the Datary should deny him the Pale: or when the University has
conferred the degree of Doctor, the Beadle should deny him his Scarlet Hoode:
or when the Captain has admitted a soldier into his band, any under officer
should forbid him to wear his colors. As incongruous, if not far more, it is,
when God the Lord and Master conferres the thing signified by the Sacrament,
for man, the servant, and minister to deny the sign.

The asumption is easily proved; for the thing signified by the Cup, is either
the Communion of Christ's blood, as the Apostle testifies; The 1. Cor. 10. 16.
Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ? Or it is remission of sins by the bloodshedding of Christ, as the
words of the institution imply; This is the blood of the new Testament, which
is shed for man for the remission of sins: Neither of which benefits the
Romanists dare to exclude the Laietie from. They have union with Christ by
faith, therefore Communion of his blood: they receive the remission of sins
by Christ's blood shed upon the Cross, with what color then can the Romanists
take away from them the Cup, the sign and pledge thereof? if they except
against this argument, that children, and abstemious persons, such as cannot
brook wine, receive the thing signified, viz. remission of sins, and
participate of Christ's blood, and yet A Popish cavil.
drink not of the holy Cup; the answer is easy; None are by this argument
meant, but such as desire the Cup, and are capable thereof: such are not either
children, or abstemious persons. Let the Opposition then, or Mayor be
understood as it is intended, with this explication, or limitation: No
faithful Christians ought to be denied the Cup, upon whom God conferreth the
thing signified by the Cup. viz. none that desire it, and are capable thereof,
and can The answer thereunto.
receive it according to Christ's ordinance, such are the faithful people
ordinarily, and so the former Cavil vanishes into smoke.

This whole argument is confirmed by a Canon, extant in Si quoties cunque
effunditur sanguis Christi, in remissionem peccatorum effunditur, debeo illum
semper sumere, vt semper peccata mihi dimittantur.
Gratian de consecrat: did: 2. If as often as the blood of Christ is shed, it
is shed for the remission ofsins: I ought always to take it, that always
sins may be forgiven me. This Gratian gathered as a flower out of Saint
Ambrose his works: but behold a greater then Saint Ambrose, our Lord and
Savior implies as much, saying, This is my blood which is shed for you, and
for many for the remission of sins; Drink ye of it, for it is shed for you,
and the remission of your sins. These therefore for whom Christ's blood was
shed, and they who have obtained remission of sins by it, ought by the reason
annexed to this precept, drink of it. And I persuade my self, that no learned
Papist has so little charity in his heart, or so much brass in his brow, as
doctrinally to deliver, that Christ's blood was not shed sor the Laietie, or
that they receive not remission of sins thereby, as well as Priests.

CHAP. V. The fourth argument drawn from the nature of a banquet, or supper.
IN every supper, feast, or banquet, the cup is to be given to the guests, that
they may drink as well as eat:

The Sacrament of the Eucharist is a supper, feast, or banquet:

Therefore in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the Cup is to be given to all the
communicants, that they may drink as well as eat.

The proposition is evident to sense, and is readily assented unto by the
adversaries, Aquinas Ad corporalem refectionem duo requiruntur sc. cibus, qui
est alimentum siccum, and potus, qui est alimentum humidum. r Datur sacramentum
sub duplici specie, sc. panis and vini: vt per hoc spiritualis refectio
perfect designetur. s 1. Cor. 11. 20.
part. 3. q. 73. To a corporal refection, or repast, two things are required,
viz. meat, which is a dry nourishment, and drink which is a moist. And y
Lyranus in 1. Corin. 11. The Sacrament is given in two kinds, or forms, viz.
of bread and wine, that thereby a perfect spiritual refection might be
signified.

The asumption is testified by a cloud of witnesses: by Saint Paul; When you
come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper;
for in eating, every one takes before hand his own supper. By Saint Cyprian,
who intituleth his Treatise of this Sacrament, De coena Domini, of the Lords
Supper: by Tertullian, who says, what shall her husband sing to her, what
shall she sing to her husband? Audiat aliquid Dei coena de taberna, de
gehenna? quae Dei mentio, quae Christi invocatio?
shall Gods Supper hear something from the Tavern, from hell? what mention of
God? what calling upon Christ can there be there? etc. By Saint Ierom epist.
14. ad Damasum, Uitulus saginatus ipse saluator est, cuius quotidie carne
vescimur, cruore^ potamus: hoc conuiuium quotidie, celebratur quotid e pater
fi^um recipit.
pa. 409. * the fat calfe is our Savior, whose flesh we daily eat, and drink
his blood; this banquet is every day kept, every day the Father receives his
Son. By Soto, art. 12. quest. in 12. did. Sacramentum nisi in (...) raque so
c^e non (...); est enim conu^tum ex cibo and po^u constans.
The Sacrament is not perfect, but in both kinds; for it is a banquet
consisting of meat and drink Nay, by the whole Church of Rome in her Offices,
and public Liturgy, in the Antiphony sung at the Vespers, on Corpus Christi
day, O sacrum conuiuium.
O holy banquet; and in the prayer after the Communion, in the feastof Cosimus
and Damianus.

This whole argument is confirmed by Hoc sacramentum sub duplici specie est
institutum, vt ^sset instar conui^ij: ide^que de illo dix^t hristus: caro mea
ve^est cibus, and sanguis vere est potus Nam in conuiuio ni^il a^ud est, nisi
cibus and potus; quorum quilibet su^ pec^iari modo resi^t, and ad nutri^nem.
and aug^entum cond^it. Vasqu. in Aquin. part. 3. quaest. 80. art. 12 disp. 215.
Vasques the Jesuit, disp. 215. The Sacrament is instituted in both kinds,
viz. bread and wine, that it might be a kind of banquet. Therefore Christ
speaking of himself says, My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed: now in a banquet there is nothing but me ^t and drink, whereof each
refreshes the body after a several manner, and conduces to the nourishment
and increase thereof. Whereupon he infers, that each kind in the Sacrament
has a peculiar and proper signification and operation. This testimony of
Vasques comes home to the point; for he confesses all that is enforced by
this argument: first, that a banquet consists of drink as well as of meat:
Secondly that the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist is a banquet; Thirdly,
that the several kinds of food in this banquet nourish after a several
manner; from whence, who sees not, that it will follow that the Laietie which
are debarred of one kind of viand in this banquet, and receive only the
other, cannot participate the full effect and operation of the Sacrament, which
is a perfect spiritual refection, or nourishment.

CHAP. VI. The fifth Argument drawn from the precept of drinking.
NOne can drink in the Sacrament without the Cup:

All that communicate, ought to drink in the Sacrament:

Therefore all that communicate, ought to have the Cup given them.

The proposition cannot be denied, the relation is so near between drinking
and the Cup; none drink but by taking the Cup; none takes the Cup in the
Lords Supper, but he drinks: Spiritual drinking indeed may be * For albeit
the Pope at this day is said to suck the wine out of a quill, and in some
Churches anciently the people drank out of pipes, for fear of spilling: yet
this drinking was not without the cup, out of which they drank, though not
immediately as we do, and they ought to do, according to the practice of the
Apostles themselves.
without a material Cup, or Chalice; but corporal and sensible, such as is
drinking in the Sacrament, which is a visible sign, cannot be without the Cup.

The assumption may be collected, if not out of Saint John, 6. 53. and 56.
unless you drink my blood you have no life in you: and he that drinks my
blood, dwells in me: (because some Judicious Divines understand those texts
of Spiritual, and not Sacramental drinking) yet most evidently out of other
texts of Scripture, which by consent of all divines, either directly point
unto, or manifestly allude to drinking in the Sacrament; As the 1. Cor. 11. 28.
So let him drink of that Cup: verse. 29. Whosoever drinks unworthily,
drinks damnation unto himself. And 1. Cor. 10. 4. All did drink that same
spiritual drink: and verse. 21. Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the
Cup of devils: and 1. Cor. 12. 13. we are all made to drink into one spirit.
Besides, Mat. 26. 28. Drink you al of this; of which before in the first
argument.

This whole argument is confirmed by Pope Innocent himself, one of the
learnedest of all the Popes, and best studied in this argument. In his fourth
book of the Mysteries of the mass, c. 21. The blood of Christ is Vecsanguis
sub specie panis comeditur. nec corpus sub specie vini bibitur: quia sicut nec
sanguis comeditur, nec corpus bibitur: ita neutrum sub specie panis bibitur,
sub specie vini comeditur.
not said to be drunk under the form of bread, as neither to be eaten under
the form of wine; but we infer, all faithful Christians are invited by
Christ's precept, and the undeniable practice of the Apostolic Churches, not
only to participate of Christ's blood in some manner, as the Romanists conceive
they may do in eating the flesh, but truly and properly to drink it, but
sacramentally. And therefore albeit we should admit, that the blood of Christ
might in some sort be taken together with the body, because now since his
resurrection and ascension, they are never severed; but where his body is
locally and really, there is his blood also: yet this does not satisfy Christ's
command, who requires, that we distinctly Drink of the Cup, or wine, which he
calls his blood, Mat. 26. 28. and that we drink his blood, John 6. 53. which
most of our learned adversaries understand properly of drinking Christ's blood
really present, as they believe, in the Sacrament. Were his blood really
present, as they suppose, in the bread by the words of consecration turned into
his body yet certainly in eating the body they cannot be said to drink his
blood: for eating is not drinking; neither can any man possible imagine true
real and proper drinking of any thing, which is not sub liquida forma, as
Christ's blood cannot be sub forma panis, under the form of bread, which is
dry and solid.

CHAP. VII. The sixth Argument drawn a pari.
Whatsoever is sacrilege in the Priest, can not but be sacrilege in the
people also:

To communicate in one kind only, viz. by taking the bread, and not the cup,
is sacrilege in the priest:

Therefore to communicate in one kind only, can be no other then sacrilege,
or as bad in the people.

The proposition needs no proof; for as adultery, and simonie, and other
crimes alter not their nature by whomsoever they be committed: so neither does
sacrilege. The same sin I grant, may be more grieuious and scandalous in
one, then in the other; but magis and minus non variant speciem; agrauating
circumstances make a graduall, not a specificall difference in sin.

The Corpus sine sanguine sacerdos non debet suscipere. quia diuisio vnius
eiusdemque mysterij sine grandi sacrilegio non potest prouenire.
assumption we find in the Canon law, De Consecr. did. 2. The priests must
not receive the body without the blood. This is the title of the Canon: the
reason follows in the body of the Canon, because the division of one and the
same mystery, cannot be without great sacrilege; as also in that burning
Taper of Louaine, Tapperus, and the Jesuit (...) Suarez.

This whole argument is confirmed by Aquinas, Bonauenture, Alfonsus, and
Vasques. Tapperus, art. ^5. Non est perfecta oblatio sacramentalis, quae mortis
christi imaginem plane referas, nisi stat sub vtraque specie.
Aquin. part. 3. quest. 80. art. 12. It is requisite or agreeable in regard of
the Sacrament it self, that both be taken, viz. the body and the blood,
because in both consists the perfection of this Sacrament. And Suarez. in 3.
part. Tho. q. 80. art. 12. Distin^uiz Thomas de Sacerdotibus and laicis, and de
prioribus dicit, nullo modo debere corpus sumi sine sanguine. b^ Exparte ipsius
sacramenti conuenit, quod vtrumque sumatur. Sci: and corpus and sanguis: qua in
vtroque consistit perfectio sacramenti. c Ambae species f^nt de integritate:
quia in neutra per se exprimitur ves huius sacramenti, sed in vtraque fi^ul.
Bonauenture in 4. did. 11. part. 2. art. 1. quest. 2. Both the species or
kinds are of the integrity or perfection of the Sacrament, because the thing
signified by the sacrament, is expressed in neither kind by it self, but in
both together.

Sacerdos hac lege deuinctus est, vt quotiescunque celebret, nec panem sine
vino consecret, nec vnam specie^ sine altera sumat; quoniam etsi sub qualibet
specie totus integer Christus lateat, non tamen quaelibet species totum
Christum significat, vt repraesentet: sed species panis solam carnem
significat, species vinisolum sanguinem repraesentat: eiusque solius memoriam
gerit; quo fit, vt si solum panem consecraret, aut solum panem consecratum
sumeret, solius oblationis memoriam faceret, qua Christus obtulit suum corpus,
nulla autem tunc fieret memoria sanguinis effusi, atque pro nobis oblati; quod
species panis etsi sanguinem contineat, non tamen sanguinem repraesentat, aut
eius memoriam facit.
Alfonsus aduersus hereses. The Priest is bound by this law, that as often as
he celebrates this Sacrament, that he neither consecrate the bread without the
wine, nor take one of the forms or kinds without the other, because although
Christ be whole and entire under either kinds; yet either kind by it self,
does not signify, or represent whole Christ: but the species, or form of
bread does signify the flesh only, the species or form of wine does
represent the blood only, and exhibit the memory of it alone. Whence it
comes to pass, that if he should consecrate the bread alone, or receive the
bread alone consecrated, he should represent only the memory of that
oblation, whereby Christ offered his body, but there should be made no
commemoration at all of his blood shed, and offered for us: because the
species, or form of bread, although it contain the blood, yet it represents
not the blood, nor makes any memory, or commemoration thereof. And Hoc
sacramentum sub duplici specie institutum est, non tantum quatenus sacrificium
incruuentum vt sacrificium crucis Christi repraesentaret, sed etiam quatenus
sacramentum.
Vasques, tom. 3. in 3. disp. 215. cap. 2. number. 5. The sacrament is instituted
under a double form, or in two kinds, not only as an unbloody sacrifice of
Christ's Cross, but also as a Sacrament. From these testimonies of Papists of
eminent note, they infer against themselves; If both kinds be requisite to the
integrity of the Sacrament, as well the people, as the Priest in communicating
in one kind mutilate the Sacrament, and divide one and the self same
mystery, as Gelasius speaks; If the Priest in receiving the bread only
signify not whole Christ, nor represent the memory of his blood shed for us,
as Alfonsus teaches; neither do the people in so communicating either receive
whole Christ, or celebrate the memory of his blood shed upon the Cross, and
offered for us, to which end especially this Sacrament was instituted. Lastly,
if the Sacrament were instituted under a double form, or in two kinds, not
only as a sacrifice representing Christ's Sacrifice on the Cross, but also as
a Sacrament (as Vasquez determines the point) then doubtless it may no more
be divided as a Sacrament, then as a sacrifice; and he is as well guilty of
sacrilege, who takes away one part of the Sacrament, as he who takes away one
part of the Sacrifice. If they answer, that though the Sacrament was instituted
in two kinds, yet that it is really entire in one, because the body is not now
without the blood, nor the blood without the body: so we reply, that the
Sacrifice is entire also in one kind. If the doctrine of co^comitancie take
place in the Sacrament, it must needs take place also in the sacrifice; if in
the people receiving the bread represents and exhibits whole Christ, it must
needs do also in the Priests co^secrating. As Pliny writes of the Bees, that
Plin. hist. Nature. lib. 11. cap. 19 Nocent and sua mella ipfis.
they are often entangled in their own honey and wax: so are our adversaries
caught fast and entangled in their own fancies, viz. the necessity of
consecrating both kinds in the sacrifice of the Mass, and their doctrine of
Concomitancie, viz. that whole Christ's body and blood is contained in each kind
by it self. Thus as the bees honey stop the little pipe, which serves them
in stead of a mouth, so our adversaries own Tenants stop their own mouth.

CHAP. VIII. The seventh Argument, drawn from the nature and condition of a
will, or legacy.
NO legacy bequeathed by the last will and testament, confirmed by the death
of the testator, ought to be withheld from any legatarie, that is person, to
whom it is bequeathed:

The Cup in the Eucharist is a legacy, bequeathed by Christ's last will and
testament to all true believers capable thereof:

Therefore the Cup in the Eucharist ought not to be withheld from any true
believer capable thereof.

The proposition is the Apostles, Gal. 3. 15. A man's testiment, if it be
confirmed, no man disanulleth, or adds thereunto: and Heb. 9. 7. A ^estament
is of force after men are dead.

The assumption is part of the words of Christ's institution, Luke 22. 20. This
cup is the new Testament in my blood. Christ calls it his Testament, or last
legacy, as Quia ea quae vl^ adicuntur, maxim ab amicis recedentibus, magis
mem^iae commend^ntur; pias^ tim quia tunc magis inflammatur offectus ad amic^s:
ea ver^ ad quae magis afficimur, profundius animo imprimunar.
Aquinas par. 3. qu. 73. art. 50. truly notes, Because those things which are
spoken last, especially by friends departing, do stick faster in the memory,
by reason that the affections are then most inflamed to our friends, and those
things wherewith we are more affected, make a deeper impression in the mind.

This whole argument is confirmed by Iansenius, who meeting with an answer,
that seems to be made to this argument, directly impugneth it. The answer
given by Bellar. and others is: The legacy bequeathed, is not bread, nor wine,
but the body and blood of our Lord; both which are given under one kind, as
well as under both: the difference is, that they which drink of the Cup,
receive the legacy as it were in two paiments, they who do not drink,
receive the same legacy in one payment. This answer is substantially refuted by
Iansenius in Liturge. Non solum rei sacramentariae, sed etiam signaculorum
habuit ratione^.
lib. 4. and 7. and thereby the former argument very much strengthened. First,
says he, the answer were to some purpose, if Christ by will had disposed only
of the things signified in the Sacrament; but Christ in his legacy had respect
not only to the thing signified, but also to the sign, for the manifestation
of his Passion, and representation of his death.

Secondly, he acutely and truly observes, that the will of the testator might
be satisfied, in giving the whole legacy at once, or twice, if it were of the
nature of money, which may be paid in one great piece, or in many small
amounting to the same value: But Nec res sacramentales perplures formas diuidi,
nec Ecclesiae arbitrio sub vnam contrahi. Ex Chamiero.
it is not so in the Sacrament, says he, the thing signified by the Sacrament
cannot by the discretion of the Church be divided into more forms, nor be
co^tracted in one. It is not in the power of the Church, to make the body alone
to be under the form of bread; nor the blood alone under the form of wine;
nor both of them together under one form, or kind. Therefore, as when a man
bequeatheth to any by his will one thousand pound in coin, and one thousand
pound in ancient plate of such a making; he that paieth the whole legacy,
either in coin only, or in plate only, violates the will, because though he
may give the value, yet he gives not the thing in specie bequethed; so
although it should be granted, which yet is not, that the Priest gives to the
people the body and blood of Christ in the bread; yet he violates the will of
the testator, because he gives it not so as it may be drunk, or in the form
of wine. Whence I conclude, that what the Apostle says: No man offers to the
will of a man; The Gal 3. 15.
Romanists offer to the last will and testament of God our Lord: and therefore
are guilty not only of greuious sacrilege, but also of grand fraud and
impiety, in violating the Testament of our Savior, and deceiving the people
of a most precious legacy bequeathed by him unto them.

CHAP. IX. The eight Argument drawn from the end of the Sacrament.
THis Sacrament ought in such wise to be received by all Communicants, that
thereby the death of Christ may be represented and showed forth:

But without partaking of the Cup, it cannot be so received, that thereby
Christ's death may be represented and showed forth:

Therefore without pertaking of the Cup, it ought not to be received by any
Communicants.

The proposition is the Apostles. 1. Cor. 11. 28. As often as you eat this
bread, and drink this Cup, you show forth the Lords death, till he come again.

The assumption is evident to sense and reason: to sense for the breaking of
bread represents in no wise the effusio^ of blood: to reason for blood which
is contained in the body and veins, no way shows the killing or bloody
death of the party; but the blood, if it be at all in the bread (which we
deny,) it can be there no otherwise, as themselves confess, then by
concomitancie, as contained in, not severed from the body: as enclosed in, not
shed out of the veins. Therefore if it should be granted to our adversaries,
that the blood might be received in the bread by it self: yet by such
receiving, Christ's death by the effusion of his blood for us, could in no wise
be represented, or showed forth; which yet is acknowledged to be the principal
end of the celebration of this Sacrament.

This whole argument is confirmed by ^bus Reihing, who ingeniously
acknowledges, that in the Encheridion, which he wrote when he was a Jesuit
against the doctrine of the Araneorum oper. cap. 21. In Enchiridij mei editione
argumentum hoc dissimulaui, quod ac solid responso desperaui.
reformed Churches, he co^cealed this objection of the Protestants; because he
despaired ever to give a satisfactorie answer thereunto. It may be, that wits,
if they be put upon the rack, may find out euasions for any argument; but a
true solution, on which a man may settle his conscience, no Papist can ever
give. For if the Priest be bound to consecrate, and receive the wine a part,
because otherwise he should not represent the effusion of Christ's blood: by
the same reason, all Communicants that receive the Sacrament, ought to take the
wine apart, being mystically Christ's blood, as well as the Priests: because
they in their eating and drinking are commanded to show forth, and declare
Christ's death, as the Apostle teaches us. Neither can it be said, that this
manner of receiving, to show forth Christ's death, was necessary only, till
such time as the Church in the Council of Constance had otherwise ordained;
for the Apostles Canon extends to Christ's second coming; 1. Cor. 11. 26.
As often, says he, as you eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, you shall show
forth Christ's death, till he come again. Therefore till his second d^ng, even
to the end of the world, this Iniunction is of force.

CHAP. X. The tenth Argument, drawn from the example of Saint Paul, and the
Corinthians.
THat which Saint Paul delivered from Christ to the Corinthians, touching the
administration of the Eucharist, ought perpetually to be observed in the
Church:

But S. Paul from Christ delivered to the Corinthians the communicating of the
faithful in both kinds:

Therefore the communicating of the faithful in both kinds, ought perpetually
to be observed (in the administration of the Eucharist) in the Church.

The Proposition is vncontroleabl^; because an example of the Apostle, and the
Primitive Churches, having warrant from Christ's word, is a safe president to
all succeeding Churches.

The Assumption is contained in the 1. Cor. 11. from verse the 23. to the 29. I
received of the Lord, that which I delivered unto you, etc. After this preface,
he relates this institution of the Sacrament in both kinds, verse. 24, 25. and
from the 26. to the 29. he teaches in what manner they ought to communicate
in both kinds, and how they ought to fit and prepare themselves thereunto. S.
Paul's authority, writing by divine inspiration, ought to sway with all
religious Christians: how much more when it is backed, and seconded with some
Command, Precept, Order, or at least, Warrant from Christ himself? That which
I delivered unto you, says he, I received from the Lord; and therefore you may
safely follow, what not I, but the Lord has prescribed.

This whole Argument is confirmed by Becanus, who confesses, that the Apostle
delivered the Communion in both kinds; Becanus. fateor vtramque speciem a
Christ institutam esse: fateor vtramque ab Apostolo traditam.
I confess that both kinds were instituted by Christ; I confess that both
were delivered by the Apostle. Antiqua consuetudo a temporibus Apostolorum fuit
in ecclesia sub vtraque specie communicandi: in hac assertione nulla est
controuersia.
Tollet upon the sixth of John says; There is no question of it. It was an
ancient custom observed in the Church from the times of the Apostles, to
communicate in both kinds. In this assertion there is no controversy at all.
No controversy at all indeed; for it is the Protestants plea generally, and
the Romanists themselves admit of it; but yet come in with a strange non
obstante. See the Council of Constance, sess. 13. Declarat, decernit, and
definit, quod licet Christus post coenam instituerit, and suis discipulis
administrauit sub vtraque specie panis and vini hoc venerabile sacramentum,
etc. and licet in Primitiua Ecclesia huiusmodi sacramentum reciperetur sub
vtraque specie.
The Synod declares, decrees, and defines, that although Christ after supper
instituted, and administered to his Disciples this venerable Sacrament in both
kinds, viz. of bread and wine; and though this Sacrament were received in both
kinds in the Primitive Church; Hoc tamen non obstante; notwithstanding all
this, the Council gives order to the Contrary. The Prince by his Prerogative
sometimes in his Proclamations appoints and commands in some particular, Acts
to be done contrary to some former Statute, or Act; but we never read of a
non obstante against the Kings Prerogative; how much less against the express
Command and Law of the King of Kings? Wherefore this Council deserves to be
branded for ever, either with the infamous name of non obstantiense Concilium,
which Luther gives it, or In-constantiense, for breaking their public faith
given to John Hus, and Jerome of Prage, and burning those blessed Martyrs,
because they were not able to confute them.

CHAP. XI. The eleventh Argument, drawn from the uniform, and constant
practice of the Catholic Church in all ages.
THe words used in the institution, Drink you all of this, ought to be
expounded according to the uniform and constant practice of the Catholic
Christian Church:

But the constant and uniform practice of the Catholic Church extends them
to the Laytie, as well as to the Clergy:

Therefore the words of the institution extend to the Laiety, as well as to the
Clergy.

The Proposition was assented unto by Master Euerard, in the Conference held
with him: neither, think I, any Christian will stick at it, who seriously
weighs Christ's promises to his Church, to lead her by his Spirit into all
truth; to be with her unto the end of the world; to build her upon a rock,
against which hell gates should never prevail;

The Assumption can no otherwise so certainly be proved as by induction, and
particular instances in every Age; which, God willing, shall be brought, and
made good, against the adversaries exceptions, in the Sections following.

SECT. I. Testimonies of the practice of the Christian Church in the first Age.
From Christ's Ascension to the first 100. years following.
AFter the writings of the blessed Apostle Saint Paul, whose testimony in the
ninth argument is discussed, I allege for the practice of the Church in this
first age Dionysius Areopagita, Martialis Lemouicensis, Clemens Romanus, and
Ignatius Antiochenus. For albeit I assent thus far to our learned Critickes,
that these Authors are not altogether current; there is some dross in
Ignatius, more in Martialis, and most of all in Clemens: and Dionysius is
undoubtedly post-natus 300. years at lest younger then his age is set in the
Roman register; yet for the reasons following, I thought fit to produce these
Authors, and rank them in the first age. First, because our adversaries
usually so rank them, and allege them against us for fathers of the first
age; and surely if their testimonies be good and ancient, when they seem to
make against us, they are to be accounted as good and ancient, when they make
for us.

Secondly, because we cannot make authors, but must take such as we find,
these are the only authors that are extant, out of whom testimonies may be
alleged for this first age. Therefore as the sage Senator of Capua, when the
people upon a just distaste given by the Magistrates, had a purpose at once to
casheere them all, advised them: Before you remove these, choose fitter in
their places; and when diverse were named unto them, and they could like of
none, in the end he persuaded them to keep the old officers, till they could
agree to name better in their rooms: so I would desire our Critikes to name us
more approved authors in this age, then these are, and if they can name none,
then to let these hold their places, and the estimation they have had for many
hundred years.

Thirdly, because I hold it no good Topic, to argue a part ad totum,
affirmatively in this manner. There are some false passages, or corruptions in
an author: therefore the author is spurious, and of no credit. If we may thus
fillip off ancient Writers, we shall have but a few left. If there are (as no
doubt there be) diverse dead boughs and superfluous stemmes in these Writers
of so long standing: let our Critics prune them off, not cut the trees down
by the roots. Poliat lima, non exterat, says Fabius, let the pluimer smooth
the timber and cut of the rugged knobs, not grate or wear out the heart of it.
Volo nasutum, non polyposum. Fourthly, because the testimonies I cite out of
these authors, were never questioned, much less proved to be taken for good by
the adversary, until he can disprove them, according to the rule of the
Civil law: supponitur esse bonus, qui non probatur esse malus, he is supposed
to be an honest man, who was never proved otherwise. To call in then these
ancients in that order, as commonly they go: * Postquam rogauit, vt cast
distribuat, and ij qui Sacramentis participaturi sunt, digne sumant, pane qui
opertus erat and integer, ape^o, and in multas parts fracto, and vnico cal^ce
diniso inter omnes, quod vnum est, signis multiplicat, and distribuit.


First, Anno 70.
Dionysius Areopagita in his book of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. chap. 5.
relates the practice of the Church in his time on this manner. z After the
Priest has prayed, that he may holyly distribute, and that they that are to
partake of the Sacraments, may receive it worthily: discovering the bread, that
before was covered, and breaking it into many pieces, and dividing one Cup
among all, he multiplieth that in the signs, which is but one, and
distributeth it.

Anno. 80.
The second, Martialis Honorabatis sacerdotes, qui decipienant vos suis
sacrificijs, quae mutis and surdis statuis offerebant, quae nec se, nec vos
iuuare poterant; nunc autem multo magis sacerdotes Dei omnipotentis, qui vitam
vobis tribuunt in calice, and pane viuo, honorare debetis.
Lenoricensis, who styles himself a servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus
Christ, in his epistle ad Burdigal. writes thus: You heretofore honored the
priests, which deceived you with their sacrifices, which they offered to dumb
and deaf images, that neither could help you, nor themselves: but now much
more you ought to honor the Priests of Almighty God, who minister life unto
you in the Cup, and living Bread. By this argument of Martials, the Romish
Priests, that give the people but an half Communion, should lose half of the
honor due unto Gods Priests, if not the whole. For thus out of Martials
premises I conclude. Those, and none but those Priests are to be honored and
reverenced, who administer life to the people in the Cup:

The Romish Priests administer not life to the people in the Cup:

Therefore they are not to be reverenced, or honored.

Anno 92.
Thirdly, Clemens (...).
in his second book of Constitutions, 57. chap. thus enioyneth: after the
offering of the sacrifice, let every order a part receive the body of our Lord,
and his precious blood.

Anno 100.
Fourthly, Ignatius, the Scholar of Saint John the Evangelist, Bishop of
Antioch and Martyr, in his Epistle to the Philadelphians, enforces an argument
to unity from the Communion: I exhort you to embrace one faith, one manner of
preaching, and use of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: for the flesh of our
Lord Jesus is one, and his blood one that was shed for us, there is one bread
also broken for all, (...).
and one Cup distributed unto all.

Bellarmine his first Answer.
Bellarmine is put to a miserable plunge in his answer to this allegation.
First, he says, in the Latin Bell. de sacr. Eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 26. In
Latinis codicibus non habetur; vnus calix omnibus distributus; sed vnus calix
totius Ecclesiae. nec multum fidendum Graecis codicibus.
copies the words of Ignatius are not as we cite them; There is one Cup
distributed unto all: but there is one Cup of the whole Church: and though the
Greek copies read as we do, yet he says, that much credit is not to be given
to them.

The Refutation.
Against this answer I reply:


First, that if we may not trust the Greek editions of Ignatius, much less
may we trust the Latin translations; especially since of late they are come
into hucksters hands. To appeal from a translation to the original is usual:
but to appeal from the original to a translation is a thing unheard of. This
is to make the brook or stream to be purer then the fountain or spring. The
Poet teaches Bellarmine another lesson: Dulcius ex ipso font bibuntur aquae.
Ignatius, as it is well known, wrote in Greek, and therefore unless
Bellarmine can prove, that other Greek copies agree with his Latin
translation, and not with ours, he speaks nothing to the purpose: for a
translation is of no credit further, then it agrees with the And howsoever
Bellarmine may produce some Latin copy, that translateth the words of
Ignatius, as Bellarmine sets them down, vnus Calix totius Ecclesiae; yet
Uitlemeus, and diverse other Latin copies following the original verbatim,
render them thus, vnus calix omnibus distributus, that is, One Cup distributed
unto all.
original.

Secondly, even Bellarmines corrupt translation makes against the Church of
Rome, and proves, that the practice in Ignatius his time was for the whole
Church to communicate in both kinds: for why else calls he it, Calicem totius
Ecclesiae, The Cup of the whole Church? Ignatius there speaks not of the
possession, but of the use of the Cup: and if the Priests only had drank of
it, he would have called it the Priests Cup: but in terming it the Cup of the
whole Church, he plainly signifies, that the whole Church used it in the
celebration of the Lords Supper.

Bellarmine, his second answer.
Secondly, Respondeo, Ignatium vim facere in vnitate calicis, non
vniuersalitate bibentium.
Bellarmine says, that the force of Ignatius his argument consists in the
unity of the Cup, and not in the universality of them that drink, for he
exhorts there to unity.

The Refutation.
First, Ignatius exhorts there all to unity, because all eat of one bread,
and drink of one cup. His argument therefore stands both in the
universality of them that drink, and the unity of the Cup: and it may be
thus reduced into form.

All that eat of one bread, and drink of one holy Cup, in remembrance of one
body offered, and one blood shed for all, ought to embrace unity:

But all you of the Church of Philadelphia (people as well as Priests) eat of
one bread, and drink of one holy Cup, in memory of one body offered, and one
blood of Christ shed for you all:

Therefore all you of the Church of Philadelphia ought to embrace unity, and
godly love.

If the pinch, or strain of the argument were in unity only, it would not
hold; for if some only drank of this Cup, and not others, this should rather
make more for a division, then for unity; it is the communion of more in one,
that Ignatius lays for the ground of his argument, enforcing unity.

Secondly, howsoever the argument stands, it makes no great matter; since we
insist not so much upon the argument it self, as upon that his express
affirmation; That one Cup in his time was given unto all. This assertion alone
sufficiently proves the practice of the Church in his time.

Bellarmine his third answer.
Thirdly, Respondeo, nihil ex his verbis elici, nisi fuisse vsum illo temp^re,
cum pauci erant Christiani, vt omnibus daretur potus calicis, sed hoc exemplum
est, non praeceptum.
Bellarmine says, that nothing can be enforced from these words of Ignatius,
but that it was the use in that time, when there were but few Christians to
give the Cup unto all: but this is an example, it is no precept: so the
Cardinal.

The Refutation.
First, it is not true, which he here affirms; that there were but few
Christians in Ignatius his time: for all histories of those times, and the
Epistles of Ignatius testify the contrary, and in this very Church of
Philadelphia, the holy Ghost testifies, Apoc. 3. 8. That there were many
Christians. Behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man shall shut
it, etc.

Secondly, though the Primitive Church were not of that large extent, as the
Church in suceeding ages: yet the authority of the Church in that age, in
which the Apostles lived, and their immediate successors, is far greater,
then in any later age.

Thirdly, in this last answer the Cardinal yields us the cause; for we cite
these words of Ignatius only to prove the practice of the Primitive Church,
and thus much Bellarmine confesses, whereupon I add; that this confessed
practice of the Primitive Church was grounded on our Lords precept: drink you
all of this; for the Church so near Christ cannot be supposed to have swarued
any way from his institution, by adding any thing unto it, or taking away from
it: certainly, Ignatius, and the Churches, wherein he bore sway, observed the
order and practice of Saint John his master; and if Saint John administered the
Cup in all Churches to the people, so did the rest of the Apostles; for they
varied not from Christ, or among themselves in celebrating the Lords Supper.
And what the Apostles did jointly, no Christian doubts, but they did by the
direction of the holy Ghost, according to our Lords will and commandment. And
thus we see this example amounts to a precept, and the practice in Ignatius
his time, ought to be a president for all future times.

SECT. II. Testimonies of the Practice of the Christian Churches in the second
Age.
From 100. to 200. Anno Dom. 150.
IVstin (...).
Martyr in his second apology, thus writes: They which are called Deacons
among us, give to every one that is present of the consecrated Bread and Wine.
And when he has related the whole manner of the celebration of the Eucharist,
as it were to prevent a cavil that might be made, and is now made by Papists;
the Martyr here shows the practice of the Church, but makes no mention of
the precept of our Savior; as that they did so in deed, but were not bound so
to do: he further adds for the close: as they report that Jesus commanded
them, or, as they have delivered (...).
unto us, Jesus his command given unto them.

Bellarmine, his answer.
Bellarmine repineth at this so express a testimony of so ancient a Father,
and so renowned a Martyr; and therefore labors to disparage it some way or
other. -- Si non aliqu a nocuisset, mortuus esset. Yet all that he says
Respondeo, verba illa Iustini, vbi commemoratur Christi praeceptum, non
pertinent ad Communionem, sed ad consecrationem.
to it is but this; that those last words of the Martyr, which mentions
Christ's precept, belong not to the Communion, but to the Consecration.

The Refutation.
This solution will no way bear water. First, it is evident to any that reads
the whole place, that Justin Martyrs words, wherein he mentions Christ's
precept, belongs both to the Consecration, and to the Communion. For after he
had spoken of the Communion, he subioyneth these words; And therefore they
cannot be severed from the Communion: The series or method of the passage in
Justin is thus: having rehearsed the words of the Institution, This is my body,
do this in remembrance of me, and this Cup is the new Testament; drink you
all of this: he adds; and he commanded, that they only should participate,
as had been before washed in the lauer of Regeneration, and lead such a life as
Christ prescribed them. These words? that they only should participate,
clearly convince the Cardinal, and demonstrate, that Justin Martyr extends
Christ's command both to the Consecration, and to the Commumunion it self:
which in Christ's precept cannot be divided, both being enjoined in this one
precept; do this in remembrance of me* that is, Consecrate, and Communicate.

Secondly, howsoever the Cardinal by any trick of sophistry shall dismember
the whole sentence, and pull these words, As Christ commanded, from the rest,
and refer them to which part of the sentence he pleases; yet he can never
smoother the light of truth shining in these words; The Deacons deliver or
minister to every one, of the consecrated bread and wine. The practice then of
those times makes for us against the Church of Rome. The Deacons then, as the
Ministers now, delivered the Sacrament to the people in both kinds.

Anno. 152.
Laurence Deacon, to Pope Sixtus cried out to him as he was led to his
Martyrdom: Whether go thou, father, without thy son? whether hastest,
thou Priest, without thy Leuite? try whether thou have chosen a fit Histor.
tripartit. l. 9. Cui commisisti Dominici sanguinis dispensationem; Cui
consummandorum consortium sacramentorum, huic consortium tui sanguinis negas?
citatur hic locus a Tappero artic. 15. p. 335.
minister, to whom thou have committed the dispensation of our Lords blood.
Will thou deny me to be a copartner with thee in the effusion of thy blood,
who have made me a copartner with thee in the celebration of our Lords blood?
This gives such light to Justin Martyrs words, and so fully accords with
them, that Tiletanus, the defender of the council of Trent confesses, that it
is Manifestum est aetate Sixti vtriusque speciei vsum omnibus dispensatum
fuisse.
manifest, that in this age the use of both kinds was common to all.

Anno 180.
Saint Irenaeus Bishop of Lions and Martyr, in the fourth book against
heresies, and 34. cha. proves the resurrection of the flesh, and eternal life
by an argument drawn from the faithfulls eating Christ's flesh in the
Eucharist, and he presses his argument in this manner; How do they, viz. the
heretics, say, that the flesh Quomodo dicunt carnem in corruptione^ devenire,
quae corpore Domini, and sanguine, alitur. Et paulo post: corpora nostra
participantia Eucharistiamiam non sunt corruptibilia, spem resurrectionis
habentia.
should be utterly corrupted and never rise again, which is nourished with the
body and blood of Christ? and a little after, Our bodies by participating the
Eucharist or Sacrament of our Lords supper, are not now corruptible, or shall
not utterly be corrupted, and come to nothing, because they have the hope of
theresurrection. Irenaeus speaks of all Christians, people as well as
Priests, for all faithful Christians have hope of a blessed resurrection; and
he says, that they are nourished with the body and blood of Christ, by
participating of the Sacrament of his supper.

Papists answer.
The Romanists seek to avoid these and the like passages by their doctrine of
concomitancie, auerring that the blood of Christ is not severed from his body;
and consequently, that the Laietie take the blood in the body, and are
nourished therewith to eternal life, and this, say they, is all that can be
gathered from Irenaeus his words: They are nourished with the blood of Christ,
which they receive together with his body, not with the blood of Christ, which
they take by it self in the Cup.

The Refutation.
This answer of theirs is weak, and insufficient.

First, because it is built on a weak and ruinous foundation. viz. the real
and carnal presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament under the accidents of
bread and wine: which I have else where by Scriptures and Fathers refelled. See
the fisher caught in his own net. part. 2.

That the doctrine of concomitancie is builded upon the real and carnal
presence, is not denied by the Romanists, for they make the one the ground of
the other.

Secondly, albeit we should grant, that the Laiety in some sense receive the
blood of Christ in the bread; yet they receive it not so as Christ commands:
for they receive it not by drinking; No man drinks in eating, or eats in
Drinking.

Thirdly, the blood of Christ, which we receive in the Sacrament, we receive
not as subsisting in his veins, or as being a part of, or joined unto his
body; but as shed for us: In which quality and manner it is impossible to
receive the blood of Christ together with, and in the body by natural
concomitancy.

Fourthly, whatsoever becomes of the device of concomitancy, our adversaries
therewith cannot shift off Irenaeus. For in his fifth book, and second Chapter,
he speaks distinctly of the Cup, and declares his meaning to be, that the
faithful are made partakers of eternal life by drinking Christ's blood,
(mystically) in the Chalice: He confirmed the Chalice or Cup, which is a
Caliccm, qui est creatura, suu^ sanguinem, qui effusus est, confirmauit, ex quo
auget nostrum singuinem. Et post: quando mistus calix, and fractus panis
pereipit verbum Dei, fit Eucbaristia corporis and sanguinis Christi: quomodo
negant carnem essecapacem donationis Dei, que est vita aeterna, quae sanguine
and corpore Christi nutritur, and est membrum?
creature, to be his blood, shed for us, wherewith our blood is nouvished: and
a little after; when the mingled Cup and bread broken receives the Word of God
(that is the benediction, or consecration) it is made the Eucharist or
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood: how then do they (the heretics) deny,
that our flesh is capable of the gift of God, which is eternal life, since it
is nourished with Christ's body and blood, and is a member?

From these passages of Irenaeus thus I collect his argument.

All they that in the Sacrament of the Lord Supper eat of the bread, and
drink of the Cup consecrated, are nourished by Christ's body and blood to
eternal life:

All faithful Christians, or worthy communicants eat of the bread, and drink
of the consecrated Cup:

Therefore all faithful Christians, or worthy communicants are nourished by
Christ's body and blood to eternal life.

If the adversary will have the assumption restrained to Priests only, he
must needs in like manner restrain the conclusion to Priests only; which is
little less then heresy. Irenaeus his intent and drift in that place is, to
confirm all the faithful in the doctrine of the resurrection, and therefore
his medium must be universal, and such as holds as well for the Christian
people, as for the Priest.

Anno. 190.
Clemens Alexandrinus stromatum lib. 1. when they distribute the Eucharist, as
the manner is, they give to every one of the (...).
people a part or portion thereof. Now that the Eucharist includes the Cup, as
well as the bread, he declares himself in express words. paedagog. li. 2.
cap. 2. The mingling of the drink and of the water and the word is called the
Eucharist: and a little before: to drink the blood of Jesus is to be partaker
of the Lords incorruption. and stromatum lib. 4 Melchizedeke sanctified bread
and wine for (...).
a type of the Eucharist; not bread only, but bread and wine is the Eucharist,
and of this every one of the people participated in his time, therefore all
drank of the Cup.

Bellarmines answer.
Bellarmine cauilleth Non sequitur illa negatiua ex affirmatiua, qui bibit
Christi sanguinem, habet incorruptionem, ergo non bibit, potest enim aliunde
habere, nempe a corpore. * Sanguis Domininon dat incorruptionem, quia bibitur,
sed quia sumitur: sanguinem autem vere sumunt, qui sub vnica specie communicant.
at the last passage save one, viz. where Clemens says, to drink Christ's
blood is to be partaker of his incorruption. First he says it does not
follow, that because he that drinks Christ's blood has immortality or
incorruption: therefore he that drinks it not, has not incorruption: for he
may have it otherwise, namely, by the body.

Secondly, he says, that Christ's blood gives incorruption or immortal life,
not because it is drunk but because it is taken. Now it is truly taken of
them, who communicate in one kind only, because the blood is not severed from
the body, which they partake of.

The refutation.
This answer of Cardinal Bellarmine is many ways defective.

First, when we gave him three wounds, he applies a plaster but to one of
them, and it is too narrow for that too: he cunningly silenceth our strong
allegations out of Clemens, and singleth out one of the weakest.

Secondly, that passage of Clemens, to which alone he would seem to say
something, he says indeed nothing. For if the drinking of Christ's blood be a
means to attain our Lords incorruption, or immortality, as Bellar, out of
Clemens confesses, although he denies it to be the only means; why should
the people be deprived of this means? Our argument out of Clemens stands thus.

None ought to be deprived of the means of attaining our Lords incorruption,
and immortality.

But the drinking of Christ's blood is the means to attain immortallitie:

Therefore none ought to be deprived of the use of the Cup: I mean none that
are fit guests for the Lords table.

Thirdly, Clemens says not, to take Christ's blood, but to drink it, is to
partake of incorruption. And therefore, albeit Christ's blood might be
otherwise participated, then by drinking of the Cup, this satisfies not
Clemens his intention and scope, who speaks expressly of taking of it in
this manner, viz. by drinking.

Fourthly, Bellarmine in his answer beggeth the question. For he supposes,
that Christ's blood, is taken in the bread, as his body in the Cup, which I have
before refuted out of Innocentius.

SECT. III. Testimonies of the practice of the Church from 200. to 300.
Anno. 210.
FIrst Tertullian in his book of the resurrection of the flesh. cap. 8.
speaking of the practice of Christians in general, and not Ecclesiasticke
only, says: Caro corpore and sanguine Christi vescitur, vt anima de Deo
saginetur.
The flesh feeds upon the body and blood of Christ, that the soul may be
fatted, as it were of God.

Papists answer.
Loc. sup. cit. Tert. Dixit nos sanguine vesci, non sanguinem bibere, vescimur
autem sanguine, cum sumimus per modum cibi, sub specie panis.
Cardinal Bellarmine shifteth of this sentence of Tertullian: by tithing minte
and cummim, nicely distinguishing between feeding upon Christ's blood, and
drinking it. The people may and do feed upon Christ's blood, though they drink
it not, but eat it, or take it by way of meat, under the form of bread.

The refutation.
This nicity will not serve the turn. First because Tertullian speaks of the
body and blood of Christ as distinct things, saying, corpore et sanguine. Now
the blood taken as a distinct thing from the body, cannot be fed upon, but by
drinking: we feed upon the blood of Christ in the Sacrament as shed for us; and
therefore necessarily as severed from the body. And how is it possible, to take
blood, or feed upon it as shed and severed from the body, without drinking of
it? All faithful Christians in Tertullian his time fed upon Christ's blood, as
distinguished from the body; they drank it therefore. Why then does Tertullian
use the Verb, vesci, signifying to feed upon, and not bibere, signifying to
drink? The reason is evident, because he speaks of the partaking of both
the body and the blood, which he could not express by the word, Drink,
because we drink not the body; he uses, therefore a common word Vesci, to
feed, which may be applied to both acts, eating and drinking; namely, eating
the body, and drinking the blood. Feeding is as the Genus to both, and may be
affirmed of both, For which cause Tertullian speaking of both made choice of
it, rather then of the Verb, bibere, which could not agree to Corpore, though
it were proper to sanguine.

Secondly, Tertullian himself elsewhere makes mention of the Cup given to the
Laietie, and not only to Lay men, but women also. Tertul. ad De cuius m^
desiderabit, de cuius poculo participabit? etc.
vxorem lib. 2. c. 6. shall the Lords Table hear any thing, or have to do
with the Tavern, or with hell? from whose hands, shall she desire (the
Sacramental) bread, of whose Cup shall she participate? He speaks of a
Christian woman married to an infidel, and shows the inconueniencie of such
a match, whereby the faithful wife was like to be debarred of the comfort of
receiving the Sacrament, and drinking of the Lords Cup. Tert. then is clear
for the Laietie communicating in both kinds. And so is Origin.

Anno. 230.
Origin in 16. Quis est iste populus, qui in vsu habet sanguinem bibere? etc.
populus fidelis populus Christianus audit hac, and amplectitur eum, qui dicit,
nisi manducaveritis carnem filij hominis, etc.
Hom. on Numb. makes this question. What people is it, that is accustomed to
drink blood? and he answers the faithful people; the Christian people
hears these things, and embraces him, who says, unless you eat the flesh
of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. For my flesh
is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. Mark the ingemination? The
people, the faithful people hears these things, etc. Therefore in Origens
time it was the peoples use and custom, to drink the blood of Christ.

Papists answer.
Respondeo, habet in vsu, non praecepto. Secundo, vt vsum eum habeat populus
Christianus, non necesse est, vt singuli de populo bibant, sed satis est, si in
ecclesia aliqui sint, qui id faciant.
Bellarmine loc. sup. cita. says to this testimony of Origin, that the people
did drink, but they had no command so to do. It was their use, it was not
Christ's precept. Secondly, he says, the people might have such a use or
custom, to drink at the Lords supper, though every one drank not, but some
only.

The Refutation.
I need not refell this answer, because Bellarmine grants all that, for which
I produce this testimony: that the practice of the Church in Origens time
goes for us; and his mincing the matter, that some of the people might drink,
not all, and that they drank it by custom, not by law, no way healpeth his
bad cause.

For first, Origin in this very place alleges Christ's precept for this
practice of the faithful people, John. 6. unless ye drink my blood, you have
no life in you.

Secondly, in the end of this homily, he turns his speech not to some of this
people, but to his audience, and thus concludes; Tu ergo es verus populus
Israel, quiscis sanguinem bibere, and nosti carnem verbi Dei commedere, and
^vae sanguinem illius, qua est ex vera vite, and illis palmitibus, quos pate
purgat, ^rire.
Thou therefore art the true people of Israel, who know to drink the blood,
and have learned to eat the flesh of the Word of God, and to take a draught of
the blood of that grape, which is of the true vine, and those branches of which
the father purges. The evidence of this truth is like the light of the
morning: it grows cleerer and cleerer. For Origin is cleerer in this point
then Tertullian, and Cyprian is yet cleerer, then Origin.

Anno. 250.
Cyprian that learned Bishop of Carthage, and blessed Martyr of Christ Jesus,
not only delivers but propugneth our assertion by a forcible argument.
Quomodo prouocamus eos in confessione nominis sanguinem suum effundere, si ijs
militaturis Christi sanguinem denegamur aut quomodo ad martyrij poculum idoneos
facimus, si non eos prius ad bibendum in Ecclesia poculum iure communionis
admittimus?
epist. 54. How do we inuit them (Gods people) to shed their blood for
Christ in the confession of his name, if when they set forth to fight for him,
we deny them his blood? how shall we fit them for the Cup of Martyrdom, if
before we admit them not by right of Communion to drink of the Lords Cup in
his Church? in his 63. epistle Quoniam quidam vel ignoranter, vel simpliciter
in calice Dominico sanctificando and plebi ministrando hoc non faciunt, quod
Jesus Christus Dominus and Deus noster docuit, and fecit, etc.
Because some men out of ignorance, or simplicity in sanctifying the Cup of
the Lord, and ministering it to the people; do not that which Jesus Christ our
Lord and God, the Author and Institutor of this Sacrifice did, and taught; I
thought it both a matter of religion, and necessity, to acquaint you herewith
by letters: that, if any yet be held in that error, the light of truth being
now discovered unto him; he might return unto the root and beginning of our
Lords institution.

Papists answer.
Bellarmine in his answer to Saint Cyprian, makes good the Poets observation:
Qui semel verecundiae limits transiuerit, hunc grauiter impudentem esse
oportet: he that has once passed the bounds of modesty, he must be stoutely
impudent, and arm his forehead with brass: for here he is not content to
slight this allegation, as he did the former: but is bold to challenge it for
an evidence on his own side. This place, says he, rather makes for our
opinion, then against it: for Loc. supr. cit. Respondeo, hoc loco confirmatur
potius, quam infirmatur nostra sententia. Loquitur enim de lapsis, quibus ab
Episcopis oblatum erat ius communionis: and hortatur, vt ijs restituatur,
iminente persecutione; ius ergo Laicorum ad Communicandum a Sacerdotibus datur,
and tollitur; and si prelati possunt ob crimina tollere, possunt ordinare de
modo Communicandi sub vnica specie. Bellarm. loc. sup. citato. Non agit eo loco
Cyprianus, opor^ne calicem prebere, an non? sed tantum, si ministretur, vt ex
vine misto, non ex aqua sola constet; and hoc dicit dominum docuisse.
Saint Cyprian speaks of certain Christians, that fell in time of
persecution, from the profession of the true faith, and were therefore
excommunicated by the Bishops, whom Saint Cyprian exhorts, in regard of the
eminent persecution, to restore these weak Christians to their former right
and interest, which they had in the Lords body. The right therefore of the
Laietie to Communicate, is given by the Priests, and taken away by them. Now if
the Priests or Prelates, may for certain crimes take the right of
Communicating from the Laietie, they may also dispose of the manner of
Communicating under one kind. To the second testimony he answers, that
Cyprian in that place handles not the point, whether the Cup ought to be
delivered to the people or no, but if it be delivered unto them, he will have
it delivered not in water only, but wine mingled with water. And this he
says, Christ taught us.

The Refutation.
Neither of these answers will bear scale, both of them are to light by many
grains: the first of these is liable to these exceptions.

First, it is impertinent: for we bring the testimony to prove the practice of
the Primitive Church concerning the Laieties participating the Cup: But
Bellarmine craftily waves that point, and questioneth by what right the people
did Communicate. Admit that, which is most falfe, that the Bishop or Priest
gave the people all the right they had to the Cup, yet they had it, and used
it; their practice therefore makes for us.

Secondly, it is inconsequent: for first, when a'man is Excommunicated, and
has lost his right to the Lords Table, a Bishop upon the parties submission,
and sorrow for his sin, and humble entreaty, may restore him to his right
again, and set him where he was: yet this proves not, that the Laietie had
their original right of Communicating from them; as a Bishop may upon just
cause suspend a Lay man, or Clergy from the Communion, so he may also exclude
him from hearing of the word, and public prayer; yet no man will hence
conclude, that the Laietie, or Priest have no right at all to come into the
Church, and to pray, and to hear Gods word, but from the Bishop. Albeit
Cyprian in his own Church, and any other Bishop in his Diocese may admit, or
reject some particular persons upon just cause from the Communion: yet it will
not from hence follow, that the Bishop of Rome may take away either the Cup, or
the Bread from Gods people in all Churches.

Thirdly, it is no good inference, that because the Bishop may deprive a man of
the whole Sacrament upon some causes, viz. for a great crime, or high
misdemeanor, that therefore he may deprive him of a part of it without any
fault at all, as the Romanists do the Laietie in general.

Fourthly, a Bishop may dispense with his own censures, or revoke them; but he
cannot dispense with Gods law. To suspend a man from the whole Communion, if
the delinquent deserve it, is agreeable to Christ's and the Apostles discipline;
but to admit him to one part of the Sacrament, and not to the other, is a
manifest violation of Christ's ordinance, who instituted this Sacrament in two
kinds, and said to the same, Drink ye all of this, to whom before he said,
Take, eat, this is my body.

Fifthly, and lastly, if it were sufficient reason to redeliuer the Cup in
these times to the Laietie, who have been deservedly deprived of it, namely to
arm them against eminent persecution, why should not the faithful people of
God, especially those, who never incurred the censure of Excommunication, or
suspension, be much rather admitted to drink of the Cup, to arm them against
as great, or greater conflicts of temptations? The sinnew of Saint Cyprians
reason is in the word militaturis: Those that are to fight the Lords battles,
are to be strengthened thereunto, by taking the Cup of Salvation, or drinking
the Lords Blood. But I assume, all Christians in all ages were, are, and shall
be militantes, or militaturi, such as have fought, do fight, or shall against
their ghostly and bodily enemies; therefore according to Saint Cyprians
military discipline, they are to be strengthened, and armed thereunto, by
participating of the Lords Cup.

The answer of Bellarmine to the second testimony of Saint Cyprians 63.
Epistle, comes not home to the mark by many bows: for albeit the maine
scope of that Epistle be, to prove the necessity of administering the
Sacrament in Wine, against the corrupt custom of the Aquarij, (certain
heretics that administered it in mere water) yet on the by, he discovers the
practice of the Church in his time, to Communicate in both kinds; and in the
words alleged, be expressly faith, that the Cup was ministered, or delivered to
the people, which is all we produce this passage for.

SECT. IIII. Testimonies of the practice of the Church from 300. to 400.
Anno. 314.
IN the council held at Ancyra, Deacons that had sacificed unto Idols, are
forbidden to exercise any sacred function: and in particular, nec panem, nec
calicem, (...); not to offer or deliver bread or the Chalice. The Chalice then
by their Deacons was delivered; to whom, but to the people? for Priests
administer to Deacons, but Deacons never to Priests.

Anno. 316.
In the Council held at Neo-Caeserea can. 13. country Priests are forbidden in
the presence of a Bishop, or the Priest of the city, to deliver the sanctified
bread or Cup to any. Here we see the Cup as well as the bread was delivered at
the communion; the words are, nec panem, nec calicem porrigere.

Anno 325.
In the acts of the (...).
Council of Nice, set out by Gelasius Cyzicenus, we have a most express
testimony of the belief and practice of the Church in that flowrishing age.
Let us understand by faith, that in that holy Supper the Lamb of God, that
takes away the sins of the world, is offered without blood by the Priests,
and that we taking his precious body and blood, do verily believe, that they
are symboles, or pleadges of our resurrection.

Anno. 337.
Quod pro complemento communionis intinctam tradunt eucharistiam populo; nec
hoc prolatu^ ex Eua^gelio testimonium receper^nt. Vbi Apostolis corpus suum
commendauit, and sanguinem. seorsum enim panis, and seorsum calicis commendatio
memoratur.
Julius the first, as we read in Gratian de conse. did. 2. condemns the
practice of such, who gave the people a bit of bread dipped in wine for the
whole Communion, alleging against this corrupt custom, the practice of our
Savior, who when he commended his body and blood to the Apostles, he commended
the bread and the Cup apart. This ancient Pope concludes from our Saviors
practice, that the people ought to receive the holy elements of bread and wine
a part, and consequently, that it is not sufficient to give them the bread
dipped. Now if it be not sufficient to give them the bread dipped in the wine,
Julius would have held it much less sufficient to give them dry bread. If our
Savior, as he rightly conceiueth, enjoined; that all ought to partake of the
elements apart, certainly he enjoined, that the people should receive both,
and not bread only, or wine only by concomitancie.

Anno 340.
Athanasius in his second Apology makes it plainer, that the undeniable
custom in his age was for the people to receive the Cup. This says he, is the
use of this Cup and no other: in this Cup you lawfully or of right drink
before, or to the Laity. This you have received for an Ecclesiastical Cannon;
(...).
it belongs to you alone to drink the blood of Christ before the Laietie.

Anno 355.
Haec accepta and hausta id efficient, vt and nos in Christo, and in nobis
Christus sit.
Hilarious Pictauiensis de trinitate lib. 8. writes thus. There is no place
left of doubting concerning the truth of Christ's flesh and blood; for both by
our Lords own profession, and our faith, it is truly flesh, and truly blood;
and these being taken and drunk, do work this effect, that Christ is in us,
and we in Christ; Saint Hilarie spoke of all Christians, and says, that they
receive the flesh of Christ, and hauriunt: that is, take a draught of his
blood, which cannot be without partaking the Cup. For although the doctrine of
concomitancie were admitted, whereby our adversaries suppose, that the people
take the blood of Christ in the body: yet certainly there they cannot haurire
sanguinem, take a draught of blood, or drink it, because it is not there in a
liquid form, or so that it may be sucked, or drunk.

Anno 365.
(...), etc.
Cyril. Catechesi Mystagogica 4. Under the form of bread, Christ's body is
given unto thee, that taking the body and blood of Christ, thou may be of one
body and blood with him. And a little after; After thou have (...).
participated of the body of Christ, draw near also to the cup of his blood.

Anno. 366.
Macarius Egyptius. hom. 27. By offering bread and wine in the Church, he gave
us a pattern to take his body and blood.

Anno 370.
S. (...).
Basil in his 289. epistle to Patricia exhorts her frequently to participate
the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, saying, It is good and profitable
every day to participate the holy body and blood of Christ. And in his moralls,
chap. 22. he propounds this question: what is the proper (...).
duty of a Christian? and he answers immediately; to have no spot, or
wrincle in his Conscience, to be holy and unblameable, and so to eat the body,
and drink the blood of Christ. Our adversaries do well to conceal this
testimony of Saint Basil, because it is so direct and full to the point, that
it admits not any collourable answer. He says, that it is the proper duty of
a Christian; and therefore not of a Priest only, not to eat Christ's body
only and receive his blood (by concomitancie) but expressly to drink it: and
this he teaches to be as necessary a duty of all Christians, as to cleanse
themselves from sin and to be holy and undefiled.

Anno. 372.
(...).
Gregory Nazianzen, surnamed the Divine, S. Basils bosom friend in his 42.
oration inuites all to drink the blood of Christ, who look for life by him,
without any doubting or shamefast fear: Eat his body, and drink his blood, if
thou desire life: and in his second oration he testifies, that his sister
Gorgonia, after she had Communicated, (...).
laid up some part of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. With what
face then can our adversaries deny the Cup to Lay men, when the ancient Church
delivered it usually to religious women, such as were Patricia, and Gorgonia?

Anno 375.
Ambrose in his fifth book de sacramentis chap. 1. elegantly applies Moses
his striking the rock, and the water flowing out thereupon to the holy
communion, saying, see the mystery, Moses, that is a Prophet, the Rod, that is
Gods word, the Priest with the Word of God touches the rock, and the water
flows, and the people of God drink it. Tangit sacerdos calicem, and redundat
aqua in calicesaliens in vitam aeternam, and bibit populus Dei, qui Dei gratiam
consequutus est.
The Priest therefore touches the Cup, and there abounds in the Cup water
springing to eternal life; and the people of God drinks, and obtains the
grace of God. The same S. Ambrose, as Theoderet writes in his fifth book of
Ecclesiastical story, and 17. chap. repelleth the Emperor Theodosius from the
Communion with these words: Quomodo venerandum eius sanguinem ori ad mouebis,
qui furore irae iubente tantum sanguinis tam in ique effudist^?
How dare thou take into thy hands, sprinkled with blood, the holy body of
Christ? How presumest thou to lift up his dreadful blood to thy mouth, who in
thy rage have spilt unjustly so much blood? We see in Saint Ambroses time,
that both Prince and people communicated in both kinds: albeit Theodosius at
this time were deservedly suspended from the participating of Christ's body, as
well as his blood: Yet after he had cleansed his bloody hands with penitent
tears, he was admitted to the blessed Sacrament, and he received both the
blessed Body, and the holy Cup into his hands.

Cardinal Bellarmine himself in his answer to this our allegation out of
Theodoret, says, We confess, that both kinds have been sometimes given to x
Fatemur datam aliquando vtramque speciem Laicis, sed negamus id iure diuino
mandatum.
the Laietie, but we deny, that it is so commanded by Gods Law. A poor and
miserable evasion. For first many of the ancients, whom we have before
alleged, do not only testify the practice of their times, but urge divine
precept for it.

Secondly, they indifferently exhort the Laietie, as well as the Clergy to the
Communion in both kinds, and urge a like necessity for both: but the Papists
themselves confess, that the Clergy, who administer the Communion, are bound
by the Law of God to communicate in both kinds; and since Sacraments may not be
administered to any without order and command from him, who instituted them,
questionless, the ancient Church would never have usually administered the Cup
to the Laietie with the bread, if they had not conceived, that Christ's words,
Drink ye all of this, belonged to them as well as to the Clergy.

Anno. 390.
Dominica caena omnibus debet esse communis, etc.
Hierome upon the eleventh of the 1. Cor. The Lords Supper ought to be common
to all, because Christ equally delivered the Sacraments to all his disciples,
who were there present. It is to be noted, that he uses the word Sacraments in
the plural number, speaking only of the Lords Supper; whereby it is evident,
that by Sacraments he understands the elements bread, and wine and from
Christ's example enforces, that they be equally delivered to all communicants.
The same Saint Hierome speaks yet more expressly of the Laietie, receiving the
Cup from the Priest in the Eucharist, in his comment on the 3. chap. of
Zephanie; Qui sanguinem Domini populo ^ius diuidunt.
the Priests also, who administer the Eucharist, and divide the blood of the
Lord to his people, commit wickedness against the Law, To which allegation
Cardinal Bellarmine Bell. de sac. Eucha. lib. 4. cap. 26. Respondeo, nihil
no^i audimus.
answers nothing, but we hear no news. It is true we hear no news out of
Saint Ieroms mouth. For all the fathers above alleged testify as much; and
this Bellarmine is for ced to grant. Durum telum necessitas; ignoscite. If he
could have coined any new answer, we should have had somewhat else from him,
then, Nihil noui audimus, but seeing he brings nothing new to impeach our
argument, I need not to add any new confirmation.

Anno 398.
In the fourth council of Carthage it is ordered, that if any penitent desire
the peace of the Church, when he lies on his death bed, if it be believed,
that he will presently depart, that the Church peace be given unto him by
laying on of hands, and vt ori eius effundatur Eucharistia, and that the
Sacrament be powered into his mouth.

Anno 399.
Saint Chrysostom in his 18. homily, in the 2. epist. to the Corinth. makes it
a clear case, that the people by the new law have as good interest to the
entire Sacrament, as the Priest, Sometimes, or in some things there is no
difference between (...).
the people and the Priest, as in the participation of the dreadful mysteries:
for all are equally admitted unto them. In the time of the old testament it was
not lawful for the people to eat of those things of which the Priests did
eat; but it is not so now; for one body is offered to all, and one Cup.

The Papists answer.
Bellarmine answers, that the difference which Saint Chrysostom observes
between the sacrifices of the old and new Testament was, that the sacrifice of
the old was divided into parts, and could not be entirely taken by any one,
and hence it came to pass, says he, that some received a greater, and some a
less portion; and for the most part, the Priests part was the greatest: but
this our Sacrament is given entirely to every one, neither has the Priest more
then the Lay people, although the symboles are more or greater in the Communion
of the Priests, then of the people.

Refutation.
This slight color of answer is easily washed away: for

First, Saint Chrysostom in the original Greek has no word signifying parts,
or division into parts, but says, (...), etc. that the Priest fed on other
things, and that the Laietie might not feed upon the same: as for example; The
laity might not at all eat of the show bread, and in the sacrifices the people
might not eat of the same, specie, or numero, which the Priest eat. For the
Law expressly set down what belonged to the Priest to eat, and what to the
people: but in the new Testament it is not so: for the people may eat of the
bread, which the Priest eats, and drink also of the same Cup. This is
evidently Saint Chrysostomes meaning.

Secondly, although it is true which Bellarmine says, that the whole Sacrament
is eaten by every Communicant; yet this must be understood of the integrity of
the thing signified, and of the essence of that sign, not of the integrity of
the quantity of the outward elements. For no one man eats the whole loaf,
or quantity of bread, that is consecrated, nor drinks the whole measure of
wine, that is sanctified, but a portion only. Herein then the difference is
not between the Priests of the old Law, and the Priests of the new, that the
Priests of the old Law might eat but a part of the Sacrifice, but the Priests
of the new might eat the whole. For if we speak of the thing signified, both
received the whole, if of the signs, neither receives the whole, that is, the
entire quantity of the thing offered. The difference was in this, according to
S. Chrysostom, that the people simply might not eat of those things, of which
the Priest might, but in the new testament the people may eat of all that the
Priests may.

Lastly, although we should admit of Bellarmines answer touching the condition
of the Priest and people of the old law, and the new; that they of the old fed
of the sacrifice apart, each having their several portions appointed for them;
but that the Prists and people of the new, received the sacrament entirely, the
Priest entirely, and the people entirely, which in some sense is true: yet this
no way satisfies the words of Saint Chrysostom: who says expressly, that one
Cup as well as one bread is set before all people, as well as Priests, and that
according to Christ's institution in the new testament.

SECT. V. Testimonies of the practice of the Church from 400. to 500.
Anno 410.
ABout the beginning of the fifth Age, God raised up that golden Tapour in the
Church, Saint Austin, by whose light, as we may discover other errors and
abuses of the Church of Rome: so this their mutilation of the Sacrament, and
defrauding Gods people of one part of this Supper. This Author in his dialogue
to Orosius, quest. 49. he interprets the blood of Abel, the blood of Christ,
which, says a Sanguis Abel significat sanguinem Christi, quo accepto, vniuersa
Ecclesia dicit, Amen. Dum potatur sanguinem Christi, dicit, Amen. Non soum nemo
probibetur, sed omnes ad bibendum exhortantur, qui volunt habere vitam.
he, when the whole Church receives, it says, Amen. For what a cry makes the
whole Church, when after she has drank the blood of Christ, cries, Amen? And
in his 57. question upon Leuiticus, he not only testifies, that the people did
drink of Christ's blood, but that they ought to do so, if they expect life
from him. What is the meaning of this, says he, that the people are forbidden
to eat of the blood of the sacrifices, which were offered for sin, if by those
sacrifices this sacrifice was signified, in which there is trueremission of
sins? and yet not only no man is forbidden to take the blood of this
sacrifice for nourishment, but on the contrary all men, who desire life, are
exhorted to drink it.

Papists answer.
Non vim sacit in modo bibendi, sed in ipsa sumptione songuinis, quodidem
efficit, sieve sumatur per modum cibi, sieve per modum potus.
Bellarmine de sacra. Eucharistiae. lib. 4. cap. 26. answers, that the force
of Saint Austines reason consists not in the manner of drinking, but in the
taking of the blood, which produces the same effect, whither it be taken as
meat, or drink.

Refutation.
Saint Austin in that place observes a difference between the precepts of the
old, and the precepts of the new testament; that in the old, blood was
forbidden so much as to be eaten with the flesh; but in the new it is
commanded to be drunk, even by it self, and so the force of his reason ab
oppositis stands not only in some way taking blood for sustenance, but even in
the manner of taking it, even by drink.

Secondly, whereinsoeuer the force of Saint Austines reason stands, his words,
which we allege, are expressly for taking it by Estius. Omnes fere patres
tesantur, fideles bibere sanguinem Christi, vt Tertul. Orig. Cyprian. and Aug.
in Psalm. 94. and 96 Ser. 59. de verbis Domini. homil. 27. and tract. 31. 38.
40. and 45. in Johan.
drinking. For he says not, as Bellarmine will have him; all who desire life,
are exhorted to take Christ's blood for sustenance, or to feed upon it. But they
are exhorted to drink it. The people therefore, if they look for life by
Christ, they must drink his blood, which they cannot do, if the Priest deny
the Cup.

Anno. 420.
A fidelibus in panis and vini sacramento quotidie manducatur, and bibitur.
Eusebius Emissenus in his Homily upon Palme-Sunday, speaks of the faithfulls
communicating in both kinds, as of a daily and frequent practice. As then our
Lord lived, and spoke, and yet was eaten by his Disciples, and drunk; so now
he remains whole and uncorrupted, and yet is daily drunk and eaten by the
faithful. I believe, no Romish Priest will be so impudent, as to restrain
believers to Priests only. If the Layetie are not to be reckoned in the number
of fideles, or belieuers, they may not eat Christ in the Sacrament of bread;
and if they are fideles, or believers, then they usually, nay, daily drink his
blood in the Sacrament of wine, as well as eat his flesh in the Sacrament of
bread.

Anno 430.
Theodoret in his Dialogue, called Atreptus, (...).
cap. 11. allotteth to all the faithful an equal share in the Lords Supper:
one mystical Table is prepared for all, from which all believers take unto
themselves an equal portion. And in his Comment on the second Chapter of the
first to the Corinthians, he observes a difference between ordinary suppers,
and the Lords Supper: Illius enim, ex aequo omnes sunt particip^s, hic autem
alius esurit, alius vero ebrius est.
Of that, viz. the Lords Table, all are equally partakers: but here, viz. in
common suppers, one is hungry, and another is drunk: He says not, he
drinks; but is drunk, blaming him for two reasons; first, that he drinks
alone; secondly, that Et quod solus bibit.
he is drunk. If the Layetie drank not of the Lords Table, they did not
equally participate with the Priests. And if in Theodorets time the Priests did
drink alone, as now they do at the Roman Mass; Theodoret could not herein
have differenced them from common and profane tables: so that at the one all
eat and drink alike, at the other, one is satisfied, and another is hungry;
one is thirsty, and another drinks alone, and is drunk.

Anno 431.
Cyrillus of Alexandria, Glaphyr. lib. 2. writes thus; As long as we are in
this world, we will communicate with Christ by his holy flesh, and precious
blood. Communicatio sanctae carnis, atque item poculu^ ex salutari ipsius
sanguine, etc. The communicating his holy flesh, and the Cup of his holy blood
has in it a confession of Christ's death: by the participating in these things
in this world we commemorate Christ's death.

Anno. 450.
Leo the Great, Bishop of Rome, in his fourth Sermon de quadragessima, gives it
as a character or mark, to descry the Manichees by; that at the Sacrament they
would eat of the bread, but in no wise drink of the wine. Ita in sacramenti
communione se temperant, vt interdum tutius lateant, ore indigno Christi corpus
accipiunt, sanguinem autem redemptionis nostrae haurire omnino declinant.
They, viz. the Manichees, so carry themselves at the Communion, that they may
more safely lie hid: they take the body of Christ into their unworthy mouths,
but altogether they refuse to drink the blood of their redemption, which I
would have your Holiness know, that you may set a mark upon these men, and in
whomsoever you find such sacrilegious simulation, you discover them, that by
Priestly authority they may be driven from the society of the Saints. Here
Leo, both a Bishop of Rome, and a great Clarke, makes it sacrilege, and
heresy, to receive Christ's body in the Sacrament, and to refuse to drink his
blood.

Anno. 451.
In the general (...).
Council of Chalcedon, act. 10. there is an accusation brought in against Iba
the Bishop of Edessa, that in some Church in his Diocese, at the Commemoration
of the holy Martyrs, there was but a little wine, and that corrupt and sour,
provided for the Altar to be sanctified, and distributed to the people. This
general Council was counted to represent the whole Christian Church, whereby
it appears, that at the time of this Council, the Cup was given through the
whole Christian world to the Laiety, and that the administering of the Sacrament
to the people without wine, was held a profanation of the Lords Supper: for
which cause that Bishop was severely taxed.

Anno 453.
Regnum Dei, vt docti intelligunt, Ecclesia est, in quaquotidie bibit sanguinem
suum Christus per sanctos suos, tanquam caput in membris suis.
Eucherius, Bishop of Lions in his questions upon Matthew implies, that all
holy men in general, and true members of Christ in his time drank our
Redeemers blood in the Sacrament. His words are; The Kingdom of God, as the
learned understand it, is the Church, in which Christ daily drinks his own
blood by his Saints, as the Head in his members.

Anno 492.
Among the Decrees of ancient Popes collected by Gratian, we find that
sentence of Gelasius, which I have set in the frontispiece of this book, Great.
de consecra. did. 2. cap. Comperimus. Aut integra sacramenta, percipiunt aut
ab integris arceantur.
We find that some receiving a portion of Christ's holy Body, abstain from the
Cup of his sacred blood: which because they do out of I know not what
superstition, we command, that either they receive the entire Sacraments, or
that they be entirely withheld from them, because the division of one and the
selfsame mystery cannot be without grand sacrilege. In this Decree of
Gelasius, first, we are to note, that it is a Papal decision ex Cathedra; That
the elements in the Lords Supper must be taken jointly. This Gelasius
determines not as a private man, but as a Pope ex Cathedra, and therefore all
Papists are bound to believe, that he did not, nor could not err in this
decree.

Secondly, it is to be noted, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is not
entire without the Cup, which quite overthrows our adversaries new fancy of
concomitancy.

Thirdly, it is to be noted, that he defines the withholding the Cup from
any Communicant, or dividing the holy mystery, by half communicating, not
only to be sacrilege, but to be grand sacrilege, or the greatest sacrilege
that can be committed. For grande is more then magnum, or grave, and it
signifies sacrilege in the highest degree.

Papists answer.
Gratian, or his gloss in the title to this Decree would bear us in hand,
that this Decree concerns the Itarespondet Aquinas, part. 3. q. 80. and
Thomistae passim.
Priests only, and not the Laiety. For a Priest to consecrate, or to offer the
bread without the wine, or after they have consecrated both, to participate but
of one, this Gelasius forbids, say they; but not the Layetie to communicate in
one kind only. Cardinal Bellarmine adds a second answer; that this Canon was
made against the Manichees, and Priscillianists, who refused the Cup in the
Sacrament, partly because they held wine in an abomination, partly because they
believed not, that Christ had true blood in him. These, says Bellarmine, in
token and testimony that they had reformed their former error, are commanded
to receive the Sacrament in both kinds, or else not at all to be admitted unto
the Communion.

The Refutation.
Neither of these wards will bear off the blow. For first, it is not likely,
that Gelasius made this decree against the Manichees, or Priscillianists: for
then he would not have said, Quia nescio qua superstitione astricti tenentur:
that is, that they were entangled in I know not what superstition; but rather,
Quia nota haeresi astricti tenentur: that is, they do it, because they are
entangled in a known heresy.

Secondly, admit that the Manichees, and Priscillianists occasioned this
decree; yet this decree is backed with a general reason, which forbids all to
Communicate in one kind only, under the peril of grand Sacrilege.

Thirdly, Gratians evasion will no way save the Laietie harmless, or acquit
them of Sacrilege: where of the Priest by this decree, say they, is made
guilty: For that which is Sacrilege in the Priest, cannot be Religion in the
people. Gelasius says not, that the Sacrilege consists in the division of
one and the self same sacrifice, but in the division of one and the self same
mystery. Now the self same mystery, or Sacrament is divided as well in the
half Communion of the people, as of the Priest.

Lastly, it is evident, that the decree concerns the Communicants, and not
the Priests Conficients, or administering. For the word arceantur, that is, let
them be kept from, or driven from the entire Sacrament, must needs be meant of
the people. For the people suspend not the Priests from the Sacrament, but the
Priests, or Bishops the people. Here Master Euerard is locked fast with a like
pair of fetters to those, which Campian makes for Protestants. As he says,
Patres, so I say, Papas admittis? Captus es; exludis? Nullus es. Do you allow
of the Popes decissions? You are then taken. Do you disallow of them? You are
no body in the opinion of your own selves. If you subscribe to the
determination of two Popes, Leo, and Gelasius, you must confess your self
guilty of Sacrilege: if you subscribe not to them, of heresy. Vtrum horum
mauis, accipe.

SECT. VI. Testimonies of the practice of the Church, from 500. to 600.
AS Cic. Brut.
Tullie writes of Hortensius, that after his Consulship he decayed in his rare
faculty of eloquence, though not so sensibly, that every auditor might
perceive it: yet in such sort, that a cunning artist might observe, that he
drew not so clear a stroke in his masterpieces, nor cast on them so rich and
lively colors, as before. Such was the state of the Church in this age. It
decayed and failed, though not so sensibly, and grossly, that every ordinary
reader might take notice thereof: yet in such sort, that the learned and
judicious have discovered in the writers of this age, and much more after, a
declination from the purity of former ages, both in style and doctrine. Their
Latin much degenerated into barbarism; and their devotion into superstition.
Whence it is, that the prime Doctors of the Reformed Churches, who appeal from
the late corruptions in the Romish Church to the prime sincerity in the first
and best ages, confine this their appeal within the pale of the fifth age.

Wherefore, the reader is not to demand, or expect from hence forth, either so
frequent testimonies, or at least, of men of that eminency, and reverend
authority, as the former were. For such, the succeeding ages brought forth
none: but it shall suffice to produce such witnesses as the times affoorded;
men that held rank with the best in their times: Such were Remigius Archbishop
of Rhemes, Gregory, Bishop of Tours, and the Fathers of the Council of Toledo
and Iledra.

Anno 524.
In the Council held at Ilerda, can. 1. All those that serve at the Altar (and
Christi corpus and sanguinem tradunt) and deliver the body and blood of Christ,
or handle any holy vessel, are strictly charged to abstain from all man's
blood, yea, even of their enemies.

Anno 560.
In 1. Cor. c. 10. Appellatur calix communicatio, quasi participatio; quia
omnes communicant ex illo, partemque sumunt ex sanguine Domini. Biblioth. PP.
Tom. 5.
Remigius Archbishop of Rhemes, thus expounds those words of Saint Paul: The
Cup of blessing wherewith we bless; is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ? The Cup is called the Communion, because all communicated or received
the Communion out of it, participating of the blood of the Lord.

Papists answer.
If our adversaries here fly to their old starting hole; that by all, here all
Priests are meant, and not all Communicants, they may be stopped by that which
Hincmarus writes in the life of this Rhemigius: that he gave a Chalice for the
peoples use with this Motto: Hauriat hinc populus vitam de sanguine sacro
Iniecto, aeternus quem fudit vulnere Christus.
Rhemigius reddit Domino sua vota Sacerdos.
Rhemigius Priest, that gave this Cup,
Prai'th that in it the people sup;
And still draw life from flowing blood
Out of Christ's side, as of a flood.


Let it be noted, that he says not, hauriat hinc clerus, but populus: not
let the Priest, but let the people out of this Cup, draw life from the holy
blood, which Christ shed out of his wounds. Whereby it appears evidently,
that this Chalice was given by the Archbishop, for the peoples use, at great
and solemn Communions, and not for the Priests in their private Masses, if any
such were in Rhemigius his days.

Anno 580.
Greg. Turonens. de glor. Martyr. li. 1. ca. 10. relates a miraculous
accident, that fell out by occasion of a Ad participationem gloriosi corporis,
and sanguinis Domini ^um alijs infantibus infans Iudaeus accessit.
Jews child, coming with other children to the Communion of Christ's body and
blood: I am sure these children were not Priests that said Mass; and if
children were admitted to the holy Cup, much more men of riper years.

Papists answer.
This was an abuse to let children come to the Communion, who cannnot examine
themselves; and therefore from this abusiue coustome no good rule may be drawn.

The Refutation.
I allow not of the coustome of admitting children to the Communion in the
Church, or giving it them at home: though it be more ancient then most of the
new Articles of the Romish Creed, coined by Pope Pius the fourth, in his Bull.
but I make a true inference, though from an erroneous practice, as the Apostle
does from a custom among the Corinthians, who were baptized for the dead.
Doubtless if the Laietie in those days had been kept from the holy Cup,
children never had been admitted to drink of it. For no man can imagine, that
the Church would give little infants that privilege, which they denied their
parents.

Anno 537.
In the second Council of Toledo, Can. 7. It is ordained throughout all the
Countries of Spain, and Gallicia, for the confirmation of the new conversion
of the people from Arianisme, that before the participation of the body and
blood of Christ (corporis and sanguinis communicationem) according to the
manner of the Eastern Churches, all the Congregation shall with an audible
voice, rehearse the most holy Articles of the Christian faith.

Anno 597.
In the third Council held at Toledo, in the reign of Recaredus, c. 2. Vt
primum populi quam credulitatem teneant, fanteantur; and sic corda fide
purificata ad Christi corpus and sanguinem percipiendum exhibeant.
It is decreed, that the people shall first make profession of their faith, and
so exhibit their hearts purified by faith, to receive Christ's body and blood.
Does not this Council speak in the Protestant language? that the people are
to receive Christ's blood, as well as his body, and both by faith, or, which is
all one, in their hearts purified by faith. How near comes this to the form
at this day in use in our Church? Feed on him in thy heart by faith? I find no
exception taken by any Papist at this testimony; and therefore there needs no
ward, where no blow is so much as offered.

SECT. VII. Testimonies of the practice of the Church from 600. to 700.
Anno. 600.
IT was truly spoken of Constantine, that he was Praeteritis melior,
venientibus auctor; Better then his predecessors, and a good president to those
that succeeded him. But on the contrary, we may say of Gregory the Great, that
he was Praeteritis peior, yet venientibus auctor: that he was bad in
comparison of his predecessors, Like Fabullus in the Poet, vt verum loquar,
optimus malorum, etc. Mart. epig. lib. 12.
but good in comparison of his successors. For he was the worst of the good
Popes, and the best of the evil. It was this Pope, who sent Austine the Monk
into England to propagate the Christian faith; who in some places sowed, in
others watered the seed all ready sown which was wholesome, yet somewhat
smutty, and such as needed to be washed and cleansed from superstition. He much
stikled for Gregory his masters authority, and brought in some customs and
ceremonies, that savor rank to those that are Emunctae naris: yet the faith
he preached was for substance the same, which the reformed Churches embrace at
this day; as in my answer to the Jesuits threefold challenge I have made it
appear; And as in other controversies of greater moment, so in this he is
clearly ours.

Homil. 22. Sanguis super ^umque postem ponitur, ^uando non sol^ ^e cordis, sed
etiam ore corporis hauritur.
in Euang. he mystically applies the blood of the Pascall Lamb stricken upon
both posts of the door, to the participation of Christ's blood in the
Eucharist; saying; The blood is then put on both posts, when is taken, or
drawn in both by, or with the mouth of the body, and of the heart.

In the fourth of his Eius ibi corpus samitur, cuius caro in populi salutem
partitur, eius fanguis non iam in manus in fidelium, sed ad fidelium or a
perfunditur.
dialogues (if his) c. 58. His body is taken, whose flesh is broken, and
divided for the peoples salvation, his blood is not now powered out upon the
hands of infidels, but into the mouths of the faithful. If with any color
the adversaries might restrain fideles to the Priests only, yet the word
populi going before, will enforce them to understand this passage as well of
the people, as Priests; if not the people more especially, who are named
expressly, and not the Priests.

Papists answer.
I answer, says Bellarmine, Bell. de Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 16. Sancti isti
patres sumi dicunt sanguinem ore corporis, quod nos non negamus esse faciendum;
bibi autem debere ore corporis, aut sub specie vini sumi non dicunt.
that Gregory, and Bid say, that Christ's blood is taken with the mouth of the
body; but we deny that they say, that it ought to be drunken with the mouth of
the body, or to be taken under the form of wine.

Refutation.
This answer of the Cardinal can argue no less in him, then either supine
negligence, or a cauterized conscience. For S. Gregory in the words
immediately preceding those above alleged, expressly speaks of drinking
Christ's blood, saying, quod sit sanguis Christi non audiendo, sed bibendo
didicistis. What is meant by the blood of Christ, you have learned not by
hearing, but by drinking. Had he not in express words mentioned drinking, yet
the phrases he uses, hauritur, and perfunditur; that Christ's blood is shed,
and taken as a draught, demonstrates, that he speaks not of partaking Christ's
blood, as it is joined to his body, and enclosed in his veins; but as severed
from it. And if the Cardinal himself had not been drunk with the Cup of the
wine of Babylon, he would never have denied, that Saint Gregory speaks of
drinking Christ's blood under the form of wine: when he uses that very word,
u Potat. Quis exponere queat quantae fuit miserationis, u Greg. in Psalm. 6.
Poenitent. Primis Ecclesiae te^porib. Euchar. fideli populo co^municatam esse
sub vtraque specie manifestum est exscriptis omnium fere patrum; quitestantur
fideles bibere sanguinem Christi. Ut Tertul. Orig. Cypr. Aug. Greg. Estius in
Sent.
sacratissim a praeciosi sanguinis effusione genus humanum redimere, and
sacrosanctum viuifici corporis and sanguinis sui mysterium membris suis
tribuere, cuius perceptione corpus suum, quod est Ecclesia pascitur, and
potatur, abluitur, and sanctificatur? Who can express how great mercy it was,
by that most holy effusion of his precious blood to redeem mankind, and to
give to his members the most holy mystery of his quickening body and blood, by
the partaking whereof, his body, which is the Church, is nourished as with meat
and drink, is washed, and sanctified?

These and other passages of Gregory are so clear and bright, that they
dazeled the eyes of Estius, a great Parisian Doctor, who handling this question
professedly, acknowledges, that Saint Gregory among other fathers is expressly
for the Commmunion in both kinds.

Anno Dom. 620.
The Service Book, commonly called Ordo Romanus, The Roman order set forth by
Gregory, or under Pope Gregory with his allowance, sufficiently discovers the
present practice of the Roman Church in their dry Masses, to be a disorder and
shameful abuse. For there they may read, and blush to read in the Rubricke,
these forms set down at the Supplices te rogamus, vt qui corpus and sanguinem
Domini nostri Jesus Christi sumpserimus, omni gratia and benedictione spirituali
repleamur. Et post communionem; Corpus tuum, Domine, quod sumpsimus, and
sanguis quem potanimus, adhaereat visceribus nostris.
Communion: We humbly beseech thee, that we which have taken the body and
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, may be filled with grace and heavenly
benediction: and after the Communion; Let thy body, O Lord, which we have
taken, and thy blood which we have drunk, stick to our bowels, that no blot
of sin may remaiue in us, who have been refreshed by these pure and holy
mysteries.

Anno 630.
Saint Quarta infertur pro osculo pacis vt charitate omnes reconciliati inuicem
digne sacramento corporis and sanguinss Christi consocientur.
Isidore, as in other things, so in this, treads his master Gregory's steps
de divine. of fic. lib. 1. c. 15. The fourth prayer is brought in for the kiss
of peace; vt omnes, that all being reconciled by charity, may join in the
worthy participation of Christ's body and blood; omnes, all People therefore,
as well as Priests, unless they will have the people to be out of charity, all
that are in charity must communicate together in the mystery of Christ's body
and blood. But Gods people are, or ought to be in charity, and therefore to be
admitted by Saint Isidores rule, as well to the Cup, as to the bread at the
Lords Table.

Anno. 633.
In the fourth Council of Toledo, Can. 6. All the people are appointed one
good friday to ask pardon for their sins; that being cleansed by the
compunction of repentance, they may be thought fit one Easter day to receive
the sacrament of Christ's body and blood. And in the seventh Canon it is
appointed, that after the Lords prayer, and the blessing of the people, the
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood be received after this manner: the Priest
and Leuite is to communicate before the Altar, the rest of the Clergy in the
Quire, the rest of the people without the Quire. See also 57. Canon.

Anno 675.
In the eleventh Council held at Toledo, the fathers determine, that such who
received the Cup in extemity of sickness, but refused the bread, because in
regard of the drines of their throat they could not swallow it down, should
not therefore be cut off from Christ's body. The decree runs thus; The
infirmity of humane nature in the very passage out of this life is accustomed
to be oppressed in such sort with drought, that the sick are not able to take
down any meat to refresh them; no, nor scarce any drop of drink to strengthen
them; which thing we have observed in the departure of many, who desiring the
wished food of the holy Communion to sustain them in their last journey, have
yet cast Collatam sibi a sacerdote Eucharistiam reiecerunt, non quod
infidelitat, hoc agerent, sed quod prater dominici calicis (...) traditum
(...), non possent Eucharistiam deglutire.
away the Eucharist given them by the Priest, not out of infidelity, but
because they could not swallow any thing down, beside a small draught of the
holy Cup; such as these therefore ought not to be separated from the body of
Christ. The Council speaks of the Laiety, refusing bread at the Priests
hands, which they could not take down, and yet receiving the Cup: and in this
case of necessity, the Council dispenceth with their refusing the bread, but
finds no fault with them for taking the Cup. Nay upon that point, excuses
them from infidelity, and saves them from excommunication. How does this
Council clash, and cross shins as it were with the Council of Constance, and
Trent? In these the people are condemned for taking the Cup; in that, they are
acquitted for it. In them, the Priest is censured, that gives them the Cup; in
this, the people are absolved from censure in refusing the bread, because they
Communicate in the Cup.

In the same year, in the Council at Braccara, they are blamed that ministered
not wine to the people in the Sacrament, but either milk, or grapes, Can. 2.
Non expressum vinum in sacramento dominici calicis offerre, sed lac pro vino
dedicare, aut oblatis vuis populo communicare. In the same Council they are
blamed also. Qui intinctam Eucharistiam populis pro complemento communionis
porrigerent; Who delivered to the people a piece of bread dipped in wine for the
whole Communion which custom, how repugnant it is to the doctrine of the
Gospel, and custom of the Church, may easily be proved from the fountain of
truth, who gave the Cut by it self saying, Drink ye all of this, as he took
the bread by it self, saying; Take, eat, etc.

SECT. VIII. The Testimonies of the practice of the Church from 700. to 800.
IN this age we have four concurrent witnesses, and contestatours beyond all
exception:

Beda. Greg. 2. Greg. 3. Alcumus.
We will produce them in order. And first Venerable Beda.

Anno 720.
Venerable Beda, the honor of England, and mirror of his time, witnesses as
follows: Christ washes us daily from our sins in his blood, when the memory
of his passion is celebrated or recounted at the Altar; Beda, homil in verba
Ioh. vidit Ioh. Iesum, etc. Cum panis and vini creatura in sacramentum corporis
eius and sanguinis transsertur. et post: sanguis fidelium ore sumitur ad
salutem.
where the creatures of bread and wine, by the unspeakable sanctification of
the Spirit, are changed into the Sacrament of his flesh and blood; and thereby
his body and blood is not powered out by the hands of Infidels to their
destruction, but is received, or is taken by, or into the mouth of the faithful
to salvation. In this testimony I note, first, that he teaches not a
substantial change of the elements of bread and wine into the body and blood
of Christ; but a sacramental only, agreeable to the harmony of Protestants
Confession. Se condly, that Beda either alludes unto, or transcribes herein the
words of S. Gregory above alleged, which I have there proved to be most
pregnant to our purpose.

Anno 726.
Gregory 2. in his Epistle of Images to Leo Isaurus; A man that has sinned,
and confessed after they have well chastened, and punished him with fasting,
let them impart unto him the precious body of our Lord, and Sancto illius
sanguine potent.
give him his holy blood to drink.

Anno 731.
Gregory 3. in his former Epistle to Boniface, forbids at the Lords Table
more then one Cup to be used; saying, It is not a fitting thing, to put two or
three Chalices on the Altar. No doubt the reason, why more Chalices were put on
the Altar, was for the use of the people, otherwise one would have served.

This custom the Pope dislikes not, for that the Cup was given to the Laiety:
but because in the first institution, Christ gave but one Cup to all his
Disciples. The same Pope afterward thus resolves the question touching the
leprous Communicants, with whom the sound could not with safety drink in the
same Cup: As Leprosis, si fideles fuerint, Dominici corporis and sanguinis
participatie tribuatur.
for leapers, if they be belieuers, let them not be deprived if the
participation of our Lords body and blood, but by no means let them be at the
same Table, or participate together with them, that are clean.

Anno. 780.
Alcuinus in his book of divine duties, instanceth in some, who were not fit to
communicate every day, because they had no purpose to leave their sins; To
these, says he, Saint Austine thus speaks; I like well of your humility,
that you presume not to approach to the body and blood of Christ; but it were
better, that you would depart from your iniquities, and being made clear by
repentance, d Mundi facti per poenitentia^, corpus, and sanguinem Domini sumere.
would take the body and blood of Christ.

Papists answer.
Cardinal Bellarmine, for want of a better, aduentureth upon this answer: that
indeed these Fathers say, that the blood of Christ is taken by, or with the
mouth; but they say not, that it ought to be drunken with the mouth of the
body, or taken under the form of wine.

Reply.
The Heart as often as he is wounded flies to his old Dictamus, and Bellarm. to
this distinction to heal himself: but none of this herb here grows; there
is no ground for it. For first, the Fathers alleged speak of the body and
blood of Christ, as distinct things; and therefore not as of one inuolued in
the other by the doctrine of Concomitancy: to approach unto, to take the body
of Christ and his blood, or the creature of bread and wine sacramentally
changed into Christ's body and blood, as Beda speaks, is not to take bread
only, and wine by, I know not what, consequence; or the body only in specie,
and the blood by Concomitancy.

Secondly, could this answer be appliable to other general sentences of the
Fathers, yet not to these, in which there is express mention made of the
Chalice, of pouring out the blood of Christ, and taking it as drink; and
therefore under the form of wine. And who are they that so receive it? The
Laietie as well as the Priests, unless none but Priests are faithful
Christians, or all lepers and excommunicate, or suspended persons are to be
taken for Priests. Beda reaches the Cup to the faithful indifferently, and
Gregory to penitents after confession and contrition, of what rank so ever.
Yea leapers are not excluded simply, but secluded, that they might not infect
the sound, by drinking together with them.

SECT. IX. The practice of the Church from 800. to 900.
Anno 800.
CHarles the Great in his book (as the Inscription bears) of Images,
testifies, that Lib. 3. cap. 6.
in his time not only frequently, but daily, Christians participated of
Christ's body and blood. He affirms, that sins are remitted by Per sanguinem
Christi, quia nobis in sacramento sumitur, et pro nobis effusus. est.
the holy Ghost, or by the blood of Christ, which is taken of us in the
Sacrament, and was shed for us, for the remission of sins. That he means by
us, the Laiety, as well as the Clergy, is evident. First, because himself was a
Lay man; and therefore necessarily, in us, includes those of his own rank and
order. Secondly, because he speaks of all their communicating, who receive the
remission of sins by the effusion of Christ's blood for them; and these I am
sure, are not the Priests only. Thirdly, because in the fourth book c. 14.
he speaks expressly of the faithful in general: whereby the people must
needs be understood, as well as the Priests. His words are: the mystery of the
Corporis, and sanguinis Christi mysterium quotidie a fidelibus sumitur.
body and blood of Christ is daily received by the faithful in the Sacrament.

Anno 820.
Paschasius Rathertus, Abbot of Corbie, who was the first that ever wrote of
purpose, and at large, of the truth of Christ's body Bell. de scripter. Eccles.
ad ann. 820. Hic auctor primus suit, qui serio and copiose scripsit de veritate
corporis and sanguinis. Pasdecor. and sang. dom. ca. 15.
and blood in the sacrament (if we may believe Bellarmine) is full and direct
against the Church of Rome in the point of their half communion. O man, says
he, as often as thou drinkest of this Cup, or eatest of this bread, thou may
not think, that thou drinkest other blood, then that which was shed Cap. 1 9.
for thee, and for all for the remission of our sins. And again; The blood
is well joined to the flesh, because Nec caro sine sanguine, nec sanguis sine
carne iure communicatur.
neither the flesh without the blood, nor the blood without the flesh is
rightly communicated. For the whole man, which consists of two substances, is
redeemed; and therefore fed together both with the flesh of Christ, and his
blood. Had he lived in our days, and professedly wrote against our modern
Papists, he could not in more express words have impugned the Romish Gloss
upon the words of our Savior, viz. drink ye all of this: that is, all
Priests, then he does. cap. 15. He alone it is, says he, who breaks this
bread, and by the hands of his Ministers distributeth it to beleiuers, saying,
take ye ad drink all of this, as well Ministers, as the rest Bibite ex hoc
omnes, tam ministri, quam reliqui credentes.
of the faithful; this is the Cup of the blood of the new and everlasting
Testament.

Anno 830.
Amalarius, praefat. in liber. 3. de Offic. Eccles. affirms, that the
benediction of Bishops, or Priests without Chaunters, Readers, or any other, is
sufficient to bless the bread and wine, wherewith the people might be Ad
benedicendum panem and vinum, quo populus reficeretur ad animarum salutem.
refreshed to their souls health, as it was wont to be done in the first times
by the Apostles themselves. Quot verba, tot fulmina; so many words, so many
thunderbolts to strike down dead the Popes sacrilegious heresy. If the bread
and wine were blessed for the refection of the people, then not of the Priests
only; if this refectio^ was for the health of their souls, who dare deny it
them? If this was the manner of blessing and administering the Sacrament used by
the Apostles themselves, by what authority at this day does the Church of Rome
alter it?

Anno 835.
Lib. 1. de instit. Cleri. cap. 31 Maluit Dominus cor poris and sanguinis sui
sacramentum sidelium ore percipi, etc.
Rabanus Maurus, Bishop of Mentz teaches us, that the Lord would have the
Sacrament of his body and blood to be received by the mouth of the faithful,
and made their food; that by that visible work, the invisible effect of the
Sacrament might be showed. For as the material food outwardly nourishes the
body, and makes it quick and lively, so the Word of God within nourishes,
and strengthens the soul. Temporalem vitam sine isto cibo and potu habere
possunt homines, aeternam habere omnino non possunt, quapropter necesse habemus
sumere corpus and sanguinem eius.
Men may have this temporal life without this meat and drink, but they
cannot have the eternal, because this meat signifies the eternal society,
or communion of the Head with the members. Who soever (says he) eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, he abides in me, and I in him. Wherefore of
necessity we must take his body and blood, that we may abide in him, and be
made members of his body. In these passages this learned Bishop every way stops
the mouth of our adversaries. They cannot say, that he speaks of Priests only;
for he speaks of all faithful, that either are already, or are to be made
members of Christ's body. Neither can they shift off this passage, as they do
some others, by granting, that the people may, but denying, that they ought to
communicate in both kinds. For he presses very far the necessity of thus
communicating, without which he supposes neither communion with Christ, nor
eternal life can be obtained. Neither lastly, can they euade by their doctrine
of concomitancy, saying, that the people participate of the blood in the body,
when they receive the consecrated Host. For he speaks distinctly of eating
and drinking, bread and drink, and sacraments, in the plural number, which
cannot possibly be understood of participating the bread only, or
communicating in one kind after the Popish manner.

Anno 840.
In Apoc. ca. 2. in Ecclesia quotidie fideles comedunt Christi corpus, and
sanguinem bibunt.
Haymo Bishop of Halberstat, relates the manner of the faithful to have been
in his time, daily to eat the body of Christ, and to drink his blood; and
paraphrasing upon these words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. cap. 10. The Cup which we
bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? He says, the Cup is
called the Appellatur calix communicatio, quasi participatio; quia omnes
communicant ex illo, partemque sumunt ex sanguine Domini, quem continet in se.
Communion, because all communicate of it, and partake of the blood of the
Lord, which it contains in it. Surely if the word fidelis, or faithful
carries not the Layetie, yet the word omnes, or all, must needs; the faithful
then, and all of them in Haymoes time, were as well admitted to the Cup, as to
the bread.

Anno 849.
Valafridus Strabo speaking of the suspension De verb. Eccl. ca. 17. Ab ipsis
sacramentis Ecclesiastico suspendantur iudicio, ne indigne ea percipientes
reatu maiori involuantur, vt Judas.
of scandalous persons from the Communion, calls the Lords Supper Sacraments
in the plural number, in regard of the two elements, or kinds in which it is
administered. Those, says he, that wander from the members of Christ by the
enormity, or faeditie of capital crimes, by the judgment of the Church are
suspended from the q Sacraments, lest by the unworthy receiving them, they
should be entangled in a greater guilt, as Judas. Here by capital offenders,
to understand Priests, were a capital offense; as if they alone were the
greatest offenders in the Church, and to have the rod of Ecclesiastical
censures to be spent upon them only. Therefore the Romanists, will they, nill
they, to save themselves from the lash, must put the capital offender upon the
Laiety, and consequently confess, that they, who for their crimes were at some
times suspended from the Sacraments, were ordinarily, when they were free from
such crimes, admitted to both the Sacraments, (as Strabo calls them) that is,
both the elements, the wine as well as the bread. For the same Strabo in his
twentieth Chapter stirs up himself, and all good Christians to the
continual participating of the Quantum mentis, velcorporis grauiores maculae
non obsistunt, panem and sanguinem dominicum, quibus sine viuere non possumus,
iugiter ambiamus.
body and blood of Christ, without which we cannot live, so far forth, as some
greater blots or blemishes in body or mind do not withhold, or hinder from it.

Anno. 868.
In a Council held at Worms under Lewis the second, we find a Canon to this
purpose: Can. 36. Si vir viduam duxerit, quae ex priori marito filiam babuit,
and cum eadem filia postmodum concubuerit, coniugium modis omnibus diffoluatur;
and vir ille poenitentiae subiaceat sanctionibus: vt per trien^ te^pus a
corpore Domini nost. Ies. Christ. suspendatur, and sanguine.
If any man shall marry a widow, which had a daughter by her former husband,
and shall after lie with this her daughter; let that marriage by all means be
dissolved, and let that man undergo the penance of the Church, so that for
three years he be suspended from the body of Jesus Christ, and his blood. He
who upon a special reason is debard from the Communion of the body and blood of
Christ, and that for a certain time, must needs be supposed before that time to
have been admitted to communicate in both kinds, and after his penance of
three years done, cannot be denied again admittance to the Lords Table. I
desire then to know, what incestuous crime all the Laiety under the Papacy have
committed, that for these two hundred years, ever since the Council of
Constance, they have suspended them from the Sacrament of Christ's blood.

Anno. 869.
Reg. in Chro. ad an. 869. Communionem corporis and sanguinis Domini de manu
pontificis sumpsit, and post: Corpus and sanguis Domnostri lesi Christi prosit
tibi in vitam aeternam.
Regino discribeth the manner of Pope Adrians delivering the Communion to King
Lotharius and his followers in both kinds, then which we cannot desire a
nobler president, or fairer evidence of the custom of the Church in that Age;
Thus then Regino; The Pope inuites the king to the Lords Table, taking the body
and blood of our Lord in his hands; the King takes the body and blood of our
Lord at the hands of the Pope: Then the Bishop turning himself to the
followers of the King, delivers the Communion to each of them in these words:
If thou have not showed thy self a favorer, or an abbetter of King Lothar. in
the objected crime of adultery, neither have given thy consent thereunto,
neither have communicated with Waldrand, and other persons excommunicated by
the Apostolic See, let the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ be
healthful to thee unto eternal life.

Anno 875.
Quod in Ecclesia ore fidelium sumitur corpus Cbristi and sanguis, quaerit
vestrae magnitudinis excelientia, in mysterio fiat, an inveritate? and postea:
Interius si consideres, non iam liquor vini, sed sanguis Christi fidelium
mentibus and sapit, dum gustatur, and agnoscitur, dum conspicitur, and probatur
dum odoratur.
Bertramus, or as some write his name Ratramus, in his book of the body and
blood of Christ, dedicated to Carolus Caluus, writes thus: you demand, whether
the body of Christ and his blood which in the Church are received, by, or with
the mouth of the faithful, be his body and blood mystically, or in truth? And
a little after he resolves thus; If ye look inwardly, it is not the liquor
of wine, but the blood of Christ, which is tasted by the minds of the
faithful, when it is drunk, and acknowledged, when it is seen, and liked,
when it is smelt unto.

This Bertram speaks so plainly through this whole book for the entire
Communion, and against the Popish carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament,
that the Romish Inquisitors were in a quandary, what to do with this Author,
whither quite to prohibit the reading of him, or to devise some colorable
excuse and evasion for such passages in him, as hold no good quarter with their
Trent Faith.

Papists answer to the testimonies of the writers alleged in this former Age.
Before most of these testimonies, our adversaries draw Timanthes his courtain,
and answer them with silence. Only to Paschasius and Haymo, Cardinal
Bellarmine pretends to give an answer; either because for shame he could do no
less, being so often vpraided with them: or because like a new Alcumist, he
hoped out of the iron that wounded him, to draw an oil to cure the wound of
his cause. To the testimony out of Paschasius, his answer, like Cerberus,
consists of three heads. First, he Bell. lib. 4. de sacra. Christ. cap. 26.
Primum est, locum istum videri corruptum, secundo obseruandum est, non exponere
Pasch. verba Domini, vt sunt apud Matheum. Tertio obseruandum est, verba
Paschasij sententiae nostrae plurimum sauere; significant enim bibendum esse
Domini sanguinem, sed in specie panis.
says, that the place in Paschasius seems to be corrupted. Secondly, he
says, that Paschasius does not expound the words of our Lord, as they are in
Matthew, but as they seem to be spoken of Christ, when the sacrament is
administered in the Church. His reason is; In the institution of the Sacrament,
there were no other Ministers present distinguished from other believers: and
therefore Christ's words, as they were uttered then, no way admits Paschasius
explication, Drink ye all of this, as well Ministers as other believers.
Thirdly, he says, that the words of Paschasius make much for the opinion of
the Romish Church. For they signify, that Christ's blood is to be drunk, but
under the form of bread, not under the form of wine, As for Haymo, he
answers him with a short come-off, saying, He spoke of the Respondeo, loquitur
iste author (vt supra diximus Ignatium, and Chrysostomum) de vnitate calicis.
Significat enim eos, qui sanguinem Domini sumunt, ex vno colice sumere.
unity of the Chalice; and that his meaningis, that they that receive the blood
of the Lord, receive out of one Cup.

Refutation.
The threefold answer of Bellarmine to Paschasius, is not like a threefold
cable that cannot be broken, but rather like a rustie twisted wyer-string, that
breaks with the least strain. First, he bears us in hand, that the place in
Paschasius seems to be corrupted. Corrupted? By whom? by Papists? Surely they
would never have corrupted this text to make against themselves: by
Protestants? That cannot be. for no Protestants have set forth Paschasius, for
ought we find, or have had any thing to do in that Edition of Paschasius,
which we cite. Besides, in all the ancient impressions of Paschasius, and the
Manu-scripts, that have come to our sight, the words are found as we cite them.
Yea but John of Louane suspects, that the copies are faulty, and that, bibite,
is put for, edite, Drink ye, for eat ye: why so? because the words going
before are, he distributeth the bread by the hands of his ministers to the
believers, saying, Take ye, and drink ye all of this. This reason like a
rope of sand, has no coherence at all. For though Pascasius spoke of bread,
yet to prove that Christ is he, who alone by his Ministers distributeth the
sacrament, he rehearses the words of the institution both concerning the
Bread, and the Cup; neither can, bibite, or drink you in Paschasius be put for
edite, eat ye, but must stand as it does; drink ye. For the words
immediately following in Paschasius are, for this is the new and eternal
Testament. Now what a ridiculous inference were it, if we read the words, as
John of Louane would have us: take, eat this, for this is the Cup of the blood
of the new and everlasting testament? Bellarmine his second answer is as absurd
as his first. For Paschasius his words make more strongly for us, and against
himself, if Paschasius expound the words, Drink ye all of this, as they seem
to be spoken by Christ, not at the first Institution, but afterward,
whenever the sacrament is administered in the Church; If now also, whenever
the sacrament is administered in the Church, Christ commands, drink ye all of
this, that is with Paschasius gloss, all Ministers, and other believers; it
follows, that all other believers, as well as Ministers, ought now by Christ's
command to drink of the cup. Thirdly, as Bellarmine his first answer is
against the text of Paschasius, and his second against himself, so his third
is against common sense. How can blood be drunk under the form of bread? if
we speak of drinking siguratiuely by faith, this kind of drinking the
Romanists explode. If he speak of drinking properly with the mouth, every
suckling is able to confute the Cardinal, who know by mere sense, that
nothing ca^ be drunk, but that which is moist, and of liquid substance? Nay,
the Cardinal discourses like a man that had drank too deep of the wine,
forgetting in this page, what he said in the former. There he says, that the
fathers do not say, that Christ's blood is to be drunk of the people by the
mouth of the body, but here he says, that other believers, as well as
Ministers, by Christ's command ought to drink it, but after a manner never
heard of before, to drink it under the form of bread.

Now for his answer to Haymo pari facilitate reijcitur, qua profertur, it is as
easy to be rejected, as urged. For first, the Cardinal corrupts the text of
Haymo: he says not, the Cup is the Communion, because all drink of that one
Cup, the word one is not in Haymo. Admit it were; this no way disapointeth our
allegation out of Haymo. For still this word omnes, or al, remains. And be it
out of one Cup, or more, Haymo says expressly, that all did partake of it, and
received of the blood of Christ contained in it. If all, then the people, as
well as the Priests.

SECT. X. The testimonies of the practice of the Church from 900. to 1000.
ARistole rightly observes, that it so (...). Aristot. Rhetor. lib. 2. cap. 15.
falls out in the descent of families, as it does in diverse grounds, in which
sometimes we have great plenty, sometime as great scarsitie: so, says he,
some families have afforded store of noble personages; at other times scarce
any of note or eminence. So it fares here with us in the last Age we had
plentiful store of testimonies for the truth, but in this we are like to have
Penury. Although (if we consider aright) this scarsity may be imputed rather
unto the injury of the time, and want of Records of History, which happily
being extant might have afforded us no less plenty of Testimonies, then the
former Ages, as well in this, as in other points in question. The Poet wisely
observed: Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona Multi, sed omnes vrgentur ignoti longa
Nocte: carent quia vate sacro. Dan. Chamier. after much inquiry can bring
notice but of one witness, and him he dares scarce avow. Bell. de Romans
pontis. cap. 12. and de Scriptor. Ecclesiast. p. 198
Bellarmine brandeth with a note this ninth Age, as being the most obscure and
dark, that the Sun ever cast his beams upon: yet even in this Age we have
somewhat to show for the right of Gods people to the holy Chalice of the Lords
Table.

Anno 910.
In Leuiticum lib. 14. c. 4. Populus sacratum Christi corpus assumit, bibit and
beatum ipsius sanguinis haustum.
Rodolphus Tongrensis testifies, that the people in his time took the sacred
body of Christ, and drank a blessed draught of his blood.

Anno 920.
The Abbot of Prumes Regino teaches us, Lib. de Eccles. disciplina, c. 119
that what Rodolphus witnesses of the practice of the people in his age, was
not an abuse, or disorder in the people, but done in obedience to the sacred
discipline of the Church, whose Canon he mentions: Let the souls of the
weak be refreshed, and strengthened with the body and blood of our Lord.

Anno 950.
De sacr. alt. c. 17. Quotidie nobis haec dona praestantur, quando corpus and
sanguis in altari sumitur. in quibusdam edit. cap. 14.
Stephanus Edvensis; says These gifts or benefits are daily performed unto us,
when the body and blood of Christ is taken at the Altar.

Anno 990.
Lib. 14. cap. 5.
Vincentius writes of Elgifa, an old Matrone in this age, who being ready to
give up the ghost, took the body and blood of our Lord.

Anno 995.
Aelfricus, first Abbot of Saint Albons, and after Archbishop of Canterbury, in
his epistle to Woulfinus, and in his sermon translated of late out of the Saxon
in die. S. Paschae, is as full for the entire Communion, as he is against
Transubstantiation: the Howsell, or Host, says he, is Christ's body, not
bodily, but Ghostly; not the body, which he suffered in, but the body of which
he spoke, when he blessed bread and wine to Howsel, ep. ad Wolfin. and in his
sermon: Without, they be seen bread and wine, both in figure and in taste: and
they be truly Christ's body and blood after there halowing through ghostly
mystery as a pledge and a figure. And a little after: All our fathers drank
the same ghostly drink of the stone, which followed them, which stone was not
bodily Christ, who calls to us, to all believing and faithful men: Whosoever
thirsts, let him come and drink that heavenly liquor, which had
signification of Christ's blood. Now it is offered daily in Gods Church; it was
the same, which we now offer not bodily, but ghostly.

I find no answer made by any Romanist to the testimonies in this Age, which
yet are very full and pregnant, both for the precept and practice of
communicating in both kinds, both by men and women. If any except against the
Authors in the words of the Orator, haurimus de foece, we draw out dregs and
lees: I answer, where learning ran so low, as it did in this Age, we could do
no other wise: yet the Reader may see, that out of these lees we have ex
tracted some Aqua-vitae, whereof, though he has but a taste now, he shall have
a full draught in the next Age.

SECT. XI. The testimonies of the practice of the Church from 1000. to 1100.
IN this age the Bishops of Rome were so busy about transubstantiating the
bread into the body of Christ, that they suffered the laiety to go clear away
with the Cup, and gave them no public check or control for it, till the
Council of Constance held 400. years after. Of which hereafter in his due
place.

Anno 1002.
Fulbertus Carnotensis confesses with the Fathers of the former Age, though in
a higher, and more affected strain, Put forth the palate of d Fulb. de 3.
capitibus. Exere palatum fidei, dilata fa^es spe^, viscera charitatis extente,
and same panem vitae interioris hominis alimoniam: s^ nihilomnius vinum, non
ser dido calcatore calcatum, sed torquilare crucis expressum.
faith; enlarge the Jaws of thy hope; extend the bowels of Charity, and
receive the bread of life, the food of the inward man; take also the wine not
trodden out by feet of a nasty husbandman, but crushed out of the wine press of
the cross.

Anno 1014.
Bruno Abbas Richen-angiensis speaks to the point, as Fulbertus; Ser. de
purifi. Maria. Christi non solum pane quotidie vescimur, sed and sanguine
potamur, etc. Idem de Miss. Vini poculo in mystery sanguinis Christi potamur.
we also, though most unworthie, do not only eat daily the bread of Christ,
when we take the food of his flesh from the table of his Altar, but also
drink his blood.

Anno 1050.
(...). in 1. Cor. cap. 10.
Oecumenius ascribes our spiritual union with Christ our Head to the
participating of his blood in the Sacrament; the blood of Christ, says he, by
partaking thereof, ioynes us to Christ, as members to the head. And the same
Father, commenting upon the eleventh Chapter, schooleth rich men for disdayning
to admit the poor to their table, whom Christ admits as well as them to his, to
partake both of his body (...). Oecam. in 1. Cor. cap. 11.
and blood: If the Lord, says he, sets his body and blood on his table, and in
the Chalice, as well before the poor, as before thee, do thou dare to drive
them from thy table in dispite and contempt?

Anno 1060.
De verit. Eu char. lib. pri. Ipsi, qui sumimus communionem huius sancti panis,
and Calicis, vnum Christi corpus efficimur.
Guitmundus ioines with Oecumenius, in assigning our Communion at the Lords
Table, to be an especial means of union with Christ. And they both speak of
all faithful Christians indifferently, without distinction of Priest and
people, who are one in Christ. we, says this Author, who receive the Communion
of this holy bread and Cup, are made one body of Christ.

Anno 1061.
Desacra. Eucha. Dum frangitur hostia, dum sanguis de calice in ora fidelium
funditur. Et post: Quorum alterum quod dum frangitur, and in populi salutem
diuiditur, alterum vero effusum de calice ab ore fidelium sumitur, mors eius in
cruce, sanguis eius de latere emanans fi guratur.
Lanfranck, sometime Archbishop of Canterbury, delivering a rule touching all
Sacraments, says, Sacraments they are always a likeness of those things,
whereof they are sacraments; as in the sacrament about which we contend, when
the Host is broken, and the blood powered out of the Cup, and into the mouth of
the faithful, what is signified else, but the sacrificing of the body of our
Lord upon the Cross.

Anno 1070.
In 10. cap. 1. ad Cor. Nonne vos pudet Corinthij, cum ad Idolorum calicem ab
hoc Christi decurritis poculo, qui vos ab Idolis liberauit?
Theophilact reproues the Corinthians out of Saint Paul, for leaving the Lords
Cup, and running to drink with the Idolaters of the wine offered to Idols; Are
not you ashamed, O you Corrinthians to run to the Idols cup from Christ's Cup,
who has freed you from Idols? And in his comment upon 11. chap. he reproues
as sharply those, who took delight in drinking alone, and quassing by
themselves, Et in cap. 11. Quo pacto solus perpetans debaccharis, praesertim
cum tremendus hic calix pari cunctis condition sit traditus?
How do thou take thy cup alone, considering, that the dreadful Chalice is
alike delivered unto all?

Anno 1080.
Com. in 11. cap. prio. ad Corinth. Duebus modis manducare and bibere hoc
sacramentum, ore cordis, and ore corporis.
Anselme, Archbishop of Canterbury, speaking of Christians in general,
delivers a double manner of participating the Sacrament, both spiritually,
and Corporally: we ought, says he, to eat and drink this sacrament two manner
of ways, with the mouth of the heart, and with the mouth of the body. And upon
1. Cor. and Cap. 10. Idem Ansel. Ad tuitionem corporis, and animae sacramenta
eius percipimus: quia sanguis pro anima nostra effusus est.
All we, says he, who partake of one bread, and one Cup, are made one body.

Anno 1090.
Consuetudinis est, Eucharistiam nulli, nisi intinctam dari; quod nec ex
dominica institutione, nec ex sanctionibus authenticis reperitur assumptum etc.
Hildebertus Cenomanensis, together with Burcardus, Micrologus, and Humbertus
de silua candida, relate and aproue that Canon of the third Council of
Brachara, which condemns the delivering the bread sopt in the wine to the
Laietie for the whole Communion; It is the manner, says Hildebertus, in your
monasteries to give the sacramental bread to none, but dipped in the wine, which
Custom we find is not taken either from the Lords institution, nor out of
authentical constitutions. If you look into Matthew, Mark, and Luke, you
shall find the bread delivered by it self, and the wine by it self; neither
do we read, that Christ delivered bread dipped unto any, but that disciple, whom
by giving him a sop, he declared to be the betrayer of his Master.

The Papists answer.
This Canon of the Council of Bracara confirmed by so many witnesses,
Burchard, lib. 5. cap. 1. Gratian, de consecratione, did. 2. Micrologus de
Ecclesiasticis obseruationibus. cap. 19. and Lambertus de Silua candida, lib.
cont. Graec. calumnias. Cardinal Bellarmine could not any ways baulk with
credit; therefore he sets his brain upon the rack for a double answer. The
first is, that the Bell. de sacra. Euch lib. 4. cap. 16. Concilium prohibet
intinctionem, etc. non tamen addit, debere dari vtramque speciem.
Council indeed forbids the dipping of the bread, upon this ground, that our
Lord gave not bread dipped, or sopt in the wine: neither can any such o dipping
be proved by any testimony, or example of scriptures: yet, says he, the
Council does not add, that both kinds ought to be given to the Laietie.
Secondly, he says, Praeterea, si hoc concilium diceret, responderemus, loqui
de eo tempore, quo libera erat communio sub vtraque specie, etc.
If the Council should have said so, we would have answered, that the
Council speaks of that time, in which it was free for the Laietie to
communicate in both kinds. For then if any desired both kinds, the Council
commands, that both be given unto them, to wit, bread and wine a part, and
not a sop of bread dipped in the wine.

The Refutation.
These answers are like the apples of Sodom, which fall to ashes, if you
touch them. The first thus presently dissolueth: the Council of Bracara does
as well command Commnion in both kinds, as forbid receiving the bread dipped in
wine for the entire Communion: for thus stands the argument. In administering
the Sacrament, we ought to do as Christ did, and no otherways: but Christ at
his last Supper delivered first bread by it self, and then wine, and not bread
and wine together in a sop, or bread dipped in wine: therefore we ought in like
manner to administer the Sacrament in both kinds severally, and not by
intinction, or sopping the bread in the wine. Who sees not, that this Canon of
the Council is a two edged sword, cutting off Concomitancie on the one side,
as well as intinction on the other: and giving as deep a wound to the late
Council of Constance, inioyning the mutilation of the Sacrament; as to the
ancient Council of Toures, inioyning the confusion of it, by the infusion of
the bread into the Cup. The second answer does vanish to nothing: the Council
in deed spoke of that time, wherein the Communion of both kinds was free. For
so it had been from the time of the Apostles, and continued in the Roman
Church, till the Council of Constance: and in the Greek Church till this day.
The greater wrong is offered by the Romanists to the Laietie, from whom they
have taken the Cup after so many hundred years possession. If any such thing
had been attempted in the time of this Council at Bracara, they would have
been as earnest, or more earnest against this abuse, then they were against
that in their time, which was far less; for of the two, it is better to
receive the bread dipped in the wine, then the bread, and no wine at all. The
Council does not ground it self upon any supposed dispensation of the Church,
for the Laieties Communion in both kinds, as Bellarmine surmiseth, but upon
the institution of Christ, and the example of the Apostles, which in their
judgment ought to prevail against any sanction of Council, or custom of any
place whatsoever to the contrary.

SECT. XII. The testimonies of the practice of the Church from 1100. to 1200.
Anno 1101.
IVo in his collections out of the writings of the ancient for the present use
of the Church, in his seventh Chapter, relates a sentence out of Saint Ambrose
to our purpose: The Blood Beneficij diuini sanguis testis, cuius typum nos
Calicem mysticum ad tuitione^ corporis and animae percipimus. Illis aqua de
petra fluxit, tibi sanguis ex Christo, illos ad horam satiauit, te sanguis
diluit in ^num.
is a witness of a divine benefit in a figure, whereof we receive the
mystical Cup for the preservation of our body and soul. To them (to wit, the
Jews) water flowed out of the Rock, to thee blood out of Christ, the water
quenched their thirst for on hour, the blood of Christ washes thee for ever.
And in his 31. chapter, he recites a decree of Pope Syluerius: Sacramenta
Corporis and sanguinis Christi sumenda sunt in singulis diebus dominicis
quadragesimae.
Every Lords day in the Lent all, besides Excommunicate persons, or such as do
public penance, ought to receive the Sacraments of the body and blood of
Christ.

Anno 1105.
Zacharias Crysopolitanus applies the sprinkling of the door posts with the
blood of the Lamb in Exodus, to the Sacrament of Christ's blood: he says, Lib
4. cap. 156 Sanguine Christi corpus and animam linimus: quia sanguis agni super
vtrumque postem domus liberauit Haebreos.
We sprinkle our body and soul, with the blood of Christ, because the blood of
the Lamb sprinkled upon both the posts of the house, freed the Hebrews. And
again, The real and Sacramental eating of Christ are joined, when receiving
in the bread, that which hung upon the tree, and Accipientes in Calice, quod
manauit e latere.
receiving in the Cup, that which flowed from his side, our souls attain unto
the eating of the bread of life.

Anno 1110.
Lib. pri. did. 3. In specie and sapore panis and vini manducamus, and bibimus
ipsam substantiam corporis, and sanguinis.
Odo Cameracensis in expounding the holy Canon, affirms, that under the shape
and taste of bread and wine, we eat and drink the very substance of Christ's
body and blood.

Anno 1120.
Rupertus enforcing the necessity of receiving the sacrament, concludes upon
our Saviors words in Saint John, that every man ought to communicate in both
kinds, for the repast of his soul, as well as his body; lest any man In Ioh.
cap. 6. Nequis existimet se absque corporis and sanguinis eius cibo potuque
visibili, vitam vtramque corpo. and animae sola fide recup^rasse, and isto
sacramento non egere; hoc ipsum repetiuit, proculdubio, contestans, quod non
vere credat, quisquis manducare and bibere contemnit. Nam quantumuis fidelis,
and Catholicae professionis homo sis, si manducare and bibere recuses de hoc
cibo, potuque visibili, eo ipso quod tibi hunc necessarium non esse praesumis,
a so^taie membrorum Christi, quod est ecclesia, te praecidis: neque recte
credis in eum, cuius in hoc cibo, potuque ab ipso tam diligenter commendato,
d^ogas authorita^.
should think, says he, that he has recovered by faith alone the life of his
body and soul, without the visible meat and drink of the body and blood of
Christ, and consequently needs not the sacrament; Christ repeates the same
thing again touching the eating his flesh, and drinking his blood; thereby
undoubtedly testifying, that he does not truly believe, whosoever dispiseth to
eat and to drink. For although thou be a faithful man, and profess thy
self to be a Catholic, if thou refuse to eat and to drink of this visible
meat and drink; even by this, that thou presumest, that this meat and drink
is not necessary to thee, thou cuttest thy self off from the society of the
members of Christ, which is the Church. But I infer, that all lay Papists,
that have bin instructed by the Fathers of the Councels of Constance and Trent,
presume, that it is not necessary for them to receive the visible drink,
whereof Rupertus speaks; Therefore by Rupertus his conclusion, they cut
themselves off from the Church. And though they are men of a Catholic
profession, which he speaks of, yet they are not true believers. In the same
Book and Chapter; We, says he, that is the Church, are that earth, which
opens his mouth, and faithfully drinks the blood of Christ. And in his
third book de operibus Spiritus Sancti et 20. cap. he says, in specie panis
et vini sanctus Sanctorum est, et in omnibus electis, qui ad fide eius veniunt,
idem efficit, quod in illa specie, qua perpendit in cruce, id est, remisssionem
peccatorum: that is, the Holy of holies is in form of bread and wine, and to
all the elect, who come to the faith of him, he works remission of sins, as
he did in that shape, in which he hung upon the Cross.

Anno 1130.
Sermon. 3. in ramis palma. De sacramento corpo. and sanguinis. Nemo est, qui
nesciat hanc quoque tantam and tam singularem alimoniam ea primum die
exhibitam, etc.
Bern. in his 3. Sermon. one Palm Sunday, makes the sacrament of Christ's body
and blood the Christians food and alimonie. Touching the sacrament of Christ's
body and blood, says he, there is no man who knows not, that this so
singular a food was on that day first exhibited, on that day commended, and
commanded to be frequently received.

Anno 1135.
Algerus does not barely affirm, that the sacrament Lib. 2. de sacra. cap. 5.
and 8.
was instituted at first, and ought to be administered in both kinds: but he
confirms it strongly by the testimony of Saint Austine. And Pope Gelatius,
first in his fifth Chapter he positiuely delivers the necessity of
communicating in both kinds, in these words; Quia cibo and potuita vinimus, vt
alterutro carere nequeamus, vtrumque in suo sacramento esse voluit, etc.
Because we so live by meat and drink, that we can want neither of them,
Christ would have them both in his sacrament, least if either should be
wanting, by that imperfect taking of life, and not entire, an imperfect life
might seem to be signified. In his 8. chap. more at large he unfolds the
mystery, that lies in the communicating in both kinds. There is nothing found
in the creature, says he, whereby more fitly and nearly life may be
represented, then by blood, which is the seat of the soul; in which that it
may be signified, that our bodies and souls ought to be united and made
conformable to Christ's body Simul corpus and sanguis sumitur a fidelibus, vt
sumpto toto Christo, totus homo in anima and corpore viuificetur.
and soul, the body and blood of Christ are both taken together of the
faithful, that by taking whole Christ's body and, soul, the whole man in body
and soul might be quickened: in as much as the flesh of Christ, as I have said,
is believed not to be without blood and dead, but living and quickening: whence
it is that Saint Agustine says, that neither the flesh with out the blood, nor
the blood without the flesh is rightly taken. Also Gelatius writes to
Maioricus, and John, Bishops, in this manner: We understand, that some taking a
portion of Christ's body, abstain from the Cup of his sacred blood, to whom our
commandment is, that either they partake the sacrament entirely, and receive
both, or be kept from both.

Anno 1136.
Hugo de Tom. 5. cap. 6. Ideo duabus speciebus sumitur, vt significetur huius
sacramenti duplex effectus: valet eni^ ad tuitione^ corporis and animae.
Sancto Victore yields a like reason of the full and entire communicating in
both kinds; Therefore, says he, the sacrament is taken in both kinds, that
thereby a double effect might be signified. For it has force, as Saint
Ambrose says, to preserve both body and soul. In the same terms has
Halensis. Sum. Theol. par. 3. number. 29. art. 4.

Anno 1140.
Peter Lumbard Mag. sentent. propounds this question: Lib. 4. did. 11. Quare
sub duplici specie sumitur, etc? vt ostenderetur totam humanam naturam
assumpsisse, vt totam redimeret.
Why is the sacrament received under a double form, or kind, since whole Christ
is in either kind? He answers, That thereby it might be signified, that
Christ took the whole nature of man, that he might redeem the whole.

Anno. 1150.
Petrus Cluniacensis Epist. lib. 1. Though he Epist. lib. 1.
fight against the truth one way, and wounds the Albigenses; yet he fights
for it another way, and gives a deeper wound to the Trent Fathers, and all
that content themselves with an half communion. That men might not only
learn by words, says he, but have a sensible feeling by deeds, that they
cannot live unless they be joined and united to Christ, after the manner of
carnal food and life, they receive the body of Christ, and drink the blood of
Christ. And a little after, to signify that for this cause he would Accipiunt
corpus Christi, et bibunt sanguinem Christi, vt propter hoc, carnem suam ad
manducandam, sanguinem suam ad bibendum omnibus se dare velle signaret. Lib.
27. cap. 28.
give his flesh to all, to eat it, and his blood to all, to drink it, he
draws a similitude from Manna, that fell in the wilderness. In this year of
our Lord also Vincentius relates of one Tundanus, a profane person in his
former life, that being suddenly stricken from heaven, he called for the body
of our Lord, which when he had taken, and drunk the wine, he began to praise
God in these words; O Lord, thy mercy is greater then mine iniquity. In this
same Age Antoninus writes in his Chronicles, that Northmanni man^ dominico
corpore, and sanguine communicauerunt.
the Normans the morning before they fought with the Danes, received the
Communion of Christ's body and blood.

Anno 1170.
De consecr. did. 2.
Gratian rehearses many ancient Canons and Constitutions for communicating in
both kinds, which because they have been handled before, I here let pass.

The Papists answer.
The only answer, which I find to our allegations out of the Fathers in this
Age, is Cardinal Lib. 4. de sacr. Euch. cap. 26.
Bellarmines, who indeuoureth to put a gloss upon Saint Bernards words on this
wise: Under the form of bread, the entire nourishment, or complete food of
Christ's body and blood is contained. Wherefore our Lord, says he, commanded
that food to be often taken, but he commands not, that it should be taken
in both kinds.

Refutation.
S. Jerome says, it is the part of a bad Physician, omnibus oculi morbis vno
collyrio mederi: to apply but one eye-salue to all manner of diseases of the
eyes. Yet such a Physician is Bellarmine; he has but one salve for all
diseases, and that has no virtue it in at all in effect. To the saluing of all
the testimonies of the ancient Fathers opposed against him, he applies only
this medicamentum (...) of concomitancie. whatsoever the Fathers speak of
receiving the body and blood, and the entire food of our souls, he would make
us believe, they intend nothing against their half Communion. For, as he
accounts, the blood is never severed from the body, and the blood is under
the form of bread. He therefore, who takes the bread, takes the body and
blood of Christ: and consequently communicates entirely. But besides, that
this proposition of his, has been heretofore refuted, I add first in
general, that, albeit we should admit, that in the judgment of the Fathers in
this Age, the blood of Christ were with the body, and with the form of bread:
yet there is no Cup, nor Wine in the bread, no drinking in eating, no pouring
out of the wine, or blood into the mouths of the faithful. Of which the
writers of this Age speak so expressly, that those of our adversaries, who have
not rubbed hard their foreheads, never so much as offer to make answer to these
testimonies, but have held it the wisest course, never to take notice of them.
Secondly, for Saint Bernard in particular, his words have relation to the
Institution of Christ, saying, The entire food of the body and blood of Christ
was that day first exhibited: nay, at our Lords last supper there was wine, as
well as bread. And this Vasquez the Jesuit ingeniously confesses, howsoever
it cut the throat of his fellow Jesuits answer. Bernardus aperte loqui videtur
de altera part alimoniae, quae sub specie vini per modum potionis sumitur.
Bernard, says he, speaks plainly of the other part of nourishment, which is
taken by way of drink under the form of wine. What then? Does Vasquez freely
give us Saint Bernard? Not so! but deuiseth another evasion, to wit that
communicating in both kinds, for the entire repast of the soul is commanded to
the whole Church, not to every particular believer: Defumo in flammas. Vasq. to
avoid the smoke, that put out Bellarmine his eyes, falls into the fire. For
that which is enjoined the whole Church, is necessarily inioined every
saithfull. The words of our Savior, Drink ye all, etc. are evidently a command
to each particular. For so the Apostles understood him, and drank every one of
them of that Cup, and not any one, or more, in the name and behalf of all the
rest. Doubtless, as every man must live by himself, so he must also in his
own person and by himself, receive the entire food of life, the body and
blood of Christ.

SECT. XIII. The testimonies of the practice of the Church from 1200. to 3000.
Anno. 1229.
ABbas Vrspergensis writing of the besieging of Damiata, says, that
Communicato sacramento corpo. and sanguinis domini, ascendunt in turrem illam
ligneam page 322.
the soldiers, before they scaled the wooden tower, made confession of their
sins, and received the sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord. The like
Antoninus Chron. part. 2. Northmani confessioni peccatorum vacantes mane
dominico corp. and sang. communicauerunt.
writes of the Normans in William the Conquerors time, and Matthew Paris of
the English in King Heralds time, and William Rufus. Neither was that custom
as yet controld in that age, nor an hundred years after, as in due place shall
be showed.

Anno 1236.
Durandus In rationali Divine. lib. 4. c. 54 Solam hostiam recipiens, non plen^
sacramentum recipit sacramentaliter. etc.
Mimatensis in express terms affirms, that he who receives the Host only,
does not receive the whole sacrament sacramentally. For although the blood of
Christ be in the consecrated Host (he speaks according to the schools in
these times; yet it is not there sacramentally; because the bread signifies
the body, and not the blood; the wine signifies the blood, and not the body.
In regard therefore that the sacrament is not complete in one kind according to
the sign, the sacrament must be made complete before the Priest use it. Durand
his conclusion falls short upon the Priest, but his reason stretches to all
people, as well as Priests. For all ought to receive the entire Sacrament
sacramentally, and if one kind only be an imperfect Sacrament to the Priest in
regard of the sign, it must needs be imperfect also unto the people: unless
they will say, that the sacrament presents less to the Priests, then to the
people, or that the Priests aprehend less in it, then the people surely that
which is but half a Cup to one, cannot be a whole one to an other; that which
is empty, or incomplete to one, cannot be complete and full to another.

Anno 1240.
Halens, sum. Theolog. part. 3. quaest. 11. memb. 2. art. 4. and in 4. sent.
quest. 40, Illa quae est sub duabus, est maioris meriti, tum ratione
augmentationis deuotioris, tum ratione sumptionis completioris. Totus Christus
non continetur sub vtraque specie sacramentaliter, sed caro tantum sub specie
panis, sanguis tantum sub specie vini. Rursus sumptio sub vtraque specie, quem
modum sumendi tradidit Dominus, est maioris efficaciae, and complementi.
Halensis, howsoever he some way inclines to that opinion, that it is
sufficient to receive the sacrament in one kind: yet he confe^eth, that there
is more merit and devotion, and compleatnesse, and efficacy in receiving in
both.

Albertus Magnus in 4. Sent. did. 8. delivers this general rule: sacramentum
Ecclesiae nihil in gratia causa^, quod non ex similitudine significat: The
sacrament of the Church causes nothing in grace, which it signifies not by
similitude: that is, it produces nothing, which it presents not. And from
thence inferres, that the unity of Christ's mystical body is not perfectly
caused, and signified, but by a double sign: and therefore by Ideo virtute
sacramenti oportet habere vtrumque.
virtue, or in regard of the sacrament we ought to have both. Let the Reader
note, that Albertus says not, according to the new evasion of the Jesuits,
virtute sacrificij oportet habere vtramque, but, virtute sacramenti; not that
both kinds are requisite to the sacrifice, but to the sacrament. The sacrament
by the doctrine of Albertus, wants so much of his efficacy, as it does want of
its significancie, but the receiving under the form of bread only bears no
similitude, nor has any signification of the spiritual drink of Christ's blood.
The Romanists therefore in taking away one of the signs from the Laiety,
consequently deprive (as much as in them lies) the Laiety of the grace
represented by that sign, and conferred with it. And Etsi ^lus gratiae
conferretur per sumptionem vt iusque speciei, tamen merito Ecclesiam hoc non
curare, magisque prespicere reuerentia ipsins Sacramenti, quam vtilitati
sumentium, etc. Aegid. de Coninck in D. Thom. de Sacram. quaest. 80. art. 12.
nu. 126. Antuerp. 1624.
yet Aegidius Coninck, a modern Jesuit, and professor of Divinity at Louaine,
makes this audacious assertion out of the Chair of his School Divinity:
Although more grace may be conferred by receiving in both kinds,
notwithstanding, the Church upon good reason cares not for that, and does more
respect the reverence of the Sacrament, then the profit of the receivers, etc.

Anno 1260.
In 1. Cor. c. 11. Traditur hoc sacramentum sub duplici specie propter tria. 1.
propter eius perfectionem, etc. 2. Propter cius significationem, etc. 3.
Propter salutarem effectum. valet enim ad, salutem corporis, and ideo offertur
corpus, and valet ad salutem animae, and ideo offertur fangu^. Aquinas loc.
citat. sum. part. 3. q. 80. art. 12. Ex part sacramenti conuenit, quod
vtrumque sumatur quia in vtroque consistit eius perfectio.
Aquinas yields three reasons of the institution of this sacrament under a
double form: the first is; For the perfection of it, because since it is a
spiritual meal, or refection, it ought to have spiritual meat, and
spiritual drink; secondly, for the signification of it, for it is a memorial
of the Lords passion, whereby his blood was severed from his body; and
therefore in this sacrament the blood is offered by it self; Thirdly for the
healthful effect of it, for the body is offered to show, that it is of force
to save the body; and the blood is offered to show, that it is of force to save
the soul. The half Communion therefore in Aquinas his learning wants
perfection, significancie, and efficacy. Bonauenture thus indeuoreth to clear
the matter: In the sacrament there are two things, efficacy, and significancy;
concerning efficacy, neither kind is of the integrity of the Sacrament, but
either is the whole; concerning signification, so the two signs are of the
integrity of the Sacrament, or integrall parts of the Sacrament, Bonauent. in
4. sentent. did. 11. q. 2. Neutra per se exprimitur res buius sacramenti, sed
in vtraque. Et post. Vt perfecta esset and signaretur redemptio, and ex hoc
perfecta refectio, debuit signari corpus in pane, and anima in vino, cuius
seeds est in sanguine.
because the matter of the Sacrament is expressed in neither kind by it self,
but in both together: and a little after; To make it represent perfect
redemption, and thereby a perfect refection, the body ought to be signified in
the bread, and the soul in the wine, the seat whereof is in the blood.

Anno 1280.
Richardus de Mediauilla, and Petrus de Tarantasia; who afterward was advanced
to the Popedom, and changed his name into Innocentius the fourth, testifies,
that the Sacrament was administered in both kinds to the better sort of the
Laietie, howsoever they entertained the vulgar and meaner sort with a dry
Communion: thus Tracta. de Commu. sub vtraque specie. sec. 24. Maioribus ^cet
dari potus, sub vtraque specie, de quibus non timentur pericula effusionis, and
erroris, quod maiorem reuerentiam, and cautelam seruare sciunt.
Cassander relates their words, The Sacrament may lawfully be given in both
kinds to greater personages, or men of quality, where there is no fear of
error of spilling the blood, because such men know how to observe due
reverence, and caution.

The Papists answer.
I find no answer in particular made by any to the passages above alleged;
but in general their answer is, that the Schoolmen might write more freely,
before the Council of Constance had decreed the contrary. And they add; that
some, if not all of these Schoolmen approve of the administering of the
Communion under one kind to the Laietie.

The Reply.
The Council of Constance by their decree could not make that; which was
before false, to be then the truth: or that which was in Gelasius his time
sacrilege, to be then piety. What Apud Aristot. Rbetor. 2. cap. 23. (...).
Androcles spoke sometimes of the Athenian laws; The laws had need of a law
to mend them: may truly be said of this Canon in the Council of Constance,
that it needs a Canon to rectify it: for it depraues Christ's institution, it
checks the Primitive Church, it controules the practice of the whole Christian
world, for 1200. years and more; even till the middle of this age, wherein
Sacrilege stole in by degrees. A curious eye may tracke these fellons of the
holy Chalice. First, under color of preventing abuses, in spilling the Cup,
they take it away from the vulgar and meaner sort of people, not daring to
offer this indignity to the better sort; to them, as we hear out of
Mediauilla, they delivered the Sacrament in both kinds, afterward upon this
pretext, that the blood was in the body, and the whole Sacrament in either
kind, they nimmed the Cup from the lesser Churches, as Linwood informs us:
Lib. de summa Trin. and side Catholic. Solis celebrantibus sanguinem sub specie
vini cousecrati sumere in minoribus Ecclesijs est concessum.
It it granted, says he, only to Priests, that celebrate in such small
Churches, to receive the blood under the form of wine. Going clear away with
this their Sacrilege in lesser Churches, they adventure upon the greater. And
by Aquinas his confession, the Sacrament was administered in one kind, but in
some Churches in his days, For in diverse Churches, says he, Aquin. part. 3.
q. 80. art. 12. Ideo provide in quibusdam Ecclesijs obseruatur, vt populo
sanguis sumendus non detur, sed solum a sacerdote sumatur.
it is prouidently observed, that the blood should not be given to the people,
but that it should be received only by the Priest. In the end, when they had as
far as their authority stretched, robbed all assemblies of the Laietie, in
depriving them of the Cup: they after inacted a general law in the year of
our Lord, 1414. to warrant this their public Sacrilege. This thirtenth age
resembles the river Iordane, which is sweet at the spring, but bitter and
brackish in the fall of it; and in the end runs into the dead Sea. Abbas
Vrspergensis, Matthew Paris, and Vincentius, who flourished in the beginning,
and continued until the middle of this age, gave a full testimony unto the
truth. But those who lived after, spoke partly in the language of Canaan, and
partly in the language of Ashdod. Halensis s Part. 4. qu. 55.
says, that the lay people for the most part communicated in both kinds;
Lynwood, that in greater Churches they did so; Aquinas, that in some Churches
they did, and in some they did not. For by this time, according to the Greek
proverb; Serpens genuit serpentem, vt fieret Draco: One Serpent has begot
another, that from them both a Dragon might issue. The error of
transubstantiation, had begotten the error of concomitancie; and from both
these at length issued out their heretical sacrilege, or sacrilegious heresy
in defending the practice of their half Communion.

SECT. XIIII. The testimonies of the practice of the Church from 1300. to 1400.
IN this Age, when this sacrilegious error like a Gangreene, had spread over a
great part of the Latin Churches, God stirred up many learned Chirons and
Machaeons, known by the nicknames of Walldenses, Lollards, and Wickliffests,
to apply a sovereign remedy unto it. And they, Deo secundante, wrought great
cures upon this Cancer in England, France, and Bohemia. In other parts of
Europe, the people were so intoxicated with the golden Cup of the whore of
Babylon, that they willingly suffered the Priests to keep away from them the
Lords Cup. Yet in this Centurie, if we add to the sounder Divines, or
Doctors, in the Latin Church, the judgment and practice of the whole Greek
Church, the entire Communion will carry it away from the half, by more then
half the voices of Christendom.

Anno 1301.
The custom of communicating in both kinds was not abolished in the beginning
of this age, but was retained in certain places, especially in Monasteries,
until the year of our Lord 1300. and more. Thus writes Cas. consul. art. 22.
In vtraque specie communio in quibusdam locis, presertim in monasterijs retenta
est, idque ad annum amplius millessimum tricentessimum.
Cassander.

Anno 1320.
Pet. in 4. sent. did. 11. quaest. 1. In multis ecclesijs consuetudo suit,
quod communicauerunt fidelibus sub vtraque specie, etc. sacramenti effectus est
persecta animae refectio; ergo, materia representa^s debet esse per pe^ctam
corporis refectionem, quae non est nisi per cibum, and potum.
Petrus de Palude says, that in his time the custom was in many Churches,
that the faithful communicated in both kinds, and he backeth this his
testimony with a solid reason. There ought, says he, to be a double matter in
this sacrament, to wit, meat and drink: because the effect of this Sacrament
ought to be represented perfectly by the matter thereof, in a manner agreeable
to the things natural. For sacraments effect that which they signify: but the
effect of this sacrament is a perfect refection, or repast of the soul:
therefore the matter representing, it ought to be a perfect refection of the
body, which is not but by meat and drink. This argument of Peter of the F^n
has so far sunk our adversaries, that to this day they cannot by all their
sophistry get out of the boggs.

Anno 1341.
Clemens 6. in his Bull to the King of England; grants him the use of the
Cup, ad gratiae augmentum, to the increase of grace.

Anno 1360.
Lib. contra errores Armeniorum. c. 8. Vtrumque sumere certo tempore, aut velle
sumere, and esse paratum ad hoc, quantum in eius potestate est, necessarium est
ad vitam spiritualem habendam.
Richard Archbishop of Armach thus wardeth off a blow of the Armenians, when
the Armenian heretic objected against him: unless you eat the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in yon; He answers, that
this speech of our Savior, if it be taken as spoken of sacramental drinking,
ought to be understood with this qualification, to wit; That it is necessary
to obtain spiritual life, that a man receive both at sometime, or be willing
to receive, and be ready so far as it is in his power.

Anno 1372.
Besides these written testimonies, we have engraven, I mean the inscriptions
of Chalices, or Communion Cups, called Ministerales because they served for the
people; Aphoris. Euchar. lib. 6. Ad plebeiam illud, and publicam communionem,
haud dubie, factam.
Vadianus writes of a cup in the Abbie of Sangall, that weighed 70. marks in
silver: without doubt, says he, for the use of the people at the public
C^mmunion. Ascitis quibusdam argumentis, qu^ auribus probe purgatis non satis
probe ti^iunt. In Notis ad Pelichdorfiu^.
Gretser censureth the writings of Pelichdorfius against the poor men of Lions
in this manner: This author, says he, does refute in the first part of this
work the poor men of Lions, but with some such arguments as ring not well in
the purified ears (of Catholics. I am sure this argument drawn from great
silver chalices, some of them with pipes for the Laiety to suck out the
consecrated wine, ring not well in the purified ears of Roman Catholics.
For not only, Rhenanus z In Tertul. de corona militis. Nequicquam pretium
^asorum possideant, pr^ter calicem argenteum, and fistulam, qua Laici Dominicum
excipiant sanguinem.
out of Conradus Pellicanus relates a constitution amongst the Carthusians,
whereby they are forbid to have any precious vessels, or plate, besides a
silver chalice, and a pipe, wherewith the Laietie may suck the blood of our
Lord: but also Caietan makes mention of them, and their use to this purpose:
and Cassander very much taxes Eccius, for that he writes, that he never read
of the Laieties Communion in both kinds in the Roman Church, save only in the
story of S. Laurence his life; Si non meminerit calicum ministerialiu^ in
Ecclesijs vrbis Romanae, quorum in libro Pontificali subinde fit mentio. etc.
In plerisque locis calicibus, qui ministeriales vocaba^ur, argenti^ fistulae
inserebantur.
It is strange, says he, that a man of so excellent a memory, as Eccius,
should forget the ministerial Chalices, whereof there is ever and anon mention
made in the Roman Pontifical; which were so called, because the blood of
Christ was out of the^ ministered to the people; In most places for fear of
shedding the blood of Christ, in delivering it to the people, there were silver
pipes put into the Chalices, that in the peoples drinking, or rather sucking
the blood of Christ, not so much as a drop might be spilt. These Chalices
were not only in use in this Age, but a 1000. years before, in Saint Cyprians
time: if we may believe Cardinal Caietan; who ingeniously confesses, that
they were so called from their use in the Church, which was to serve the
people. Thus In t^t. partem s^mmae.
he commenteth upon Thomas: This custom, says he, continued not only in the
time of that Martyr, whom Cyprian thought fit to be forearmed with the Lords
Cup, but also in the time of the peace of the Church. For we read not only of
basins, but also of ministerial Quare ministeriales dict^ sunt, nisiquia non
ad offerendum, sed ministrandum populo Christi sanguinem deseruiebant?
Chalices made for this use. a For why were they called ministerial, but
because they served not to offer the blood of Christ, but to minister it to the
people?

Anno 1390.
The custom was in France to administer the whole Supper not in the middle of
the b Guliel. Bellaius Langius de Francisco 1. Gall. Rege. and Sleid. hist.
lib. 9. Franc. 1. dixit, patrum (...) diu tributam fuisse per Galliam quibu^bet
integra^ c^nam, non quidem in medio te^pli, sed in sa^llis.
Church, but in Chapels. This, says Francis the first, I heard of old men,
who affirmed; that this had been the manner in France for 120. years before.

SECT. XV. The testimonies of the practice of the Church from 1400. to 1500.
John Hus, and Hiero. of Prage by the books of Wickliffe, were brought unto the
knowledge of the truth. And as in other points they concluded for that
holyfaith, which we at this day profess against the errors and corruptions of
the Church of Rome: so in this they were most earnest, and so prevailed in the
Kingdom of Bohemia, that from the time of the effusion of their blood for the
testimony of the Gospel until this day the Cup of the new Testament in
Christ's blood has been delivered to the people in these parts, and the entire
Communion preserved.

Anno 1410.
Petrus Dresensis taught publicly, that the Laietie might not communicate
under one kind; as is confessed by Didacus de Tapia in sent. lib. 4.

Anno 1412.
Aeneas Syluius in Histor. Bohem. edit. per Orthu^num Gratium. ^aepit (...)
populum ne (...) communionem calicis quo* quo pacto neglige^ent.
Iacobellus Misnensis, a Preacher of Prage, being admonished by Petrus
Dresensis, after he had searched into the writings of the ancient doctors,
and by name Dionysius, and Saint Cyprian, and finding in them the communicating
of the Cup to the Laiety commanded, he from thence forth exhorted the people by
no means to neglect, or omit the receiving the Communion of the* Cup.

Anno 1414.
In the Council of Constance, in which the entire Communion is professedly
oppugned, yet the Truth extorted from her bloody adversaries a remarkable
confession of the practice of the Primitive Church, and of the continuance of
it in diverse parts, even until the time of the calling of that Assembly. In the
petition of those, that procured this Synod, it is expressed, that one cause,
for which the procurers desired that the Church should take order for the
establishing of a law touching the laieties communicating in one kind, is
declared to be, Quia in nonnullis mundi partibus sacerdotes laicos sub viraque
specie, panis scilicet and vini, communica^e non cessant.
because in some parts of the world the Priests did not forbear to administer
the communion to the laiety in both kinds, against the custom of the Romish
Church. Here we have the continuance of this practice; the antiquity whereof
they likewise acknowledged in the preface to their sacrilegious decree against
it. Although Christ instituted, Sess. 1^. Li^et Christus instituerit, and
^ederit sacramentum post coenam sub v^raque specie discipulis, etc. ab ipso
ducit opes animumque ferro. Hor. Od. 4. lib. 4.
and gave the sacrament after supper in both kinds to his disciples, and in the
primitive Church it was in like wise administered: yet the Council for certain
reasons commands, that the sacrament be otherwise administered. As the tree f
gains more branches by being lopped with the axe; so the Truth gains much
luster and authority from the very Canon of the Council of Constance, by which
her adversaries do seek to oppress her. For who will not rather follow
Christ's institution, then their ordinance, and the ancient acknowledged
practice of the Primitive Church rather, then a late custom of the present
Romish Church?

Anno 1420.
Martin the fifth after the Council of Constance upon Easter day, after he had
delivered the body of our Lord with his own hands to the Laiety, Card* Cusanus
epist. ad clerum. permisit laicis accedere ad susceptionem san* guinis de man^
Diaconi.
suffered them to receive the blood of Christ at the hands of the Deacon. The
like Henricus Kal^* contra Bohem* percipiens Pap^ Martinus sic se elusum, ex
tunc subtraxit calicem communionis laicis.
Henry Kalteysin reports of other Popes, and withal acquaints us with the
cause, why the Pope left off this custom. It fell out, says he, that a
certain Bohemian came amongst the rest to the Popes chapel, and received the
Communion at his hands and he wonderfully bragged of it, whereof Pope Martin
being advertised, and much enraged, that such a trick was put upon him, from
that time took away the Cup from the Laiety.

Anno 1430.
Tom. 1. cap. 88. and 94. contra Wick^ff. Matoribus e populo, Rectoribus
in^gnium locorum, and alijs dignitate praestantibus, fide fortibus, and
discretis fidelibus, vt doctoribus, Regibus, alijsque, qui tanta re digni
iudicabantur, hoc donatum suisse, vt sacrificium, and eius sacramentum, scili^
ad commu nicandum sub ^traque specie, assumerent.
Thomas Waldensis, who took upon him to refute Wickliffes books, howsoever he
maintained the decree of the Council of Constance touching Communion in one
kind; yet he witnesses, that greater personages amongst the people, and men
of note or place, as Kings, and doctors, and others that were thought worthy
so great a mystery, were admitted to the Communion in both kinds.

Anno 1413.
In the Council held at Basil, as Nauclerus writes, tom. 2. generat. 48. a
kind of hope was offered to the Bohemians, that upon certain conditions, the
use of the Cup might be restored unto them. The order of the Council is
conceived in these words: Si perseuerauerint Bohem. etc. Sacer conuentus
Bohemi^ and Morauiae sacerdotibus communicandi sub vtraque specie personas sibi
subiectas libertatem impertietur.
If the Bohemians continue in the desire of the Communion in both kinds, and
send an Embassage to the Council to that purpose, the holy assembly shall give
liberty to the Priests of Bohemia and Morauia, to administer the Communion in
both kinds to such persons, as being in years of discretion shall reverently
desire it.

Anno 1438.
The Bohemians put the faith and honesty of the Fathers of Basil to the Test:
they send comissioners John Belouar of Prage, John Rokyzana, Peter Panie,
Procopius, and others, to treat about the concession of the Cup, and to
express their earnest and unfeigned desire thereof. To whom the Council
returns this answer; That the request should be granted them, so that they
will really, and effectually keep unity with the Church; and conform
themselves in all other things, save the communion in both kinds, to the faith,
and rites of the universal Church.

SECT. XVI. Testimonies of the practice of the Church from 1500. to 1600.
IN this Age I might produce many Testimonies of such learned Doctors and
Professors of the Gospel, as have been by Gods providence raised up in the
Reformed Churches in former and latter years, who by their writings learnedly
and soundly have maintained the cause we have in hand; as also do the joint,
and unanimous Confessions of the Churches of England, France, Scotland,
Germany, Polonia, Sweueland, Morauia, etc; Howbeit, because the Romanists do
except against all the foresaid witnesses, as insufficient, and of no
authority, because they have departed from their Synagogue; therefore I will
allege some prime Doctors of this Age also, and men of eminency among
themselves, maintaining the same truth with us; against whom I see not what
just exception may be taken by them.

Anno 1541.
Lib. de Missa publica proroganda. in 7. part. Canonis. Sunt pseudo-ca^olici,
qui reformationem Ecclesiae quoquo modo remorari non v^rentur. Hi ne Laicis
altera species restituatur, nullis parcunt blasphemijs. etc. Idem Lorich. l. de
sacr. Euch. fol. 72. Non possum non culpare nostrates, qui non ^nimaduertunt,
sacramentum Eucharisti^ hinc in (...) labi ^rimen, illic in (...) and (...)
causam rap^* propter alterius (...). N^c (...) ^obis (...)* ^d magis di^mulant,
and ad^iuent. Vnde omnium huiusmodi malorum Dominu^ ab illis ratione (...) illo
di^ poscet.
Gerardus Lorichuis zealously oppugning the sacrilegious practice of the Church
of Rome: There be false Catholics, says he, that are not ashamed by all
means to hinder the reformation of the Church; They, to the intent that the
other kind of the sacrament may not be restored to the Lay people, spare no
kind of blasphemy. For they say, Christ said only to his Apostles, Drink ye
all of this, but the words of the Canon of the Mass be these, Take, and eat
ye all of this. Here I beseech them, let them ^ell me, whither they will have
this word, all, only to pertain unto the Apostles? then must the Lay people
abstain from the other kind, of the bread also. Which thing to say, is an
heresy, and a pestilent and detestable blasphemy. Wherefore it follows,
that each of these words were spoken to the whole Church.

Anno 1545.
Instructions, et Missiues des Roys de Fra. et d^ leurs Embassad. ann. 1561.
and 1562. ^rodijt Gall^ce 8. 1608. Hist. Conc. Trid. lib. 3. 5. and 6.
The Ambassadors for the Emperor, and for the French King, were earnest
suitors to the Fathers in the Council of Trent, for the restitution of the Cup
to the Layety.

Anno 1562.
The observation of Epist. 79 ad finem.
Seneca; That a lie is of a thin and transparent nature, a diligent eye may see
through it; was verified in the Divines, and Bishops present at the Council of
Trent. Whereof some saw obscurely, others clearly through this grand lie of
the Romish Church, which under color of concomitancy, subtracteth the use of
the Cup from the Layety. For Antonius Mandulfe^sis had a glympse; but Card.
Madrutius Gaspar de casa, and the Bishop of Quinque Ecclesi^, and also Amans
Seruito, a Histor. Conc. Trid. lib. 6. page 522. Angl. ann. 1629.
Friar had a full sight of the truth in this point. Antonius Mandulfensis,
Chaplain to the Bishop of Prage, professedly impugned the distinction of the
Eucharist, as a Sacrament, and as a sacrifice: which distinction the Papists at
this day hold before them, as a buckler to bear off our arguments, drawn from
the necessity of representing Christ's death in the Lords Supper, by receiving
his blood apart, as severed from his body. He also infringeth their common
argument for their half Communion, drawn from the example of the Disciples at
Emaus, and Saint Paul his breaking bread in the ship. For he truly and acutely
noted, that if these Texts are to be expounded of communicating in one kind
only, that it would from thence follow, that it were not only lawful for the
people to communicate in one kind only, but for Priests, such as the Apostle S.
Paul, and the Disciples were, to consecrate in one kind only. Thus he saw
light as it were by a chinke; but Historia Concilij Trid. lib. 6. page 423.
Amans servito Brixianus, as a man in the open air felt the light of truth to
come so full into his eyes, that it dazeled them. For following the doctrine of
Caietan, who holds, that blood is not a part of man's nature, but the first
nourishment thereof; and adding, that it cannot be said, that the body
necessarily draws the nourishment into concomitancy with it; from thence he
inferred, that it was not altogether the same substance under the form of
bread, and under the form of wine. Withal he added: that the blood in the
Lords Supper was blood shed out of the veins, in which as long as it was
contained, it could not be drink: and therefore could not be drawn with the
vein into concomitancy: Moreover, that the Lords Supper was instituted to
celebrate his Passion; which could not ^ee represented, but by effusion of
blood, and seuering it from the body. It is true, this Amans had a check in the
Counfor his pains: but his reasons were not answered: himself for fear
shuffled and fumbled about some answer unto them, but gave no satisfaction
either to himself, or to others. Welfare Cardinal Hist. Conc. Triden. page
454.
Madrusius, who being asked his opinion, answered directly, That he thought
fit the Cup should be restored to the Layety, without all exception. Gaspar de
Casa, Bishop of Lerye, a man of eminent learning, concurred with the Cardinal
in judgment; adding, that he thought, that God would never send the spirit of
delusion into the mind of the Emperor, in so weighty a point; especially
considering, that Charles the French King, and the Duke of Bauaria, joined with
the Emperor in this request, that the Cup should be granted to the Layety.
This speech of so learned a Bishop, not only confirmed those, who were of the
same mind with him, but also made most of the opposite faction to startle.

Anno 1563.
Dudithius, Bish. of Quinque-Ecclesiae, as in the Council of Trent he had
stoutly maintained the entire Communion, and refelled all objections to the
contrary: so after the breaking up of the Council, in an Epistle, which he
wrote to Maximilian the Emperor, he bitterly complains of the miscarriage of
this business in the Council: Quid profici potuit in eo Concili^, in quo
numerarentur, non suis mementis ponderarentur sententiae? Si causa, si ratione
pugnandum fuisset, si pauci quidam socij nobis adfuissent, viceramus, quamuis
pauci, magnas copi^s aduersariorum. Sed cu^ numerus tantum prodire^ in aciem,
quo long inferiores futuri fuissemus, in optima causa victores disced^re non
potuimus. etc. Andr. Dudithius Episcopus Quinqu. Eccles. epist. ad C^s. Maxim.
2.
What good could be done, says he, in that Council, wherein voices were
numbered, but not weighed? If the merits of the cause, or reason might have
prevailed, or if but a few had joined with us, we had won the day: but when
the number only did bear the sway, in which we came far short, though our
cause was exceeding good, yet we were feign to sit down by the loss.

Anno 1564.
Georgius Cassander being set a work by Ferdinand the Emperor, to advise
about a means of composing differences in Religion, declares himself fully
for us in this point of the Cup: Cassand. consult. art. 22. page 184. Quare non
temere est, quod optimi quique etiam Catholicae pro^essionis, in diuinorum, and
Ecclesiasticorum scriptorum lectione versati, summo desiderio potiundi dominici
calicis acce^duntur, omnibusque modis contendunt, vt* hoc salutare sacramentum
fanguinis Christi vno cum sacramento corpo^is iuxta veterem, and multis seculis
perpetuatam vniuersali^ Ecclesi^ consuetudinem, in vsum (...).
It is not, says he, without cause that the best learned Catholics most
earnestly desire and contend, that they may receive the Sacrament of Christ's
blood together with his body, according to the ancient custom in the
universal Church continued for many Ages: or at least, that the liberty* which
was granted two hundred years ago of communicating in one kind, or both, may
be restored. Wherefore I hold it not only nothing contrary to the authority
of the Church, but rather very agreeable to the peace and unity of the Church,
and in a manner necessary, that either those in whose hands lies the government
of the Church, restore the ancient custom of communicating, or, which may be
done without great trouble, that the Churches themselves by little and little
return to their ancient use.

SECT. XVII. The confirmation of this Argument from the custom of the Church,
by the testimonies of our learned Adversaries.
THis Argument, as all the former, may be confirmed by the testimonies of our
adversaries themselves, who Didacus de T^pia. (...) Ecclesi^ primitiu^ and
antiquorum patru^ frequens vsus suit communicandi sub vtraque specie. Aestius.
give sufficient evidence to condemn their own Church of innovation, and
manifest defection from Primis Eccles. temporibus Eucharistiam sub vtraque
specie Communicatam esse manifestum est ex vetere historia, and scriptis omnium
fere patrum, qui testantur fideles bibere sanguinem Christ. waldenfis. (...).
2. c. 93. Non aduersor Nicola^ de Lyra dicenti, quod in primitiua Ecclesia
communicauit populus sub vtraque specie, etc.
the Primitive, in this their halfing the holy Sacrament. The Law says, that
custom is the best interpreter of law. And of all customs the ancient,
especially if they be general, and have lasted out diverse Ages, ought to bear
most sway with those, that maintain the truth of antiquity, or antiquity of
truth. An argument drawn from an ancient, general, and long continuing custom
for more then one thousand years, is like a threefold cable, that cannot be
broken. If we may believe the Councels held at Consuetudo ab Ecclesia, and
sanctis patribus introducta, and di^tissime obseruata habenda est pro lege.
Conc. Constan. ses. 13.
Constance and Laudabilis est consuetud^ ab ^cclesia and sanctis patribus
rationabi^ter introducta, and hacte^us di^tissime obseruata est a doctoribus
diuin^ legis, sacraru^ Scripturarum atque Ca^onum multam (...) babentibus: ^am
longo tempore commendata, pro l^ge habenda est. Council. Basil.
Basil, such a custom ought to be held for a law, and in^iolably observed:
But I infer; The Lay-Communion in both kinds is a 1. Point, the antiquity of
this custom.
custom commended by antiquity, generality, and duration, as has been
proved before by the testimonies of approved Writers in all Ages, and is
confessed by the Romanists themselves. First, for the antiquity of this
custom, I appeal to the Council of Constance, Arboreus, Aquinas, Lyra,
Carthusianus, and Ruardus Tapperus.

The Licet Christus post coenam instituerit, and licet in primitiua Ecclesa
receiperetur a fidelibus sub vtraque specie. etc.
Council of Constance admits under a licet, that Christ instituted the
venerable Sacrament under both kinds, and that in the Primitive Church it was
so received by the faithful; yet with a non obstante, countermands Christ's
Institution, and the practice of the Primitive Church: which gave Luther just
occasion to nickname this Council, and for Constantiense, to call it, Non
obstantiense Concilium.

Theophisoae l. 8. cap. 11. Olim laici communicabant sub vtraque specie.
Johannes Arboreus in plain terms confesses, that anciently the Lay people
did communicate under both kinds.

Comment. Ioh. 6. Secundum antiquae Ecclesiae consu^tudinem omnes sicuti
communicabant corpore; ita communicabant and sanguine.
Thomas Aquinas is a contest to Arboreus, auerring, that according to the
ancient custom of the Church, all those that were partakers of the communion
of Christ's body, were partakers also of the communion of his blood.

In primitiua Ecclesia hoc fiebat: sed nunc aliter est ordinatum. Comment. in*
6. Job.
Dionys. Carthusianus speaks Aquinas his words after him: It was so done
indeed in the Primitive Church, but now the Church has ordered otherwise.

Lyr. in 1. Cor. Fit hic mentio de duplici specie. Nam in primitiua Ecclesia
sic dabatur fidelibus.
Lyra harpes upon the same string: Here is mention of both kinds: for so the
Sacrament was rereceiued of the faithful in the Primitive Church.

Aestius, that famous Sorbonist, upon the Sentences, lib. 4. handling this
question, professedly says, that it is manifest out of ancient histories, and
the writing of almost all the ancient Fathers; qui testantur fideles bibere
sanguinem Christi, that the Eucharist was communicated to the people in both
kinds.

Ruardus Tapperus speaks rather like a Protestant, then a Papist in this
point. For he professes, that it were more convenient, the Communion were
administered under both kinds, then under one alone: and that the Communion
under both kinds is more agreeable to the Institution, and fullness thereof,
and to the example of Christ, and to the Fathers of the Primitive Church.
Arti^. 15.

Eccius, though Enchiridij cap. 10. fatemur hunc vsum fuisse in primitiua
Ecclesia. The second point: The generality of this custom.
in short and brief terms, yet comes home to the question, saying; We
confess it was the use in the Primitive Church to administer in both kinds to
the Laiety. For the generality of this custom, if ancient Records had failed
us, we have enough in the writings of modern Papists to convince the denyers
thereof. Suarez says somewhat to this point; Slotanus presumes further, and
says more; and Salmeron goes beyond him, and says enough; and yet Alphonsus
exceedes him, and says more then enough.

Suarez: Disput. 71. sect. 1. Solebat christianus populus frequenter sub
vtraque specie communicare.
The Christian people were w^t frequently to communicate under both kinds.
Frequently they might communicate, yet but in few places. There Slot. ap^* D^.
(...) lib. 8. c. 11. Haud diffite^ur (...) consuetudinem illo sempore, and
subsequentibus ad tempu^ in (...), etc.
Slotanus adds We do not deny, that the custom of communicating in both
kinds was observed in very many Churches, and continued so not only in the
time of persecution and martyrdom, but also in the peaceable days of the
Church. This custom might be in very many Churches, yet not general;
therefore Salm. tract. 35. Ingenue and aperte confitemur, morem generalem
extitisse communicandi etiam laicos sub vtraque specie.
Salmeron adds further; We do ingeniously and openly confess, that it was a
general custom to give the Communion to the Laiety in both kinds, as the
manner is at this day among the Greeks, and was in ancient time among the
Corinthians, and in Africa. General the custom might be, yet not universal
without exception, and in all places. Therefore to put the matter out of all
question, Alphonsus a Castro adds yet further; Alphons. aduersus hereses. Olim
per multa secula apud omnes Catholicos vsitatum esse, ex multorum sanctorum
scripturis didiscimus.
We believe, it is not against Christ's Institution, to give the Communion to
the Layetie in both kinds. For we learn out of the writings of many Saints,
that in old time this was the practice for many ages amongst all Catholics.
For the continuance of this custom, which was the last point, what more
pregnant testimonies can we desire, then these following of Tolet. in 6. Ioh.
Antiqua consuetudo a temporibus Apostolorum fuit in Ecclesia sub utraque specie
communicandi. In hac assertione nulla ^st controuersia.
Cassander, Soto and Gregory de Valentia? Cassander and Tapperus witnesses for
one thousand years in these words: Cass. art. 221. Orientalis Christi Ecclesia
in hunc vsque diem, Occidentalis vero, sieve Romana, mill amplius a Christo
annis, vtra^ que panis, and vini speciem omnibus Christi Ecclesiae membris
exhibuit.
Touching the administration of the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, it is
evident enough, that the Eastern Church even unto this day, or that the
Western or Roman Church for one thousand years after Christ and more, in the
solemn and ordinary distribution of the Sacrament, delivered both the kinds of
bread and wine to all the members of Christ's Church* which is manifest by
innumerable testimonies of ancient Writers, both Greek and Latin. Tapperus.
art. 15. Testimonia Communicandi sub vtraque specie multa sunt, ea^que
certissima: and longissima consuetudine hunc modum in Eccleijs Apostolicis
fuisse obseruatu^, testatur Dionys. Cypr. etc.
Tapperus calls it a custom of longest continuance. Soto. art. 12. quest. 1.
in did. 12. Non modo inter haereticos, verum inter Catholicos ritus ille multo
tempore inualuit, adeo vt temporibus S. Thomae nondum fuerit abolitus.
Soto witnesses thus for twelve hundred years and more: not only amongst the
heretics, but also among the Catholics, the manner of giving the Communion to
the Layetie in both kinds for a long time was of force; in so much as it was not
utterly abolished in the days of Aquinas. Now Aquinas by De Scriptor. Eccles.
Bellarmines exact calculation, was borne in the year of our Lord 1224. and
died in the year 1274. Between the birth of Aquinas and the Council of
Constance there passed 90. years, which time Greg. de Val. De legitimo vsu
Eucb. cap. 8. caepit ea consuetudo in Ecclesia Latina esse generalis non multo
ante tempora Council. Constant.
Greg. de Valentia after a sort gives us over and above: We do not deny, says
he, that both kinds were anciently administered to the people, as appears out
of S. Paul, Cyprian, Athanasius, Hierome, and others. And truly when the
contrary custom of communicating under one kind only began in some Churches,
it appears not: but it began not to be a general custom in the Latin
Church, much before the Council of Constance. Nor then neither. For Tapperus
says, that in some Churches they used both kinds, even unto the Council of
Constance. Who sees not in the frequency o Tapperus. art. 115. Quibusdam
retinentibus vtramque speciem etiam vsque ad ipsum Council. Constantiense.
and pregnancy of these testimonies, out of the mouth of our adversaries, the
observation of Bud. de Ass Operae pr^tium est; ^m veritatis animaduertere,
quae (...) nunquam inuitis erumpit, and fall^ns inter mendacia ab audientibus
demum agnoscitur: Cum interim loquentes adhuc habere se in potestate putent.
Budaeus to be verified; that such is the force of truth, that she breaks out
of men's mouths against their wills, and stealing amongst lies, is perceived by
the hearers, when the speakers think they have her safe enough in their own
power.

CHAP. XII. The Papists Arguments drawn from Scripture answered, and retorted.
SECT. 11. THe first argument, urged by our adversaries for their half
Communion, is drawn from the types and figures of the old Testament. I will
propound it in Bellarmines own words, that they may not cavil, as they use to
do, that we mar their arguments in relating them. Thus Bell. de sacr. Euch.
lib. 4. c. 24.
Bellarmine disputes against us: Most of the figures of the Eucharist in the
old Testament signify eating under one kind; it is not therefore probable,
that Christ would command the eating of both kinds. For that which is figured,
ought to answer the figure. The first figure was of the Tree of life in the
midst of Paradise, which Paschasius in his book of the body of our Lord, chap.
7. teaches to have been a type of the Sacrament of the Eucharist; but it was
manifest, there was no drink joined to that Tree. The second figure was of the
Paschall Lamb, Exodus the 12. The third figure, Manna, Exodus 26. The fourth
was shewbread, Exodus 25. The fifth, the sacrifices, in which the flesh was
eaten, but the blood was not drunk.

To this Argument we say,

First, that these figures were types of Christ himself, and not necessarily,
or properly of the Sacrament of the new Testament. For types are shadows
representing the substance, and the body, not properly other types. Christ
interprets Manna to be himself, Ioh. 6. I am the true bread that came down
from heaven. S. Paul calls Christ our Paschall Lamb, and says, The Rock
that followed them was Christ. And S. John, Apoc. 2. by eating of the Tree of
life in the Paradise of God, understands not the sacramental eating; which
cannot be in heaven, where there are no sacred elements, but the spiritual
feeding on the flesh of the Son of God.

Secondly, if we admit, that the types and figures of the old Law were
representations of the Sacrament of the new; we answer then, that the types and
figures of the old Testament must be equally compared with the Sacrament of the
new; part of them must be referred to the part of these. For example, the
Shewbread, and Manna, and the flesh of the Lamb, and the Tree of life,
prefigured one part, or kind in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to wit, the
Bread: and the Rivers of Paradise, and the Waters that Flowed from the Rock,
and the Drinke-offerings, and the striking the blood of the Lamb upon the
doore-postes, represented the mystical effusion, and drinking of Christ's blood
in the Sacrament. There was no drinking of the Tree of life; but there was
drinking of the Rivers of Paradise: there was no drinking of Manna, or of the
Shewbread; but there was drinking of the Waters that issued out of the Rock
at Horeb. And S. Paul testifies of the Hebrews, 1. Cor. 10. verse. 2, 3. that
they were all baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea; and as they did all eat
the same spiritual meat, so they did all drink the same spiritual drink.
For they drank all of that spiritual Rock, and that Rock was Christ. If they
will needs have in one type a perfect image or emblem of the Communion in both
kinds, Cyprian, and other ancient Fathers, will direct them to Melchisedec; who
brought forth bread and wine not bread only, but bread and wine.

Thirdly, this argument may be strongly retorted upon our adversaries after
this manner:

The Truth ought to answer the types: but the types of the old Law prefigured
the faithfulls communicating in both kinds, as is gathered by the ancient
Fathers, S. Chrysostom. S. Ambrose, S. Austine, and S. Gregory.

23. Hom. in 1. ad Corinth.
Chrysostom. As thou eatest the body of our Lord, so they did eat Manna: and as
thou drinkest the blood of our Lord; so they drank the water of the Rock: To
them he gave Manna and Water; to thee he gives his Body and Blood.

Deijs, qui mysterijs initian^ur. cap. 9.
S. Ambrose, in the water that issued from the Rock, drunk by the people in
the wilderness, notes the resemblance of Christians, who in the wilderness
of this world drink of the blood, that sprang from the true Rock Christ
Jesus. Illis aqua de petra, tibi sanguis e Christo, illos ad horam satiauit
aqua, te sanguis deluit in ^ernum.
To them, says he, water flowed from the Rock* to thee, blood from Christ:
the water satisfied them for an hour; the blood refreshes, or washes thee
for ever.

Tract. 26. in Ioh. Omnes eundem potum spiritualem biberunt, aliud illi, aliud
nos. sed specie visibili; quod tamen idem est virtute spirituali.
S. Austine compares the drinking of all the Fathers in the old Testament,
with ours in the new, in these words, All drunk the same spiritual drink;
We drink one thing, and they drink another but in visible appearance; which
yet is the selfsame thing in spiritual virtue. So the Paschall Lamb was
eaten, but the blood was stricken upon both posts, which mystery 22. Homil. in
Euang. Quid sit sanguis Christi, non audiendo, sed bibendo didicistis. Et super
vtrumque postem ponitur, cum non solum ore corporis, sed and ore cordis
hauritu^.
Saint Gregory thus unfolds; What is meant by the blood of the Lamb, you have
learned not by hearing, but by drinking it: Which blood is put upon both
posts, when it is drunk not only with the mouth of the body, but also with
the mouth of the heart.

SECT. 2. The second reason, says Bell. de sacr. Euch. lib. 4. c. 24.
Bellarmine, is drawn from the doctrine and example of Christ. For our Lord in
the sixth of John, speaking of the fruit of the Eucharist, or Lords Supper, not
once, but four times teaches one kind to be sufficient to salvation: he that
ea^eth me, shall live by me; he that eats this bread, shall live for ever: if
any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: This is the Bread, that
came down from Heaven, that if any man eat of it, he may not die. It cannot
therefore be, that the same Lord should command both kinds to be taken.
Again, our Lord proves the same by his example; first, Ioh. the sixth, where
he multiplied the l^aues, and thereby satisfied the people, there remaining
twelve baskets full: but neither multiplied he, nor gave them any drink.
Moreover, in the 24 of Luke, in the supper with the Disciples at Emaus, he
took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it unto them: but we read of
no Cup that there he took, or blessed, nor indeed could: For the story of the
Gospel so joins the distribution of the bread with our Lords departure, that
it leaves no place for the blessing, or distributing the Cup. For so S. Luke
speaks: It came to pass, as he sat with them, he took bread, and brake
it, and gave it to them, and their eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he
suddenly vanished out of their sight.

Answer.
Cardinal Bellarmine Quintil. institut. orator. lib. 5. cap. 20. Infirmiora
argumenta congreganda sunt. Imbecilla enim nature (...) mutuo auxilio
sustinentur.
in propounding this second reason, as he calls it, makes use of the Orators
precept, to heap weak arguments one upon another, that, though each by
themselves be of their own nature feeble, yet they may receive some support by
the help of one another. For here in like manner he lays together diverse
places of Scripture to strengthen his cause; which being severally examined,
will prove of no moment, being misapplied in his own defense.

To the first place therefore alleged out of the sixth Chapter of S. John, we
say;

First, that in the judgment of Tapperus, Iansenius, Caiet. in 3. partem Thom.
quaest. 80. not only affirms, that Christ, Ioh. 6. speaks not of the
sacramental, but of the spiritual eating of Christ: but also confirms it by
a strong reason: Verba Christi, Ioh. 6. ad literam in^lliguntur de mamducatione
spirituali Christi, abstrahendo eam a manducatione sacramentali, and probatur,
quia sola manducatio spiritual^ est illa, sine qua non potest vita esse in
nobis, etc. Thom. (...) ens^ to. 2. c. 91. probat ex Augustino, Cypriano,
Bernardo, bibere. Johan. 6. Sanguinem Christi, spiritua^iter (...). Et
con^ludit his verbis; Plane ergo non conciudunt, bibere speci^m (...)
inuis^ilis, sorbendo illud ore corp^is, ex illo verbo saluatoris; Si non
bibe^is sang^ ^ly hominis, non habebitis vita^ in vobis: sed intelligitur, si
non secundum fi^, and deuotione^ passionis biberitis sanguinem filij hominis
ore cordis, no^ habebitis vita^ in vobis.
Caietanus, Cusanus, and diverse others quoted by Bellarmine himself in his
first book of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and fifth Chapter. Christ in the
sixth of John, speaks not at all of the Sacrament, which was not yet
instituted, but a year after at his last Supper with his Disciples.

Secondly, for the words insisted upon by Bellarm. in particular, Christ
himself four several times tells us, that he means by bread, himself, who
came down from heaven. verse 48. I am that bread of life. 50. this is that
bread which comes down from heaven. verse. 51. I am the living bread, which
came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever.
verse. 58. This is the bread which came down from heaven, not as your fathers,
which did eat Manna, and are dead. If then there be any force in the number of
four, we answer; that our Lord, who four times in this cap. attributes life
to the eating of bread, four times expounds himself, that by bread he
means celestial bread, not sacramental; for the sacramental bread comes
not from heaven, but is made of the grain of the earth, and many that eat of
it, live not for ever. Judas and many other reprobates have eaten, yea Mise,
Rats, and other vermin may, and sometimes have eaten the sacramental bread,
who yet never have, nor shall taste the power of the heavenly gift, much less
enjoy eternal life. These texts therefore are mis-applied by Bellarmine to the
Sacrament; and being mis-applied, prove nothing for his half Communion.

Thirdly, we say, that Christ having spoken of Manna, the Israelites bread in
the wilderness, calls himself bread, keeping the subject and occasion,
which he had begun to speak of: As Ioh. 4. 14. speaking with the woman of
Samaria about drawing water, he promises her to give her water to drink, of
which whosoever drinks, shall thirst no more. There Christ speaks of
drinking, and mentions no eating; but in the places of Saint John, alleged
by Bellarmine of eating, and not drinking, because the Metaphore of drinking
better fitted the subject of his speech, which was water there; but eating
better relished in the sixth of John, where the occasion of his speech was
bread; yet as from these words of Ioh. 4. 14. no man may infer, that drinking
alone is sufficient to salvation without eating; so neither may Bellarmine
conclude from the sixth of John, in the places above quoted, that eating is
sufficient without drinking; as eternal life is ascribed here to eating, so to
drinking, Ioh. 4. 14. as also unto believing, Ioh. 6. 47. He that believes in
me, has everlasting life. Believing, eating, and drinking, are all means of
eternal life, but not exclusiuely: even by the same reason, whereby Bellarmine
would prove eating alone to be sufficient to eternal life; Because eternal
life is promised to eating, he may prove believing alone to be sufficient to
salvation, without partaking the Sacrament at all by eating or drinking;
because eternal life is promised unto believing. Eternal life is promised to
believing, as blessedness is in the fifth of Matthew to poverty, and to
meekness, and to purity in heart, and to godly sorrow, and to hungring and
thirsting for righteousness, and to peace making, and to patience: Not that
each of these virtues are sufficient of themselves alone to salvation, or to
make a man happy, but that they are special means to make men happy, and
altogether with faith make a man most blessed.

Fourthly, this argument of Bellarmine may be retorted against him thus: Our
Savior here speaks of such eating, whereby eternal life may be attained: But
eternal life cannot be attained by eating exclusiuely, that is, eating without
drinking, as Christ in this very Chapter three several times teaches us,
verse. 53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood,
ye have no life in you. And verse. 54. and 56. He that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has eternal life, and dwells in me, and I in him.
Therefore Christ in the places alleged by Bellarmine speaks not of eating
exclusiuely; but of such eating as is necessarily accompanied with drinking.
And consequently, if these Texts are meant of the Sacrament, they prove, that
we ought to communicate in both kinds.

To the second place alleged by Bellarmine out of Ioh. 6. 11. we say:

First, that there are three sorts of signs; signs of Gods wrath, and such
are prodigious events: signs of his power, and such are Miracles: lastly,
signs of his grace, and such are Sacraments? The multiplying of the loaves in
the place alleged, is to be ranked amongst the second sort of signs, and not
the last. It was a miraculous sign, not a mystical sign.

Secondly, if it be granted, that this action of Christ's was mystical, and
prefigured some thing besides the corporal refection of the people, yet
questionless it had no reference to the bread in the Lords Supper. For that,
as Saint Paul teaches, represents unto us, that we are all one bread, and one
body; because we partake of one bread: whereof the multiplication of the loaves
in S. John could be no type, but rather on the contrary. Moreover, in that
place of Saint John, there is mention of fishes multiplied, which can have no
affinity with the Sacrament of our Lords Supper. And this, if Bellarmine had
well considered, it would have made him as mute as a fish in this argument.

Thirdly, the edge of this argument may be retorted upon our adversaries thus:

The multiplying of the loaves, Ioh. 6. without multiplying the wine, does no
more prove, that we may communicate in bread alone, then the multiplying, or
miraculous supplying of wine without the like supplying of bread, Ioh. 2. in
Cana of Galily, proves, Vid. 170.
that we may communicate in wine only: But the multiplying or miraculous
supplying of wine, by turning water into it, without any miraculous supply of
bread, proves not, that we may Communicate in wine, or in the blood of Christ
only; (for such an half Communion the Church of Rome condemns.)

Therefore the multiplying of the loaves in S. John makes nothing for the
popish halfe-Communion in bread only.

SECT. 3. To the third place out of the 24. of S. Luke, the 30. and 31. verses:

We say; first, that the bread, which Christ there brake was common bread, and
not the Sacrament, as may be proved, both by the circumstances of the text,
and the confession of our Adversaries. In the Text we find no words of
consecration of the Bread, or the Cup, no command to reiterate that action of
Christ. The place was a common Inn, the Disciples came thither to receive
common food, and to lodge there that night, they met not together for the
Sacrament, nor read we of any prayers before, or preparation meet for
receiving of so holy and heavenly a mystery; and therefore some Papists doubt
of it, as Iansenius: whether the Bread here was Transubstantiated, or no. Ians.
concor. Euang. cap. 146. Q^dam existimant Dominum hic sub specie panis suum
porrexisse corpus: qu^madmodum Apostolis in vltima ^oena: at ^a sententia non
est ce^a, nec multu^ ver^milis, etc.
There are some, says he, who think, that our Lord* here gave unto the
Disciples under the form of bread, his own body, as he did to the Apostles in
his last S^pper; and hence they would draw a certain argument to show, that it
is lawful to deliver, and receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist in one kind
only. Howbeit, although that opinion be not certain, nor very likely to be
true, yet as all the actions of Christ contained in them something mystical
and hidden; so doubtless this action of Christ signified some holy thing.
Iansenius somewhat lyspeth. He durst do no other ways, for fearing of having
his tongue clipped. But the more ancient Papists speak the truth plainly.

Carth. comment. in Luke 24 Accepit panem, and benedixit, non tamen in corpus
suum conuertit, sicut in caena.
Dionysius Carthusianus thus paraphraseth upon the place of Saint Luke: It came
to pass as he sat down, that is, rested, and eat with them, he took bread
and blessed it, yet he turned it not into his body, as in his last Supper, but
as the manner is, he blessed the meat, thereby teaching us to bless our meat
and drink, or give thanks beforeour meals.

Widford in his book against Wickliffe, comes off roundly: Lib. 1. cont.
Wickl. Non habetur in textu, vel in glossa Luc. 24. vel per antiquos patres,
quod ille panis, quem fregit post resurctionem in sero coram discipulis, suit
consecratus, etc.
I say, says he, that it appears not in the Text, or in the Gloss, Luke 24.
or by the ancient Fathers, that the bread which Christ brake after his
resurrection at Even before his Disciples, was consecrated bread, or that it
was sacramental, or turned into his body.

Justinian. in 1. Cor. c. 10. Non simplicem fractionem intelligit, qualis erat
illa, cujus meminit Lucas, qua indigentium necessitati consulebatur, sed sacra,
and Eucharistica
Iustinianus, a later commentator of great note amongst the Papists upon the by
(in a parenthesis before he was aware) discovers the truth, and concurreth
with Widford, and Carthusian. For expounding those words of Saint Paul, The
bread which we break, etc. he understands here not a simple, or ordinary
breaking, such as that was, whereof Saint Luke makes mention, whereby the
necessity of the hungry was provided for; but a holy breaking, belonging to the
Sacrament of the Eucharist.

Our adversaries are very loath, that this weapon should be so wrested out of
their hands, and therefore they tugge hard for it. Hesselius Hesselius.
catches at the benediction mentioned before the breaking of the bread, which
he will have to be the consecrating of it.

Maldonate lays hold on the consequence, to wit, the opening of the Disciples
eyes in the breaking of the bread, which, says he, Maldo. in 24. Luc. Accedis
Miraculum, quod in fractione panis ab illis, qui tot eum ante sermonibus non
cognouerant, cognitus est, quod alia ratione quam Eucharistica virtute factum
esse non potest.
could not be done, but by the virtue of the Eucharist.

Iansenius and Bellarme allege Austine, Beda, and Theophylact, who in their
judgment seem to shrowde the Sacrament of the Eucharist under the form of
bread at Emaus. But these mistes are easily dispelled.

To Hesselius his conjecture we answer, that Christ never brake, or eat bread,
but he blessed it before, Matthew. 14. 19. He took the five loaves and two
fishes, and he looking up to heaven, he blessed, and brake, and gave the
loaves to his Disciples, etc. Likewise, Matthew. 15. 36. he took seven loaves,
and the fishes, and gave thanks, and brake them, and gave to his Disciples.
And Ioh. 6. 11. And Jesus took the loaves, and when he had given thanks, he
distributed to his Disciples. From all which Texts, as also from this in S.
Luke, nothing can be inferred for the celebration of the Sacrament, but for an
holy custom of giving thanks before meat, as before was noted out of
Carthusian. To Maldonates bold assertion, that the opening of their eyes must
needs be ascribed to the virtue of the Sacrament, we answer, that if himself
had opened his own eyes, he might have seen the contrary both in Mary, and
John; Mary's eyes were opened, when she said, Ioh. 20. Raboni; and John's, Ioh.
21. when he said to Peter, It is the Lord. Yet neither of them at that time
received the Sacrament, or had their eyes opened to know Christ by virtue
thereof; neither is it said in the text, that the breaking of the bread was a
cause, or instrument, whereby they were brought to know Christ; but it is only
said, (...), that he was known of them in the breaking of the bread, or as he
brake the bread; which might be other ways, then by virtue of the Sacrament,
either by means supernatural, or natural. Euthy. in hunc locum. cum
vidissent asseuetam, and cog nitam panis benedictionem, tunc permissi sunt, vt
eum agnoscerent. Calu. in hunc locum. peculiarem precandi ritum illi in vsu
fuisse apparet, cui sciebat Discipulos familiariter assueuisse, vt hac nota
admoniti, sensus suos excitarent.
Euthymius and Calvin are of opinion, that the Disciples knew Christ in
breaking of bread by the peculiar form of prayer, or blessing, which he used
at the table. Lyra by his manner of breaking bread: for he so brake it, as if
it had been cut with a knife. Kemnitius exam. Conc. Trident. part. 2. page 141.
Qui discipulis notierant ritus Christi in benedictione and fractione panis;
inde ipsum agnoscebant.
Kemnitius ioynes both together. Because, says he, Christ's manner both in
blessing, and breaking of bread, was known to the Disciples, from thence it
was, that they came to know that it was Christ, as he sat at meat with them, by
observing his peculiar manner of giving of thanks, and breaking of bread.
Whereunto we may add out of Lucas Brugensis in hunc lo^um.
Lucas Brugensis, that when the Disciples received bread from him, they locked
more steadfastly upon our Savior, that they might more perfectly know who he
was; which when our Savior perceived, he took away the veil, or impediment
from their eyes, and showed his native countenance more manifestly unto them,
as he did to Mary Magdalene, after she called him Raboni.

To the allegations out of Saint Austine, Beda, and Theophylact, we answer,
that the word Sacrament is taken by them largely for any mystery. For nothing
is more frequent with the Fathers, then to call the mystery of the Trinity, of
the Incarnation, of our Saviors fasting, his washing his Disciples feet, and
the like, the sacrament of the Trinity, the sacrament of the Incarnation, of
fasting, washing, Passion of Christ, and the like. Their meaning is, as Bell.
de sacr. Euch. lib. 4. cap. 24. August. Beda, Tb^h. Hoc tantum docere videri
possunt, nempe fuisse in illa panis benedictione mysierium quoddam, quo
vtilitas Eucharistiae significaretur. August, de consensu Evangelist lib. 3.
cap. 25. Nec quisquam se Christum agnouisse arbitretur, si eius corporis
particeps non est, id est, Ecclesiae, cuius vnitatem in sacramento panis
Apostolis commendat.
Bellarmine out of Iansenius, acknowledges, that there lies hid some
mystery, whereby in the blessing and breaking of bread, the fruits of the
Eucharist is signified.

Saint Austine in particular interprets this mystery not of the Sacrament, nor
of Christ's natural body, but of his body mystical, which is the Church; and
that whosoever is partaker, or member of the Church knows Christ, and
whosoever is without the unity thereof, knows him not. His words are; Let no
man think he knows Christ, unless he be partaker of his body, that is of
the Church, the unity of which Church the Apostle commends in the Sacrament
of bread, saying, We being many, are one bread, and one body.

Saint In Euangel. hom. ^3. Mensam ponunt, panes, cibosque afferunt and Deum,
quem in scripturarum expositione non cognouerunt, in panis fractione cognoscunt.
Gregory and Bid conceive, that our Savior manifested himself in the
breaking of bread, to commend hospitality, whereby, as the Saints of the old
Testament, that unawares entertained Angels, so the Disciples here entertained
our Lord. They laid the table, says S. Gregory, and set forth bread and wine;
and God, whom they knew not in the expounding of the Scriptures, they knew in
the breaking of the bread. Which observation Bid and Saint Gregory seem to
have borrowed from Saint Euangelicarum quaestionum, lib. 2. cap. 51.
Austine, where the like words are found with this introduction, quia
hospitalitatem sectati sunt, etc. because they were given to hospitality, they
knew him in breaking of bread, whom they knew not in expounding the Scriptures.

Theophylact (whose note upon this place is, that Christ his flesh has a
great, and unspeakable virtue to open their eyes, who receive the blessed
bread) does not affirm, that the bread, which the disciples brake at Emaus,
was the Sacrament, but that thereby the virtue of the Sacrament was shadowed.
His plain meaning is this, that as the Disciples at Emaus knew Christ
corporally in breaking of bread, so we in breaking bread in the Sacrament know
him spiritually. Eusebius Emissenus has a different conceit from all these: he
will have the knowledge of Christ, by breaking corporal bread at Emaus, to
signify the knowledge of Christ, which is obtained by the opening of
Scriptures: Feria 2. post Pascha. Nunquam tam been cognoscitur Christus, sicut
in fractione panis, pan siste spiritualis est, non carnalis, panis iste cibus
animae est, etc. nobis panem fregit, nobi^ scripturas exposuit, and sensum
aperuit Christus.
Christ, says he, is never so well known, as by breaking of bread; this bread
is spiritual, and not carnal; Christ has broken bread unto us, he has
expounded the Scriptures, and opened the meaning thereof.

Secondly, we answer, that extraordinary actions are not to be taken for
presidents: that Christ here after breaking the bread, did not likewise take
the cup, was, because (as our adversaries collect) immediately upon the
breaking of the bread, he vanished out of sight; which case is extraordinary;
like as if when a Minister had consecrated, and participated of the bread, he
should presently die, or be caught away by the Spirit (as Philip was) before
he had taken the cup. Now that which falls out by accident, and upon an
extraordinary occasion, is not to be drawn into a common rule: especially,
when it is a bare example, without any precept annexed unto it. Christ at his
last Supper, when he had broken the bread, and taken the Cup, he added a
Command; Do this. And Saint Paul teaches, that this Command is of force
until his second coming. That example therefore, which has a command added
unto it, ought to be followed; not that in Emaus, which was extraordinary, and
without any precept at all.

Thirdly, although there be no mention made of the Disciples drinking: yet no
doubt they did drink, as well as eat before they rose. For who could imagine,
that two travelers, at that time of the year, in a Country so hot as Judea,
taking an Inn of purpose for their repast, should call for dry bread without
any drink? Gregory, and Beda, and all those, who from hence commend
hospitality, must needs be understood by breaking of bread, to commend
courteous entertaining of strangers at their table, which is not without
refreshing them with drink, as well as bread. Saint Aug. in exposit. Ioh. in
hunc lec. Discipuli non agnoueru^^ eum, nisi in fractione panis; and vere qui
non sibi iudicium manducat and bibit, in fractione panis Christum agnoscit.
Austine, upon whose judgment our adversaries seem most to rely, in the
exposition of this Text, intimates, that the Disciples at Emaus then did, and
that the faithful ought in the Sacrament, drink, as well as eat; The
Disciples, says he, knew him not, but in breaking of bread: and verily he
that eats not, and drinks not damnation to himself, takes knowledge of
Christ in breaking of bread.

Fourthly, the point of this argument may be turned upon our adversaries, and
it wounds them deeply both in their doctrine of the sacrifice of the Mass,
and their Priests communicating. For they teach, that a Priest may not
consecrate, or communicate in one kind only, which was here done (if this
place be to be understood of the Sacrament, according to their Gloss.) This
Text therefore, which they conceive to make most for them, makes most against
them, and may be doubly retorted upon them. First, thus: Without consecration
of the Cup, there can be no sacrifice, or true sacrament: At Emaus there was no
consecration of the Cup; For, as our adversaries teach, after Christ had broke
the bread, before he took the Cup, he vanished out of their sight: Therefore
at Emaus there was no sacrifice of Christ his blood offered, or Sacrament at
this time administered. Here is then no ground at all for communicating in bread
only. Secondly, it may be thus retorted; Suar. in (...). partem Thom. q. 80.
Distinguit Thomas de sacerdotibus, and laicis; and de prioribus dicit, nullo
modo debere corpus sumere fine sanguine.
All Priests by Christ's commandment are to drink of the Cup in the Sacrament.
For this is the Roman Gloss upon our Saviors words, Drink ye all of this;
that is, all Priests: But the Disciples that traueled to Emaus, were Priests,
and had commission to preach, and administer the Sacrament; Therefore if they
celebrated the Sacrament at Emaus, they drank of the Cup, or else they
violated Christ's commandment, and were guilty of sacrilege, by the doom of
Cardinal In 3. partem summae quaest. 80. Sicut sacrilegus esset sacerdos,
consecrando panem and non vinum, sic sacrilegus esset, sumendo sanctum panem,
and non sumendo vinum. * Sect. 4.
Caietan. For his definitive sentence is, that as a Priest is a sacrilegious in
cons^crating bread, and not wine; so he is guilty of sacrilege also, if he
participate of the holy Bread, and not of the Cup.

The third reason, says Bellarmine, is drawn from the doctrine, and practice
of the Apostles. For in the second of the Acts, verse. 42. the communication of
the Eucharist is thus described: Bell. lib. 4. de sacr. Euchar. cap. 24.
And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, and in prayer. In which place it cannot be denied, that the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is meant: as well because breaking of bread is
joined with doctrine and prayer, as also, because it were rather a
discommendation, then a praise of the faithful, to say, that they continued
steadfastly in dining and supping. Lastly, Luther in his Sermon of the Lords
Supper, and Calvin in his fourth book of Institutions, chap. 17. acknowledges,
that this place is to be understood of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Harding in his thirteenth division adds hereunto the testimony of the
Waldenses, in the confession of their faith to Vladislaus: and he says there,
that he might likewise allege the place of the twentieth Chapter, and
especially that of the seven and twentieth of the Acts, where Chrysostom, and
the Fathers understand the bread, that Saint Paul in peril of shipwreck
took, gave thanks over, brake, and eat, to be the holy Sacrament.

Answer.
If the Romish half Communion be so visible, and apparent in these places,
alleged out of the Acts, I wonder the Fathers in the Councels of Constance,
Basil, and Trent saw no such thing in them. As for the ancient Doctors in the
Primitive Church, some of them expound these places of common bread, some of
the Sacrament, none of the Communion in one kind. In the 20. of the Acts, it is
not certain, that Saint Luke speaks of the Sacrament; and in the 27. of the
Acts, it is certain he speaks not of the Sacrament. With such untempered
mortar, that will not stick together, our adversaries build the ruins of
their Babell. To clear then these passages in their order:

To the first, Acts 2. 42, 46. I answer,

First, that there is no necessity at all enforcing us to understand by
breaking of bread in either verse, the celebration of the Sacrament. The words
of themselves are indifferent to either of these three expositions; They
continued in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and distributing their bread
one to another, as each had need. It seems to be Caietan. Fractio panis
communis distribuebatur singulis.
Caietans exposition: They continued in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship,
and had their common diet with them, which is Beza. Latius patere puto hanc
panis fractionem, qua nimirum communis conuictus significetur.
Beza's; or, Lastly, they continued in their doctrine, and participating the
Communion with them: Which interpretation Luther, Calvin, and the Waldenses
seem to like best. The joining of breaking of bread with doctrine and prayer,
seems for to make for this interpretation; but that which follows, verse.
44. All that believed were together, and had all things common; and verse. 46.
breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness, and
singleness of heart; swayeth the balance on Beza his side. To which opinion
Chrysostom, and Oecumenius, Theophylact, and Caietan before alleged propend.
Chrysostom. in Act. sermon. 6. cap. 2. (...) Et post: (...).
Saint Chrysostom says, that their Communion was with the Apostles, not in
prayers only, but also in doctrine, and civil c^uersation. All things were in
Common: By bread he seems to me to signify their fasting and austere life:
they took their food for the maintenance of life, not of Luxury. Occum. in
hunc locum. (...).
Oecumenius, and Theophylact accord in their note with Saint Chrysostom. He
says, breaking of bread, to show the Apostles simple and sparing diet: so
Oecumenius, and Theophylact; by this phrase, breaking of bread, he signifies
the faithfulls temperance annd slender diet; whereby Bellarmines cauil is
easily answered, when he says, it were a discommendation, not a praise of the
faithful, to say they continued in eating and drinking: for it was a
commendation to continue in the fellowship of the Apostles, and to eat and
drink with them after their temperate and sparing manner; especially, if we
add out of Cardinal Caiet. in Act. cap. 2. Perseuerabant in fractione panis,
hoc est, in distributione cibi, communicatio redigebat propria in commune,
fractio autem panem commnnem distribuebat singulis.
Caietan, that this their breaking of bread was a charitable releiuing of those
that wanted: they continued, says he, in breaking of bread, that is in
distribution of meat: the communication brought their own proper into common,
but the breaking of bread distributed that which was common to every man in
particular.

Secondly, if we should grant, that Saint Luke by breaking of bread, understood
the celebration of the Lords Supper, yet our adversaries would gain nothing by
it. For it is certain, that in the Hebrew phrase, to break bread, signifies
to make a meal, to dine, or sup with a man: which, I trow, is not without
drink, as well as meat. Is not this, says Esaias, the fast, that I have chosen?
And chap. 58. verse. 6. 7. Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungery, and that
thou bring the poor, that are cast out, to thy house, etc. And Ezechiel. cap.
18. 7. Who has given his bread to the hungry, and Luke 14. 1. He went into
the house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread: and the second to the
Thessal. 3. 21. Let them eat their own bread. In all which places, and many
more, bread is taken for all manner of victuals, and to break bread,
signifies, to break or take food, and natural sustenance; which is not
bread only, but bread and drink. Therefore howsoever the cup, or drinking be
not expressed in this place of the Acts, yet it must necessarily be understood
by a usual Synechdoche in holy Scriptures. To the second place out of Acts the
20. 7. We answer as to the former Acts 2. that the disciples meeting to break
bread, was either to keep a feast of Charity, which they called then (...),
or to receive the Communion in both kinds. For the Disciples publicly never
received it otherwise in the primitive church.

To the third objection out of Acts 27. 35. Where Saint Paul is said to take
bread, and after he had given thanks, to eat it: we answer, that the bread
which Saint Paul took and brake, could not be the holy sacrament. For Sant
Paul would never have given that which is holy to Dogs, or cast Pearls before
swine, which he should have done, if in the ship before, and to Infidels he had
administered the blessed sacrament. The text says, Ver. 33.
that they had been many days fasting before; and S. Chrysostom. (...).
Chrysostom, Theoph. (...). d Occu. (...).
Oecumenius, and Theophylact expressly affirm, that Saint Paul both by words,
and by his own example, persuaded the Mariners, after so long fasting, to
take food, to keep them from staruing. Moreover, it is to be observed, that
after Saint Paul began to cat, it is said ver. 36. that they were all of good
cheer, and they also took to themselves some meat. It is not said, that they
took bread from Saint Paul's hand which they must have done, if they had
received the Communion from him. Neither do any receive the sacrament in that
quantity, that they may thereby satisfy hunger, and be said to have eaten
enough. verse 38. These circumstances of the Text do so evidently convince any
man of understanding, that the bread, which Saint Paul brake in the ship, was
common bread; in so much that Lorinus Lorin. in act. 27. Occurr. Chrysostom.
Beda, alijque huius loci expositores vsit atum, ac vulgarem duntaxat panem,
escamque intelligunt, nec non Hieronymus. and mihi etiam magis placet.
the Jesuit, a great Patron in other places of the half Communion, here
yields unto us, ingeniously confessing, that Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Beda, and
other expositors upon this place, understand usual and common bread or food:
as also does Saint Hierome: And I better, says he, like of their exposition.

Lastly, this third and last argument of our adversaries out of the scriptures,
drawn from the example of Paul, the Disciples, and Apostles in the Acts, may be
forcibly retorted upon them. For the Apostles, Disciples, and Saint Paul were
Priests, and Ministers of the Sacrament: in whom, as we learned before out of
the Gloss of the Canon law, and Cardinal Caietan, it had been sacrilege to
communicate in one kind only. Bellarmine saw this retortion in Kemnitius, and
seeks to avoid it by telling us that in the second of the Acts, Saint Luke
relates the faithful peoples continuance in prayer, and receiving the
sacrament, and not the Apostles communicating, which he yielded was in both
kinds. But this is a vain evasion, both because the word (...), or fellowship
of the Apostles, implies, that the Apostles were communicants with them, as
also because properly those, who administered the communion, brake the bread,
and not the people; they took it after it was broken by the Apostles. To
conclude, they are caught on both sides by this Delemma. Either breaking of
bread in those places, is not celebrating the sacrament, or if it be, their is
a synechdoche in the words, whereby one part is put for the whole. For how can
they put by this thrust?

No priests may consecrate, or communicate in one kind only:

The eleven Apostles Acts. 2. and the Disciples, Acts. 20. and Paul Acts. 27.
were Priests:

Therefore they did not, nor might not consecrate, or Communicate in bread
only.

In the places above alleged therefore, under the name of bread, both kinds by
a synechdoche must needs be understood.

CHAP. XIII. The arguments of papists drawn from Councels answered, and
retorted.
Our adversaries in this question, much boaste of the definitions of three
general Counsels in favor of their half Communion, The Council of Ephesus,
Constance, and Basil. Whereunto in general we answer, first, that either these
Councels approve not the half Communion, or they are not approved themselves.
The Council of Ephesus is an approved Council, but it approves not the half
Communion; the Councels of Constance and Basil approve the half Communion; but
they are not themselves approved, no not by the Roman Church, much less by
the Catholic Christian Church.

Gratian. did. 50. In gestis Concilioru^, quotiescunque discors sententia
inuenitur, illius Concilij sententia magis teneatur, cuius antiquior, and
potior extat auctoritas.
Secondly, we are resolved by the Pope himself, that if Counsels are at odds
with one another, and their definitions irreconciliable, we ought to take part
with the ancient against the latter. This is our present case; two latter
Councels to wit the Council of Constance and Basil contradict many Counsels
more ancient; by name, the Council of Nice, and Calcedon, cited before. Ancyra,
Canon 2. of Neocorsarea, Can. 13. of Africa, Can. 4. of Brachar. 2. cap. 1. of
Ilerda Can. 1. of Toledo the 3. Can. 2. and. 7. of Matiscon the 2. Can. 2. Can.
4. of Toledo the 4. Can. 6. 7. 17. 57. of Toledo the 11. Can. 6. 11. of
Cabilonum. Can. 46. 47. of Paris, lib. 3. cap. 20. of Worms, Can. 4. 31.
Therefore by the Popes decision, and that ex cathedra, we may, and ought to
embrace rather the whole Communion enjoined, or approved in so many ancient
Counsels, then of the half Communion, commanded to be practiced by the
Laietie, under pain of a curse, in these latter, and fewer.

In particular, we answer to the allegations made by Hosius, Harding, and other
Papists out of the Council of Ephesus; that they took it upon trust of some
ancient Schoole-man or Canonist, who thought it a matter of merit, to forge an
ancient record for the good of the catholics cause, and defense of the Roman
Church. For neither in the Acts of the Council of Ephesus, nor in any approved
history is there any footstep, or print of any such constitution, as is
pretended by our adversaries to be made, for the half Communion, and that upon
this occasion; Caietan. in 3. part. Thom. q. 80. art. 12 Nestoriani p^ant sub
specie panis corpus tant^m Christi esse, sub specie vini sanguinem, quia in
morte Christi sanguis fuit separatus a corpore.
Because the Nestorians held, that Christ's body in the sacrament under the
form of bread was Cadauer exangue, a carkas without blood; In this fiction the
Romanists sufficiently show (to use the words out of Saint Hierome) that they
had voluntatem, but not artem ^entiendi; that they had a good will to lie for
the Catholic cause, but were not their craftsmasters. For they that hope to
gain credit by a ly, ^ust build it upon some probable ground, or color at
least of truth, which here is wanting. For neither did the Nestorians maintain
any such error touching the sacrament, as neither had the Council of Ephesus
any reason thereupon, to have prohibited the use of the Cup to the Laiety. For
what a consequence is this? The heretics denied any blood to be in the body
of Christ in the Sacrament; Therefore Catholics and right believers of the
Laietie ought to be deprived of the use of the holy Cup in the Sacrament. To
coin new Fathers is a usual practice, and therefore of no transcending merit:
but to coin new Canons of general Councels, and to forge records of such
antiquity (as is the true Council of Ephesus) can be no less then a work of
superarrogation. To the allegation out of the Council of Constance, we answer:
first, that it was no general Council. The Eastern Church of as large, or
larger extent, then the Western, sent no Patriarch, or Bishop thither.

Secondly, this Council is impeached by the Roman Church it self. Bellarmine
de council. cap. 7. k speaking of this Council of Constance) says, this
Council, so much as concerns the i Hoc Council. quantum ad primas sessiones,
reprobatum est in Council. Florent. and Lateranensi. In Hierarchi^.
first sessions, is disallowed and repealed in the Councels of Florence and
Lateran.

Albertus Pighius is yet hotter against this Council, saying, that it decreed
against the order of nature, against manifest Scriptures, against the
authority of all antiquity, and against the Catholic faith of the Church.
What credit is then to be given to this erroneous, and perfidious Council?
Which both adulterated the Christian faith by heretical decisions, and brake
their morrall faith by bloody cruelty, exercised against John Hus, and Hierome
of Prague, to whom safe conduct to the Council, and back again was promised.
If the Romanists themselves reject this Council in point of the Popes
Supremacy, why may not we in point of the Sacrament?

Lastly, out of this very Council we may draw an invincible argument against
the half Communion.

The institution of Christ and practice of the Primitive Church ought to sway
more with every good Christian, then any constitution of a late Council, never
generally approved of by the Church of God.

But the Communion in both kinds has the institution of Christ, and the
practice of the Primitive Church for it, as is confessed by the Fathers in this
Council:

Therefore every good Christian ought to communicate in both kinds, the
prohibition of the Council of Constance to the contrary notwithstanding.

To the allegation out of the Council of Basil, our answer is the stronger, by
how much the authority of this Council is weaker, or rather of no validity
at all.

First, there lies against it the same exception, which we took before
against the Council of Constance; that none of the Bishops of the Eastern
Churches were present at it, and in this regard it cannot be held for an
Occomenicall, or general Council.

Secondly, while the Fathers of this Council sat at Basil, the Pope fearing
least some thing might be done to his prejudice, called an other Council at
Ferrara: and ^ in this regard the Council of Basil cannot be esteemed a
general, or total Council, no not so much as of the Western, or Roman
Church.

Thirdly, the Acts of this Council are repeated in the Council of Florence,
and Lateran. Pighius writes as bitterly against it, as against the Council of
Constance; and Cardinal Huius Concilij nihil est ratum and probatum, nisi
quaedam dispositiones circa beneficia. Cor. cil. vero ipsum reprobatur in
Council. Lateran. sess. 11. l Vasq. in 3. part. Thom. quest. 80. art. 12. disp.
215 cap. 3. Basiliense Council. nullius est auctoritatis in hac re.
Bellarmine writing of it, says, There is nothing of this Council ratified
and allowed, but certain orders, about benefices: the Council it self is
rejected, and condemned in the Council of Lateran, Sess. 11. No marvel then,
if Protestants account the decrees of this Synod, no better then dross, when
by the Roman test it self, they are proved to be no good mettell. Wherefore
as the Roman Orator makes a Dilemma, touching Brutus and Antonie, being in
Arms one against the other; if Brutus be a preserver of his country, Antonie
is an enemy; if Antony be a Consul, Brutus is an enemy: so may we say of
those two Councels of Basil and Lateran; if the Council of Basil be
Catholic, Lateran is heretical; if Lateran be Catholic, the Council of
Basil is heretical.

Lastly, be this Council of Basil, of what authority it may be, the Romanists
loose more by it, then they gain. For though the half Communion were after a
sort established in this Council, yet the Bohemians petition for the entire
Communion was yielded unto, and signed in this Council; whence we thus argue
against them.

If the Papists arguments drawn from danger of irreuerence, inconveniences,
examples, or testimonies of antiquity, and pretended consequences of Scripture
were necessary and concludent, the Council of Basil could not lawfully grant
to the Bohemians, and Morauians the use of the Cup: but the Council of Basil
might lawfully, and did yield to the Bohemians, and the Morauians the use of
the cup: Therefore the reasons of the Romanists drawn to the contrary from the
heads above mentioned, are not necessary, or concludent.

CHAP. XIIII. The Arguments of Papists, drawn from ancient pretended rites of
the Church, answered, and retorted.
THere is no more certain sign of a bad cause, then extorted testimonies, and
wyer-drawne arguments; such as our adversaries, for want of better, insist upon
in this question. For the truth never wants voluntary witnesses to depose
for her, nor arguments that offer themselves in her defense; as the Poets
feign, that stones came of their own accord to the building of Thebes. Such
are those proofs, which the texts of scpriture without any forcing, and the
free deposition of all ages before alleged, have furnished us withal. On the
contrary, our adversaries strain ancient rites, and customs weakly proved,
and peruersely applied to excuse their sacrilege. They tell us of reserving the
Sacrament for a long space, of carrying it home to men's houses, giving it to
infants, and impotent persons, on their deathbed, to Priests put out of their
rank for misdemeanour; and lastly, of a Communion of such things, as were
before consecrated. All which observations are as headless arrows shot at
random. Falces petebamus, we demand sithes, and they answer us with mattocks.
Our question is of the public, and general practice of the Church, their
answer is of private customs; our question is of the lawful use of the Lords
Supper; their answer is, of abuses and corruptions; our question is of the
depriving the Laietie of the Cup; their answer is of Priests; our question is
of fit and worthy receivers qualified to communicate in both kinds; their
answer is of children, excommunicate persons, or men lying on their deathbeds:
This might suffice to wash away their varnish of antiquity. Yet lest they
should accuse us, as Fimbria did sometimes Scecuola, quod non totum telum
corporereceperimus, that we received not the full thrust into our body, I will
bring in their great Cardinal laying amain at us in this wise.

SECT. I.
From the reservation of the Sacrament, thus he disputes against us: Bellar.
de sacram. Euchar. lib. 4. c. 24.
That the Sacrament was accustomed anciently to be reserved, we have proved by
the testimonies of Fathers, and Councels. Now, that it was reserved in one kind
only, and consequently, that the communicants received in one kind only, it
is manifest, because sometimes they reserved it for a very long time;
Sophronius in his spiritual meddow relates of the keeping of it for a whole
year, but wine, especially in a small quantity, could not be kept so long,
because within that time it would be corrupted.

The answer.
First, although we grant, that the ancient Answ. I.
Church, upon some occasions, reserved the holy elements after the Communion:
yet not for any long space. They had no reason, nor need so to do, because, as
Saint Omni hebdomada offerendum est, si non quotidie perigrinis, incolis tamen
velbis in bebdomada.
Ambrose teaches us, the Church consecrated every day for strangers, and twice
in the week for the inhabitants. As for Sophronius his tale of keeping the
Sacrament for a whole year, it is a fit flower for his spiritual meddow,
which no man ever saw, or heard of, unless it were in Sir Thomas Moors
Vtopia. I give much more credit to Alphonsus Job. Munster a vertleg. discurs.
ea nobilis.
his experiment, who locking up a consecrated wafer in a Casket of gold, after
a few months opened it, and found nothing in it but a worm.

Secondly, as wine cannot be long kept, but it will sour, so neither can
bread, but it will grow mustie; and of the two, if care be had to stop close
the vessel, to keep out air, the wine will keep sweet longer then the bread.
If the Cardinal fly to a miracle, I answer, that by the same miracle, whereby
the bread was kept a whole year from moulding, the wine was, or might have
been kept from sowring.

Retortion.
Thirdly, this headless arrow may thus be headed, and shot back upon our
adversaries;

If the Sacrament were anciently reserved in both kinds, then the custom of
reserving it makes for, and not against the Laieties Communion in both kinds:

But the Sacrament was anciently reserved in both kinds:

Therefore the custom of reserving the Sacrament makes for, and not against
the Laieties communicating in both kinds.

That the holy mysteries were kept in the Primitive Church in both kinds,
appears manifestly by Saint Chrysostom in his first Epistle to Inocentius,
Nicephorus Histor. Eccles. lib. 13. cap. 19, and Cardinal Baronius himself;
whose words are very obseruable, Anno 404. Annal. tom. 4. Hic, lector
considera, quam procul abborreant a patrum traditione, vsuque Catholicae
Ecclesiae, qui nostro tempore negant osseruandam esse sacratissimam
Eucharistiam, quam videmus non sub specie panis tantum, sed etiam sub specie
vini olim consueuisse recondi.
Here, O Reader, consider, says he, how wide they are of the Traditions of the
Fathers, and the use of the Catholic Church, who deny, that the holy Eucharist
in our time ought to be kept, which we see in ancient times was reserved, not
only in the form or kind of bread, but also in the other kind, to wit, in the
wine. You have this proved by the authority of Saint Gregory: in the 3. of his
dialogues. where he says, that the Mariners carried in the ship the body, and
blood of Christ.

SECT. II.
The second headless arrow is, their argument deduced from the carrying the
holy mysteries after consecration into private houses; and thus they draw this
arrow at us:

Bellar. de sa. Euch. lib. 4. cap. 24.
The second rite, or custom of the ancient Church was, to carry the Sacrament
home, and there to take it at some seasonable time. This custom is most
certainly proved out of Tertullian his second book to his wife. Clem. Alexand.
stromatum. li. 1. Cyprian Sermon. Stromatum 1.
de Lapsis. Basil epist. to Cesarea Patricia. Hierom. Apolog. contra Iouinian.
Now that the Christians were went to communicate at home in one kind only, it
is manifest, both for that the only form of bread was given to the hands of
the faithful, the blood being drunk out of a Chalice, as Cyrill demonstrateth
in his 5. Catechism, and also, because their were no Chalices in the bouses of
Laymen, or holy vessels to receive the blood of Christ; as it may be evidently
gathered out of the second Apology of Athanasius. p Hard. diuis. 19. art. 2.
r Harding imbellisheth this argument with a miraculous narration out of Saint
Cyprian: that when a woman had gone about with unworthy hands to open her
Coffer, where the holy thing of our Lord was laid up, she was made afraid with
fire that rose up from thence, so as she durst not touch it.

The answer.
First, this argument is very impertinent to the purpose, and in consequence
also. For the Answ. 1.
question is of the public use of the Sacrament in the Church: this argument
proceeds upon private abuse thereof in men's houses at home. Now an argument
from a mere abuse is an abusiue argument, and concludes nothing. A mere
falsehood cannot prove a truth, nor a corrupt custom the lawful use of any
thing. Saint Aust. contra Parm. l. 3. Pensandae sunt doctrinae non in statera
dolosa consuetudinum suarum, sed in statera aequa diuinarum scripturarum.
Austine gives us a golden rule to the contrary; Doctrines are to be weighed
not in the deceitful balances of their own customs, but in the even
balances of divine scriptures. In which, if this custom of carrying the
Sacrament home to their houses be wighed, it will be found too light. And
therefore it is rejected, and condemned under a curse in a Council holden at
Council. Caesar* Aug. ^an. 3. Eucharistiae gratiam si quis probatur acceptam non
consumpsisse in Ecclesia, anathema fit imperpetuum.
Cesar-Augusta in Spain. If any man receive the Sacrament, and eat not the
same presently in the Church, let him be accursed for ever. And likewise in the
first Council of Toledo, cap. 14. If any man receiving the Sacrament of the
Priest, do not presently eat it, let him be driven out for a sacrilegious
person. As for the miracle of fire, urged by M. Harding, it burns his own
fingers. For God showed himself by that miracle to be offended with that,
which the woman did, fraying her that kept the Sacrament in her coffer with a
flame of fire.

Secondly, this corrupt custom is no shadow 2
of proof for the Laities communicating in one kind. For as they carried the
bread home to their houses, so they might also a portion of wine; yea but says
Bellar. they had no Chalices at home; what then? they might have and had
bottles, or glasses, in which they might, and did carry part of the
consecrated wine home to their houses.

Retortion.
Thirdly, this headless arrow may be thus headed, and shot back upon our
adversaries:

If the Sacrament were anciently carried home to Laymens houses in both kinds,
then this custom of carrying it home makes not against, but for the Laieties
Communion in both kinds:

But the Sacrament was anciently carried home to Laymens houses in both kinds:

Therefore that custom makes for, and not against the Laieties Communion in
both kinds:

That the Sacrament was carried home in both kinds, is proved by the vndeni
able testimonies of Justin Martyr, Gregory, Nazianzenus, and S. Hierome.

Justin Martyr Just. in apol. 2. (...).
declaring the order of the Church in his time, says thus: of the things that
be consecrated, to wit, the bread, water, and wine, they give a part to every
one, and they carry the same things to those that are absent.

Nazia. in fune. Gorgoniae. (...), etc.
Gregory Nazianzen writes of his sister Gorgonia, that if her hand had laid
up any portion of the tokens of the precious body and of the blood in devotion,
she mingled it with tears, and so received it.

Hier. epist. ad Rust. Nihil illo ditius, qui corpus domini in canistro, and
sanguinem portabat in vitro.
Saint Hierome highly commending Exuperius Bishop of Tolosa, says of him:
there was no man richer then he, that carried the Lords body in a wicker
basket, and his blood in a glass.

SECT. III.
The third headless arrow, is an argument deduced from the Communion of
Infants; Thus they draw it at us;

Bellar. desacr. Eucha. lib. 4. c. 24.
The third rite of the Church is the administering the Communion to Infants. For
the ancient did sometimes administer the Communion to Infants, but under one
kind only, namely, by dropping into their mouth something of Christ's blood; as
it appears both by Cyprians Sermon of those that are fallen, and by this
manifest reason, because Infants cannot take any solid sustenance.

The answer.
First, as glasses cannot strengthen one another, Answ. I.
but may easily break one another, and bubbles in the water, deface one
another; so false holds and errors may destroy one the other, but they can in
no wise establish one the other. The administering the Communion to Infants is
an abuse, if not a profanation of the holy Sacrament. How then can it justify
the Romish half Communion, since it self is unjustifiable? Metal upon
metal is no good hearaldrie, and error upon error is no good D^uinity. By the
Apostle Saint Paul's rule, none ought to be admitted to the Communion, that have
not knowledge to discern the Lords body, and discretion to examine themselves.
This sucklings cannot do, and therefore not only the Reformed Churches; but
the Romish also at this day, forbid the Communion to be given to Infants.

Secondly, it appears not out of S. Cyprian, or any other way, that infants
received the Communion in one kind only, for though Cyprian mentions one kind
in that place, yet he excludes not the other. And howsoever children cannot
eat strong meat, yet no man doubts, but that they are able to swallow down
a crume, or a small piece of a wafer.

Retortion.
Thirdly, this headless arrow may be thus headed, and shot back upon our
adversaries.

If the Sacrament were anciently given to sticklings in both kinds, then the
Communion of Infants makes for, and not against the Layties receiving in both
kinds:

But the Sacrament was anciently given to sucklings in both kinds:

Therefore the Communion of Infants makes for, and not against the Laieties
receiving in both kinds:

That Infants had the Sacrament delivered to them in both kinds, is testified
by Saint Cyprian Saint Austine, and Gennadius. Saint Cyprian in his Sermon of
such as fell away in time of persecution, brings in Infants thus pitifully
complaining against their parents: Nec derelicto cibo, and poculo Domini.
Alas, the treachery of others has destroyed us, we have done nothing of our
selves, we hasted not of our own accords to profane contagions, leaving the
Meat, and Cup of the Lord.

Quando carnem Christi man ducauerunt, vel non manducauerunt, quando biberunt,
vel non biberunt sanguinem c, 8.
Saint Austine in his 107. Epistle, writing of the doom of Infants, that if
they dyed in their tender age, they shall receive according to those things,
which they have done by the body, to wit, in the time in which they were in the
body, that is, when by the mouths or heart of them that carried them, they
believed, or believed not, were baptized or were not baptized, they did eat
the flesh of Christ, or eat it not, they did drank his blood, or drank it not.

Gennadius of Massilia conceiueth the case to be alike in Baptism, and in the
Lords Supper with sucklings, and children, who if they be not capable of
heavenly doctrine, he requires Genesis lib. de Eccles. dogmat. cap. 52. Si
paruuli sunt vel hebetes, respondeant pro illis qui illos afferunt, and ita
Eucharistiae mysterijs admittantur.
that those that bring them, answer for them; and so being confirmed by
imposition of hands, and Chrisme, he admits them to the mysteries of the
Eucharist, or the Lords Supper.

SECT. IIII.
The fourth headless arrow is their argument, fetched from the Communion of the
sick; And thus they draw it at us:

Bellar. loc. supr. citato.
The fourth Rite is the communion of the sick, which for the most part was
administered in one kind. Eusebius in his. 6. book of his Ecclesiastical
history writes of a Priest, that gave to a young Lad a piece of the holy
Eucharist to carry it to old Serapion, that lay on his deathbed and that he
commanded that the young Boy should moisten it before he gave it him. Paulinus
in the life of Saint Ambrose writes, that Saint Ambrose a little before his
death received the Lords body, and as soon as he had swallowed it down,
presently gave up the Ghost. And Amphilochius in the life of Saint Basil
writes, that at his death he received the Sacrament in one kind, namely, in
bread, which he had kept along time.

The answer.
First, these instances are not to the purpose: Answ. 1.
for our question is of the prohibition of giving the Laietie the Cup in the
Church. These instances are for private communions of the sick at home. Our
question is of members of the Church, and those of the Laietie, but of these
instances, the first is of a person excommunicate; the second and third are of
Bishops.

Secondly, these instances are not sufficiently proved.

To the first instance, Serapions Boy were able to answer. For what a sequel is
this, the old man's mouth was dry, and the Boy was therefore commanded to
moysten the bread, to wit, by sopping it in the wine; Ergo, the old man
received no wine? The story is thus set down in Eusebius. Serapion an old man
that had been excommnicated for sacrificing unto Idols, lying upon his
deathbed, desired to be reconciled to the Church, and sent to a Priest to
give him the Communion; the Priest not being able for sickness to go
himself, least the old man should depart comfortless in desperation, in token
that he was reconciled to the Church, sent unto him the sacrament by a young
Lad, and charged him, for the more ease of the old man, to moisten the bread,
to wit, in the wine he brought with him which the Lad did accordingly, (...).
moystening the portion of bread which he received of the Priest, and inf^sing
the same into the old man's mouth.

To the second instance we answer, that this Paulinus is an author branded by
Erasmus, and other learned Critics. And if it were true which he writes, it
no way releiueth our adversaries, nor hinders us. For if Saint Ambrose
straight upon the receiving of the bread yielded up the Ghost, before he could
receive the Cup, it was by accident, that he received not in both kinds,
because death prevented him: Otherwise, that Saint Ambrose, and the Church in
his time received in both kinds, is proved at large in the testimonies of the
fourth Age.

To the third instance in Saint Basils life, we answer, that Amphilochius is a
fabulous writer, and that his tale in him of Saint Basil, discredits it self.
For the Author says, that this bread, which Saint Basil called for at his
death, had been kept for the space of seven years and more, and that S. Basil
received it, to the intent that it might be buried with him. Similes habent
labra lactucas. Like Lettice for such lips: It is as true, that he communicated
in bread only, as that he kept the bread seven years by him for this purpose,
to be buried with him.

Retortion.
Thirdly, this headless arrow may be thus headed, and shot back upon our
adversaries.

If the Sacrament were usually given to the sick in both kinds, then this rite
of the Church makes for, and not against the entire Communion of the Laietie:

But the Sacrament was usually given to the sick in both kinds:

Therefore this custom of the Church makes for, and not against the entire
Communion of the Laietie.

That the sacrament was given to the sick usually in both kinds, may be
gathered from the words of Instin Martyr above alleged, in his second
Apology; who says, that the holy mysteries, which had been before
consecrated in the Church, were sent to those that were absent; amongst which
number were necessarily the sick. And from the charge, which Dionysius, of
Alexandria gave to his Priests, that Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l. 6. c. 36.
if any that were ready to die, desired to be partakers of the holy mysteries,
they should obtain there desire; especially, if it could be proved, that
before in the time of their health, they had been humbly suitors for them.

Lastly, by the words of Bed. hist. lib. 4.
Beda, who speaking of a sick Boy, says; thou may stay till the Mass be
done, that then thou may receive the viaticum of the Lords body and blood.

SECT. V.
The fifth headless arrow is, an Inference from a phrase of the ancients
Communio laica, or the Laick Communion, distinguished from the Communion of the
Clergy; And thus they draw it at us.

Bellar. loc. sup. cit.
The fifth Rite, or custom of the Church is, the use of the Communion, called
the Lay Communion, which was a kind of censure inflicted upon Clergy men,
for some great offense, by which they were deprived of their Clericall
Communion; of this Lay* communion we have often mention made in the decrees of
ancient Popes, and Councels. For by Felix 3. in his first Epist. and second
chapter; and Syricius 1. epist. 11. cap. and the Council of Eliberis. Can. 76.
and of Sardica. cap. 10. and of Agatha cap. 2. 5. and 50. this punishment could
be no other, then when other Clergy men communicated in both kinds, these
dilinquents were kept from the cup, and were enforced to content themselves
with one kind.

The answer.
We acknowledge, that there is often mention made in the Ancients of the Lay
Answ. 1.
Communion. For Cyprian speaks of it in his 52. epistle, and Eusebius in his
sixth book of Ecclesiastical story. Inocentius the first, in his 22.
epistle. The Canons of the Apostles, Can. 15. Basil to Amphilochius, and diverse
others, quoted by Chamierus in his ninth book de Caena Dom. chap. 2. But we
deny, that this Laick Communion was the Papists half Communion. The meaning
of the ancient in their decrees touching the permitting of Cleargymen to
participate of the Laick Communion, or communicate as Laics, was this; that in
regard that these Priests had sometime or other scandalized their calling, they
should be degraded, and never admitted to consecrate, or administer the
Sacrament, but receive it only at the hands of the Priests mere Lay men; not
in the Council. Tolotan. 4. Can. 17. In Choro Clerus communicet, extra chorum
populus.
Quire, or Chancell, as Priests used to do, but without the Quier in the body
of the Church among the common people. This argument therefore of the Papists
is a maine Petitio principij, or begging the point in question; to wit, that
the Laick Communion, or Communion of Laics, was in one kind only. The
contrary whereof has been proved before, by the testimonies of all Ages. This
headless arrow therefore of our adversaries may be thus headed, and shot back
upon them by Retortion.

If the Laick Communion spoken of by the Ancients, were in both kinds, then
nothing can be gathered from it against, but for the entire Communion:

But the Laick Communion spoken of by the Ancients was in both kinds:

Therefore nothing can be gathered from it against, but for the entire
Communion.

That the Laick Communion was not without the Cup, Saint Cyprian, who first
named it, clearly shows in those words: in calice sanctificando, and plebi
ministrando: in sanctifying the Cup, and ministering it to the people. Nay,
which is very remarkable, Cardinal Bellarmine himself in this very argument,
(to verify the observation of Saint Austine, that evident truth strikes into
the eyes of such, as are shut against it) acknowlegeth as much: The Sola
species panis dabatur in manus, ex calice autem bibebant, qui volebant, in
Ecclesia, sed non licebat laicis calicem tangere.
only form of bread, says he, was given to their hands, but they drank out
of the Cup, who would, in the Church; but it was not lawful for Laymen to
touch the Cup, or carry home with them. Drink they might, and did, as many as
desired. Thus Bellarmine convinced by the light of story, confesses, that the
Laietie drank of the holy Cup: as does also his fellow Cardinal Annal. tom.
1. an. Christi 57. Fideles sacrificij tempore, olim in Ecclesia sacratissimam
Eucharistiam sub vtraque specie panis and vini sumebant.
Baronius, saying; The faithful of old, in the time of the sacrifice in the
Church, received the most blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper in both kinds,
under the form of bread and wine.

The sixth headless arrow is, a collection from an ancient rite of
communicating in such things, as before had been consecrated; And thus they
draw it at us:

SECT. VI.
Bellar. loc. sup. cit.
The sixth rite, or Custom of the ancient Church is, the communion of the
presanctified forms of bread and wine. This Communion was in use in the Greek
Church all the Lent long, except the Lords day, and the Saturday: this custom
was also in the Latin Church, and remains unto this time on the sixth day of
the holy Week. For on that day there is no consecration, and the Priest
himself communicates in one kind. Of this custom among the Greeks there is
mention made in the Council of Laodicea, Can. 49. and the Council in Trullo,
Can. 52. Of the like custom amongst the Latins Inocent. 1. makes mention in
his 1. epist. cap. 4. and the Book of Sacaments made by Saint Gregory in the
service for the preparation to the Passover. Rabanus in his 2. book of the
Instruction of Clerks. And Micrologus in his book of Ecclesiastical
observations. cap. 19.

The answer.
This argument has two parts, the, first is taken from the custom of the
Greek Church, Answ. 1.
the latter from a custom of the Roman. To dispatch first the latter, because
it is of small moment; we say, that there is no ground for this custom: we
dislike it no less, then the half Communion it self. For why should not the
Sacrament be consecrated upon good Friday, as well as any other day? Or what an
argument is this; the Priest communicates in one kind alone on good Friday,
therefore the people ought to be deprived of the Cup all the year long? And
why, I pray you, does the Priest receive the Sacrament on Good Friday in bread
only, more then any other day? And why do they communicate in such bread
only, as was consecrated the day before? Why might they not consecrate it on
that day? As some Gramarians excuse all Homers fables of the Gods, by turning
them into Allegories, and Mythologicall expositions. So Harding division 22.
arti. 2. salueth this superstitious custom, by telling us, that it was not
without signification of a singular mystery. This mystery is revealed unto us
by Pope Innocentius, Aquinas, and Hugo Cardinalis. Innocentius says, that it
is, because the Apostles ran their way that day, and hid themselves. Aq^inas
says, they consecrate not on Good Friday, because if any had consecrated that
day, whilst Christ lay dead, the body had been without blood, and the blood
without the body. And others say, if the Sacrament that mean while had been
kept, it would have been dead in the Pixe. Hugo Card. says, Christ's Passion is
the truth, and the Sacrament is a figure of the same. Therefore when the truth
is come, the figure gives place. Consider we the weight of these reasons: The
Apostles fled sixteen hundred years ago on Good Friday; therefore we must
not now on that day consecrate the elements, or communicate in both kinds. On
Good Friday Christ suffered, his blood then was severed from the body:
Therefore now we must not receive his body and blood on that day. Christ's
Passion was on that day; therefore we must never receive the figure thereof on
that day.

2. Concerning the custom of the Greek Church.
It is true that the Greek Church in Lent 2
used to consecrate only upon Saturday and Sunday; and on the other days of
the week they did communicate ex praesanctificatis, of the presanctified
forms, which had been consecrated the Saturday, or Sunday before: as may be
gathered out of the 49. Canon of the Council of Laodocea; and 52. Canon of the
Council in Trullo. Sed quid ad rhombum! we dispute not of the Communion of
things before consecrated, but of the communion of both kinds. Such no doubt
was this communion of the Greeks, as the word, (...), or praesanctificata in
the plural number does implie. It is not called by Balsamo, upon the 52. Canon
of the sixth Council, (...), but (...); not a communion of presanctified
bread, but of presanctified mysteries. This headless arrow therefore, as all
the former, may be thus headed, and shot back upon our adversaries:

Retortion.
If the Communion of presanctified elements were in both kinds, this Rite of
the Greek Church no way suporteth, but quite overthrows the Romish half
Communion in one kind only:

But the communion of presanctified elements of the Greek Church was in both
kinds:

Ergo, this Rite of the Greek Church no way supporteth, but quite overthrows
the Romish half Communion in one kind only.

That this Communion in the Greek Church was in both kinds, we need no better
evidence, then the Seruice-booke, or Office of the Greek Church, wherein we
read, that after the Priest has sanctified the bread, he powers wine and
water into the sacred Cup, and rehearses the accustomed words in the Liturgy
it self, called Liturgia praesanctificatorum. The dreadful mysteries are named
in the plural number. And that all that communicated, received in both kinds,
it appears by the form of thanksgiving there set down; We give thanks to
thee, O God, the Savior of all, for all thy benefits, which thou have bestowed
upon us, and in special, for that thou have vouch safed Lyturg. praesanctif.
(...).
to make us partakers of the body, and blood of thy Christ.

CHAP. XV. The arguments of Papists drawn from reason answered, and retorted.
SECT. I.
Our adversaries are driven to rake hell for arguments, and to beg proofs
from damned heretics, such as were the Manichees. From whose dissembling at
the Lords Supper, our equiuocating Jesuits would make us believe, that their
half Communion was in use in the Primitive Church. The Manichees, Answer to
certain questions. Sect. 5.
says Fisher, lived in Rome, and other places, shrowding themselves amongst
Catholics, went to their Churches, received the Sacrament publicly with the^,
under the sole form of bread: yet they were not noted, nor then discerned from
Catholics. A manifest sign, says he, that Communion under one kind was
publikly in the Church permitted. For how could the Manichees still refusing
the Cup, have been hidden amongst those ancient Christians, if they had bin
persuaded, as now Protestants are, that receiving one kind only is sacrilege?
The like argument Master Harding draws from a trick of Ledger demaine, used
by a cunning housewife: who made her husband believe, that she receiving the
bread from the Priest, stooped down as if she had prayed, but received of her
servant standing by her somewhat, that she had brought for her from home,
which she had no sooner put into her mouth, but it hardened into a stone. If
this seem to any incredible, says Sozomen. Eccles. hist. lib. 1.
Sozomen, that stone is a witness, which to this day is kept amongst the
Jewels of the Church of Constantinople. By this stone it is clear, says
Master Harding, the Sacrament was then ministered under one kind only. For by
receiving that one form, this woman would have persuaded her husband, that
she had communicated with him; else, if both kinds had been ministered, she
would have practiced foam other shift, for the avoiding of the Cup, which had
not been so easy. (...); an ill egg of an ill bird; a loose inference of a
lewd practice. As if the Manichees in Rome, or this woman in Constantinople,
might not pitisare, sip, and make as if they drank, and yet let not a drop go
down; or as if this their fraud was not discovered. Howsoever these disembled,
it is certain out of Saint Leo in his 4. Sermon of Lent, and Saint Chrysostom
18. Homile upon the second to the Corinthians, that the faithful people of Rome
and Constantinople received the Communion in both kinds. For Saint Leo, in the
place above alleged, gives this as a mark to discrie Manichees from other
Christian people, intruding amongst them at the Lords Table, by refusing to
drink the blood of Christ with them. And Saint Chrysostom says expressly, that
there is no difference betwixt Priest and people in participating the dreadful
mysteries. Therefore as the Priest in Constantinople, and every where else in
his time, received the Communion in both kinds, so did the people.

SECT. II.
To leave these absurd inferences of the Papists from the ungodly practice of
heretics, I come now in the last place to batter and break in pieces such
weapons, as they hammer against us in the forge of reason. The first reason
they shape in this wise:

Fisher in his answer to certain questions propounded by King James his
Majesty. Point. 7.
If whole Christ Body, Blood, Soul, and Divinity are under the form of bread,
the Laietie are no way wronged by denying them the Cup:

But whole Christ is under the form of bread, to wit, his Body, Blood, Soul,
and Divinity:

Therefore the Laiety are not wronged by denying them the Cup.

That whole Christ is under the form of bread, they prove by the inseperable
union of the body and blood of Christ, etc. Since his ascension, his body now
in heaven is a live body; and therefore has his blood in his veins, and is
informed, and glorified by a most excellent soul: Therefore Christ cannot say
truly, that a body void of blood, sense, and soul, is his body, but soul,
life, and blood, must needs follow and concomitate his body, wheresoever it
be. Therefore when the Priest in the person of Christ, or rather Christ by the
mouth of the Priest, says, This is my body, the meaning must be, a living
body with blood in the veins.

The answer.
First, the doctrine of natural Concomitancie, presupposes the natural body
of Christ to be substantially, and carnally, under the Answ. 1.
form of bread: which we deny; and consequently this argument, from
concomitancie, is of no force. The words, This is my body, being rightly
expounded by Austine, Tertullian, Theodoret, and many other of the ancients to
be no other, then, this bread is a sign, a figure, or a sacrament of my body,
not this bread is turned substantially into my body, or under this is contained
my very body, flesh and bones. Where Christ's natural humane body is, there we
grant his blood, and soul, and divinity are. But, That his body, is now in
heaven, Acts 3. not in any place upon the earth; much less in every place,
where the Mass is celebrated.

Secondly, although we grant, that the body of Christ cannot really be severed
from his blood, yet the signs of his body, and blood are really severed: if
we speak of sacramental Communion, the Apostle teaches us, that the bread,
which we break, is the Communion of Christ's body, and the Cup, which we
bless, is the Communion of his blood: neither can we truly and properly, say,
the Bread is the Communion of his blood. Alexand. Hal. 3. part. q. 11. membr.
2. art. 4. Corpus non est sacramentaliter sub specie vi^i, nec sanguis
sacramentaliter sub specie panis. Ergo vt sacramentaliter sumatur totus
Christus, necesse est, vt sumatur sub duabus speciebus.
And therefore they that communicate in bread only, do not sacramentally
communicate his blood.

Thirdly, should we liberally grant unto our adversaries, that by the receiving
the body of Christ in the bread, we consequently receive the blood also, which
since his Passion was never severed from his body: yet will it not hence
follow, that we drink the blood of Christ in eating the bread: but Christ
commanded us expressly, to drink his blood, which cannot possibly be done by
communicating in bread only, no though we should admit of the carnal presence
of Christ's body in the Sacrament, and the doctrine of concomitancie also.

Retortion.
Lastly, this Argument may be retorted upon our adversaries in this manner:

Whosoever receives Christ in the Sacrament, ought to receive whole Christ, to
wit, his body, and blood:

But the body and blood of Christ cannot be received but by communicating in
both kinds:

Therefore all that receive Christ in the Sacrament, ought to communicate in
both kinds.

The Proposition is our adversaries, the Assumption also is inferred from their
own Tenets. They deliver this rule, that the Sacraments Vid. supra. Arg. 2.
effect, and exhibit that, and that only, which they signify: But the bread
signifies only the body of Christ, and the wine his blood: he therefore that
will receive whole Christ, as he is exhibited unto us in the Sacrament, must
necessarily communicate in both kinds.

SECT. III.
The second reason is this.

Bell. de sacra. Euch. lib. 4. c. 24.
If the whole nature and essence of a Sacrament be found in one kind, the
Romanists Communion in bread only is not a maimed, or imperfect, but an entire
Sacrament.

But the whole nature, and essence of a Sacrament is found in one kind:

Therefore the Romanists communicating in bread only, is not a mained, or
imperfect, but an entire Sacrament.

That the whole nature, and essence of a Sacrament is found in either kind by
it self, Bellarmine endeauoreth thus to make evident, There are but two things
required essentially to a Sacrament, a sign, and a thing signified: both which
are found in one kind; first, a sign, to wit, bread; secondly, the thing
signified, to wit, the inward nourishment of the soul, and the representation
of the union of the faithful with Christ, and among themselves.

The answer.
First, there is a double essence of the sacrament, Answ. 1.
the general essence, which makes it a sacrament in general, and the
specificall essence, which makes it in special, Baptism, or the Lords Supper.
To be a visible, and effectual sign of invisible sanctifying grace is
sufficient to prove a sacrament in general: but not to prove the Lords Supper;
the entire definition whereof is, a Sacrament of the new Testament, sealing
unto us the perfect nourishment of our souls, by the participation of the
sacred elements of bread and wine.

Secondly, there are two sorts, or parts essential, 2
or integrall. For example; the essential parts of a man are animal rationale;
the integrall parts are legs and arms, and other members. In like manner, in
the Sacrament, besides the essential parts, which Bell. loco supracitat species
panis and vini non tam essentiales, quam integrales parts huiu^ sacramenti
videntur.
Bellarmine will have to be the sign and the thing signified, there are
integrall parts, to wit, the elements of bread and wine, of which if either be
wanting, the sacrament may be as truly called a maimed or imperfect Sacrament,
as a man that wants an arm, or leg, is truly called a maimed, or imperfect
man, though he have in him the essential parts of a man entirely, to wit,
animal his Genus, and rationale, his difference.

Thirdly, although in the Roman half Communion there be a sign, and a thing
signified; yet neither is there the whole sign, nor the whole signification;
not the whole sign, because bread is but a part of the sign, representing
Christ's body, and not his blood; not the whole signification, which is such an
entire refection and nourishment of the soul, as bread and wine are of the
body.

Retortion.
Lastly, this Argument, as the former, may be retorted upon the adversary.

The Lords Supper is the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood:

The bread is not the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood;

Therefore bread alone is not the Lords Supper.

Or in this wise:

The Lords Supper essentially includes and signifies such a perfect
refection, and nourishment of the soul, as bread and wine are of the body:

Communicating in one kind neither includes, nor signifies such refection:

Therefore communicating in one kind is not the Lords Supper, nor contains in
it the whole nature, and essence of this Sacrament.

SECT. IIII.
The third Argument of our adversaries, drawn from reason, is an offspring of
the two former.

If the faithful receive as much benefit by communicating in one kind, as in
both, they have no cause to complain of the Church, for the restraining of
them from the Cup:

But the faithful receive as much benefit by communicating in one kind, as in
both:

Therefore they have no cause to complain of the Church, for the restraining
of them from the Cup,

That they receive as much benefit by communicating in one kind, as in both, it
seems to follow necessarily upon the two former supposalls; that whole Christ
is in each kind, and that the whole essence of the Sacrament is found in either.

The answer.
First, the two props of this Argument being Answ. 1.
before taken away, it must needs fall to the ground: neither is whole Christ
contained under one kind, neither in it is preserved the whole essence of the
Sacrament. Therefore questionless the fruit of the half Communion, if it be
any at all, cannot be equal to the fruit of the whole.

Secondly, the consequence of this Argument is not found: For neither the
only, nor the principle thing to be regarded in the Sacrament, is our benefit,
but Gods glory, and the testification of our obedience to his Ordinance.
Therefore, albeit it were granted, that the people lost nothing by the taking
away the Cup from them, yet they have just cause to complain of the Church of
Rome, for the violation of Christ's Institution, and hindering them from
discharging their whole duty in communicating in both kinds, according to his
commandment.

Thirdly, unworthy Receivers receive no benefit at all by the Communion, but
eat and drink their own damnation. Ambr. in 1. ad Corinth. cap. 11. Indignus
est Domino, qui aliter mysterium celebrat, quam ab eo traditum est.
And Saint Ambrose pronounces him to be an unworthy Receiver, who celebrates
these mysteries otherwise, then the Lord has appointed: Therefore they
amongst the Papists, who consent to this violation of Christ's Institution, and
mutilation of the Sacrament, may expect no benefit at all by this their
sacrilegious practice; much less may they look to share equally with them,
who communicate entirely, according to Christ's commandment.

Fourthly, Halensis part. 3. qu. 11. membro. artic. 4. sumptio sub vtraque
specie minoris est efficaciae, and complementi. Vasquez in 3. Tho. q. 80. art.
12. probabilior sententia mihi semper visa est, maiorem fructum gratiae ex
vtraque specie huius sacramenti, quam ex altera tantum percipi. Ita docet
Halensis, Gasper Consaluus. quam sententiam absolute secutus est Clemens sextus
in Bulla ad Regem Angliae, Anno 1346. qua illi concessit, vt ad gratiae
augmentum in vtraque specie communicaret. Aegidius de Coninck Iesuita. Etsi
plus gratiae conferat sumptio vtriusque speciei; dicimus tamen merito hoc
Ecclesiam non curare, quaest. 10. art. 12. in lib. 4. sent.
although each Element represent Christ unto us, yet not so fully, or
expressly, as both together. Therefore this argument, as all the former, may
be retorted upon the adversary.

The efficacy of Sacraments is answerable to their significancie: for they
effect that, which they signify, etc.

But the significancie of one Element is not equal to the significancie of
both.

Therefore the efficacy of one Element, is not equal to the efficacy of
both. Which conclusion is assented unto both by Halensis, and Vasquez, Gasper
Consaluus, and Clemens the sixth.

SECT. V.
The fourth Argument our adversaries thus frame:

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper ^ught to be administered, that all faithful
people may communicate.

(All cannot receive in both kinds, exempli gratia: Abstemij, whose stomach
cannot brook wine; and Nazarites, who made a vow against drinking of wine.)
But all faithful people cannot communicate in both kinds:

Therefore it ought not to be administered in both kinds.

The answer.
First, this Argument touches not the point in question: for we find no
fault with the Church of Rome, for her indulgence in this kind, but for her
sacrilege; not for her dispensing with them, that cannot receive in both kinds,
but for prohibiting them that can, and desire it.

Secondly, Laws, as De leg. and Senate. consult.
Pomponius observes, Provide for those things, that happen commonly, or for
the most part, and not for such things as happen to few, or seldom. A man can
scarce find one in a Kingdom, that has such an Antipathy to Wine, that he
cannot endure so small a quantity of some kind of Wine, as may suffice for
the Communion. And I believe our adversaries can hardly name now a Christian
Nazarite (...) the world. And is it any way reasonable, out of respect to so
few, to make a general law for the restraint of the Cup from the Laietie? Is
there any reason, that the disabilitie of so few, should prejudice the right of
all the rest of Gods people? Some Priests have at some times so weak
stomachs, that they cannot taste wine, and some both of the Laietie and
Clergy, through infirmity of stomach, or drought in the throat in hot
diseases, cannot swallow down the bread; will they therefore make a general
law to take away the Cup from the Priests, or the bread from both?

Thirdly, for Nazarites, if there be any in the Church, they are to be taught,
that there Evangelical liberty releaseth them of the strict rigor of their
legal vow, and that our Saviors command, Drink ye all of this, is a
sufficient warrant for them to drink of the sacramental wine at the Lords
Table, though they drink no wine else where. Saint James the Brother of our
Lord, though as Saint Hier. in Catal. Viror. illust.
Hierome writes of him, he kept strictly the Nazarites vow in abstaining from
wine, and strong drink at other times; yet he was amongst the twelve at
Christ's last Supper. And Saint Mark testifies that all drank of the Cup; and
for such, whose stomachs cannot away with the smalest quantity of wine, it may
be sufficient for them to take the Cup into their hands, and show their desire;
or they may have a Cup by themselves of wine so allayed with water, as their
stomachs may brook; as the fathers in the Counsel of Towers ordered to give
to sick folk bread sopt in wine, because they were not able to take down dry
bread.

Lastly, this Argument is both answered, and retorted in the Conference.

SECT. VI.
The first and last Argument, which our adversaries draw from reason, may be
thus formed:

The Sacrament ought to be so administered, that all inconveniences in the
celebration thereof may be prevented.

But many inconveniences cannot be prevented, unless the Cup be withheld from
the Laietie:

Therefore in the administration of the Sacrament, the Cup ought to be
withheld from the Laietie.

The inconveniences, which they pretend to arise from the public use of the
Chalice, are summed up by M. Harding, art. 2. diuis. 8. viz. irreuerence of so
high a Sacrament, whereof Christian people in the beginning had a marvelous
care and regard; the loathsomenesse of many, that cannot brook the taste of
wine; the difficulties of getting wine in countries near situated to the North
pole; and impossibility of keeping it long.

The answer.
First, inconveniences in a matter of indifference, may be pondered and put in
the other Answ. 1.
scale against the commodities in the thing in question; and if the
inconveniences be such, as cannot be prevented, and they are greater, and more
in number, then the profits, or advantages that are like to grow upon the use
of it, in this case wisdom advises to take away a thing, that is not
necessary: I say, if the vn-auoydable inconveniences exceed the certain
profits thereby. But in religious duties, which cannot be omitted, without
violation of Gods Law, and Christ's Ordinance, inconveniences must not turn the
balance: only we must take all the care that may be, to prevent such
inconveniences: Which though they be never so many, yet are they rather to
beindured, then Gods absolute Command disobeyed, or Christ's Institution
corrupted.

Secondly, Christ and his Apostles, and the Christian Churches throughout all
the world, 2
for twelve hundred years, foresaw the inconveniences which our adversaries
now pretend: yet they thought it not fit in regard of them, to violate Christ's
Institution by restraining the Cup to the Clergy only: For they, as we have
proved by abundant testimonies, generally and ordinarily gave the Cup to the
Laietie, as well as the Bread.

Thirdly, if they would from these wants and impediments infer, that some
favorable 3
course should be taken, and dispensation granted to such, as cannot taste
wine, or live in such countries where wine cannot be got: we would not much
strive with them. We censure not the Priests in Russia, who for want of wine,
used to consecrate in Methegling, nor call Innocentius the eigth into question,
howsoever now many Papists condemn him for it, for dispensing with the Priests
in Norway to consecrate without wine. That which in this question we charge the
Church of Rome with, is a manifest transgression of Christ's Ordinance, and a
general prohibition of giving the Cup to the Laietie, where wine may be had,
and the communicants are able and willing to drink, if the Priests will admit
them. As some Lay men cannot brook wine, so at some times the Priests through
some disease after drinking of the Cup, may be enforced to cast it up. And as
the peoples hands may shake in taking of the Cup, and so spill a drop: so may
the Priests also: And as some Countries have no wine, so, if we may believe
Strabo, and Arianus, and many later Geographers also, some Countries have no
bread. Yet the Church of Rome her self never thought it fit, in regard of such
few Instances, and rare accidents, to make a general law, either to deprive
the Priests of the use of the Cup, or the Laietie of the use of the bread.

Fourthly, for the matter of irreuerence, if any through carelessness or
contempt, spill a 4
drop of the consecrated wine, or let fall a crum of bread, he ought to be
punished for it. And if he amend not his fault, to be denied the Communion.
But if such a thing fall out through infirmity, or by some casualtie against a
man's will, it is no irreuerence at all. And for the difficulty of getting wine
in the Northern parts, especially where Vines grow not, we answer, that wine
is easier to be gotten, the^ Balsamum, which the Romish Church uses in
confirmation. For Vines grow in many Countries, and that in great abundance:
True Balsamum but in one. Yet the Church of Rome, in regard of this difficulty
in getting it, will by no means suffer, that their Sacrament to be administered
without it. Yet their Chrisme is a mere humane invention, but wine in the
Lords Supper is Christ's ordniance. But what do they pretend impediments, that
are not, and surmise difficulties against common experience? He is but a
stranger in Geography, who knows not, that by the benefit of Navigations,
store of wines are brought into those parts, where no vines grow. In the
reformed Churches in England, Scotland, Denmark, Norway, and the other regions
situated nearer the North Pole, the Sacrament is administered in both kinds,
and never yet any complaint was heard of the difficulty, much less of the
impossibility of providing wine for the Communion. Surely if there may be had
wine for the Priest, their may be had also for the people. Who ever heard of
Merchants, that transported wine in so small quantity, that there might be a
draught for the Priest, and none for the people? If there be none for the
Priests, how can they consecrate without facrilege, according to their own
Canon?

Lastly, this argument, as all the former, may be thus retorted upon them.

The Council of Basil yielded the use of the Cup to the Bohemians; and the
whole Council of Trent reserved it to the Pope to grant the use of the Cup to
all the Germans; and the Pope assented thereunto upon certain conditions,
notwithstanding all the former inconveniences. Therefore it is not
inconueniency they stand upon. But the true cause why they at this day with
hold the Cup, is either obstinacy, lest they should seem to yield any thing to
the Reformed Churches, and acknowledge their former error, or pride to
maintain a prerogative of their Priests above the people. Which, as I showed
before out of Saint Chrysostom, ought to be none in partaking the dreadful
mysteries.

To conclude, howsoever they pretend in this their erroneous practice, like u
Aesop, to remove that stone, at which all that came into the Bath, stumbled at;
yet in truth they rather resemble Aesop in some thing of another nature. For as
he was accused to have stolen away a piece of holy plate, that was found among
his carriages, from the Temple of Apollo at Delphi; so these grand Aesops, and
Coyners of Fables, whereby they delude the simple people, are clearly
convinced of sacrilege, in taking away the Chalice from the Lords Supper. For
they have taken away the Cup of blessing from the people, and in stead thereof,
offer the Whore of Babylons cup of abomination.

CHAP. XVI. The contradictions of our adversaries in this Question noted, and
the whole Truth for us delivered out of their own mouths.
IT was the manner of the Roman Emperors in their Triumphs amongst other
spectacles, to exhibit to the people ludos gladiatorios Fencers playing their
Prizes, fighting not with foiles, but at sharp, till they had killed one
another. In like manner, in the conclusion of this Discourse, for the better
adorning and setting forth of the Triumph of Truth, I have thought not
unfitting to present unto the Readers view, Quaedam Gladiatoru^ paria some
certain couples of the professed Champions, and defenders of the Roman cause,
bickering one with another in such manner, that by their sharp weapons of
evident contradictions, they must needs wound on another, even to the death of
their cause.

SCRIPTVRES. The first Combat: Whether the Scriptures make for, or against the
half Communion?
The Antagonists.
Thom. Harding, and Gerardus Lorichius. Joan. Maldonate, Jesuit. and Widford.
Stanislaus Hosius, and Laur. Iustinianus. Joan. Cochlaeus, and Joan. Lorinus,
Iesuita. Joan. Gerson, and Ruardus Tapperus.
Art. 2. diuis. 5.
Harding the Assaylant.
THE words of Christ, Drink ye all of this, pertain to the Apostles, and
their successors. For to them only he gave commandment to do that which he
did, saying, Do this in remembrance of me. By which words he ordained them
Priests of the new Testament. Wherefore this commandment belongs not at all
to the Lay people, neither can it be justly gathered by this place, that they
are bound of necessity to receive the Sacrament under both kinds.

Lorichius the Defendant.
THey be false Catholics, who say, that Christ said only to his Apostles,
Drink ye all of this. For the words of the Canon be these, Take, and eat ye
all of this. Here I beseech them to tell me, whether they will have these words
also, only to appertain to the Apostles, then must the Laiety abstain from
the other kind of bread also: which thing to say is heresy: wherefore it
follows, that each of the words are spoken to the whole Church. Gerard.
Loric. de missa. part. 7. in praef.

In Luc. 24. verse. 30. 31.
Maldonate Assaylant.
I doubt not, and I marvel, that any other doubt, but that this place where
Christ took bread, blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the two Disciples,
of whom he was known in the breaking of bread, must be understood of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. I am induced hereunto by the whole form of the
action, which I know not what Christian can deny to be the action of the
Eucharist. We read of the breaking of the bread, blessing it, distributing
it, and a miracle ensuing upon it, and shall we not believe it to be the
Eucharist?

Widford Defendant.
I say, that it appears not in the Text, nor in the Gloss, Luke 24. nor by
the ancient Fathers, that the bread which Christ brake, and gave to his
Disciples, was consecrated bread, that it was sacrame^tall bread, or turned
into his body; with who^ Carthusia^ accords. It came to pass, says he, that
as Christ sat down, he took bread, and blessed it, yet he turned it not into
his body, as in his last Supper; but as the manner is, he blessed the meat he
eat; thereby teaching us to say Grace before meals. Wid. cont. Wicklif. and
Carthus. in Luke 24. Vid. Justinian. supr. c. 12.

Gers. defens. decret. con. Constant.
Gerson the Assaylant.
Christ our Lord in the sixth of John, speaking of the fruit of the Lords
Supper, teaches one kind to be sufficient to salvation; saying, he that eats
this bread, shall live for ever. And if any man eat of this bread, he shall
live for ever.

Tapperus the Defendant.
Ruardus Tapp. In this Chapter, John 6. Christ speaks not of the sacramental
eating and drinking of his body and blood. Tap. in expli. art. Louaniens. art.
15. Idem habet Gabriel Biel. lec. 84. super Canone Missae. Cusanus epist. 7. ad
Bohemos. Caiet. in 3. part. quest. 80. Ions. c. 59. concordiae. Wald. and alij.

Hosius the Assaylant.
James in the Church of Jerusalem delivered and kept the Communion in one kind.
For in the second of the Acts, in the description of the exercises of the
Church of Jerusalem, there is rehearsed breaking of bread, and no mention at
all made of wine.

Iustinianus the Defendant.
Justin. on the first to the Corinthians, verse. 10. The Apostle by breaking of
bread, un derstandeth not the ordinary breaking of bread, such as that was,
whereof S. Luke makes mention, Acts the second; whereby the necessity of the
hungry was provided for.

Cochlaeus the Assaylant.
Acts 27. Saint Paul taking bread, gave thanks to God in the sight of all, and
when he had broken it, he began to eat. Here is an example of the Communion
in one kind, for there is no mention made of wine.

Lorinus the Defendant.
S. Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Beda, and others, expounders of this place, by
bread understand usual and common bread. And I am also of the same mind. For I
cannot believe, that this mystery, being the greatest of all other, was
celebrated in the sight of profane persons. Lor. in Act. 27.

COVNCELS. The second Combat: Whether Councels make for, or against the half
Communion?
The Antagonists.
Stanist. Hosius, and Dominicus a Soto. Tho. Caietan, and Gabr. Vasquez,
Jesuit. Alph. Salmeron, Jesuit. and Rob. Bellarmine, Jesuit. Edm. Campian,
Jesuit. and Andr. Dudithius. B. of Quinq. Eccles.
Confess. Polonica.
Hosius the Asaylant.
THe Council of Ephesus decreed, that the Communion should be given in one
kind only to the Laity, in opposition to the heresy of Nestorius, who held,
that under the bread in the Sacrament, Christ's body was without his blood.

Gabr. Vasquez the Defendant.
Unto the time of the Council of Constance, where the use of the Cup was first
taken away, there arose an error about the integrity, or whole humanity of
Christ under either kind: wherefore it cannot be said, that there was any law
made in the Church for the taking away of that error. Vasquez cap. 4. disp. 216.

Caietan the Assaylant.
Nestorius, and Pelagius affirmed, that the Communion ought to be kept in both
kinds, though upon a diverse reason. Nestorius, because he held, that under the
bread, the body only was contained, and under the form of wine, his blood
only. Pelagius, because he believed, that infants could not be saved without
Communion in both kinds. To oppose both which heresies, it is very likely, that
the Council of Ephesus decreed, that the Communion should be administered in one
kind. Caietan in 3. Tho. quest. 80. art. 12.

Soto the Defendant.
Caietan refers the beginning of the custom to the Nestorians and
Pelagians, as also another custom of giving the Sacrament to Infants. But as
for the second of these customs, we have showed before in the ninth Article,
that it is not likely the Pelagians had any such custom; because they taught,
that Infants might attain everlasting life without any Sacrament; neither were
the Nestorians in the Council of Ephesus taxed with any such error, but with
this, that they believed not the body of Christ in the Sacra meant to be united
to the Deity. Soto in 2. did. 91. art. 12.

Tom. 9. tract. 35
Salmeron the Assaylant.
Two general Councels held in the bowels of Germany, to wit, the Council of
Constance, and Basil with a great consent of Bishops, decreed, that the Cup
should not be given to the Laietie: now we know, that the authority of
General Councels is vncontrowleable; He does wrong to the holy Ghost, who
despises, or goes about to abrogate their Decrees.

Bellarmine the Defendant.
The Council of Constance, for so much as concerns the former Sessions, is
repealed in the Council of Florence, and the last Council of Lateran. Nothing
in the Council of Basil is ratified, and approved, save only certain orders
about benefices, which for peace and unities sake, Pope Nicolas approved. But
the Council it self is repealed in the Council of Lateran, last Session.
Bell. de Council. cap. 7. Vasquez disput. 215. c. 3. Basiliense Concilium
nullius est authoritatis in hac re: The Council of Basil is of no authority in
this point.

Campian, and Norrice the Assaylant.
The Council of Trent teaches, that, he who inioyeth the least particle of
either kind, receives not a mangled or imperfect, but an absolute, complete,
entire, and perfect Sacrament, true Author and Giver of life; the whole
refection of Christ's body and blood.

Norrice Antidot contro. 50. This Council of Trent is highly extolled by
Campian. The Synod of Trent, the older it grows, the more it shall
perpetually flourish. Good God! What variety of Nations was there? What choice
of Bishops of the whole world? What lusture of Kings, and Commonwealth? What
marrow of Divines? What holiness? What tears? What fasting? What flowers of
Universities? What tongues? etc.

Andreas Dudithius the Defendant.
What good could be done in that Council, wherein voices were numbered, but not
wayed? If the merits of the cause (he speaks of the Communion in both
kinds) or reason might have carried it, or if but a few had joined with us,
we had won the day. But when the number only could bear sway, in which we
came short, though our cause was exceeding good, we were feign to sit down by
the loss, etc. In sum the matter came to that pass, through the wickedness
of those hungry Bishops, that hung upon the Popes sleeue, and were created on
the sudden by the Pope for the purpose, that that Council seemed to be an
assembly not of Bishops, but of Hobgoblins; not of men, but of Images, moved
like the statues of Dedalus, by the sinews of others. Dudith. Quinque-Eccles.
episc. ad Maximilianum 2. Caes.

REASONS. The third Combat. Whether Reason makes for, or against the half
Communion?
The Antagonists.
Mart. Becanus, Jesuit, and Domin. a Soto. Joan. Hesselius, and Gabr. Vasquez,
Jesuit. Rob. Bellarmine, and Guli. Durand. Alph. Salmeron, and Thom. Aquinas.
Becanus the Assaylant.
IF whole Christ be no less contained under one kind, then under both, it is
all one, whether we receive in one kind, or in both. For always we receive
the same Christ, and him entire. But the former is true; therefore the latter.
And Norrice in antidoto 1. part. cont. 5. Under the form of bread alone, or
wine alone, and that in every part, or parcel of them, the wholebody of
Christ, and all his precious blood is contained, as we, with the sacred
Council of Trent maintain. Therefore he who inioyeth the least particle of
either kind, receives not a mingled, or imperfect; but an absolute, and
complete, entire, or perfect Sacrament.

Soto the Defendant.
IT is denied by us, that when the body alone is taken, that the whole
Sacrament is taken, according to the entire representation thereof. Because
since by the force of consecration, there is nothing under the bread, but the
body; the taking of it is nothing but the eating; for to drinking is required,
that the blood be taken, which ought to be there by it self, and that by
virtue of consecration, and not by concomitancy only. Soto in 4. did. 8. art.
2. And before him Halens. loco super. cit. Christ is not contained under each
kind sacramentally, but the flesh only under the form of bread, and the blood
under the form of wine.

Hesselius the Assaylant.
There is not more spiritual fruit reaped by the Communion in both kinds, then
by the Communion under the form of bread only. And our Norrice, as if he had
transcribed him, says; We teach, that not only the entire Sacrament, and
total substance thereof, but the whole fruit, grace, and virtue, which
proceeds from both kinds together, is fully also exhibited under one alone.
Every particle of a divided Host, every drop of the Chalice is a maine Ocean
of spiritual blessing. Yet many of them by the same moral actions successively
received, afford no more grace, then one alone, because that one instilleth the
whole Fountain it self: which cannot at that time be further increased, or
produced a new.

Vasquez the Defendant.
The opinion of them ever seemed to some to be more probable, who teach, that
there is more fruit of grace received by the^, who communicate in both kinds,
then by them that receive in one kind only. And therefore they, who receive
the Cup, obtain thereby a new increase of grace. His reason is; each kind in
this Sacrament, as it is a part of the Sacrament, has a diverse signification
by it self, and since according to our former suppositions, in the Sacraments
of the new law, the efficacy follows the signification thereof, it ensues
thereupon, that each kind in this Sacrament does produce its own effect by it
self, Vasquez in part. 3. Tho. disp. 215. Cap. 2.

Bell. de sacra. Eucha. l. 4. c. 24.
Bellarmine the Assaylant.
The whole essence of a sacrament is found in one kind. For to the essence of a
Sacrament two things are required, significancie and efficacy: For a Sacrament
is a Sign, and cause of Grace, but both these are found in each kind: For
although the form of bread does signify a spiritual nourishing only, by way
of meat: and the form of wine a spiritual nourishing only, by way of drink.
Yet it is absolutely sufficient to make it a Sacrament, that it signifies
spiritual nourishing, and effects it also.

Durand the Defendant.
This Sacrament is ordained by God, for spiritual nourishment, which is
signified by bodily food, and it is not perfect, unless there be something in
it, that may nourish as meat, and something that may nourish, as drink.
Durand, quest. 1. did. 8. in 4. with whom I join Aquinas. To the nourishing
of the body are two things required; meat, which is a dry nourishment; and
drink, which is a moist. And therefore to the entire Nature of the Sacrament
two things concur, spiritual meat, and spiritual drink, Aquinas part. 3.
quest. 73. art. 2.

Salmeron the Assaylant.
If from the beginning, it had not bin lawful to communicate in one kind
only, very many Christians should have either been deprived of the Communion,
or enforced to do that, which they were not able to perform, as it is
manifest in those people, that live far North, who have no store of wine.
Salm. tra. 35. tom. 9.

Aquinas the Defendant.
We must say, that although that wine is not made in all places, yet that so
much may easily be carried to all places, as may suffice for the use of the
Sacrament. Neither for the defect of either kind, may we consecrate in one
kind only: because so the Sacracrament would not be perfect. Aquin. part. 3.
quest. 74. art. 1.

The Muses after a long fight with the Sirens, when they had fully conquered
them, took from them their Plumes of Feathers, and made of their enemies
Ornaments Crowns for themselves. Truth and Religion have now Melanth. Orat.
long been in sight with false-hood and sacralege, and in the end, as we see,
turned their own weapons upon them, and quite vanquished them. What remains,
but that after the manner of the Muses, we take their Plumes of Feathers,
wherewith they adorned themselves, from them, and make of them a crown to
beautify Christ's spouse and to set forth the truth in this manner.

Christ instituted the Sacrament in both kinds: so the Council of Sess. 13.
Constance. The command of Christ, Drink ye all of this, extends to the
Laietie, and belongs not only to Priests: so In Can. Missae, tract. 7.
Lorichius. The Sacrament is not perfect, but in both kinds: so Quest. 74.
part. 3. art. 2,
Aquinas. The dividing of one and the self same mystery cannot be without
sacrilege: so De Cons. dis.
Gelatius. Therefore in the Primitive Church, the Sacrament was given in both
kinds to the faithful: so in 1. Cor. c. 11.
Lyra. This custom continued for above 1000. years in the Church: so Consil.
de Commu. sub vtraque specis.
Cassander. The contrary custom of communicating under one kind only began
not to be general in the Latin Church much before the Council of Constance.
an. dom. 1414. so Delegit. vsu Eucha. cap. 10.
Greg. de Valen. The use of the Cup was first taken away from the Laietie in
the Council of Constance: so Disp. 216. c. 4.
Vasquez. After that Council, by a decree of the Council of Basil it was
restored to the Bohemians: so Hist. Bohe.
Aeneas Syluius. After this in the Council of Trent, it was desired by the
Ambassadors of the Emperor, and of the French King, that the use of the Cup
might be granted to the Laietie: so the Author of the Lit. mis and Hist.
Council. Trid.
Letters Missiue. After the Council break up, the best learned Catholics
most earnestly desired, and contended, that they might receive the Sacrament of
Christ's blood together with his body, according to the ancient custom in the
universal Church, continued for many Ages: so Lo^. sup. cit.
Cassander. And that upon very good grounds; Tap. Consonum est institutioni,
sacramenti integritati, imo and exemplo Christi, and patru^ primitiu. Eccles.
vt populus communicaret sub vtraque specie. citat. Cassand. tract. de commu.
sub vtraque specie.
for this were more agreeable to the institution and fulness of the
Sacrament, and to the example of Christ: so Ruardus Tapperus. And lastly, of
more fruit and 4. part. quest. 53. memb. 1.
efficacy: and so Halensis, and Vasquez. Whose opinion thus Nugnus
explicateth: if a Priest and a Layman come equally prepared to the Lords
Supper, the Priest, who communicates in both kinds, receives thereby grace in
8. degrees, to wit, 4. by eating the Bread, and the other 4. by taking the Cup:
but the Layman, that communicates in one kind. recipit gratiam 4. receives
grace but in 4. degrees. Nugnus in 3. partem Thom. quest. 80. art. 12.

Thus having removed all rubs and obstacles out of the way we have passed
clearly throughout all Ages: from the time of Christ and his Apostles and in
every hundred year since produced evidence against the Church of Rome, And
finally by verdict of some Doctors of chief credit among themselves found her
to be guilty of sacrilege, in taking away the Cup from the Laiety at the Lords
Table. If any demand, where this Cup may be found, I answer, as we read in o
Genesis, it is found with Benjamin; k Gen 44. 12.
I mean the Reformed Churches. Etymon, filij dextrae, chrildren of Christ's
right hand: by which he distributeth to his people the bread of life, and wine
of Immortality, his most precious body and blood. There is yet palpable
darkness in Egypt, but there is light in Goshen. In Rome under the Papacy, the
people are fed with Husks of legendary fables, or at the best, with mustie
bread of old traditions, and sowred with the leaven of heresy. And all their
public Communions are dry feasts: but in the Reformed Churches, the people are
fed with the flower of Wheat, the sincere Word of God, and drink of the purest
juice of the Grape, the blood of our Redeemer in the holy Sacrament. Psalm. 16.
13.
What shall we therefore render to the Lord for all the benefits, which he
has bestowed upon us? we will take the Cup of Salvation, and continually call
upon the name of the Lord. So be it. (...).
Finis, Deolaus sine fine.


Cassander tract. de Communione de vtraque specie. page 1019. edit. Paris.
1616. Veteres omnes tam Graeci, quam Latini in ea sententia fuisse videntur, vt
existimauerint in legitima and solemni celebratione Corporis and sanguinis
Domini, et Adminiratione, quae in Ecclesia fideli populo e sacra mensa fit,
Duplicem s^ciem panis and vini esse adhibendam: atque hunc morem per vniuersas
Orientis, and Occidentis Ecclesias antiquitus obseruatum fuisse, tum
expriscorum Patrum Monumentis, tum ex vetustis diuinorum, and mysteriorum
formulis apparet. Et post: Ad hoc inductifuerunt exemplo and mandato Christi,
qui instituendo huius Sacramenti vsum, Apostolis fi^lium Sacramenta
percipientium personam repraesentantibus, quibus dixerat Accipite edite, idem
mox dixit, bibite ex hoc omnes: quod ex veterum sententia interpretatur
Radbertus, tam ministri, quam reliqui credentes.

All the Ancients, both Greek and Latin, seem to be of opinion, that in the
lawful and solemn celebration of the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, and
administering it to the people, that both kinds, to wit, bread and wine ought to
be used at the Lords Table. And it appears both out of the works of the
ancient Fathers, and the old Rites, and forms of the divine mysteries, that
this custom was observed in all the Eastern, and Western Churches: And a
little after: Hereunto they were induced by the Example and Command of Christ,
who in the institution of this Sacrament, speaking to his Apostles, then
representing the persons of all faithful Communicants, said, Take and eat: and
presently after said to the selfsame, Drink ye all of this: which Radbertus
according to the mind of the Ancients expounds, as well Ministers, as other
believers.

FINIS.
A RELATION OF WHAT PASSED IN A CONFERENCE BETWEEN DAN. FEATLY, Doctor in
Divinity, and Mr. Euerard, Priest of the Romish Church, disguized in the habit
of a Lay-Gentleman unexpectedly met at a Dinner in Noble street.

Ian. 25. 1626.



LONDON, Printed by F. Kyngston for Rob. Milbourne, and are to be sold at the
Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1630.

THE SPECIAL POINTS of the Conference.
OF the necessity of Episcopal government to the essence of a Church. 2 Of
ordination by Presbyters. 3 Of the distinction of Bishops and Priests, iure
diuino. 4 Of differences among Papists in matter of faith. 5 Of the immaculate
conception of the Virgin Mary. 6 Of the authority of a General Council above
the Pope. 7 Of prayer for the dead. 8 Of the authority of the original
Scriptures, and corruption in the vulgar translation. 9 Of the Communion in one
kind, 1. The state of the question opened. 2. The necessity of communicating
in both kinds. 3. Popish objections answered.

10 Of the Popes supremacy. 11 Of mingling water with wine in the Sacrament.
12 Of the perfection of Scripture.
THE CONFERENCE.
L. F. I Pray you, Doctor Featly, resolve me, whether think you a Church may
be without a Bishop, or no?


D. Featly. Your L. propounds a question, that little concerns you any way,
or any member of the Church of England. For in England we have, (God be
blessed) Bishops, and those, besides many learned Priests, very well able to
justify that Calling. If I might be so bold, I would advise your L. not to
trouble your self with such curious questions of small, or no moment to you,
wherein learned men, without hazarding of their salvation, may have different
opinions.


L. F. I hold it a matter of great moment, and desire you not to decline it,
but plainly to deliver your judgment thereof.


D. Featly. I profess (Madame) with submission to more learned judgments,
that I ever held, and do hold, that a Hieron. aduersus Lucifer. Ecclesia non
est, quae sacerdotem non habet. I mean, a complete Church. For in some sense
that of Tertullian is true: Where two or three are, there is a Church, although
they be Laics. Tertul. exhort. ad cast. b See P. Moul. Bucklet of faith. and
P. Mart. epist. ad Iuel. episcop. Salisb. Zanch ad Grind. Archiep. Bucer and
Gualterum. Item Bezam, and Suadael. ad Epis. copos quosdam Angliae.
Church cannot be without a Priest, or a Pastor; but it may be, and sometimes
is without a Bishop, properly so called. The Church of Geneua, as also the
Reformed Churches in France, and the Low Countries, and diverse in Germany, are
true Reformed Churches, and yet they have no Bishops, such as you mean;
Although some of them would after our manner have them, if they could.
Discipline, or a precise government of the Church is not simply of the essence
of the Church. And therefore, albeit it be granted, that these Churches have
not the best government, nor the Apostolical discipline in all points: yet
because they have the Apostolical doctrine sincerely taught, and believed in
them, and the Christian Sacraments rightly administered, I believe that they are
true Churches.


L. F. Ought there not to be Bishops in every Church by the Law of God?


D. Featly. What if there ought? This does not prove, that in case there be no
Bishops in some Countries (as there ought to be,) that therefore there are no
Churches. I say, that by the Law of God congregations ought to meet in public
Churches to serve God in his House; yet if the use of public Churches be
taken away from the faithful, or they be not permitted to resort unto them, as
in time of persecution it has been, and in some places is at this day: the
Pastors, and their flocks may meet in Cryptis, that is in private, and secret
places; as they did in the Primitive Church. And the faithful thus meeting,
continue a true Church, though they have neither a Temple allowed them, nor
Tithe to the Ministers, nor Bishops over the Priests. All which yet we do
acknowledge, in a peaceable and flourishing estate of the Church, ought to be
had: And we have cause to praise God for our happiness in England above other
Churches, in this behalf.


M. Euerard. Here M. Euerard stepping in, not being called, said, I pray you
Sir, if there may be a Church without a Bishop, who shall ordain the Priests
in that Church?


D. Featly. Sir, what are you, who intrude your self into our private
conference? It seems you are a Romish Priest. Are you not so?


M. Euerard. I am no Priest.


D. Featly. What, will you deny your Priesthood?


M. Euerard. I am no Priest to tell you.


D. Featly. Now I perceive you are not only a Priest, but a Iesuited Priest
also. For you can equivocate.


M. Euerard. It is no equivocation, to say, I am no Priest to tell you.


D. Featly. Indeed now that you express your mental reservation, you use no
equivocation; but while you concealed it, you did equivocate. And I marvel you
blush not, to use such a simple shift, or evasion, as to say, you are no Priest
to tell me: As if you, or any man were made a Priest to tell another man you
are a Priest.

At these words the meat was brought in, and thereby a stop made of a farther
reply for the present. But not long after the Guests were all placed, the L.
revived the former question, demanding of Doctor Featly,


L. F. Who should ordain Priests in a Church, where there are no Bishops?


D. Featly. If there be no Bishops in any adjoining Church, by whom they may
be ordained, and presented to the Church, I say, in that case, the Church, to
whom Christ (as St. Lib. 4. de bapt. contra Don. c. 1. and 18. and tract. in
Ioh. 124 Ecclesia claues ab ^oregni coeloru^ accepit in Petro.
August. says) gave the keys, may commit Episcopal authority to certain
Priests; and they thus authorized, may ordain other Priests, as well as
absolve, and confirm the baptized, and perform other D. Field of the Church,
lib. 3. c. 239. page 156. Presbyters, as they may do all other acts
(whatsoever special challenge Bishops in ordinary course make unto them) so
they may do this also. Who dare condemn all those worthy Ministers of God,
that were ordained by Presbyters, in sundry Churches of the world at such time,
as Bishops in those places, where they lived, opposed themselves against the
truth of God? He cites there Armacanus, and Alex, of Hales, affirming, that
many learned men of their time were of this opinion, that Presbyters in case of
necessity, may ordain.
acts ordinarily reserved to Bishops. d And this ordination (in a troubled
state of the Church, and in case of necessity) I hold to be lawful and
warrantable; both because it has that which the Apostle requires, 1. Tim. 4.
14. to wit, the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, and because there
have bin presidents of such ordination in the Primitive Church. And
questionles, the Church, that commits the power to one Priest, set in an
eminent degree over the rest, may commit the same power to more Presbyters or
Priests, especially considering it is the judgment of learned divines, both
Protestants and Papists, that Bishops, and Presbyters differ rather in
execution of some acts of their order appropriated to Bishops only, then in
their essential order. A Bishop has an eminency of degree in the same order,
but his ecclesiastical order is essentially the same with the Presbyters, or
Priests. But what does this question concern any here present? Neither we,
nor, for ought I know, the Papists themselves define it to be a matter of
faith, necessary to saluato resolve this way, or that way. Therefore this
question might have been forborne. e Quid est enim episcopus, nisi primus
presbyter? denique non aliter, quam cum presbyteros and consacerdotes vocat,
nunquid and ministros condiaconos suos dicit episcopus? non vtique, quia multo
inferiores sunt: and ^rpe est ludicem dicere Primicerium. nam Alexandriae, and
per totam Aegyptum, si^desit Episcopus, consecrat Presbyter. August. ex vtroque
Test. mixed. quaest. 101. D. Mort. Apol. Cathole. 21. Presbyter alter alteram
ordinare potest, non in Ecclesia been composita, sed in statu collapso, and
deplorato, maxim in casu necessitatis.



M. Euerard. The Council of Trent has defined it: therefore to us it is a
matter of Faith.


D. Featly. I scarcely believe the Council of Trent, (be it of what credit it
may be) has defined this point in such sort as you intimate.


M. Euarard. I will show it.


D. Featly. When you show it, I will answer it.

After this passage, some speech having been cast in by some of the table,
concerning differences in point of Religion among the Protestants of England;
D. Featly said, it was to be considered, that the differences amongst the true
members of the Church of England were only in point of Discipline and Ceremony,
not in point of Doctrine, or matter of Faith. But the Romanists differed one
from another in point of Doctrine, and matter of Faith; for the present, says
he, I will instance in two remarkable particulars. First, touching the
conception of the blessed Virgin; secondly, touching the Popes supreme
authority even over General Counsels. In the first point, the Iacobins, or
dominicants maintain, that the blessed Virgin was conceived in Original
sin: the Jesuits Franciscans, and Sorbonists hold the contrary.


M. Euarard. Yet both keep the Feast of the immaculate Conception.


D. Featly. They may both keep a Feast upon the same day, and that for the
Conception of our Lady. But certainly they, who believe she was conceived in
sin, cannot without hypocrisy keep a Feast of the immaculate Conception.
Touching the second point, the Sorbonists have ever held, and do hold to this
day, that a General Council is above the Pope: but the Iacobins, Jesuits, and
all orders of Friars generally, besides many Secular Priests hold the contrary,
that the Pope is above a General Council. When I lived in Paris in the
Ambassadors house, I heard of a general Chapter, as they called it, held by
the Iacobins in Tho. Aquinas School. Where for many days together diverse
divinity questions were handled, and among other, this question touching the
Popes superiority to Councels. An acute Serbone Doctor there present, thus
impugned the Iacobins assertion.

Whatsoever is defined in a General Council, confirmed by the Pope, is
infallibly true, and de fide.

But it is defined in a general Council, to wit, the Council of Constance,
confirmed by Pope Martin the fifth, that a General Council is above the Pope:

Therefore it is infallibly true, and de fide, that a General Council is
above the Pope.

The Auditors (the greater part of them) very much applauded this argument of
the Sorbonist, and expressed their applause by a kind of shout. But the
Iacobin respondent in a kind of scorn answered it by retortion thus:

Whatsoever is defined in a general Council confirmed by the Pope, is
infallibly true, and de fide.

But it is defined in a General Council, to wit, the Council of Lateran,
confirmed by Leo the tenth, that the Pope is above a General Council.

Therefore it is infallibly true, and de fide, that the Pope is above a General
Council.

At this Syllogism, the Iacobin had near as great an applause, as the
Sorbonist. We that were present of the Reformed Churches (unknown to the
Romanists) received very much satisfaction, to hear Papists amongst themselves
thus bandy Council and Pope, against Council and Pope. For from both, we
concluded: that, since contradictories cannot be both true, and it appeared in
matter of Faith, that General Councels, confirmed by Popes, had decreed direct
contradictories: that therefore General Councels confirmed by Popes, might
err, and consequently, that the strongest pillar of a Romanists Faith is
weak, and tottering:


M. Euerard. The Council of Constance, which decreed a General Council to be
above the Pope, was confirmed by Martin the fifth False, vid. Untruth 3. in the
Appendix to this Conference.
: only in such points, as were in that Council determined against Hus, and the
Bohemians: the Pope confirmed not all points defined in that Council.


M. L. Have you any example of any such confirmation of a Council, wherein
some points defined by a general Council are confirmed, and the rest not?


M. Euerard. There may be such a confirmation of a Council, and it was so in
that Council. For the Pope never confirmed this article touching a general
Councels authority above the Pope.


D. Featly. Had I known that I should have met with you here at this time, or
that there should have been any disputation about points of Religion, I would
have brought my books with me, and produced the Acts of the Council. For the
present, since we have not here the Tomes of the Counsels, all that I will reply
shall be this, that as the Council of Constance defined, that a General
Council was above the Pope; so they exercised their power, and made good that
decree by deposing three Popes in that Council, and setting up a fourth, by
name this Martin the fifth, whom it much concerned to confirm this Council
even in that point.


M. Euerard. Those three Popes, I say, deposed that Council.


D. Featly. Resolutely spoken, and bravely: but yet by your favor, the three
Popes deposed by that Council sat down by the loss, and the Fathers that
deposed them still held there Bishoprics, and the fourth Pope chosen in that
Council held the Papacy during life.

This point being thus put off for the present until the Tomes of the Councels
might be had, and the Popes confirmation extant in them Infrain Appendice.
explained, the Lady asked Doctor Featly;


Lady Faulkland. Whether he thought the ancient Fathers prayed not for the
dead? D. Field of the Church, lib. 3. cap. 29. Howsoever we dislike the Popish
manner of praying for the dead, which is to deliver them out of their feigned
Purgatory: yet we do not reprehend the Primitive Church, nor the Pastors, nor
guides of it, for naming them in their public prayers, thereby to nourish
their hope of the resurrection; and to express their longing desire of the
consummation of their own, and their happiness, that are come before them in
the faith of Christ.



D. Featly. Questionless they did, and Aerius is condemned by them for simply
and absolutely condemning the practice of the Church in naming the dead in
their public prayers, and celebrating the Sacrament of the Eucharist: that is,
of thanksgiving for them. We condemn not all commemoration of, or prayers for
the dead, but the Popish manner of praying for the release of their souls out
of Purgatory.


M. Euerard. To what end should the Fathers pray for the dead, if not for the
release of their souls out of Purgatory?


D. Featly. To what end does the Church of Rome pray for the soul of blessed
Leo, and other Saints in heaven? I trow not to release their souls out of
Purgatory.


M. Euerard. The Church of Rome prays not for the soul of blessed Leo, or
any Saint now in heaven.


D. Featly. Bellarmine says, she did, and yet does, and proves it out of
Innocentius the Pope.


M. Euarard. Will you put this under your hand?


D. Featly. I will, let it be written: See the place of Bellarmine, cited in
the Appendix. g Can. 6. Si quis dixerit in Ecclesia cathol. Non esse
Hierarchiam diuina ordinatione constitutam, quae constat ex Episcopis,
presbyteris, and ministris anathema sit. Can. 7. Si quis dixerit, Episco pos
presbyteris non esse superiores, anathemasit. See the history of the Council
of Trent, lib. 7. p. 478. 480 The Legates consulting among themselves, answer,
that there were cause to declare, that a Bishop is superior to a Priest, verum
quo iure declarato non esse opus. But by what right, the Council need not
determine. A little after the Doctors in the Council were divided about the
Hierarchy, some placing it in Orders only, naming the Orders of Deacons,
Priests, and Bishops, and others following. For Aerius placed it in
jurisdiction; a third sort placed it in both; and the reasons of their direct
opinions are there to be seen.
Bellarmine says, that the Church of Rome prayed for the Soul of Saint Leo,
and other Saints,


Dan. Featly. About this time Master Euerard having gotten the Council of
Trent, called upon Doctor Featly to acknowledge his error in denying, that the
Council of Trent had defined it, as a matter of Faith, that a Bishop is in
order above a Presbyter by the Law of God: Look here, says he, in the 23.
Sess. Canon 6. expressly it defines this point. g If any man shall say, that in
the Catholic Church there is not an Hierarchy, instituted by Divine
ordination, consisting of Bishops, Presbyters, and Ministers, let him be
accursed. Can. 7. * If any man shall say, that Bishops are not superiors to
Priests, or Presbyters, let him be accursed.


D. Featly. This Canon of the Trent Council defines not, that Bishops, and
Priests differ ordine, sedgradu; not that Bishops are in Ecclesiastical order
essentially different from Priests, but that they have a degree of superiority
in the same order. Secondly, the Council defines this as a truth, but not as a
matter of salvation for the Laietie to believe, upon pain of damnation. And
therefore I say as before, that this point, might have bin forborne. Thirdly,
the Council defines Bishops to be superiors to priests, but says not, iure
diuino. Here diverse of the auditors desired Doctor Featly, and Master Euerard
to disscusse the point touching Communion in one kind; which they conceived to
be a point of great moment; because if the Laietie, as well as the Clergy,
ought to have the Cup, the Church of Rome does them great wrong in debarring
them of it, and she violateth Christ's institution.


D. Featly. If Master Euerard like well of it, we will confine our selves to
this point. But first I desire a Bible. For I will never dispute of point of
Faith without Scripture, the Ground of Faith.


M. Euerard. What Bible will you have? For I allow not of the English
Translation.


D. Featly. The original, if it may be had, especially the new Testament in
Greek.


M. Euerard. I desire the Vulgar Latin Translation.


D. Featly. What, rather then the original? That is strange.


M. Euerard. Not so. For the Vulgar Latin is purer then the Greek of the new,
or the Hebrew of the old Testament.


D. Featly. Will you set your hand to it? The contrary to this assertion is
maintained by the learned in the Romish Church. vid. Pagn. In praef. in suam
ver sionem. Ariam Montanum. praef. Bibl. Reg. Ignatium Leuitam contra Lindanum,
and alios Pontificios. and prae omnibus Hieron. apologiam pro Hebraica Veritate
in Prologis, and Comm. in Zach. cap. 8. vid. Decret. 1. part. did. 9. ca. vt
veteres. citat. Bellar. plures alios in hanc sententiam. de verbo Dei lib. 2.
cap. 11. 10. Benedict. Parisiensis theologus aliquot millia locorum in lat.
vulg. versione correxit ad veritatem hebraicam and graecam. edit. Paris. an.
1552. 1558. sed postea prodijt noua editio, ibid. 1573. omissis omnibus illis
emendationibus, cui praefixa est satis insulsa praefatio Iacobi fabri Sorbonici
D.



M. Euerard. I will. The vulgar Latin Translation is purer then the Greek of
the new, or the Hebrew of the old Testament.


Ita est, Euerard. p. D. Featly. This is a new and erroneous assertion, if not
blasphemous.


M. Euerard. Neither erroneous, nor new. Other Catholics have held the same
before me, and namely Bellarmine De verbo dei lib. 2. cap. 11. Certe, vix
dubitari potest, quin sicut Latina Ecclesia constantior fuit in fide retinenda,
quam Graeca^ita: etiam vigilantior fuerit in suis codicibus a corruptione
defendendis. Bell. de Verb. Deil. 2. c. 11.
Truly it can scarce be doubted, but as the Latin Church has been more
constant in retayning the Faith, then the Greek so also that she has been more
vigilant in preserving her books from corruption.


D. Featly. 1. Although Bellarmine had come home to your assertion, yet it
follows not, but that it is new and erroneous.

Secondly, the reason Cardinal Bellarmine, uses, is not found, that because
the Latin Church, has preserved the Faith purer, then the Greek: therefore
the Latin Bibles, kept by them, are freer from corruption, then the Greek
Original. For it is not true, that the Latin, that is (as he means) the
Roman Church, has kept the Faith more sincerely, then the Greek. Beside, the
original Greek has not oenly been kept by the Greek Church, but also by
the Latin Church, which Latin Church, no doubt, had as great, or greater care
to preserve the Original from corruption, then the Latin Translation.

Thirdly, Bellarmine affirms not so much, as you do. For he speaks not a
word of the Hebrew of the old Testament in this place, but only of the Greek
of the new. Whereas you prefer the Vulgar Latin not only before the Greek
of the new, but also the Hebrew of the old. Neither does Bellarmine say, that
the Vulgar Latin is simply to be preferred before the Greek of the new, but
that the Latins were more carefullin keeping their Latin, then the Greeks in
keeping their Greek. This might be Bellarmines Judgment, without preferring
the Latin absolutely before the Greek. For albeit the Latin for a Translation
were better kept, then the Greek for the Original, yet he might say still,
that the Translation must needs come behind the Original simply. This
Bellarmine must needs say, unless he contradict himself. For a little after
in the same chapter he confess^th, that in four cases we may correct and mend
the vulgar Latin Translation by the Greek and Hebrew Fountains. De Verb. Dei
lib. 2. cap. 11. sect. 17. See Hieron. Apolog. ad Pam. Interpretum v^tio, quae
apud suos puriss^o orationis cursu labuntur, apud nos vitijs scate^t. ^dem
cont. Heluid. cap. 6. Multo purior manare credenda est sontis vnda, quam riui.
A Translation, be it never so good, cannot come near the Original in
authority, though it be kept never so free from corruption. For at the very
first, when it was purest, it was by many, nay infinite degrees inferior to the
Original.

But that we may not digress from the point proposed unto us, touching
Communion in both kinds, here I promise you, that in discussing this question,
I will allege no text of Scripture, wherein our English Translation agrees
not both with the Original Greek, and the Latin vulgar. That I may therefore
know, what to impugn, I desire you to set down the state of the question, as
you mean to hold it.


M. Euerard. I believe, that wheresoever the body of Christ is, there is also
his blood by concomitancie, and consequently, that the Church, though it give
not the Cup to the Laietie, yet it gives them the blood of Christ, which they
participate in, and with his body.

Secondly, I deny not, that the Laietie may receive in both kinds, if the
Church give them leave, but they are not bound by Christ's Institution, so to
receive. It is sufficient, that they receive in one.


D. Featly. We teach, and believe, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
according to Christ's Institution, ought to be administered in both kinds, as
well to the Laietie, as to the Clergy.


M. Euerard. Let the Scriptures be interpreted by the consent of Fathers, and
practice of the Primitive Church.


D. Featly. I assent unto this condition, especially in this point, wherein the
continual practice of the Church is undoubtedly for us: as also the clear and
express letter of Scripture. And this I prove, First, by the words of the
Institution, Matthew. 26. 28. Drink ye all of this. For this is the blood of
the new Testament, which was shed for many.

Christ commands the same to drink, whom he commands to eat:

But he commands the Laiety to eat the bread:

Therefore also to drink of the Cup.

And Again:

He commands those to drink, for whom his blood was shed, saying, drink ye
all of this, for this is my blood of the new Testament shed for many:

But Christ's blood was shed for the people, as well as for the Priests:

Therefore the people are to drink, as well as the Priests.

By the words of our Savior, John 6. 53. Except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. This Text is
alleged by Bellarmine and most Papists, as a strong proof of the real
presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament. And if that you grant,
that these words are to be understood of the Sacrament, you must needs
confess, they require all people, as well as Priests, to receive the Communion
in both kinds, to wit, to eat the flesh of the Son of Man under the form of
bread, and drink his blood under the form of wine.

Thirdly, By the words of Saint Paul, 1. Corinthians. 11. 28. Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. Here the
Apostle inuiteth all to drink of the Cup, who are to examine themselves;
saying: Let a man examine, etc. and so let him drink. But the Laietie as well
as the Clergy, are bound to examine themselves; nay, the Laietie in some
respect are more bound to examine themselves, because most commonly they are
more ignorant in this holy mystery:

Fourthly, In hunc locum Ignat. exceptioni Bellarm. primae. An Ignatius hoc
loco corruptus? item secundae ac tertiae. Item Baronij deprauationi, and fraudi
respondet. Nic. Vedelius. exercit. 2. in epist. ad Philadelph. Morn. de
Eucharist. lib. 1. c. 10. 11. vbi de hoc toto argum. agit plenissime.
by the practice of the Primitive Church. For which it shall suffice for the
present to produce the testimonies of,

1. Ignatius, epist. ad Phil. speaking of the administering, of the Sacrament,
says, (...); one Bread is broken unto all, and one Cup is distributed unto all.

2. Cyprian, epist. 54. Quomodo ad Martyrij poculu^ idoneos faciemus, si non
eos primum in Ecclesia ad Bibendum poculum Domini iure communicationis
admittimus? Cypr. epist. 54. ad Cornet.
How shall we make them fit for the Cup of Martyrdom, if we do not first
admit them into the Church to drink the Cup of the Lord, by the right of
Communication? Here Saint Cyprian speaks of the Laietie, who are to suffer
martyrdom for Christ, and not Priests only: and he says, they have a right
to Communicate in the Cup: therefore the Church of Rome does them wrong, to
debar them from it.

Again, the same Cyprian in his 2, book, and 3. epistle Cur quidam in calice
sanctificando and plebi ministrando non faciunt quod Dom fecit and docuit?
Why do some not do that our Lord did, and taught in sanctifying the Cup, and
administering it to the people?

Thirdly, Ad bibendum sanguinem omnes exhortantur, qui volunt habere vitam.
S. August. quaest. 57. in Leuiticum. All men are exhorted to drink the blood
of Christ, who desire to have life. I hope you will not deny, that the Laietie
desire to have life, and therefore by Saint Augustines inference, they are
invited to the Cup.

Fourthly, Aut integra sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur. Quia
diuisio vnius eius demque mysterij sine grandi sacrilegio non potest prouenire.
Gelatius de consecratione did. 2. Let them receive the Sacrament entirely, or
let the^ be kept from them entirely. Because the division of one and the self
same mystery cannot be without great sacrilege.

Saint Quid sit sanguis non iam audiendo, sed bibendo didicistis.
Gregory hom. 22. in Euangelia, speaking to the people his auditors, says,
Sanguis non in manus fidelium, sed in ora funditur. These books of Gregory are
cited by Papists against us under his name: though they be justly suspected to
be count feit in learned Divines judgment.
You have learned what is the blood of the Lamb, not by hearing, but by
drinking it. And in his fourth book of dialogues; q The blood of Christ is
powered not into the hands but into the mouths of the faithful.


M. Euerard. Master Euerard here produced for the Romish opinion, diverse
practices of the ancient Church, as the sending the bread See an answer to
these pretended ancient Rites, supra. c. 14.
a far off to the sick, and not the Cup: the denying the Cup to all those,
who had eaten meats offered unto Idols. He answered in General to the
allegations above mentioned; that either Christ commanded not the Communion in
both kinds determinately, but either in one, or in the other; or if he enjoined
both, yet this precept of his was dispensable by the Church. In fine, says
he, you cannot expect, that I should answer all the places you have cited, at
once, and on the sudden.


D. Featly. These instances which you allege of the practice of the Primitive
Church, are either false, or impertinent; as I will show, when I am to answer.
For dispencing with Christ's precept, I say, that no mortal man can dispense
with the precept of God. As for the craving time to answer my former
allegations, It is now two years and more, since Master Euerard has had this
Scedule in his hand, unto which he has been sundry times importuned to answer,
but has not performed.
take what time will, and you answer them one by one.


M. Euerard. Dispute then syllogistically.


D. Feately. If Christ command the Laietie to take the Cup, as well as the
bread, they that take away the Cup from them, do ill,

But Christ commanded the Laietie to take the Cup, as well as the Bread:

Therefore they that take away the Cup from them, do ill.


M. Euerard. I deny the sequel of the Mayor.


D. Featly. The sequel of the Mayor cannot be denied, for they certainly do
ill, that transgress Christ's Commandment. Therefore if Christ command all to
receive the Cup, as well as the Bread, they that take away the Cup, do ill.


M. Euerard. Christ commands not all to drink of the Cup, that eat of the
bread.


D. Featly. I prove he does by the words of the Institution. Matthew. 26. 28.
Drink ye all of this. He says, not of the bread, Eat all of this, though
his meaning was, that all should eat:

But he says expressly of the Cup, Drink ye all of this, yet you deny the
Laietie the Cup, and give them the Bread.


M. Euerard. This Commandment, Drink ye all of this, is given to all Priests,
and not to the Laietie.


D. Featly. Christ gives the command of drinking to all those, to whom he
gives the command of eating. For he says to the same, Drink, to whom he says
before, Take, and eat:

But he gave the commandment of eating to the Laiety, as well as to the
Clergy:

Therefore he gave the Commandment of drinking to the Laiety, as well as to
the Clergy.


M. Euerard. He commands not the Laiety to eat. For he speaks here only
to the Apostles, who were Priests M. Euerard should have taken notice, that the
Apostles were not at this time fully ordained Priests, though they had been
once sent to preach. For after his resurrection, Ioh. 20. Christ breathed on
them the holy Ghost, and said, Whose soever sins ye remit, etc. whereby he
fully endued them with Priestly power. Secondly, the Apostles at this Supper
were Communicants, not Ministers of the Sacrament. Christ was then the Priest,
and Minister only in that action, and therefore the Apostles supplying the
place of mere Communicants, it follows, that whatsoever Christ then
commanded them, he commanded all Receivers after them.
.


D. Featly. If Christ commands not the Laiety to eat, then the Laietie are
not bound to receive the Communion in bread at all. And consequently they
transgress not Christ's Commandment in receiving the Communion without bread.


M. Euerard. It is in the power of the Church to take away the Bread, and leave
the Laiety only the Cup. If neither precept of eating, or drinking belong to
the Laiety, the Laiety are not at all bound to receive this Sacrament.
The Laiety are not bound to receive the Communion in Bread determinately.


D. Featly. This never any held before you, to my knowledge.


M. Euerard. It is the common Tenent of Shameful untruth, and notorious
ignorance. See the Appendix, number. (...). item Chamierum de Euch. lib. 8. cap.
(...) de panis distributione quaestio nulla est, nec dubitatur omnibus esse
fidelibus distribuendum, si qui se been praeparatos offerant.
Catholics.


D. Featly. Thus I disprove it. The Laiety are bound determinately to receive
in both kinds. For Christ in Ioh. 6. 53. says, Except ye eat the flesh of
the Son of man, and drink his blood, etc. This place is alleged by most of
your side, to prove the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament: but if
it be meant of the Sacrament, it enforces Communion in both kinds.


M. Euerard. This place in the Judgment of Calvin, and Luther, is not of force
to prove the Communion in both kinds.


D. Featly. Luther, and Calvin, have no such words. Although some Protestants,
as well as Papists Waldensis, tom. 2. cap. 91. fol. 162. edit. Salmant. 1557.
Prolixe probat ex August. Cypriano, Bernando bibere spiritualitur
intelligendum. Caietanusin 3. partem Thom. q. 80. verba Christi Ioh. 6. ad
literam intelliguntur ad Manducationem spiritualem.
are of opinion, that this place is not meant of the Sacrament. But if it be
meant of the Sacrament, it enforces both kinds; And I am sure no Protestant
contradicts.


M. Euerard. First, I answer, that these words are meant disiunctiuely thus;
Unless ye eat his flesh, and, that is, or drink his blood, as in Saint
John, except a man be borne of Water and the Spirit, that is of Water, or the
Spirit.


D. Featly. And for or, a conjunction for a disjunction, is a forced
interpretation. And the place you allege for it, makes against you. For if
our Saviors words, (except a man be borne of Water and the Spirit) are taken
disiunctiuely, then that Text no way infers the necessity of Baptism of
Water, for which it is alleged by the best divines, even of your own side. If
a man may enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, be borne again either of
Water, or of the Spirit, it is sufficient then to be borne again of Water
without the Spirit, or of the Spirit without Water. And consequently, this
place so expounded, no way proves the necessity of Baptism of Water; or at
least, no more makes a necessity of the spiritual, then of the Sacramental
Baptism.


M. Euerard. You know well, that we hold a threefold Baptism: fluminis,
flaminis, and sanguinis: and that a man may enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
that has any of these Baptismes.


D. Featly. I know, that the Baptism of water is not absolutely, and simply
necessary; but it is then only necessary, when it may be had* the wilful
neglect or contempt of it is damnable: but not the inevitable defect. Baptism
is necessary, where it may be had. But if these words (except a man be borne
of Water, and the Spirit) may be meant disiunctiuely, that is, of Water, or the
Spirit: this Text so glossed, proves not the necessity of Baptism, when it
may be had. For it suffices to be borne of the Spirit without it, by your
exposition, which is contrary to the judgment of the best learned divines,
ancient, and latter. But to come back again to the former Text out of the
sixth of Saint John.

If you expound these words disiunctiuely (except a man eat the flesh of the
Son of Man, and, that is, or drink his blood:) then your Priests are not
commanded to communicate in both kinds, but in one only.

But the Priests are commanded according to your own Doctrine, to communicate
in both kinds:

Therefore these words cannot be taken disiunctiuely.


M. Euerard. In this Text there is no commandment for Priests, or people to
communicate in both kinds, but only to take the body and blood of Christ into
the mouth, and convey it into the stomach.


D. Featly. If eating and drinking be taken here properly, then this Text
infers communicating in both kinds distinctly, and not only, as you expound
it, taking the body of Christ and his blood, whether by eating only, or by
drinking only:

But the words of eating and drinking are to be taken properly:

Therefore this Text infers Communion in both kinds, both in Priest and
people.


M. Euerard. The words are not to be taken properly, but figuratively.


D. Featly. All the divines of the Church of Rome, that allege this place of
Saint John, to prove the real presence, say, that these words, except ye eat
my flesh, and drink my blood, are to be understood properly. For otherwise
they could not infer from them there real presence.


M. Euerard. The acts are meant figuratively, the object This answer he
contradicts in his last answer: infra. vid. A.
properly in that place above mentioned of Saint John.


D. Featly. From the proper acception of the object only, and not the act, the
corporal and substantial presence of Christ in the Sacrament cannot be
inferred. For spiritually, and figuratively a man may feed upon Christ's body by
faith, though his body be not present on earth.
The acts are meant properly, to wit, eating, and drinking, which I thus prove.

Christ commands us in these words to receive the Communion, as you confess.
For you say, they are meant of the Sacrament:

But the Communion is received by eating, and drinking properly:

Therefore Christ commands eating, and drinking properly:


M. Euerard. I answer, that though the commandment do not fall properly upon
formal eating, or drinking; yet that the act formally commanded, cannot be
performed without formal eating and drinking.

Secondly, I distinguish the Mayor; Christ commands the substance of the
Communion, I grant; I deny that he commands See this answer refelled by
Vasquez, tom. 3. in 3. partem disp. 116. Nisi manducaueritis, etc. Haec verba
non tantum reseruntur ad rem ipsam sumptam, sed and ad modum sumendi came. nam
manducate, and bibite, si verba proprie vsur^entur, cuiuis speciei conuenire
non possunt. Neque enim sanguis sub specie panis bibi dicitur, sicut neque
corpus sub specie vinimanducari, vt optime notauit Innocent. 3. lib. 4, de
mist. miss^. cap. ^1. Christus autem praecepit, vt bibamus, alioquin si
praedictam solutionem probare velim, oportet, vt improprie verba
praedictacaptam, and ita nibil in eo cap. de calice sanguinis Christi dictum
putemus: quod est absurdum. cum enim, inquit Christus, caro mea est vere cibus,
and sanguis men's vere est potus, non possumus no^ de sanguine sub specie vini
intelligere.
properly the manner of receiving.


D. Featly. Christ commands the substance of the Communion to be received:

But the substance of the Communion cannot be received, without eating or
drinking properly;

Therefore he commands the act of eating, or drinking properly.


M. Euerard. If properly in the Conclusion be applied to command, then the
Syllogism is naught; if it be applied to the act of eating, or drinking; then
the conclusion is true, and makes nothing against us.


D. Featly. This answer, contrary to the rules of disputation, is given to the
conclusion, and the distinction appplied to no term of the premises, which
should have been done.

Secondly, You grant, that which before you Supra vid. A-
denied, and so contradict your self. When I pressed, that those words: unless
you eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, do prove, that the people
are commanded to drink, (as drinking is taken properly, and distinguished from
eating;) you answered, that the word, drinking, was taken figuratiuelie, and
not properly, as likewise eating; But now you grant, that eating, or drinking
is here to be taken properly. For you grant, that Christ in these words
commands the act of eating, or drinking properly.


M. Euerard. I answer; the grant you charge me withal, was no other but this,
that the formal act of eating was commanded, but not formally; and so in that
I do not contradict my self.


D. Featly. Whether you contradict your self, or no, I leave it to the
hearers. You before denied, that in the Text of Saint John, the words, eating
and drinking were taken properly; but now you grant, that Christ in these words
commands eating or drinking properly, at least, consequently, though not
formally. In sum, I desire, that it be noted, that whereas you promised, and
it was so agreed upon, that the Texts of Scripture should be interpreted by the
consent of the Fathers, and practice of the Primitive Church, that you
interpret them according to neither, but your own private fancy. Secondly,
note, that in your answer to the first Text which I alleged against you, you
contradict you own side; in the answer to the second, you apparently
contradict your self. Which I thus make evident. Before you said, that the
words, eating and drinking were not taken properly, but figuratively: now you
acknowledge, that they are taken properly, or must so acknowledge. For

Where proper eating, and formal is commanded, the words commanding must needs
be taken properly:

But in these words (Except you eat) formal, and proper eating, and not
figurative, is commanded, as you grant:

Therefore these words (except you eat) are to be taken properly, and not
figuratively; and consequently the former answer was false, and you now
contradict your self.

Thirdly, out of your own answer I infer; that all Christian people, that
live by Christ, are bound to communicate in both kinds.

The formal acts of eating and drinking in the Sacrament (as you grant) are
here enjoined to all men:

But the formal acts of eating and drinking in the Sacrament, are
communicating in both kinds:

Therefore the communicating in both kinds is enjoined to all men.

Lastly, whatsoever is commanded in formal and express words, is commanded
formally:

But all men that have life in Christ, are commanded in formal and express
words, to eat and to drink in the Sacrament:

Therefore they are commanded to eat and to drink formally. And consequently
your former answer has the formality of an answer, but no truth and realty at
all.


M. Euerard, opponent.

D. Featly, respondent.

M. Euerard. In the places alleged by you, D. Featly, in Saint Matthew, and
Saint John;

If any besides Priests are bound, then all are bound:

But all are not:

Ergo, none are besides Priests.


D. Featly. I distinguish of All: All may be taken either for All simply, or
All that are fit, and qualified both by natural and spiritual qualification:
that is, such as are able to examine themselves, and repent, and believe, and
can take it in both kinds.


M. Euerard. If any be bound to receive both besides Priests, all that are
qualified to receive one, are bound to receive both:

But all that are qualified to receive one, are not bound to receive both:

Ergo, none are bound to receive both, but Priests.


D. Featly. I deny the Consequence.


M. Euerard. All are bound to fulfill the Commandment:

Ergo, all are bound to receive in both kinds, as well as in one.


D. Featly. First, you prove not the Consequence.

Secondly, I answer to your Antecedent. In the sense of the Commandment all
are bound, if qualified for both, not otherwise.


M. Euerard. No man may lawfully receive the Communion, unless he fulfils the
Commandment:

No man fulfils the Commandment, according to you, unless he receive both:

Therefore no man lawfully receives the Communion according to you, unless he
receive both.


D. Featly. This is for form, no Syllogism. For it consists all of Negatiues,
and is in no Mood and Figure. For the matter, I answer, by denying the Minor,
and distinguishing thus: If by no man you understand simply no man at all,
qualified, or vnqualified, I deny it; If no man qualified, then I grant it. But
it is not to the purpose.


M. Euerard. He that is vnqualified for both, must not receive but one. I prove
it.

No man can receive it, unless he fulfils the Institution of Christ:

But the Institution is of both:

Ergo.


D. Featly. Progrederis in gyro, you hunt counter? Thrice have you urged the
same objection. I distinguish of the Minour. Christ instituted the Sacrament to
be received in both kinds of all qualified for both.


M. Euerard. No man may receive the Sacrament, unless he fulfill the
Commandment in receiving it; that is, fulfill all that is substantially
required in the Sacrament, considered in it self, and not in order to the
Communicants:

But no man whatsoever, that receives but in one kind, fulfils the Commandment
in receiving it, id est, fulfils all that is substantially required in the
Sacrament, considered in it self, and not in order to the Communicants.

Ergo, no man, etc.


D. Featly. This again is no Syllogism. For it consists all of Negatiues.


M. Euerard. The whole substance of the Sacrament is both bread and wine.

They that receive only bread, do not receive bread and wine:

Ergo, they do not receive the whole substance of the Sacrament.


D. Featly. The substance of the Sacrament is taken either for the whole
substance of the sign, or outward elements, or for the whole substance of the
thing signified, viz. the body and blood of Christ. He that receives in one
kind, to wit, bread being not qualified to receive it in the other, receives
the whole substance of the Sacrament, as it is taken for the thing signified.

Secondly, he receives not the whole substance of the outward elements simply,
yet he receives the whole substance of the elements, required to be received
of him. For Christ commands not impossibilities in the Sacrament. He therefore
that cannot drink any wine, is not commanded to receive the Sacrament in wine.
Withal, I desire those that are present, to observe, that all this while you
strongly dispute against your self. For if all sorts, even Abstemij, such as
have an antipathy to wine, and can by no means brook it, are bound to
communicate in wine, as you would infer, then certainly much more all other
Christians, be they Lay, or Clergy, are bound to communicate in wine Indeed
some Doctors of the Reformed Churches have conceived, that such as cannot
receive not so much as a drop of wine, by their antipathy to wine, or other
natural infirmities, should altogether abstain from the orall receiving of
this Sacrament, because they cannot receive it in both kinds, according to
Christ's institution. So Jacob Rhenig. Arancoroper. cap. 22. page 212. But
others incl^ne rather unto a more moderate tenet, that in this case, which
falls out very seldom, either such Abstemij, Clinici, or infi^me, and
bed-^ead persons may receive the Sacrament in some other liquor, which their
stomach may brook, or that it is sufficient for them, to receive it in bread
actually, and in wine only voto, or in desire; and in this case, that the
saying alleged by our Savior may take place, misericordiam volo non
sacrificium. Of which judgment D. Andro. Episcopus Winton. Respons. ad apol.
Bell. cap. 8. page 192. seems to be: applying the words also of our Savior
to this purpose: The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath. So may
we say, the Sacrament was made for man, not man for the Sacrament. Verum casus
ille in legem trahendus non est, sed cessante ferrea necessitate de reliquo
redeundum mox ad Christi institutum. Decumbit quidem hoc argumentum, and ver e
clinicu^ est. i. e. But of this case we are not to make a general law, but
where we are not kept back by the Iron bar of necessity, we must presently
return to Christ's institution. This argument drawn from bed-read men, lies
bed read. In like manner may we say of your argument taken from Abstemij, that
you might very well have abstained from it, seeing there is no more strength in
it, then in their stomakes.
.

Here the Conference was interrupted for a time, supper being brought in; about
the middle whereof Doctor Featly asked Master Euerard, whether he believed,
that the Priests drank properly whatsoever was in the consecrated Chalice.


M. Euerard. We do so.


D. Featly. But according to the Doctrine of concomitancie, the flesh and bones
of Christ are in the consecrated Chalice:

Therefore according to the doctrine of concomitancy, you drink, and that
properly, the flesh and bones of Christ.


M. Euerard. What if I grant you that also?


D. Featly. Then you do more then Christ commands: For Christ commands you to
eat his flesh, and drink his blood; and he no where commands you to drink
his flesh and bones. Who ever heard of flesh and bones to be drunk, and that
properly, without any figure?


M. Euerard. In Mummie the flesh of man may be drunk.


D. Featly. Peradventure the flesh of man may be so handled, and altered, and
the bones also grounded to so small a powder, that in some Liquor they may be
drunk: but the flesh of man and bones, without an alteration of quality, or
quantity, cannot be drunk. And I hope you will not say, that the flesh and
bones of Christ in the Sacrament receive any alteration at all.

At these words, Doctor Featly and Master Euerard were entreated to desist from
any further dispute, till after supper. And so this point was not further
pursued.

After supper, Doctor Featly calling for Saint Cyprian, besides the places
above alleged for Communion in both kinds, showed Master Euerard the speech of
Saint Cyprian in the Council of Carthage. Wherein he expressly denies the
Bishop of Romes Supremacy; The words are these; Super est, vt de hac ipsa re
quid singuli These words of S. Cyprian are rehearsed, and commenmended by S.
August. de baptismo cont. Donatistas lib. 2. cap. 3. and commented upon, lib.
3. de baptis. contr. Donatist. cap. 3. and l. 4. cont. Donat. c. 8.
sentiamus, proferamus; neminem iudicantes, aut a iure communionis aliquem, si
diuersum senserit, remouentes. neque enim quisquam nostrum Episcopum se esse
Episcoporu^ constituit, aut tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem
collegas suos adigit. Quando habeat omnis episcopus, pro licentia libertatis
and potestatis sua, arbitriu^ propriu^ tanqua^ iudicari ab alio non possit, cum
nec ipse possit alteru^ iudicare. Sed expectemus vniuersi iudicium Domini
nostri Jesus Christi, qui vnus and solus habet potestate^ and praeponendi nos in
Ecclesiae suae gubernatione, and de hoc actu nostro iudicandi. i. e. It
remains, that every one of us deliver his opinion of this matter, judging no
man, or removing him from Communion with us, if he differ from us in judgment.
For none of us makes himself a Bishop of Bishops, nor compells by tyrannical
terror his Colleagues to a necessity of following him; seeing that every
Bishop within his liberty and jurisdiction, has free power of himself; and as
he can judge no other, so neither can he be judged by any other. But let us all
wait for the judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who only, and Unus and solus.
alone, has power to prefer us in the government of his Church, and to judge
of this act of ours.


M. Euerard. Saint Cyprian speaks this in a Council that is condemned by the
Church for defining an error, to wit, that those, that were baptized by
heretics, ought to be rebaptized.

Secondly, Saint Cyprian in these words; Christ one, and alone, excludes not
his Vicar general, the Bishop of Rome.


D. Featly. Your first exception is not to the purpose. For albeit the sentence
of this Council be not approved touching the rebaptization of those, who had
been baptized by heretics: yet this speech of Saint Cyprian uttered by him, at
the first meeting of the Bishop of Carthage, sitting in Council, was never
disliked by any of the ancients. Neither S. Nay, on the contrary, S. Aust.
often remembers it, approving it and commenting upon it. See note Marg. supra.
Augustine, nor any other Father, who impugned the sentence of this Council,
did any way impeach, or dislike, much less refute this sentence of Saint
Cyprian, wherein he denies all manner of submission to Stephen then Bishop of
Rome. Nay, by a Sarcasme he glance that him, and checketh him for making
himself a Bishop of Bishops, and goeing about to compel other Bishops to
subscribe to his judgment.

Your second answer is controwled by the direct words of Saint Cyprian. If any
besides Christ, to wit, his supposed Vicar the Bishop of Rome, have power to
place Bishops in the Church, and censure their Synodical Acts; then it is false
which Saint Cyprian here says, that Christus vnus, and solus, that Christ
alone has this power. The Pope with Christ is not, Christus vnus, much less;
Christus solus. But Saint Cyprian says, Christus vnus and solus; one and only
Christ has this power: therefore not the Pope.


Lady Faulkland. If Christ alone have power to prefer Bishops in the
government of the Church, and to censure their acts made in their Counsels,
how can you then maintain the Kings Supremacy? does not the King place, and
displace Bishops?


D. Featly. In Saint Cyprians time there were no Christian Kings, or Emperors;
and therefore this exception could not be taken against the blessed Martyrs
words.

Secondly, That which Saint Cyprian here reproves in Pope Stephen, no
Christian King, or Emperor assumed to himself, to be a Bishop of all Bishops,
and to censure the acts of Bishops, and their determinations delivered in point
of Faith, in Councels lawfully assembled.

Thirdly, Christian Kings within there own Dominions grant Conge de-lires, to
Deanes, and Chapters, and confirm their Elections, and give Mandates to
Metrapolitans to consecrate: but they take not upon them to be Bishops of all
Bishops through the world, as the Bishop of Rome does: nor as Bishops or
Archbishops to consecrate any Bishops, but upon persons ordained, and to be
consecrated by order of the Church, they confer and collate such Bishoprics,
as lie within there own dominion.


M. Euerard. Before I answer you any further, I require you to answer a place
of Cyprian touching the mingling of water with the wine in the Sacrament;
Mingling the Cup of Christ, let us not depart Calicem Dei miscentes a diuino
magisterio non recedamus. Si vinum tantum quis offerat, sanguis Christi incipit
esse sine nobis, si aqua sola, pl^bs incipit esse sine Christo. quando autem
vtrunque miscetur, tunc sacramentum spirituale, and coeleste perficitur.
from the divine Mandate. If any man offer wine only, Christ's blood begins to
be without us; if water be alone, the people begin to be without Christ. When
both are mingled, then the spiritual and heavenly Sacrament is perfect.


D. Featly. It does not appear by scripture, that Christ, or his Apostles
mingled water with wine, only because it was the manner of those hot Countries
to temper their wine with water, many of the ancients, and amongst them Saint
Cyprian conceived, that Christ at his last Supper did so. Which if he did, yet
seeing he commands us not to follow his example any further, then to do that
which he did, that is to take bread, and break it, to take the Cup, and
distribute it; we transgress not Christ's Institution, whether we communicate
in leaven or unleavened bread, whether in pure wine, or in wine mingled with
water. The commandment lies upon the substance, to eat of the bread, and
drink of the Cup, and therein of the fruit of the vine: but not on the
circumstances, which are left free, and indifferent.

Secondly, Saint Cyprian in this epistle, mainly bends this discourse against
the Aquarij, certain heretics, who contended, that the Sacrament ought to be
received in water only. Against these he proves most strongly, that we ought
to receive in wine. This is his maine drift, and thus far we hold with him.
On the by, he speaks of mingling wine with water, which was the use in his
time: and we dislike it not, only we hold, the Church is free in this kind to
receive it in pure wine, as it is the manner of some Protestant Churches, or in
wine mingled with water, as it may be in some other. But Master Euerard, if
you had read this epistle, upon which you so much insist, you might have found,
that though Saint Cyprian by the way favors your practice of mingling wine
with water, yet he condemns your Church by the maine scope and drift of the
epistle, in the very point now in question. For he says, that Christ taught,
that the Cup ought to be sanctified, and ministered unto the people, which you
do not, Cur quidam in calice sanctificando, and plebi ministrando non hoc
faciunt, quod Jesus Christus Deus noster sacrificij huius author, and Doctor,
fecit, and docuit.
In sanctifying the Lords Cup, and ministering it to the people, why do some
through ignorance, or simplicity not that which Jesus Christ our Lord and God,
the author and teacher of this Sacrifice both did, and taught?

By this time it grew very late, and so the Conference brake up.

This is a true Relation of the some of the Conference, so far as I can
remember. Most of the answers of Master Euerard are taken verbatim out of the
notes, set down by consent in the Conference, which I have to show. The
arguments I perfectly remember were these above written. If Master Euerard
think good to add any thing to his arguments, or answer, I freely give him
leave, and desire him so to do, that we may have a perfect copy.


An appendix to the former Conference.
Untruths uttered by Master Euerard.
He says, it is the doctrine of the Roman Catholics generally, that the
people are not bound to receive the Communion in bread determinately, but that
they may, if the Church please so to appoint, receive it in wine only. On the
contrary, see Bellarmine, li. 4. de sac. Euch. 6. 25. Etsi Christus non dedit
laicis panem, non tamen prohibuit dari; and alihi etiam iussit dari, cum it,
hoc facite. Paulo post: Lucas illud, hoc facite, posuit post datum sacramentum
sub specie panis, post datum autem calicem illud non repetiuit, vt
intelligeremus, iussisse Dominu^, vt sub specie panis omnibus destribueretur
sacramentum, sub specie vini autem non item. Idem notat. Caiet. Becan.
Tilitanus Hesselius citat. a Chamiero. de ^ucha. lib. 8. cap. 4. page 4^7.
Although Christ did not give bread to the Laietie, yet he did not forbid it to
be given them, and elsewhere he commanded it to be given them. And Bellarmine
says a little after: S. Luke, after the Sacrament given under the form of
bread, adds, Do this: but he repeateth it not after the giving of the Cup,
that we might understand, that our Lord commanded that the Sacrament should be
given under the form of bread to all, but not under the form of wine.

Again, Fisher in his answer to certain questions propounded by King James,
contradicts directly this assertion of Master Euerard, touching Communion in
both kinds. Sect. 4. This precept (do this) being the only precept given by
Christ to his Church, and given absolutely of the form of bread, conditionally
of the form of wine, there is no color to accuse the Church of doing against
this Precept.

Secondly, When offer was made unto him, to prove every point of the
Protestants belief out of Scripture, and he was required to do the like; he
answered, that it was the custom of all heretics to appeal to sole
Scripture, and reject Tradition.

Untruth. For H^retici, cu^ ex scripturis arguuntur, in accusatione^
co^uertuntur ips^ru^ scripturaru^. quasi non recte habeant, nec sint ex
authoritate, and quia vary sint dictae, and quia non possit ex his inueniri
veritas ab his, qui ignorant traditionem. non enim per literas traditam illam,
sed per viuam vocem.
Irenaeus. lib. 3. cap. 2. thus writes: Heretics, when they are convinced out
of Scriptures, fall accusing the Scriptures themselves, as if they were not
right, nor of authority, and that they are ambiguous, and that the truth
cannot be known out of them by those, who are ignorant of tradition: for that
the truth was not delivered by writing, but by word of mouth.

Tertul. de praescrip. aduers. haeret. cap. 17. To confer by scripture will
avail nothing with this kind of * Tertul. Cum hac haeresi nihil perficiet
congressio scripturae, nisi plane vt quis stomachi ineat euersionem aut creebri.
heretics, unless a man go about to ouer-turne his brain, or his stomach,
etc. And c. 23. Credunt sine scrip. vt credant aduersus scripturas.
They believe without Scripture, that they may believe against Scripture: Et de
resurrect. carnis cap. 47. he calls heretics flyers, or shunners of the
light of the Scriptures. qualiter accipiunt lucifugae isti scripturarum. And
against Hermogenes, cap. 22. he appealeth to sole Scriptures: Adoro scripturae
plenitudinem. Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis officina: si non etc. Si non est
scriptum, timeat illud; adijcientibus, aut detrahentibus, destinatum.
I reverence the fullness of Scripture; let Hermogenes Shop, or School teach,
that this is written. If it be not written, let him fear that woe or curse
threatened to all that add, or take away.

Thirdly, He affirms, that the Council of Constance was not confirmed by
Martin the fifth, in all points defined in that Council: but only in those,
that concerned Wicklife, Hus, and the Bohemians. Sanctissimus Dominus noster
Papa, Mart. 5. dixit: omnia, and singula determinata, conclusa, and decreta in
materia fidei per praesens Concilium inuiolabiliter obseruare volo, ipsaque
haec conciliariter facta approbo, and ratifico. Postquam omnia, and singula
decreta materiam fidei concernentia approbasset. In die S. Leonis dicebatur.
Quaesumus, Domine, vt animae B. Leonis haec prosit oblatio. Et licet bae^
oration mutala sit, tamen ad huc body in secreta oratione in festo dicimus. S.
Leonis confess tui atque pontificis annua solennitas nos tibi reddat acceptos,
vt per haec piae placationis officia illum beata retributio comitetur, and
nobis. gratia tuae dona conciliet. Bell. l. 2 de Purg. c. 18.


Untruth. In the Acts of the Council of Constance set out by Binnius, sess.
45. we read, Our most holy Lord the Pope, Martin the fifth, said, I will
vnuiolably observe all and every of these things, that are determined,
concluded, and agreed in matter of Faith by this present Council: and those
things so done Councell-wise, or in a Councell-way, I approve and ratify. And
Binnius testifies as much, p. 960 that the Pope gave order for the dismissing
of the Council, after he had approved, and confirmed all and every Decree,
that concerned matter of Faith; and is not the Popes supremacy with you a
matter of Faith?

Fourthly, he peremptorily denied, that the Church of Rome ever prayed for the
souls of the Saints in heaven, or in particular, that she prayed for the soul
of blessed Leo.

Untruth: for Innocentius the third, Cap. cum. Mathae. extra de celebratione
Missar. This prayer was used upon Saint Leos feast; Grant we beseech thee, O
Lord, that this oblation may profit, or help the soul of blessed Leo. And
although (says Bellarmine) this prayer be now changed, yet at this day in the
severed prayer or collect for this Feast, we say, let the yearly solemnity of
Saint Leo the Confessor, and Bishop, make us acceptable unto thee, that by
these pious offices of appeasing thee, a blessed retribution or reward may
accompany him, and he may procure unto us gifts of thy grace. Bellarmine
adds a little after: Pope Innocentius answers to these, and the like prayers
two manner of ways; when the Church desires glory to Saints, who already
possess the Kingdom Respondit Innocent. dupliciter; 1. cum Ecclesiam petit
gloriam Sanctis, qui regnum coelorum iam possident, non petere, vt illi in
gloria crescant, sed vt apud nos illorum gloria crescat, ut toti mundo illorum
gloria innotescat. 2. dicit, non videri absurdum, si petamus illis augmentum
gloriae alicuius accidentalis. Fortasse petimus gloriam corporis, quam habebunt
in die resurrectionis.
of Heaven, he desires, or prays not, that the Saints may increase in glory,
but that their glory may increase with us: that is, that it may be made
manifest to the wholeworld.

Secondly, He says; that it seems not absurd to pray for the increase of some
accidental glory unto them.

He adds in the third place, that peradventure in these prayers we pray for
the glory of the body, which they shall have in the day of the resurrection.

FINIS.
A CHALLENGE TO MASTER JOHN FISHER, alias PERCIF, ahas STEPDEN, Jesuit.
FIrst, whereas you, Master John Fisher, sent questions by way of challenge to
Doct White, now L. Bishop of Norwich, and to me, June 21. 1623. concerning the
visibilitie of Protestant Professors in all Ages: whereupon we returned you
this answer, viz. Although divine infallible Faith is not built upon deduction
out of humane History, but upon divine revelation; as is confessed by your own
Schoolmen, and expressly by Cardinal Bellarmine: Historiae humanae faciunt
tantum fidem humanam, cui subesse potest falsum: Humane histories, and Records
beget only an humane Faith, or rather credulity, subject to error, not a
divine and infallible belief, which must be built upon surer ground.

Secondly, although, I say, this question of visibility are grounded upon
uncertain and false supposals. For a Church may have been visible, yet not the
names of all visible Professors now be showed and proved out of good Authors.
There might be millions of Professors, yet no particular, and authentical
record of them by name. Records there might be many in ancient time, yet not
now extant, at least for us to come by. Yet we will not refuse to deal with
you in your own question, if you in like manner will undertake the like task
in your own defense, and maintain the affirmative in the like question, which
we now propound here unto you in writing.

Whether the Romish Church (that is, a Church holding the particular entire
doctrine of the now Romanists, (as it is comprised in the Council of Trent)
was in all Ages visible, especially in the first 600. years; and whether the
names of such visible, or legible Romanists in all Ages can be showed, and
proved out of good Authors?

Secondly, whereas in a Conference, June 27. 1623. with you, and M. Sweet, I
undertook to prove the perpetual visibility of the Protestant Church, both a
priore by Syllogism, and a posteriore, by Induction: and then also made an
Essay in both kinds, as the time permitted, demonstrating the visibility of the
Protestant Church, being an effect, by the eternity of our Faith, as the cause:
And further, to stop your clamor for names, I produced at that time the names
of visible Professors of our belief for 200. years.

Thirdly, whereas since the Conference I have made good my demonstration, a
priore, of the perpetual visibility of the Protestant Church, against all your
cauils, refuted at large through my whole book, entitled, The Romish Fisher
caught, and held in his own net, printed at London, 1624. but particularly, and
more especially in the Remonstrance therein to Sr. Humphry Linde, from page the
14. vsque ad finem, and in my Reply to your answer, Paragraph 8. page 89. vsque
ad 112:

Fourthly, whereas now I have quite finished my demonstration a posteriore, and
have set down the so much harangued for Catalogue of visible Professors, in
all Ages from Christ to Luther, of our Protestant doctrine, in a maine point of
difference, and one of the first mentioned in the Conference, touching the
communicating in both kinds:

I now therefore challenge you, M. John Fisher, according to your deep
engagement, before, in, and since the Conference, as you tender the tickle
state of your Catholic cause with your collapsed Ladies, immediately after the
perusal of this my Treatise, to go about, and in convenient time without
further delays, and tergiuersatio^, to draw a like Catalogue for your part, of
such Writers, and Authors of note in all Ages, who have defended, or at least
approved your dry and half Communion. Which after that you have performed, I
will proceed, God assisting me, to name visible Professors in all Ages in other
points of greatest moment.

But if you refuse to meet me in this field, pitched by your self, diuerting
into your common place of railing at Sectaries and Nouelists:

Or if like Caligula, you triumph at Rome, for a signal victory in Germany,
when he had gathered only a few pebbles on the shore at Caieta: and you
thereupon cry out upon the shifts, and tergiuersations of D. Featly, whereas
(to pay you backsome of your own in coin) your Fishers reply to D. White, and
D. Featly, page 79. anno. 1625.
white liver will not suffer you to come so much as in sight of the walls and
gates of my defense, but only to shoot a few paper bullets against three or
four of my redoubts; you in all your Replyer not replying one word to the
defense of my proceeding in the Conference; and Refutations of your answers;

Or if for want of better employment, Ne toga condylis, and penula desit oliuis:
You shall tacke together a cento of relations, See a book entitled, Sundry
Relations by I. C. printed permissu superiorum. 1626.
like Sibylles leaves, as much distracted, as the brains of the Penner: and if
you shall entreat in good earnest your Midas Reader, to give credit to your
own report, in your own cause (you being both a Romanist and a Jesuit) against
the subscription of sundry persons of honor, worth, and quality, affixed to
the Conference:

Or if having a leaden Treatise, that has long See the second part of the
Reply to D. White and D. Featly.
lain heavy upon your hands, touching no salvation out of the Church of Rome,
you shall clap my name, and D. Whites upon it, to make it sell, intituling it:
A Reply to D. White, and D. Featly; whereas from the first page, being 145. to
the last, 181. there is not one syllable against either of their writings:

Fifthly, and lastly, if you shall change your trade, and of a Fisher turn
Sawyer, nothing but drawing the Saw of your ragged style 1000. times by the
same line backward, and forward, and never pierce into the heart of any
Controversy: impute it to no other thing, then mere compassion in your
opposites, that they reioyne not to your Replies; ne famam tuam sponte
concidentem Cicero proCaelio.
maturius extinguant suo vulnere; lest they should give a deaths-wound to your
reputation, that lies on bleeding already. In tauros ruunt Libyci leones,
Ne sint Papilionibus molesti.


FINIS.
THE SVMME AND SVBSTANCE OF A DISPVTATION BETWEEN M. DAN. FEATLY, OPONENT, AND
D. SMITH THE younger, Respondent, (now by the Pope intitutuled Bishop of
Chalcedon, and Ordinary of all England) at Paris. Sept. 4. 1612. Stylo nouo,
touching the Real presence in the Sacrament.



LONDON, Printed by Felix Kyngston for Robert Milbourne, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Greyhound. 1630.

THE SVMME AND SVBSTANCE OF A DISPVTATION between M. Dan. Featly, Opponent,
and D. Smith the younger, Respondent (now by the Pope entitled Bish. of
Chalcedon, and Ordinary of all England) at Paris. Sept. 4. 1612. Stylo nouo,
touching the Real presence in the Sacrament.
The Laws of the Disputation.
1. That they should dispute calmely and peaceably. 2. That all impertinent
discourses should be avoided. 3. That M. Featly at this time should only
oppose, and D. Smith only answer.
THese Conditions agreed upon, it was thought fit both should set down the
state of the Question, and the points of difference between them: which D.
Smith being Respondent, first undertook, distinguishing between the questions
of Real presence and of Transubstantion, and determining the point in question
to be this. Whether the body of Christ were truly and substantially in the
Sacrament, under the forms of bread and wine?

Which being done, he entered into a large discourse, to set down the proofs
and confirmations of the affirmative, used by their Church:

Whereupon he was challenged by M. Featly of a breach of the third Law: and so,
after Master Featly had for his part promised him to answer all his arguments
at another time, when the hearers should think good, D. Smith surceased.

And M. Featly explained the terms of the Question as follows.

There are two terms, (said he) in the question, Presence, and Real: I
distinguish of both.

First, The Scripture speaks of a fourefold Fouresold presence; 1. divine; 2.
spiritual; 3. sacramental; 4. corporal. Ephesians. 3. 17.
presence of Christ, first, Divine, according to which, he is present in all
places. The second, Spiritual, according to which he is said after a special
manner to dwell in the faithful. The third, Sacramental, according to which,
he is united to the Sacrament both mystically and effectually. For the
Sacrament does not only represent him, and his death to the eye of our body,
but also truly present, and offer him, and all the benefits of his Passion to
our souls. It does not only signify, but also by virtue of Christ's promise,
truly, and effectually exhibit Grace: The fourth, is carnal and corporal, of
which those words are meant, Verbum care factum est, and babitauit in nobis.
The Word was madeflesh, and dwelt among us.

Secondly, In like manner the word Real is diversely taken; 1. Sometime as it
is opposed to that, which is feigned, and imaginary. Secondly, as it is opposed
to that, which is merely figurative, and barely representative. Thirdly, as it
is opposed to that which is spiritual, and immateriall; in which sense, Real,
Material, and Corporal are co-incident.

We believe, that Christ is present in the Sacrament, Stat. Quaest.
and that Really, in the two former significations of Real, and the three
first acceptions of Presence: we deny it in the last of both. In sum, Christ
is there many ways Really, not Corporally; that is, not according to the
substance of his natural body, shrouded under the accidents of bread and wine;
which he thus proved.

That doctrine which has no foundation in the The maine Argument.
Word of God, and is repugnant to the doctrine of the true ancient Church, and
overthrows the principles of right reason, implying palpable absurdities, and
apparent contradictions, is to be rejected as erroneous and heretical:

But the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, touching the bodily presence of Christ
in the Sacrament, is such:

Ergo, it is to be disclaimed.

D. Smith here denied the minor.

Which Mast. Featly undertook to prove according to all the parts: but the
time permitted to prosecute only the proof of the first: which was, That the
Papists have no ground in Scripture for their Real Presence of Christ's body in
the Sacrament. And thus he proceeded.

First, if there be any ground in Scripture for this your opinion, certainly
it is either in the words Hoc est corpus meu^.
This is my body; or in those, the 6. of Ioh. 53. Nisi carnem meam comederitis,
etc.
Unless you eat my flesh, etc. upon which all Papish build their belief in
this point.

But neither the one, nor the other are any sure ground for it:

Ergo, You have none.

D. Smith in this Syllogism, as in the former, denied the assumption.

Which was thus confirmed.

If the words of the Institution, Hoc est, etc. and the other John 6. are to be
taken figuratively, and not in the proper sense: out of all question, they make
nothing for the bodily presence, or carnal eating of Christ with the mouth.

But the words above alleged in both places are to be construed
figuratively, and not properly according to the rigor of the letter; which I
prove (says he) by uncontrollable testimonies of Fathers, and evident
arguments drawn from the circumstances of those texts.

And first he alleged a place of Tertullian, li. 4. cont. Marcionem cap. 40.
Acceptum panem, and distributum discipulis, corpus suum illud fecit, Hoc est
corpus meum, dicendo, id est figura ^orporis mei.
The bread taken, and distributed unto his disciples, he made the same bis
body, saying, this is my body, that is, a figure of my body; adding withal,
that if D. Smith, or any other could being a more pregnant place for the
figurative exposition out of any Protestant, he would yield him the better.

D. Smith could bring none, but made this answer; Ex Autographo. Verbailla
Tertulliani sic sunt intelligenda: vt verba illa, id est (figur^ corporis mei)
reserenda sint ad illud vocabulum, Hoc, quod est subiectum propositionis
Christi, and illud explanent: vt sensus Tertulliani sit: Hoc, id est, figura
corporis mei, est corpus meum.
Those words of Tert. are so to be understood, that the words (a figure of my
body) are to be referred to the word (this) which is the subject of Christ's
proposition, and do explain it so: that the meaning of Tertullian is: This
that is a figure of my body, is my body; or: as he afterward mended it, Id
quod erat vctus figura, est corpus meum.
that which was of old a figure of my body, is now my body.

To which, M. Featly thus replied. To rehearse this answer, is to refute it: if
it be lawful unto a speech of three words to ad (id quod erat vetus) to the
subiectum; and (corpus meum) to the praedicatum: and to refer the words
(idest figura) not to the praedicatum, as all men do in the like; you may make
quidlibet ex quolibet.

To this D. Smith answered out of Cyprian, that Tertullian was a very obscure
Writer, and had a very ill gift in expressing his mind.

Whereunto it was reioyned; If he be obscure in other places, what is that to
this which is most clear to any, that will not shut his eyes? discredit not
Tertullian, whom Cyprian so highly esteemed, that he let no day pass without
reading some part of his works, calling for him by the name of his Master: Da
Magistrum, Tertullianum videlicet significans. Hier. Ca^al. vir: illustr.


Secondly, he replied, that how ill soever a gift Tertullian might have in
expressing his own mind, he could not be so dull in conceiving our Saviors
mind, as to make this to be the meaning of our Saviors words;) This is my
body,) that is, the bread which was a figure of my body in the old Law, is now
my body: seeing that our Savior speaks never a word there, nor has any
relation at all to any figure of the old Testament, neither in the words going
before, nor coming after.

Thirdly, admitting this most strange, and forced interpretation; yet out of
this place of Tertullian, I infer necessarily, that the words of the
Institution be figurative. For this Proposition. The figure, or that which was
the figure of my body, is my body (which is your exposition of Tertullian)
cannot be true, but by a figure: since panis, and corpus Christi, are disparata;
which cannot properly be one affirmed of the other; Let the Pronoune
demonstratiue, Hoc, stand for figura corporis mei, as you will have it, and
add thereunto the copula and praedicatum, you feign, est corpus meum, saying,
figura corporis mei est corpus meum: you must needs fly to a figure to make
this Proposition true. For whether you put the Bread, or the accidents to be
the only figures of Christ's body, all is one: since neither Bread, nor the
accidents of Bread can be truly, and properly said to be Christ's body.

Here D. Smith was forced to acknowledge a figure in the words of the
Institution. These are his own words; Ex autogr. Ego agnos^o, quod in verbis,
hoc est corpus meum, est figura, sed non mera figura, aut figura vacua a
veritate, quae figuratur.
I acknowledge, that in these words this is my body, is a figure, but not a
mere figure or a figure void of that truth, which is figured by it.

Thus they grew to an issue, Master Featly affirming, that he demanded no
more, then to have him grant, that there is a figure in these words, hoc est
corpus meum, (which Bellarmine, and all other Papists disclaim, as quite
overthrowing their opinion of the Real presence.) For (quoth he) as for your
distinction of a mere figure, and not mere in speech, it is nothing, but a
mere fiction of your own brain; as if you should say, This is a shadow, but
not a mere shadow.

Secondly, he insisted upon the words of S. Augustine; August. de Doct.
Christ. lib. 3. cap. 16. page 23. edit. Parisiensis. Si autem flagitium, aut
facinus videtur iubere aut vtilitatem, aut benificentiam vetare, figurata est
locutio. ex. gr. Nisi manducaue^is (inquit) carnem fil^j hominis, and sanguinem
bibe^itis, non habebitis vitam in vobis: facinus vel flagitium videtur iubere:
figura est ergo praecipiens passioni Domini esse communicandum, and suauiter,
and vtiliter recondendum in memoria, quod pro nobis caro eius crucifixa, and
vulnerata sit.
But if the scripture seem to command a sin, or an horrible wickedness, or
to forbid any thing that is good and profitable, the speech is figurative. For
example: unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, etc. seems to command
a sin or horrible wickedness; it is a figure therefore, etc. Three things
(said he) are to be observed in this testimony. First, that Saint Augustine
makes choice of these words of our Savior, as a most known example of a
figurative speech. Secondly, that he not only affirms it to be a figurative
speech, but confirms it also by an argument. Flagitium vid^tur iubere, figura
est ergo. Praecipiens recondendum in memoria, etc.
Thirdly, that he shows what figure it is, and expounds it conformably to
the doctrine of the Protestants, and contrary to the now Church of Rome.

Hereunto D. Smith first answered, that it was no horrible, nor wicked thing to
eat man's flesh, since we usually eat it in Mummy.

What (said M. F. not the flesh of a live man?

Sub aliena specie.
Not (said D. Smith) under another shape or form.

Say you so, (quoth M. Featly) Then indeed Saint Augustines argument is but
very weak, if it be not horrible to eat a live man, though masked or
disguized. What then say you to S. Augustines conclusion? D. Smith answered,
Figura est eogo. s^u figurata locutio, Respondeo, quod est figura mixta ex
propria and figurata action.
It is a figure mixed of a figurative and proper action. (...). Resp. ex Autog.


Prop^ia figurata. Replic.
A proper figurative speech or action, quoth M. Featly; This is, as if a man
should say, a white black color; or a true false answer. I pray you expound
your self, D. Smith, and show us, how the self same speech can be figurative
and proper, that is, proper and improper. For in my understanding, every
figurative speech is improper; and if it be taken in the proper sense of words,
is always either untrue, or impertinent. Let us hear therefore your proper
doctrine of an improper proper speech.

Thus (quoth he) I explicate my self; Ex Autogr. Locutio Christi, nisi
manducaueritis, etc. est secundum Augustinum prapria, and figurata: figurata
qu^ad modum ^dendi, scilicet in propria sorma, quoed rem est propria, scilicet
quoad substantiam ca^nis Christi, and i^a mixta est figurata and prop^ia
locutione.
Christ's 2 Resp.
speech; unless you eat my flesh, is proper and figurative, according to
Saint Austin: figurative according to the manner of eating, viz. in the proper
form: but according to the matter it self, it is proper, viz. according to
the substance of Christ's flesh, and so it is a speech mixed of a proper and
figurative.

Hereunto M. Featly replied; A speech figurative according to the manner of
eating; and eating of a thing not in propria forma, are Schoole-delicacies.
Where find you any such thing in S. Augustine? or what is this to prove, that a
speech, which may not be properly taken (such is every figurative) may be
properly taken, and so be figurata and propria both? It is most certain, that
Saint Augustine by figurata locutio, meant such an one, as could in no sense be
proper. For Saint Augustines words are. Si hoc iam proprie sonat, nulla putetur
figurata locutio. ibid.
If this now be taken in the proper sense, let it be accounted no figurative
speech. A proper speech is here by S. Austine manifestly distinguished from
figurative, and figurative from proper. Besides, he speaks of such a speech,
wherein an horrible wickedness is commanded, or a virtuous action condemned;
which can in no sense be true in the proper acception of the words. Otherwise,
it should be lawful to sin, because expressly commanded, and sinful to do
well, because forbidden. Furthermore, to prove that these words could not be
taken properly, and literally, he cited the words of Origin in Leuiticum. Ho.
7. Si secundum literam sequaris quod dictum est, nisi mandocaueritis carne^
filij hominis, etc. litera illa occidit.
If you follow the letter in these words: Unless you eat the flesh, etc. that
letter kills.

Respondeo secundum literam Caperniticam.
I answer (says D. Smith) that if you understand those words according to the
Caperniticall letter.

Now good Sir, quoth M. Featly, what is litera Capernitica: a Jews letter?

Secundum literalem sensum, quem intellig^bant Capernitae. 2. Resp. D. S.
By Capernitica letter I understand the litterall sense, in which the
Capernaits took Christ's words.

M. Featly replied, that for ought appears by Scripture, or any ancient
Record, the Capernites error was in this, that they construed Christ's words
grossly and carnally, as you do: which you and they should have taken spiri
tually (My words are spirit and life. V^rba mea Spiritus sunt, and vita.


No, quoth D. Smith, the Capernites thought, that Christ's flesh should be sold
in the market, and cut in pieces.

There is no such thing, quoth M. Featly, employed in the literal meaning of
these words, (unless you eat my flesh:) nor can be gathered 2. Resp.
from any circumstance of the Text. A man might eat flesh according to the
rigor of the letter, though he neither buy it in the market, nor cut it. The
horror of the sin of Anthropophagy, or eating man's flesh, is not in buying
man's flesh, nor in cutting it, but in eating it with the mouth, and chamming it
with the teeth: If we should do so in the Sacrament, we should follow the
killing letter Origin speaks of, and run upon the point of Saint Cyrils
sharp reproof; Number hominis commestionem hoc Sacramentum pronuntias, and
irreligiose ad crassas cogitationes vrges fidelium mentes? Cyr^l. ad object.
Theod. in expos. an^. 11.
do thou pronounce this Sacrament to be man-eating? and do thou
irreligiously urge the minds of the faithful to gross, and carnal
imaginations? I oppose against your interpretation Saint Chrysostoms, who
says: To take Scripture according to the letter is to take it according to the
sound of the words. Now I appeal to the ear of all that are here present,
whether these words, nisi manducaueritis carnem, sound after D. Smiths
Caperniticall strain. I hear nothing but the eating of the flesh: which you
do as properly, as the Capernites could conceive, De consecr. did. 2. Berenga
rius is forced to subscribe, as follows. Ego Berengarius, etc. Credo corpus
Domini nostri Jesus Christi sensualiter, and in ve^itate manibus Sacerdotum
tractari, frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri.
with the mouth and teeth.

To which D. Smith replied. When I see the words of Chrysostom, I will answer
them.

You shall when you please (quoth M. Featly) in the mean while, because the
book is not at hand, I will press you with another, against whom (I trow) you
dare not except.

Who is it, quoth D. Smith.

It is Gratian (quoth M. Featly) who Decret. 3. part. de consecrat. distinct.
2. cap. Hoc est quod dicimus, has these express words: Sicut ergo caelestis
panis, qui Christi caro est, s^ modo vocatur corpus Christi cum reuera sit
Sacramentum corporis Christi: Glossa addit: c^leste Sacramentum dicitur corpus
Christi, sed improprie, vnd^ dicitu^ suo modo, sed non r^i veritate sed
significante mysteri^: ^t fit sensus: vo^atur Christi corpus, id^st,
significatur.
As therefore the heavenly bread which is Christ's flesh, after a sort is called
Christ's body, when as in very truth it is the sacrament of it; the Gloss
adds, the heavenly Sacrament is called the body of Christ, but improperly,
and therefore it is said after a sort, but not in the truth of the thing, but
in a signifying mystery, etc.

To which authority D. Smith shaped this answer: Aliud est Sacramentum tantum,
aliud res tantum: aliud res and Sacramentum.
the sacrament is taken either for the figne only, or for the thing signified
only, or for both, and applied his distincton thus: Gratian, and the Gloss
understood by Sacramentum, Sacramentum tantum, or signum, the sign only.
Therefore Accidentia sola panis, according to your doctrine (inferred M.
Featly.)

To which D. Smith accorded.

Then M. Featly thus refelled the former answer: Gratian, and the Gloss speak
of heavenly bread, or Christ's flesh, and a heavenly sacrament: but the mere
accidents of bread, neither in Gratians opinion, nor in yours can be termed
coelestis panis, heavenly bread, nor Christi caro, Christ's flesh, nor coeleste
Sacramentum, a heavenly Sacrament. Therefore the former words cannot be meant
of the accidents, but of the consecrated Host it self.

To which D. Smith with some indignation replied; Gratianus quoad nos non est
authentic^s author, mul^o minus Glossa. Arg. 1 duct. a circumst cont.
Gratian with us is no authentical Author, much less the Gloss.

Well (said M. Featly) if you so easily avoid Gratian, approved by so many
Popes, citing in this very place S. Augustine in the Margent for his warrant, I
will see whether you can so rid your hands of Divine authorities.

I argue thus from the Text: Christ took bread, and brake it, and gave it, and
said, This, etc. Therefore by this word, This, he meant this bread, as the
Fathers generally accord in their interpretations of it. Irenaeus lib. 4. c.
34. Unde consta bi^ ijs pan^, in qu^ gratiae (...) sunt, (...) corpus Dom^i?
How shall it appear unto them, that the bread which was blessed, was our
Lords body? Tertullianus lib. 4. cont. Marcion. cap. 40. Pan^ corpus suum
a(...).
He calls the bread his body. Athanas. in 1. Cor. 11. Quid est panis? Corpus
Christi.
What is the bread? Christ's body. Hieron. ad Hedib. quaest. 2. page 416. Nos
autem audiamus panem, quem fregit Dominus, deditque discipulis, esse corpus
Domini, ipso dicente: ^oc est corpus meum.
Let us hear, that the bread which Christ brake and gave to his Disciples, is
his body, as himself says, This is my body. August. sermon. 2. de verb.
Apost. Quod videtur, panis est and calix, quod etiam (...) renun^iant; quod
^utem fides p^stulat instru^da, panis est corpus Christi (...) sanguis.
The bread is Christ's ^ody, and the Cup is his blood. Epiphan. in Anchorato; De
^o quod rotunda est figu^ae, and (...), Dominus per gratiam dixit, Hoc est
co^pus meum.
Christ said of that which is of a round figure, and without sense, This is my
body. Cyril. Catech. mystag. 4. Christus depan^ affi mat, Hoc est c^rpus meum.
Christ said of the bread, This is my body. Theodoret. Dialog. 1. In
distributione mysteriorum, panem vocat corpus suum.
In the distribution of the mysteries, he called bread his body. Gerson. contra
Flor. c. 4. Dicendum est, quod (hoc) demonstrat substantiam panis.
We must say, that the Pronoune (this) demonstrates the substance of bread. I
could produce many more of your own Writers, that are cited by Suarez to this
purpose: but these suffice to prove* that the Pronoune Hoc, stands for Hic
panis. Now I assume, Corpus Christi, cannot properly be affirmed of bread, since
bread and Christ's body are substantiae disparatae: Ergo, will you, nill you,
either you must accept of a figure in Christ's words, or put back, and reject
all these reverend Fathers, and your own Doctors also at once.

I answer, quoth D. Smith, that the Fathers by panis, meant, panis
Eucharistatus.

What mean you, quoth M. Featly, by panis Eucharistatus, Transubstantiatus
actu, actually transubstantiated, or not?

Transubstantiatus actu, quoth D. Smith.

Therefore replied M. Featly, by panis they Repl.
meant that which is not now panis. For panis Transubstantiatus is no more
panis, then homo mortuus is homo, or the Rod being turned into a Serpent, is
still a Rod. Is this, think you, their Exodus 4.
meaning? Bread is Christ's body, that is, Bread not being bread is Christ's
body. Might not I say with as good reason: It is my body, that is, it is not my
body?

I say (quoth D. Smith) Panis Eucharistatus (panis non manens panis est corpus
Christi.
bread (not remaining bread) is the body of Christ. Refell you this my
Exposition if you can.

It is needless (quoth M. Featly*) it cannot be made worse then it is; yet to
gratify you, I thus impugn it. This Pronoune demonstratiue, Hoc, must needs
signify some thing, that then was existent, to which Christ pointed, saying,
Ex Autogr.
This: But there was no panis transubstantiatus, or your non manens panis, when
Christ pronounced this Pronoune, This, pointing to something at the table: for
you all confess, that the bread is not converted into the substance of Christ's
body, till after all the words of consecration are uttered.

D. Smiths answer was, This subject hoc, signifies, * Subiectum (hoc)
significat quando proser^, corpus Christi* sed non significat pro tunc, sed pro
proximo non esse (...) propositionis.
when it is uttered, the body of Christ: but it signifies not for that
instant, but for the next not being of the whole proposition.

What say you, is a proposition true, when it is not at all (Hoc est in non
esse suo?) Aristotle makes signification de esse propositionis, defining it,
Oration significans verum, vel falsum. Is this then that you say, Christ's speech
signifies, that is, has his esse pro Proximo non esse? How many non esses
has a Proposition, which you will have signify pro Proximo non esse?

Go on (quoth D. Smith) with your Argument.

When Christ (said M. Featly) uttered precisely this Pronoune, Hoc, did it
signify any thing then, or no?

Signifi^bat tunc, non pro tunc.
It signified, This, but not for that instant.

Quid ergo tunc significabat, panem transubstantiatum?
What did it then signify, quoth M. Featly,) bread transubstantiated, or not?
If you say, transubstantiatum, you make a false Proposition: If you say, non
transubstantiatum, you must acknowledge a figure.

To this D. Smith said nothing, but repeated his old distinction, Tunc, and pro
Tunc. This your distinction (quoth M. Featly) is like unto his in Keckerman, by
which he turns off all arguments, ^rthopodialiter, non restexiue, which no
man was able to refute, because they understood it not. I profess (said he) I
know not what you will, by your Tunc, and pro Tunc, unless this be your
meaning, that the Proposition is true, de futuro, non de praesente: which to
say, is apparently to put a figure in the copula est, construing it pro erit.

No figure, quoth D. Smith, but s an enlarging of the copula.

I might say likewise, (quoth M. Featly) that no Protestant makes a figure in
the copula, or praedicatum, but only an amplification of it in your language.
I pray you, what difference is there between that your Ampliatio copulae, and
the Rhetoricians enallage temporis? I see no more then between a silver and a
leaden token of the same value; both an half penny, Let us not strive about
words: What is the thing meant by Hoc? pro quo nomine stat hoc pronomen?

Pro pane transubstantiato.
For bread transubstantiated, says D. Smith.

Ergo pro corpore Christi.
Therefore for the body of Christ, says Master Featly.

What of that, quoth D. Smith?

Then (quoth M. Featly) the meaning of the words is, Corpus Christi est corpus
Christi.
The body of Christ is the body of Christ. y Conced^ sensus eorum verborum
(Panis est corpus Christi) est iste quoad identitatem signifi^ati: Corpus
Christi est corpus Christi: quoad modum significandi, non est idem; sed
diuersus, and non i^enticus.


I grant, says D. Smith, that the sense of these words, the bread is the body
of Christ) is this, according to the identitie of the thing signified, the body
of Christ is the body of Christ; According to the manner of signifying, it is
not the same, but diverse, and not identicall.

Belike (quoth M. Featly) the Apostles were ignorant, that Christ's body was his
body, and by virtue of these words, he made his body his body; as if it were
not so before. Will you stand to this interpretation, quoth M. Featly? See what
will come upon it.

What (quoth D. Smith?)

That the words of consecration make nothing for Transubstantiation, or any
thing else. For a Proposition that is merely identicall quoad significatum,
proves nothing at all. I may* truly say, pointing to Christ's body in heaven*
at the right hand of his Father; This, or that body of Christ is his body: and
will it hence follow, that bread, or any thing else, is substantially turned
into Christ's body? were it not much better to admit a Trope, then to commit a
Tautologie in your exposition? To grant an elegancy in the words, then defend
an absurdity in the meaning? to acknowledge a figure, then to disfigure so
divine a sentence, and make of it a Battologie?

Here D. Smith after his manner, largely discoursed of the nature of
identicall, and nugatory propositions. Of which, M. Featly gave this judgment,
as Aristotle answered the Philosophers disputes, de inani, (...); so says he,
your discourse of nugatory propositions seems to me nugatory, and altogether
impertinent. And therefore I proceed to a new argument.

The words used in the consecration of the 2. Arg. deductum a circumst.
contextus.
bread are so to be expounded, as the like in the consecration of the Cup:

But the words used in the consecration of the Cup are to be expounded by a
figure, or more:

Ergo*

Prove your Assumption, says D. Smith.

Thus (quoth M. Featly*) these are the words, as they are recorded, Luke 22.
20. Hic calix est n^uum Testamentum in meo sanguine.
This Cup is the new Testament in my blood: but both Calix is here taken by a
figure, Pro contento* and no^um Testamentum pro sign^ sigillo, Sacramento noui
Testamenti.
for the thing contained in it; and the new Testament for the sign and seal,
or Sacrament of the new Testament: Ergo, etc.

I will not contest with you (quoth D. Smith) about Calix; let that be a
figure: but I deny there is any figure in the word Testamentum.

It is well (quoth M. Featly) you grant one figure in the words of
consecration: I assure you, D. Bagshaw is of another mind; to grant one figure,
in his judgment, is to loose all* For what privilege have you more to set a
figure upon the words of consecration of the Cup, then we upon the like of the
bread? Where are now your exclamations against us, for obscuring, deprauing,
and disfiguring the words of Christ by Tropes and Figures? One figure you
grant, and it shall go hard, but I will multiply it, and make more figures of
it. Either there is a figure in the word Testament, or that, which you say, is
meant by Calix, is properly Christi Testamentum: But that cannot be: Ergo.

Thus I demonstrate it: By hic calix you mean hic sanguis: but sanguis Christi
is not proprie testamentum.

Negatur minor, says D. Smith.

Probatur (quoth M. Featly,) No substantial part of the Testator is properly
his Testament: But the blood of Christ is a substantial part of the Testator:
Ergo, it is not properly his last Will and Testament.

In this Syllogism D. Smith denied the Mayor, affirming, that if any man
should sign any Resp.
thing with his blood, that blood being an authentical sign of his Will,
might be properly called his Testament.

Hereupon M. Featly replied; Blood properly a Testament? I read in Scripture
of blood Replic.
of the Testament: but never heard of a Testament, or blood a testament.
Certainly the word Testament signifies properly the Will it self of the
Testator, but by an usual phrase of speech, or figure, it is applied to the
Instrument, which is (speaking properly) but a testimony of his Will. As for
the blood, or mark wherewith any man signeth his Will, he never heard any man
call that his Testament, no not by a figure, much less properly; Testamentum
est voluntatis nos^ae iusta sententia d^ eo, quod quis fieri velit post mortem
suam. Digest. de Test. estque aut Scriptum, aut nuncup^torium.
The Will of a man is the just determination, or appointment of what he would
have done after his death, and it is either written, or nuncupatiue. Blood can
be neither. How many new Testaments shall we have, if every authentical
sign of Christ's Will, be properly his Testament? The sign of Christ's Will is
no more his Will, then the sign of his Body is his Body. Therefore what color
have you to forbid us to interpret these words, This is my body (that is, a
sign of my body?) when you your selves expound these words: This cup, or, this
blood is my Will, or Testament (that is, the authentical sign of my
Testament?) yet we in our exposition, of the former words, commit no
Tautologie, as you do in the latter, thus paraphrasing Christ's words: This
cup, that is, this blood is the New Testament in my blood, blood in blood, or
signed with blood. Will you say, that Christ's blood needed his blood to sign
it, as Saint Austin says of the heathens God, Apollo; Interpres Deorum eget
Interpret: and sors referenda est ad sortem, id est. The interpreter of the
Gods wants an Interpreter, and we have need to cast Lots upon the Lot it
self.

How say you, is not this your interpretation?

Hereunto D. Smith wrote this answer, Sensus huius propositionis, Hic calix est
n^uum Testamentum in meo sanguine, est iste: Hic liquor, qui qu^ad rem
significatam est identice sanguis meus, est novum Testamentum: id est,
a^thenticum signum vltimae m^ae voluntatis, sancitum in sanguiue meo; fuso pro
vobis.
The sense of this Proposition, This Cup is the new Testament, is this: This
liquor, which according to the thing signified, is the same thing with my
blood, is the new Testament, that is, ^n authentical sign of my last Will,
confirmed with my blood shed for you.

Judge, Sirs, (quoth M. Featly) Is not this a Tautologie; S^nguis meus (...) in
sa^guine meo.
my blood confirmed in my blood, or the sign of my blood, signed in my blood?

And did not I tell you before (says D. Smith) of a twofold identicall
proposition? Identicall Quoad rem significatam, and quoad modum significa^di.
according to the thing signified, and according to the manner of signifying.
Sisyphi saxum voluis.

Tuergoes Sisyphi saxum (quoth M. Featly) te enim (...).

Nec proficis ^ilum, (quoth D. Smith.)

True (quoth M. Featly) quia semper eodem re^olueris. (...). Him. Odys. (...).
3. Arg. Circumst. text.
Yet I will have one lift more.

Thus I prove, that Christ's blood is not in the consecrated Chalice. Blood is
not the fruit of the Vine:

That which Christ and the Apostles drank in the consecrated Chalice, was the
fruit of the Vine:

Ergo, not blood.

That it was the fruit of the Vine, our Savior affirms in express words,
Matthew. 26. 29. I will not drink from henceforth of the fruit of the Vine;
having in the words immediately going before consecrated the Chalice, and
instituted the Sacrament of his blood, saying, Drink ye all of this (C^p;) for
this is my blood of the new Testament, verse. 28.

To this D. Smith answered, that our Savior spoke this of the Cup of the old
Testament, mentioned in Luke, not of the Sacrament.

Which answer M. Featly thus infringed: These words in Saint Matthew, This
fruit of the Vine, must have relation to the Cup, of which Saint Matthew spoke
before: but Saint Matthew spoke of no Cup before, but of the Cup of the new
Testament: therefore these words: This fruit of the Vine, must needs be
understood of the Cup of the new Testament. If I should take here a Cup, and
after I had drank of it, say, I will drink no more of this, were it not
ridiculous to understand me of any other cup, then that I took last in my
hand, and drank of?

D. Smith repeated his former answer, and said: it was sufficient that Saint
Luke spoke of another Cup.

M. Featly replied: what, is it sufficient to make perfect sense in a sentence
set down in Saint Matthew to fetch a proposition, or narration from Saint Luke
his Gospel? Will you make Saint Matthew to write nonsense: to relate Christ's
words (I will drink no more of this) and no where to express of what he
spoke, or to what this (This) is to be referred? I refer my self to your
own conscience, whether these words (I will drink no more of this fruit)
immediately following these: Hic calix, This cup, or Hic est sanguis noui
testamenti, This is the blood of the new testament, can have relation to any
other words then those, or to any other Cup, then which is here consecrated.
Not only all the circumstances of the Text are against your interpretation,
but also all the Fathers generally controwle it; who understand these words, (I
will not drink of this fruit of the Vine) of the Sacrament, and not of the Cup
of the old Law. And he quoted Clemens, in Pedag. l. 2. c. 2. Qu^d vinum esset,
qu^d ben^dictum est, Christus o^endit, ^icens, non bibam a (...) de h^c fructu
vitis.
That it was wine which was blessed, Christ showed, saying, I will not drink
from henceforth of this fruit of the Vine. Cypr. lib. 2. Epist. 3. alleging
the words of Saint Matthew, Non bib^ ex ^oc f^uctu vitis.
I will drink no more of this fruit of the Vine, adds: Qua in part
inuenimus calic^m mixtum fuisse, quem Dominus obtulit, and vinum fuisse, quod
sanguinem suum dixit?
where do we find that the cup which Christ offered, was mingled, and that it
was wine, which he called his blood? Chrysostom. Hom. 83. in Mat. Cum Dominus hoc
mysterium trad^et, vinum tradid^; ex geni^ine, ai^, vitis, quae (...) vinum,
non aquam producit.
When our Lord delivered this mystery, he delivered wine of the fruit of the
Vine, says he, which certainly produces wine, and not water. August. de
Eccl. Dogm. cap. 75. and Concilium Worm. ca. 2. Vinum fuit redemptionis nostrae
mysterio, cum dixit; Non bibam de hoc genimine.
Wine was in the mystery of our redemption, when he said, I will drink no more
of the fruit of the Vine. If you have not yet weight enough, I will add one
Author, that in the skales of your judgment, bears down all these, Pope
Innocentius, lib. 4. de Mist. Missae cap. 27. Quod autem vinum in calice
consecra^rat, patet ex ^o, quod ipse subiunxit; Non bibam a modo de genimine
vitis.
It is manifest, that he consecrated wine in the Cup by those words he added, I
will not drink from henceforth of the fruit of the Vine. What answer you
(quoth M. Featly) to so many Fathers, a Council, and your Pope?

I answer (quoth D. Smith) that their opinion is probable.

And though M. Featly pressed him in the words of Campian, Patres admittis, an
excludis? admittis, victus ^s: excludis, Nullus^s.
Do you admit of the Fathers, or reject them; if you admit of them, you are
overcome; if you refuse them, you are no body.

He answered only as before, that their opinion was probable: but he preferred
his own before it: and yet triumphed, as if he had gotten the day, saying; Are
these your demonstrations? Are these sufficient causes, why you should separate
your selves from our Church, and from your Brethren the Lutherans?

And it was replied; Are these your best answers, and defenses? Is your great
brag of the Fathers, and of the Councels come to this; that when they are
alleged against you, you either discredit them, as you did Tertullian, or make
miserable excuses for them, as In resp. ad hoc arg. lib. 1. de sacr. Euch* c.
11.
Bellarmine does for Saint Augustine? Augustinus non perpendit hunc locum
diligenter.
Austin did not well weigh this place: or cashere a whole troop of them, Pope
and all; yet with civil and respective terms, saying, their opinion is
probable: follow it who so will, yet you will not quit your own for it! And
here, because it grew late, they brake off for the present. At the breaking up
of the Conference, a Priest, who was said to be D. Smiths Chamberfellow, was
heard to say Profecto haec fuit vera digladiatio, non Sorbonica velificatio:
that is, This was a true fight, not a Sorbonicall flourishing.

In this Relation we have omitted of set purpose all D. Smiths by-discourses,
together with his proofs of the maine, because they were against the third
Law. And M. Featly at this time took no notice of them in particular, but
promised in general to answer them all, when it came to his course to answer:
Now he was bound by the Law only to oppose, and D. Smith only to give his
answers, which are here truly set down, most of them out of his own writing,
as we depose, who were present at this Disputation.

I must willingly subscribe to the truth of that, which D. Smith did so
voluntarily present to our eyes and ears; And for the rest, which is M.
Featlies, none of the adverse party can take any just exception against it.

I. P.
I profess, that all things in this Narration delivered and quoted out of D.
Smiths Autographie, are true out of my examination. And of the rest I remember
the most, or all: neither can I suspect any part. B. I.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 5. marg. read, quidem for q^id. p. 6. l. 20. r. (...). p. 11. marg. r.
contr^dictionis. p. 13. marg. r. Christus. ibid. l. 22. r. m^re pr^ not. p. 17.
2. r. proposition. p. 27. 19. r. Ians^. p. 43. 13. r. o^ pr^ as. p. 54. 24
marg. r. p^er for pot^. 56. 14. r. immine^t. p. 70. marg. r. sanguine. p. 96.
23* r. this. p. 84. 4. r. fa^antur. p. 84. 28. add, it. p. 101. 22. dele
former. 108. vlt r. con^rteth. p. 112. 8. r. (...). p. 117. 1. r. fidem. p.
126. marg. r. lic^. ib. p^st for potus. 132. marg. r. (...). p. 137. 12. r.
Plain. p. 13^. 8. r. 1561. p. 145. vlt. r. therefore. p. 149. 22. r
Sacraments. p. 202. 22. r. ^imed. p. 206. 2. r. sound. p. 209. 27. 1. f^ft. p.
225. 25. r. m^gled* p. 228. 21. r. ^ight. p. 249. 19. r. sound. p. 255. 11. r.
take what time you will. p. 2^8. marg. r. Bernard^. p. 263. 13. r. your. p.
129. 10. r. but for and* p 274. 23. r. (...). ib. 30. r. answers. p. 278. marg.
r. Ecclesi^ ^m. p. 279. vlt* dele, Isa. p. 288. (...). r. Transubstantiation.
291. 2. r. bring. p. 294. marg. r. ^x figurat^. p 29^. 23. (...). then for
this. p. 299. 14. r. ampli^ion. p. 301. marg. r. and for (...).


