The young man's gleanings.

GATHERED OVT OF DIVERSE MOST ZEalous and Devout Fathers, and now published for
the benefit of every Christian Man, which wishes good success to his soul
at the later day.

Containing these four Subjects.

1 Of the Mortality of Man. 2 The Poor Man's Harbor. 3 The Mirror of
Vainglory. 4 Saint Barnards Sermon on the passion of Christ.
Whereunto is adjoined a most sweet and comfortable hymn, expressing the
everlasting Joy of a Glorified Soul.

By R. B. Gent.

AT LONDON Printed by John Beale, for Benjamin Lightfoote: and are to be sold
at the Corner shop at Graies Inn Lane end in Holborne 1614.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
CHristian Reader (in the absence of the Author) I was moved to write
something in his behalf, to demonstrate the zeal and entire affection he
bears to the Church in general, and to the comfort of thy soul in
particular. But so well were his devout intentions by these his succinct labors
expressed, as I took it needelesse to set a portall before a Building of it
self so meriting, or a proeme before a labor so well deserving. Great it is
not, but it comprehends so much (I dare say) of spiritual consolation for
refreshing the soul dejected, and motive meditations to rouse the secure and
carnal soul, in the sleep of sin belulled, as an ampler Treatise may well
yield to so compendious a volume. Briefly I may speak so much of it, as
Cicero spoke of that sententious work of his entitled de Oratore: Est non
magnus verum aureolus Libellus. Use it to thy comfort, and give thanks to the
Lord, whose hand is not only the beginner, but perfecter of every good work
that he in his due time may bring thee to those ineffable Joys in real
fruition, which whilst thou live here thou only enioyes by contemplation.
Thus recommending these meditations to thy devout consideration, Thy self to
the father of all spiritual comforts, whose mercy ever shadow thee under the
wings of his protection, I rest

Thy souls well-wisher, R. B.
Works that now adays go to print: are put to a double press, Censure and
Errors: for thy censure I hope it will be charitable; for these errors let
them be excusable. This age like a favorable Jury, acquites all errors: only
they are put to their book, and that saues them.

Errata.

Page 19. l. 13. for despirable read despicable. p. 83. l. 14. for employed
read implied. p. 87. l. 18. for pilgrimation read peregrination* and l. 27.
for shllatory read sallatory.

OF THE MORTALITY OF MAN.
WHat art thou (O Man) and from whence had thou thy beginning? What matter
art thou made of, that thou promisest to thy self length of days: or to thy
posterity continuance. I have read the truest computer of Times, and the best
Arithmetician that ever breathed, and he reduces thy days into a short
number: The days of Man are threescore and ten. That reverend Patriarch Jacob,
(though he had lived a long and prosperous time) yet he confesses his days to
be few and evil: the life of Man (says the Prophet) is as the grass that
soon withers: it is as swift as a Dromedarie, continuing not, but passing
from this pilgrimage of earth, aims at the center, to which all flesh is
limited, this earthly mansion from whence we had our Beginning; Homo abhumo
natus. Man is borne of the earth, from whence he had his birth, and shall
conclude the date and period of his days. What is it to enjoy honor upon
earth, or to be graced by the royal aspect of Potentates, their majesty
cannot authorize thy sins, nor exempt thee from the judgment of the
Almighty. It is not the King, but the King of Kings shall judge, who holds
his iron rod in his hand, to be avenged of him that works wickedness before
him. He cannot endure the ways of the unrighteous, but will either look upon
thee, with the eyes of his mercy, or give thee the wages of sin, to live
with reprobates and sinners in the never quenched fire of his wrath, there to
be punished eternally. But remember thy mortality, be not puffed up with a
self conceit of thine own excellence: The Swanne may not be more ashamed of
her black feet, then thou of the ulcers and blemishes of thy soul distained
with all impurities. It was the Philosophers saying: It were better not to be,
then to be miserable, thy being is most miserable, thy state lamentable, and
thy case irreparable: if thou meditate not of thy creator, acknowledge thy
redeemer, and have recourse unto thy merciful protector: who preserves thee
daily with his grace, reuewing in thee his Image, quite defaced and abolished
by reason of thy transgressions. Wherefore as there is noe moment nor article
of time, wherein thou stands not in need of his providence, so ought there to
be no time omitted wherein thou should not ascribe all praise, and gloie to his
excellence. He created thee being nothing, he recreated thee being worse then
nothing, and he preuents thee with his grace, that art like to fall again to
nothing. O consider wherein thou have offended, and how many and sundry times
thou have been pardoned for the self same sin: let thine eyes therefore be
dissolved into an ocean of tears, craving remission with entire contrition. It
is recorded that the tears of the vine will cure the leprosy: tears of
hearty and unfeigned repentance will cure the leprosy of sin, restore thee to
the Throne of grace, and in the end conduct thee to the Kingdom of glory. Thou
art far transplanted from thy native Country: in a desolate and remote place:
far from comfort or hope of rest, till this Tabernacle of sin shall be
dissolved, this roabe of flesh shall be divided from that spiritual stole of
purity, whereby thou may ascend the palaces of eternal glory. There is none
that lives in exile, but would have the censure of Banishment revoked: thou
art in a place of exile an inhabitant with Wolves and Tigers: for better were
it (says Diogenes) to live with Wolves, Tigers, and all savage Beasts of the
Mountains, then with Sycophants, flatterers and such tame beasts in the City.
Thou art environed with many sharp encounters invaded with many turbulent
passions, thought* fear, desire, and the like: all which as so many waspes do
continually infest and annoy thee. Thou art traveling a dangerous way, where
many objects seem to seduce thee from the high-roadeway, to the flourishing
bypath of vanity, being never less secure, then when thou seem most
secure. Thou art sailing betwixt two perilous rocks, two calamitous shelfs,
Scilla and Charybdis, Presumption and Despair. Thou had need of an expert
and vigilant Pilote to direct thee, a faithful friend to comfort thee, and a
prepared mind within thee: thou fishest in a troubled stream, and many things
I could caution thee of, which not foreseen may endanger shipwreck to thy
crasie and surcharged Bark. Oppose not thy self to all extremes, but fix the
Anchor: it would hold against all tempests, and provide a repose in time for
thy poor vessel, least vanquished and oppressed with violence of Billows,
and extremity of adverse waves, she be enforced to split, loosing both thy
self and thy freight: spread not thy sails too broad for the winds (thy
violent affections) are most forced, when thy sails, (thy ambitious thoughts)
are most extended. Ballace it light, least it sink with her Burden: It is
better to loose the freight then the Merchant: and the Philosopher Mymus chused
rather to lose his gold then himself. Enter not thy Bark with any profane
man: if his company do not ruinate thee, it may well deprave thee: and when
Bias came into any ship or vessel with a wicked man, where he was in danger
of shipwreck, he would never suffer the profane man to pray, saying, take
heed least the Gods hear thee, for then we can expect for no mercy. But
above all let the stern (the principal Organs and faculties of the soul) be
ever with all vigilancie attended, wisely gouernened, and industriouslie
employed. Thou art to sail by Sirens (those three daughters of Achelous and
Callyope) a natural euitation of that which is good, a natural inclination to
that which is evil, and a natural deprauation of the will: reject the
pernicious embraces of sin and impiety, stop thine ears to the Sirens
melody, and reduce thy thoughts to that retired harbor of tranquillity, a
sincere and secure conscience: it is a Christians brazen wall, it makes us
secure of things past, it aduertiseth us of things present, and prepares it
self for things to come: No Monument so glorious, no statue so specious: for
what will curious Sepulchers avail us, when infamy perpetuates the memory of
us. Vita mortuorum in Memoria viuentium posita est. And virtue lives after
death; The Ancient Patriarchs returned to the sepulchers of their Ancestors,
but that had been but little, if their virtues had not equalled their
ancestors. Desire thou to have the excellency of this painted world, the
beauty of this earthly Theater charactred and displaied to thee in her
colors? Thou shall see in her many seeming flourishes of happiness, many fair
promises of a continuated eminence: but she fails in her performance: her
fruits are but flowers, and her harvest soon tipe, and soon rotten. Sodoms
apples were fair to the eye, touch them, and they turn to dust. Painted
Sepulchers show much beauty, and seem as if they would outliue time, yet
continuance defaceth them, remaining memorable in nothing, save that they were
once memorable. Stars fixed shine the brightest: fix thy thoughts upon the
morning Sun of righteousness, and like the Sun, thou shall shine more bright
at thy setting, then at thy rising, at thy death then thy birth, let thy mind
be established on that which can suffice it: no terrestrial respect of earths
vanity, but an expectance of heavens eternity, to receive that Crown for
which it was created, and not the wages of sin, for which she was not
ordained. Thou have many difficulties to pass in this wilderness, ere thou
can see the Land of promise; Thou must thirst, hunger, and wander; thirst, but
for the well of life; hunger, but for the staff of spiritual Bread; wander
but at last (with the good Shunamite,) to return from the mountains of
Gilboa, to the vale of Bethlem, the poole of Bethesda: to the vale of Bethlem,
where thou may repose, to the poole of Bethesda, where thou may take repast:
yet must thou not murmr in this long peregrination: Thou art but as thy
forefathers have been: if afflicted, so was thy master Christ: if tempted, so
was he: if persecuted, behold the whole College of those blessed Apostles,
making their whole life a persecution, a very martyrdom to propagate their
masters glory, and to perform that work for which they were sent. Thou must
not make profit of thy profession with Magus, nor make sale of thy conscience
with Demas, nor sell thy Savior with Judas. Thou art invested with Christ's
own Garment, endewed with more especial privileges, and prerogatives then
many of thy brethren, boast not of that thou have received, he that did give
them thee, can take them from thee, and make thee naked, that was once
garnished with such singular ornaments, bestowing them on others that shall
better use them, since whilst thou had them, thou did abuse them. Envy not
another gifts, but rather thank God for his ample benefits extended upon thy
brother: that pernicious vice of envy is the corrupter of many singular
virtues: and to describe her more perspicuously, hear the ancient fathers how
they decypher this universal contagion of the world. Envy consumes all
virtues: by envy was Christ crucified, the history whereof is mentioned unto
thee, envy and malice above all other vices inebriate the soul. Where there
is envy, there can be no Brotherly love. Who enuieth loves not: the law of
the Devil is in him, because the devil by envy fell. Therefore envy is
known by this, that she is never in charity. For by envy was Christ
crucified, and consequently who enuieth his brother, crucifieth Christ. Aug:
Envy always follows virtue: he is a valiant man that can conquer envy with
humility. Hier: He is sure an envious man that takes pleasure in seeing
another man's damage or punishment: Ambros: the error of envy does not only
invade the Synagogues of the impious, but the cells of the religious. Eusebius.
Envy manifests that we have not the love of God in us. Effrem.

It is a rare thing to want envy in prosperity. Josephus: where the good man
profits, there the envious repineth: as the Poet says: Inuidus alterius,
etc. Isidorus.

Here thou feast envy dismasked: who ever with Ctesyphon kicketh against the
Moles heels: there is no virtue can pass uncensured: no exquisite work
unreproved: necesse est quod Momum aut Mimum habet, qui vertutem amat. But run
thou a religious course inclining neither on the right hand, nor on the left:
on the right hand thou may be too precise in being too regular, on the left
hand, insuccessiue, being too sinister. The Goulden mediocritie, is as good a
way, and as secure as the Philosophers Galaxia, their milk way: here is true
consolation in spirit: for the righteous be glad and rejoice in it: walk in
this way, and the suggestions of Satan shall not seduce thee, for thou art in
the way that leads unto life, not entangled in the Brakes of this world, but
expecting the glorious possession of those Joys above. Continue in perfect
charity with thy brother, it is (...), the fulfilling and perfecting of the
Law: it reconciles us unto God, appeaseth his indignation conceived against us,
and assures us of the performance of his promise, made unto us in his son. By
the love of God is the love to our Neighbor engendered, by the love to our
Neighbor, is the love of God nourished: here is a mutual and reciprocal
love: a threefold Cord is hardly broken. But thou obiectest thou have felt the
heavy hand of God, thou have tasted of the bitter cup, and drunk deep of the
Cup of affliction: what then? where is thy conclusion? do thou reason hence
that thou art deprived of the favor of God, and excluded from his sheepfold?
God forbid: these afflictions do rather approve and testify his exceeding
love toward thee: whom I love says the Lord, those I chastise and correct: he
is not a father, where thou art not a son, nor is he a son that is
incorrigible: he must bow his neck unto the yoke, and press his shoulders
with the Burden, he must not argue that the burden is heavy, or the yoke not
easy: but with all patience sustain all, and support all, that God may be
glorified in all. This resolution will arm thee with a serious preparation
against all difficulties, calling to mind, how the Apostler (after the death
and passion of Christ Jesus) were as a puissant army constant amidst all
tribulations. Their afflictions, their stripes, their imprisonments, were
experiments to try them not affrightments to dismay them: By them they were
proved and in their resolution approved, because they fought valiantly the
Lords Battle, to increase the number of the faithful, to break the bread of
life, to such as were appointed unto salvation: weakening the power of
Antichrist, and discomfiting sin. Fight thus (dear Christian) and thou shall
reign where those victorious champions reign already: the vale of this earthly
habitation shall be dissolved, and thy spiritual Temple renewed, to supplant
the whole body of sin, and to receive a glorious diadem of eternity, by
subiecting thy self to the material sword, to be nourished with that
spiritual food of Gods word unto eternal life: for whosoever will reign
with Christ, must likewise suffer with Christ. He was crucified that we might
be saved, and shall we be exempted from that which he suffered? No, rather let
us put on the complete Armor of righteousness, with slings in our hands to
wound that malicious Goliath, that terrible Philistine in the head: that is,
utterly to discomfit him: that we who have received so glorious an inuestiture,
the special indowments of his Grace, may by the operation of his spirit
effectually working in us arrive at the Kingdom of glory. That what is here
inchoate, may be there consummate; of Christ we are called Christians: if we be
Christians of Christ, we should follow Christ: that ascending with him to the
Cross on Mount Caluarie, we may likewise ascend with him to his Throne exalted
with majesty.

THE POOR MAN'S HARBOVR.
IN thy affliction have I heard thee and in the bitterness of thy sorrows
have I attended thee: for thou descendedst down as it were into the grave, and
buried thy honor in the dust. But who ever has cried upon me, that I have not
heard, or craved my help, whom I have not aided? Art thou poor, and sick,
and hungry, and naked, crying for alms yet art not rewarded, for one crum yet
art not satisfied? why, what of this? if thou be poor, so was Lazarus: if
sick, hungry, and naked, so was he: if despised, so was he: character what
miseries soever thy miserable state is afflicted with, and thou shall see them
personated (in more ample sort) in disconsolate Lazarus; yet was not he
comforted? were not his rags turned to robes, his hunger to festival honor,
his pensive affliction, to extensiue consolation? he was abandoned of Dives,
contemned of Dives, nay reproved and shamefully injured by the servants of
Dives; yet behold the exchange: Lazarus is exalted, Dives tormented, Lazarus
comforted, Dives afflicted: Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, in joy for ever, Dives
in the fire of hell, to be delivered never* O what subject of joy and comfort,
what argument of divine consolation is this unto a poor distressed soul, that
travels upon the pilgrimage of earth, hungry, naked, and despised? But there is
a greater occasion then this for him to pull up his courage, to solace his
depressed mind; and that is the very promise of God himself past (and that by
a constitution irreuocable) to the poor and afflicted spirit. I look to him
says the Lord by the mouth of his Prophet Esaias, that is poor, that is broken
in spirit, and that trembles at my words. Here the Lord professes himself a
patron to the poor, their stength and mighty defense in the time of their
necessity. He is none of our time-obseruing friends, our state affectors, that
rather patronise our errors (to insinuate themselves in to the vnstedy
affections not of us, but of our patrimonies) so long professing amity till
our estate (the adulterate oil of their pretended friendship) be
extinguished. These are good Mammonists augmenting their means by indirect
courses: running ever on the Byas of Adulation, till that clawing humor work
to their unhappy friend remediless desolation. But God is faithful: and whom
he once loves, he loves unto the end. How happy art thou (poor pilgrim) of
such a lover, that erects thy drowping head, directs thy erring feet, supports
thy declining faith, and places thee in the retired harbor of all spiritual
comforts, ministering these and the like solaces unto thee. Wipe thy eyes (poor
harborlesse soul) complain not of times iniquity, descant not of thy penury,
relate no more of thy misery: I have heard thy voice, and am come to comfort
thee, I have put all thy tears up in a Bottell, and they shall remain as
testimonies against those obdurate and impenitent, those remorcelesse and
uncharitable Nabals that have stopped their ears to thy cries, their eyes to
thy tears: solace thy self in me, for I will receive thee into my protection:
I will shelter thee under the wings of my mercy, so as no violence shall
oppress thee, no ensewing misery afflict thee, no poverty dismay thee: for
why? I am rich in mercy, and will enrich thee with the comforts of my divine
spirit. Who ever called upon me, and I heard him not, or powered his prayers
unto me and I relieved him not? Thy poverty is no bar in my Court to hinder
thy expedition: Thou beggest and surest informa pauperis, yet thou shall find
a Solicitour that will not neglect thy affairs: He it is that created thee (as
well as the mighty ones of this world) and he will not suffer his Image, his
similitude, his Impression to be rased, defaced or contemned. It is I that have
seen thee exposed to all the miseries of earth, and I considered thy patience:
for which have I accepted thy prayers which (like sweet and redolent persumes)
ascended up unto my nostrels. Be comforted, be comforted: the extent of thy
afflictions is almost expired, the date of thy sorrows extended, and the
period of thy miseries consummate. I will cloth thee with the Garments of
eternity: Thou shall dwell in the mansions of my glorious City, and for thy
poverty, receive the rich ornaments of a celestial inheritour: and herein
shall thy joys be redoubled, for thou that lived desperable in the eyes of
men, shall Triumph amongst the quires of Angels, being incorporated in the
glorious society of all those heaunly Citizens which reign with me eternally.
There shall thou have for these poor rags, Garments that shall never be worn.
There thou shall feed on spiritual Manna, and Mella, there shall be no
hunger, but eternal feasting, no sorrow, but perpetual rejoicing, no discord,
but minds generally uniting: where fullness shall not breed lothing, nor
others glory in thee repining, nor lights perpetuity obscuring, nor times
eternity ending: for there will I be all unto all, to show my glory more
evidently toward all. Thus will that father of all comfort, comfort thee with
his divine consolations: thus will he in the very midst of thy anguishes,
miraculously, infuse and instill into thy distressed soul, these and the like
spiritual refections: he will anoint thee with the oil of Gilead, and put
upon thee a new raiment, and on thy finger will he put a ring of pure Gold,
with the seal of Arms on it: with the seal of thy election, predestined to
eternal life. O meditate of this, and the like divine comforts, and the
perturbations, billows and afflictions of this life, will be lightly esteemed
in comparison of that exceeding measure, and quantity above all measure, of
spiritual Treasures, reserved for thee in heaven. Alas thou live here
(that I may use the Greek phrase) (...), In the very penetrals and cauernes of
the earth: far removed from thy center, far transplanted from thy native
Country. O then be not so enthralled with this mass of corruption, so
captiuated by sin and Satan, so deluded by the vain flourishes of earths
vanities: eleuate thy spirit, erect thy mind, live not so long in this
dangerous Clymate, as thou forget to return into thy Country. Thou have an
excellent motive (poor hunger-starued soul) not to desire thy abode or
residence upon earth: since thou feel within thee naught but biting hunger,
and without thee, naught but hard hearts, that consume their days in
chambering and wantonness, in security and carelessness, respectlesse (heaven
knows) of their chiefest good, the advancement of Gods glory, the fear of
his name, reverence to his ministers, or any work which might tend to the
edification of faith or manners. Hinc illae lachrimae; hence comes our cause of
lamenting, hence the true and efficient motives of sorrowing: But thou (poor man) that art sequestered as it were out of the world, not as much as observed
with the eye of popular respect, seeing thy own contempt of one side, and the
impiety of this enormious Age of the other side, have reason with Paul not
only to desire thy dissolution, but even in the meditation of it to conceive
especial comfort, and delight. For the world what is it, But a cage of
unclean Birds, a mass of indigestion, an indisposed frame of pollution, a
sink of corruption? True was it, that that Dominican Friar observed: There was
in the world at the first (says he) conscientia, but that was altered
presently and turned to scientia, and that too (by the foolish stupidity of
these times) is changed into mere Entia, a poor Being indeed, when we know not
the essential cause of our Being: but led away with either singular conceit
of our ignorant knowledge or besotted with the present objects presented and
represented to us: which so auert and distract the intellectual eye of our
understanding, or so enthralled and engaged as it were to private profit, like
the worldly statist, or with the itch of honor like the Ambitious Artist, or
with the dispersing of our victories in foreign provinces with the insulting
Martialist: that we forget (for a little worldly gain) the Gain and treasure
of Eternity: for a puff or blast of vain glory or ambitious honor, the
Honor of God, and sacred ministers: for a soon perishing fame, the fame and
reputation which we ought to purchase of our heavenly father. Dear pilgrim,
thou see these transitory and temporary delights, how soon they fade: how
short their continuance is: for thou can see further then one in higher place
can see. We make the Argument infallible: for demonstration proves it: a man
may see more piercingly into the beauty of the firmament within some hollow
place or pit, then he can upon the even superficies of the earth. Thou art
placed in this pit; retired from the world: inferior in order, bereft of the
cloud of honor, nay exempted of all inconveniences which might any way seem
to darken the eye of thy understanding, here thou see the piecolored flagges
of vanity displaied, the poor Ostrich robbed of her tail, to fan a Ladies
face. The silly worms disbowelled to cloth a case of corruption with a
silken cover. Nec atriora sane vidimus peccata, quam ea quae sunt sericea;
Silken sins go with a privilege: they have a good cover for deformiti, this I
know (simple soul) thou see and admirest. Then thou goes further, and thou
sees seeming sanctity put on the roabes of holiness: furnished with a little
lip labor to mumble a few key cold deuotion-lesse prayers, making his lips
go as if possessed with some spirit, as indeed he is, for no spirit more
execrable then hypocrisy: there thou see halting instice; a Magistrate that
goes on stilts to save his footecloth, he ouerperes a whole multitude, but
taking so great pains upon his artificial legs, he must be anointed;
there is no remedy, he will grow stiff else: it is a golden potion must restore
him his sense of hearing which was welnigh perished: apply but this receipt to
his pulse; and the virtue is admirable, its better then Eare-salue it will
restore him the faculty of hearing instantly. There thou see a great patron
of injuries, that has erected two Sanctuaries, dedicated to two contrary
Soueraignesses: Virtue, and Vice; Virtue for her name, Vice for her Nature:
many such professors of virtue (poor beggar) I know thou find, that can
make external show or appearance of virtue, but has vice to be virtues
rival: virtues building is easy to be discerned: there is no superficial cost
to beautify her Temple: she has a good inside and a bare outside: vice her
opponent boasts (and truly so she may) of curious edifices, rare devises,
monuments of more honor and celebritie then poor virtue and all her posterity
ever attained to, in the one the worlds map is rightly charactred: in the
other, there is representation of a more glorious palace. But I will proceed
further: they have been characterised too often to be now unknown. Now thou
have seen all this (poor pilgrim) ragged virtue, and roabed vice: thou can
not be deceived in their Colors. The purple whore is easy to be discerned, me
thinks thou should glory much in thy rags: seeing virtue no better clad:
one better habilimented with rents then rints. God has done well for thee to
give thee so fair a pattern to imitate: nor is it disparagement to be her
attendant with thine own Garment: without adorning thy outside to grace so
fair an inside, for virtue is depictured the best when he is garnished the
least. Thus, thus consider what thou art, and whom thou resemblest: not one
undeserving because of thy wants: for the exquisitest deseruings are for most
part the vnworthiliest recompensed: But the very Idea of imparaleld goodness,
Virtue her self, she is naked, so art thou: harborlesse so art thou: in her
self deserving, yet desertlesly esteemed, and so art thou: your fortunes seem
equal: do but match her in the minds proprieties, and thy reward shall be by
so much more eminent, in regard thy estate was here depressed. I will yet draw
nerer thee, thou art here placed in a desolate forest, far removed from any
either internal or external comfort, save that continual feast (a sincere
conscience:) Thou art without friends, and no desert more solitary no forest
greater, then to be deprived of friends: and in this uncouth promontorie there
be many savage Beasts which seek to pray upon thee, or at least to triumph
over thee: and would thou not willingly retire thy self, and purchase thy
own safety by a sequestered life? or if not, Semel mori melius est, quam semper
moriendo viuere. Alas (dear christian pilgrim) thou art in this state: this
desert is the world replenished with savage beasts, with which thou art
environed: some lion like contemn thee for thy poverty, others deride thee
without remorse had to thy dejected fortunes: But all triumph over thee (being
made as Heluius pertinax was entitled) Pila fortunae, fortunes ball: tossed
into every hazard, subjected to every calumny, being indeed made the very
stale of disgrace: yet in all these occurrents (if thou make right use of thy
poverty) thou remains free from any perturbation whatsoever: their pride
makes the more humble: their ambition works in thee mortification: their
contemning thee breeds in thee a contempt of the world, relinquishing the
garish objects of vanity to reap the harvest of heavens glory. I will now
descend and that briefly to the discourse of such as conceived more entire joy
and rest in their souls, by abandoning the world, giving their goods unto the
poor, nay such as voluntarily became poor, that they might follow Christ,
then if they had possessed the inestimable treasures of the whole Earth. The
reason that induced me hereunto was: forasmuch as I know examples be of more
force then precepts, the exact and as it were lively description thereof
imprints in our minds an ardent desire of imitating such whose well disposed
lives made their ends glorious Read but the sacred ordinances and laws of
God; Thou shall see the Apostles contemning all private respects whatsoever to
taste the sweetness of the inestable love of Christ: here thou shall see one
called from the receipt of custom, a place of profit, to follow him, who had
as little appearance of external happiness as might be: straight thou shall
behold another (converted from an Arch-persecutour of Christians) one that
flourished in the height of honor and was chosen for a patron of infidelity,
despise honor and her superficial flourishes, and consecrate himself to the
supportance of truth: here another (even now a Rabbi a great Doctor of the Law,
and one in especial esteem with the multitude for Christ's sake) become
contemptible to taste the sweetness of Christ's love in it self inexplicable.
Zacheus for this love willingly became poor, duiding his goods to the poor,
and making restitution for what he had injuriously taken: for this love, and
for this incomparable sweetness did the stones wherewith blessed Stephen was
stoned seem sweet unto him: for this did Saint Laurence taste the Torments of
the Gridiron with especial sweetness: this moved Andrew to go pleasantly
unto the Cross, that he might hasten unto the divine sweetness: for this
Bartholomew willingly sustained death, John drunk poison, and Peter (as one
made drunk, with the apprehension of that supernal sweetness,) cried out, let
us build here three Tabernacles, let us soiorne here, let us remain here,
since we need nothing that is necessary for our comfort so long as we abide
here. O then dear christian if the surueigh of these glorious professors
prevail any thing with thee to distaste the bitter and unsavory affections of
this transitory life: make use of thine own poverty: thou have no reason to
stand all the day idle, but to have recourse to the spiritual vineyard. It is
hard for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, for why? he must take
leave of his friends and favorites, of his revenues and possessions, there be
many things oppose themselves to his intended resolution. But thou that
carriest all thy prefserments about with thee, having nothing at home but bare
walls, appendices of ruin, thou that can not yield nature her necessaries,
being made a very spectacle to triumphing fortune: one as exposed to the
inconveniences of times occurrents, so deprived of those external Blessings,
by which we only seem to be and have our wellbeing: art rid of these maine
impediments which use to hinder the worldling from the prosecution of such
affairs as might yield more perfect and accomplished content, then all the
semblances of fortune, and prosperous success. O how hard has the abandoning
of the world seemed to such as have planted their affections already upon this
terrestrial foundation. They could willingly serve Christ, if they might
reserve (likewise) some retired hours of service and devotion to Mammon: but
wholly to give up their interest in earth and earthly possessions, never more
to call themselves masters of their ample and commodious inheritances: O it is
an hard lesson, such a bitter potion had need of some sweet pill to season
it. Thou now see the high roade-way that leads thee to a port of secure
rest: hold on (dear pilgrim) and faint not in thy Journey: thou art now
toward a rich inheritance, and shall possess those true essential and real
joys which with such feruencie thou have desired. But yet ere I leave thee in
this Harbor, let me expostulate the cause with thee, and ask thee, why thou
art dejected? why so sorrowful? thou sustainest disgrace and art called
impudent Beggar; Beggar? alas what is that? who is not? do we not (even the
best of us) beg from day to day for our diurnall sustenance? included in that
particle: Give us this day our daily bread: but thou art impudent; with far
more impudence are we branded, that are ever begging, yet never satisfied: nay
more, presuming to have what we need without asking: and for thee (poor
soul) necessity pleades thy cause excusable. Egenti viro pudor nequaquam est
vitilis. A shamefast Beggar never gained by his profession. Grieve not thy
self then at the strange language of the hard hearted miser: his own words
shall condemn him when he appears (as of necessity he must) before the
Tribunal of Gods judgment: its not then the awful regard of his authority
(for he is then degraded) nor the abundance of his wealth (for of that he is
deprived) nor the general respect had to his person (for then he is
disualewed) that shall answer for his neglect: Thy hunger shall witness
against him, thy afflictions shall condemn him, and those many Injuries (which
with such patience thou in this life sustained) shall be recorded in those
monumentall leaves of eternity, and proclaim him Guilty: for doubt it not
(poor wretch) though there be none now to comfort thee, but such as laugh at
thy miseries, when thou shall be let out of this poor prison of flesh, and
transported to thy native country, there will be an Advocate that will plead
thy cause freely, and do thee right speedily. The evil Judge in the Gospel
was rather moved by the widows importunity, then her causes equity to do her
right. But this Judge will discuss thy cause, neither drawn by importunacie,
nor awed by authority, nor subjected to partiality: he it is that is Judge of
heaven and earth, extending the Heavens lke a Curtain, and in mercy
expressing his affections to the Children of Men. Before this Judge shall thou
appear, and he that oppressed thee: he to taste the rigor and severity of
justice, thou to remain in the comfortable embrace of his mercy: he to reap
the fruits of his own works, to condemnation, thou to conceive the sweet and
amiable taste of eternal consolation. O what difference then betwixt thy
misery, and his earthly happiness? where is then that great attendance? those
many superficial ceremonies of obsequiousness? vanished, vanished: his
afflictions more violent, in as much his comforts in this life were more
eminent. O if the Great ones of this world would consider this: how little
would they esteem the insubstantiall flourishes of this world? how attentively
would they observe the dimensions of their life, least the labyrinth of sin
should ensnare them, the affections of earths vanity surprise them: or the gay
colors of mundane allurements captiuate them. But sin is now mounted, her
throne is erected, and who dare censure so general a profession? as rare is it
to find vice without a champion, as to find hospitality in an ancient house,
sanctity in a Monastery, religion in a house of prostitution. A man may see
feasts solemnised, but the halt, lame* and blind, seldom or never invited;
resembling those sensual meetings of Penelopes wooers, which Emneus in Homer
so exactly describes, opifices Vates, Medicus seu etiam poeta qui cantando
oblectet, hi sane vocati sunt in orb: Egentem vero et Medicum qui sibimet est
in commodo nullus vocat. None calls the beggar: his rags are not fit for
festival solemnities: alas poor man, then must he feed (like Democritus)
upon the smell of dainties, full services are not for a weak stomach, and yet
me thinks (poor Soul) thou deseruest better entertainment. Thy Image should
not be so lightened. Thy natural Garment is of as pure stuff, and as curious
as the perfumedst Gallant of them all: and should the cover of our shame so
much transport our affections, that without respect unto the image of our
Savior, we should disualue the instrument, and so ouerprise the cover* O no,
let us not so obscure our judgments: let us rather have recourse to our
beginning, and then conceive the especiallest motives wherein we have cause to
glory. Sure Nature seems as if in the beginning she hated all other
ornaments then such as were native: being at the first a raiment to her self,
and sufficient in her self against the inclemencie of heat, the violence of
cold, and all distemperatures whatsoever: But when man lost himself, he
desired to shroude himself against the violent assaults of a troubled
conscience. Hence then we glory in our shame: for by these external habits
are we put in mind of those primitive graces of which we are deprived. In
this then (silly Beggar) may thou likewise be comforted: Thou see thine own
nakedness, and acknowledgest thy sin: But the fine creatures of this world
imitate the Pagan Idolators, they hang vales over their deformities; making
their worst part the most precious. Pore vessel of corruption what needs all
this bravery? what makes thee set out thy enemy so gorgeously? she seeks thy
ruin, lays continual battery at the fortress at the fortress of thy soul,
enuirons thee with hostile and fatal affections, and yet thou pamperest her up
still, strengthening thy own forces against thee. O madness! O exceeding
frenzy, do thou not (or is it wilful blindness) perceive with what
violence this morsel of flesh which thou bringst up and nourishest so
carefully, suggesteth into thy mind poison? making the labor of an incurable
contagion, even the lethargy of thy soul; and will thou cherish yet this
Snake in thine own Bosom? will thou raise so glorious an Image for so corrupt
a Trunk? Surcease, surcease: Thou have played too long with this inchantresse:
it is now high time to purchase thy liberty. After Calypso had so long time
detained Ulysses in miserable servitude, at last sought means for his
delivery. These bosom enemies are most dangerous, they know our constitution,
and can transform themselves unto the distinct habit of every affection, to
shadow their designs more covertly; they assume that form which best concords
with our Nature. This thou see (poor man) and in this art thou eased: for
this enemy of thine, thy flesh, receives more hard entertainment at thy
hands. Thou keepst her from rebelling, and strengthens thy spirit by her
weakening. In this then have thou advantage of the flesh-pampering Epicure, and
therein shows pregnant testimony of thy expert judgment; for who would
prefer the rind before the pith, the Bark before the medull, or core before
the sap? But these do so, disesteeming the internal ornaments of the mind,
the best graces that a Christian soul can appropriate to her self, exalt the
outward (which God wot) like a painted Sepulcher, or Sodoms apples be no sooner
touched then to ashes converted* Beauty, a flourishing vanity that soon
fades: external pomp, honor and magnificence less then bare Beings, for
soon they decline and have no being. Time-obseruing worse then either, making
of times an oilie Tongue the ruin of the owner. These are the scopes are aimed
at: and yet what greater vanity, than the possession of such extrinsecall
shadows? I have oftimes seen it, and the frequencie of it has welnigh made
it a position, those which suddenly stepped to honor, by their unexpected
risings, made their fall shortly to be expected: Nor did their memory die with
their fall: the merit of their honor was called in question after their death,
howsoever ill in them that called it in question, taking the Cynicks precept for
an especial caveat in all my Actions: in Sepulchra Mortuorum leuius calcare.
But of this digression too much: I have retired my self too long from thee
(poor brother) yet I perceive my former motives of consolation have prevailed
a little with thee, which I will succinctlie conclude with this final comfort,
that this might minister no less solace in the end the^ the precedent comforts
in the beginning.

I have prepared this harbor for thee (poor pilgrim,) and would have thee as
one careful of thy weal, to retire thy self here, against the turbulent
storms of all afflictions: that though the pomp of this world seem to
persuade thee to a kind of despair in thine own estate: yet flying to this
harbor, the holes of the rock (Christ Jesus) thou may find eternal
comfort: intuere rupem et erige ratem. This rock shall defend thee from all
adverse oppositions either of world the flesh or the Devil: having thy
habitation so firmly planted upon those future ioies, that the miseries of
this world may seem small in comparison, in regard of that exceeding measure
of consolations prepared for thee in that Sanctuary of Eternity: where no
disturbance can surprise thee, no poverty afflict thee, no care depresse thee:
Tranquillam sedem tenes et in ea sola glorieris. Hence may thou conceive
perfect joy: and ruminate of those internal and etternall comforts which are
promised thee if thou bear up thy self in thy adversities: the bosom of
Abraham is open unto thee, and all patient men that destitute of mundan
succor, retire to the sacred bowels of Christ's compassions: no affliction so
great which Time will not allay: no discomfort so exceeding which the exceeding
comforts of Christ's passions cannot mitigate. Time is a perfecter of all
things, says the worldling: but if this time be not employed in the exercise
of Christ's passions, the distaste of times continuance affoords no less
bitterness, then the increment of afflictions. The tempests are well calmed:
thou may sail without an adverse encounter of turbulent affections. Thy
Pilote is skillful, for the winds and seas obey him: he is merciful, for he
never forsook the poor mariner nor distressed seafaring man, till he be
arrived at his port and expected Harbor.

THE MIRROR OF VAIN GLORY.
WHerein art thou proud O Man? or whereto do thou exalt thy self? art thou
composed of more then humane substance, that thou should glory in thy
feature? Thou admirest thine own wisdom, and reposest more confidence in thy
smooth wit and acute conceit, then Mammons statist. Why (fool) art thou wise
in thine own Imagination, and yet directest not thy ways to the square of
wisdom? Thou art wise because thou can deceive: O spiritual folly! how
unhappy was Achitophel in this wisdom? how improuident and imprudent was
Haman to erect a Scaffold for himself? Thou desire some attendants (not so
much to serve thee, as to look upon thee) for thou esteems not so much a
serviceable fashion as thine own admiration. How foolish art thou to think
the world should term thee wise that art so phranticke? purge, purge, thou
have a malady within thee will consume thee: Thou breakest the Lepers Law:
they were enioined to cry I am unclean, I am unclean. But thou that laborest
of a more loathsome leprosy, will not confess thy shame: not one fig leaf
to cover thy nakedness. Sin now goes with a protection, who dare repre^d her?
Nemo hercule, Nemo. None, none. Sins grow habillements of Nature in which we
most glory: that which shames us most, in that we shine most, boasting of our
vices, as if motives of respect. All sins pass with impunitie: for who will
throw the first stone? what place from the highest to the lowest exempted?
Sin flies for Sanctuary into Sancturaies: what Time dispenst with, wherein
the Creature can say, I have desisted from sin, and done that for which I was
created? in what place does not vanity represent her self? Not only in the
fair Structures (wherein we glory) to leave so beautiful mansions, monuments
of our care and providence to our posterity; but even in our Beds of earth,
our Graves, and Sepulchers. Shebna was careful of this, and yet his intentions
were frustrate: for he built his sepulcher in one country, and was buried in
another. Alas, why glory we so much in the cover of corruption? Tombs are
not made so much for the dead as for the living: and the life of the dead
consists in the memory of the living. All that was writ over that great Pompey
was this: Hic situs est magnus. Alas poor Greatness, when an ambicious and
incircumscribed spirit can be confined within so strait a circumference! It
was Innocontius question to describe humane frailty.

Dic mihi vas cinerum, quid prodest flos facierum.

Thou have been present I know it, sometime at the burial of thy friend, or
neighbor, where thou saw the character or embleame, of all the sonns of
Adam: and yet thou art returned from his grave, this good commemoration of thy
mortallity, (as from the Centaures banquet) more obdurate in heart, remorceles
of sin, senceles of shame, then before thou saw thy dead friend interred, O
conceive remorce and live: let not the publicanes and sinners condemn thee,
let not pagans outstripp thee. Thou live in the light of the Gospel: many
preachers are sent thee, (take the opportunate time,) now is the harvest, labor
to bring thy sheaues with thee. Qui arat, arat vt metet, qui pugnat, pugnat vt
vineat. So sow, that that thou may reap plenteously; so fight that thou may
be crowned after victory achieved. Cast but thine eye (dear Christian) upon
all the ways and bypaths, which seem to lead us to mundane felicity: thou
shall find nothing but intricate ways, unfrequented labyrinths, which menace
ruin to the passenger. Aditus prospicitur, reditum non patitur; easy is it
for thee to enter, but to come forth difficult. The world is like Polyphemus
cave: entering once into the pleasures of earths vanity, thou art so enchained,
so ensnared to the delights and inordinate affections, which like merry
Sirens, do so solicit thee, as thou can hardly exempt thy self from their
serpentine embraces. Holy Athanasius saw in his sleep (for so the vision
appeared) the whole world encompassed about with snares and nets: its true;
what profession but exceedingly tempted, if not seduced? avarice, as sure an
attendant upon age, as sensuality upon youth. Church usury, Simoniacall
patrons, making sale of the precious things of Gods temple, and who remains
there to whipp them out? Usury (as in it self a legal sin, because
suffered), grows tyrannical: she cries not with the false mother, neither
thine nor mine, but divide it: but she erects a Monopoly for her self, and
will engrosse a grocerie of souls, to enrich the palace of her father Mammon*
O poor decrepit soul, thou that art stepping into the womb of thy mother,
and carriest deaths head about thee, consider thy creation, acknowledge thy
composition, weak by creation but weaker by times revolution, Seusim sine
sensu seuescimus. O gather spiritual riches, provide thee a skripp that shall
never be worn, but continue ever. The rich man in the Gospel gathered much,
possessed much, enlarged his Granars, and promised to himself security with a
retired adue from the world, now soul take thy ease; but his Epiphonema was
answered with a Threnodia; Thou fool this night shall thy soul be taken
away. Alas so soon? this was the first night (it seems) of his rest, and must
it be his last too? yes: Esaias answers him, There is no rest to the ungodly:
he is ever in discontent, seeking to quench his hydropticke thirst with
getting, but is never satisfied. They which should be Gods Amners to
distribute to the necessity of the Saints, are oppressors, being as sponges
which suck up the laborious gains of the poor. Let there not be a beggar in
Israel (says God to Moses) but these regraters, which exhaust and consume the
means of the poor, make many beggars in Israel. But the Lord shall come in
thunder, and root them from the face of the earth, he shall raze down their
buildings* and make their dwelling with Ostriches. For the Lords delight is in
the poor that humbles himself before him: his horn shall be exalted with
honor: but for the mighty oppressors that grind the face of the poor, the
Lord will chastise them in his fury, and be avenged of them in his mighty
displeasure. O if the rich man knew (being Gods dispensour) how soon the sithe
of humane frailety will cut him short, he would not promise to himself length
of days, but with all integrity of heart, feruencie of spirit, and humility of
mind fall down before the Throne of Gods merry: Sicut Apes flores quaesitant,
ita Sancti misericordiam Dei. The Saints of God and such as are consecrate to
him, will seek the mercy of God, and with tears of entire compassion turn
to the Lord, that it would please him to turn from their sins. They will not
protract the time, nor take day with their sins, but with hearty contrition,
speedy conversion and firm resolution not to commit the like sins again,
they purchase their atonement with God, leaving off sin before sin leave
them. For what is it when the Organs and natural faculties of the body
through their debilitie have lost all power of sinning, then to surcease from
sin? No, reserve the heat of the day for the Lords vineyard, let not him
have the afterlings. The first fruits were in ancient time given to the
Priests, and will thou detain thy first fruits from him which is the head
Priest? O dedicate thy labors unto him, and be converted even in the maturitie
of thy time. Thou art now able to cope with Antichrist: to morrow it may be
thou shall be less able. A valiant captain (in the siege of any City or
fortress) will apprehend every advantage and occasion of attaining his
purpose: he will not intermit any time, but with all alacrity prosecute the
charge he has in hand, that his deportments may purchase him glory: Sub
vexillo meret, and moeret si non mereat. Thou art in the same case: in a
strait siege, beleagred with impetuous and violent enemies. The world
besieges thee on every side, and by those 5. Gates or breaches, viz. thy five
corporal senses, eye, ear, taste, smell, and touch, he wounds thy soul as
with most venomous Arrows: so as death enters in at the very window of thy
soul. Ismaell plays with thee, and deludes thee: the flesh whom thou
pamperedst rebels against thee: thy very households sins begin to wrestle
with thee: and Grauis lucta Grave est periculum contra domesticum hostem
pugnare, says Barnard. Thou must wrestle with sin conspiring within thee,
with the flesh which enuirons thee, and the voluptuous affections of worlds
vanity that seek to surprise thee. Show thy self resolute in this encounter,
fight a good fight, and with the complete Armor of a spiritual warrior raze
down the tyrannical kingdom of Antichrist. Thou must pass many difficulties
ere thou can obtain the victory. Those Cyanea saxa: those rocks of peril
temptations of every kind: but perseverance will make thy victory most
eminent. The young man must needs take leave of his friends, before he can
follow Christ. But thou must abandon friends, estate, possessions, and all
encombrances, that thou may be thought a worthy follower of Christ. Qui
Christum sequi petit, equum est vt omnia relinquat, quo Christum arctius
teneat. Riches were best demonstrated by the Roman word Impedimenta:
hindrances indeed for our heavenly expedition: we should use them in
necessary respects, not to adore them: if the price of gold had not been
known, Baals golden calfe had not been erected. It is a cause of much false
Adoration: and many I am persuaded (yet timorous in persuasion) worship the
idol in their chest, more then their Messiah in his Temple. O profanation of
Times! when an external appearance of tempting vanity, can seduce an
Intellectual soul from her Creator, with the desire of a bare metal
ordained for the use of his creature. We are wise and understanding in chymicke
labors, and are profoundly read in minerals: But that only and principal
good, the select treasure of the mind is as far estranged from our reading,
as Demas heart was from any thing, save what tasted of the world. We can talk
of eccentricke lines, bodies, motions, temperatures, and affections: but which
amongst us seeks to season the ill disposed temper of our mind? O pity and
great pity it is to neglect so divine a substance: let the Philosophers idle
axiom alone: the body should take her temperature from the soul, and not the
soul from the body. Corpus Ancilla est vt pareat, non domina vt imperet.
Confusion of Governors spoil every well governed state: and those kingdoms
be most happy where there be not the most but the best Kings. Thou have a
monarchy (and that's the best kind of Government) within thy self: O dispose
then of thy affections like a Prince: be invested with a roabe worthy an
Emperor, the pure stole of integrity, thy thoughts must be eleuate, not
depressed down to this earthly center. It is reported that the Emperor
Augustus could see as well by night as day; thy eyes should be so; not obscured
or darkened with the night of error, but ever tralucent, that if there were
windows in thy heart, the splendour of thy internal man might show her own
dignity. But especially let me caution thee in this: that thou be open handed,
and bountifully hearted to thy neeedfull brother: it will make thee see more
clearly into the providence of God, and excite thee to an acknowledgement of
his mercies; ever meditating of his bounty in bestowing, and thy immerrited
service in deserving: It will inflame in thee a perfect and exact measure of
charity, to give freely, because thou have received more amply. An affectionate
charity is approved by God and man: making our selves in distributive justice
Christians, and imitating the inimitable pattern of Christ, who sustained the
weak, supported the needy, relieved the hungry, being all to all, that he might
show his glory toward all: his humility may assuage our pride, and caution us
to be humble here, that we may be exalted elsewhere. His penury may tax us
of excess, that live in Epicureal riot, consuming our days in security and
careless profanation of God and his sacred ministers; neither using reverence
to them nor him: for in contemning them, we contemn him (as he the father of
verity has spoken.) O dear christian! we have too long dallied with sin,
too long delaied the time of our conversion: Turn, turn from thy evil ways:
least thou be cut down in his fury: the vials of his wrath have been long in
diffusing, but so much longer the stroke is delaied, so much it returns more
violent. O let us relinquish earths vanity, and plant our affections upon
heavens beauty; why should we love such things as breed lothing: having
bitterness in their taste, and producing no fruits, but the distasteful weeds
of repentance? Who so is bewitched or captiuated with the pie-coloured vanities
of this world, deserves a pie colord coat to describe the fool in his
follies. Learn to be wise in spiritual affairs, that the commerce which thou
have had with the factors of vanity, may be now disualued, having reference to
the maine price of thy redemption working out thy salvation with fear and
trembling. Thou see the race thou must of necessity run, not the race of
lascivious prodigals, whose exorbitance makes their house die in infamy, nor
the race of the Auaricious Miser, that treasures up vengeance for himself and
his posterity, making the issue of his loins the heirs of shame, nor the race
of adulterers that wast their estate in the brothels of licentious delights:
but the christian race, making thy beginning a hopeful proeme of a successiue
end: thy end a happy concluder of so fair beginnings. Run thus and thou
shall obtain, not a temporal reward, but the crown of eternity: that God
(who reclaimed thee from thy sin, may be glorified in thy members,
consecrated to holiness and integrity* Meditate of this, contemplate this,
exercise the faculties of thy soul in these, and the like spiritual
meditations: so shall the deceipts of Satan be diuerted, the gracious
operations of Gods spirit renewed: and the promises of God to thee performed in
supernall Syon.

A SERMON of Saint Barnard upon the passion of the Lord.
LEt us celebrate (dear christians) with divine honors, Jesus of Nazareth, by
the Jews innocently condemned, by the Gentiles crucified. Let us that are
Christians worship with all reverence, embrace with all feruentnesse, and
imitate with all faithfulness (as it is meet, comfortable and glorious) the
infirmities of our Savior: for these sufferings be those instruments, by which
the omnipotent power and inscrutable wisdom of God has wrought wonderfully
and powerfully the restoration of the whole world. For Christ our Lord has so
wrought for us, that he became less then Angels, to make us equal unto
Angels; And who will not humble himself for Christ's sake? Christ our Lord was
crucified for our sins, and has sweetened the bitterness of the Cross, to
such as love his Cross. He died, and destroyed death, that through him we
might live: and who will not love Christ our Lord? who will think much to
suffer for Christ? Christ by the ignonimie of his Cross, passed to the glory
of heavenly excellence, and all power in heaven and in earth is given unto him
(by God his father) for his reverence: All the Angels of God do worship him,
and in the Name of Jesus let every knee bow of things heavenly, earthly, or
whatsoever is under the earth; wherein (O Christian) can thou glory, save in
the Name of our Lord God crucified, and in the name of Christ, which is above
all names, in which whosoever is blessed, shall be blessed upon earth? Glory
in the Name of the Son your redeemer, and ascribe honor to your Savior, who
has done great things for us, and magnify his name with me, saying: we
worship thee O Christ thou king of Israel, and of all Nations, King of Kings,
Lord of the whole earth, God of Sabboath, the most sure strength of the
omnipotent God. We worship thee that art the precious price of our
redemption, the peace offering, who (alone) by the inestimable sweetness of
thy perfumes, have moved thy father whose dwelling is on high, to behold the
things which are on earth, appeasing his indignation conceived against us. We
declare thy mercies O Christ, and we utter the remembrance of thy sweetness
in abundance. We offer unto thee (O Christ) the sacrifice of praise, for the
multitude of thy goodness, showen unto us, of a depraved seed, wicked and
rebellious children. For when we were thy enemies (O Lord) and death had
entered upon all flesh, to which all the seed of Adam became subject, by the
condition of our original sin, thou remembredst thy mercy, and lookedst
down from thy high habitation upon this vale of tears and misery. Thou
saw the affliction of thy people, and being inwardly touched with the
sweetness of charity, thou conferredst the thoughts of peace and redemption
upon us, and when thou was the son of God, very God, coeternall and
consubstantiall with God the father, and God the holy Ghost, inhabiting an
inaccessible light, and supporting all things with the word of thy strength;
thou disdainedst not to bow down thy majesty to this frail prison of our
mortality, whereby thou might both taste, swallow down our misery, and
advance us to thy glory. It had been but little to thy charity, to finish the
work of our salvation, by deputing the consummation thereof to some Cherubin
or Seraphin, or one of thy Angels: but thou vouchsafedst thy self to come unto
us, being commanded by thy father, whose exceeding charity we have tried in
thee. Thou came (I say) not by changing thy place, but by exhibiting thy
presence unto us, by taking upon thee our flesh. Thou came from the royal
throne of supreme glory, into the womb of a Virgin, humble and abject in her
own eyes, sealed with the religious vow of virgins continence, in whose sacred
womb the ineffable power alone of the holy spirit, made thee to be conceived,
and to be borne in the Nature of true humanity, so as the occasion of thy birth
did neither impair in thee the power of thy majesty, nor in thy mother the
pureness of her virginity. O amiable and admirable humility, that being God
of infinite glory, became as a contemptible worm of misery! Thou being God
of all, became a servant unto all. It seemed too little in thy sight to be our
Lord and father, but thou vouchsafest likewise to be our brother, and thou Lord
of the whole earth, standing in need of nothing, from the beginning of thy
Nativity, refusedst not to taste the inconveniences of poverty. For as the
Scripture says, thou had not when thou wast borne any place in an Inn, nor
cradle, which might receive thee in thy tender infancy: but in the base crib
of a filthy stable. Thou which containest the whole earth in thy self, art
wrapped up in swathling clouts, and placed in a desperable repose. Hence is it,
that thy mother took thee from amongst the brute beasts. Take comfort, take
comfort ye that live in poverty, because God lives with you in your poverty,
he lies not in delicious beds, nor is he found in the ways of such as live
in their delights. To what end do thou rejoice, (O rich man) being but clay,
wallowing in thy gorgeous and trim bed, since the King of Kings chused rather
to honor the straw beds of the poor with his humble repose? Why do thou
disdain hard straw, when a tender infant in whose hand are all things,
preferred the hard litter of beasts before thy silks and feathers? But this thy
tender and weak infancy (O Christ) was not secure from the sword of the
persecutors: for whilst thou yet sucked hanging at thy mothers breast, an Angel
appeared unto Joseph in his sleep, saying: Arise* and take the child, and fly
into Aegipt, and abide there till I shall tell thee; for it will come to pass
that Herod will seek the child to kill it etc. Now from this time (O good
Jesus) thou beginnest to suffer sharp things: for thou sufferedst not only
this vexation in thine own infancy, but) the death of those little ones, many
thousands whereof by the cruelty of Herod were put to death, being rest from
their mothers breasts. Having past thine infancy, thou gave unto us an
example of professing the truth with all humility: for thou satest not with the
counsel of vanity, but in the midst of Doctors, questioning, and hearing
them: although thou wast the Lord of knowledge, and the wisdom of God thy
Father. But thou wast likewise an example of obedience unto us, when as thou
being Governor of the whole world subjected thy self humblely unto the will
of thy parents. When the grouth of a stronger age came, so as thou wast to
apply thy self to more weighty affairs, thou wentest forth to finish the
salvation of thy people: as a mighty Giant to run the race of all our misery.
And that thou might (in humane resemblance) frame thy self like unto thy
brethren, thou the innocent lamb of God, (never defiled with the lest stain
of sin) came unto thy servant baptizing penitent sinners, as if thou had
been a sinner, desiring that thou might be baptized: but he baptized not
thee in the water, but the water in thee, sanctifying them, that they might
sanctify us, by thy sanctifying spirit working in us. From Baptism by the
strength of thy spirit, thou wentest into the desert, giving us an example of
solitary life in thee. Thou sufferedst patiently solitarines and fasting, for
the space of 40. days, bitterness of hunger, temptations and illusions, to
the end thou might make all these things more tolerable unto us. At last
thou came to the lost sheep of Israel, showing openly the lamp of thy
divine word to illuminate all the world, declaring thy kingdom to all such as
obeyed thy word, and followed thy precepts; confirming with signs, and showing
the power of thy divinity to all that were sick, doing all things to all men
freely, which might conduce to the salvation of sinners, to the end thou
might profit all. But the fools heart is darkened (O Lord) and he has
thrown thy commandments behind him, never harkening unto all those wonderful
works which thou have wrought amongst them: except a few very noble and stout
champions, which thou have elected out of the weak and abject things of the
world, that by them thou might wonderfully discomfit the strong and mighty.
Neither have they alone bin unthankful unto thee for thy benefits: but (O
Lord of Lords) they have reproched thee, and done unto thee whatsoever it liked
them: for what said they when thou did those works of God which none else
could do? This man is not of God: in the Prince of devils he throws out
devils, he has a devil, he seduceth the people, he is a glutton and a bibber
of wine, a friend of Publicanes and sinners. Why weepest thou? why sighest thou
(O man) when thou art injuriously reproched? do thou not hear how many
rebukes fell upon thy Lord and Savior for thy sake? If they call the master of
the household Beelzebub, how much more his household servants? But (O good
Jesus) whilst they spoke these and the like blasphemies, stoning thee
sometimes with stones, thou sufferedst all things patiently, and thou becamest
as if thou had not heard, having no rebukes in thy mouth. Lastly they set thy
just and undefiled blood) betrayed by thy disciple a son of perdition) at the
price of thirty pieces of filuer, that they might take away thy life without a
cause. Albeit the treachery of that wicked betraier was not hid from thee, when
in the supper where thou washedst thy Disciples feet, kneeling down on thy
knees before him, thou vouchsafedst to handle, wash* and wipe his cursed feet
(swift to sheede blood) with thy most holy hands.

Wherefore then (O thou dust and ashes) art thou yet so proud? does pride yet
lift thee up? does impatience yet vox thee* Behold thy Jesus, the creator of
all things, the fearful Judge of the quick and the dead, the very parerne of
humility and mercy, kneeling before the feet of a man, and that man a
traitor. Learn, because he is meek and humble in heart, and be ashamed of
thy pride, and blush at thy patience. This was also (O Lord) an especial token
of thy mildness, when thou would not discover that disloyal wretch in the
midst of his brethren, nor publicly confound him; only bidding him do
that he would do quickly. In all these his malice ceased not toward thee,
but going forth he perfects his mischeeuous purpose.

O Lucifer, how fellest thou from heaven, that shined before so brightly in
heaven, thou that once appearedst glorious in the delicious borders of
Paradise, fellow Citizen with the Angels in Heaven, and a guest at the table
of the divine word: how art thou now reckoned among the children of darkness?
thou that wast nourished with spices, wherefore do thou embrace filthiness?
Now is thy family (O Christ) purified, when he went into the world, leaving
the Angelical society which in heaven remained. Now is that happy company
made drunk with the plentiful inundation of thy divine oracles, having casten
him out whom thou knew to be unworthy of the infusion of so pure a liquor.
When thou had given a commandment of charity and wholesome patience, and
had disposed of thy Fathers Kingdom unto thy brethren: thou wentest aside
with them, toward the place known to thy Betrayer: knowing all things that
would come upon thee. There thou wast not ashamed to confess in the hearing of
thy Apostles, the sadness of thy soul by the imminencie of thy passion which
voluntarily thou assumedst, as also other things which then thou sufferedst,
saying: Now is my soul heavy even unto death. Also kneeling upon the ground
thou fellest flat upon thy face, praying in thine agony, and saying: O Father
(if it be possible) let this cup pass from me. And that bloody sweat did
most evidently express the sorrows of thy heart, which all the time of thy
prayer trickled down drop by drop upon the ground. O my Lord Jesus,
whence comes this thy sorrowful supplication? did thou not voluntarily offer
thy self a sacrifice unto thy father? even so Lord. But we suppose that thou
took this upon thee, for the comfort of thy weak and disconsolate members,
least peradventure some should despair if at any time the frail flesh seem
to murmr, when the spirit is ready to repel any tentation. Surely thou did
it to this end, that we might have continual motives of love and thankfulness
toward thee, having expressed the natural infirmity of our flesh by these
tokens in thee. By which we are taught, that thou have truly borne our
infirmities, and have passed the pricking thorns of thy passions not without a
sensible feeling of them. For that voice seemed not to be the voice of the
spirit but of the flesh, in that thou addest, the spirit is truly ready, but
the flesh is weak. That the spirit was ready to thy passion thou evidently
demonstrated, when thou ran of thine own accord to meet thy betraier and such
men as were given to shed blood attending him, seeking to take away thy life
with lanternes and Torches and weapons upon the Night: and least they should
receive any notice by the Captain of this impiety, thou manifested thy self:
for thou turnedst not away from that cruel Beast coming to kiss thy most
holy mouth, but affably gave thy mouth (wherein was never deceit found) unto
his mouth which abounded with all malice. O Innocent lamb of God, what have
thou to do with that wolf? what concord betwixt thee and Belial? but this was
O Lord thy great mercy, to exhibit all such things as might any way mollify
the pertinacie of a depraved heart: for (as one not al together unmindful of
ancient friendship) thou admonished him saying; my friend to what end came
thou? and willing (as it seems) to wound the heart of this impious Traitor,
with the horror of his sin, thou said: Judas do thou betray the son of
man with a kiss? and behold the Philistines are upon thee Sampson. Neither
did thou drive them from thee intending to smite them at the hour of thy
apprehension, with thy right hand, no not in defense of thy self, that the
foolish presumption of man may know that they can do nothing against thee, but
so much only as is permitted by thee. But who can hear without weeping how
they laid their murdering hands upon thee, tying thy innocent hands with cords,
sweet Jesus, who like a most meek lamb speaking nothing, was carried after the
manner of a thief, contumeliously to the slaughter. Neither ceasedst thou then
(O Christ) to show thy mercy upon thy Enemies, and to diffuse the honiecombe of
thy sweetness upon them, reproving the zeal of thy defendor, and withholding
him from hurting such as haled thee. Their fury was cursed because wilful,
being neither moved by the majesty of thy miracles, nor the greatness of thy
benefits. Thou wast brought before a counsel of wicked head-priests consulting
against thee; and confessing the truth (as was seemly) thou wast adjudged to
death for thy blasphemy. O loving Lord, how many unworthy things have thou
suffered of thine own Nation? men of polluted lips beslubbring with their
spittle* thy amiable countenance, on which the Angels have desired to look,
replenishing the whole Courts of heaven with joy; and unto which all the rich
men in the world shall make intercession: beating it with their sacrilegious
hands, and blindfolding thee in derision: and being Lord of all creatures
buffetted thee as a servant most contemptuous of all others. But let us now
come to their delivering up of thy soul, to be swallowed up by uncircumcised
flesh. They lead thee bound before Pilate, requiring that thou may be
crucified which knew no sin, and that a murderer might be let loose unto
them, less esteeming of a lamb then a wolf; of gold, then clay. O unworthy
and unhappy merchandise! neither was that wicked Pilate ignorant, how all these
things were done through envy against thee; yet for all that, he proceeded
rashly in judgment against thee, filling thy soul with much bitterness
without a cause; He suffered thee to be mocked, commanding thee to stand in the
sight of thy mockers; nor spared he to tear thy pure virgin-skinne with most
sharp scourgings, cruelly inflicting stripes upon stripes, and wounds upon
wounds. O thou dear child of God, what have thou committed, that should
deserve so great bitterness, so great reproach? Surely nothing. It is I, it is
I, wicked man that I am, that was the cause of thy death. I (O Lord) have eaten
the sower grape, and thy teeth are on edge, paying for that which thou never
took. And yet the impiety of the treacherous Jews is not satisfied with all
these indignities done against thee: but thou art now at last delivered over
into the hands of uncircumcised soldiers to be put to a most shameful death.
It seemed but a little matter for those sacrilegious miscreants to crucify
thee, but they must also vex thy soul with reproaches. For what says the
Scripture of them. Then all the people gathered together, and taking his own
garments from him, they put upon him a purple coat, and they clothed him with
a skarlet robe, and winding a crown of thorns they put it upon his head, and
a reed in his right hand, and bowing unto him they mocked him saying, Hail,
King of the Jews: and they buffetted him and spit upon him, and taking the
reed in their hands they smote him on the Head, and after they had mocked him,
they put his own garments upon him, to crucify him bearing his own cross;
and they led him to Golgotha, giving him wine to drink mixed with mirrhe and
gall: and when he had tasted of it, he would not drink: then they crucified
him, and two thieves with him, the one of the right hand, and the other of the
left, and Jesus in the midst. And Jesus said: Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do. Afterward Jesus knowing that all things might be done,
that the Scripture might be fulfilled, said, I thirst: and one amongst them
running took a sponge and filled it with vinegar, and put it upon a reed and
gave him it to drink: as soon as he had received the vinegar he said, It is
finished: and crying with a loud voice he said, Father into thy hands I commend
my spirit, and bowing down his head he gave up the ghost. Then one of the
Soldiers opened his side with a spear: and presently their issued out water
and blood for the redemption of man. Awake O my soul, shake of the dust of
sin, and fix thy contemplation upon this memorable pattern of Humanity,
whom thou see presented unto thee in this glass of Gods word. Behold O my
soul, who it is that comes in unto thee, having the image of a King, and yet
reproched by his most despicable servants* treading upon Crowns, and yet his
Crown is a vexation unto him, wounding his beautiful head with a thousand
pricks: he is clothed with royal purple, but in it he is rather despised
then honored: he caries a Scepter in his hand, but with it his reverend head
is wounded: they worship him with bended knees, and call him King, but
presently they besmere his amiable face with spitting, dishonouring his cheeks
and venerable aspect with their fists. See O my soul, how this man is
afflicted and contemned of all sides. He bows himself under the burden of
his Cross, and bearing that ignominy which was proper unto thee, where being
brought unto the place of execution, his thirst is quenched with mirrhe and
vinegar upon the Cross, saying: Father pardon etc. What kind of man is this,
who in all his sufferings does not once open his mouth, or utter one word of
complaint, or excuse, or of threat, or of curse against those reuiling dogs:
but concludes with such mild words of blessing, as have not bin heard before.
O my soul, when have thou seen any one more merciful? what can be more
courteous then this man? Behold him with more attention, how worthy he is of
admiration, and most tender compassion. Look at him naked, and torn with
whips, betwixt two thieves ignominiously nailed upon the Cross, quenching his
thirst with vinegar, and after his death wounded in the side with a spear,
sending out plentiful rivers of blood from those wounds in his hands, and
feet, and side. O my eyes abound with tears, and O my soul be thou
dissolved with the fire of compassion, in condoling so merciful a man, whom
thou see amidst so great biternesse to be afflicted with sorrows. And now
(O my soul) thou have seen his infirmicies, and thou do pity him: now thou
have looked upon his majesty, and thou do admire him: for what says the
Scripture; From the sixth hour unto the ninth hour there was darkness upon
the whole earth: and the Sun was darkened, and the veil of the Temple rent
asunder from the top even to the bottom, and there was an Earthquake, and
the rocks cloue, and the graves opened, and many bodies of the Saints which
were dead arose. Who is this, with whom both Heaven and Earth do suffer, and
whose death does raise men from death? Know O my soul, know that this is the
Lord God, Jesus Christ thy Savior, the only begotten son of God, very God,
and very man: who of all men under the Sun, was only found to be without
sin, and behold how he is accounted amongst the wicked, and esteemed as one
of the Lepars, or as an abortiue birth thrown from his mothers womb. So is
he thrown from the womb of his Mother, the unhappy Synagogue. He that was
the fairest amongst the children of men, how deformed is he made? he was
wounded for our iniquities, and broken for our sins: he was made a burnt
Sacrifice of sweet incense unto thee O Father of eternal glory, to pacify
thy wrath conceived against us, and to place us in the celestial mansions of
glory. Behold (O holy Father) from thy Sanctuary, and from thy high
habitation, behold this our holy sacrifice, which our Head-priest offers unto
thee, thy holy Son, and our Lord Jesus offering himself up for our sins:
and mercifully do away the multitude of our transgressions. Behold the voice
of the blood of our Jesus cries unto thee from the Cross. For what (O Lord)
what is it that hangs thereon? he hangs even now, because things past are
as things present before thee. Take knowledge (O Father) unto the coat of thy
true son Joseph: Behold a savage beast has devoured him, and trampled upon
his garment in his fury, staining his beauty with the effusion of his blood:
behold he has made pitiful rents in it This O Lord is the garment which thy
inocent son left in the hands of that Aegiptian harlot, thinking it better to
lose his coat, then his honor, and choosing rather to be spoiled of the
garment of his flesh, and to descend into the prison of death, then for the
glory of the world to harken unto the voice of the Adultresse: to that voice I
say, where it was said unto him: All this will I give thee if thou will fall
down before me and worship me, which was as if he should have slept with the
Adultresse. And now, O my Lord, we know that this thy son lives, and is
Governor over all Egypt, and in every place of thy dominion: for he is
advanced from the prison of death and of Hell, to thy Empire, and attaining a
Crown of immortallity, has changed the garment of his flesh, to reflourish
within the immortality of the spirit, where thou have received him with much
honor. For he has subjected the empire of Pharoh unto him, and has
triumphantly ascended Heaven by his own proper majesty: and behold, he is
crowned with glory and honor, when he sits at the right hand of thy
majesty, mediating for us; for he is our flesh, and our brother. Behold (O
Lord) the face of thy Christ, who became obedient unto thee even unto death:
nor let the scars of his wounds ever depart from thy sight, that thou may
remember the satisfaction thou have received for our sins. I would O Lord
thou would but weigh our sins in a balance, by which we have deserved thy
wrath, and the calamity which thy son suffered to appease thy wrath. Surely
more forcible and more worthy would the cause appear to show thy mercy upon
us, then by reason of our sins to power down the viols of thy Ire upon us.
Let every tongue (O father) give thanks unto thee for the exceeding abundance
of thy love, in not sparing thy only begotten Son: but giving him over unto
death for us; that we might have him as a faithful Advocate before thee in
Heaven for us. And thou O Lord Jesus, most mighty and most zealous of man's
salvation, what thanks shall I give unto thee, that I may give thanks worthy,
being but dust and the workmanship of thy hands? for what could thou do
for my salvation, and have not done it? from the sole of thy foot to the crown
of thy head, thou have plunged thy self wholly into the waters of thy passion,
that thou might draw me wholly from them: and these passions have entered
even unto thy soul. For thou subiectedst thy soul to death and desolation, to
preserve my soul from death and perdition: and behold thou have bound me in a
double bond unto thee. First in that thou have given thy life for me; and
secondly because my soul was given by thee, twice unto me, once in my
creation, and once in my recreation; wherefore I have nothing that is fitter to
give thee then my soul, which I had of thee, for if I should in recompense of
thy mercy give unto thee the Heaven, the earth, and all the excellency thereof,
yet surely could not I attain to the measure of that I owe thee: since that
which I owe, and that which is possible for me to give is thy gift, without
which I have nothing to give. Thou art to be loved (O my Lord) with all my
heart, with all my soul; with all my strength: and thy imitable footsteps are
to be followed by me, because thou vouchsafedst to die for me: and how can this
be done in me, but by thee? let my soul cleave unto thee, because all my power
depends on thee. And now O Lord my redeemer, I worship thee as the true God:
I put my trust in thee, I hope in thee, and with my utmost desires do I sigh
after thee: help my many imperfections. I incline my self wholly unto the
glorious signals of thy passion, wherein thou have perfected my salvation. In
thy name O Christ, do I reverence the royal Banner of thy victorious Cross.
O Christ with all humility do I adore and glorify the remembrance of thy
thornie crown, thy red-skarlet nails besmeared with blood, thy lance drenched
in thy sacred side, thy wounds, thy blood, thy death, thy burial, thy glorious
and victorious resurrection and glorification. For the breath of life breaths
to me in all these: by these lively and redolent odors raise my spirit O Lord,
from the death of sin: By the power of these preserve me from the subtilties
of Satan, that the yoke of thy commandments may be unto me easy, and the
burden of thy Cross (which thou command me to bear after thee) may be
light: for what is my strength, that (according to thy commandment) I might be
able with an invincible spirit to sustain so manifold afflictions in the
world. Are my feet like Hindes feet, that like a swift courser I may be able
to run over the thorns and difficulties of thy passions? but hear my voice,
and lay thy corsse softly upon thy feruant, that cross, which is the wood of
life to them that lay hold upon it: my hope is, I shall run swiftly, and
shall carry as constantly the cross which is given me of my enemies, to
follow thee. Lay (I say) that most divine cross upon my shoulders, the breadth
whereof is charity, the length eternity, the height omnipotency, and the
depth inscrutable wisdom, replenished with majesty. Nail my feet and my
hands unto it, and conform thy servant, O Lord, wholly unto thy passion.
Grant unto me O Lord, that I may abstain from all the works of the flesh,
which thou hate, and do those works of righteousness which thou love,
and in both to seek thy glory. I suppose it very expedient that my left hand
be nailed unto the cross with the nail of temperance, my right hand with the
nail of uprightness. Grant that my soul may continually meditate upon thy
law, fixing all her cogitations upon thee: and fasten thou my right foot to
the same wood of life, with the nail of wisdom. Grant that the seeming
felicity of this transitory life may not enfeeble the operation of my spirit
with a sinister sensuality, nor that it be troubled with this present lives
infelicity, but that both my right hand and left may be fixed unto the cross
with the nail of fortitude; and that some appearance of the thorns which were
platted upon thy head, may be resembled in me, give unto my heart I beseech
thee the wholesome compunction of repentance, and compassion of another
misery, and the prick of fervent zeal which may be found upright before
thee and to turn unto thee in my affliction, whilst my head is crowned with
this threefold wreath of thorns. I desire thee also to reach a sponge unto my
mouth by a reed, and to minister the bitterness of gall unto my taste. I
desire also that by thy Scriptures thou would illuminate my reason, that I
may taste and see how this flourishing world is as an empty sponge, and all the
concupiscenses there of more bitter then vinegar. So (my father) may that
Babilonian Cup diffused upon the whole earth seem bitter unto me: not able
with her fruitless flourish to seduce me nor with her false sweetness to
inebriate me, as she does those who call darkness light, and light
darkness, that which is bitter sweet, and what is sweet bitter. Thy wine
mixed with mirrh and gall is suspicious unto me: forasmuch as thou would not
drink of it, because it employed the bitterness of envy and impiety of such
as crucified thee. Fashion thy servant, O Lord, after thy lively death, so
working in me that I may die in the flesh, but live in the righteousness of
the spirit But that I may rejoice in the carrying of the whole image of Christ
crucified, express in me a similitude of that which* the insatiate malice of
the wicked Jews exercised against thee after thy death: let thy quick and
effectual word more piercing then the sharpest lance, reaching even unto the
division of my soul wound my heart: and produce out of it as from my right
side in stead of blood and water, a love (O Lord) unto thee and to thy
brethren: finally wrappe my spirit in the pure syndon of my original stole of
innocence, that I may rest there, going out and going in into the place of thy
admirable Tabernacle, hiding me till thy fury be ouerpast: but in the third
day after the day of my labor, the day of punishment, early in the first
sabbath raise me (thy unworthy servant) and place me perpetually among thy
children, that in my flesh I may see thy glory and be satisfied with the light
of thy countenance. O my Savior and my God, let the time come, let it come I
beseech thee, that what I now believe, I may behold with revealed eyes; what I
now hope for, I may at last obtain; that what I now desire vehemently. I may
embrace really, may kiss lovingly, being plunged in the bottomless sea of
mercy, O my Savior and my God. But bless thou my Savior O my soul, and
magnify his name. O how good and sweet art thou O Lord Jesus unto the soul
that seeks thee. O Jesus the redeemer of the lost, the savior of the
redeemed, the hope of the banished, the strength of the wearied, refreshing to
the distressed, and comfort to the desolate, a sweet repose and a comfortable
to the sorrowful soul, running O Lord speedily after thee, till she oreget
thee the crown of triumph, the chiefest merchandise, and the joy of all the
heavenly Citizens; an euer-flowing fountain of all spiritual graces, the
only child of God, and the great God: Let all things which are in Heaven above
or in earth below praise thee. Great art thou, and great is thy name O thou
immortal glory of the high God, and the pure majesty of the light eternal,
O life that quicknest all things; O light that enlightenest all things, O light
that illuminatest every light, and conseruest by thy eternal splendour:
Thousands and ten thousands of lights have shined before the Throne of thy
majesty from the beginning. O eternal, substantial and inaccessible, clear
and delectable stream of that fountain, hid from the eyes of all mortal men,
whose beginning is without beginning, whose bottom is without bottom, whose
periodde is without period, whose circuit is incircumscrutable, whose purity
is imperturbable. The heart of the Almighty has sent thee (O my soul) out of
his impenetrable Abyss. O life, from thee have we in all fulness received
life, from thy light have we received light: thou that art eternal, have made
us eternal, thou that art boundless, have made us boundless, making us in
all things equal to thy self. For thou that art the most plentiful fountain
of every perfect gift, have vouchsafed to convey the precious River of thy
seven fould graces into our hearts, to enrich us with thy secret treasures,
and with the sweetness thereof to allay the saltness of this sea, (that is)
of our infirmities. O thou Spring of the oil of gladness, thou river of pure
wine, thou torrent of entire zeal, the holy Spirit our comforter, being sent
unto the world by the Father and thee, to both he is equal in dignity of
essence, fills all things, contains al things, being spirit of the spirit
of thy Father, one of both, as the individual communion uniting both: a
soulder uniting, a conjunction indissoluing, and that peace which passes all
understanding. This is the well of thy comforts, O Lord, by which thou daily
supportest, and with pleasant objects most abundantly refreshest that delicate
and glorious City Jerusalem is above: where those glorious and flamie Organs
do incessantly sing Hymns in the voice of exultation and feasting, with the
desired tunes whereof the hungry jaws of thy people in the days of this their
pilgrimation crave daily to be refreshed. Suffer (O Father) the little dogs
to feed on the crumbs which fall from their masters table. Send out your dew O
Heavens from above, and let the clouds rain upon the righteous, him O Lord
whom thou have made zealous of thy laws. Purge we beseech thee O Lord with the
sallatorie of thy word, the religious first fruits of thy people, being a
testimony of our solemn celebration of this time: renew, illuminate, inflame,
inspire, confirm, and unite the hearts of all believers unto thee, that they
may be one, taste one, and with all unanimity require, apprehend, see, and
glorify thee our only God in Sion. Let glory, thanks, honor, and power be
attributed to the individual Trinity for evermore.

Amen.
Quaedam sententiae, eaeque vere Aureolae, ad humanae mentis intimam deuotionem
inflammandam, excerptae.
Qui de se humiliter sentit, haec legate.
CHristus qui pro nobis passionem sustulit, in fructus passionis nos
promouebit: vt sicut spinarum corona tempora eius figebantur, gaudiorum mercede
mentes nostrae illustrentur. Hic viximus in dolor, illic afficiemur Honor:
Honor dei, qui mundano Honori maxim aduersatur, ille enim a christianis (qui
sub vexillo suo meruerunt) possidetur, Hic autem ab Ethnicis (qui eorum famam
auxerunt) petitur. O quam incundum est in domo tua (domine) habitare? vbi nullo
metu, nulla cupiditate, nullo motu distrahimur! videntes vero faciem tuam
meridiana luce multo clariorem laeitia vultus tuisatiamur. Hic dilectus est
meus, quem quaerit men's mea: quaeret nec desistet donec cum quaerendo inueniet.

A MOST DEVOVT MEDITATION of Saint Barnard entreating of the misery of man,
and examination of the last Judgment.
TOuching the outward man, I descend from those parents, who (ere I was borne)
made me forlorn. Sinners beget sinners in their sin, nourishing them from
sin unto sin: miserable man has brought his miserable issue to light: from
my parents I have nothing but misery, and sin, and this corruptible body
which I carry about with me. And to them I hasten who are departed hence by
the death of their Bodies: whose Sepulchers when I behold, I find nothing in
them but dust and worms, filthiness, and horror; what I am, have they been: and
what they are, I shall be. What am I (miserable man?) engendered of liquid
humor, at the time of my conception I was conceived of humane seed: which
seed afterward growing thick by increasing little by little, became flesh:
whence weeping and shriking, I was exposed to the exile of this world: and
behold now I die, being full of iniquities and abominations. Even now shall I
be presented before a fearful Judge, that will take an exact account of all
my works. Woe is me wretch that I am; when that day shall come, and those
books shall be opened wherein all my actions and cogitations shall be rejected
in the presence of God; O then shall I stand fearful before the Lord in
judgment, hanging down my head and confessing my shame, remembering the
offenses I have committed, and the sincerity of a pure conscience which I have
defiled: and when it shall be said of me, behold the man and his works: then
shall I set before mine eyes all my sins, and transgressions: for it will
come to pass (by a certain divine instinct) that all our works both good and
evil, shall come unto our remembrance, and by the piercing sight of the mind
shall be apprehended by a wonderful quickenesse: to the end knowledge might
accuse or excuse conscience, and so all universally and every one distinctly
might together be judged, each man shall give account, what he has done of
all, to all, how ended, how begun: for what we are now ashamed to confess
privately, shall be then manifested publicly: and what we now seek to shadow
by dissembling, shall be discussed by the fire of revenge ever burning. Swift
flaming fire shall scorch with boundless rage: and by how much longer God has
expected our amendment, by so much more severely will he punish us, because we
were negligent. Why therefore do we so greatly desire this life, wherein the
longer we live, the more we offend: for by how much our life is longer, by so
much be our offenses more. For daily are evils increased, but goodness
diminished: daily is man changed, by prosperity and adversity, yet knows
not he when he shall die: for as a glittering star coasting swiftly in
heaven, suddenly vanishes: or as a spark of fire is quickly extinguished,
and turns to ashes: so soon the dissolutio^ of man's life: for whilst man
soiorneth willingly and ioifully in this world, and promises himself to live
long, disposing many of his affairs for succeeding times, suddenly is he
surprised by death; and unawares is his soul taken from his body: yet with
great fear and unmeasurable grief is his soul separated from his body. For
the Angels come to take it, and bring it before the Tribunal seat of that
fearful Judge: where remembering his evil works, (nay his most impious
works) which he has committed night or day, he trembles, seeking to fly
from them, and to take truce with them, saying: Give me one hours respite.
Then his works (as if speaking together) shall answer him and say: Thou made
us, we are thy works, we will not leave thee, but abide ever with thee, and
attend on thee to thy judgment: his vices also with diverse and manifold
criminacions shall accuse him, and shall find many false testimonies against
him, albeit one were sufficient to condemn him. Nay, the devils with a
terrible countenance, a dreadful aspect, shall terrify his soul, persecuting
her with implacable fury, seazing on her so terriblie, and so horribly, as
they seem willing to detain and take possession of her, if there were none to
deliver her. Then the soul finding her eyes shut, her mouth and all other
senses corporal by which she used to be delighted, in these outward things
stopped, shall return to her, self; where seeing her self desolate and
naked, she shall be exceedingly amazed languishing through despair in her
self, and falling below her self. And because she relinquished the love of
God, for the love of this world, and the satisfying the pleasures of the flesh,
shall be miserably forsaken of God, in that hour of necessity, and shall be
delivered over to the devils to be tormented in hell. So shall the sinful
soul in the day which she knows not, and in the hour of which she is
ignoant, be taken away by death, separated from her body, whence she goes on
(full of misery, anguish, and fear) where having no excuse which she can
justly show for her sin: she pineth, languisheth, and grows afraid to
appear before God; she is surprised with great horror, and tossed with the
sundry billows of discomforting passions: the dissolution of the flesh
enforcing her, and all means of assistant comforts leaving her, she considers
her end appproching, and after a little reuoluing, she finds that in this
perpetual state to which she hastens, there is no changing, she plainly
considers with what severity the eternal Judge will come, and before the
severity of such justice what reasons can she produce to quallifie his
justice? for if all the works (which she may consider in her self) either
committed or omitted had bin by her avoided: yet she is in fear, there will
such works come before the terrible Judge which she never apprehended: her
fear increases when she conceaueth how she could in no wise pass the ways
of this life without sin: nor that part of her life which seemed most praise
worthy could be exempted of guilt, without recourse had to Gods mercy. For
who can duly consider or exactly number the evils we have committed in every
moment, or what works we have neglected? for as sin is the committing of
evil, so is sin the forsaking of what is good. A great depriuall of
sanctity (sure) when we neither do good, nor think that is good, but permit
our hearts to wander by vain and unprofitable things. It is to difficult a
thing to restrain thy heart and preserve it from every unlawful thought. It
is also a matter of too great difficulty to employ our selves in terrene
affairs without sin. Wherefore I conclude that none can perfectly comprehend
and judge himself, but being occupied with many cogitations, he must of
necessity remain in something ignorant to himself, as not knowing what he
does altogether tolerate in himself: wherefore near his end, he is terrified
with a more serious and retired fear, because that albeit he never remembers
himself to have omitted anything which he knew, yet he fears himself to
have neglected many things which he knew not.

A Meditation of the short life of man, extracted out of the devout and zealous
meditations, of that mellifluous Father Saint Barnard.
THe days of man are as a shadow upon earth, there is noe stay, for where
we seem to stand, it is in effect nothing. Why therefore does man so heap up
treasure upon earth, since he must pass without delay, both that which is
gathered, and he that gathers it? And thou (O man) what fruit do thou
expect in this world, whose fruit is destruction, and whose end is death?

I wish thou would be wise, and understand, and discreetely provide for the
day to come. I know one, who (for many years) has lived familiarly with thee,
has sitten at thy table, taken meat from thy hand, slept in thy bosom, has
conferred with thee when so ere he would, being thy servant by way of
inheritance. But because thou have pampered him delicately from his youth up,
and have spared the rod, he is become stif-necked, he has lifted up his
heel against thy head, and has brought thee into slavery, and tyrannically
triumphs over thee. Peradventure thou will ask me who this is? It is the old
man who treads underfoot thy spirit: who little or nothing esteems the
desires of this earth, because it tastes of nothing but the distasts of the
flesh.

This man was blind, deaf, dombe, and inueterate in evil from his nativity,
a rebel to virtue and truth, an enemy to the Cross of Christ, deriding the
inocent, and simple man, and walking in great and wonderful ways, far above
his apprehension or conceit. His pride exceedes his strength, he reuerendeth
none: saying in the foolishnes of his heart, there is no God. He repineth at
the prosperity of others, he fattens himself with the adversity of others:
he is fed with beastly and sensual cogitations, nor is he wearied with them*
transgressing securely even to the end: he consumes and scatters his own
estate like a prodigal, he desires and deuoureth other men's estates like a
covetous miser: under pretense of dissimulation he gathers to himself shame
and ignominy, and subtilely provoke the wrath of God.

This man was wholly borne in sin, and so nourished, and brought up with the
fiends of iniquity, the children of death, vessels of wrath, created for
dishonor and perdition. And yet this man being such (as you hear) declares
the judgments of God, and takes the testament of his word into his mouth, he
hates instruction, he casts God behind his back: when he sees a thief
he runs with him, and deuideth his portion among adulterers, he asperceth
reproach upon the child of his own mother, and heapeth up the treasure of ire
against the day of wrath upon himself, he would gladly take thy inheritance
from thee, and quite root thee from of the earth. And thou reuengest not so
great an injury done against thee, but dissemblest it, thou speak not one
hard word unto him, nor show any discontent in thy countenance, but smilest
at him flattering thee, playing with a deceiuer. Thou art ignorant how it is
Ismael that dallies with thee. Nor is this play of his to be imputed to
childishnes; simplicity, or innocence, for it is the very illusion of the
soul, persecution, death, throwing thee headlong into the ditch he had made
for thee. Now art thou become altogether effeminate, now art thou pressed
down with the yoke of most miserable bondage, being trod under his feet
miserablely and vildly. O wreched and miserable man, who shall deliver thee
from the bonds of this enthrallement? let the Lord arise, and let this armed
man fall before him, let this man (greatest enemy to man) fall, and be
confounded, since he is a co^temner of God, a worshipper of himself, and his
own illimited affections, a friend to the world, and a servant to the devil.
How do thou think of it? if thou think rightly, thou will say with me, he
is guilty of death, let him be crucified. Do not therefore dissemble, do not
differ, do not spare, but with celerity, magnanimity, and insta^cy crucify
this man. But so, as with the Cross of Christ, wherein there is salvation and
life: for whosoever shall call on Christ intentiuely, and incessantly, shall
presently have his crucified old man, inuiting him with all benignity: and
Christ answering with as much mercy: To day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. O the exceeding mercy of Christ! O the inopinate salvation of the
wicked, made righteous by Christ! So grateful and approved is the love of
God, so admired is his sweetenes, so unexpected his louingnes, so immerited his
mercifulness, that whosoever cries to him, is heard of him, for the Lord is
merciful, and calls to mind how he made him. O how great is the mercy of
God, how ineffable the compassion of the right hand of the almighty? yesterday
was I in darkness, this day am I in light: yesterday in the mouth of a Lion
most bloody, this day in the hand of my mediator full of mercy, yesterday in
the gate of hell to be tormented for ever, to day in a paradise of perpetual
pleasure. But what do these letters of admonition profit, unless thou wipe
from thy conscience those letters or characters of death? what do these
writings profit, what do they both read and understood avail, unless thou
both reads and understand thy self? apply thy self therefore to inward
reading, that thou may read, conceive and apprehend thy self: so read as
thou may love God, that thou may fight, and by fighting vanquish the world, and
all thy enemies therein: that thy labor may be converted into rest, thy
lamenting into rejoicing, and after the darkness of this life ending, thou
may see the rising of that morning sun of righteousness ever shining, where
thou may likewise see that meridian sun of eternity, in whom thou shall see
the Bridegroom with his bride, one, and the same Lord of glory, who lives
and reigns for evermore.

A Meditation of Saint Barnard wherein he describes the method of prayer, and
how a zealous Christian should pray.
Have mercy on me (O Lord) for I sin there the most, where I ought to
reform my self the most for in the private Monastery, often times whilst I
pray, I give not attention to that I pray: I pray with my mouth (and implies
thereby a lip labor) but my mind is wandering abroad, and therefore am
worthily deprived of the fruit of my prayer: in body I am inward, but in
heart outward, and therefore I lose the benefit of my speech: for little
aualleth it us to sing only with the voice without the pure intention of our
heart: wherefore it is great perverseness, nay, great madness, when we
presume to talk familiarly with God in our prayer, being of so exceeding
Majesty, sencelessely to divert our minds from him, and prostitute our hearts
to I know not what folly. Great madness is it likewise (and greatly to be
punished) when vile dust and ashes composed of naught but sin, disdaineth to
hear the creator of this universe speaking unto him. But ineffable is the
humility of his divine goodness, daily beholding us (unhappy wretches)
turning our ears, hardening our hearts, yet vouchsafes he incessantly to cry
unto us, saying, return you that be of an uncircumcised heart* behold and see
I am your Lord and God* God speaks unto me in a Psalm, and I unto him,
neither yet when I say the Psame do I consider whose Psalm it is: therefore
do I a great injury unto God, when I desire him that he would hear my
prayer, which I, when I power it before him, do not hear my self.

I beseech him to incline his ear unto my prayer, but I incline mine ear
neither to my self, nor to my prayer, but which is worse, by meditating of
unprofitable and sensual affections, I oppose a most filthy and horrible
corruption, in the consideration of my hearts pollution, before the eyes of his
all-seeing Majesty.

A very profitable prayer taken out of Saint Barnard, entreating of the form
and manner, how every one ought to consider himself, no less sententious
then zealous.
IF I behold not my self, I know not my self: but if I behold my self, I
shall not endure my self: because I find so many things in me noe less
worthy of reprehension, then confusion and shame: so as by how much more
exactly and seriously I examine my self, so many more abominations do I
find in the corners of my heart. For since the time I first began to sin, I
could never pass one day without sin, neither as yet do I cease from sin,
but from day to day add sin upon sin, which though I have them before mine
eyes, and consider the exceeding measure of them, yet do I not lament them. I
see sins in me to be ashamed of, yet am not I ashamed: I behold sins to be
sorrowed for in me, yet am not I sorrowful: which is an evident sign and
token of death and damnation, for that member which feels not pain is dead:
and a disease insensible, is incurable.

I am sensual and dissolute, neither yet do I correct my self: but daily
reiterate those sins which before I confessed, neither am I aware of the
ditch, into which (miserable soul that I am) I have fallen, or made another to
fall, or seen him falling. And whereas I ought to deplore my sins and (with
instancie of supplication) pray for remission of them (to wit) for the evils
which I had committed, and the good which I had neglected and omitted: woe is
me, I did the quite contrary, for first I grew luke warm, and after
chill-could in the fervor of my prayer, and now I remain key-could, without
any sense or apprehension of sin: and therefore cannot bewail the sin
committed by me, because the grace of tears and remorse is departed far
from me.

That sin is not to be excused.
Where I ought to have amended my sins, I added sin upon sin: when I was
accused of them* I either in a sort excused them, or wholly denied them, or
which is worse, I defended them, and with impatience answered for them, whereas
there was no sin, with which I was not defiled, or might have been defiled.
It is fit therefore, that all occasion of delay set apart, I promise amendment
of all sides, or by whomsoever I am accused: to the end I may be delivered
from the servitude of sin by me committed, or which might be by me committed.

Qui ver saturin atrijs Dei, oret and deploret: oret, vt peccata eius
remittantur: deploret peccata que co^mittuntur: speret in Deo vt possideat Deum
in quo sperauit. Ibid.

A Glorious Hymn of an ancient Father, expressing the Harmonious union of the
heavenly Citizens.
SAcred powers united ever,
Which no discord can disseuer,
So enriched by the heavenly giver,
As empouerishd are you never.
Concords perfect joys uniting,
To melodious feasts inuiting,
Where all objects be delighting,
Noe dark clouds, your day benighting.
What one has is not so private,
But his friend may likewise have it,
And suppose he should not crave it,
Yet united loves receive it.
There Is no light that moon does borrow,
All Is one day, there is no morrow,
Perfect solace free from sorrow,
Year by year contented thorough
Noe Ecclips of Sun or Moon,
Neither of their lights be showen,
Heaven has tapers of her own,
Which to heavenly saints are known.
Fruits so mellow, full of pleasure,
Sacred mounts repleate with treasure,
Of which saints have perfect seasure,
Reaping them at their best leisure.
There the Cedar and the Pine,
Fruitful Olyue, braunchie Vine,
Peaceful Myrtle, Mirrhe divine,
There the Rose and Eglantine.
Every flower in seemly order,
Stands to beautify her border,
More then Art could ere afford her,
Since diuinest powers have stord her.
There loves bird sits on a spray,
Chaunting out her roundelay,
Glorious souls their joys display,
Every saint keeps holiday.
Clad they be in goulden clothing,
Ophir gould to that is nothing,
Full of joy, yet without lothing,
Time-obseruing without soothing.
There the Topaz, Emerald,
And the Diamond, that's called
The worlds beauty: Cities walld
Round with gould: with gemmes empalld.
There is that Bethesdas poole,
Which refreshes every soul,
There the books which do enroule
Such as laugh, and such as houle.
None must in that camp appear
Conquerors, but conquered here,
Such as past their days in fear,
To be cround for ever there.
Let us fight, that we may win,
Mastrie over death and sin,
That after life we may begin
To renew our life with him.
Who has mercy still in store,
And does live foreuermore.
FINIS.

