THE difference between the ancient Physic, first taught by the godly
forefathers, consisting in unity peace and concord: and the latter Physic
proceeding from Idolaters, Ethnickes, and Heathen: as Gallen, and such other
consisting in dualitie, discord, and contrariety.

And wherein the natural Philosophy of Aristotle does differ from the truth
of Gods word, and is injurious to Christianity and sound doctrine.

Natura naturam continet and superat, and sua natura solum latatur and
emendatur, and eius propinquitatis res commisceri and coniungi facit.

By R. B. Esquire.

Imprinted at London for Robert VValley.

1585.

(...) Ca 8. Certain differences, between the ancient Physic and the
Physic of the Heathens. Ca. 9. The causes why this Art is evil spoken of,
and finds few favorers. Ca. 10. The first Authors of the ancient Physic,
and of the succession and progression thereof, to Hermes Trismegestus, and how
he left writings thereof yet extant. Ca. 11. What was the Physic of Apollo,
Aesculapius, Machaon, and Podalirius, and of the knowledge of Thales Milesius.
Ca. 12. Of Pythagoras and his knowledge in this Art, and that he taught in
Italy. And of his scholars and folowers. And of the medicine of Empedocles. And
of the 70. Books that Esdras was commanded to keep. Ca. 13. That the Physic
which Hypocrates left in writing, was not descended from Aesculapius. Ca. 14.
That Democritus Abderites a Thracian did write of this art, whose Books are
yet extant: and of his teachers, scholars and followers: and of some of their
works yet extant. Ca. 15. That in Plato his time, the Priests of Aegipt, were
very skillful in this art. And that Plato did find that fault with the
Physicians of Greece, in his time, as the Chimicall Physicians do now with the
Ethnicke Physicians, and their folowers. And how Aristotle and Plato do differ
in the natural causes of Effects. Ca. 16. Of diverse Poetical Fables shadowing
and hyding the secrets of this Art. Ca. 17. Of certain Physicians that used
Chimicall medicines. And of the three sects of Physicians, that were between
the time of Hypocrates and Gallen. And that the Chimical Physicians, ought
rather to be called Rationales, then the Galenists. And that Galen following
Hypocrates 600. years, did comment upon him against his meaning and words. And
how Hypocrates agrees with the Chimicall Physicians. Ca. 18. Of the
continuance of this Art in Aegipt, until the time of Dyoclesian the Emperor:
And a notable monument thereof in Italy. And the spreading of this Art into
other Countries. And of diverse writers of this Art between Galens time and
Paracelsus. Ca. 19. That Theophrastus Paracelsus was not the inuenter of this
art, but the restorer thereof to his purity: And that he has given more
light thereunto, then any other before him. And the testimonies of great cures
that he did by this Art. And of diverse writers and learned Physicians, which
since his time have written of this Art. Ca. 20. The true meaning of Paracelsus
in dedicating his Book, entitled Philosophia magna to the Athenians:
wherewith Erastus one of his adversaries is so grieved. Ca. 21. How materia
prima and mysteriam magnam, was the beginning of all things, according to
Paracelsus his meaning: And how all things created were at one time in the
increate. Ca. 22. Of the separation of visible and material bodies. Ca. 23.
Certain notes and cautions given, for the better understanding of this
Chimicall Physic. Ca. 24. Of the celestial medicine of Paracelsus: and
matters toucking his person and ignorance. Ca. 25. The Conclusion of the
Author.
The Authors obtestation to almighty God.
O GOD the father almighty, the true light O Christ, the light of the light,
the wisdom, mystery, and virtue of GOD. O holy Ghost that knittest all
things together in one, which sustainest, and quicknest all things by this
divine power, and give strength to live and to move, and also to continue,
and to be preserved and nourished. O the holy Trinity, three persons and one
God, which of nothing, that is having no matter, preexisting, or going before,
have created all the world, that is, all things that are, to set forth thy
glory, wisdom, power, and goodness: I beseech thee teach, aid, and assist
thy seruau^ts against the heathnish and false Philosophy of Aristotle, which
teaches that the world had no beginning, neither shall have endyng. And that
of nothing, nothing can be made, whereby it makes the world

(...) So likewise thy most excellent creature man was created to thy Image, in
pure understanding, perfect memory, sincere will without any care, or without
all fear of death or perrilles. But (O most just God) after his fall, death
crept in as it were a leaprosie, and the Image of God was darkened, blemished,
and almost blotted out: Yet by thy merciful goodness O God, this Image is
repaired by thy gospel, because we be renewed by faieth into the hope of
everlasting life, that we may live in God, and with GOD, and may be one
with him. And whereas man after the eating of the Apple forbidden, had the
knowledge of good and evil, yet the evil men do detain thy truth O God, in
unrighteousness, and do refuse thy vocation and calling, which by thy truth
do continually call us unto thee, yet this thy truth naturally grafed in us
continually does endeavor as much as it may to appear in action, but it is let
and hindered by concupiscence, which some say is in the nether part of the
soul* others say it is in brutali spiritu or Anima, therefore thou have given
us, O God, that what we know, we study to make manifest and show forth, which
if we do not we be reproved by our own judgment: for the better part of the
Soul or Spiritus, which some call sinteresis, does persuade to that is good.
Hereby appears the wonderful power and strength of conscience: which in
great offenses cannot be perfectly quieted. Wherefore, it is written, the
Gentiles which have not the law, by nature, do the works of the law, and
do show the work of the law written in their hearts: their conscience
bearing the^ witness: their thoughts either accusing or defending them. This
property to persuade to do good, some call sinteresis, which thy word calls
conscience, which is a living law, which cries, stirs, and moves to do
good: for thou O God, art so merciful and good to us, that thou have given
this knowledge to our mind: which like a Schoolmaster does instruct and teach
us: so that conscience, is as it were a certain law in things subject to
sense and reason. But (O good God) omnipotent, Aristotle his heathnish
Philosophy, very absurdly teaches, that all the Orbs, be bodies subject to
no corruption, and that they and their motions be eternal: and he assigns to
certain minds, Intelligentis, or under strange natures and essenties, and
separated their several and singular motions of the said Orbs: And he
assigns one Orb to the high God, which is moved by him. Whereby he makes
all those essenties separated, among who^ those Orbs are distributed to be
equal and like substance: but he allows that mind or essence which is the
elder: that is, God to be only so much the more excellent then the rest, by
how much the orb assigned to him, is more excellent then the other Orbs. That
Philosophy also teaches, that it is an absurd thing and against reason, to
say that any thing eternal had any beginning: therefore because those Orbs be
eternal they had no beginning. Likewise, it teaches that God medleth not under
the Moon, and that he is not the maker nor the creator of any thing, but
only the mouer of the heaven: and it makes God to be the final cause only
of motions, and not of the nature of each several thing: neither does his
Philosophy teach any agent cause of those things which it affirms to be
eternal. And by this doctrine it must needs follow, that because the world is
eternal without beginning and ending, and incorruptible, therefore it needs
not thy providence, either that it should be, or continue, nor that it needs
thy help. And because it has no other efficient cause of any other but of it
self, therefore it needs none other to provide for his being or well being.
It also teaches that thou O GOD medlest not under the Moon, but that thou
rulest under the Moon only with a common influence and usual course of
second causes, though some do untruly go about to excuse this doctrine: in
saying, that it accompteth Nature to be God, or at least Gods Vicar or deputy:
which neither need any such, nor yet have any deputy. O most mighty God,
creator of all things, strengthen thy people against these and all such
doctrines, tending to the derogation of thine honor, goodness, mercy and
wisdom: and by reason it appears that no body of it self is immortal,
because each body consists of his parts, therefore it may be dissolved: but
the soul of man is immortal, and the body is made immortal at the last
resurrection, by reason of the presence of the soul: But Aristotle makes no
mention of the immortality of the soul, neither does he attribute any
felicity to it after the death of man: whereby Alexander Aptrodisienses
concludes, that he denies the immortality of the soul: Also reason
teaches, that many diverse and contrary things can not be joined together by
themselves, without the help of an other, and be not brought to one certain
form, unless they be united together by the help of some other. The world
therefore, consisting of so many diverse and contrary parts: in which, cold,
heat, dryness, and moisture, are joined together, and other things of
contrary nature^ and virtues, do agree together in one form. And the Orbs
and celestial bodies of contrary motions from the East to the West, and from
the West to the East, and in retrogradation and direction, and stationarij,
their motions in the Epicycle, in the Aust. and oposito angis, do make no
discord, but keep a regular order in all those contrarieties. Therefore, we
must be compelled to confess, that there was and is one that has coupled,
united, and joined together, such and so diverse contrary things: otherwise,
such diverse and contrary things and motions, by their own swing, course and
moving, would be dissolved one from an other, unless they were preserved by
some others. Can there be a table painted with diverse colors and pictures, or
pots of diverse sorts and fashions, without a workmaster? Can any thing that
lacks a governor or ruler, be moved by it self continually in a regular or
certain order? Therefore, by reason it appears, that the world is governed
and ruled (O God) by thy divine providence: And thou (O God) that rulest all
the universal world, do also govern, rule, and provide for each part
thereof: for he does nothing well, that neglects the least part of that
thing.

Likewise, O almighty God, that heathnish Philosopher does teach, that homo
and Sol genera^t homine^, whereby (O good God) it must needs follow, that man
and the Sun must be eternal and infinite. Though heat nourishes and
cherishes our bodies, yet for all that it is not the cause of generation and
begetting, but thy word, O merciful God, so commanding, that the blood of
this or that man shall be made male or female. Reason can not comprehend this
word, therefore it must needs childishly trifle off the causes of such
things. So the Physicians following the Philosophers, do refer the cause of
generation (O God) to a convenient mixture of qualities, which do work in the
matter ordained before, what color soever reason does bear herein: yet for
all that, they do not attain to the first cause thereof. For, the holy Ghost
(O God) does lead us into a higher cause then to nature, then to qualities,
and their temperature, when it sets before us thy word, O omnipotent God,
in which all things are created and conserved. Also, O most high God, this
heathnish Philosophy does not admit any Metaphisicall principle in natural
things, in which ascending by the doubtful care of natural things, being
removed from divine, man's mind is turned from them. And surely such natural
Philosophy is the next way to make men forget thee, O God, and to become
Atheists: for it teaches men to clean and stick fast unto the nature of
things, not ascending nor considering the Creator: And so it tyeth thee (O
God) to the second causes, and does not attribute to thee any actions, but
according to that nature of things: whereby it does bewitch men in such sort,
and make their minds so mad, that they neither do ask neither look for any
good thing at thy hand: for the event and success of each thing must of
necessity be answerable to the natural cause. And by that doctrine thou (O
God) do follow the nature of things created: whereas contrariwise all
things created must follow thee: so that it places the effected cause in the
steed of efficient, and the isntrumental cause for the agent. And further it
teaches, that matter and form is the first principle of natural things:
which doctrine draws thy people (O God) from true honoring of thee, for the
creation and providence of thy creatures. It is not enough to confess that
thou did create all things, if it be said also that thou have forsaken
those things as soon as thou have created them: as the Carpenter leaves the
house when he has once made it: for so should the world sone perish and come
to ruin: but thou, O most merciful God, do direct all things that be or
shall be by thy understanding and knowledge to meet and convenient ends, such
as pleases thee to thy honor and glory. For, in thee we live, move, and have
our being: and all things be of thee, and in thee, and by thee. For, we can
not move our tongue, which is the lytist part of our body, without thy
providence: Man may prepare the heart, but thou (O God) rulest the tongue:
neither does a Sparrowe light upon the ground, without thy good will O
almighty father: And all the heirs of our head be numbered, thou c^ri^st all
things by the word of thy power: thou art the Lord of all flesh: thou art the
Lord of all spirits: thou workest all things according to the decree of thy
will. Therefore, O God, grant we may cast our care upon thee, that thou may
nourish us: take thou care over us: touch the apple of our eye: be thou our
shield and brazen wall: Be thou our helper and we care not what man may do
to us. Give us a new heart and a new spirit: as thou have given us thy
Commandments, so make us to walk in them. By these and such like testimonies
of thy most sacred and holy word, O good God, we learn thy divine providence
over man and all other thy creatures, and that thou do not leave nor forsake
them when thou had made them, but do of thy most tender goodness
govern not only man, but also whatsoever thou have created: whose infinite
power works every thing in every thing. And thy servant do acknowledge (O
God) that a peculiar force and virtue was given to every thing at the beginning
by thy word, voice, and commandment: which yet are in continual force: but
yet the same be but only second and isntrumental causes, not working of
themselves, not principally, but depend upon thy power and commandment,
without which thou workest the same effects when thou please: which thou art
wont to do by means of the second causes. And all things which are in this
world, and which are seen, do not only take their beginning from thee to be
things, but also to have such power and virtue, and to be such manner of
things as they are. Therefore is the world a looking glass, in which thy
wisdom is perceived: If we ascend into heaven, thou are there: If we
descend into hell, thou art present. And though th^se virtues and powers have
in them great strength and e^f^^acie, and thou (O God) (...) often times work
by them, as thou do* by th^^e Angels thy ministers which do thy will: yet
are they all but the second causes and instruments of thy divine providence,
and can do nothing unless thou be present to govern the things, and help
and bring forth the effect: For thou (O God) do not so give force to
things, nor do so send thy Angels thy ministers, that thou art absent thy
self: for thou reachest and touchest from end to end mightily, and disposest
all things sweetly and profitable to thy glory. Therefore art thou (O most
mighty God) the first and efficicient cause of all things. For, thou (O God
almighty father) art the resting and quiet fountain of al things that be,
perfect of thy self, needing none other: Thou art the first action, and
workest inwardly: thou art the true light. Thou art not only all in each
several thing, but all in all, spiritually in power and essence: so thou art
every where: thou art the being, first, chief, and principal living and
parent of life: having quiet motion in thy self, and moving thy self inwardly,
being not moved by motion. Thou art the being and beginning of all other
things: Thou art silence, thou art quietness, or resting, abiding in thy
self: that is, secret moving, or secret action. Wherefore, thou art said (as
it were) to sit in the Center of all things that be, from whence with an
universal eye: that is, with the light of thy substance, by the which each
thing has his being, life, and knowledge: thou do behold them: thy will is
the still word. Thou (O Father) art the beginning of being of all substaunces,
which from thee that is the being it self, do give (being power of life and
substance) to all things according to the power and capacity of the
receiver. All things dwell in thee, potencially: thou art the parent of all
things in power. Thou art omnipotent: thou art all in all in those things:
whereof thou art the original and cause in virtue and power. Thou fillest
heaven and earth, and thy spirit has filled the whole world yet it is in
secret: that is, in power. For, there must be a certain might or power,
wherewith all things are quickened into lively Spirits, as it were from a lively
fountain, that they may live of that: and because they do live, they obtain
their being. For there must be an Actor before there be action, the Agent
brings f^orth action. Therefore, thou (O Father) which art the principal and
first living, do bring forth life.

Thou (O God the Son) by whom all things were made, and without whom nothing
is made, art the f^ood or river running from the Father the fountain: thou art
the light of the world: for by reason of thee all worldly things live: Thou
art the Image of the Father, the word, the wisdom of the father, and the
virtue and power of operation and working. Thou (O God the Son) art the
apparent and manifest motion or moving, moved by motion, the active motion or
action, and active word: for the manifesting of the power is action: which
action having all things that be in power living and knowledge according to
motion, does bring forth and make manifest all things: not by local motion,
neither by transferring into place, but by a better and divine motion, such as
belongs to the Spirit* which by his own motion does give life, and brings
forth understanding (...) in it self, and not cut from the first power in the
operation. Thou (O Christ) art life having life in thy self, appearing
outwardly in quickening: And because thou art life, therefore thou art motion
quickening all that is quickened* for life is cause of motion. And because thou
art manifest motion, coming from secret and inward motion, and life taking
life from living, and the principal life and beginning: therefore life is
begotten of living or principal life, and thou art the Son of the father,
and by thee all things are made. Thou art life in all things* seeing thou art
every where: all fullness does inhabit in thee corporally: that is, in
operation substantially. And because the very life had no beginning, being
always of it self, to it self, of the father: therefore it never c^as^th, and
it is always infinite: and there is no life which in so much that it is life,
does not pertain to the river of life: it gives life and breath to all
things, and in all things, from supercelestiall things to celestial and to
heavenly bodies, to ^^yall, waterie, and earthly things, and to all things
that the earth does bring forth, and to all other things: therefore, every
matter whereof the world consists is indewed with life, and Christ is in the
life, by whose power all things do come forth and proceed into generation,
and consist according to their matters and substancies, to the which thou
give such property and virtue as they have. Thou art the universal word
remaining impassible and not turning: yet life is before the soul: for the
life of the soul is of the power of living: Thou art the seed of all things
that be in operation and made manifest: for nothing can come nor proceed from
the Elements of parents nor of any seed, if thou (O Christ) work not: if thou
withdraw thy working power from things, they perish immediately. Thou (O GOD
the holy Ghost) art the springing knowledge and understanding, flowing and
proceeding from the Father and the Son. Thou art the spiritual voice of the
manifest voice or Son, as the Son is the voice of the voice in silence,
therefore thou art of the Son and of the Father: yet but one voice, one word:
that is, one active power agreeing together before it makes any thing to be.
Thou art the Spirit of God, the power of Christ: and the Spirit of God is God:
therefore, all three of one substance: All things be in thee, as al things be
by the Son, and of the Father. Thou (O God the holy Ghost) art (as it were)
the ministry of God, and do divide the graces and ministeries in the
operation of life: so that by thee the first seeds of things are nourished and
sustained, and now also be continually moved: and first bring forth roots and
blades: after stalks, ears* flowers, blossoms, s^edes, and fruit, of each
thing in his degree, according to thy distribution and division of the gifts.
As the Father is the cause of the operation* and the Son the manifest
operation: so all three are one action and substance. Thou couplest and
k^^^est the Father and the Son in one, and art coupled with them: and all
other things thou ioynest in unity and band of peace. And because in God to
know, is as much to say, as to understand, and to know that one lives, and
to know himself is to live: therefore, to know or understand, and to live,
is all one: And because they be one, and because to be, is all one with life
and understanding: (for true being can not be without life and understanding:
neither can life and understanding be without such being) therefore they be
three, yet one substance and one God. So the soul of man, in that it is a
soul has his being, giving life and understanding, and is there in one. And
as God the Father is a Spirit substancially, and the Son is a Spirit and
motion moved, and working openly: so thou the holy Ghost art the secret
spirit and motion: Thou implantest and give strength to live and to move,
and also sustaynest all things that they may exist and live, and also continue
and be preserved. And because thou art God, thou art a Spirit: and because
thou art that Spirit thou do quicken: for it is the Spirit that
quickens: and because thou quicknest, thou have power of life: (for the
Spirit is life) therefore thou live and art life, and substancially
quickenest or give li^e to all things, or make life in all things. But
this Spirit and life which is in thee (O God) is not that which is in man,
beasts, Angels, or other things created: but all things of the world
created whatsoever they be, and of what sort souer they be, do receive life
and live of that life, according to their kind of being, and as that life does
breathe power and give power of lively virtue and strength to the^, as the
things be made able to receive it. For, there must be Agens before there be
Actio: so in all things there is proper being, life and understanding or
feeling, according to their several capacities, which they do receive of
being life and understanding: which three be all one: that is, of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, three persons and one God: in every one of which three,
all these three, vz. being life and understanding are, by which all things are
made. For, though certain things be attributed unto the several persons, to
be proper to each of them in divine things: yet it is to be understood, to
be the inseparable and agreeing operation of the three or Trinity together:
for there is but one beginning, and one cause of all things that be: and part
of divine things always is the same that is the whole.

By these (O merciful God) it may appear how injurious (and contrary to thine
honor and glory, in creating of the world, and to thy providence over the
creatures that thou have made) is the heathnish Philosophy of Aristotle, which
admits nothing, that cannot be demonstrated: And also how falsely that
Philosophi^ makes privation to be the third beginning of all natural
things: and that it assigns no Author nor propagator unto the essences or
natures which a says be eternal: and that, that Philosophy will not allow
any cause of their being besides their motion: and that some things that be
done are done without cause: as deliberation, etc. From these and such other
blind and injurious doctrine taught in that Philosophy (good and merciful
God) deliver thy people and servant. And (O most merciful God) because the
heathnish Physic of Galen, does depend upon that heathnish Philosophy of
Aristotle, (for where the Philosopher ends, there begins the Physician)
therefore is that Physic as false and injurious to thine honor and glory, as
is the Philosophy. For, that heathnish Physic (O God) does not acknowledge
the creation of man, whereby it does not rightly know why he is Microcosmus,
or little world: which is the cause why they neither know his deseases
rightly, neither provide medicine for him aptly, nor prepare it fitly, neither
minister it accordingly. This heathnish Philosophy and Physic, does
attribute thy works (O God) to heat, cold, and such causes, which it calls
falsely natural: So it teaches, that natural heat does change meat
received into man's stomach into blood, flesh, bones, brains, sine^^es,
veins, and artires: And that the like meare received of a dog, horse, beast,
or bird, etc. by heat of that beast or foul, is turned into his flesh,
blood, bones, etc. Much unlike unto that which is in man: which operation and
transmutation, in truth comes of thee, (O God) and not of any nature of
heat: and whereby in seeking for like cure in such defects, their Physic
must needs err, in not seeking help at thy hands, nor praying to thee, nor
give thanks to thee: No more does that heathnish Philosophy and Physic
acknowledge, that all seeds did receive by thy divine word the power of
multiplying, of transplantation, the essence and properties: of which, all
Philosophy, Physic, and Alchimie does consist: Therefore they must needs
err, both in the cause and effects of things in the great world and in the
little world.

Likewise, because the heathnish Philosophy does not know out of thy word,
that thou (O God) have made all things in weight, number, and measure,
therefore that Physic does not know the cause nor cure of those deseases
that be either originally or inflicted into the invisible part of man Anima
or Limbus, nor to help them: which error Plato reproved in the Greek
Phisitio^s long ago which Plato taught, that Anima curat corpus. And because
the heathnish Philosophy does attribute the cause of things to dead
qualities, of heat, cold, etc. and not to the lively virtues and powers in
things, therefore that heathnish Physic seeks by like dead qualities, to
cure lively and mechanical spirits: And because they understand not, that
deseases do proceed of the mechanical spirits and tinctures of impure
seeds joined to the pure by thy curse, O just God, therefore they seek not
their medicines in the pure seeds. And because (O mercisull God) the heathnish
Physic and the heathnish Philosophy does not acknowledge, that it is thy
power and virtue that brings forth all things that grow, and that thy
working power does preserve and maintain all things: and that it is thy
curing virtue that helps and cures all deseases, greeses and infirmities, by
such means as it pleases thee, or without means: therefore they cleave fast
to their false imagined natural causes and means of help, forgetting thee:
whereby many of them become Atheists. And because the heathnish Physic of
Galen, does not know how thou (O God) have ordained all things in unity
peace and concord, therefore it seeks the cure in dualitie and contrariety.
To be short, because (O most merciful God) the heathnish Physic does not
know that the purest, best, and medicinable part of each thing is in his
Center, therefore it neither does seek, neither have his favorers learned, nor
do know, how to find that pure part, nor to separate the pure from the
impure: they cannot digest, nor make ripe that is raw: they cannot change
sower into sweet: they cannot mittigate the lothsomnesse of heates, tastes,
smelles, coagulations, etc. neither make any medicine volatile: For which
cause, therefore do they not know the power of the mechanical spirits, by
means of their subtlety, finesse, pearcing, and moueablenesse: neither do
they know the finesse and pearcing, by means of separation of things mixed
with them: neither the separaetion by means of digestion and circulation:
wherefore, they do not know how the mechanical spirits of deseases do
differ among them selves, and one from an other in power, pearcing,
moueablenesse, finesse, grosnesse, in easy or uneasy resolution and
alteration, and such like tokens: whereby they are ignorant of the true causes
of the pangs, fits, and passions of deseases: and how and in what manner, bodies
and parts of bodies do differ one from an other, and among themselves. For,
seeds do differ in parts of the body: and as the seeds do differ, so the
bodies and parts of the bodies do differ one from an other, and their natures
and properties: of which difference of the seeds comes the difference of the
mechanical spirits contained in them, in which the gifts and offices of the
seeds do flourish. Likewise, might they know of the fits, panges, and passions
of deseases, the difference of the seeds, and of the fruits of the seeds
being known, the seeds or roots of deseases are known: even as the Pear
tree is by the Pear: because the fruits, vz. the panges, fits, passions, and
manner of the deseases, are brought forth like to the roots. Neither have they
any skill to reject the Bynary, and to bring the Ternary, to the simplicity of
unity, where by the medicines may be purged from their carcases and
impediments: and the spirit Anima, be brought out of darkness into light: by
means whereof, the corrupt body of man may be so purged, and purified, that
the troubled mind and oppressed memory may be quickened and relieved, by thy
gift (O God) and be made more able to use the talent by thee given ^t the
beginning, and the more strongly to resist the wicked deceiuer, and be better
disposed to honest life and conversation, pleasing to thee O God.

Because (O most merciful God) I do find these faults and such like in the
heathnish Philosophy and heathnish Physic, I do know that by the favorers
and followers of that Philosophy and Physic, I shall be mocked, laughed at,
had in derision, and my sayings and words shall be wrested, racked, writhed,
dismembered, pulled from their parts, and turned from their right sense and
meaning. And the more unskillful the adversaries be in the true Philosophy and
Physic, and withal wilful, the more busy (O God) will they be to replye with
taunts, quippes, scoffs, and gibes: but such deserve no place nor time of
answer. Wherefore, O most wise God, author of all wisdom, I pray thee
instruct thy people and servant in the true Philosophy and Physic: and open
the eyes and mollify the hearts of the followers of the heathen, that they may
see and follow the same for thine honor and glory* And from lying lips and
deceiptfull tongue, deliver me O God.

R. B.

FINIS.
Chapter first. What the ancient Physic is. And what the physic of the
Ethnikes or heathen is. And that there is no truth that is not derived from
Christ the truth it self.
THE true and ancient physic which consists in the searching out of the
secrets of Nature, whose study and use does flow out of the Fountains of
Nature, and is collected out of the Mathematical and supernatural precepts,
the exercise whereof is Mechanical, and to be accomplished with labor, is part
of Cabala, and is called by ancient name, Ars sacra, or magna, and sacra
scie^tia, or Chymia, or Chemeia, or Alchimia, and mystica, and by some of late,
Spagirica ars. Which shows forth the compositions of all manner bodies, and
their dissolutions, their natures and properties by labor by the fire,
following Nature diligently. So that Philosophy natural and supernatural,
the Mathematicals Chimia and Medicina be so combined together, that one of them
can not be without the other. I do mean the true and right use of Chymia, and
not the abuse thereof, which promises golden mountains under the vain title
of Philosophy and Wisdom, the wisdom whereof is consumed and wasted in
smoke, by force of the fire. This ancient and true physic consists of
Medicines of two sorts. The first is Vniuersalis or vnarii. The second is
ternarii or particularis. These two are founded upon the Center of unity,
concord and agreement, their scope and end is to bring the sick person to
unity in himself, they do agree with the rule of Gods word, they depend
upon the fountain of truth. The Eth^^kes or heathen have of their own brains
devised a third kind of physic or Medicine which is binarii or vulgaris.
This is most gross and worst, and is that physic which is most commonly
used, and most stoutly maintained and defended. This physic is founded upon a
contrary Center to the other, therefore a false Center. For it consists in
dualitie, discord and contrariety. It makes war and not peace in man's
body. It is not founded upon the rule of Gods word, but upon the authority
of men reprobate of God, and such as were Idolaters and ignorant of the truth,
consisting only in God (whom they knew not) and in his Christ the truth it
self, whom Galene the prince of that physic, in his works has blasphemed
of set purpose and by express words. And therefore he and the rest his
folowers, were sedused with the spirit of contradiction and error. Yet their
folowers think we do them great wrong in saying, such have not said nor
written the truth. As though Arts and Sciences may be possessed and exercised
by man's brains and inue^tions without God that made them. This may well be
called blasphemy. Herein Plato may be sufficient witness against them, saying
that no man can rightly understand and have knowledge of things belonging to
man, if he be ignorant in things parteyning to God: and do not first know
things divine. For seeing Christ is the way by the which we ought to begin,
proceed, go onward and to the end in all our actions, arts and Sciences, we
ought to walk in this way, as well to attain knowledge, health and life in
this world, as life in the world to come. The heathen Physicians not walking in
this way, must needs err and stray, not receiving the key of wisdom, which
is science of GOD himself, who gives wisdom to the wise. And seeing that
all things which the Father has, be his sons Christ's: and seeing wisdom
and science be the riches of God, and all wisdom is of him, and the power of
God is wisdom and science, and the working power of GOD is Christ, and Christ
is the truth, therefore he that swarueth from Christ neither has the
treasures and riches of the wisdom and science of God, neither is lead into
the truth by the truth it self, therefore has not truth. And seeing Christ
is life it self, which is the power of life to himself and to al others, by
whom all things are made and move, and by whom life is in all things, from
things celestial to things in the heavens, air, water and earth, and to all
matter in the world which has life, and he is in the life, and is the power of
the seed of all things, which become and proceed to be manifested and come to
action, of whom every body brought forth by touching, and conjunction does grow
and increase, and by whom all things are one, not as a heap of Corn or
grain is one body, only by lying together, but because all parts do hang
together, and be as it were one chain. For God, Christ, the holy Ghost, the
soul, Angels and all corporal things is as it were this chain, and the
Father is the principal life and cause of life, and al things in the world
have being and life of Christ, the life it self which gives them to all
things, and is in the life, and all in all. Who also is the light of the light,
that is of God which sits in the Center of all things that be, from whence
with his universal eye, that is with the light of his substance, whereby he is
their being, and life, does behold all things. For from the Center all things
are seen at once, and alike. Therefore all persuading speeches and fair and
plausible arguments, having great show and color of reason, being derived out
of man's brains, or corrupted or mingled with the leven of man's inue^tions,
swaruing from Christ or not resting in him, or leaving nothing or very little to
him, in whose power and government all things are: from whom health and life
is derived, in whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid, must
needs be not only confuse and vain, but also erroneous, foolish, deceitful,
false and counterfeit, though they bear never so gay titles of Philosophy,
wisdom or physic. Such is the Philosophy whereof S. Paul gives us
warning, Col. 3. saying, beware lest there be any man that spoil you through
the tradition of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ: for in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhed bodily. Such
Philosophy and physic hang not together in the chain aforesaid, nor yet be
illuminated from the right Center, nor seen from the same, but be founded upon
diverse Centers, whereby their Circles do cut one another, or touch each other,
therefore they do not consist in union, but are contrary to each other. Such
Center is the Center of dualitie, contrariety and discord. The original
thereof is worthily called Binari, the author of diversity and contrariety,
which always makes sedition and discord, as unity is the band of concord.
For concord is the union of diverse appetites of those things that do desire,
whereby they be of one mind. Therefore every thing in the world does so long
endure and abide as long as it is one: but it dies and is dissolved as soon
as it sesseth and leaves to be one. Unquietness begins in things, where
Meum and tuum, is become to be known in them: whereof comes grief, which is
a sense or feeling that can not abide division or corruption. Whereby it
appears how desirous Anima (which is medium inter corpus and spiritum) is of
unity in his body, which bends it self and strives against that passion or
grief of his body, by the which it greeueth him, that his unity and
integrity should be weakened.

Chapter second. The original causes of all diseases in the great world, and
in the little world, which is man.
GOD almighty the creator of al things, did see the angels which he had
created fall from unity, and he made all the world to the image and similitude
of unity wherein it did consist. Also by his bountiful goodness and
providence he created Microcosmum or little world, vz. man, his ternarium and
last creature, and substituted him in the place of his other creatures which
were cast out of heaven. From this one did God derive all mankind. And he did
not create the woman which should be cowpled to man, as he made him but out of
him, that al mankind should spring out of one, to the commendation of unity
and concord. The world did persist in this union, and did observe the nature
of unity, until that wretched creature Binarius, which fell from unity, and
made a dualitie and contrariety, envying the state of man, that persisted in
unity, by captious sophistical reason did persuade him to eat of the Apple
forbidden, whereby he brake unity, and fell headlong into disobedience,
dualitie and contrariety. Then was he spoiled of perfection, and of the health
of his soul and body, and purchased to himself all the filthiness of vice,
infirmity and sickness. Also the Seeds of all things of the world, which by
virtue of the word of God at the beginning, had received power of generation
and multiplication, were perfect and sound without corruption, and did persist
in unity, until such time as by the said counsel of Binarius, man fell into
disobedience and brake unity. Whereupon by the curse of God impure Seeds were
mingled with the perfect seeds, and did cleave fast to them, and do cover
them as a garment: and death was joined to life. So imperfection and impuritie,
is joined to purity, and death to life, sickness to health, not only in man,
but also in all living creatures, Herbs, Plants, Mynerals: and in the fruits
of the Firmament and air. By this means the Mynerals have their rust and
canker, which work their destruction and end. The vegetables, as herbs,
trees and plants, have their corruptions of diverse sorts, joined with their
pure balm and seeds, which in their time work their putrification, withering
and co^sumption, according to the Science and property of their impure seeds,
besides the alteration which they receive by the nature of the soil wherein
they grow, as may be tasted, felt and perceived, by wheat sown in some
ground, which will manifestly taste of Garlic, and be much like in property.
And some ground will make transplantation of one seed into an other, as from
Wheat to Drake or Darnell or such like. The beasts also, Cattle and such
living creatures, because they live and be nourished with the vegetables and
mineral resolutions, have like impurities as they have, according to the
nature of the soil whereupon they feed, and of the water which they drink.
As appears by the Meadows near the River Potheus in ye I Will of Candie, near
the City Cortina, wherein grows such grass and herbs, that the Cattle
which be fed therewith will have no appare^t Spleen. Some countries and soil
do infect the Liver, others the Lungs, other places, other parts of the Cattle
which be there fed, as experience teaches. Which parts of the Cattle our
forefathers did diligently vewe and search before they laid the foundation of
their houses, towns or Cities, and that they did oftentimes, because they
would know whether those parts were infected with sickness, with their food
and by the often sight of them, they judged whether the Cattle fed there were
wholesome for their victual and food or no. And because man receives his
nourishment out of all the rest, therefore he has infinite sorts and kinds
of diseases, and therefore no other Creature has so many means to bring it to
sickness, nor to his death. But the food and nourishments for man's body,
though they have in them mingled, venomous, sickly or medicinable properties,
yet for all that, by reason of that mixture with their good seeds, as long as
unity and concord is kept between them, they be tempered, separated, resolved
and expelled out of man's body. But if man do take them out of measure, or if
the first stomach, or the Stomach of any part of the body be faulty in
attraction, separation, resolution, digestion, distributio^ or expultio^, the
seeds of diseases do then take root in man's body. And that every thing has
his impure seed joined with his pure, and death to his life, though it be
never so wholesome or pleasant to man's nature, is manifested and made plain to
the eye, touch and taste of them that have skill to separate the pure from the
impure, by his ancient Physic or Chymia. They find in Honey and Sugar, as
veuemous impuritie as in Arsnicke, and in Roses, Violets, Balm, Betony, gold,
Silver, etc. there be impurities. They also find by this art, as there is
nothing so good, but it has in it also some impure thing and unwholesome, which
they separate from the pure, so also there is nothing so unwholesome, perilous
nor venomous, but it has in it also some good thing and pure which has virtue
and power to cure and help those diseases and hurtes which be caused and
procured by them and by others also. As out of Quicksiluer is drawn medicine
which can help diseases by him caused, and by other means also. They find in
Arsenicke excellent medicine for diverse griefs. So Lead has in it remedy for
those diseases which be caused and bread in the Miners of Lead. Out of Tartar
also is drawn excellent medicines for those diseases which come of the Tartar
of Wine, and so forth of others. Therefore all diseases do proceed of their
impure Seeds, which are endowed with science and knowledge of generation and
transplantation of impure fruits, vz. of sickness and diseases, according and
agreeable to their gift and science: Which do appear and proceed into action
by separation, breach of unity, peace, concord and agreement, whereby they
are enabled to strive for the superiority with nature and pure seeds in man's
body. Seeing therefore yt first original of diseases in man did proceed from
the breach of unity, therefore it must needs be that all health must consist
only in unity. And in and by this unity health is to be sought, and not in
contrariety, as the Ethnikes do.

Chapter third. Of the universal Medicine, And how the dark speeches of the
writers thereof, did deceive covetous men, whereby the right use of this
Physic was not understood, but by abuse it grew to be despised.
THE first of the Medicines aforesaid of the ancient Physic which is the
universal Medicine, is such, as by that only, all and al manner diseases of
what sort and kind soever they be, are cured. It is so perfect, temperat, pure
and incorruptible, that it is able to correct, amend and consume all
corruptions in man's body, even as fire does consume the impure part, and
separateth it from the pure. It increases the vital spirits, and defends
and preserves the body from corruption, because it is separated from all
corruptible substance, from all qualities of heat, cold, etc. It is not
moist, could, dry nor hot, but it is Aethereall, separated from the
inferior Elements: and it is of an incorruptible nature in respect of the
body from whom it is taken. And because it is agreeable with our Anima (the
Medium aforesaid) it nourishes, fortifieth and strengthens it, whereby it is
made able to digest, consume and expel, all the corruption and impedimentes of
man's body, wherewith it is overwhelmed and let, that it was not able to
exercise, perform and accomplish his office, duty and actions. If this
natural lively fire in man like to the Ethereal fire, were not continually
nourished, it would consume it self and also that is ingendered of it.
Therefore when nature in the stomach has separated the pure from the impure,
of meats which we eat, and of our drink, he does expel the impure parts
by their proper passages, but it reteineth and keeps the fine and pure
bodies, that be the cariers of the heavenly virtues, for nourishments of two
sorts, the one is of all the members of the body, the which nourishment also is
separated into the nourishment of the three substanties, whereon we consist.
That is of our Salt, Sulphur and Mercury. The other which is the liquor of the
heavenly Luna, is the nourishmeut of our natural fire or Anima. But if this be
oppressed, stopped, or let of his operation or working by the corruption of our
bodies, then is it to be nourished, helped and fortified with this
Philosophical and Ethereal medicine, in which is no grossness, impuritie,
nor any thing superfluous. And our Anima lively and natural fire does take and
receive to it this Aethereall medicine, virtue, and heavenly power like to it
self, Whereby it is helped, strengthened and made able to be delivered from
his impediments and lettes, and to consume and expel superfluitics of the
body, whereby the body is compelled to agree and to be changed into the like
nature, void and clean from corruption and superfluity. Because nature
delights to be joined with her like, with peace rather then with war, with
unity and concord, rather then with discord. And all natural bodies desire in
their kinds to be perfected: which natural desire is the cause of all
perfection. This Medicine Vnary, among the Philosophers and Chymicall
Physicians, is called by diverse and many names, and covered under diverse
parables and dark kind of speeches, which brought the right use of this Art
into oblivion, and deceived worldly men, and brought many from rich estate to
extreme beggary. For whereas the Philosophers were lovers of wisdom and not of
the world, nor of worldly riches, but desired to have ternam atque quaternam
beatitudinem, vz. mentem sanam in corpore sano. Therefore they used this
universal medicine, wherewith they digest and expel the corruptions out of
their natural bodies, whereby the body was so prepared, that therein was made a
perfect union between Corpus, Anima and Spiritus, and transitus ab extremo
perfecto per medium ad imperfectum. Whereby the body was made subject to the
soul, whereof seperatio mentis a corpore might ensue. This surely they
accounted purest Gold and chiefest riches, as appears as well by other
Philosophers, as by them that write of this art. But they that did write of
this Medicine, did it so covertly, that men thought that those Philosophers
promised in their writings mountains of Gold, and such a Stone or fixed
matter that could convert and turn al other base metals into material Gold,
wherein (I think) they were greatly deceived. For though some say that they
do find by experience, how to take out of an ounce of Gold, a small
quantity, wherewith they will turn an Dunce of Duick silver or Lead into
perfect Gold, yet they get nothing thereby, for by this means they make no
more Gold, then that weight of Gold was, fto^ whence they took their medicine,
because the medicin had no more goldish nature, then served only for an ounce,
therefore could give no more to others, but may slightly color more metal,
but then it is no Gold. The probable and likely reasons of concockting,
digesting, purging and separating of the raw and impure metals, and so to
make them pure by art, as nature in the earth does make perfect Gold and
silver, by conquocting and purging of Sulphur and Mercury, because art is the
follower of Nature, has deceived and undone many men. But if there may be such
tra^smutation made into gold, as men imagine and hope for, yet I would advise
no man, to study this Art to that end, nor yet to assay or practice that way,
least he do repent to late, as others have don before. For in my opinion, the
Philosophers Gold is such a temperate medicine as I have declared, which in
deed is Astrum separated from his impediments and gross substance, and
brought to such puritic that it works in man's body, even as the virtue and
power of the Stars work in any matter prepared therefore, by nature. For
this cause the Philosophers called the Mynerall diseases and instrmities of
man's body, by the name of imperfect metals, as of Lead or Saturn, of Coper or
Venus, of Iron or Mars, etc. like as the Astrologians do, as well by reason of
their place in man's body, as for their nature and properties. For there be
double Excrements in man's body, the one proceeding of his Balm which is his
Gold, the other proceeding of nourishment. The excrements coming of his Gold
be called Myuerall excrements, of the likeness of the dross which is about
the Gold, before it be fined with Antimony. These Mints are as it were Stars
or Seeds, therefore they make influencies and blomings, which are the fruits
of Stars and Seeds. Therefore they call bealth and sickness in man,
Minerals, that is the fruits of man. Such diseases in man's Gold are called
Mynerall diseases, which be purged only with Mynerall Medicines. For Mynerall
excrements are only purged with Mineral medicines, which consist in the
universal medicine and in the tinctures of Gold, Mercury and Antimony, which
purge man's Balm* and remooueth it from all filth, which being purged, all
other filth will easily be voyded. But if these myneral excrements be not
purged, then they hinder the operation and working of man's Gold or Balm, into
the three Principia, of man's body aforesaid. Whereof follows their
corruption, and of the corruption of the Salts in man, follow Boyles, Ulcers,
Impostumes and griefs not outwardly discerned, most paynefull, etc. So that
when any man yt had any of these infirmities, was brought to perfect temper by
this universal medicine, then they said, that those imperfect metals were
turned into Gold. And by this means, was this great treasure of medicine
hidden, so that very few Physicians and professors of Philosophy did
understand it, though the Philosophere themselves in their writings exhorted al
men that did read their books, that they should not credit the bare letters
of their writings, but should rather make an allegorical exposition thereof.
This seeking of material gold by this Art, did bring it out of the right use
of physic, and did (as I said) bring many rich folk to extreme beggary,
whereby they grew to sophistication of mettalles, and so when they had wasted
their own substance they proceeded to exercise deceit, lying and devises to
bring others into like state and case unto them selves, which moved princes in
their countries to make Laws against Multiplyers as they were termed.

The ancient Chymicall Philosophers and Physicians, did use such dark
speeches and parables in their writings, because Secrets are to be reueyled
only to the Godly, and unto the children of doctrine and knowledge, and unto
the wise, therefore they did write unto such, that the secrets might be hidden
from the ungodly, foolish, slothful and unthankful hypocrites, whereby the
wise and diligent with travail and labor might attain to the understanding
thereof, as one of them said, it is not meet to provide for a man, a Pigion,
and to roast it for him and also to put it unto his mouth, or chawe it for him.
The ancient Egyptians did use no letters in holy and secret matters, but
pictures, figures and charects graven of things and beasts, least the Secrets
and mysteries should be profaned among the vulgar people. Such was the manner
of the wise men of the oldest age, to deliver the profund and deep inquisition
and search of wisdom, by allegogories of secret Letters, and by Mysteries.
Therefore all the wrytings of the ancient Philosophers and Poets are full of
Riddles, dark speeches and parables, to avoid the contempt of the common
people. Such were the often teaching of our savior Christ. So in the Primative
Church, those that were Catechymeni and Energymeni, and those that had penance
enjoined them, might hear the Psalms and the reading of the holy Scriptures,
but they might not be present at the ministration of the Sacraments, nor at the
holy works which were done afterward, but they only were present which were
thought worthy.

An example by an excellent particular Chymicall Medicin, under the title, to
convert into
TAke the green dragon and bath him in warm liquor, so long until all his
blood be come out of his veins, take out the purer part of this blood
according to art, and distill it, then c^hobate the same three time, take this
liquor and distill it with the Liver of Mars, and keep it for a precious
thing. For it will turn the Calces of Luna, into perfect Sol, that is to say,
it will turn silver into Gold.

But the true meaning hereof is, that this medicin will convert and turn those
parts of man's body affected, which be subject or attributed to the moon into
perfect health.

Chapter 4. Of the Medicine Ternarij or perticularis.
But because this universal medicin and knowledge thereof is gr^u^ted of ye
almighty God but unto very few, and is rather to be wished and prayed for,
then to be looked for, therefore the particular medicin called Ternarii, as is
aforesaid, is diligently to be labored for and searched out, which often times
performs and works the effet of the universal medicin, even in grievous
diseases, in consuming the impure seeds of diseases, and in confirming and
fortifying the power of our inward and natural Balm. This medicin of
Ternarii consists in ye three substa^ties, which are to be found in every
body* that is to say in Sal, Sulphur and Mercuri. For as each body is
compounded of these three, so they be causes of all diseases and not humors. In
these three consists all man's health and sickness, as long as they do agree
together, the body is in health, but as soon as they disagree, and unity is
broken between them, and if any of them be exalted or break unity the body
is sick. Therefore there be three general kinds of diseases, and each of them
have their especial sorts of infirmities, as there be sundry sorts of Sal,
Sulphur and Mercuri of diverse and sundry natures. There be like wise three
kinds of medicine required, and each kind of sundry nature to preserve or
restore man's body to health. So that if any of these three be exalted to much
and pass their mean, or break unity, he must be amended and reduced to
perfect state by his own kind, and not by a contrary kind, by way of
trasmutation. If the disease be mixed or compounde of any of these (for there
is no disease almost but is mixed by some means, yet it has one of these
three that is chief) then must such disease be help with oue or two of these
taken out of some other fit body or substance. per propriu^ ad suum innatum,
because nature cou^teth his like nature, and desires much to be coupled joined
and changed into his like. This natural desire is cause of all perfection. As
long therefore as the three substanties aforesaid, do abide in unity peace
and concord in ma^s body, and in their own proper degrees, without pride doing
their office, their body continues in health. But because nothing is perpetual
nor continues in estate long, among creatures consisting of flesh, therefore
by reason of the diversity of the gifts, virtue and power which be in them,
and by reason of the impure seeds joined with our norishment, they abide not
long in their office, they abide not long in their degrees, they exalt
themselves, they break unity peace and concord, the badd is separated from
the obedience and mixture of the good: which breach of unity and separation
does show those sicknesses and deseases in man's body, which before by reason of
the unity concord and obedient mixture could not break forth appear nor be
made manifest. The which things as they come to pass in man, that is
Mycrocosmus, so do they likewise in the great world. Which therefore is called
Mycrocosmus or the little world, because after God had made all things in the
great world of nothing, he made man in whom spiritually be contained all those
things that is the properties of all those things which be really in the
great world, as the ancient Philosophers have taught by these and like
words, homo naturaliter habet naturam omnium tincturarum. Therefore that this
Mycrocosmus may be inwardly known to the Physician, he had need to have
lumen naturae, that is the knowledge of things in the great world, how all of
them do grow increase be changed and dye, whereby he may by the insight of
his mind understand the inward and hidden nature of man. Wherefore he that
would perfectly know what inward things be in man, he had need to compare the
virtues and properties of the natural things in the great world with the
inward things of man. As you may perceive by wine (for this purpose) which as
long as his spirit does abide in him mingled with the tarte vinegar in unity
and peace, the wine is sound pleasant and perfect, but as soon as the
spirit of the wine is separated from the mixture of the sharp vinegar, then
the vinegar does appear is manifested and may be tasted. Likewise when the
vinegar is separated from the tartar, the^ does the tartar appear. So is it in
all things when they grow to corruption putrefaction and dissolution, then
the good that was in them is separated from the bad seeds, the bad do no
longer abide in obedience of the good, but have broken peace, concord, unity
and obedience, whereby things do grow to corruption and death. This ancient
Chimnicall Physic does teach such separation of the good from the bad out of
all things, and to make them manifest to visible and palpable experience,
which the Ethnicke Physic has nothing to do with, nor his followers has
any skill thereof, yet they bark and bite against this skill through their
ignorance.

Chapter fifth. How deseases ought to be cured by peace and not by discord in
man's body.
THerefore, as when the seed of the disease or corruption in man is separated
from his temperature co^corde and unity of the body, or of the good seed in
the body, then the body feels grief and sickness: so on the other side, to
separate the impure seed that hach gotten the maysterie from the pure that is
maystered, is the way to get health, therefore sweat which is the seperatio^
of the unclean from the clean is wholesome, for it purges by the pores and
transpirations, so it makes the good seed able to master the badd, by
seperating the bad seeds in vapors, through the pores and transpirations in
the time of sweating, and with the sweat, whereby the unity and concord is
restored in the body, whilst nature and the good seeds be made so strong
that the badd do not exalt themselves above the other. Likewise al medicines
ministered into the body, ought to be such as have property to bring the sick
body to unity and concord: therefore like is to be ministered to that which is
like in our nature, which order does depend upon the true Center of union. And
contrary things are not to be cured by their contraries, unlike to our nature,
which manner of proceeding is from the Center of discord, contrary to the
Center of unity, and therefore a false Center. For seeing that all things do
hang together in one chain (as is aforesaid) and man is partell of that
chain, and Mycrocosmus having in it the properties of the great world
spiritually, therefore there is in the great world, that which is agreeable
to the nature of man, in what part soever it be weakened, or not able to
resist his enemy, which because of the conueniency and agreement with our
nature, does desire to be joined with it. Wherefore it must be ministered in due
order, finesse and proportion, it is able to fortify, comfort and strengthen
nature and our natural balm, and it will be as it were a weapon for nature
against the enemy or disease, whereby nature by him self will become and be his
own physician. Therefore the Physician ought to minister such things, which
nature in the place afflicted does require for the cure that is like to it
self, and not contrary qualities, such as will make peace in the body and not
wars, unity and not discord, such as will help nature and not trouble it,
and will strengthen it and not weaken it. Such medicines for the love and
liking they have to our nature afflicted have a desire to be joined and coupled
together, as a hongry and thirsty man desires meat or drink, which nourish
well. And as one friend coueteth and desiereth the company of his dear friends
long absent, which natural love is the cause of perfection. Therefore his
proper and ordinary medicine, is to be ministered to each thing. So shall we not
need of the Ethnikes directories. And such like are to be joined to their like
in right Anotomie. We ought not to seek help in things contrary and
repugnant: who finds medicine for the Liver in Gratian, Agarick, or
Colocinthis, or who finds medicin for the Gall in, Manna, Honey, Sugar or
Polipody? therefore like are to be joined with their like in right Anotomy,
Ministering of contraries perteyneth rather to diet then to medicin, and they
may serve to mittigate the pain, but not to take away the root of the
disease. Humors and qualities, to the which the folowers of the Ethnikes do so
much clean, and in the which they spend their study and labor, are but
only dead accidents, without power of life. They be conditions, signs,
tokens, and as it were only flowers and colors of diseases and not the very
matter, cause, substance, or nature of the disease, they are caused and not the
causes. Wherefore when they go about to cure the humor or quality, they
fiatter the pain and grief, but they leave the disease uncured. For the
signs of things are not the matter or substance it self. Therefore he that
will be a perfect Physician, must know each disease by his right Anatomy, that
is to say, by the matter, property and nature of the true substance of the
disease, as which of the three substances have broken unity, and not by the
sign of it. Also he must have the right Anatomy of all diseases, and of all
natural thing before his eyes, so shall he apply to each infirmity his apt
remedy. For by the concordance and agreement of the Anatomy of the herb or
other natural thing for medicine, and of the disease, the Physician knows
what things have affinity together, and ought to be coupled and joined together
in unity. For the right Anatomy consists not in cutting of the body, but in
the knowledge of the Amity, concord and nature of all natural externe things,
with man, which do agree, embrace and receive each other, and concord together
in mutual agreement, in virtue, power, property and essense, to defend
nature. So that by the right concord of these two Anatomies, vz. of the disease
and of the medicine, true cure does proceed and grow, whereby is declared,
that like are to be joined with there like, and like are cured with their like:
and that all health consists in unity and agreement, in which of necessity
health is to be sought for. And that sickness can not be taken away from the
third creature by Binarius the Author of discord and contrariety, but by
vnari ruling equally in three.

Chater 6. Of the medicin Binarii or Vulgaris, how injurious it is to the body.
By these aforesaid it does appear how the medicines of the ancient Physic
do disagree with those medicines which be commonly in use, which be contained
under the third kind of Medicine called Binarii or vulgaris, For these
medicines do more agree with the body (because bodies are nourished with
bodies) then with Anima wherein Fons vitae consists. This medicine helps
little to long life, or to the relief of Anima, if it be feeble or hindered in
his work. Because these medicines be ministered with their bodies, the work
virtue and power in them that should do good is hindered: so that it does little
good, especially in parts of the body, a far of from the Stomache. For all
things that should serve for medicine, should be purged first from their
gross substance, because whilst the heavenly virtues be wrapped, hidden and
clogged in the matter or substance of their bodies, they abide and cleave fast
to them, and can not easily be parted a sunder, unless nature have help
thereunto prepared by Art, which may separate the pure from the impure,
otherwise the working of that heavenly virtue is hindered. For it is the virtue
of each thing that is medicinable and not the body. So that seeing separation
of the pure from the impure must needs be made in the stomache, if it be not
made before, because every thing has his corruption joined with it, and
because the virtues of each thing be small in quantity, and tied and clogged
with the mass of his body, (as is aforesaid) it is better this separation be
made before the medicine come near to the stomache then after, in the sick
man's Stomache which is to weak to make such sepation. Besides this, by such
gross and raw medicine, the patient receives rather nourishment then
medicine, centrarie to their own rules, Omne medicamentum quod transit in
alimentum, cessant esse medicamentum. For when the medicine ministered with his
body or substance, comes into the Stomach, it is separated into treble
nourishment, that is of our Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, and into double
excrement. So that when these medicines be rightly considered and compared
together, there seems to be as great diversity between the raw and gross
medicines, and those that be purged by fire, as is betwixt the true doctrine of
Christ and the Romish doctrine, For as the doctrine of Christ for the health of
the Soul, is altogether spiritual, and the holy Scriptures of God do instruct
the soul of man and speak to it, whereby the evil affections and the actions
and filthy works of the body be taken away, and amendment of life follows.
So do these ancient medicines for the health of the body consist in heavenly
virtues, which are to be ministered and joined with the lively Spirits of man's
body, that they may thereby be fortifyed and made strong, or rectified and
brought to unity, whereby follows the help and cure of the diseases of the
body. And as the Romish religion is mixed with impurities, and stands in
outward ceremonies and traditions, corporal exercises which be lets to the
works of the spirit, whylest it is occupied about them. So these corrporall
and gross medicines, which serve for the body, consist in bodyly gross and
raw substances, whereby the work of the heavenly virtues be let and hindered.
And these bodies do resist digestion, which is occupied about them, by means
whreof the weak and faint parts that desire relief, can not draw to them
these virtues for their succor, being bound and fast tied to their gross
substance. And even as the Romish religion teaches that in the Eucharist,
there is no substance of bread and wine, but only accidents, and that our
bodies be nourished with the accidents of the Sacrament, even so the Ethnicke
Physicians and their folowers do teach, that accidents, vz. heat, cold, etc.
be causes of al diseaces. And that by them diseases are cured, and health
restored, whereby they attribute vim vitae, to accidents and dead qualities
which are caused, raised and stirred up, by other things, and be them selves
only Simptomata morborum. So that in curing those accidents and qualities,
they do as if a man would go about to stop the flame and smoke of the fire,
and leave the hot coals burning.

Chapter seven. One cause why the Author did write this treatise.
I Was the last Parliament time before this that is now sommoned at the table
of a reverend Bishop of this land, which was not unskillful in Physic, in
the company of a Physician, which inueying against this ancient Physic, by
the name of Paracelsus his Physic, ignorantly attributing to him the first*
invention thereof, pleased himself and some of his audience, in telling that
the same Physic, had no ground nor foundation, neither any being. Whereupon
he told a tale that a man came to a Physician and said to him that he was
sick, but he could not tell where, neither how he took his sickness, nor how
it held him. The Physician answered him, that he* had a Garden he could not
tell where, it was full of simples he could not tell their properties, and that
he would help him but he could not tell when: And concluded that this
Paracelsicall Physic (as he called it) was like, in that, it was vain, had
no ground, nor being. I answered him with an other tale of a Poet, which
disdayning that Paynters and Poets were compared together and joined in one
proverb, pictoribus atque poetis quidlibe^ addendi semper sunt equa potestas,
came to a ^u^ning Painter and asked of him whether he could paint a man,
shooting at a bird sitting upon the top of a tree, with a Sun, and the bird
therewith killed and falling down, yet the man should not be seen nor appear.
The Paynter answered he could do all that he required, saving the noise of
the Gunne and the smell of the powder: which being excepted, the price was
agreed on, the day set for the delivery of the work and for the payment of
the money, and bands made of each side for performance of couenauntes on both
sides. The Poet at the day prefixed seeing and vewing the piece of Paynting,
could not find the man with the Gunne, but all the rest of the work he found
very artificially wrought: whereupon he enters the Paynters band into the
law: He pleads performance of couenauntes: the condition of the band being
read and the paynting vewed, the Gunner could not be found: whereupon the
action was like to pass against the Paynter. Then said he, it is parcel of
the condition of ye band that the Gunner should not be seen: But yet said he,
turn over the leaf, which cunningly was couched in the piece of painting:
then appeared the Gunner very artificially painted, and also a great sort of
the fables and tales of the Poets, before his time very cunningly wrought. And
among them he had made very artificially a little Ant or Pisiner, with a Poets
hood about his neck, creeping out of a Cave under a great huge Mountain. I
left the applying of the tale in both the po^utes thereof to him. I do confess
that new vain confused and imperfect doctrine, without ground is odiouse and
a sign of r^she wit and great folly. But seeing that both sides do claim
truth, perfection, aunciantie and continuance, on their sides their methoodes
and opinions being somewhat briefly laid abroad to the indifferent Reader, and
after the original progression and continuance of both these Phisickes
likewise being set down, I doubt not but he will be able to judge hetwixt them.
The chief points therefore be these.

Chapter eight. Certain differenses, between the ancient Physic and the
Physic of the Heathens.
THE Ethnic Philosophers lay the foundation of their Philosophy upon
Aristotle a Heathen and ignorant Master and teacher of the true knowledge of
God and of his truth.

The Chymicall Philosopher lays the foundation of his Philosophy in Gods
book, and allows none other principles of Philosophy, but such as be there
sound, or such as may be deduced out of the same, or be not contrary to it.

2 The Ethnicke Philosophers ascribe the efficient chief and principal cause
of things unto nature, which is in them, whereby they tie and bind God to the
second cause, and take away his providence over his creatures.

The Chymicall Philosophers affirm, that all nature of things be only
isntrumental causes, not working of them selves nor principally, but depending
wholly upon the power and commandment of God.

3 The Ethnicke Physicians do seek with mortal medicines (that is to say)
such medicines as have corruption joined with immortality, whereof must needs
follow dissolution, whereof comes death, to cure and help the heavenly and
Aethereall virtue in man's body. And they seek to cure the material body
subject to the worker and mouer, and leave the worker and mouer and his art
and cunning unthought on, and not provided for, because his art and cunning is
not to them known.

The Chymicall Physician teaches for the perfect Philosophical medicine, to
separate the gift of nature, the life, the Science, cunning and art ^^ the
worker and mouer, (which he calls immortal) and the artificer worker and
mouer, in a metaphisicall body, from the corruptible material body, subject to
the worker, into which it moves and works therewith ^o cure and help the
Aethereall and heavenly virtue and power in man, which is the subject wherein
life consists and shines, by whose power and virtue the body subject to the
mouer is preserved and maintained, and by it restored, when the corruption
thereof does oppress, let, and hinder his operation. So that it appears that
the followers of the Ethnicke Physicians in ministering of their medicines, do
as if they would go about to restore a fire, where is remaining a few
sparkles, under green wood, by heaping on more green wood, thinking thereby to
make the sparkles to kindle and burn, but they will not put more fire to the
sparkles, nor yet use any means to blow then* to make them burn. And as if
they would minister medicines to a sick man's house wherein he dwells, and
not to the man that is sick.

4 The Etnick Physicians lay their foundation upon the false Center of Binarii
and dualitie, which is the Root of contrariety discord and dissension,
therefore most commonly they teach that contrary things are to be cured by
their contraries.

The Chimicall Physician lays his foundation upon the true Center of Vnarii
or union, which is the root of concord and unity. So that when any
contrariety in man's body that is to say, any infirmity or weakness of
nature must be removed or amended, which did rise, begin and grow by reason
of the contrariety and inward dissension of the three substanties of Sal,
Sulphur, and Mercury, whereon man's body consists, which have broken unity and
concord among them selves, or exaited themselves one above an other, it must be
done with peace and concord, and not with dissension and discord. One disease
may not be added to another. And the Monarchy of man's body must be preserved
by harmony, consent and agreement, and not by Mono^nachie. Therefore the
Medicine ought to be such as may bring the sick body to unity, which can not
be done by Binarii the author of discord and contrarietie^, but by vnarii
ruling equally in three. But this doctrine the folowers of the Ethnikes can not
digest, because they know not the three substanties aforesaid, though by art
they may be made manifest out of each thing to the eye and touch: neither do
they know the concordance and agreement of the three in one, nor their
exaltation.

5 The followers of the Ethnicke Physicians, be ruled by the doctrine and
principles of Galen, Auicen, and such other.

The Chymicall Physician in his physic first and principally respects the
word of of God, and acknowlegeth it to be his gift, next he is ruled by
experience, that is to say, by the knowledge of three substanties, whereof each
thing in the great world and man also consists, that is to say, by their
several Sal, Sulphur and Mercury, and by their several properties, virtues and
natures, by palpable and visible experience. And when he knows the three
substanties and all their properties in the great world, then after shall he
know them in man. For man is Microcosmus for this cause, that he might have
the good and bad sickness and health of the great world. The right way to come
to this knowled is to try all things by the fire: for the fire teaches the
science and art of Physic. It is the Physicians master: it teaches the
Physician experience, by digesting, fixing, exalting, resolving, reducing,
compounding, and such like. By this experience shall he find out the three
substanties of all creatures in the world, of what nature, faculty, property
and condition they be of. So shall he know all things by visible and palpable
experience, so that the true proof and trial shall appear to his eyes and
touched with his hands. So shall he have ye three Principia, each of them
separated from* the other, in such sort, yt he may see them, and touch them in
their efficacy and strength, then shall he have eyes, where with the physician
ought to look and read with all. Then shall he have that he may taste and not
before. For the^ shall he know, not by his own brains, nor by reading, or by
report, or hearesay of others, but by experience, by dissolution of Nature,
and by examyuing and search of the causes, beginnings and foundations of the
properties and virtues of things, which he shall find out not to be
attributed to cold or heat, but to the properties of the three substanties of
each thing and his Arcanum. Then may he use Lumen Naturae, and by means of
that use his eyes in those things that he to be seen. This is the sure way
as one of their own coat says, it is in vain to leave the use and help of
senses for reasons sake. And an other of the same stamp, says: Experience is
the maysteries of things.

6 The followers of the Ethnickes in the nature of Simples, as Herbs,
Plants, Roots, etc. father themselves upon Gallen, Mesue, dioscorides, etc.
and say it is written that in their Books. So that who is learned in their
Books may proceeve Doctor of their Physic.

The Chymicall Physician tries all things by fire, whereby the virtue,
nature, and property of each thing appears to the palpable and visible
experience. By this is found in Honey a venomous tartis^nesse, and much
filthiness in Surgar. And in Arsenicke excellent good medicine, wholesome and
friendly for man^ body, when the impuritie is separated and cast away. By this
means be found especiali things even of one kind only to differ from an
other of the same kind. As the Rosine of one Country is not of that nature as
the Rosine of an other Country. Wheat that grows upon some ground has the
property of Garlic, or some other property according to the nature of the
soil or ground either wholesome or unwholesome. And the things growing upon
Mountains do differ from their like, or from things of the same kind growing
on the plain. And generally each Country most commonly has his proper desease
(besides them that be caused of Influencies) by reason of ye food which we
receive for nourishment, either of the vegetables which receive their
nourishment of the resolved spirits of the Myneralles, or of the Animals which
be nourished of the vegetables, in the soil whereupon they feed. Whereby it
comes to pass, that if a Physician do follow the opinion of Writers of other
Nations, or be cunning only in his own Country and Region, he shall err in
his medicine. So that Nature made manifest by fire and the right applying it to
medicine, makes a Physician according to this Art. He that lists to lean
to Books, let him learn of those Books which Paracelsus has most Godly and
learnedly expressed in his Labyrinth. In comparison of which al other
Aucthorities in those matters are small or none. Ars Signata also has his
place to give evidence of the properties of things.

7 The Ethnickes themselves that write of Symples, etc. measure (as the plowe
man does) the nature of them by their outward tastes and accidents, which
perish in digestion, so few outward things keep their degrees, which the
Hearbals describe, for the middle body does blind the physician.

The Chymicall Physician in trial of the nature of things, first spoyleth
them of all their outward forms, qualities, impurities, and accidents, which
be couerts and clothes of the virtues and garments, or ornaments of nature,
because superfluities, impurities, etc. do come to bodies accidentally and not
borne in them, in their first nature, nor be in them radically, therefore they
are fugitine, by reason whereof it is possible to spoil them of their
accidents, and by the fire artificial to purge and cleanse them, and to take
away all their superfluities and externe things, meet for the plowman to judge
upon, leaving only their Arcana, inward and secret things remaining for the
physician to judge upon. For mortification is the beginning of dissolution and
separation of good from evil. Whereby the inward Nature and arcana thereof
does remain free from his accidents which then do show the very properties
and nature of things. Aron called in english Coccowpint, has a very hot
taste in the leaves and root. Wormewod has a bitter taste, yet by light
digestion, preparation and separation of their virtues and properties from
their bodies, they vanish away and be lost. It is otherwise in Ginger, because
his heat is stable, lively and fou^^ed in his natural seed, virtue or
property, and cleaves to it steadfast. The Vitrum of Antimonie is without any
taste, yet for all that is vehement Purgation. Lead like wise has no taste, yet
notwithstanding, a pleasant sweet Sugar will be drawn out of it, comfortable
or pourging medicines, or such as cause sleep, can never be found out by their
taste of heat or cold. The practisers in this art do find by experience by
healpe of the fire, that each thing has two natures, that is occultum and
manifestum, and that manifestum is commonly contrary to occultum. By this
means of the fire, they find Quicsiluer in manifesto is cold and moist. and
within his occultum, is hot and dry, And farther that in each thing is good
and bad: of the bad do diseases rise, by the good being separated from the
bad, the same diseases are cured and helped. This good thing is Arcanu^ of that
thing, and is in the inner part of the thing in occulto, and is not tasted
before separation, as in Arsnick and poisons. And diseases caused by
Quicksiluer, Lead, or any other thing be cured by Arcana taken out of them.
Honey and Sugar have good in manifesto, but in occulto they have sharp poison,
which can not be tasted before separation, Glass is hidden in ashes and Glewe
in leather, Therefore the outward tastes of the inward body of any thing does
not, nor can try the inward nature, virtue or property of any thing, which
should serve for medicine. Even as the Stomache does prepare all things put
into it, and dissolueth, seperateth, and breaks all the accidents of heat,
cold, etc. and searches out all their Arcana and ver^nes of the meat,
because all other things dye in the stomach: even so the Herb* Plant, etc.
must putrify and dye in putrefaction, and be borne again before it be a
medicine. But the s^cend life which is after putrefaction is profitable for
medicine. For a Grain does not bring forth fruit unless it be first cast
into the ground, and suffer putrefaction: so the stomach leaves nothing
whole or vnputrified, but seperateth, digesteth, and putrifieth all things put
into it, but if they dye not and putrify in the stomach they doc no good: but
it is a sign of weakness thereof. So what soever of the Herbs, Plants,
etc. dies or goes away with the life thereof (as the outward ornaments do)
whatsoever does not remain after putrefaction, nor does pass in regeneration
that is not subject to the Physician. Therefore those things that let
putrefaction let health. And unless all the outward things be spoiled there
can be no knowledge of their natures. And unless all the old nature of
things do pass into regeneration, there will be no right medicine. Therefore
all the Physicians labor and endeavor ought to be bent about the separation of
the pure from the impure, and about regeneration. For from thence ^^^w
Tynctur^s, Arcana, Quintum esse, in which be reposed and hidden all mysteries,
the whole foundation true labor and care of the Physician.

8 The Heathen Physicians and their followers say there be four humors in
man, and according to those humors they attribute to man four complexions.

The Chemical Physician says, each member has his proper humor not like to
any of the four, but according to the c^^itution of the members, and their
effect, each member possesses his own humor. and that each disease consists
upon one quality, and not upon two or many. And that there is but one heat,
one cold, one moisture, and one dryness: because it cannot be proved that
there is a dubble or treble cold, substance, hott, moist, or dry substance.
Neither do those humors receive any anatony, nor yet can they be showed as
the three principia can. And humors are dead things without life or power of
life.

9 The Heathen Physicians and their followers take upon them to discern the
deseases in man, by the complexions, humors, and qualities.

The Chymicall Physician teaches, if the Physician covet or desire to know the
nature of man, with all his deseases, he must first know the deseases of all
things which nature suffers in the great world, by reducing those bodies
into their three substanties: So then shall he see one desease in this kind of
thing, in that kind an other desease, but in man he shall see them all. For by
the Anatomy of the three substanties, the Seeds, Roots, foundations, causes,
similitudes, and likenesses of the effects, panges, griefs, and fittes, which
appear in deseases and sicknesses are known and espied. If he join these
things together, he shall be endowed with the knowledge of all deseases. And
the knowledge of the nature and effect of deseases of the great world
pertayneth to the Philosopher. Thereby therefore shall he be a perfect
Philosopher. And where the Philosopher ends, there begins the Physician.
And he that can know the nature of man and his deseases, and the efficient
causes of them, as the Philosopher knows the causes of deseases of externe
things (for that which hurts Herbs and Plants, etc. that causes the like
in man) and can bring nature to that point and pass, that it may be made fit
and apt to help and cure the desease by extracting out of things in the great
world that which is wholesome and fit, and by casting away that which is
unprofitable, and knows the efficacy, strength and virtue thereof, and does
so apply and minister the same, that it cures the desease, such an one is to
be accompced a Chymicall or Spagyricall Philosopher and Physician. For Chymia
and Medicina may not be separated asunder, no more the^ can preparation or
separation from knowledge or science.

10 The Heathen Physicians and their followers, attribute the causes of all
deseases to dead accidents, vz. to the first and second qualities, etc. So
they make no difference betwixt fire and smoke, betwixt seeds and their
fruits, between substanties and their accidents, between the thing it self
and his excrements.

The Chymicall Physician proves, that there be spiritual Seeds of all manner
deseases, endowed with lively power, which bring forth those qualities, and all
other fruits of deseases, and their sundry kinds of griefs in our bodies, as
ye earth brings forth fruit by means of seeds in it. And that those
qualities be only signs, colors and Symptomata of deseases. And though each
desease be either hot or cold, etc. yet they be but signs and conditions of
the desease, and not the desease it self. But all deseases are in the three
substanties of Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury. For the spirits or spiritual
essent^es being kindled, resolved, sublimed, and brought to action, do ascribe
the cause of their operations and actions to those principia. Yet it is to be
understood, that some greeses do come to man which be not properly deseases
but lesiones or hurtes.

11 The Heathen likewise measure their medicines according to those accidental
qualities aforesaid.

The Chymicall Physicians in their medicines consider the essential virtues
and actions of the medicines not the qualities accidental. But the followers
of the Ethnickes them selves in taking one hott thing before an other, as
Pepper before Camamil, etc. and one cold thing before an other, do testify
sufficiently that they seek not heat nor cold, but Arcana which they think
to be degrees. Therefore the Chymicall Physicians consider the nature of
things, and not the humors or qualities, their seeds and the effects of their
Mechanical spirits: As whether they be Attractiua, Anodymae, Abstergentia,
Aperitiua Constringentia contrahentes. Quale membrum principale respicientia:
or in carne cartilagine ossibus sanguine Synouia, etc. operantia condensantia,
conglutinantia, Corrosiua confortantia, coagulantia digestiua diuretica,
dyaphoretica, dormire facientia discussiua expulsiua eracuantia, extenuantia,
famen morentia grauedinem more^tia, horrorem morentia, renouantia incidentia,
incrassantia, inflamantia, incarnatiua mundificatiua mollificatiua maturantia,
mortificatiua, morbos quosdam respicie^tia Martialia Narcotica Nitrosulphureae
nutritiua oppilantia purgatiua penetratiua, retentiua regenerantia repellantia
repercussiua resoluentia trahentia vlceratiua venenum repugnantia vomitum
morentia and such like. Some curing of a wound they take things that have
property to bring or engender flesh, without consideration of heat or cold.
And for the Dropsy those things are to be taken which do expel Sal
resolutum without consideration of heat or cold. And in Purgatio^s
Colocynthis does purge without respect of the qualities. So in all Purgations
the Ethnicks them selves are driven away from their qualities accidental.
Hereby appears the cause, why the followers of the Heathen often times, yea
after their consultations, either know not what to do, or else determine often
the worst rather the^ good for their patient: as when in a Mynerall desease the
toe or foot is growing toward mortification, because Balsamu^ humanum that
should keep unity between the three principia, in that part is oppressed
with impediments, as Gold in his Mine, and fails there and is not mingled
with that part, wherefore it cannot pres^rue it from putrefaction: whereby
that part grows first to a s^n^^l^sse Adust^o^: and after if an unnatural
heat do come to it, then it grows to Gangreua: for cure whereof the
natural Balm inwardly ought to be cleansed, and outwardly preseruantia, as
Mumy or Balm taken out of other fit matter ought to be applied to it. Then
regenerantia and renouantia, and not that paynefull cutting and mangling of
that part of the body. Likewise in Caukrose and corrosiue Ulcers they pur^e
and ^uacuate moisture out of the body which should mitigate the corrosiuenesse
of the Salt, and so increase the desease. Also when any corroding Salt in the
blood exalted has frett through some vain within the body, whereby sometime
the patient auoydeth pure blood douneward they use Purgations, the next way to
make an end of them, or else that shipmans hose and suprema aucora of the diet,
the profitablest thing that ever they could devise for their purses, and not
always for their patients, whereas sanguine^ renouantia, dulcedines out of apt
things rightly extracted, and potiones vulnerariae and consolida^tia ought to
be used. Finally, all things have their power and virtue, not of the
qualities but of their nature which excels in them. Wherefore all virtue of
things are their Arcana, that they may heal the deseases after that manner as
they be caused.

12 The Ethnikes doctrines stands upon contemplation, Sophistry argument,
opinion and probability of reason without proof, and commonly fighting
against experience.

The Chimical doctrine stands and founded upon experience joined with
knowledge of the property, virtue and nature of every thing, and not upon the
knowledge only of his operation and working, nor upon contemplation only but
in action, not upon reason only, but upon experience, whereby his works be
made perfect and truth tried. Thereby he learneth what man is, what the
medicine is, how they agree in right Anatomy. For medicin consists in
nature, so that nature is medicin, which ought to be learned in nature: and
nature has brought forth medicine by experience, so that by fire and labor the
physician makes nature manifest, wherefore without the doctrine of fire, there
is none other schole, by the which we may learn physic. So that experience
and practice ought not to proceed of speculation, but speculation ought to be
derived out of practice. This practice and experience teaches that a medicin
prepared by the heat of the Sun, has an other power then that which is
prepared by the fire Coals and dung, and that the heat of water and sand do
work diversely, though they be outward heates: and that one medicin or simple,
by preparation may be made to work diverse operations, and made fit for
diverse purposes, as appears by experience. So that probability of reason
only against true and perfect proof, found out by practice and experience,
makes the folowers of the Ethnikes to say, that all medycins prepared by this
Art, do get a fretting corrosiue and hurtful property by the fire. For it by
the fire the medicin does get at the first any evil corrosiuenesse, yet by
operation and by degrees of working (to the skilful known) it shall not only
lose that and have it clean taken away, but also it may be brought to the
highest degree of operation and working, and made most perfect like to ye
Aethereall fire, which nourishes and quickens man's body, whose property is
to consume all corruptions, caused hy the elementall fire, and with his
batefulnesse to restore the natural moisture which was consumed by the
Elementall Fire. In these things labor and diligence is required which the
followers of the Ethnicks for the ease sake love not to hear of. Yet God which
has created medycine, would that the Physician should prepare it by his labor
and diligence. For he sells all things to us for the price of our labor: and
he wills us we should eat our bread in the labor and swette of our face.
There like probabitie of reason without knowledge of the working by this Art,
makes them to inueigh against medicines taken out of Metals, because they
know not that before they be medicin, they are not reducible into metal
again, but be volatill spirits: and they themselves being ignorant to get out
such their nature, virtue and property by Art, are glad to sees Gold, and
steal in Drink or Brothe, and to give Gold beaten into five leaves in
medicin, and to use Pearls and Precious stones (which be Mynerals also) in
power (which is their body) for medicin and sometimes the very bodies of some
Metals: which is contrary to the Rules of this ancient Chymycall Physic,
and think they do much good therewith.

13 The folowers of the Ethnikes do call the names of diseases only the humors,
heat, cold, etc. which be only the signs of the diseases, not the matter or
cause of them. So is the Agewe by them called and Agewe without any foundation
in reason. For this name is derived of his heat, which is only the sign of
the disease.

The Chimical Physician takes the names of the diseases of the matter,
property and nature of the true substance (for all diseases are in the three
substanties aforesaid) therefore the Agewes ought to be called the disease of
Sulphur, of salt peter kendled, for this cause diverse diseases are called
tartareall diseases, because of the likeness of the property, that those
diseases have unto the Salt of Tartar, which is most sharp: but the followers
of the Ethnikes not knowing that Salt, are sore grieved for that name, and
because the Chimical Physicians do lay tartar to be the cause of diverse
diseases. Or else the name is to be taken of the Medicin yt heals and cures
ye disease: so by this means every disease has his right name, and is rightly
understood.

14 In the medicines of the followers of the Etnickes, no Anatomy is observed,
but fantasy, for qualities accidental receive no Anatomy.

In the Chymycall Medicines the Anatomy of the disease and medicine do agree
and join together. He considereeh the amity, concord and agreement of nature
of externe and outward things with man, and how they do receive and embrace
each other, so is he cunning and skillful of the Anatomy: and of the
concordance of the two Anatomies the Physician does grow: so man is taught of
the great world and not of man. This Anatomy makes a perfect Physician when he
knows the great world, and of that knows the disease in man, by the
disease of externe things: and the* Medicin by the medicine, by the help of
the Anatomy.

15 The Medicines of the Ethnickes and their followers do consist in gross and
raw substancies, in which the virtues of the medicine be fast tied, bound and
incumbered with hurtful baggage, and therefore hard to be separated in the
stomache, and commonly they provoke the pacient to vomit, or at least his
stomache abhors them.

The Chymycall Medicines for the most part be purifyed and pourged by the fire,
and the impure separated from the pure. And the virtue and pure part only
ministered, and therefore may be received without offense: and that in small
quantity, (because the virtue of each thing is small in quantity) but he
ministers not the substance and gross quantity or bodies as the other do,
unless it be in some Alimentary diseases.

16 The followers of the Ethnickes in disccening diseases, and the original of
them are merueilously trobled with the causes antecede^t and conseqnent, and with
signs repugnant, and agreeing, and such other very doubtful causes, tokens
and signs. And so likewise in curing, they proceed without respect of the
right difference betwixt diseases, vehement, long, circulated, rooted, and in
places hard to be removed, and their contraries, with medicines gross,
gross, gross, and sickly, even in such rooted diseases and in such places.

The Cimycall Physician teaches that the right causes signs and tokens of
diseases, be founded in the properties of nature: their originals be by them
rightly discerned. And that some diseases be Caelestes, other some be
Terrestres, by reason of the lower and upper globe in man's body. And they that
be in the upper globe are made mighty and vehement, and harder to be removed
then those that be in the lower globe. Wherefore those Alimentary diseases of
the lower Globe, may be cured with Arcana of vegetables, but if they be in the
upper Globe, they require medicines of higher degrees of preparation. Likewise
if the cause of the disease proceed of the Minerals or metals, they must be
cured with Arcana of Mynerals, because such will not yield to Arcana of
vegetables, that is of herbs and roots, etc. But if the disease be caused
by influencies of the heavens, nether of the other Arcana will serve, but they
are to be cured by A^^ronomy and influencies. But those Diseases and griefs
that come by supernatural means, will not be helped by any means aforesaid,
but by supernatural means. Likewise the agreement of the Medicin with the
disease in one degree, is thus by those Physicians considered, that the
Midicine that has the pure only separated from the impare, may agree in one
degree, with the diseases of the lowest degree, of least danger, and in places
of least parrell, and of least continuance. And Medicines that have that pure
body sublymed, and a purer thereby separated from it, may agree with diseases
more stubborn, of longer continuance, and in place more perilous. And medicines
so sublymed, after distilled in the Sun, may agree in degree with diseases,
most stubburne, and of longest continuance. For unless the Mecicine do agree
with the disease in oue degree, he can not prevail, because the weaker can not
draw, consume, nor expel the stronger. In this sort does the Chimycall
Physician proceed from medicines fine and pure, to purer, fyner, and most
excellent, and makes choice of his medicines as occasion serves, by the reason
of the cause, place, vehemency and continuance of the disease. Such medicines
do not moulde and putrify, but will continue in the virtue, a man's life.
Furthermore, by operation and working according to this Art, you shall see
with your eye, and perceive the reason, why one disease is vehementer then an
other, why in one place it is more painefuller then in an other, why in
continuance of time the disease is harder to be removed then at the first:
why some diseases be vehement and yet continue long: why some be suddenly
vehement and seone gonne: Why other be long in growing: why some be extreme:
why some be not, why in some places of the bady they he more easily removed,
then in an other, whereby you shall be led into the knowledge of that part of the
body wherein the root of the disease lurketh.

17 The folowers of ye Ethnikes in judgment of Vrin. (most of them) take upon
them to pronounce of al diseases in any part of ma^s body, by looking on the
water. Other some of them confess, that they be able to judge of those
diseases only, which be in those parts of the body, through the which the
Vryn passes. And some of them affirm that the Urin is Meretrix and
deceitful, yet all of them are contented to make gain of the looking upon the
Urin.

The Chymicall Physician affirms that such judgment of urine is monstrous,
and that the right judgment is to be had after due separation thereof be made
by fire: so shall he see the matter of each desease and his medicine and touch it
with his hand, whereby he shall be able to give a perfect judgment if he be
able to judge as becomes a Philosopher and a Physician. By this means shall
he find the urine not to be Meretrix nor liar.

18 The followers of the Ethnickes, to purge spiritual tyncturs of deseases,
do minister raw and indigested medicines, which draw from the stomach and
other parts things necessary for them, as well as excrements: And also such
Purgations do withal purge humidum radicale, and thereby do shake the body
and weaken it, and leave behind them much venenositie, for lack of due
separation. But in such deseases grievous and deeply rooted, or in places
principal, or parts where deseases are hard to be removed, such Purgations do
vex and torment the bowels (which have not deserved it) in vain, without any
help or ease, because the stronger is not drawn of the weaker.

The Chymicall Physician knowing, that only the superficial and gross
impurities, in primis officinis alimentorum will yield to Purgations, and be
expelled by seege and stool, therefore to purge spiritual tyncturs of
deseases, and also against deseases in places far distant from the first
receptacles of our meats, or in principal parts of the body, he uses
spiritual tyncturs for Purgations, which do purge radicitos, within and
without: that is to say, they take away not only, the superficial impurities
by seege and stool, but also the deep rooted spiritual tyncturs, of long
continuance and fine circulation, either by absolute and perfect consuming of
them, without any sensible avoiding or expulsion, or else by mundifying and
clensing of Balsamum, and the Spirits and Elements of man, and renewing of
blood, or else by dissoluing, clensing and sending abroad, the rooted spiritual
tyncturs of deseases by urine, sweat and insensible transpirations.

19 The followers of the Ethnickes in their medicines, credit Recipe of Gallen
Auicen, and such other, though in these days the bodies of men be not so
strong as they were in their time. And though deseases in nature do daily
alter, and new are bredd, which were not in their time known. And if they do
not follow those old receiptes of their Authors, but make new medicines of
themselves, yet they have none other skill, but to try them, and make their
experiment upon men.

The Chymicall Physician calls such receiptes, decipe, and wills their
followers to leave such receiptes, and to provide that the medicine do agree
with the deseases in one degree. For if it fail in degree it fails in cure.
And as in manual operation he wills his followers not to work before they
know the nature of the work which they intend. So in ministering of
medicines, he wills the^ not to minister, before they know the cause and
nature of the desease, and what and how much it wants of his proper nature,
and what and how much it has gotten of an other nature. For incognita causa, a
casu procedit cura, to the knowledge whereof we ought to come, as the
Alkimistes do come to the knowledge of the body that is to them unknown, and
not by trying of the medicine in man. For, Ve his qui nesciunt experiri nisi in
hominibus, as that worthy Chymicall Philosopher and Physician Roger Bacon
says, and per effectus facta, and signa, causa tuenda est.

Chapter. 9. The causes why this Art is evil spoken of, and finds few
favorers.
BY these controversies thou may see gentle Reader, that most of the matters
wherein the Chymicall Physician does differ from the Ethnickes, and their
followers be such as do not consist in opinion or dunsicall wrangling and
arguing, as those of the Ethnicks do, but in palpable sensible and visible
experience, which is the maysteries of Arts and Sciences, of which manner of
experiences and operations the followers of the Ethnicks are utterly ignorant:
wherefore it is no marvel that they inueigh so vehemently against this Art.
For therein they verify the old saying, Ars non habet inimicum preter
ignora^tem. It is an unjust dealing for any man to reprove, hate, and with
despightfull words to inueigh against that whereof he is ignorant. For love
and hatred ought to proceed of knowledge, whether the thing descrueth to be
loved or not, and not of chance. But when a man knows not whether the thing
be worthy to be loved or hated, how can he give a ^ust reason of hate thereof,
especially when the thing whereof he is ignorant may be good. Therefore it is
great reason that a man should know what the thing is whereunto it leans,
and app^rtayneth, before he hate it, or if he be ignorant thereof then not to
hate it. Which of them knows what way to begin to separate the Salt, Sulphur,
and Mercury, from Herbs, Plants, and all other things as it ought to be
artificially, according and agreeable to the properties and several natures of
each Herb, Root etc. For diverse and several Herbs require several manner of
seperations. Plants have their peculiar seperations: Mynerale theirs:
Marchesies theirs. etc. Which of them does know the several manners of
Calcination, Reuerberation, Cementation, Inceration, Imbybytion, Pa^tation,
Liquefaction, Ablution, Sublymation, Exaltation, Contrition, Resolution.
Putrefaction, Circulatio^, Inhumation, Distillation, Ascension, Fixation,
Lauatio^, Coagulation, Assation, Co^gelation, Fermentation, etc. And the
natures and properties of these several works and operations, whereby
Regeneration, Tvncturs, Arcana, Magisteria, Quintum esse, and Elixirs be had
and gotten. Which of them can tell what transmutation of Elements means: Eau
any of them make ripe, the raw medicine, separate the pure from the impure,
turn bitter into sweet, mittigat corrosions, heates, tastes, smelles,
Coagulations, etc. of medicines, and make them volatill and spiritual, to
help and cure spiritual and long circulated diseases? For this cause Erastus
and others not conceauing a right the meaning of Paracelsus, do imagine a
construction of their own heads and brains of that they read in him, which is
not agreeable with his meaning: and upon such an absurdity of their own
devise, they make long discourses, and go about to disprooue that, which is
not affirmed, or that which they can not skill of. I would such folowers of the
Ethnickes did in this follow their Prince and Captain Gallen, as they do in
the rest of his doctrine, which being demanded at any time of any Sect (being
himself addicted to noue) whether it were sound or good or no, used to say,
that he could not make any answer there unto, unless he had first learned all
their decrees and determinations perfectly, and had gotten a brief method to
judge them, for no man says he can judge of things to him unknown. But alas,
herein the cause of this Chimicall physic consists in a desperate state,
for though this Art be showed by work and experience: and experie^ces which
do agree with nature, and do bring forth like actions, by the cause of all
certeintie, yet it may not come to that trial: for in the schools nothing may
be received nor allowed that sauoreth not of Aristotle, Gallen, Auicen, and
other Ethnickes, whereby the young beginners are either not acquainted with this
doctrine, or else it is brought into hatred with them. And abroad like wise the
Galenists be so armed and defended by the protection, privileges and
authority of Princes, that nothing can be allowed that they disalowe, and
nothing may be received that agrees not with their pleasures and doctrine:
and whatsoever is ministered to any person according to their rules and Canons,
although it be to the destrunction of the patient, must be reputed, accepted,
ratifyed, allowed and accounted learnedly well and rightly done, and they are
excused and discharged of their fact, by the law called Lex Aquilia. But as
long as the vns kilfull and fluggish Physician may enjoy that immanitie and
freedom, and as long as it shall be allowed in the Schools to be heresy and
foul ignorance to speak against any partof Aristotle, Galen, Auicen, or
other like heathens doetrine: as long as the Galenists may shrowde themselves
under the Wings and protection of Princes, Privileges and Charters, the cause
of the Chimycall Physician must needs lie in a desperate state. And no man
almost shall be able to attain to the perfection in true Physic. As long as
Scotus or Thomas Aquinas, and such other were so priuileged in the schools,
that no interpretation of Gods word was allowed, but such as was brought out
of them, or agreed with them, the cause of true Religion, and serving of God
was in desperate state, and it lay oppressed and hidden. And as long as those
that were noseled in such puddle, were mainteyned, defended and privileged by
princes and potentates, it was hard for truth to show his face abroad
openly. Wherefore if the Chymicall doctrine agreeing with Gods word,
experience and nature may come into the Schools and Cities in stead of
Aristotle, Gallen, and other heathen and their followers. And if it were
lawful I and commendable for every honest student to labor in the
Philosophical searching out of the truth, by the fire or otherwise, and
thereby either confirm and make manifest the truth by this Art tought,
cather to add new things well tried to the old that be good, and then to
reject the other vastard, adulterat, sophisticat stuff, and so join words and
deeds together, then should there be no time spent in vain, and vain glorious
babble and sophistical disputations, without due trial by labor and work of
fire, and other requisite experiments, then should it easily be seen whether
Gallen and other heathen or the Chimests were most to be followed and allowed.
And whose writings and travails were more available for man's health, either
conseruing or restoring, and who seeks more paynefully, faithfully,
sincerely, charitably and Christianlike, for the certain help of his
neighbor, and not for lucre or vein glory and pomp, the ancient Chimical
Physician or Gallen and his folowers. Then as Galen the prince of their
Physic says, if men would not be sworn to the words of any master or
teacher, they would choose out of each thing that were best, and would not be
slaves to follow or name them selves either of Hypocrates, Praxagoras, or of
any other man.

Chater 10. The first authors of the ancient Physic, and the Succession and
Progression thereof, to Hermes Trismegestus, and how the rest writing thereof
yet extant.
FOR the Authros, Inuentors, original succession and progression of this
ancient Chimycall Physic, whose study and use does flow out of the
fountains of nature, and is collected out of the Mathematical, natural, and
supernatural precepts (as is aforesaid in the beginning hereof) it is to be
understood, that Adam by divine revelation, or by art given to him of God,
did foretell of the universal destruction of the world, one by water, the
other by fire. And no doubt he was endowed with singular knowledge, wisdom and
light of nature, that as soon as he did behold any beast, he by and by did so
exactly know all their natures, powers, properties and virtues, that he gave
them names, apt, meet and agreeable to their natures and properties, whereby
it appears he knew the natures and properties of things better then we, when
we have spent all our life time in searching out their natures, which was a
singular gift of God and pleased him mightily. The sons of Seth which were
his Nephews, receiving wisdom and knowledge from the hands and delivery of
their Auncitors, least that the Mathematicals and that knowledge they had so
learned should perish with the fludde, did erect two Pillars, in which they did
^ngraue their learning, knowledge and inue^tions, out of the which they that
should be preserved from the fluddde, might learn those knowledges, cunning
and Art, ss Iosepus writes in his first book Chap. 13. of Antiquities, which
did see one of the Pillars that was of stone in his time standing in Syria as
he writes.

Abraham the Prince of faith was borne in that Country, where those
Mathematicals and other knowledges and learning was thus preserved, and
continued 292. years after the Flood, in the year of the world 1949. This
Abraham having knowledge in the Mathematicalls, which in his Country were
preserved as is aforesaid, by the wonderful harmony of the world did ascend
to the knowledge of the one only God, as some say. But rather, thereby he did
see and perceive, the invisible things of GOD, that is, his eternal power and
Godhead, by the creation of the world. And he being the mighty and renowned
father of the elect nation, no doubt was a great Divine, as he was excellent
in the Mathematicalls and other learning. But because the Chaldea^s,
Mesapotamians and Assyrians were moved and s^^rred against him, for Religions
sake, he left his Country and kinsfolks by the Commaun^ ement of God, and
went to soiurne in the land of Canaan. From whence shortly after through great
Famine, he was constrained to go in to Aegipt. He there as Josephus writes,
declared God to be the Creator of all things, teaching them the Sciences and
Mathematicalls. By this means was the true knowledge of God and of the
Mathematicals and Sciences brought into Aegipt, the which knowledges the
Priests of Aegipt, successively, did after that profess. And they had divided
among them portions of land, by Pharoes appointment, for their maintenance and
stipende, as appears Gene. cap. 47. After that Abraham returned into the land
of Canaan, where ye Godly fathers did successively profess these Arts and
knowledges. After this in the year of the world 2355. Moses that was so
acceptable unto God was borne in Aegipt, and was learned in all the wisdom of
the Aegiptians, as S. Luke writes in the Acts of the Apostles Cap. 70. And he
does there set down and make mention of that his learning for his excellent
praise and honors sake. Saint Augustine says in his Book, de Ciuitate dei
lib. 18. cap. 39. that the wisdom of the Aegiptians wherein Moses was
instructed was Astronomy, Geometry, and Arithmetike, and surely it was that
which before they had learned of Abraham. And although some of the Aegiptians,
as some of the Chaldeans did wander and stray aside in many foolish vain and
supersticious speculations, yet some were contented, with the simple order of
Nature, profitable to be learned and praise worthy, which is to be considered
and marked in the wonderful work of God, not only in the places of the
Stars, and in so goodly and beautiful distinguished variety of the^, but
also in their motions, powers, and secret offices and operations: whereof it is
like that Moses made choice, abandoning and forsaking the other supersticious
and vain doctrine, not deserving the name of wisdom. After these lived
Hermes, or Mercurius Trismegestus in Aegipt not long after Moses: For alas ye
great A^tronomer lived in Moses his time, and was grandfather on the mothers
side to Mercury the great, whose Nephews son was this Hermes Trismegestus,
as S. Augustine writes in his Book, de Ciuitate dei lib. 8. Cap. 26. and lib.
18. Cap. 39. In his time says Saint Augustine, in Aegipt the study of
Phylosophie, which did promise to teach that, whereby m^n might be made blessed
or happy did ^he^^ly ^l^rishe. This Hermes or Mercurius was called
Trismegestus, as some say, because he was the greatest Philosopher, the
greatest King, and the greatest Priest. But Guydas says, that he was called
Trismegestus, because he held opinion of God nere agreeable with the right
doctrine of the Trinity. He did write diverse works, as one Dialogue in which
Asclapeus is brought in to think that one only God is the maker of all
things, and confesses the errors of them which found out the superstition of
Idols, and does prophecy in that Book that they shall perish. And in his
Book dedicated (...)tion among the Aegiptians at that time. Now concerning his
knowledge in profane Sciences, and in this Art which we have in hand, for his
excellency in Philosophy (as is before said) he had one of his titles after
Maximus. For in his time did the study of Phylosophie chiefly flourish, as
writes Volateran, lib. 15. Also in his first Book of 15. entitled libri
Hermeicorum, he brings in a Priest saying thus. Do thou not hear that our
Hermes has divided Aegipt into his bounde^, and lotted each man's ground
asunder, that he measured with a cord, and divided dikes for to water the
grounds, and that he has ordained, laws and rules, and that he has named
governors out of those statutes and ordinances, and has appointed chaunges of
buying and selling, and has sat down the brief doctrine of the course of the
Stars, and has divided the Herbs. And that he has invented, found out
and taught with numbers or Arithmetike and Geometry. Also all Astronomy,
Astrology, Music and Grammar. Others write of him that he attained at the
full, to all the parts of Phylosophie. Bradeus in primo Epigrammatu^ says,
that Mercurius found out th^s^ four, that is, Letters, Music, Geometry, and

Wrestling. Dioderus says, that this Mercury found out Physic among the
Aegiptians. This Hermes did also write diverse other Books, as one entitled
Pymander, of the power and wisdom of God. And other things in Iamblicus
proctus, and prophirius. Also an other Book entitled, Latromathematica, that
is to say, meditations applied to Astrology, and diverse fragments and little
pieces be by him written, which be alleged and cited by other Writers, which
be not extant. But among others his excellent work entitled, Tabula
Smaragdina, or Sermo veredicus Hermetis, or Mercurii Trismegesti patris vere
metaphycices does sufficiently declare his excellent skill and knowledge in
this Art, which is extant hitherto thou have heard gentle Reader how the
true knowledge of God and the Science of Chymia (from which medicina may not be
separated) have been derived from Abraham the renowned father of faith, under
the title and names of the Mathematical sciences, whisedome and Philosophy,
unto the Priests of Egypt, and from them, unto Mercurius or Hermes,
Trismegestus the Egyptian, which as has bin said, was called three times
great, whereof two of those titles sleep with Apollo his golden Harp, that is
by equal sweet and temperate motion in the said fire. By this means does the
Chemical Physician dissolve, make thin, eleuate, and convert natures, and
make perfect medicines: It should seem therefore that the Physic of Apollo
was exercise of the natural virtue and power in man like to the Aethereall
fire, or else that it was not the gross Physic of the followers of the
Ethnicks now in use, but some pure medicine like to the Aethereall fire, or a
very simple fine and pure medicine, whereof the Binarii Physicians have no
skill. And then surely it was not of his own inue^tion or devise, but he had
learned the same in some other Countries and brought it into Greece, and there
practiced it: wherefore it was accounted his invention there, or else he learned
it of some that had been in some other Countries. For Eusebius and others do
testify that Greece was barren and bare of all good Arts and doctrine before
the time of Pythagoras, which lived about the year of the world ^4^6. And
whatsoever good learning and knowledge they had, they got it from other
Nations. As Pythagoras, Plato, and others did travail out of Greece, for to
get learning and knowledge into Syria, Iudia, Aegipt, Persia, and other
Nations, which the Grecians do call Barbarians. And surely if his Physic was
of his own and not proceeding from the Children of God, then was it not
worthy the name of true Physic: because as Plato says, he that is ignorant
in divine things, cannot have right understanding in profane learning. As
Apollo and Aesculapius, and all the Grecians at that time were without the true
knowledge of GOD, and were Idolaters, and both they were honored as Gods, and
each of them had a temple dedicated to him. But it should seem by that Plato
has written, and Pliny also, that their Physic was altogether Surgery.
Whereunto Cicero does seem to consent in his third Book de Natura deorum,
ascribing to Aesculapius the first invention of bynding and healing of wounds.
Sabellicus also and Strabo, do write that the old Physic was rude, and their
medicines were such only as were found out by chance, to have helped any
body, and such they did minister unto those that were sick of like deseases.
Aesculapius did not meddle with bodies infected with inward sicknesses, but
only prescribed to such a diet about meat and drink: as one did to Euripilus
that was wounded at the siege of Troy, in the presence of his two sons
Machaon and Podalirius: and as they two did to Menataus whom Pandar wounded
there, because they thought deseases did commonly come to man, either by
external hurtes, as by pricking, cutting, or brusing, or else did chance to
him by evil diet, lack of exercise, and evil order of his living: therefore
they thought it necessary to help them that were so hurt. But they thought as
long as men used good diet, exercise, and good order of life, they continued in
health, and prolonged their life at ease. Therefore Phocilides used to say,
that the lively virtue and power of the body must be exercised whilst we be
able. But Plato says, that Aesculapius and others were of this opinion, that
he which would not live in the appointed and accustomed rule and order of life,
but by incontinencie of living, did fall into deseases, was not profitable for
himself nor for others, and that the Art of Physic had nothing to do with
such, nor served for them: and that such ought not to be cured, though they
were richer then Midas. And that it was against reason to think that men
should need Physic for Rewmes, Distillations, and for the griefs of the
swellings of the inward spirits, which come through delicacy of living and
sloth, and lack of good order in living, and therefore proves that those
deseases were not known to Mahaon and Podalirius, at the siege of Troy.
Asclepyades also the Physician said, that health consists in abstinence of
meat and drink, and in ryding, walking, and running. Then rests to consider
what manner medicines they used in Surgery. I do read in Plato in the 31.
Book and 3. Dialogue de iusto, that when Pandarus had wounded Menalaus at the
siege of Troy, after Mahon and Podalirius had dried up the blood of his
wounds with their hands, they did anoint the wou^d with mitigating Balmes or
Ointments, and prescribed him a certain order and form of diet in his meat
and drink. Whereby it appears, that the manner of their Surgery, was like unto
that of the Chymicall Surgions, whose manner is with Oils and Balmes to pacify
nature, and to keep the wound defended from accidents, and to leave the cure
to nature which is able then to be his own Surgion. And more plainly to prove
their doctrine, one Petrus Hasardus is sufficient witness, who in his French
Epistle before the great Surgery of Paracelsus, writes that as he travailed
through the Country of Lyuonia, he arrived in a certain Monastery there, where
he tarried two days in perusing the Lybrarie, and there he found two pieces of
the works of the same Mahacon and Podalirius, which entreated fully that
Chemical form and manner of doctrine. About the time of Apollo, that is the
year of the world 2697. lived Orpheus the Thracyan, and was the first that is
remembered to have written of Herbs (as some say) exactly, and he found out
remedies for many deseases. After him followed one Musaeus, his Scholar. After
them lived Hesiodus in the year of the world 3111. After him lived Pronopis the
Master of Homer, which likewise had knowledge of Herbs in the year of the
world ^258. Thales Milesius lived in the year of the world 3379. and before
Christ 584. He trauayled into Aegipt, and brought into Greece great knowledge
in the Mathematicalls. Ameristus or Mamercus succeeded him. Before this time
was one Sisiphus, otherwise called Theosophos, a famous Physician.

Chapter 12. Of Pythagoras and his knowledge in this Art, and that he taught
in Italy, and of his Scholars and folowers: And of the medicin of Empedocles.
And of 70 Books that Esdras was commanded to keep.
ABout the year of the world 3434. lived Pythagoras, a Grecian famous for his
wisdom and divine knowledge, and for his learning in the Metaphisickes and
Mathematicals, he labor^^ much in Arithmetic, he brought Geometry to
perfection as Laertius writes. He lest diverse rules of Astrologicall
proguoslic^tion, and of this art some what, he found out Music in the
stars, and derived the same to mittigate the affections of the mind: he did
write of the effect of herbs. He trauayled into Persia, Arabia, Aethiopia and
Egypt for learning and knowledge: he was conversant with the Priests of the
Jews, after he had once professed their Religion. After his return he taught
in Italy. He was a great Cabalist. Some say that one Phericides was his
teacher, which did first write de Natura. After Pythagoras in this learning and
knowledge succeeded as his scholars and folowers Telanges his son, after him
Xenophanes, Archilas, Philolaus, Lisias, Parmenides, Leno, Eleates, Anaxagoras,
Leucippus, Democritus, Nausiphales, Naucides, Epicharmus, Alchmeon, Epimenides.
For Aeliames lib. 9. writes that all the Pithagoreans were studious in
Physic, and many ancient kings and others before the time of Pythagoras were
studious in physic which I do omit, putting you first in remembrance of
Empedocles a singular Philosopher and notable Physician, about the year of the
world 3308. Suidas writes of a medicin that he used to minister, called
Apnus, which was of that nature, yt it would preserve a man's body 30. days
without meat, that was speachlesse and ready to give up the Ghost, for so does
the word (...) signify. I think the Physicians the folowers of the Ethnickes
will confess that it is no part of their profession to make such a Medicine,
and that their gross medicines can have no such virtue, because the knowledge
of such medicines does depend upon Metaphisicke and supernatural principles,
which Empedocles, Pithagoras, Democritus, Plato, and diverse others do
maintain in natural things, contrary to the gross Physic. About the year
of the world 3503 lived Esdras, to whom the most high gave understanding and
commandment to write, and to whom the most high spoke thus. The first books
that thou have written publish openly, that the worthy and unworthy may read.
But the last seventy books keep, that thou may give them to the wise among
the people. For in them is the vein of understanding, and the Fountain of
wisdom, and the river of knowledge, in which 70. books as some think, be
contained the understanding of this art, out of the which the worthy from time
to time have received the vayue of understanding of this Art.

Chapter 17. That Physic which Hypocrates left in writing was not descended
from Aesculapius.
Now are we come to the time of of Hipocrates of Cous in Greece which lived
at the time of the wars of Peloponensus which began about the year of ye world
3536. Gesnerus and Andreas Lacuna for credit of their Physic, say that he was
descended from Aesculapius, and that Apollo taught Aesculapius Physic, which
likewise did teach his sons which were called Asclepiades after their father
Aesculapius, and so Physic by inheritance successively did descend from the
Parents to the Children unto Hypocrates. And that it was not lawful for them
to communicate the same to any man that was not borne of that family or kindred,
therefore they that were cunning in that art, were called the sons of
Physicians. And though his ancestors and kindred before him did deteine their
art in their families, and did not communicate ye same to others, yet he
reduced it into method, and did commit it to writing, that it might be common
to all men. And therefore he is said to be author of method and princeps
naturalis medicine, and the first that did write of Physic.

That Hypocrates was descended from Aesculapius, I will not contend, because it
should seem by ancient writers to be so, or else for reputations sake they did
term him of that progeny. But that the Physic which Hypocrates did leave in
writing, was in all points the self same which Aesculapius did learn of
Apollo his father, and which he did teach to Machon and Podalirius, and was
delivered successively by tradition down the right line from them, to
Hypocrates by the space of 800 years (for so long time was between Aesculapius
and Hypocrates) is hard to be proved, because tradition of doctrine without
writing, not cos^sting upon natural practice, nor continuing in one place
certain, but at large, is no faithful preserver of the truth thereof, so many
years, neither is it like that the issue of Aesculapius line could be known,
and did not fail in 800 years, nor cease nor degenerate from the steps and
studious love of that art of their Ancestors, neither is it like that
Hypocrates would have broken his oath if it were true that goes under the name
of iusiurandum medicorum Asclepiadaru^, or Hipocraticu^ iusiurandu^, and would
make that common which should have been kept so secret. But if the Physic of
Apollo and Aesculapius was any other then exercise of Surgery, (as is
aforesaid) then no doubt was their medicines simple, pure, and like to the
Aethereall fire, and therefore altogether unlike unto gross medicines that be
now stoutly defended, (as is before declared) And that it may appear, that
the physic which Hypocrates had learned, was not so precious, nor kept so
secret in one kindred, line and family, as we are borne in hand, thou must
understand gentle Reader, that Pliny in his 29 book, cap. 1. and Strabo in
his 8. book do write, that from the time of Aesculapius, Physic lay hidden
and covered in most thick darkness, until the time of Hypocrates, which did
bring it to light by this means. For whereas it was the manner and fashion of
those that were cured and delivered from any sickness, to write in the Temple
of Aesculapius which was in Cous, the manner and form of their remedy, and
cure thereof, to the end, that the like diseases might be by them cured,
Hypocrates did write out these Medicines, and out of them began Physic. Here
thou see, gentle Reader, that the Physic of Aesculapius was not known at
Cous, at the time of Hypocrates, but he out of the experiments of old wives,
men and women of the Country and City, which were not kept secret, but by
custom and usage were written and fastened to the wall of Aesculapius, his
Temple openly to be seen, he derived his Physic: He wrote out those
experienses of men and women of all sorts, he brought them into order. Out of
the which afterward he drew Aphorisms and brief Rules of Physic. Besides
this, it has been said of some, that Hypocrates for envy that he bare to
Aesculapius, did set a fire his temple, and so consumed the writings of the
ancient Physicians. And besides them that be folowers with them, it appears
by Sudas and other writers, that before Hypocrates, diverse did write of
Physic, though we have not their works extant among us, as Democritus the
Son of Caliphon, which was Aesculapius his Priest. Nichomachus the Son of
Machaon, did write six books of physic and one of Philosophy. Also
Hypocrates the first of the seven, which Suidas speaks of, did write of
Phisike, Orpheus also did write of herbs, and so did Pithagoras and diverse
others, whereby it appears, that Physic was not kept so secret in one
famely, but it was at liberty for every man to see their writings. But this is
true, yt they which did write of ye right, true ancient physic Chimical, did
write darkly and in figurative kind of speeches, to the intent they would only
be understood of the children of their Science. And therefore they did write
filiis scientie. So they which were cunning in that Art, might well be called
the Sons of Physicians, as is before declared. But to what purpose should any
man write darkely of that Physic, which is so gross? whose medicines be so
common to old wives, and men and women of all sorts. And why should any man be
called the Son of a Physician, for such Medicines, rather then the man or
woman of the Country, which had done the like good with such a medicine as the
professor of Physic did.

Chapter. 10. That Democritus Abderites a Thacian did write of this art, whose
books are yet extant, and of his teachers, Scholars and followers, and of some
of their works yet extant.
DEmocritus Abderites of Thracia, was in the time of this Hypocrates: He was
old when Hypocrates was young, Anaxagoras and Lacippus were his teachers. Also
he trauayled into Caldea, Aegipt, and Persia, for to learn their knowing and
knowledge. He had a notable Scholar called Metrodorus, whose Scholar was
Anaxarchus: He did write two Books, one called Magnus diacosmus, that is to
say, of the government and distinction of the nature of things: and one other
de natura mundi. He was skillful in all kind of Phylosophie natural, moral
Mathematikes, Metaphysics, and Logic. He also did write one excellent work,
entitled, Democritus de Art Chimica, vel de Art sacra, sieve de rebus
naturalibus and misticis, entreating of this Art, in effect like unto that of
Hermes Trismegestus aforesaid, which is yet extant among us. Sinesius Pelagius,
Stephanus, Alexandrinus, and Olympiodorus, four famous Chymistes and
Philosophers, did write Commentaries and Expositions upon that work of his.
After him of this Art did write Blemida Zosimus, and Archelaus.

Chapter 15. That in Plato his time, the Priests of Acgypt were very skillful
in this art. And that Plato did find that fault with the Physicians of
Greece, in his time, as the Chimicall Physicians do now with the Ethnicke
Physicians and their followers. And how Aristotle and Plato do differ in the
natural causes of Effects.
AFter these about the year of the world 3586. followed Plato in the
Mathematicalls, Phylosophie, wisdom, knowledge, virtue, and Eloquence, far
exceeding al others in his time: He was borne at Athens, he did not only hear
the famous Philosophers and Geometricians in Greece, but also went into Italy,
Affrike and Aegipt, to learn the mystical Sciences. Strabo writes that the
Priests of Aegipt, were so much esteemed and reverenced in the old time, for
their wisdom and knowledge, that the most famous, and best Philosophers of
Greece, did travail to them for learninges sake. They excelled in secret
Seyences, which they called Cabalisticae, and did communicate the same to
others, that were desirous to learn. All the Priests of the Aegiptians, were
Physicians, as Homer and Plato do testify. Plato himself when he trauayled to
them, with his companion Euripides, was taken with sickness, and was cured by
those Priests. The opinion of Plato was this, that the Phi^tions of Greece, had
no knowledge nor understanding of many deseases in man's body, because they were
altogether and wholly ignorant in that which they ought chiefly to cure: the
which if it be not well at ease, it is not possible for any part of the body
to be in health. For all things either good or bad, be derived and do flow
from Anima, (before declared) into the body and to every part of man, as they
do from the head into the eyes. And as a man cannot cure the eyes, without
that he first do cure the head, nor the head before the body be cured, even
so the body can not be cured without you begin with Anima. For Anima corpus
curat, is his doctrine in diverse places. This he learned out of Greece by his
travail. The lack of knowledge hereof, was in his time the cause of error of
the Physicians of Greece, and so has hitherto continued. This is the doctrine
of the Chymicall Physicians, which the followers of the Greeks and Ethnickes,
have no skill of, and therefore so much impugn it.

Aristotle was in the time of Plato, and was his ungrate and unkind scholar.
Wherefore Plato used to call him a Moyle, whose property is when he has filled
his belly with his dams milk, then to kick at her with his heels. He did not
only kick at Plato, but he omitted no man whom he did not taunt, reprove, or
find fault with: thinking to gain and derive to him self so much glory, as he
had taken from others, although he were more high and more excellent the^
others, and could see farther then any man else. Aristotle contrary to his
Master Plato, refers natural causes of effects, only to certain
Elimentall qualities, and so vaynly he does attribute the power of life to dead
things, and rests in such a beginning and ending, in which ascending, by the
doubtful care of natural things being removed from divine, man's mind is
turned from them, which is the right way to Atheism. But Plato uses his
natural knowledge in descent and not in ascent: for he does demonstrate and
show the natural beginnings in descent by the divine causes of natural
things.

Chapter 16. Of diverse Poetical Fables shadowing and hyding the secrets of
this Art.
Diverse Poets before the time of Plato, and also after his time did wrapp and
hide this Art in Ridles, dark speeches and fables. As by the fable of the
golden Fleece brought from Colchos by Argonautae, the companions of Jason, in
the year of the world 2694. by their perrilous navigations, by the place where
it was kept, which was the field called Martius, or dedicated to Mars, by ye
plowing of it with Oxen, that breathed and blowed out fire at their
nosethrills, by the ground which should be sown with the teeth of the Dragon
that watched and kept the golden Fleece, by the bringing the Dragon a sleep,
and obtaining the golden Fleece, they signified the practice of this Art,
dangers and perrills in this work, the purging and preparing of the matters
and substance of the medicine, in the furnaces that breath out fire at the
venteholes continually in equal quantity: the Quicksiluer and Mercury
sublimed, which should be sown in Mars his field like seed, which by often
sublimation, does so rise out of the matter contained in the Alembeck, into the
helm or head, and in it makes diverse forms, figures and fashions, as if men
were fighting, and one killing an other. By these finally they signify the
medicine obtained by labor, wherewith Medea restored Aeason the father of Jason
to his youth again. The Poetical Fables and dark tales of the Stones which
Pyrra and Dewcalion did cast from the^, which were converted into women and
men. The Fable of Gorgon, which turned all things that he did see into stones.
The Fable of Ganimedes whom Jupiter did turn into an Egle and carried him up to
heaven. The Fable of Dedalus, and his son Icarus, enclosed in Laberinth, and
the wings which were made for them of feathers fastened together with wax to
fly out of the Laberinth. The golden Bow which Virgil does speak of, which
being cut of, an other like to it did immediately rise in his place. The Fable
also that Jupiter being angry with his father Saturn, did cut of his prime
members with a sharp Cycle, of the blood of which when it was fallen into the
Sea, Venus was begotten. The Fable that Jupiter did shake his head, whereby
Minerua lept out of his brain. The tale how Minerua escaped from Vulcan, taken
with the love of Minerua, when he followed her hastily. The tale how Io (whom
Jupiter loved) was compassed with a gross and dark Cloud, whereby she was
stayed when she was running from Jupiter. The black sails of Theseus, which
his father did see, for sorrow whereof he drowned himself in the Sea. The
Serpent also that was engendered after the great Flood, whom Apollo did kill
with an Arrowe. The Fable of the Gardens of Hesperides, out of the which
Hercules took the golden Apples, which were kept by a Dragon. And the Fable of
Cadmus the son of Agenor, which killed the Dragon that devoured his
companions, whose teeth he did pull out and sowed them, of which men did rise,
which did immediately kill each other. And his building of Thebes in Boetia,
after the manner of Thebes in Aegipt where he was borne (as some say) with money
which he got by this Art: whereby it is signified that this Art did still
florishe in Aegipt. All these and such other Poetical Fables, dark speeches
and colored tales, do secretly hide and cover this whole Art, taught by the
Poets in Method and wrapped in Ridles: namely after Plato by the Poets Ovid and
Virgill, which lived in the year of the world 3959. and four years before
Christ was borne, which did chiefly excel in this Art, and did hide the same
in secret speeches and dark tales.

Chapter 17. Of certain Physicians that used Chemical Medicines: and of the
three sects of phitions that were between the time of Hypocrates and Gallen.
And that the Chimical Physicians ought rather to be called Rationales, then the
Galenists. And that Galen following Hypocrates 600. years did comment upon him
against his meaning and words. And how Hypocrates agrees with the Chymicall
Physicians.
A Echines of Athens did use to help and cure the disease called ye Qwinscie,
the kernels grow in ye mouth, and the inflammation that comes by the same,
and the Canker in the mouth, with the Ashes of a brunt man. This medicin he
called Botrion, as Plini writes, lib. 28. ca. 4. Artemon also did help the
falling sickness with the Ashes of the Skull or brain pan of one that was
killed, and burned in the fire, by giving the same to the pacient in water, in
the night time as Pliny writes, lib. 28. cap. 1. Aeschrion did help them
that were bitten with a mad dog, with the Ashes of S^acrab^. These and such
other experiments depending upon the foundation and principles of this
Chimicall Physic, do prove that the same has had his continuance, until
Christ's time and after. For this Aeschrion was Empericus and Gallens master,
who lived in the year of the world, 4139. which was after the incarnation of
Christ 178. years, and after the time of Hypocrates about 600. ye^res. In which
space of time between Hypocrates and Gallen, our new Phisi^ions say were
three kinds and sects of Physicians, yt is, Rationales the Prince and chief
whereof they would have Hypocrates to be. The second sort be the sect of
Emperici. The difference between these two sects they say is this, that
Rationales do use both reason and experience, to s^nd remedy for diseases
agreeable to them, but the other are only contented with the use of those
things, which by often observation, they have found to do good. Although any
man would enterprise first to make medicin, unless he were before thereunto
moved by some reason, that the experiment thereof would take success. The
third sort were Methodici, which as the new Physicians say, do refuse to
search out the secret causes, nor yet do allow of particular experiments
which Emperici do clean unto. But they reduce all particalar affects, unto
two general, that is to say, to Astructum and Laxum: and they do affirm that
all manner cure does consist in binding the loose, and in loosing that is
bound. Yet these ought not to be condemned to have tought this without some
reason, joined with some experience, before they established their doctrine.
Therefore the Galenists do very presumptuously challenge to them selves only
the name of Rationales, whose foundation does depend upon a false Center of
dualitie and contrariety, contrary to the true Center of unity, and upon the
false and uncertain judgment by the superficial and outward taste and smell
of things, whereby they take upon them to judge of the nature of them, leaving
the inward and hidden nature of the thing unsearched, and not reached unto,
they search, consideration, and knowledge whereof, does only make a reasonable
Physician, whereof they are vnterly ignorant as is aforesaid. Therefore the
Chimicall Physicians to whom this search and knowledge does apperteine, ought
rather to be called Rationales medici, then their adversaries: and their
physic ought to be accounted vain, false, and uncertain, and not this
Gallen following Hypocrates 600 years as is aforesaid, took upon him to
Comment upon Hypocrates, and contrary to his masters doctrine, set down in his
book, de antiqua medicina, he attributes ye causes of diseases and their
cures, to bare dead qualities of heat could, etc which be caused and not
causes. And so our later Physicians, following their Prince and Captain Gallen
that heathen and professed enemy of Christ, in stead of Physicians and healers
or curers of sicknesses and griefs, are become warmers, or coolers and
bathers, whereas Hypocrates teaches plainly and expressly that diseases are
not caused nor cured by the bare dead qualities of heat and cold, etc. but by
such things yt have power to work, which he calls (...), Wherein he agrees
with the ancient and true physic of the Chimists, which teaches that
diseases are caused, and all natural actions are performed by lively and
spiritual vapors and Essenties, which they call by the name of stars and
diverse other names. And that they are to be cured by such as they are
themselves, in finesse, power and strength, according to this Chimicall rule.
Necesse est vt astra fiant medicamenta, and astris ipsis, que morbos creant
accommodentur.

Chapter. 18. Of the continuance of this art in Egypt until the time of
Dyoclesian the Emperor, and a notable monument thereof in Italy: and the
spreading of this art into other Countries: and of diverse writers of this art
between Galens time and Paracelsus.
AS you have heard of the continuance of this Art in Aegipt until Plato his
time, and from thence how it has been derived into Greece and into other
places: so also you shall understand, that it flourished mightily in Aegipt, in
the time of Dioclesian the Emperor of Rome, which lived in the year of the
world 4252. and after the Nativity of Christ 292. as Swydas and others do
write. And as this Art was brought into Italy by Pythagoras, and there
continued by his Scholars and followers, so no doubt as the Romans did get
and gather the use of the best laws of those Countries which they conquered,
so did they also the best Arts Sciences, learning and knowledge out of all
parts of the world, which they subdued to their dominion: as appears by the
skill that Ovid and Virgill had in this Art, and diverse others after them. And
also by that most ancient Monument and wonderful proof of this Art of
Chymia, that was found at Padway or Pauie in Italy, that is in an earthen pot,
wherein were these verses written.

Plutoni sacrum munus ne attingite fures,
Ignotum est vobis hoc quod in vrna latet,
Namque elementa graui clausit digesta labor
Vase in hoc modico Maximus Olibius:
Adsit foecundo custos sibi copia cornu,
Ne pretium tanti depereat laticis.
An other little pot of earth was within this, mulieru^, and Ludus puerorum,
Rosarius* and diverse works entitled, de Alchymia, and de magni lapidis
compositione. The names of their Authors be unknown, and many others as well
in Print as in written hand.

Chapter 19. That Theophrastus Paracelsus, was not the inuentor of this Art,
but the restorer thereof to his purity: and that he has given more light
thereunto then any other before him: and the testimonies of great cures that he
did by this Art: and of diverse writers and learned Physicians, which since his
time have written of this Art.
AFter all these followed that famous and worthy Phylosophicall Chemist
Theophrastus Paracelsus, whose pains were intolerable in searching out the
secrets of Nature, and in setting forth and amplifying this Art, and in
practice wonderful.

He was not the author and inuentour of this art as the followers of the
Ethnickes physic do imagine, as by the former writers may appear, no more
then Wicklife, Luther, Oecola^padius, Swinglius, Calvin, etc. were the Author
and inuentors of the Gospel and religion in Christ's Church, when they
restored it to his purity, according to Gods word, and disclosed, opened and
expelled the Clouds of the Romish religion, which long time had shadowed and
darkened the truth of the word of God. And no more then Nicholaus Copernicus,
which lived at the time of this Paracelsus, and restored to us the place of the
stars according to the truth, as experience and true observation does teach
is to be called the author and inuentor of the motions of the stars, which
long before were taught by Ptolomeus Rules Astronomicall, and Tables for
Motions and Places of the stars and by others, whose Tables of motions of the
stars by long excess of time grew to be imperfect (which imperfections by
Copernicus his observations were disclosed, opened and brought to the former
purity, nor yet is the law of nature in the starry motions, now though newly
and lately we have the old tables reformed, and truth lively restored. Neither
was any Country or people at any time tied and fast bound to one kind of
Salve, Oyutment or Medicin, but it was lawful and needful for men to search
and find out, and to add better to that was in use, and to altar the same,
though it were unlike and contrary to that was before used. So that latter
ages have always added somewhat to the former and new diseases require new
Medicines. And so much the rather, for that by the Ethnickes physic, old and
common diseases have not their certain remedies, as the Gout, the Leprosy,
the Dropsy, the falling sickness, nay now and then the Quarteyne and black
Jaundies, yea, what ado sometime does the seely toatheach make among them to
cure it, nay what disputations and mutes are to be maintained about the cause
of it by their doctrine. Therefore true search and true proof by him made and
revived, and true principles by him restored, are and ought most joyfully of
others to be embraced and followed. But after the truth is found and
established, then to seek or go about to alter, that is to seek after
lacsings.

His most enemies can not deny, but in Surgery and also in Physic he did
great cures: and had great skill in preparation of Medecins. Erastus his
greatest enemy, in the Preface of his first volume to ye Reader, has these
words. Studiu^ and diligentia^, quam in preparatione medicamentorum certoru^
adhibuit, nequaquam reprehendimus, sed vehementer commendamus. Again he
says. Laud eum sua frustratum non velimus, dum artem preparandi and
destillandi, quasi reuocare ad vsum conatus fuit. Such like commendatios I
find in him, and in other of his enemies, though in truth this is no
co^mendatio^ of Paracelsus, in Erastus his mouth which can no skill of
preparations of Medicines, according to this Chymicall art. But in this that
his most enemy is compelled to confess the truth of preparation of his
Medicines, by reason of the success that followed in the ministering of them to
his Patients. This Epitaphe graven in a Marble stone, reared against the
outside of the Church wall of S. Sebastian at Salsburge, at the foot of a pair
of Stairs, going down unto the Churchyard, there yet to be seen, does show
and prove what opinion they had of him which knew him, concerning his
knowledge in Physic, which is as follows.

Conditur hic Philippus Theophrastus insignis medicine doctor, qui dira illa
vulnera, Lepram, Podagram, Hidropisin, aliaque insanabilia corporis contagia
mirifica art sustulit, ac bona sua in pauperes distribuenda collocandaque
ordinauit. Anno Domini 1541. die Septembris 24. Vitam cum morte mutauit.

Pax viuis requies aeterna sepultis.

He in his life time was had in such reverence, (as it is written of him) that
some called him Rabbi Moses: Some called him Hypocrates: some Esculapius: some
Monarcham perpetuum. Othersome called his doctrine a natural Gospel, the
storehouse of truth. Othersome did not stick to affirm that the world had not
his like. It is credibly wri^ten of him yt he healed twelve Leapors at
Norymberge openly brought to him. Cyriacus Iacobus Typographus, in an Epistle
dedicatory to the mighty Prince Otto, Cou^tipalatine of Rhene, and Duke of
Bayerland, writes this, if his Latm be Englished: They which have the things
yet in fresh remembrance, do report that not long ago there was one
Theophrastus of Transsiluania, who having knowledge in the secret mysteries of
this art, found out a matter (which without doubt the old and ancient
Philosophers, the serchers out of nature, hidyng by darcke parrables, and
covert speches: would signify and give the world warning of) and in appliyng
and ministering the same to man's body he has performed wouderful, and almost
diviue things: for he d^ubted not by the means of yt thing, to cure those three
most greuious dezeses (that is to say) the Gout, Leprosy, and falling
sickness, besides all other dezeses, wherein he did wonderful cures. There
be a great number of learned Philosophers and Physicians, as well such as
wear Galenists, as others, which at this day do embrace, follow, and
practice, the doctrine, methods and ways of curyng of this Chimicall Physic.
As D. Petrus Seuerinus in Denmarcke Philosopher, and Physician to the King of
Denmorke now reigning. An other is D. Albertus Wimpineus a Physician also and
Philosopher, whose patron is that noble Prince Alberte Paltzegraue of Rhene,
Duke of high and low Bauaria. He in his Epistle dedicatorie before Archidopa
of Paracelsus by him published in douche, does reprehend the folowers of the
Ethnicks, who^ he calls wenyng great Docters, because they give so much
praise to Aristotle Hipocrates Galen, etc. for there labor and travails, only
to Theophrasus Paracelsus, they are not only vuthankesull, but withal they
speak ill of him, and revile him, although he has exercised him self more then
any of the Philosophers or Physicians in the hid secrets of Nature, serched
them out, known them and published them for the preservation and furdering of
the long life of man, which their doing he judges rather worthy to be
accounted wilful blindness, then judgment agreeable to knowledge and manhood.
And he gives this farther reason of their doyngs: For they perceive (says he)
when soever this Trismegestus Physic shall win credit and furderauce, that
their authority shall fall to the ground: For they are ashamed after their
doctershipp, and long exercised weening practice to learn any more of
Paracelsus and his folowers, not withstandyng in greuious deceases, they have
no knowledge, either to council or to help: Against all which dezeases
Theophrastus has left to his folowers, true and approved remedies. After his
Epistle he has placed Paracelsus his picture, and his own by it, having
Sentensis in lattin adjoined. In the right hand of his picture he holds a
Serpente by the breast the rest of his body writhing about his arms and
hands: Over the picture, is the lattin of this english placed. Questions
framed upon thy principles (speaking as it were to Paracelsus) taken out of
the pith of nature, we will in the light of Nature (being from God
illuminated) resolve expound and we will establishe the verities. Under this
picture is this sentence. Sophisters always writhing, trimbling and shouing to
hear the voices of them which wisely charm them, neither are we afraied of,
nor make any account of you, nor yet with their unlearned railing, are we any
thing moved, standing on the rock of verity: others there be many like whereof
I will name some as Adam Bodesten, Gerardus Doru, Michaell Toxites, Johannes
Huerius, Leonardus Turneihisserus, Josephus Quercetanus, Johannes Chrisippus,
Michael Neanger, Theodorus Suingerus, Theodorus Brickmanus, D. Rochefort and
Lieband, Johannes Gwinterus Andernacus: And a number of others favorers and
folowers of this Art, as well of them that have written thereof as have not
written sense the time of Paraselsus.

Chapter 20. The true meaning of Paracelsus in dedicating his book entitled
Philosophia magna to the Athenians, wherewith Erastus one of his adversaries is
so grieved.
BEcause ye folowers of the heathnishe Physicians do seek to de^ace this
ancient t^ Chimicall Physic, by slaunderyng Paracelsus (to whom the ignorant
do attribute the first invention thereof) obiecting against him, as well
heresy coniurations, lack of learning, as also hurt and danger of mynerall
medicines and obscurity in writing, I will breefly explicate some objections
that be made against him, such as may give some light to the better
understanding of him: And also set down some causes why he is not
understood, by reasen whereof his adversaries run at large, when upon matters
not by him thought nor meant, they persecute only his shadow and not him. One
great fault is found with him for that he dedicated his book entitled
Philosophia magna unto the Athenians, whichr Erastus says be barberusse
Tnrckes and Mahumetans. His meaning herein was that all Arts and Philosophy
ought of necessetie to have their foundation in light of the holy Scriptures as
expressly in the 119. leaf of that book and in the 38. leaf and in the 45.
leaf, and in the 48. and 84, leaf of the same book, he plainly teaches and
expresses. And to be short in his book de Vermibus cap 5. he has these words:
In divinity especially in the books of Salamon, Prophets, and in the new
testament al Arts both natural and supernatural be contained, out of them we
may learn them. For in them is hidden the high treasure of the whole world
though it be hidden from the simple men: And because the original and cause of
all creatures does prosede only from God, therefore God only is to be sought
for, in him only Art does consist, he only is to be considered, of him and
his word all Art is to be learned. Wherefore Paracelsus considering that the
blindness among us Christians, in the true foundation of Philosophy (which
seek it of the Heathen which be only gessers at the truth being not
taught by Gods word) is as great, as the ignorance of the Athenians was in
the time of Saint Paul, in the true worshipping of God, therefore be calls
us Athenians: And therefore he lays the foundation of Philosophy in the
light of the holy Scripture. The effect of that doctrine which Saint Paul
did preach to the Athenians Acts 17. was that God made the world and all
things therein etc. seeing he gives to all life and breath and all things:
And has made of one blood all mankind to dwell in all the face of the earth
and has assigned the times which wear ordained before, and the bands of
their habitation, that they should seek the Lord, if so be they might have
groped after him, and found him, though doubtless he be not far from every
one of us: for in him we live, move and have our being, as also certain of
your own Poets have said etc. how the doctrine of Paracelsus does agree with
that of Saint Paul, appears by that follows: For in the same book, the
first words of the same treatise be these, All things are of God, therefore
the power and virtue of herbs be of God. The bringing forth of the Herbs is
natural, but the bringing forth of his virtue is not natural: For as God is
not natural, neither be the virtues natural. All power and virtue is
increate, because God is without beginning increate. For all virtues and power
wear in God of heaven and earth, when the spirit of God was carried upon the
waters, even so likewise when the heaven and earth shall perish, all virtues
shall return to God again, because they had no beginning, but the visible
matter of each thing is increat for they were not in the beginning with God, for
he created them of nothing, and endued them with life and virtue.

Saint Augustine in his third book De trinitate, has the like doctrine,
saying, virtus dei in terius operatur ista creanda, againt, he says, Deus
interius creans and formaus. Also the first words of the prologe of the same
book, be these. There be two sorts of influences of things, one is of the
creatures, as of Heaven. Spirits etc. the other proceeds and comes to us
emediately from God, which is the true influence. The first is Nature it
self, and whatsoever God has put in it. Also in his book de occulta
Philosophia, he saiteh: The virtue and power of God is the cause and original
of all creatures, and governs all things: therefore we ought not to atribute
and / give the power of God to cratures, as the heathen do and, their folowers.
And in the said book dedicated to the Athenians, fol. 13. he says the virtue
and power of Stars, Herbs etc. be of God, yea, the virtue and power is given
only of God to al things, wherefore he calls Annimam and the secretts of
Nature which be in Misteriis, whereby a man is healed and such like Magnalia
dei, because they proceed only from God. And the influen^is of God his gifts
and virtues be in Arcanis, and the influence and seed together bring forth
all things by the grace of God. All virtues and power of things be of God
only, The work of stars is like to the work of the fire which does seethe
the flesh in the pott, and giuethe no virtue to the flesh, it does only
sees and prepare that which is in it: even as the Carpenter which builds the
house to be dwelt in, but he makes not the dweler, he fashoneth only the
form, and the outward house with his signs, by the which each thing may
be known according to his form and fation. By these and such like
testimonies which in many places, yea, every where almost in his works be
found he shows that the Philosophy which he teaches is agreeable to yt which
S. Paul teaches ye Athenians, yt God dwells not far from every one of us:
so saiethe the psalmist, thou art nere us O God, and al thy commandiments are
truth. The Prophet likewise saienh, I am God nere at hand, and not God a far
of, sateth the Lord. Yet the great^elle of the d^^me power is not streightened
in spaces or limits, but is every where, as the invisible and incorporall
soul is diffused and disper^ed into all the members and parts of the body,
and is not absent from a^ny several part, although it have one private and
principal seat in the whole body, yet it is diffused and dispersed into the
veins, fingers and other parts: And if any member of the body be corrupt,
and need to be cut of, because that member beeng dead by defect, has not his
proper use, that f^^she which is rotten and* corrupt is cut of, without any
detriment of the Soul, even so the invisible, incorpe^ all and immesurable
God, we do understand to be in this corporal and cu^^mscriptible world, and
suf^erith no detriment, by the death or rather dissolution of any thing
therein: he pass the through all things and ail things are full of him:
Therefore both heaven earth show forth his glory: how is heaven yt scate of
God, and the earth his footestole, as the Psalmist says: But that both in
heaven and in earth his virtue might and power replenisheth al things. So
therefore is God the parent of al things, repleneshing all the world, in the
fullness of his virtue. This kind of Philosophy certain of the Poets before
Saint Paul's time have confessed, as Saint Paul saiethe, for their great god
Iupeter or (...) they cawhed (...) signifiyng by this word that we live by
him, for (...) is as much to say as to live: Aratus also the Poet said the
ways, markets, gates and all things are Iouis Plena, so said Democritus
omnia plena diis sunt, all things are full of gods. Therefore Christians ought
not to attribute the virtues power and work of God to Nature or other
creatures, or to Origenes contra Celsum. lib. 4. ^o. 2. Fol. 84^.
dead qualities, nor yet the office of life to dead things: For this cause
Selsus the heretic is worthily reprehended for attributyng the creation and
generation of one thing out of an other, as Bees out of ane Ox, Waspes out of
a Horse etc. to the temperature of qualities of heat, cold, moisture, and
dryness etc. and not to the works of God: For to give life or to quicken
belongs to no creature, but only to the Divine nature, only God quickens
all things, and the spirit of God gives life to all things. For first there
must be, quod est Viuere afterward Vita, because that Viuere is the cause of
life, and life is the effect of living: for Viuere brings forth life by force
of Nature there must be Actor, before there be Actio, for Agens begets
Actionem, we must therefore confess that there is a certain might and power,
whereby al things do live,, and as it were with a living spring, be watered and
erected into life, to the end that they may live: And because they do live
they obtained their being. God the Father which is principal Viuere, and
Potentia viuendi, and tht Son which is Vita, is that might and yower and
cause of all life, the fountain and original of living things, the which from
him that is, Esse, does give Esse and being to other things according to the
power of that which receives, and that moderateth the power of living and
substance accordyngly. But this cause of life does never forsake life: for his
invisible things vz. his virtue, power, and providence, does govern things
visible, living and created, otherwise without that eternal and invisible
virtue, nothing can abide nor continue steadfastly in his essence being and
life: for when that virtue of God is taken away that governs and quickened the
thing visible, then it lives nor moves any longer, then has it no being
longer, then is it subject to corruption: therefore to give life, to live and to
maintain life belong to the divine nature, so the^ they be eternal. For this
cause the nature of the Elements, have not of them selves: that they cann
avoyde corruption, neither do they consist of themselves, but by the words
and spirit of God: If to live and to give life and to maintain life be
immortal and eternal of their own nature, then were they not created neither
can they suffer corruption: And if at their creation things be inspired with
life (for life is the cause that things have their being) and creation he the
work and virtue of the highest nature, and of the only God of all things:
for immittit spiritum and creantur then it seems to be chiefly against the
divine glory, to say that God has given to nature or to any thing created and
subject to corruption the office of creatyng and giving life and to bring forth
things that were not: Likewise the secret operation and working of God gives
increase and norishment to all things, and the inner power of the creator,
which fills both heaven and earth, gives form, figure and moving to all
things, yea, all those thnigs which we call natures of things which do work
in this sort or that fashion, do not proced outwardly nor are the workyng of
creatures, but are the works of the high God whose seecrete power perseth all
things and causes to be what soever is by any means. For unless he make it
to be such, or in such sort, it should be nothing: Therefore it is not lawful
to say that those things that be proper to the divine and unspeakable Nature,
can naturally be in any thing made by him, or to attribute the power of God, to
creatures, or dead accidents: unless you will understand, naturally to be the
workyng of summa natura in his creatures, for this cause says Paracelsus the
virtues of things be not natural: And not only in that we are begotten and
live but also in that we move, we have it of the might and power of God, so
says the Psalmist thou have put thy hand upon me, that is thou gouernest,
conteinest, make, orderest, and bear me. And if things live not and have
not motum vitulem, or stuendi refluendi naturam, they be nothing: And that
which lacks to be some what, does not hold and keep his being so that truly
it may by no means be said to have being: for quies, brings forth nothing
but motus, and agendio operatio does frame to it felf, that thing which is, or
in what sort it is: And seeing Vita is motus quidam, hereof comes being, and
that which is exstant, and the substance. Hereof it folowith that the lively
might ^^^ and power flowyng from the word, which is life that is to say from
the Son, does cause the material things to be seen, to have their being,
and guieth to this being, in each thing, that which belongs and is proper to
it. Furthermore all things that be begotten or made, be made or begotten ex
motu, but motus ipse, quo motus, before it be moved, is quies for it is a rule
that contrarius ortus contrariorum fit, ita vt contrario ortu contrariorum,
vnde hoc ortum est pereat: as death folowith life, and of death, life rises,
and of esse comes non esse, and of non esse rises esse likewise of quies
risethe motus, and of motus, quies. Upon this reason seems to be grounded
that opinion which some do hold, that those things which seem here to dye.
do pass or go, ad non eus: But the truth is that the things which seem
to dye have their being: For seeing life is to have being, whereof rises
death, death also has his being, if life risethe of death, likewise, if of
that which is, is made that which is not, of necessity that which is, must
not be, if that which is rise thereof, in like manner if there be ceasing, or
leaving of, or quiet, of necessatie there must be ceasing of moving, if moving
be enge^dered This seems to be a strong argument, tothe^ which have not tasted
true Philosophy: For hereby it seems, yt by rising of the contraries, the
contrary does either dye or else is to be though not to have being: but in
truth it is not so, but clear contrary: For they both do abide, neither do
they dye concerning their eternal virtue: For in things vizible and
material, if there be any death, it is the death of the body. But yet to come
nerer to the truth, neither is there death of ye bodies, in that they be
material, but there is made a dissolution in that figure and form which is
now, by a certain departure: therefore only the fashion and form of the body is
dissolved. But those things do remain and have their being whereof those
things which shall live, ^e repaired renewed and rise. For seeing the first
and principal liuyug, by his omnipotency is the cause that all things, that
be or can be, have their life being and mouyng according to the capacity of
the things and substancies, as they be parted and deuioed, for every one has
his proper being, his own life* his proper moving from (...) and (...): from
Viuere and Vita, what can death prevail against close virtues and powers which
flow and are derived from that fountain and line: Therefore seeing they be
eternal, whilst they ^e in the matter or substance, if death does only
loose the composition of them, and separate them asonder, nothing dies and
perishes utterly. Wherefore it is well said that of life comes death,
because there is a dissoluyng of that body from the power and ability of
living: And likewise there is a repairing and a renuyng from death by those
guides into an other composition and things that is newly raised and sprung:
For God does create, when by his word, he calls things into being. So the
Father works even until this time, as our savior says: But the gentle
reader must John 5.
know that I do not here speak of man, that his soul after the dissolution
of it from the body does pass in to another body: For his soul is created
by God, therefore those things can by no means be understood of it.

Chapter. 21, Haw materia prima and misceria magna was the beginning of all
things according to Paracelsus his meaning: and how al create were at one time
in the increate.
ONe other great falt does Erastus find with Paracelsus, for that he saiethe
that Prima materia and Misterium magnum was the beginnig of al things by
separation. And this mystery he says to be increate hereof does Erastus
conclude, that according to Paracelsus creation, is nothing but separation.
Though in this place and many other places of the same book ad Athenienses he
does entreat of the influencies which proceed from God (as in the first entery
of the same book he plainly confesses) and of inward generations, and
fruits, and of inward seperations (for deep and secret purpose) yet if
Erastus had delte indifferently with him, he might easily perceive his meaning
in other of his works, and also in this, where he finds this horible
herecie, concerning the creation of vizible bodies to be according to Gods
word. For in his book entitled Paramirum lil. 1. cap. 2. he confesses
according to Gods holy word that Prima materia mundi was Fiat: And in the same
book to the Athenians he says that Materia prima can net be perceined by
senses: Also in that book Lib. 1. cap. primo he plainly affirms that the
vizible matter of each thing was create, for they were not with God at the
beginning: For God created them of nothing, and inspired into them life and
virtue etc. So are we taught by Gods word that in the beginning after God had
created the heavens and earth, the earth was rude, void and empty, that is to
say, it was imperfect and unfruitful, it brought for the no Herbs, Trees,
nor Flowers, of diverse colors ^or sweet smelles, nor yet any other thing,
which afterward did grow or spryng in it. The heaven also at the first
lacked his ornaments, and so did the water. The earth continued baren until
God by virtue of the word had commanded it to be fruitful, whereby it brought
forth Herbs, Trees, and Plants, which have seeds each of them in themselves
according to there kind. The firmament was empty until such time God the
creator of al things had by his word made the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and
appointed them their office, duty, and property. The water also was baren
until the same word had made it fruitful, of living creatures in their
kinds and made likewise fowls in their kinds, and blessed them, and gave
them commandment to increase and multiply. Also God created and made catell,
beasts and all creping things of the earth according to their kinds, and
likewise gave them property to increase and multiply. For as Saint Augustine
says, if we consider the nature of things properly without Allegerye, this
word increase and multiply doethe belong to all things which do grow and
come of seeds. These leeds says Paracelsus have received by the divine word
the power of multipliyng and transplant action their essence and properties. As
Saint Basil says, nothing is in any herb or plant, which is not planted
by the commandment of the Almighty. Of these Semina Essentiae of their
naturs, virtues, and properties, and their seperations does he here entreat.
The virtues of things, says he, were in God, when the Tract. 1. Fol 10.
Spirit of God was carried upon the waters. And they be of God and are not
natural but God sends forth his influences, even as the sun does his
beams, which be divided in to diverse and wonderful virtues. And God
replenisheth all things with his virtues: And God did inspire life and virtues
into those things which he created of nothing. By these places and others to
the like effect, it appears that he teaches, that in the beginning the
virtues of vizible things were united in their fountain, neither were they
separated in diversity and multitude of offices: but after that by the virtue
of the spirit, which was carried upon the waters, they were commanded to do
their offices in the worldly ministration, they were separated and divided in
offices, life, essenties, and beyngs: We need not here to imagine that these
did proceed of Chaos, but out of the treasures of the divine wisdom: but
even as the inuizible virtue in a carnell has a might, science, and power,
able to work and bring forth diverse and sundry effects, which in winter do
not appear but lie quiet, and in appointed and due time, brings forth the
root, body, pith, bark, and bow, twige, leaf, fruit, and all these
things, belongyng to the Tree, and deuideth and seperateth them in just and
true order, proportion, form, sigure, and quality,: So in the beginning were
all the virtues united in God, their fountain, until such time as by the
virtue of the word, they were commanded to do their several officies in the
worldly ministry. And as a man holdyng his peace does secretly reason with
himself, and does comprehend in his reason all those words which after he
utters and speaks perticulerly in diverse several sentences, words, and
sillables, which words be received of diverse hearers: So in the beginning all
the might, virtue, and power, of things were in God, until the word proceeded
from God, whereby they were distributed to each as seemed best to the divine
wisdom. But these virtues and power of God are not inuizible things, as the
heart is in a beast, or as it is part of a beast, but they be in things, as
the beams of the Sun be in those whereupon it shines, yet the substance of
the Sun is not in them, neither is God in part any where but in singulis
totus and in onibus omnis. And as the soul dispersed through the whole body,
is wholly in every member, and yet does not give to each member his gifts, of
his office work and ministry, but to the eye he gives only the office of
leyng, and not to here, to the ear he gives heeryng and not to see, and to
other members likewise: so god being Diffusus in singulis, replenisheth all
things essencially, both above and benethe, within and without, and round
about, and does separate and distribute, to every thing, as it pleases him:
As to a tree he gives life to grow, and not to feel, to beasts he gives
feeling and not to discern: to Angels and to ye soul he gives to deserne,
and if God do withdraw any of these things from any thing, immediately it shall
be come unprofitable in the universal body, even as ye member of the body will
be unprofitable, and without use, from which God has withdrawn his gift and
virtue: Likewise God has separated perated and parted the virtues of herbs and
plants among them elues, gyuyng to some vertus stipticke, to others virtues
lax^^iue etc. And Peri A^cho^ Lib 2. Cap. 1. Fol. ^74. T^ 1. Psalm 102. De
cognitione verz vitae Cap. 23. To. 9.
so i^ Mineralle^, A^^nailes and at things vizible, b^ they divided in
^^ueralvertues one from an other: so says old Father Origin God the parent
of all things, for the health of al his creatures has divided and separated to
each thing here, ineffabilem rationem of his word and wisdom: And the
Psalmist says all his virtues be his ministers and workers doing his will.
Therefore says Saint Augustine, every creature does feel God to be in it by
somewhat. And because Paracelsus attributes the beginning of things, as^ ell
to Materia prima, which as is aforesaid, is fiat, which I judge to be the
divine will, and the first council of the spiritual motion, as to Misterium
magnum, which he means to be Christ according to these old verses.

Adesto lumen rerum, pater omnipatens deus
Adesto lumen luminis, misterium et Virtus dei
Adesto sanct^ spiritus, patris and filij copula
It is manifest by these words, he means God the father, and the son whom
he confesses to be the creator of all things visible, and from whom all
Mysteries did proceed. For it is not to be understood that God the father,
did create all things without the wisdom, word, and virtue, that is to say,
without the only begotten or God our Lord Jesus Christ. For so God said of
the person, of the wisdom, vz I was with him making all things, sei moan
eius coeli confirmati sunt, and spiritu eius omnes vires eorum: For the works
of the son be the works of the father: and the father works in the son
for so he says, the father which is in me o^^h his work: and again I do
the works of the father: So the father works only, workyng in him and by
him whom he has begotten. In this sort Christ that great mystery was the
beginning of all things. And because all those virtues wherewith God has
inspired, things visible and material, do proceed and are derived from that
fountain and line vz from the great Mystery, he calls them likewise
Misteria saying, that great Mystery, has given, separated, and divided, to
all things their general Mysteries. And sometimes he calls the seeds, the
receptacles of the virtues, by the name of Misteria like wise: But Erastus
fasly and corruptly says, that he affirms that all things did proceed out
of Misterium magnum, whereas his words be, that all mysteries did proceed out
of Misterium magnum: And that great Mystery does give to al things their
general Mysteries etc. And that which is eternal, is the cause of all things
visible and material. God created visible things, and inspired into them life
and virtues: so all things be of God, as well things material and vizible, as
also the virtues power and might of things, which he often calls Misteria.

Fordermore, whereas Paracelsus says all things created were together at one
time in the increate, as butter and chese be in the milk and worms in the
chese, which after grow in it, and as the Image is in the wood before the
Keruer has made it. Erastus says that this must needs be the Chaos of
Anaxagoras. The true meaning of Paracelsus herein is, that every creature may
justly be said to be in God, because without God there is nothing: but yet
they be not so in God, that they be of his substance, or part of him: For it
followith not, that the thing that is in an other, is that thing in which it
is: For wine is in the botle, yet the wine is not the botle: The sunn is in the
glass and the glass in the soun, De cognitione verz vitae Cap. 25. 10. 9.
yet neither of them is that ye other is. Saint Augustine teaches by express
words, that every creature is in the creator, and God is in every creature:
for says he even as if a man were at Rome, if he do think upon the whole
City, and comprehended, and included all the City, with all the people
thereof in his mind by immagination, it may very well be said, that Rome is in
his mind, and his mind is in Rome: so is it truly affirmed, that God is in
every creature, and every creature is in God: But to go a little nerer to the
matter even as in a little corn or grane, all things be inuizible at one
time, which in process of time do appear in the stalk and ear, as the
root, stalk, knottes or joints, blade ear, blossom, chafe, brissels, and
corn, and nothing rises, comes or is in the stalk or ear which is not
derived, or desended from the secret treasure of the corn or grain: For all
those things were first in the grain not in the hu^ge quaintitie, but by
virtue and power which causes all those things, and has the coming to work
all those several forms, figures, and things, belongyng to the stalk and
ear, in just and true order and proportion, by dew separation and diuizion:
as in the same grain all things were inuizible which in time did grow in to
the stalk and ear, so is it to be thought, in the beginning when God created
all things of nothing, he had all things together in him which were made.

Chapter 22. Of the separation of vizible and material bodies.
AS concerning the separation of material and vizible bodies Paraselsus in his
book de meteoricis axpressionibus says, that in the beginning God created
the iiii. Elements of nothing by his word, fiat: and that nothing was made
somewhat by him, and was made into one substance and one body, so that all
things were included in that one vz materia prima. After that he separated each
of them out of that as pleased him, wherefore God did work six days, until
he had drawn out, separated and formed, out of Materia prima materias vltimas,
yt is to say all creatures, and had put in each of them peculierly his proper
nature condition and state, and placed and ordained him in his place and
mantion, so that after that he ceased from creatyng: and all places were
replenished with the number of creaturs of all kinds and their Essentiis: Even
as the Potter has his earth or claie before him, in which be contained diverse
forms of vessels and instruments, for he may out of one lump of claye
frame and fashion a thousand and more sondrye fashions of pots and vessels:
Likewise the Carpenter and image maker may form out of one piece of timber
what he list, so that he know how to separate from it, that which is
superfluous and not meet for the Image, so God did draw and separate all
creatures out of one lump and matter which he made of nothing: And as the
earth in the winter is bare rude and baren, without beauty, but yet has in it
al colors, as green, blewe, white, with all other fine and noble colors and
all other things, which in the spring and sommet do appear and come forth,
which a man would not believe to be in it unless he did see the^, even so all
the diversity of bodies did proceed out of materia prima: This doctrine does
seem to agree with that place of the holy Scripturs which saiethe God made
the world de materia infromi vel inuisa. And with Saint Basil and others
which affirm that there was some what before this vizible world: And it
auoideth certain objections, which certain heretics did make against Gods
holy word, and did ask from whom the water was, upon which the spirit of God
was carried: for it was not written before that God made the waters and such
like questions: for the water is not so called in this place that we should
think it to be such as we can now see and touch, neither was the earth
which is there called void and inuizible, such as this which may be seen
and handled, but where it is said in the beginning God made heaven and earth,
under the name of heaven and earth, all creatures are signified, which God made
and created out of it afterward: For prima materia was made, confused, and
without form, out of the which all things were made, which were severally
formed: And therefore it is rightly believed that God made all things of
nothing: For though all things were made of that prima materia, yet that was
made of nothing: and that prima materia which God made of nothing was call
Co^lum and terra, as it is said in the beginning God made heaven and earth not
because it was so presently, but because it was so potentia for it is written
that God made heaven after: Even as we may say of a kernel of an aple, that
in it be the root, body, bows, leaves, and fruits, not Sapient. ^^. In
hexam^. ho^^il. ^.
because they be so presently, but because they will be so after. So it was said
in the beginning God made heaven and earth, as it were the seed of heaven and
earth, whilst the matter of heaven and earth was therein confusedly. And
because it was certain, that the heaven and earth should thereof be made,
therefore the same matter was called the heaven and earth. This is the opinion
of Saint Augustine in diverse places of his works: and in his xii. book
Confessionum he says God made this world de materia informi which he made of
nothing out of which he made all things which be in this world: And an
ancient Chimist likewise saiethe de simplici substantia, primordialis
cuiuslibet eleme^tii eleme^ta que sunt materia naturae, fuerant pure creata cum
diuina separatione.

Chapter 23. Certain notes and cautions given for the better understanding of
this Chimicall Peisicke.
THus I have given thee gentle reader a taste of the dealing of Erastus aganst
Paracelsus, he has stuffed five volummes with the ^^ke stuff, for such
matters in^einyg against him as either he is ignorant and unskillful in, and
which he does not understand, or such as he has mistaken and for such as by
him be falsely gathered, or peruersly re^eited or craftily handled, and
maliciously mangled, having either somethyng cut from them, or some more added,
or racked out of their place, or wrested to a wrong meaning which the place
gives not, or else which in some other place of his work he him self does
better expound and declare, and by such as be perfect and true principles of
true Philosophy agreeable with the purity of Gods word, contrary to the rules
of the Ethnickes, Paracelsus bo^^eth the riddles, parabels, and dark speches
wherewith he shadowith and hireth this Art, and the matter whereof the
universal medecin is made, and the operation and workyng thereof out of the
Scriptures: And because in such writing he must observe the sense of the
Scripturs, and also therein comprehend the Doctrine he has in hand, therefore
be thos^ phrases, sentences, and speches, dark and subject to cauilation.
Therefore who so ever will rightly understand him where he writes of our
creation, conception* and birth and also of Babtisme, regeneration, both kinds
of death, reserection etc. Must know and understand this ancient Chimical
rule, that the Chimicall work in part, ex creatione hominis deriuatur:
Generally in other places. where he does not purposly entreat of Divinity he
that will understand him rightly, must know and understand that he teaches
Metaphisicall principles in natural things, then shall he understand how all
things participate in nature, whereby the nature of the thing that is left
perfect, does desire and couite his perfection, and the one is made perfect by
an other by reason of their concordance and agreement, which do participate
together in nature for Natura, natura delectatur and coniungi appetit which is
ye cause of perfection. Then shall he perceive what does ioyn the Elements
together in the work of Nature being so contrary, and wherewith they be
quickened. Then shall he perceive how God woorketh in his creatures, and how
all parts hang together as it were in one chain. Then shall the reader
perceive and find in his great Philosophy dedicated to the Athenians (wherein
Erastus does find so many faults) a treatise of the right and true observing
the Sabbath day, wherein he has taught delivered, and set down many good and
wholesome precepts for the keepyng of the Sabbath rightly in the plain
letter there written: yet covertly and darkely, has he hidden as many rules and
precepts of true natural Philosophy in that treatise, as of the keeping the
Sabbath, though in the bare letter no such thing appears, but filii
scientiae may understand them: Therefore gentle reader in readyng of him and
other Chimicall writers follow their own counsel and warning, that is search
out their meaning and cleeue not to the bare letter of their words, stick not
in the bark and rind, but find out the pithe, have not regard to the body,
but to the soul and life of that which is written, otherwise thou shall do
the Author great wrong and thou shall never understand him: and if in one place
the Author write darkly, in some other place some particular thing may be
found that joined with the other may explicate the meaning, for they disperse
their meaning in several places, to the end they would be understood only of
the deligent and painful reader and not of the unworthy. As concerning his
strange words and phrases of speech in his medicines and practice, they are
to be learned, by manuell experience and practice by the fire, which is the
Chimicall Physicians Scholemaister, so shall he understand his strange words
and phrases of spech by his meaning, but he must not think to find his
meaning by his strange words and phrases: as for example he that would learn
what this word Alcool means, he must know what Contritio Philosophica is,
so shall he find that it does not signify a powder stamped and most finely
serched, though he did wash it in water, and take the powder after the water be
dried away. Again he that knows what Circulation means does know that
these figures 3000. do not signify three thousand years: Likewise he that can
skill to resolve each thing into his three substancies, and has respect to the
lively virtues of things and not cleave to the ded qualities, may find what
Sanguinea, Cheri, Anthos, and such like be in Paracelsus* and would not call
his dark words Diabolical as Erastus and others do, besides this he that
knows that by diverse operations by the fire one thing may be made to
work diverse effects, shall find the difference between Arcana, Essentiae
Misteria etc. And shall find this rule true that Medicus in secunda vita
averit a^tem suam. Likewise he that knows the work and effect of Putrefactio
Philosophica, would not say that medicines prepared by the fire do get a
Corrosiue Nature or hurt by the fire, though it be by Calcination, yea the
Chimicall Physician knows by Fixation to take away all venenositie from
things: And to take away their sharpness, by ablution, and solution.
Besides this he that is instructed, that it is against the grounds and
principles of the Chimicall Physic to minister any Marchesitt or metal, to
any pacient inwardly, before it be made Volatile and Spiritual, so that it
can not be reduced into Metal again, will not say that Vitrum antimonii
(which purgethe and shakes the body so sore, or the common Aurum potabile and
such like) be mediciens warranted by this Art, or by Paraselsus, which so
laborreth to teach the separation of the pure form the impure. But he would
perceive that he is taught fustio spiritum and non corporum, but they would
rather turn this accusation upon the Ethnicke Physicians and their folowers
which stick not to minister the scales of Iron and Brass in powder inwardly,
Aetius Lib. 14. Ma^heolus in dioscoe Lib. 5. Ro^dolerius
Some stick not to minister Quicksiluer raw, some when it is burned into
ashes: So do they minister gold in leaves, and precious Stones, brimstone and
vitriell also in powder.

Chapter. 24. Of the Celestial medicynes of Paracelsus: and matters touching
his person and ignorance.
ERastus does besides these things find great falte with the celestial
medicine of Paracelsus, saying they have their strenthe and power of the
deuilles and evil spirits, and not af God nor by the ministry of good
Angels, this he would have us believe upon his bare report, but in truith
Paracelsus excludes from the true, pure, and ancient Magike, and from his
celestial medicine, all Nigromancie, Sorcery, Ceremonies, Coniurations, and
all manner of inuocations of deuilles, Demones and evil spirits: And he gives
an especial charge that this Art be only used to do good, and not to the
prejudice nor hurt of any body: and that it be done without Ceremonies,
Coniurations, Inuocations, Consecrations, Blessings, and allmaner superstytion
whereby it becomes ungodly. He says that the devil can not cure nor help
an ague, nor the toothe Philosophia magna tr^c 3. O^cul^a* Philoso. Cap. 2.
ache: And that the devil himself with all his legions has not so much power
nor authority, that he is able to break one po^t, much less is he able to
make him: also he says that evil spirits are Gods butchers and
executioners, which do execute nothing besides the commission of their
magistrate, that is to say, of the divine Magestie, therefore he concludes,
that all coniurations be against Gods word, the divine law and light of
Nature, whether they be used to Spirits, Roots, Herbs, Stones, or any
thing else: And that Nigromantiers, and Conturers, are like to thieves, living
in woods, which rob and kill so long as God permits them, and no longer,
but when the time is come when their wickedness shall be made manifest, and
the hour of their punishment is at hand, then by one means or other, they
come into the hangmans hands, which gives them the reward of their work, so
is it with the nigromantier and coniurer which receive justly their reward
both in this world, and in the world to come: besides this he says the
devil is the poorest of all creatures, and most miserable, Occulta Philoso.
Cap. ^.
and that he has no money, neither has he any power over money, therefore can
not give that he has not, nor has power over: to this purpose I could
allege out of him a number of testimonies, but you shall understand that the
cause why he sometime uses ^^dicines drawn out of Vegetables, and sometime
out of Mineralles, and sometime these heavenly medicines is this: It the
deceases have light originalls, or beginnyngs, of meat and drink, or other
fruits of the earth, those may be cured by such medicines drawn out of
herbs, or rather with their Arcana: and in such deceases if they be not long
circulated nor in the remote parts but in primis officinis ciboru^ the gross
medicines of the heathens may prevail or at least they may flatter some
diceases: But if the decease be caused by Minerals, Metalles, or Markesits, in
the principal parts of the body, or in the Balsamum of man, then they must be
cured by medicine drawn out of Metalles, or Markesits, because such deceases
will not yealde to medicines drawn out of herbs or roots, etc. Because the
roots of those deceases are not so soon resolved as the other: therefore they
neade pure spirits, for pascimur nutrimur, curamur natura Mercurii id est
spiritu, says an ancient Chimist. Likewise if disceases be caused by
influencies of stars, they are to be helped by influencie: And causes of
invisible deceases in the invisible part of man: and those grefes and pains
which be caused by supernatural means, will not be helped by any means
aforesaied, but they must be remedied by such means as they were caused, that
is by such manner of cure as has power to work in to the invisible part of
man. If Paracelsus some time would be drunk after his Country manner I can
not excuse him no more then I can excuse in some nations glottenie, in other
pride, and contempt of all others in comparison of themselves, in others breach
of promise and fidilitie, in others dissimulation, triflyng and much babbling:
but let the doctrine be tried by the work and success, not by their faults
in their lives.

As for lack of method in his works, I say his books entitled Paramirum,
his boks de vita longa, lack no method. But if in any other of his works he
did not observe method, he did it because he would disperse his mind in
several parts, to the end he would be understood only of the Children of
the Art. The ignorance in the lattin tongue is untruly objected against him:
as appears by his books de Tartare written in latten, and his epistles written
to Erasmus in latten and by diverse his lectures: and by his commentaries upon
Hipocrates etc.

Chapter 25. The conclution of the Author.
THus thou have hard gentle reader, how this Ancient Chimicall Physic, had
his beginning from Abraham, or at least from Hermes Trismegestus, and after in
the Aegiptian priests which were kings, or of the kings blood, it had his
continuance. From whom it has been derived amongst the godliest and best
learned Philosophers, in to diverse parts of the world, which have shadowed
and hidden it in parables, and dark speeches to avoid contempt among the
foolish and unworthy readers, and yet so that it should not be hidden from
those which were meet to hear and understand such secreets and mysteries:
Also thou haste hard how the new Physic of the heathen hadd his beginning
of late years, in comparisonne of the other from the heathen and Idollaters
which were without the true knowledge of God. Thou have hard also the
difference between these two Phisiks, whereby thou may be able to judge,
whether this ancient Physic be vain without beginning, as it has been
objected. Thou have hard the explanation of certain objections laid against
Paracelsus, whereby thou may the better judge of the rest, wherewith he is
charged. Now I do crave of thee gentle reader as I have taken this in hand to
do thee good, so thou will interpret my meaning to the best, if any thing
mi^like thee, do not pick at every syllable and word, but consider whilst
mine eye was bent to the matter, which I did follow and entreat of, words may
esely escape and be misplaced, especially with him which lacks eloquence, and
uses not to write. If thou understand not somewhat that is here written, do
not therefore condemn it, but keep silence, as Pithagoras his scholars did,
and be quiet, or else learn of others. If any thing herein shall seem to be
absurd and contrary to thy mind, because it is contrary to Aristotle Galen
Auicen etc. do not therefore reiecte it, but way it with an indifferent
judgment, and take not all things for Oracles which the heathen have taught.
And if any thing herein be amiss (for no man's writings can be warranted in
all,) do not give judgment and pronounce definite sentence agaiust the whole,
by reason of some one particular. And if thou perceive my meaning to be Godly
and sound, do not condemn me of error by reason of words, not rightly
placed, nor aptly used, for error consists in sense and meaning, and not in
sound of words. And though I write not to the latter Physicians the folowers
of the heathens, that be practisioners, and wilfully bent against this
Chimicall Physic, because they be like knottie and burs^e wood, not fit for
framyng timber, but will gnawe the line wherewith they be ledd, and girne err
and show their angry teeth at their leaders, and will not now become scholars:
Yet because this my writing can not escape their hands, neither can they well
digest it, therefore I do admonish them that if they take in hand to answer
it, that they answer each part thereof, and do not dismember it, nor put any
thing to it, nor take any thing from it, and that they do not answer with
railing scoffs, quippes, mockes, tauntes, and lies, as some ignorant use in
their talk against this Art: And as Erastus uses in his writing: And as
Bernar dus Dess^ius a Doctor of Physic of Colen, uses against one Fedro a
Chimist, after he was ded, which by his writing as seems may teache a schole of
scoldyng and railyng: For such manner eloquence may not pass for proof among
the indifferent readers, neither is it worthy to be answered, neither may the
bare authority of Aristotle, Galen, Auicen, and such like serve for answer
against the Scripturs of God, nor against the lively artificial proof by
fire, followyng Nature, but with charitable words, and sound arguments
dependyng upon Gods word, the true touchstone that can not err, and upon
infallible experience by the fire, the Physicians master, let the matter be
tried: then no doubt some good may come by this contention to the sick, and
deceased, which has need of the Physician: and the doctrine of Physic, will
exalt and lift up his head, and the truth of it self will appear, as fire
does by knockyng of two flintes together: which the most high God of whom
comes all healyng, and which has created the Physician because of necessity,
grant for his dear son Jesus Christ his sake, which is the life and truth.

Amen Valete 1585.

