THE COMPLAINT OF PAVLES, TO ALL CHRISTIAN SOVLES:

OR an humble Supplication,
To our good King and Nation,
For Her new Reparation.
Written by HENRY FARLEY.

Amore, Veritate, and Reuerentia. Printed by CANTRELL LEG. 1616.

The Book to the Reader.
If you will judge me, (my good friend)
First read me thorough to the end,
If all be well, you may commend me,
If ought amiss, I pray amend me.
For every one should gladly do,
The same he would be done unto.
I Poor Paul's dejected and distressed, yet being in the best prospect, and
taller then all my fellows) do see, or at least may see, (if my windows be
eyes) many stately monuments, houses, and other things builded, and done within
these few years, some for Honor, some for profit, some for Beauty, some for
pleasure, some for health and recreation, some for Royal entertainments and
sports, and many for charitable uses:

And I have seen the Globe burnt, and quickly made a Phoenix.

Q. But who sees me? A. Who sees thee not?

Tunc etiam spero, And hope will still, though still I have the worst;
For were not for some hope, my Heart would burst.
Before the Complaint is added a Prologue, and after the same an Epilogue, and
a Dream.
1. THe Prologue, is a charge given by the Church to this Book; namely, that
it should disperse it self to the Court, Clergy, Cities, and Countries, to
search and find out all such as are Royally, Graciously, Honorably,
Religiously, Virtuously, Charitably, and Bountifully minded toward the repair
thereof, To the end (that Their lights shining in such a glorious work of
Piety) may thereby illuminate, and inflame the hearts of all others, to be
willing Benefactors, Contributors, and Coadiutors to the same.

2. The Epilogue discovers a Iew-rie of Knights of the Post; that in this,
and in all other Pious Designs, will ever swear to the contrary.

3. The Dream is a Vision which the Author saw in his sleep, showing the
manner and fashion, how (as he thought) the said Church and steeple were
beautified and repaired.

THE PROLOGVE.
And first to the Court.
FLY little Book, from East unto the West,
From North to South, or where thou likest best,
Search Britain out, in all Her better parts,
Amongst the Noblest, and the Worthiest hearts.
But first (as duty binds) take thy wing,
And fly to Faiths Defender, JAMES my King;
Beseech His Highness, (by all means that be)
That (as S. Albons) He would pity me,
And so to order, by His Great command,
That I may be repaired out of hand;
Else I shall wear away, and crack, and fall,
To my great sorrow, and my lovers all.
OH tell His Majesty in humble sort,
That thou art come unto His Royal Court
To beg a Boon, that never begged before,
Which (if He grant) thou never shall beg more;
And be thou sure before from Him thou part,
Thou get Compassion from His Kingly Heart;
Like as the woman was to Christ, so be
Importunate unto his Majesty.
Do not thou look, like one, that will be daunted,
But pray, and speak, until my suite be granted;
And say, Although I ragged am, and torn,
As if I were, to all the rest a scorn;
Yet Christendom thr'oughout can truly tell,
That I for Name and Fame do bear the Bell;
And ner'thelesse that I am called poor Paul's,
I feed (with the choicest delicates) more Souls,
Then any Three (the greatest Churches) do,
In England, and in all Great Britain too.
And when thou have thus labored Him a while,
Mark, if His Gracious Countenance do smile:
For if it do, be sure He does affect thee,
And with His Royal favor will protect thee;
And by His sacred wisdom, will devise
A speedy way for my Re-edifice.
So I shall have just cause (...) song (...) sing,
No grace in the earth to that of God and King;
And shortly will be sung by every infant,
That good King JAMES made me again Triumphant.
THEN go to Her, whose Princely virtues shine
As if She were a Goddess most Divine,
(I mean my Gracious Queen and Lady ANNE,
Best Queen of Women, for Best King of Man:)
Beseech that Peereles Paragon of Time,
That She will daigne t'accept thy honest Rhyme;
The rather, in respect Her Royal Brother,
Was the Prime cause thereof, not any other,
Who being (in the sight of many people)
With other famous Princes on my steeple,
My Writer did conceit, His Highness spoke
Some charitable motion for my sake,
That it were charges well bestowed and spent,
To do me Grace with some fair Ornament;
As with a Crown, a Spire, or some good thing,
More fitter for to entertain a King.
And 'cause He there did print His royal foot,
Poor man suppo'd He signed and sealed vnto't:
And say I what I can, yet is his Creed,
His Highness did deliuer't as His Deed;
In which conceit (though oftentimes restrained)
He could not rest, till thus I had complained.
OH tell Her Highness that Her Ladies fair,
Would give good gifts to see my new repair,
And that, if first Her Majesty begin,
All Worthies of her sex will then come in,
And bring their Angels, Nobles, and their Crowns,
From Cities, Countries, Villages, and Towns;
For Women never were of bettet spirits,
To do the works that Fame and honor merits,
Then now they are, God grant them be so still,
Patterns of good, and haters of all ill.
AND when thou have appeared to King and Queen,
Unto their Princely Son likewise be seen,
The high and mighty CHARLES, our joy and treasure,
Whom all true subjects love in boundless measure.
Say to this Worthy, Well-beloved Prince,
It was my chance some fifty five years since,
To loose my top, a stately princely spire,
By lightening, which set the same on fire;
And burnt it down, (a wonderful mishap,)
Leaving me bare and bald without a cappe,
Like an old ship without her masts and sails,
Having no Beauty, but poor rotten rayles.
Pray tell this Prince what honor it will be
Unto His Highness if He speak for me;
And what a Glory, Name, and Fame, and praise,
Unto Great Britain it will ever raise,
If this my humble suit be well respected,
That so with speed the work may be effected.
SO from the Prince (as fast as thou art able,)
Make have to go unto the Counsel Table,
Show wherefore thou do come, and make a motion,
Unto their Honors there for their Devotion;
That They Will be pleased to join with Majesty,
In such a work of Christian Piety;
I know Their Wisdoms and Their Worths are such,
They will in this no gift nor counsel grutch.
THEN to all other Lords and Ladies bright,
And every virtuous Gentleman and Knight,
Do thou appear; and say thou art come from me,
And I do hope thou shall more welcome be:
As sure as I in famous London stand,
I shall have gifts of every Noble hand.
AND when with Lords and Ladies thou have done,
About the House in every office run,
And from the highest to the lowest Groom,
Say, thou for my repair and help art come;
And I dare wager every one will say,
They Will give to me, and spare another way.
Secondly, to the Clergy.
THVS do thou leave the Court, and quickly hie
Unto the Reverend Bishops and Clergy,
And giving Them due Grace and Reverence,
Crave thou Their Bounties and Benevolence.
Tell Them I am Their Church of greatest note,
Although I wear a poor and ragged coat;
And stand in fairest City of this Land,
And with great state was builded to Their hand.
I was the only Mirror, so am still,
But then for Beauty, now for looking ill:
And Strangers wonder, why I am so bare,
Where such great costs on pleasures buildings are:
And where for Vanity, there wants no coin,
Or any thing to make her brave and fine.
I do assure them (under their Correction)
That I have lived long in great subjection,
And 'cause I doubt my rents and means are small,
That I shall not be mended till I fall,
I think it not amiss for Them and me,
To try what help from others there will be:
So I have turned thee to the world therefore,
That (if I want,) good men may give me more:
And doubtless there are Thousands that would give,
Great and large gifts, to see me prosperous live.
Thirdly, to the City.
NOW from the Clergy walk through London-City,
And look them out that my poor case do pity;
For there thou wilt find innumerable many,
That for my good, will do as much as any;
No place so famous as that Royal Town,
For works of Worth, of Honor, and Renown.
Be it for profit, pleasure, health, or state,
(Whatsoever it cost,) the Citizens will have it.
Mark but Morefields, how it is advanced hie
That did before both low and loathsome lie:
And going on take Algate in thy way,
Note well her building, and her rich array.
Then without fear of stocks or pillorie,
Go to the garden called Th'artilarie,
Pass by the pikes and muskets, and be bold,
That honorable action to behold:
And I am sure if back thy news thou bring,
Thou will protest it is a worthy thing,
That men of note their time and coin should spend,
To practice Arms, their Country to defend,
And voluntarily themselves incline,
To learn the rules of Martial discipline.
I like it wondrous well, and could agree.
In every Shire and Town the like might be,
That if in time we come to counterbuffes,
We may have skill at Arms more then at cuffes,
And be prepared with skill and armor bright,
Against Gods enemies, and mine to fight.
Now come to Bow in Cheap that cost full dear,
And see how gloriously she does appear.
From thence to Smithfield if thou chance to hit,
Tell me what costs they have bestowed on it,
It was before a filthy noisome place,
And to the City very much disgrace,
Yet now some say it may with best compare,
Of market places that in England are.
Then unto Amwell see what you can say,
(The River which was cut the other day,)
Me thinks it is a very famous thing,
And does much comfort to the City bring:
I needs must say it does, and will avowe it,
And so I think all others will allow it,
And praise the Founders for their good intention,
And pray to bless them, and their new invention.
So may you very well the Founders praise,
Of water-engins made in former days;
For they are worthy, and their works good still,
Though Amwell do the best it can or will.
Also for Charity and good Almes-deedes,
What City under heaven more poor feeds?
Or who more bountiful to Preachers be,
Then Londiners to their ability?
All which I do, and may rejoice to see,
And hope (in time) they will do some good to me:
And so will leave a thousand things to name,
That likewise do deserve their lasting fame,
And those more cheifely which were done of late,
(Together with their triumphs of great state,)
Because for thee my Book, and for the Wise,
I hope it will be enough for to suffice.
And therefore now thy duty there is done,
See that to other Cities thou be gone;
Entreat them fair as thou go on thy way,
And do not care what carping Critticks say.
Fourthly, to the Country.
WHEN thou have done in City and in Town,
I pray thee walk the Countries up and down,
And so disperse thy self both far and wide,
Till every honest Christian heart be tried:
Spare neither sex, nor age, nor bond, nor free,
Nor any one of whatsoever degree:
For though some places are but poor and bare,
Yet will the poorest have a mite to spare;
The Country welcome I do know is kind,
Where means does hit according to the mind.
Therefore my loving Book take heart and go,
Thou shall find ten good friends for one bad foe:
Do not thou fear for want of Eloquence
Or filed terms, to please the outward sense;
But with a courage and a conscience free,
Do what thou can to grace and pleasure me,
And I will pray as much as in me is
To bring my Benefactors unto bliss,
Thy words are honest, and thy matter true,
Wherefore go on I say, and so A-Dieu.
Thy wel-willer to the Worlds end, St. PAVLES Church.

The Epistle of the Author to all Courteous and Charitable Readers.
IF you should ask me Why I undertook,
Into the ruins of Paul's Church to look?
Or How I durst (like Bayard) lift my Muse,
To such a height, or such a subject choose?
Or Who prouok'd me on, or bid me do it?
Or who did set their helping hands unto it?
Or Which way I do think this Land can raise,
Enough Benevolence in these hard days?
Or What the end of my intent should be?
Or When I thought this worthy work to see?
To these your Why, your How, Who, Which, What, When,
I answer thus kind friends and Gentlemen:
First, for your Why, my reason I will tell,
It Is cause I love, and still will love Bethel;
And How I durst on such a subject write?
It Is cause I do it in the Churches right;
For whom, and for my Prince and Country too,
I Will spend my blood, write, speak, ride, run, or go.
And for your Who did bid me or assist me?
It was my God that hitherto has blist me.
And for your Which way such great gifts will rise,
I could set presidents before your eyes
Of one or two, whose deeds so far extend,
As would build three, and this Church well amend.
Then wonder not (I pray) which way or whence,
This Land should raise such great Benevolence.
And for your What Is the end of my intention?
The scope of all my Book will make you mention.
And lastly, for your When this work shall be,
Belongs unto my Betters not to me,
To God and King, and Powr's superior,
And not to me that am inferior.
Wherefore (good Readers) take it well in worth,
The answer which to you I have set forth,
And when this Book of mine abroad is sent,
(Though poor and plain) believe it is well meant:
And every thing's well done that is taken so,
But otherwise the good for bad does go.
I do confess and all the world may know-it,
I am too weak, to have the name of Poet,
Yet I protest I like so well the art,
I would a good one be withal my heart;
But now it is too late to wish or cry
I was no poet borne, nor one shall die.
Since first into this business I waded,
I could not be by any friend dissuaded,
Although they told me strange things of these days,
That might have made me doubtful many ways;
But being void of fears, or thought of harm,
I did my self with Christian courage arm,
And stoutly went through thick and thin to shore,
Where never any waded yet before;
And now have finished what my soul required,
Though not so well by half as I desired;
God grant it may such good acceptance have,
That once again this Bethel may be brave.
And you dear Friends whose favors I obtain,
Health to your days while here you do remain,
And after this life ever may you stand,
Most blessed Saints in the Celestial Land.
Yours only in the uttermost of my best endeauours and wishes, HENRY FARLEY.

At Zoilus, Momus, and their mates, This do I fling to break their pates.
CRitticks surcease, and do not stir too much,
Least meddling more then needs, I may you touch,
And tell you to your teeth you are no friends
To any good beginnings, or good ends.
Though plain I am, to Prince I am as true,
And loyal too, as are the proud'st of you:
Nor have I wronged you or any other,
More then a loving child would wrong his mother:
Or written any thing so void of reason,
But that it may (to good men) come in season;
Wherefore let Justice rule you, and be quiet,
And seek not'gainst my right to make a riot:
For if you do, I must defend my cause,
By help of God, or King, or Arms, or Laws;
Yet will I yield my life unto my Betters,
But not to you, if I should starve in fetters.
Perhaps I Am borne to be a Phinees bold,
To beg and pray for poor, and weak and old,
And such as are both dumb, and deaf, and blind,
That in this flintie Age no help can find.
What Is that to you, or wherefore should you grutch,
When nine times worse, you spend ten times as much?
But that is to please your humor, that is well done,
And in that vain your course runs headlong on,
Until you make your selves so poor and bare,
That twenty such have not a doite to spare.
If this my suite be rightly well regarded,
I may have thanks, and love, and be rewarded:
And more then that, (if luck do not miscarrie)
Paul's friends will say, I was an honest Harry:
So gain a virtuous Fame when I am rotten,
By future Ages not to be forgotten,
While (if you please) you may go shoe the goose,
And (wanting garters) wear your stockings loose.
Yours, as you plainly see, till you are friends with me. H. F.

In laudem Authoris
Carmen (...).
SEmiruta aspiciens Paulini culmina templi
Farleius, queritur tale perire decus.
Mox piaspirantem componit vota libellum,
Et quia non poter at magna, minora facit.
Qui si tam nosset templum, quam condere versum,
Efficeret propria, quod vouet, ipse manu.
Fortunet laetis deus hoc successibus ausum,
Gloria and ingenuum certa sequatur opus.
THe great Kings House, and Courts on earth decay'^
Let King, and Court to heaven raise up again,
And of the Churchmen let it never be said,
That they did grudge the Temple to maintain:
Let London Londons beauty beautify,
And Countrie-men their Countries-dignity:
And with the Churches wished exaltation,
Mount up this Authors rightful commendation.
I. W. T. C.

THE COMPLAINT OF PAVLES, TO ALL CHRISTIAN SOVLES.
THE great complaint that here is made good people,
Is of Paul's Church, and of that polled steeple,
Which stands within the famous city London,
Cracked, defaced, rent, and almost undone:
Mourning like Charing-crosse, be'ing much decaid,
And of the storms and winter blasts afraid,
Saying (alas) will no man pity me,
But suffer still my poor adversity?
Is It S. Paul's doctrine you would feign embrace?
Then crown my head, do me some outward Grace:
Let strangers see and all that come to Town,
That your chief Church does flourish, not fall down:
And let me have some Beauty, form, and fashion,
That ye may show your selves a loving Nation,
And so assure me you do not reject me,
But with your wonted favors do respect me.
I know that for your own delights and pleasures,
Upon your houses you bestow great treasures,
Without, within, not any costs you spare,
To make them show most beautiful and rare,
With stately Lanthornes, Pyramids, and things,
Pictures of mighty Emperors and Kings,
High turrets, towers, and curious phanes of price,
As if it were the place of Paradise,
While I am bare, and like a Chaos stand,
That should be fairest prospect in the land.
What is the reason I should be no higher?
Because my chance was to be burnt with fire:
Or do you think the charge but cast away
That is bestowed on the Church decay?
Or is it Merlins sorceries and lies
Has made you fear with his false prophesies?
Or what is the reason you should thus neglect
To build me up again with fair prospect?
I am Gods house, consider then I pray,
What cause there is that I should thus decay:
Is it not pity I should ragged be,
While on proud flesh such golden gawdes I see?
Alas for shame I cannot choose but blush,
To see the world so stumble at a rush,
Yet easily it skips and leaps over blocks,
Not sparing charge, nor fearing any knocks.
A thousand years I stood in prosperous state,
And so remained till it was of late:
My ancient Founders were my lovers dear,
They spared no cost as does full well appear:
But raised me from the ground aloft the skies,
To be a wonder for a world of eyes,
And made my watchful cock stretch forth his wings,
As does the Lark when (mounting high) he sings
Haleluiah with his pretty voice,
And (neer'st the Heavens,) more he does rejoice.
Then with the least air that in sky did blow,
Which way the wind did set, my cock would show;
Ah, then was I a Princely Monument,
In sight of all that unto London went:
And then had I the Commendation,
And held in highest reputation:
But now (like one forlorn,) I stand vnpitt'ed,
As if I had some monstrous fault committed.
Sometimes a view is made upon my wants,
And then (twixt hope and fear) my heart it pants,
But all in vain I hope, (alas my grief,)
Surueiours gone, then this is my releife;
To undertake so high a work to mend,
Great is the charge (say some) and to no end,
For (but for show) to what use will I serve,
Whereby such cost on me, I should deserve?
Which censure makes me linger in consumption,
That to be cured I have small presumption.
Fie, fie, where are the minds were heretofore?
Are they grown poor, and will be rich no more?
Or are the gold and silver Ages past,
And now an iron Age, left at the last?
Then woe is me, my hopes, are fond and vain,
I never look to be repaired again.
When first I was by Ethelbert began,
No help was wanting could be found in man;
The Labre'r would begin at work to sweat,
Before he did desire to drink or eat;
All workmen striued for to show their skill,
Not so much for their gain, as in good will;
Whether by task, or working by the day,
Not one that would a minute spend in play;
Nor would they slight their works as now men do,
But wrought with Art and expedition too;
One free days work in every week I know,
They would on me most willingly bestow.
What should I say? If I should go about,
To reckon all particulars throughout;
(The rules observed to begin and end,
The gifts that many unto me did send,
The solemn orders laying my first stone,
With hallowing the ground I stand upon:
The candles that were burned every night,
At every time I grew a man in height,
The noise of Drums* and eke of Trumpets sound,
When first I did appear above the ground;
The triumph made at my first Scaffolds raise,
The solemn songs were sung in Heavens praise:
The number set on work by sea and land,
As if the Christian world I might command;
If I were best that uses swift to write,
I could not in two years the same recite.
And if so many men were in a plain,
As for my good did labor and take pain,
A royal army would appear to be,
Of power to fight with mighty enemy.
They wrought about me like the pretty bees,
And every night went home with weary knees,
And every morn came fresh to work again,
As if the day before they felt no pain:
Their honey-drops distilled from them apace,
(I mean the sweat of every workemans face)
Their labor was their festival for me,
In hope my future prosperous state to see,
A world it was to note how all were bent,
How willingly their coin and time they spent,
Without a Lotaty or forced collection,
For all were free in any such good action:
There was no pining at the Church expense,
But all was brought in true Benevolence:
And those that died in my diocese,
Would will me something, more or less:
At all communions, and marriage days,
At Christenings, and many other ways:
The very poorest, would (without excuse)
Send or give something to my proper use:
And all to make me beautiful and fair,
That Christ his flock might unto me repair,
To teach and learn the Heavenly words of Grace,
And so to grow and fructify apace,
In all good ways of Christian Piety,
Best pleasing to the Heavenly Deity.
Which (in good time) is long since brought to pass,
The like as never in any kingdom was:
So that for preaching, I may now compare
With all the Churches under heaven are.
Praised be God whose goodness does excel,
Beyond what I can ask, or tongue can tell,
From age to age, he still has succored me,
And out of thrall for ever set me free.
My inward garments, shine so bright and pure,
As now no error can the same obscure:
For on the Bread of life in me you feed,
And do receive all things your souls do need;
My Preachers bid you come, buy without money,
Things sweeter then the honey-combe or honey;
They tell you that the poor repentant sinner,
Shall be invited to a Heavenly dinner;
And how the wilful wicked are corrected,
And from Gods favor utterly rejected.
They preach that pride shall be consumed with fire,
And God will raise the simple from the mire.
They say that Envy is a murdering sin,
Whilst neighbour-loue the love of God dtoh win.
They teach and prove that griping Covetousness,
Is chiefest cause of sin and wickedness:
Whilst Charity and fruits of Christian love,
Does please the Lord, and all his Saints above.
They say in holy Scripture it is found,
That all the world for drunken sin was drowned,
And that with water was; but now I think,
The greatest part will drowned be in drink.
They say that gluttony and all excess,
Shall punished be in Hell with pains endless:
And that all whooredome, and adulterous acts,
All poisonings, witchcrafs, and such wicked facts,
Treason, perjury, cousenage, and lying,
Unto the Lord of Hosts are daily crying.
And thus they preach the Law and Gospel too,
And faithfully Gods holy work they do;
And all to set you in the perfect way,
That Heaven may yours be another day.
By this you see how fair I am within,
Oh blessed are they that did that work begin:
And they that did and do maintain the same,
Eternal be their Honor and their Fame:
But such as seek that Glory to deface,
Hell be their end, and in this life disgrace.
Ah fair Eliza, now I think on thee,
Full four and forty years thou succordst me,
And did defend me with thy awful sword,
Against proudest foes that did oppose Gods word:
And when away thou must from us be gone,
God and thou send'st a second Solomon,
By whom and by whose issue, I am sure,
Paul's faithful doctrine shall with me endure;
And be maintained, (maugre hellish spite)
So long as Sun and Moon do yield their light.
His words, His works, His will to God is bent,
His Books do show that He from God is sent:
For Proverbs to His Son He did declare, 1. Basilicondoron. 2. His Apology
for the oath of Allegiance. 3. Canticum Canticorum.

Then next a Preachers part He did not spare,
The third His song of songs most sure shall be,
That shall set forth His Kingly love to me,
His chief delight is all in Trinity,
Of them to make a perfect Unity.
What is the good wherein He has no part?
What is the bad He hates not with His heart?
Where are the poor that justly can complain,
Whose needs. He helps not, and their right maintain?
Where is the wight of worth and due desert,
But of his Royal bounty has had part?
And where is the Princes that to Him resort,
That do not of their welcome well report?
And eke extol His great magnificence,
His wisdom, learning, wit, and eloquence;
As did the Queen of Saba (David's son,)
So they admire our Royal Solomon,
And say though times do alter and men's names,
So that our Solomon is called JAMES,
Yet for his wealth, his wisdom, strength and all,
A Second Solomon you may Him call;
His Land the Israel that flows with milk,
And honey sweet, corn, cattle, cloth, and silk,
Gold from all parts, spice, oil, and wine,
Treasures from East and West, Pearls rich and fine;
People innumerable as the sands,
That well he may send out to foreign lands,
Great store of them to place and plant elsewhere,
That He an Israel new may build and rear,
Whereby Gods word throughout the world may go,
As in the Scriptures Christ commanded so:
Go ye preach and baptize in every coast,
In'th name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:
Which worthy work his Highness has begun,
As much as any heretofore has done:
Virginnia, Sommer-islands, and the rest,
Will testify in time how they are blessed,
By coming of His Subjects there to live,
Which could not be, if He no leave did give.
By which good means those which now Savage be,
Will come in time to Christianity;
If not the elder sort, the younger may,
And after one age thousands every day.
Though all things at the first seem hard to be,
Yet good beginnings have good ends you see,
So it be followed and well protected,
And for Gods glory cheifely be respected:
No such beginnings need to fear good ends,
For they shall have both God and King their friends.
There is not any that for wise would pass,
But holds that England as Virginnia was,
And how it is now the world may judge with me,
A brauer Kingdom never eye did see;
And so (in time) may poor Virginnia,
If seconded by rich Brittannia.
OH God, I pray thee bless this Royal JAMES, The prayer of Paul's.

Q. ANNE, Prince CHARLES, their issue, and their realms,
Prince PALATINE, and his ELIZA fair,
Their Princely Babe and first borne Son and Heir;
Feed them with Manna from thy mercie-seate,
Let thy Word be their only drink and meat:
Bless all their Counsel (faithful, wise, and grave,
With every gift good Counselors should have:
Their gracious and their reverend Bishops all,
Bless likewise Lord; and more especial,
Their Reu'rend Kingly Father of this See,
Chief Lord and Preacher that belongs to me;
Also their Deane and Chapter of this place,
Bless with thy loving countenance and grace,
And all the rest of godly Ministry,
And daily them increase and multiply:
Oh make their words and works for aie agree,
That I the Halci^on days and hours may see.
Bless all their Nobles, Knights, and Gentry all,
Their Yeomandry, and Commons great and small.
Bless both their Nurses of sweet learnings lore,
And all good Students now and euemore:
Bless Them from all designs of fear and blood,
And from all things that are not for Their good:
Poison the poisoners that seek Their death,
And suffer not a Traitor once to breath;
Root out the Romish rubble from their Land,
That naught but plots of murder have in hand;
Drive far from Them all Sorcerers and Devils,
And still defend Them from pretended evils:
Blow all the chafe away that spoils good corn,
And let no vaultie villains more be borne;
Set marks of powder-vengeance in their faces,
And let it there abide to their disgraces.
Yet Lord, thou art their potter, they the clay,
Thy skill and will can work them any way:
Then if it be thy will, for Honor make them,
And in thine anger do not quite forsake them:
Or as the Scripture says, (a blessed story)
Do what thou will, O God, for thine own glory.
Bless this most famous City where I stand,
The Flower, the Perle, the Iemme of Britain Land,
The Honorable Mayor of the same,
The Sherifs and the Aldermen by name,
All other officers in their degree,
And all good Citizens whereso'ere they be.
My Benefactors I do pray thee bless,
And frame their hearts to give with willingness:
So bless, O Lord, the Noble English hearts,
That in Virginnia have done their parts;
Encourage and increase them evermore,
And still enrich their treasure and their store;
Oh let all worthy minds imboldned be,
To do the works that best may Honor thee.
And I do pray thee since the times grow ill,
Teach all the ready way to do thy will;
So by thy goodness sin may be or'ecome,
And they prepared against the day of doom,
To live with thee in thy eternal bliss*
Where they shall never any comfort miss;
Unto which blessed place, Lord bring them still,
That fear thy name, and strive to do thy will.
AND now for to return where I left off,
Least some perhaps may rashly give ascoffe;)
I must complain of more then yet you see,
Which I desire may well amended be:
My body round within, and eke without.
My windows, and my pillars all about,
My pauements, and my doors, my leads, my walls,
And many other faults upon you calls,
And craves repair against all wind and weather,
That we may give you thanks for altogether.
The Church the foeminine gendor does require,
And like a Ladies should be her attire;
Nay like an Empresses adorned, and graced,
Within, without, in order all things placed;
And cheifely that Church which is most insight,
(The head, the members guide, and candlelight;)
So should I be that all the world may know,
Th'vnfayned love that Britains hearts do owe
To me their Princely Church, and Empress dear,
In whom the word of God does shine most clear.
Say that you should upon your back bestow
Rich clothing, as there is many do I know,
And on your head a threedbare cap should wear,
Motheaten, and at every touch to tear;
Would you not think that all which see you go,
Could choose but wonder why you should do so?
In all whatsoever like to like is best,
If one part be well clothed, so let the rest;
Or else that which is base makes all seem base,
And by that fault does all the rest disgrace.
Were it not strange also (oh pardon me,)
That any one within the Court should see
Our Royal Queen attired in base array,
And all her hand-maides clothed in garments gay?
I think it were strange, and such unseemly sport,
As never will (I hope) be in our Court:
Yet even so the case with me does stand,
That am the Queen of Churches in this Land:
For in the middle of a matchless City,
I stand like to a mourner, more the pity,
Environed with buildings fair about,
And I am tallest built in all the rowt;
All other Churches are but dwarfes to me,
Yet unto all beare-headed must I be;
My head should wear the Crown full well I know,
But that must stand upon the top of Bow: Bow steeple in Cheapeside very
well beautified at the cost of one Parish.

Or else the shaft or spire that should be best,
But that is upon S. Dunstanes in the East;
My chime of fine small bells might well be heard,
All London over, but I am afeard
That some will say, what need such cost be there?
Because (of chimes) there be enough elsewhere:
But such Lobiectors I could wish were dead,
That better minds might come in place and stead;
Let such hoard up for Sir Hugh Prodigal,
Or Sir Raph Want*wit, you may noddie call,
Whose back and belly cheer, Tobacco smoke,
All good designs does hinder, stifle, choke.
Some few (I hope) the Lord will ever raise,
To be the light and mirror of these days,
That (in good time) will pity my complaint,
And with my wants will all my friends acquaint,
And stir them up to be as frank to me,
As God (to them) is bountiful and free.
One such a Sutton as of late did die,
That turned Charter House to charity,
If to himself the honor he would have,
With half that charge he might repair me brave;
But such a worthy Phoenix is so rare;
That hardly any will with him compare;
Nay would ten thousand would now join in one,
To do as much as he alone has done.
But stay a while (my Muse) no further go,
What is the reason thou art grieved so?
Let not fell anger in thy heart take place,
But patiently I pray thee, bear a space;
Not any of my coat should angry be,
But gentle, mild, and full of courtesy;
Nor should beggars, (men do say) be choosers,
Least craving all, they still are all the loosers.
I think now on a good conceit and true,
That does my comforts once again renew;
For listening what the Princes said of late,
(When they were pleased to be on my bald pate,)
As I did understand this was their talk,
As they (about) on every side did walk;
Alas good Paul (says one) how poor and bare,
Thy head, thy sides, thy battlements now are?
Is It possible that long thou should thus stand,
In such a City and a prosperous land?
As I am Christian I Will speak for thee,
That once again thou may tryumphant be:
Thy shaft shall up again, thy cock shall crow,
Or else thou shall be crowned as well as Bow:
Which of these two will surest on thee stand,
I will entreat thou may have out of hand:
Comfort thy self (good Paul) be not dismayed,
It shall be done to thee, as I have said;
To which the other Princes all agreed,
And said it should be surely done with speed.
THIS did I hear, or else was much deceived,
And of my sense of hearing quite bereaved;
But that is no marvel if it so should be,
For age, and cold, breeds much infirmity,
And waiting so long bearehead is a thing
That (to the soundest) may diseases bring,
And make him so benumbed, and so weak,
That he shall hardly stand, or hear, or speak.
Indeed I am or'eioy'd, I must confess,
When I am visited with Princely guests;
For then I hope, some good will come to me,
Toward releife of my necessity;
So joy might make me to mistake their speech,
Which (if I did) I humbly do beseech
A pardon for this fault, and then hereafter
I Will write of nothing but I Will bring mine Author,
To verify the truth of that I write,
Or else my pen shall never more indite.
And for my Writer also let me crave,
His pardon likewise I would gladly have:
His learning you may see is poor and weak,
And I can make but signs, I cannot speak;
I showed my coat, my head, my broken sight,
How poor it was, how bald and wanting light:
Where^^ he vowed, that he would never rest
Until with state and beauty I were dressed;
For which I must not show my self ingrate,
But pray that he may live right fortunate:
His meaning's good, that you may plainly see,
Though he want Eloquence to polish me,
Bear with his wants, accept of his good will,
Encourage him that is well minded still.
If once I were attired fair and brave,
Then London all her ornaments shall have;
All things would then be suitable to me,
And to my friends most grateful will I be:
For then will I when my Request is done,
Send to the banks of learned Helicon,
Or to Pernassus mount, where Eloquence
Does pass my Authors dull intelligence,
Where I shall find such fruits on Eden tree,
As shall set forth their favors done to me;
And on my Pinnacles there shall they place,
Most thankful mottoes for my Founders grace.
And more to show their loves and good intents,
They shall set poesies on my battlements,
That shall my Benefactors love unfold,
To all the world in sentences of gold.
Let't not be said when you for Christ his sake
War with his enemies do undertake,
That your religion does with Church decay,
But let your seen, your unseen zeal display;
That valiantly you may your selves express,
Like Christians stout in weal or in distress,
In spite of all that wicked wights can do,
And for the glory of the Gospel too.
Then famous Britain thou wilt be happy still,
In godly pleasures thou shall take thy fill:
Fear thou no foes for Christ will be thy guard,
Whose breath can make a mighty host afeard:
Thy Kingly David also can dispute
With Turk or Antichrist, and them confute;
And when to wars his Highness shall incline,
He Will quell the pride of stoutest Philistine,
And in the mean time with a Bible-stone,
Will dash his brains, and crush his greatest bone:
For he that in his breast does wear that shield,
(As does this David) needs not fear the field:
But with true faith and courage he may meet
Satan himself, and stamp him at his feet.
His golden pen that wrote for Christ his sake,
The Angels up to Heaven did it take,
And bid Him be as bold with Pike as Pen,
For He should be the only King of men,
And that in Him and His posterity,
Should be or'ethrowne all Popish heresy:
Which Christ (I pray thee) grant it may be so,
To all that Thy just quarrel undergo:
For sweet's that BLOOD that in Thy cause is shed,
As was Thy BLOOD that Thou for man have bledde.
And now for to conclude what has been said,
I do beseech my poverty be wai'd:
Oh let not base Oblivion bury me,
Least in Oblivion I do bury thee,
And scorn that thou should build within my womb,
To grace thy self with any sumptuous tomb,
Where thy remembrance must endure for aye,
And I poor Church be suffered to decay.
My Innocence pleads no such Ignorance:
But it I were disposed to cast a glaunce,
I soon could find such costs on tombs laid out,
As almost would amend me round about:
These in my bowels near my heart must lie,
And I poor ragged wretch must pity cry:
And this the purse of ten or twelve have done,
Yet left enough for wife, and every son.
Can ten or twelve do so, and twice as much?
And shall a City and a Kingdom grutch
To give a trifle to so good a deed,
As should relieve my poverty and need?
And not so given, neither as quite lost,
For that were vanity and idle cost;
For from thee it does go unto thy brother,
(I mean the workman, and to many other.)
That Is cast away, that goes out of the Land,
And comes no more in King or Subjects hand:
Or that that is hidden in the earth, or bags,
While thy poor Brother's naked, or in rags.
Oh come with gladness then unto this charge,
Britain is wealthy, populous, and large,
And those that give in love and charity,
Into a Book let them recorded be,
That childrens children may hereafter know,
The love their forefathers to me did owe;
And be encouraged in their younger days,
To do the works deserving lasting praise:
For he that does defer good deeds till death,
Seild comes to good the thing he does bequeath.
ON bended knees of love and loyalty,
And at the feet of Sovereign Majesty,
King, Queen, and Prince, and Privy Counselors,
Archbishops, Bishops, Britains Senators,
Once more I do most humbly, beg and crave,
That my defaults amendment now may have:
Nobles, Knights, Gentry, Commons great and small,
In love and reverence I pray you all,
That ye these faults will help for to amend,
For Britains honor till the world does end:
Wives, and Widows, Maidens dying, living,
Unto this work of Piety be giving;
According to your works ye shall inherit,
Yet for your works no place in Heaven can merit:
For what is he that since the world began,
Has been so just, and so upright a man,
Whose good works could exceed above his evil,
But only He that conquered death and devil?
That Christ, that Lamb, that Dove, that God-man, he
Did only merit your eternity.
To him therefore do you his praises send,
And so of my Complaint I make an end.
Laus Deo in aeternum.
THE EPILOGVE:
OR, An Ecstasy, which Paul's fell into after it had complained: partly of
Hope, and partly of Fear.
WHEN my complaint was ended, I amazd
Stood, and beheld how people on me gazd:
My thought that every one that walked by,
Did look upon me with compassions eye:
EXCEPT some twelve, and that was Envy one,
A pale-faced fellow, wishing good to none:
He vo'wd, and swore from his more gall then heart,
Unto my need he would no penny part:
His reason being asked, he replied,
All others but his own good he defied.
THE second was a miserable Chuffe,
He at at my mournful suite did storm and puff;
And said, for all my poverty and rags,
He would not part with money from his bags.
Shall I (said he) give any thing to thee,
If I should want, what can thou give to me?
THE third was Pride, and he did look so hie,
That he could not my poverty epsy:
To give (he said) it is not now the fashion;
And for to beg, it is held abomination.
THE fourth was Carelessness; his answer was,
That for my need and wants he did not pass,
His reason why he will no bounty give,
Is' cause (quoth he) I Will stand while he shall live,
And so departs with scoffing, and with laughter,
And bids them care that ought to care hereafter.
THEN Pickthanke comes, the fifth he is in number,
He pries in others faults, and makes great cumber,
And for to save himself from any charge,
He does not care how he does speak at large,
And reckons up collections made before,
(Enough for to releife my wants and more;)
So that if others were in the mind he is in,
He would see that before he would begin.
Alas, if such a thing were done before,
Let it not now be laid on good men's score;
Whose wills are such (although they are not many)
Me to repair without the help of any:
But since their means compares not with mind,
(Without some help) I can no comfort find.
THEN Curiosity the sixth goes by,
And cause he sees a moate in's brothers eye,
(A word amiss, a syllable, or such,)
To give a shilling therefore he does grutch:
And thus he peepes, and pries, and looks a squint,
And thinks that beggars words should be past print:
When (God does know) if he were charitable,
The plainest terms should serve if he were able.
THE seventh, Prodigality that ass,
(That by Duke Humphry often does hungry pass,)
He says, Tobacco, Claretwine, and Sack
He will not want, though twenty Churches lack;
To plays, and playing, tailor, or to launder,
Or for a toy, he cares not how he squander:
But when poor Virtue does but crauea groate,
He Is ready in his wrath to cut her throat.
THEN comes the eight, (Hail master) with his train,
He says, what needs such wast? it is but vain:
It had been better given unto the poor,
That beg about the streets from door to door:
But such a Judas (if he bear the bag,)
Has no intent the poor should have a ragge.
THE ninth I take it was a Jesuit,
(For I did hear him mumble words of spite)
And swore by all the black deeds he intended,
He Would rather hang then I should be amended:
Hang then (quoth I,) or get thee going further,
For thy delight's in ruin and in murder:
Thy curse can do no harm, thy bless no good,
Nor all such villains as delight in blood:
For God in holy Scripture has appointed,
That none should hurt his Church or his Anointed:
Therefore avaunt thou wolf in lambskins clothed,
For through the world thy acts and deeds are loathed.
THEN comes the tenth an Atheist, not an Ar'in,
(Though both I do esteem as dung or carrin;)
He vexed and stormed that any Church should be
Where Souls should worship any Deity:
A man to seem he was, but not Gods creature,
Because he held all things proceed by nature.
THE leauenth was a brother seeming pure,
That no good works will hear of or endure,
And all the comfort which to me he says,
That I (Ass he,) must stand and live by faith;
By faith (quoth I,) what faith do thou live by?
By faith it is good when in good faith you lie;
If I had not a Faith, more sure, more humble,
I soon should crake, and rent, and fall, and tumble: The surest foundation of
Paul's is the Church under it called S. Faith.

Wherefore be gone (Profane) thy faith deceaues,
And all the world of charity bereaues.
THE twelu'th and last, a clouted shoe did wear,
And in his hand a hedging bill did bear:
(I mean the wretched man, that is so cruel,
That makes his mucke, his Idol and his Iuell,)
He says and swears, (and yet he prates and lies)
That all his wealth's not worth two apple pies;
When (if he were) to take a goodly varme,
Or in some spite to do his neighbor harm,
His Judge and he agree both in one zound,
And from their hutch can vetch a hunderd pound;
And yet he pines and pules for doing good,
As if in poverty and want he stood.
And thus with grief of mind, and in some fury,
I have impaneld up my unkind Iewe-ry,
Whose verdict would be such if they may speak,
As would my head, and heart for sorrow break.
But now these unkind twelve are gone and past,
Twelve hundred thousand I epsy at last,
Virtues welwillers men of charity,
Such as do pray for my prosperity.
They say I may without be decked brave,
Yet in my inward parts no pride may have;
I may have carerings, corronets, and laces,
I may have lovers, kisses, and embraces;
I may have Honor due unto a Queen,
And all this while no pride in me is seen:
I may have any thing to make me fair,
That all truths lovers may to me repair,
And be enamored at my lovely face,
And strive who most can enter to my grace:
Not as the wicked money-changing-rout,
(In time of prayer) walk my Isles about,
And make their bargains, and their idle meetings,
With many false, and feigned news, and greetings:
But as my friends in fervent zeal and motion,
Come for to hear Gods word with sound devotion;
My thinks they look, and smile, and speak, and give,
And wish that I triumphantly might live;
They do not seek for faults, as others do,
But do good deeds, and yet are faithful too:
They sound no trumpets when they give their alms,
They have in them no peevish froward qualmes;
But all in love and doue-like charity
They give, and give in Christian verity:
Wherefore (as is my duty) I will pray
That God will bless them all both night and day.
THE DREAM.
ON the one and twenti'th day,
Of the pleasant month of May,
To a grove I did repare,
All alone to take the air;
Sweet it was, and fresh, and green,
Decked like a Summer Queen:
Where abiding privately,
I did here fine melody:
Philomel did chaunt and sing,
Welcomming the cheerful spring:
Every bird did strain her throat,
Warbling out her pretty note.
Walking there a little space,
At last I went with nimble trace,
To a river somewhat near,
That had water pure and clear:
Fishes there did leap and play,
Swannes did sing their roundelay.
So I set me down to rest,
In a place that liked me best;
And being there a little while,
Slumber did mine eyes beguile,
Till at last a sleep did take me,
That no noise till night could wake me:
The place was sure, and I was bold,
The air was pure, not hot nor cold:
My pillowes were green grass and flowers,
The willowes were my shadie bowres;
My little dog did so attend me,
That no creature could offend me.
In this sleep (good Christian people,)
I dreamed of a Church and steeple,
Which at first my thought was bare,
As many other ruins are,
Weather-beaten and much worn,
Raged, deformed, cracked, and torn,
Without battlement or grace,
Too too mean for such a place:
For my thought this Church did stand,
In best city of this land,
And for seat and eminence,
Had the chief pre-eminence:
Wondrous great it was in sight,
And of admirable height:
King and people might it see,
How it was in poverty:
And all strangers well might say,
'Twere pity it should so decay,
Where Gods word is well regarded,
And his Preachers are rewarded.
In this dream (though fast I slept)
Yet (with tears) I truly wept,
And did pray that God would bless,
Such as would this Church redress.
After tears were ouer-past,
Joy did visit me at last,
For my thought this Church was mended,
And the steeple was befriended.
Fashions many I did see,
Er'e any fashion pleased me;
One as before (a seemly spire)
Which was burned down with fire;
One like Pulchres, one like Bow,
One like Boston was I trow;
One Grantham* like I did epsy,
But his top stood not awry:
And many other I did see,
In this dreaming fantasy;
But that which seemed to be best,
Follows after all the rest,
Which if your pleasure be to read,
You Will say it was the best indeed.
My thought the steeple was taken down,
Lower then the Churches crown,
And suddenly was raised again,
With good labor not in vain:
Square it was as it was before,
Twelve foot higher it was and more;
Round the top a battlement,
Seemly, fair, and excellent;
Above that battlement full high,
Four pinacles I did epsy,
Hollow, and of stone so sure,
That till doomes day would endure:
On the top of every one,
Was a little spire of stone,
At the feet whereof there went,
A little pretty battlement:
Round about these battlements
Were fine phanes and ornaments,
By whose motion without stay,
Drove the crows and kites away:
In each phane was guilt the Coat
Of benefactors of best note;
And in a place convenient,
On th'inside of each battlement,
A poesy thus was set in gold,
As underneath you may behold;
All glory be to God on hie,
And to this Church prosperity.
These pinacles four pictures had,
Which to see did make me glad;
That which stood next to the West,
Had his face toward the East;
Looking with maiesticke grace,
For to see his Saviors face;
A King he was, a Crown he wore,
God bless him now and evermore:
For sure as London has a Thames,
It was the picture of King James:
His Arms were in the highest phane,
And then many noble man,
Had their Arms under His,
Round that battlement I wisse:
Like to spangles they did show,
Unto such as were below;
And they that did to th'toppe resort,
Might say it did belong to the Court:
His Kingly motto there was placed,
Which the Pinnacle most graced:
Evil come to illintenders,
Good to all true Faiths Defenders.
THEN I looked to that in the East,
Where a Bishop was at least,
Opposite unto the King,
Which to me much joy did bring;
In one hand he had a Book,
Wherein he seemed for to look,
In a sweet and reu'rend wise,
Well beseeming such a guise:
His other hand did touch his tongue,
And a sentence thus he sung;
To my Savior I Will be true,
And this Church shall have her due.
On the top his Scutchion stood,
Which to see it did me good;
Under that were all others,
Which by calling were his brothers:
This Pinnacle did plainly show
The reu'rend Bishops did it owe,
And the Clergy with them joined,
Because they would not be behind.
THEN I saw toward the North,
Another pinnacle of worth;
Where was sitting in a chair,
One resembling a Lord Mayor;
The City Arms were highest there,
Under that all Cities were:
A Ship was carved there also,
As if she on the Sea did go:
Then a motto there was set,
Which the City grace did get:
Walworth killed rebel Straw,
Cause he spurned against King and Law;
So by our truth and industry,
God makes our City multiply:
Let rebels swagger how they will,
We will be true and loyal still.
This pinnacle belongs to'th'Citie,
The motto is more true then witty.
THEN to the South I turned mine eye,
And in that Pinnacle did spy
A Countryman the plough to hold,
A comely Farmer somewhat old,
A Wheat-sheafe was his Arms I trow;
And the rest that stood below,
Were implements of husbandry,
Set in the phanes most handsomely:
And his motto thus was framed,
As here underneath is named:
Plain I am as you may see,
Yet the Best grow rich by me.
TVVIXT each Pinnacle there was,
Pyramides that did surpass,
For beauty and for seemly form,
Strong enough for any storm.
In the middle of each square,
There they stood and placed were.
One had the picture of a Queen,
The fairest that mine eyes have seen,
Who surely as I Am honest man,
Seemed to be our Royal Anne:
For it had such Majesty,
Joined with gentle clemency,
That certainly it was the same,
Which before I seemed to name.
Her motto on the same was set,
Which I never shall forget:
Fair without, and grace within,
Are beauties fit for Church and Queen.
And the poesy general,
Which I named first of all,
That was placed in degree,
As high as all the others be:
All glory be to God on high, etc.
THE second Pyramides had,
The picture of a royal Lad,
Which I imagined ever since,
Did resemble Charles our Prince,
By each part of limme and feature,
He did seem a Kingly creature;
Stout and bold, gentle, free,
And all that in good princes be:
His motto now I will set forth,
Cause it was a thing of worth:
I scorn the fear of shedding blood,
For God, for Church, for Countries good;
But for all these I Will war and fight,
As Kings and Princes should by right:
I will help the poor oppressed,
And those which truly are distressed.
THE third as fair as was the rest,
With Elizabeth was blessed,
Rhynes sweet Princess, Britains joy,
Holding in her arms a Boy,
Whom (if Art do not dissemble)
Her first borne He did resemble.
At which sight I was amazd,
And with joy on them I gazd,
Ravished with admiration
At this delectable fashion,
Thinking if such great delight,
Could be in the pictures sight;
What would then the substance be,
Unto him that may them see:
I am sure to me it was Treasure
For to see them in this measure.
Her motto now I will declare,
Kill me, if the same I spare:
In the Churches wealth and peace,
Good things prosper and increase:
But if she wither and decay,
All Gods blessings fleet away.
IN the fourth fair Pyramide,
Two other Pictures I espide,
One of Denmarks royal King,
Whose fame with us shall ever ring,
And shall be linked in this knot,
Where He shall never be forgot:
Three Queens in one is His Sister,
Twice in England has he kissed her,
With such great joy on all parts,
As pleased ten hundred thousand hearts.
His motto was as does ensue,
Believe me it is very true;
I Christian King of Denmark, give
My love to These, while I do live,
And will assist with power and sword,
My kindred, friends, the Church, Gods word.
BY him was Prince Palatine,
Looking on his Valentine;
Each to other seemed to glance,
With a cheerful countenance,
In such an amiable sort,
As my soul did therein sport;
This Prince a Motto did unfold:
Fit and worthy to be told:
Gods spouse and mine I will maintain,
So long as I do live and reign,
Turk, Pope, nor devil, shall them fright,
Or do them hurt by day or night,
And in this Gordion knot will I
Be knit in love until I die.
THEN in the middle of the square
Where all these brave pictures were,
There was raised (ten foot higher)
A curious and a costly spire:
And at the top thereof a Cross
Of Silver guilt and not of dross;
Then a gallant cock to show,
Which way still the wind did blow;
In this place good Art was tried,
How to make it sure abide,
And accordingly it was framed,
That no workman could be blamed;
Not too weighty nor too light,
Like Cheape-crosse it was in sight,
But the pictures there that stood,
Were of Princes that were good,
That this Church did er'st advance,
And gave it store of maintenance.
And first the lowest placed there,
Elizabeth and Henry were,
One of proof one of hope,
Better Princes Heavens cope
Ever had or ever can,
Be better amongst the sons of man:
Then betwixt them I espide,
Two Princesses that lately di'd,
Which looked like those of King James,
Gotten since he dwelt by Thames.
And above in the next round,
Other Princes there I found,
Pictured all in their degree,
As by time now dead they be:
There in letters of pure gold,
Their right names I did behold;
And I think in hollow brass,
Every picture shaped was.
This spire was hollow, and with lead
Round about it was covered;
Framed with oken timber pure,
Such as ever will endure:
In that hollow was naught else,
But a score of little bells,
Which the Art of witty times
Made a delectable chymes:
Who being high, their pretty sound
Might be heard the City round.
In the midst of the upper loft,
A pair of wodden stayres were wrought,
And a door at that stayres head,
Which did bring me to the lead;
Where my thought I did behold,
All that I before have told.
As about the leads I went,
And saw all things so excellent,
Looking over, I did see
The Church likewise as it should be,
With new battlements about,
And walls mended throughout;
All the windows where need was,
Were amended with pure glass:
Not any thing that wanted there,
But was repaired every where,
Never did I see a thing,
Of more worth and reckoning*
Then this vision which I
In my sleep did plain epsy.
Had I been an Architect,
Dreaming of this fair prospect,
Or with true terms could relate,
All the fashion, form, and state,
Then might I say it taught me more
Then any practice did before;
But many things of note and worth,
I am not able to set forth.
After long I had beheld
The outward beauty it did yield,
Then I was upon the pin,
To see what Grace it had within;
Down I went, (my thought in have,)
But my speed did prove in wast:
For (to me) it is grief to tell;
I was waked by a bell,
And my dog began to bay,
At a frogge leapt cross my way;
By which means I did not see,
How the same within might be;
And more worse (to end my theme)
It vexed me it was but a dream;
Well I wished the Sexton hanged,
And my dog I soundly banged:
Yet to give them both their right
It Was time to go for it was night;
And I think my foolish curre
Knew it was fit for me to stir:
So away I run in have,
And came safely home at last:
Where with pen I did record
All I dreamed word by word*
And I hope it is not amiss,
To place it where it placed is.
THVS you see (good people all)
What is done for Londons Paul;
If in ought my Dream prove true,
Let it be as't pleases you:
Though I dream I do not teach,
That Is a strain beyond my reach;
Since I learned my Cross row letters,
I left all teaching to my betters;
And leave it will unto my end,
So good Reader be my friend.
The Book to PAVLES.
ACcording as you do command,
I will fly about the Land,
To Court, Clergy, Country, City,
For to find out Lady Pity:
If I find Her and return me,
Pray take order none may burn me:
Though I be but poor and plain,
I may bring you store of gain:
For this Lady does not care,
(In pious uses) what she spare:
To the Church she is more free
Then thousands other Ladies be.
The answer of PAVLES.
BOOK I thank thee for thy love,
And do pray to God above,
Thou may find this Lady out,
Where thou go round about;
That thou may return again,
With a labor not in vain.
For thy burning take no care,
Thou will surely better fare;
I will keep thee in record,
Till the coming of the Lord.
And thy Author here shall rest,
Whilst his soul with God is blessed.
FINIS.

