A TREATISE OF VSVRIE, DIVIDED INTO THREE BOOKS: The first defines what is
Usury. The second determines that to be unlawful. The third remoueth such
motives as persuade men in this age that it may be lawful.


By ROGER FENTON Bachelar of Divinity.

Chrysostom. super Matthew. Foenerare, non fratri, sed Domino. Hae enim vsurae
regnum; illae Gehennam praeparant. AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for
William Aspley. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS EGERTON, KNIGHT, Baron of Ellesmere, Lord
high Chancellor of England, one of his Majesty's right Honorable privy
Counsel, and my singular good Lord.
RIght Honorable: the questions and controversies wherewith the Church is in
continual travel, and which do make our pens so rheumatike in this writing
age; be for the most part, matters of speculation, residing in the brain, the
coldest region of the little world; and dissoluing Religion into matter of
discourse, not of devotion. For every man's Quaere is, not as of old, in the
days of Luke 3. 10
John Baptist, of Luke 10. 27.
Christ, of his Act. 2. 34.
Apostles, What shall we do? but what shall we think? As if the Gospel were
not Christiana lex, but Christianum dogma. Whereas cases of conscience, do
sleep with conscience, which of all questions are most profitable, and least
regarded: so loath are men to restrain affection, and limit their actions. Yet
of all such cases this of Usury has most need to be revived. For in this, the
custom of sinning does not only take away the sense, but the acknowledgement
of sin: so as the mere practice of it, has made an apology for it; without
either sound reason, or good authority.

This very inducement which persuades others that usury is lawful, has
moved me to write against it, fearing the loss, not only of so much truth
(which I would willingly help to redeem:) but of so many souls amongst whom
I live. So far therefore I do presume in this business to trouble Israel,
as to tell the people what 1. King. 18 18.
is the truth in this point, and the peril of their practice. Wherein they have
so entangled themselves, that they know not well how to leave it. If we then
cannot devise to make that good, which they have made necessary, they will be
angry. Seeing them then thus securely to lull their consciences, I am bold a
little to disquiet them.

A business so thanklesse, and distasteful as this must needs be, (right
Honorable and my singular good Lord) does require a worthy Patron. And of whom
may I desire the patronage of my labors, but of your Honor? whose I am, and
to whom I owe all duty and service. Of whom should I desire the patronage of
these labors, but of your Honor? who are in place to reform this sin, more
by the very countenance of Authority, then we can with all our endeavors.
From whom can I receive more encouragement in these labors, then from your
Honor? whose integrity has manifested it self with zeal against this
sin: whose judgment will not be blinded with those forged distinctions of
poor and rich borrowers: of toothlesse and biting usury, etc.

Let these poor endeavors then find favor in your eyes; not for their own
sake, being unworthy: but for the cause which I have in hand. It is the cause
of God, and the common good, worthy so honorable a Patron. Whom I beseech the
Almighty long to preserve, a protector of good causes in conscience and
equity.

Your Honors most bounden and dutiful Chaplain, Roger Fenton.

THE PREFACE TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
GEntle Reader; thy gentleness and patience is much exercised in these times,
with the multitude of books; which men say they be commonly forced to put
upon thee by the importunity of their friends. This to me is no reason at all,
for the publishing of this Treatise: and indeed they whom it most concerns
do least desire it. Yet three motives I have which may make sufficient
apology for me.

1 First, seeing the harvest of Usurers in these parts to be great; at S.
Stephens in Walbrooke, the heart of this City, I began to labor in this
point. By their flocking to those Sermons, they seemed to be ripe, and even
Ioh. 4. 35
white unto the harvest. But when men assemble after the Act. 17. 21.
Athenian fashion, it commonly proves a solemn hearing, and a solemn
forgetting. Notwithstanding, perceiving afterward those poor labors to have
made some little impression in the minds of the better sort; I was moved to
make this impression. Wherein after my plain manner, I have somewhat, not as I
would, refined that which then was more rudely delivered: cast it into a new
mold and method, that thou may carry the whole frame in thy view, and pass
more easily from point to point: and added much more, then in the throng of
other business I could, at that time, think upon.

2 A second motive has been the mistakings of some which have occasioned
misreports; as if in the end I concluded nothing, or defended some kind of
Usury. Which censures I may impute unto two causes. The first is ordinary
upon these occasions, where the most attentive may say, as wise and learned
Eliphas said of himself: Job 4 12.
Mine ear has received a little of it: for part of that which is only spoken,
must needs vanish in the air, before it can be fully fastened in the mind, and
fitted to the whole frame and current of speech. 2 Another cause is, the
narrowness of the point in question. For every question, as the learned know,
has a point which is scarce diuisible. Coming therefore precisely to cut an
usurious act from such lawful covenants as do next adioyne upon it, the
passage is so narrow, that we might easily mistake, or be mistaken.
Notwithstanding thus far I must appeal to the auditorie which then was; that
when I came to those straites at the conclusion and determination, of the
question, purposely to avoid these misconceites; I did often iterate and beat
upon the maine conclusion, that, all Usury properly so called, is simply
unlawful. But howsoever it was either not so exactly delivered, or distinctly
taken, as it should: the only remedy which now remains, is to exhibit the
effect of that in writing which then was said; that such as make scruple, may
at their pleasure, and best leisure, pause upon it.

3 Last of all, after that by the handling of this point in public, I had
troubled the waters, and stirred up the minds of men to give censures according
to their several apprehensions; I have taken time to observe what yet could
further be urged for Usury; or objected against that which then was delivered:
whereby being better furnished by reason of matter newly ministered, then at the
first I could; I thought it part of my duty to give better satisfaction in
this kind, and to meet with such probabilities as are, or may with any color
be suggested. Amongst which, if I could find any ground of reason, for the
defense of any Usury at all, I would most willingly either acknowledge it, or
be silent. Hitherto I have found none; but discharged my conscience according
to my simple knowledge. My reward shall be manifold censures no doubt: for what
other can be expected in so unpleasing a matter, and amidst so many
adversaries? Adversaries, I say, not in affection or argument, but in action.
So as being thought over busy in this business, I fear I shall be occasioned
to take up that text of Scripture, though I hope in a far other cause: Thus
was I wounded in the house Zac. 13. 6.
of my friends. Be they friends, or be they strangers, who are any ways
touched in this point; let them strike with the tongue, and wound at their
pleasure; I shall think my self well apaid, if I can cause their but to feel
those wounds which they have made in their own consciences, by this sin.

This Treatise (Christian Reader) is not so large as to require a table, though
it be tedious. Howbeit to give thee some direction (besides the order of the
general heads before the book) the last chapter being a brief of the
premises, with reference in the margin to the several places, where the
points be more fully handled; may serve in stead thereof.

So wishing that thou may read with a single eye; judge of what thou
read without affection; and conform thy affection to right judgment: I
commend thee to the spirit of grace, whom I beseech, according to the right, to
guide and sanctify the actions of thy life.

Graise Inn, August 20. 1611. R. F.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
The first book declares what is Usury.
Chap. 1. An entrance into the matter. Chap. 2. Describes Usury by the
names.. 2. Of the Latin and Greek names.. 3. Of the Hebrew names, with the
difference which has been thence taken.
Chap. 3. Propounds the definition of Usury. Chap 4. Explaineth the first
term of the definition, Loan, or mutuation. 2. Of the first conclusion thence
inferred, to the present purpose.. 3. Of the second conclusion.
Chap. 5. Describes the second term Covenant. Chap. 6. Describes the third
term lucre. Chap. 7. Arecapitulation of the premises.

The second book; whether it be lawful.
Chap. 1. Propounds the places of proof from authority. Chap. 2. The
testimony of Scripture, proouing it simply unlawful.. 2. The first exception
against that proof, answered.. 3. The second exception answered.. 4. The third
exception answered.. 5. The degree of sin wherein Usury is placed, in
Scripture.
Chap. 3. The testimony of Fathers. 1. Of the East. 2. Of the West.
Chap. 4. Of the later times of ignorance. Chap. 5. The testimony of the
Church assembled in Councels. Chap. 6. The testimony of Divines in reformed
Churches.. 2. The bitter innectiues of Master Calvin against usury.
Chap. 7. Of their assertions who have most favored usury.. 2. Of the point
of difference amongst Divines.
Chap. 8. Of the testimony of the Heathen. 1. Philosophers. 2. Historians.
Chap. 9. Of the three laws: 1. Canon. 2. Civil. 3. Common.
Chap. 10. The first reason from the nature of this question. Chap. 11. The
second reason from scandal. Chap. 12. The third reason from the statute law
now in force. Chap. 13. The fourth reason proves it to be unnatural. Chap.
14. The fifth reason proves it to be ungodly against the first table. Chap.
15. The sixth reason proves it unjust against equity.. 1. In respect of the
three terms of the desinition. 1. Loan. 2. Covenant. 3. Lucre.
. 2. In respect of the three parties whom it concerns. 1. Lender. 2.
Borrower. 3. Commonweal.

Chap. 16. The sixth reason proves it unchristian against charity.

The third book answering such motives as persuade some to the lawfulness of
it.
Chap. 1. Propounds the motives and reasons which persuade men in this age
that Usury may be lawful. Chap. 2. Answers the first motive, from custom
and conniuencie. Chap. 3. Answers the second motive from pity concerning 1
Orphans, 2 Widows, 3 Old men past trading.
Chap. 4. Answers the supposed necessity of Usury. Chap. 5. Of such cases as
seem usurious without appearance of injustice or breach of charity. Chap. 6.
Answers reasons brought in defense of Usury. 2. Proofs wrested from
Scripture. Chap. 7. Arecapitulation and inforcement of the premises.. 1. From
authority.. 2. From Reason.. 3. The Conclusion.


A TREATISE OF VSVRIE, DIVIDED INTO THREE BOOKS: The first defines what is
Usury.
CHAP. I. An entrance into the matter.
WHen the Son of God spoke unto us in his own person conuersing as man
amongst men, his preaching was with that majesty and authority, that it was
evermore admired, but never derided, saving only when he spoke against the
service of Mammon; then, and only then, Luke 16. 14
the Pharisees which were covetous mocked him. Small encouragement therefore
and little fruit of their labors are simple sinful men like to have, who
presume either to preach or write against so gainful a trade as Usury is.

Notwithstanding though we seem to labor in vain and catch nothing; let us
at the Ioh. 21. 3. verse. 16.
Lords commandment cast out again on the right side of the ship. For Jesus
standing upon the shore may happily perceive some scole of fish coming on that
side, whereof there is some hope. And verily by their coming there should be
great hope: for they will resort in great multitudes to hear these points
discussed in pulpits. They will suffer us to cast the not over them; but alas
they run themselves so deep into the mud, that it cannot get under them to
dragge them out. Son of man (says God to Ezekiel. 33. 31.
Ezechiel) they come unto thee as the people uses to come, and my people sit
before thee, and hear thy words, but they will not do them: for their heart
goes after covetousness.

Besides this, the gain of usury is a sweet gain, without labor, without
cost, without peril; omne tulit punctum; it is so pleasant and so profitable a
sin, as I persuade my self we shall never be able to persuade, though we
do persuade, that it is a sin.

Add moreover unto this, that supposed necessity which the custom of usury
has brought upon us, in so much as city and country is not only stained with
this sin (for stains may be got out) but it is so wouen and twisted into
every trade and commerce, one moving another, by this engine, like wheels in a
clock, that it seems the very frame and course of traffic must needs be
altered before this can be reformed.

Mar. 16. 3
Quis remouebit nobis hunc lapidem? That we may forsake this sin and come
unto Christ by repentance, who shall remove this great difficulty, which the
iniquity of times by the continuance of this practice has laid in our way?
For if the wise Sages of the Parliament in the 13. year of Queen Elizabeth,
utterly condemning all usury, in the preface, as unlawful; were feign
notwithstanding, in the end of that Statute, to tolerate the same in the case
of Orphants, according to the custom of Cities; and to pass it over
unpunished; because they knew not conveniently how to reform it: how much more
may it seem in many other cases necessary to be tolerated in these days?
since it has eaten deeper into the hearts of Mammonists, and spread further in
all commerce betwixt man and man, then ever, amongst us, in any age before. And
if law or Magistrate by dispensation or conniuence, shall seem but to suffer
it; it will presently be conceived of, as a thing allowed. For vulgar conceits
make but small difference betwixt a toleration and an approbation.

This advantage then has the devil gotten against us in the practice of this
sin; that usury being a trade so gainful in respect of others, so easy, so
cheap, so secure without all labor, cost, or peril: being also so common,
behooffull, and requisite in these times for all occasions; it has bewitched
even the consciences of those who are most tender in other matters. For if the
heart and affection be once won and possessed, it is an easy matter even by
slight proofs to turn the brain. Senec. in Hercules surens.
Quod nimis miseri volunt hoc facile credunt: Strong affection gives great
credit to weak arguments. Whereas indeed it ought to be contrariwise; that our
natural pronenesse, and the general inclination of the world to this practice
of Usury, should move a well tempered judgment the rather to suspect the
lawfulnes of it, and the soundnes of such reasons as are brought for it. Perit
omne iudicium cum res transit ad affectum: Men looking by affection look
through a mist, or a painted glass; to whom nothing appears in his native
color and due proportion.

But were it not for these gross fogges, which vapor out of the nether part
of the soul, and from that which the Apostle calls the 1. Tim. 6. 20.
root of all evil; those fallacies and sophistications which the patrons of
usury have cast upon us, I conceive might easily be dispelled, both by the
beams of Gods law, and by the twilight of nature. Let us therefore do our poor
endeavor to inform the understanding by evidence of argument; desiring God, by
his spirit of grace, to reform the affection, which is the greatest work in
this business.

What that usury is whereof we dispute; and Whether it be of it self simply
unlawful; be the two points wherein the understanding desires to be resolved.
And it is a question which of these two questions is the greatest. This is
certain, both are necessary. The former therefore must not be omitted, or
slightly passed over: neither in respect of the name, nor of the nature, seeing
it may be somewhat enlightened by the very name, though more fully determined,
by the received definition of usury.

CHAP. II. Of the names of Usury.
WHen Adam in Paradise did first give names unto things, they were so
significant and expressiue, as if nature her self had spoken. But since the
fall, a liberty remaining in the sons of Adam to term things as it pleased
them to conceive, God likewise and his Angels vouchsafing to speak with the
tongues of men, to the end that men might conceive them: ever since, I say,
names have been no definitions. Yet notwithstanding they may hold the candle,
and give some light unto that whereof we are to entreat: which in our English
tongue is most properly termed by the name of Usury. But whatsoever the matter
is, the more that men have been in love with the thing it self, the more have
they purposely declined and avoided this name. They will not call it Usury,
lest the word should be offensive, or make the thing odious. But it shall be
termed Use or Vsance in exchange, which are smooth words as oil, never abiting
letter in them. Or it shall be called Interest, or Consideration, which are
civil and mannerly terms, though by the^ they mean indeed nothing else but
plain Usury.

This device was not first hatched amongst us in England; for it is the very
same which Master Calvin has observed before among the French. His words be
these: Caluinus in Ezekiel. 18.
Quia nomen foenoris Gallis fuit incognitum, nomen vsurae etiam, detestabile
fuit. Galli ergo excogitarunt nouam astutiam quasi possent deum fallere: nam
quia nemo poterat far vsura nomen, posuerunt interesse. I am quid significat
interesse? omne genus foenoris: Because the proper Latin name of Usury
(foenus) was vnquoth to the French, therefore the name even of usury was
detestable. The French therefore have devised a new trick, as if they could
beguile God himself. For because no man could endure the name of usury, they
have put in place thereof, interest. Now what does interest with them signify?
All kind of usury. Men be never good who use to change and shift their names;
but are ever held for suspected persons and shifters themselves. For he who is
ashamed of his name, his name commonly may be ashamed of him. So is it
proportionably in professions. He that is an Usurer, if you ask what he is, or
of what profession; he would not be so termed: what shall we call him then?

Some call him a man that puts out his money. That is ambiguous. He may put
it out, as the Lion puts out his claw; and then well is he that comes not
near his grate. But most commonly he is termed, one that lives upon his
money; which is without all exception. For as the Gentleman lives upon his
rents; the poor labourer upon the sweat of his brows; the Merchant and
Tradesman upon their adventures, skill, and industry; the Husbandman and
Grasier upon the increase of the earth, and breed of cattle; so does the
Usurer live upon his moneis: which do yeane, and foale, and calue unto him
once in six months at the furthest.

And because the name of Usury does trouble men's consciences much more then
the thing it self; some have devised a new trick of learning, as if there were
some real and material difference between the gain of usury, and of the
use of money; imagining that vsura in Latin is derived ab vsu rapiendo, and
that the Latin condemns snatching only, as the Hebrew does biting:
insinuating thereby that such usury only is forbidden, which is a greedy
catching and snatching of gain by hook or crook. Whereas vsura in truth is
nothing but vsus rei, primitiuely taken for the use of Vsura lucis: Cicero.
uxor vsuraria. Plaut.
other things as well as money. And so was vsura originally a good honest word,
until usury did mar it: as we may observe it does in time disgrace any
term or name that is put upon it.

. 2.
The proper Latin term for usury is foenus, so called in the judgment of
Grammarians, as if it were foenus pecuniae, the brood of money And in the same
sense did the Greeks call it (...) which signifies to breed, or bring forth.
I am not ignorant how some would derive (...), of the Hebrew Toc, which
signifies oppression; as if usury were not to be misliked for it own sake,
unless it might be convicted of some sensible oppression. And I must needs
confess that in the 12. Psalm, verse. 14. I find Toc translated (...) by the
Greek Interpretors. But they are not constant therein: for in the 10. Psalm,
verse. 7. vatoc is by them translated (...).

And therefore let us rather follow the general consent of Grammarians, who
fetch it nearer hand, taking the nowne from the verb. For it is a safe rule
for Etymologies, when there is so near affinity at home in the same tongue,
never to travel abroad, or take so much pains to fetch it from strange
languages: like some great spirits of our time, who will have their names
derived from some ancient famous Roman, though originally they were taken from
some notable hillock, or mossie quagmire, before their great grandsires door.
Etymologies and Metaphors be alike in this, if they be too far fetched they
are unkind. Besides, the primitive signification of (...) is, birth. As
appears by (...). Ili. 2.
Homer and (...). Polit. 7.
Aristotle. Next it signifies the issue it self, as the first borne is called
Luke 2. 5. Ambros. lib. de Tobia, cap. 12.
(...). According to these two significations the learned have given a double
reason of this name. S. Basil and S. Ambrose amongst the ancient; Aretius and
others of the later writers, fetch it from the pains, and sorrows of travel.
Graeci appellarunt vsuras (...) eo quod dolores partis animae debitoris
excitare videantur: The Grecians (says S. Ambrose) call usury (...), birth,
because it brings the pangs of travel upon the soul of the debtor. Metaphora
ducta a parturientibus; qui soluit enim, soluit summo cum doloro and sudore,
etc. A woman in travel (says Problem. de vsuris.
Aretius) does not sweat and labor to bring forth with greater anguish of
mind, then a debtor compelled to bring home the principal with increase.

In suplem. Psalm. 15
S. Basil makes months the only fathers to beget, and borrowers, the mothers
to bring forth this unnatural brood of usury. Unnatural (says that Father)
even as the brood of vipers which eat through the entrals of their mothers: so
does the borrower being forth for the Usurer, to the destruction of himself
and his family.

But the most general conceit is, that the Greeks and Romans gave the names
of (...) and foenus unto usury, because of the ancient opinion which the
learned had amongst them: namely, that this usurious increase of money, which
is neither fruitful by nature, as land and cattle: nor fit for any other
secondarie use, as to feed, or to cure, or to clothe, or to shelter; but only
to procure such things as have increase and use in themselves: that such
increase (I say) of so barren a thing, as they conceived money to be, is
unnatural. Which position of theirs, though it be not the plainest
demonstration that we have against usury; yet I conceive we shall find much
more in it, then they that make the lightest account of it, are ware of.

. 3.
Come we in the last place to the head spring and original of all names. For
if names can express the nature of this sin, doubtless those names of all
others must do it which God himself has used in the primitive tongue, and
especially in his law: where he ever uses the best congruitie of speech.

In the first law given against usury it is forbidden under the most
significant term of Exodus 22. 25.
Neshec derived from a word which signifies to bite; because money so lent
comes not empty home, but biteth off, gnaweth away, and brings with it
some part of the borrowers wealth and substance; who if he cannot lick himself
whole again, and cure his wound with biting others, (as commonly they do) he
feels in the end to his greater grief that which at the first he could not
perceive.

Auctor operis imperfecti in Homil. 12.
Aspidis morsui similis est pecuna vsuraria: qui ab aspide percutitur, quasi
delectatus vadit in somnum, and sic per suauitatem soporis moritur: He that is
bitten by usury (says S. Chrysostom) is as he that is stung of a serpent: it
luls him asleep so sweetly and securely, that the poor man is undone before
he be aware. It is well compared (by Baldus) to the little worm that breeds
in wood with a soft body and hard teeth, which gnaweth secretly the very pith
and inward substance of the tree, the bark and outside standing entire. What
gallant shows do many men make in these days with other men's money thus
borrowed? who, if every bird should fetch his feather, would be as naked as
Aesops Crow. For when death heweth them down, their estate proves like a
hollow tree; no sound timber for posterity to build withal. For why? this
worm of usury has gnawed away their substance. Verily money thus taken up is
like a new piece put into an old garment, which being taken away, the rent is
made worse. It patcheth up his necessity for the present, but after leaves
his estate so ragged and rent, that he is in worse case and more beggarly then
ever he was before.

This biting or gnawing, because it is not always sensible, much less
mortal, (for there be moates as well as beams in all sins which cannot so
well be discerned) therefore some subtle wits have devised a new distinction
to please the world. As if there were some toothlesse and harmless usury
without the compass of the word Neshec, and without the meaning of the law of
God: as if God had never meant to condemn Usurers, but only to muzzle them
for biting. So as, if lender and borrower be both gainers, who has cause to
complain? and why may not Christians then practice so harmless and innocent
a trade? and for that usury which is condemned by the name of Neshec, if these
men had the christning of it, they would have called it by the name of Morsura,
not Vsura.

One point then in question (when we come to the matter) will be, whether it be
not the nature of all usury to bite? though with great difference; some like
the English mastiue, some like the dogge-flye; some scarce sensibly, and
therefore not perceived to be a sin.

1. First, because many are content to moderate themselves in this gain, and
then, if it be a sin, it is but a little one. As Lot said of Zoar, Gen 19. 20.
Is it not a little one, and my soul shall live? Modica sunt quae perdunt nos:
They be those little ones that undo us. A moate in the eye if it be not got
out in time, may grow to a pin and web; and a man's conscience may suffer
shipwreck as well upon a sand as upon a rock. A rock is a great one, a sand is a
heap of little ones. He that once or twice has taken extreme usury to the
sensible and apparent oppression of his brother, has run his conscience upon
a rock. But he who to avoid that Scylla, will take but a reasonable moderate
conscionable usury, (like an honest kind robber, who allows a man part of
his own money back again to bear his charges) and thus resolves to live
upon this practice; he by heaping up moderate sins, wreaketh his conscience
upon a sand; and so sinking into this sin by little and little, his soul is at
length easily swallowed up, without sense or feeling at all.

2. Secondly, it is not ever so sensible, because as the Usurer moderating
himself does not seem to bite the borrower: so the borrower relieuing
himself by others, has no cause to complain. Yea many borrowers concurring
in this practice, by their very multitudes, are able to sway and inhaunce the
market, in such manner, that they may live themselves and pay the Usurer
besides. So that in conclusion those do all set upon the Commonwealth: which
being a great body, is able to bear many dogs, before she need to
complain; and feeling the wound (as in time she must) she knows not well of
whom to complain. Burdensome therefore it is to the Commonwealth: yet
Multorum manibus grande leuatur onus.
so dispersed amongst many, that it is the less sensible, but never a whit the
more allowable.

For these and the like causes the biting of usury being sometimes not so
sensible to particular persons, Almighty God in his wisdom foreseeing how
ready men would be to cavil at the word Neshec, has of purpose expressed his
meaning more fully by the exegeticall addition of another term, which simply
signifies any increase at all. And this has he done, not only in the Comments
of the Ez^k. 18 17. Cap. 22. 12
Prophets, but in the very text of the Law it self, Leuit. 25. 36. vetarbith,
and verse. the 37. vbemarbith. Which word Pro. 28. 8.
Solomon forgets not to add: for Salomons days being both peaceable and
rich in silver and gold, men would be then more ready in all likelihood to
devise any cavil, or color to maintain that sin.

While the people of God were traveling in the deseit, or troubled with wars
in the land of Canaan, there was little borrowing of money, but only by the
poor, for the supply of their want. And of them to take usury was a more
sensible biting and oppression: in that they borrowed not to lay out for
commodities, but to spend for necessity. Therefore David in his troublesome
days uses the word Neshec only, for usury, as best fitting those times;
where the poorest were most bitten by this sin. But in King Salomons days,
being days of peace and plenty, plenty of money and merchandising, both by
sea and land, for all manner of commodities; those men who were then rich in
moneys, might sit still at home and lend forth their money to such as by their
skill and pains in traveling and trading abroad, might return them usury
for their money, and be many times gainers themselves. In which case because
there is no such apparent personal biting of the borrower, as when money is
lent to the poor to supply present wants; therefore Solomon to prevent these
cauils at words might add to the word Neshec, that word also which signifies
Increase, or overplus. Thereby teaching men that it was the direct meaning of
Almighty God simply to forbid all manner of increase whatsoever.

Neither are these my private conjectures, against the groundless distinction
of biting and toothlesse usury; but Master In Comment. in Ezekiel. cap. 18. verse.
8.
Calvin himself (upon whom they seem to rely as a chief patron of usury)
does not only condemn it as frivolous; but adds further that it was the
purpose of the Holy Ghost, by adding that other word, to prevent such cauils.
Quia homines hac in part nimium sunt acuti and versuti, and excogitant
subterfugia, quibus crudelitatem suam tegant; ideo addit: Et incrementum non
acceperit: Because (says Calvin) men in this kind be over acute and subtle,
and devise euasions how they may more cunningly cover their cruelty, therefore
he adds in the text; usury or increase. And for the distinction it self,
Calvin his censure is: Ludunt homines suis cauillis, sed Deus non admittit
tales versutias: Men cavil and play with words, but God admits no such
sleights. His meaning is simple and plain, that all increase above the
principal is forbidden.

I should idle the time too much, and weary the reader, if I should dilate
upon the fond conceits of some to avoid the word Tarbith or increase. Because
that word in his native and usual sense directly forbids all usury
whatsoever; therefore they bend their wits against it.

Some would have Tarbith, being joined with Neshec, to signify excessive
increase, or multiplication beyond measure. Another sort refer Neshec to
money, and Tarbith to victuals only, as if it were lawful to take some
increase for money, but no increase for victuals at all. These fantasies we
find in certain blind Manuscripts, without name or author, which walk under
hand like Psalm. 91. 6
the pestilence in the dark, to infect the minds of simple men, who are very
prone to embrace every thing for Gospel, which some men write in private, or
preach at their tables, in maintenance of their profit.

But tell us, in good sooth, is Tarbith to be referred to victuals only, and
not to money? so that it shall be lawful to take Tarbith for money? then does
not Tarbith signify excessive increase, or multiplication beyond measure; for
I hope it shall never be accounted lawful to take excessive increase for
money, or to multiply usury beyond measure. Does Tarbith signify
multiplication beyond measure? then verily both Tarbith and Neshec are
forbidden in money as well as victuals.

See how fitly these conceits do agree, one overthrowing another directly: and
both being overthrown by the text, and constant interpretation of all
authority both modern and ancient.

The text as it does not appropriate Neshec unto money, but applies it unto
any thing which passes for usury; (as in Deuteronomy. 23. 19. Usury of money,
usury of meat, usury of any thing that is put to usury) so does it use
Tarbith for the usury of money, as well as of any other thing. For the
Prophets, who be the true expositors of the law, do join both words together,
applying them both indifferently, evermore to one and the same thing. Ezekiel. 18.
8. cap. 22. 12. Prou. 28. 8. and that Tarbith being joined with Neshec, should
signify any excessive increase, it has neither ground in the text, nor any
authority at all.

The Greeks translate it (...): the Latins incrementum, augmentu^; that is,
simple increase. So others use words to the same purpose: Plus, amplius, supra,
accessio; any more, any overplus, any thing above or besides ye principal.
That is to say (as the ancient Latin translation reads, Leu. 25. 36.) Thou
shall not take usury of him, nor more then thou gave: or as Lib. de Tobia,
cap. 15.
S. Ambrose reads the 37. verse: In amplius recipiendum; to receive more: vbi
omne sortis excludit augmentum, where it excludes all increase above the
principal (as he observes upon the same place.) The Ezekiel. 18. 8
Geneua translateth it, any increase. So that even Tarbith, that is, simple
increase. (the best name, and the most innocent, that ever usury had) is by
the law of God utterly condemned. And therefore bad is the best.

I confess as yet I have proved little or nothing at all; but only told you
what usury is called. And if names be no definitions, then arguments taken
from names be no demonstrations. Yet thus much I dare presume to conclude, even
from the very name of usury in Hebrew, Greek and Latin; signifying, cruel
biting, painful traveling, unnatural brood; that the nature of the thing it
self is therefore greatly to be suspected. For certainly it is ominous and very
suspicious to have a bad name.

CHAP. III. Of the desinition of usury in general.
THat which Offic. 1.
Tullie observed as defective in Panaetius, may not be tolerated in this
treatise. For if we should omit the definition of usury, whereupon the whole
state of the question does depend; we should write at random in this whole
discourse, and fight with our own shadow. The two properties of a definition
according to the parts thereof, are, to express and distinguish. First to
express the nature of what kind it is: and next to distinguish it perfectly
and essentially from all other things of the like nature. And in truth to
define, is nothing else but to express by distinction. First to express the
general nature by some proper term, which distinguishes it from all other
kinds. And secondly to determine the special nature, how it stands
different from all other things of that kind. And so much the very name it
self does notify. For to desine is nothing else but to limit a thing within
his own proper and peculiar bounds.

First therefore all metaphors and borrowed speeches are to be excluded from
the definition of usury. And we are to deal only with that usury which
properly is so called. We must not therefore meddle with the usury of nature,
that most innocent and primitive increase which the earth yields in fruit
unto man for his seed sown; some thirty, some sixty, some an hundred fold.
Terra nunquam sine vsurareddit quod accepit: The earth (says De senectute.
Tullie) never returns that which it has received, without usury.

Neither are we to meddle with that supernatural usury which passes between
God and man: where sometimes man plaieth the Usurer, lending unto God, by
giving to the poor that he may receive an hundred fold. Prou. 19 17.
Foeneratur domino qui miseretur pauperis: He lends in that kind to the Lord,
who is merciful to the poor. Our God (says S. In Psalm. 26. sermon. 3. Qui
probibet te esse foeneratore^, ille iubet te esse soeneratorem.
Augustine) who forbids thee to be an Usurer, he commands thee to be an
Usurer. For it is said unto thee; Lend unto the Lord upon usury.

Sometimes God himself is the Usurer; lending tallents unto men, to lay out
that he may receive his own again, (...), with advantage, as we translate
it The vulgar says, cum vsura; Beza, cum foenore. For the word is properly,
with usury. So it pleases the holy Ghost in Scripture sometimes to resemble
the works of light to the works of darkness: that we might learn to gather
wisdom even from Serpents, and to leave the poison behind. Those delicate
wits then, who have from hence extracted conclusions, as if God, by such
parables and allusions, did somewhat favor usury; they must by the same
reason justify unrighteousness, because the example of the unjust Steward is
commended unto us; and withal conclude that even theft it self is therefore
sanctified, because Christ has compared himself unto a thief in the night.
So must we then in this business pass by all parabolicall and borrowed
speeches; and only betake our selves unto that which is homebred, proper, and
natural.

Of which there be two kinds; mental and actual usury. The first consists
only in the intention of the heart. For he that lends so freely to his
brother, that he does not indent either by word or deed, for any usurious
gain: yet if any hope or expectation of gain was to him a motive of lending,
that man in the Court of Conscience stands guilty of this sin before God.
Howbeit the other party may be innocent in borrowing. Mat. 5. 28
As he that looks on a woman, to lust after her, has committed adultery
with her already in his heart; though the woman be never so clear from that
sin. But in actual usury there must be a mutual consent of two parties at
the least.

It is my purpose to write of this second, as being more sensible then the
former; yet including the former. For every intention of the heart is
determinable by the act it self, to be good or bad. If actual usury
therefore prove unlawful, thereby shall the very thought and intention of the
mind be condemned. And if we look upon the usual practice of the world in
this kind; mental usury is but a little moate, but we are now haling at the
beam it self. Hoc opus, hic labor est: It is no time to pick moates.

Actual usury is of diverse described diversely (a variety tedious to relate)
but the pith of all is briefly contracted in three words, to be, pactum ex
mutuo lucrum.

Lucre for loan upon covenant: or
The Covenant of lucre for lending: or
Lending upon Covenant for lucre.
So that these three words, mutuum, pactum, lucrum, that is, loan, covenant,
lucre, do define and circumscribe the entire nature of that usury whereof the
maine question is made, whether it be lawful or not.

Therefore whatsoever is without the compass of any of these three terms,
though it carry the name of usury, yet it is none indeed. And of whatsoever
all these three severally and jointly may be affirmed; howsoever it may pass
disguised under any other lawful act, yet is it that actual usury whereof
this question is moved.

These three terms therefore must distinctly be handled and rightly
conceived, before it can appear plainly what usury is.

CHAP. IIII. Of the first term, loan or mutuation.
THe proper object of usury is that which is lent For so is the text: Exodus 22.
25.
If thou lend money to my people, to the poor, thou shall not be as an Usurer.
That therefore is usury which is taken for loan: yet must we here understand
a special kind of lending, which for the penury of words and narrowness of
our English tongue, wants a proper term. In Latin it is called mutuum, in
which, two words are briefly contracted into one, meum, tuum, into mutuum. If I
lend thee my money, of mine I make it thine for a time. Thine to do withal
what thou will: Thine in use and property both: So thine, as during that time,
I will not own it, nor call thee to account what thou do with it, because it
is thine. But if I lend thee a horse, or a house, I will so pass it over, as
it shall be mine still and not thine. I will be the owner still, even for the
time that I have lent it. And if thou use it not well, I will have an action
against thee; for this is not, mutuum, but commodatum, lent to use, but not to
spend or bestow.

That lending therefore which is meant in usury is defined to be, The free
passing over both of use and property for a time, at the time ended to receive
the like again. By which description it is plainly distinguished from all
other contracts. From giving, letting, selling, exchanging, commodating, or
lending to use.

1 From giving it is distinguished, because a gift is for ever: loan is only
for a time. Both are a free passing over of use and property: but that the one
is temporal, the other perpetual. So that this lending or mutuation differs
from a gift only in time. It is a free gift for a time: for which time it is
not the lenders, but the borrowers, to do withal what he list; only at the
time appointed that he return the like again.

2. It differs also from letting: because in letting we pass over the use
only, and that for hire: in lending we pass over both use and property, and
that freely. These differ therefore in two things. First, lending in it own
proper nature is free; letting is for hire. And therefore wheresoever the
Scripture mentions lending, it speaks of it as a work of mercy and free
liberality. Psalm. 37.
The just is merciful and lends. Luke 6.
Lend looking for nothing again, etc.

2. Secondly, lending passes over the property with the use, for the time it
is lent: letting passes only the use, reserving the property, even for that
time it is let.

Hence it arises, that in a thing freely lent, the borrower stands to the
hazard for that time in equity, (though there be no such covenant made:)
because the borrower is the right owner for the time; and in common right every
thing perishes to the right owner. But in an hired thing it is otherwise: if
it perish, the owner stands to the hazard, unless it perish by the default
of him that hired it.

It perishes, I say, to the owner. First, because he is the owner: and
secondly, because it went for the hire. According to the equity of Gods law,
Exodus 22. 15. If the owner thereof stand by, (to wit, that it may appear not
to be the borrowers default) the borrower shall not make it good. For if it be
an hired thing, it came for the hire.

3 From selling does this lending also differ, because sale is a perpetual
alienation of the property for a price. Lending is a free alienation for a
time. So that though lending and selling do agree in this, that both do
alienate the property with the use; yet in these two things they differ, that
the one is liberal, the other for a price; the one temporal, the other for
ever.

4 It differs from exchange. Not only in time, as giving and selling does;
but in the object; because exchange is the giving and taking of one certain
thing for another. But in this kind of loan, only the like in the same kind is
required at the time appointed to be restored. Besides, in things exchanged,
there is some difference respected, either of kind, quality, or use; which
moves us to make an exchange. But in simple lending or mutuation, both the
same in kind, money for money, oil for oil, corn for corn; the same in
quantity, and the like in quality, so much and so good, without respect of
difference, is required.

5. Last of all, this lending or mutuation, in the definition of usury,
differs from that which is called commodation, or free lending to use.
Because mutuation is only of such things whereof use and property cannot be
severed: but they are evermore spent or bestowed in the first use. As he that
lends his neighbor a loaf of bread, he lends it him to use and spend
both; because the use of bread is in spending of it. But he that lends his
servant, to work for a day with his neighbor, or his horse to travel; he
lends the use, but reserueth the property to himself: Therefore if they do
hurt or abuse that servant or horse, the owner or lender has just cause to
complain.

From the same ground also does it arise, that in this loan of money, of
victuals, of Corn, or the like, we do not require the same thing in
particular, the same grains of corn, but only the like in kind: because the
same particulars be spent or done away. But in commodation, or lending to use
the same thing in particular is required: the same servant, the same horse, the
same vessel which was lent only to use.

Hence therefore it proceeds, that such things only be thus lent, which do
pass betwixt man and man by weight, number, or measure. For seeing he cannot
possibly receive the particular things again (which if they be used, cannot be
restored) therefore he must in equity have so many in number, so much in
weight or measure, as was lent.

Thus much for the description of the first term in the definition of usury,
mutuum, that is, loan; from which there are three conclusions for this our
present purpose to be derived.

2. The first Conclusion.
OVt of the premises it is gathered, first, That money is not the only
subject of Usury, but whatsoever passes by number, weight or measure: for all
such things are subject to mutuation. To which the very words of the Deuteronomy. 23.
29.
text do accord, Usury of money, usury of meat, usury of any thing that is
put to usury. If a woman should lend her neighbor two eggs, to receive three
again; were it not damnable usury? because there is an increase or gain above
the principal, only for that which yields no profit to the borrower, beside
the first use.

A poor man wants money to stock his ground. His rich neighbor lends him
no money, but twenty sheep: for which he shall pay him twenty shillings by
the year, in the name of hire. And so making good the whole flock of sheep,
he shall take lamb and wool, both for their keeping, and for that twenty
shillings which goes for the loan. So that those sheep which rot or miscarie
are none of the rich man's, he will not own them; they be the borrowers, he
stands to the hazard, and makes up still the number of twenty sheep. Here
then is mutuum the use and property both are passed over to this poor man: to
the end that with the property, the hazard also may pass upon him. Now these
immortal sheep which never die, do bring an annual increase or gain to the
rich man; for the mere loan of them: which is plain usury, howbeit not of
money.

3 The second Conclusion.
IN the loan of money (of which principally it is my purpose to write, being
the most usual and proper for these parts) be it thus concluded out of the
premises; That gain or lucre which comes not merely for loan; (such loan,
which is before described) is no usury. For the object of usury is mutuum. It
is no usury, I say, if it be for other respective considerations, and not
merely for loan.

A man unskillful in trading has a stock of money, which he delivers to a
merchant or tradesman to employ: receives part of gain, and bears part of
hazard proportionably. This is no usury, but partnership. No usury, because
his money is not lent by mutuation, so long as he reserueth a property in it
himself, in contractu societatis cessat obiectum Molinaeus de contract.
vsurar. initio.
vsurae, mutuum. In like manner the stock of a widow or an orphant is in trust
committed to a friend to employ and use it in charity, only to their use:
they have the benefit of the increase; which is no usury; because the money is
still theirs, it prospers or perishes to them, as to the right owners.

A man lends for a time freely; that time being expired, his money is
retained longer against his will, for want whereof he is damnified. If the
lender receive an overplus in this case above the principal, answerable to the
damage which he has suffered; this is no usury, but due and just
satisfaction. No usury, because increase is not taken for the loan. For loan
is a voluntary act: whereas this money was not willingly lent, but retained by
force after the time it was due. If the lender had been damnified by the
forbearance of his money during that time which he lent it, he could in strict
justice have exacted no satisfaction, because it was his own voluntary act:
Volenti non fit iniuria. But the time being come out, to receive overplus for
his loss sustained, is no usury, but a just recompense, which is properly
termed interest.

A great man by his authority, does wring from an inferior person the loan
of such a sum, which he cannot spare without sensible detriment; and yet
perhaps, in regard of the man's greatness, he had better lose the principal then
deny the loan. To receive interest, that is to say, recompense for the
forbearance of this money, is no usury, because it was not voluntarily lent by
him, but by some violence extorted from him. As if a man should command a poor
man's tools, without which he cannot earne his living, if he give him not
satisfaction, he commits extortion. The moneys of a tradesman, be his
tools, by which he gets his living. If therefore they be either retained,
or forced from him to his sensible detriment, satisfaction is due in justice
and equity, without touch of usury.

To sell wares for time, and in respect of time to sell dearer, may be free
from usury: Either in respect of the rising of the commodity so sold, if by
the ordinary course of seasons, it will be worth more at the day of payment of
the money, then it was at the time of sale and delivery. Or in case a man can
neither vent his commodity for present money; nor keep it longer without
corruption or detriment to the ware; nor forbear the money without sensible
prejudice to himself: these may seem valuable considerations without compass
of this term. But admit a man will sell deerer of purpose for the forbearance;
and forbear of purpose, only that he may sell dearer, without pregnant
likelihood of the market rising at the time of payment; or of damnifying of
himself, by keeping his word, or such like valuable considerations; that is
usury. For it is allone as if he lent so much money for lucre upon covenant.

4. The third Conclusion.
IF it be a gain couenanted merely in respect of loan, it is condemned as
usurious. For then is it Vimutui, for the loan before described, though it
come never so disguised under the color of a lawful contract, as many times
it does.

1. Sometimes under the color of buying. If I should lend one hundred pound;
the principal to be repaied by ten pound a year in ten years, and ten
pound a year overplus for the use of that money: this were extreme usury
within the statute. If therefore purposely to avoid the statute, I do agree
with the borrower to alter the nature of the contract, thus: With the same
hundredth pound I will purchase an annuitie of twenty pound for ten years of
the same party. This is bargain and sale; yet is it the very same thing in
truth; differing only in the parchment and manner of couenanting; subject to
the same iniquity and inequality; poisoned with their joint purpose of
avoiding the penalty of usury by other conueiances. For if their purpose
could by some pregnant circumstances be discovered, the same Statute would
condemn them of usury.

2. Sometime it passes under the color of selling. A merchant lends his
chapman one hundred pound freely, but with condition that he will in lieu of
his courtesy take a commodity that lies upon his hand at such a price,
paying for the purpose eight or ten pound deerer then he might have bought
elsewhere; had he not as good have paid ten pound for the loan of his money?
Or more cunningly thus: A country Gentleman would borrow one hundred pound of
his dear friend a Tradesman. Answer is returned, That he has no money, but
rather then fail, for old love and acquaintance, he shall have 100. pounds
worth of ware even out of his shop presently to make money of. The Gentleman
cannot make it: therefore he does him yet a further kindness, in sending to a
friend that shall sell it for him (note by the way, that friend is his broker:)
who after long discourse what a prejudice it is to proffer ware, and after much
seeking, he hitteth upon a friend who will give the Gentleman fourscore and
eight pound, present money, for his ware (and that friend is the brokers own
master, who lent the ware.) The poor Gentleman glad of present money gives
the broker for his pains. Now this tradesman that has twelve in the hundredth,
is in expectation besides of as great kindness as the free loan of one
hundred pound is worth, (whereof this Gentleman will not fail him, because he
would keep such a friend in a corner for a pinch:) and he has beside
pleasured his broker for doing nothing, for the ware was never stirred out of
his place. This under color of selling is direct usury, and somewhat else
besides.

3. Sometime it is committed under the color of letting. A man lends his
neighbor such a sum of money, conditionally, that he will take such a house
at such a rent: provided always, that the rent of the house shall pay for the
use of the money. More cunningly, thus: A country Farmer comes to an Usurer,
and tells him of such a lease for years to be sold, for three hundred pound.
If it please you (quoth the Farmer) to deliver me so much money, I will buy
that lease in your name with your money; you shall sit still, never trouble
your self to look after it; let me be your tenant for thirty pound a year,
and I will put you in good security for the payment of three hundred pound,
when the lease shall expire. This is usury under the color of letting.

4 Sometime it passes under the color of free loan or mutuation. A poor man
desires a Goldsmith to lend him such a sum, but he is not able to pay him
Interest. If such as I can spare (says the Goldsmith) will pleasure you, you
shall have it for three or four months. Now, he has a number of light,
clipped, cracked pieces (for such he uses to take in change with consideration
for their defects:) this sum of money is repaid by the poor man at the time
appointed in good and lawful money. This is usury, that is, gain for loan,
under color of free loan. Or thus: A young Gallant would borrow an hundred
pound for a year; the Usurer in kindness will lend him so much freely for
three months. The Gentleman glad to finger the money, accepts his kind
offer. The Usurer takes sure bonds, knowing that he who is so hungry for a
year, will not be in case to pay at three months; then shall the forfeiture
of the bond pay the Interest of the money with advantage; only, forsooth,
because the Creditour is exceedingly damnified in being disappointed at the
time. This were usury, if the crafty purpose of the Usurer were discovered.
Or thus: One lends ten pound upon a pawn of bedding or linen, and he
lends it freely: but as the other uses his money, so he likewise uses his
pawn. This is usury; for the bedding or linen is sensibly worse for the
wearing, so is not the money.

5 Sometime under the color of Merchants exchange, delivering money upon bills
at home, to be paid in other countries: A practice which some would utterly
condemn; but considering the great use of it, I would not rashly condemn it:
but will imagine rather how it may have his grounds in equity and justice.

1 Either because the office of transportation is therein implied. For he who
delivers money here to be repaid beyond the Sea, performs the same office,
and does the borrower no less benefit, then if he conveyed his money for him
out of another country home; and somewhat more, because this is done instantly,
that could not be done but in longer time.

2 Or else, because money present is more worth then absent, not in any
usurious respect, but in a lawful estimate; for there is no present use of
that which is absent. And besides, that which is in another country, cannot be
made present without some cost, labor, or peril.

3 Or in respect of the value of money in the place where it is paid upon bill:
for though the value of coins remain one and the same, yet sums of money
may rise and fall in exchange (woe be to the^ who conspire to raise them) yet
scarsitie of money at some times may make great sums more precious, and
harder to come by; and then every man drawing as much as he can home, it makes
the transportation from foreign places to be of greater difficulty.

This Real Exchange though it may stand justifiable upon his own grounds,
yet, under it, is cloaked a mystery of iniquity, that is, of usury; either
by that vsance and double vsance, used only to an usurious intent: or specially
by that counterfeit Exchange, termed by the name of Cambium siccum, or, dry
Exchange; because it has no more juice or sap then a painted tree, either in
charity or equity: but being a griping usury under the title of Exchange, it
dries up the fountain of both.

6 Sometime it masketh under the habit of hazard and adventure. For because in
that which is mutuum, he that lends passes away together with the
property, all hazard and adventure of the principal. A man therefore to
prevent this, will deliver thirty pound the sixth of December, to receive 33.
pound for it the second of June next following, if the son of the said lender
be then alive. If he die before the day, that then the debtor should pay but
27. pound of the principal. This was L. Cook in 5. part of Reports.
Claytons case, adjudged to be usury. For that this hazard or uncertainty of
life is not to be accounted of: because by the same reason that he may add one
life, he may add many. If it be not sensible and proportionable, it is but a
mockery.

But put the case of a man's own life, and make the adventure more sensible and
proportionable. As thus: A man having no charge to leave behind him, or little
care of them, uses to lend out his money for ten in the hundred, if he shall
live until the days of payment; provided always, that if he the said
Creditor die, then his executors shall receive but four score pound for the
hundred pound. His case then stands thus: First, he hops to live many
years, and when he dies he is sure to die but once: then shall his executors
(who those shall be God knows, and not he): his executors, I say, shall pay
twenty in the hundred, of such sums only as then shall be abroad at use.
Under color of this adventure (which selfeloue in many makes no adventure)
he would lend his money, and live upon the loan, while he lives. But tell
me, in good sooth, will thou take ten in the hundred if thou live? then by this
covenant thou will be an Usurer if thou live. No condition shall bar thee
from it, but only death. Then, verily of necessity, thou must die an Usurer by
virtue of the same covenant. And tell me in thy conscience, do thou think
thy Executors after thy death can redeem thy soul from that sin wherein
thou diedst; by paying so much in the hundred of thy wealth, which then shall
be none of thine? Filij huius seculi; how witty and subtle are the children
of this world in twisting snares to entangle their own consciences at the
hour of death? Qui volunt esse diuites: They that will be rich (says the 1.
Tim. 6. 9.
Apostle) not they that would by lawful and direct means; but, they that will
be rich fall into temptations and snares: such snares as the more they struggle
to get forth, the faster do they entangle themselves.

CHAP. V. Of the second term of the definition, Pactum, Covenant.
ALbeit an overplus or increase be given and received for the mere loan,
either of money, or of any thing which passes by Number; Weight, or Measure;
yet it is no usury, except it be by some covenant or contract before. This
also is essential, and expressed in the very letter of the law of God, Thou
shall not impose usury, etc. So do Vatablus, Pagnin, Exodus 22. 25.
and Tremellius read it, Non impones. So likewise the Greek Interpreters,
(...). Now there can be no exaction or imposition upon a free person but by way
of covenant. A covenant is a mutual agreement upon a certainty. First it must
be an agreement, that is, a voluntary consent, presupposing both liberty of
will to give assent, and ability of understanding to know the thing agreed
upon. Secondly, it must be mutual. For though one party agree unto it, yet it
is no covenant unless both give consent mutually. Thirdly, that mutual
agreement must be reduced unto a certainty, else it is void. If both parties
do not understand one certain thing, it is no covenant: and therefore we see,
that a conditional covenant, because it depends upon some future
uncertainty, is no covenant at all; but upon this condition, that, that
uncertain thing do prove certain.

If a man's money freely lent for a time, be by force retained past that time,
to the sensible detriment of the lender; we have before concluded that a
recompense is due. But in case a covenant be made of free loan for such a
time, and if it be not repaied at such a time, then so much to be allowed for
Interest: this covenant makes usury, which before was none.

A man lends his neighbor a sum of money to trade withal, and that
freely. This borrower becomes a gainer: out of his thankful mind he does
gratify the lender with some part of his gain. This is no usury, but a
thankful gratuitie, termed by the name of foenus liberale; and it is lawful
to give and take, where it is not lawful to covenant or contract before. For
as to gratify a Patron for preferment, a Judge for justice, upon any
precedent stipulation, promise, or demand, is Simonie in the Church, Briberie
in the Commonwealth: so is it usury in any fashion to contract before the
time of the loan. The reason of all this is, because neither justice, which
God and nature have made free for all; nor sacred things sanctified and set
apart for the service of God; nor works of mercy, bounty or favor, as
giving and lending; are in their own natures any ways capable of bargain and
sale. Covenant therefore is that which poysoneth the nature of them, and
turns them into sin; the sin of Simonie, Briberie, Usury: let them go
together.

But that men deceive not themselves in mistaking this term of Covenant,
understand briefly the latitude of it: It is either real, by pawn laid in
both for principal and Interest: Or literal, by writing without pawn, as by
bill, book, or bond: Or personal, without writing, in taking another man for
surety befides the borrower: Or verbal; either by promise without surety
before witness, or by secret stipulation, between themselves without
witness: Or silent, without word, witness, writing, or pawn: and this
silence either of one party, or both. Of one thus:

An Usurer says, I will lend you thus much money, but so much Interest you
shall pay me. The borrower takes it in filence: this silence is a promise, and
that promise a covenant. Nay, where there is silence on both sides, there may
be an usurious covenant. A common borrower comes to a common Usurer to take
up an hundred pound for three months; there is neither bill, bond, promise,
nor demand for any Interest: only this; the borrower knows how that Usurer
never lends his money but for ten in the hundred. Likewise the Usurer
knows how that borrower never takes up, but upon Interest. The very act of
borrowing and lending in these two parties by common intendment, is a covenant
for Usury: and every covenant whatsoever, whether it be silent or express;
whether it be bare and naked in promise, or invested by further security, if
it be a covenant for loan, it is Usury.

CHAP. VI. Of the third term, Lucrum, gain.
ALbeit there be a covenant merely for loan, yet if there be no lucre, it is
no usury. I use the word Lucre, rather then Gain, because it is more proper
for this purpose in the English. 1. Tim. 6. 6
Godliness is great gain, but godliness is no lucre. Lucre is clear gain
in money or money worth. That which is couenanted or agreed upon for mere
loan, must also be clear gain. For where equality is, there can be no
usury: Clear gain either in money, which is a certain price, or else in
money worth, which is valuable and to be rated at a certain price; for (as
Lib. de Tobia, cap. 14.
S. Ambrose says) Et esca vsura est, and vest is vsura est, and quodcunque
sorti accedit vsura est; quod velis ei nomen imponas, vsura est: Be it meat or
apparel, or any overplus above the principal, what ever you call it, it is
Usury.

A man lends money to his neighbor freely in his need, (for though he be a
rich neighbor, yet upon occasion he may want a sum of money for lawful and
necessary employments:) promise passes to requite his kindness another time in
lending him as much again for his occasion. Here is a covenant for loan, yet
no usury: because no covenant for clear gain, but one good turn for
another. And where there is equality there is no usury. Christ allows Luke
6. 34
(...) in this kind.

A man owes me ten pound. I wot not how to come by it: He comes to me for
ten pound more: I condition with him that he shall put in good security for
the whole debt of twenty pound: which if he do willingly yield, this is to
me, as the case now stands, a profitable covenant for the loan of money; yet
it is no usury, because no clear gain, but only a recovery of mine own due
debt, with out wrong offered to any.

A man lends money to get the friendship of such a person as may stand him in
stead. A friend in Court is worth a penny in the purse. But because his
friendship cannot be valued or set at a certain price, therefore it is no
lucre, and consequently no usury.

A shopkeeper lends money freely to a Chapman, couenanting with him that he
will not bauke his shop, but that he may take his money before another. This is
gain to the shopkeeper: but it is not valuable at any certainty, so long as
he may be served in that place for his money as well as elsewhere. But in case
he make him pay dearer for his ware, because he lent him money, that is usury.

I lend a poor laboring man money freely, but conditioning that he shall
work so many days with me in harvest freely; this is usury: for a days
work is valuable at a certain price: therefore is it lucre and money worth.

There is an Office or Lease fallen void of such a yearly value: I lend my
Courtly friend a sum of money for such a time, freely without usury; only
couenanting that he will procure the said Lease or Office: This is usury; for
though his friendship at large was not valuable, as is aforesaid, yet now being
reduced unto a certainty, in this particular, it may be valued at a price.
Therefore is it lucre, and so consequently direct usury.

CHAP. VII. Abriefe recapitulation of that which has been said.
BY that which briefly has been delivered, it may in some sort appear, how
usury has been called, and what it is. The Gentiles, both Romans and
Grecians, led by the light of nature, termed it the unnatural brood or
generation of that which by nature is barren. The spirit of God in Scripture
has branded all increase and overplus, whatsoever above the principal, by the
name of a biter or gnawer; as appears by the exegeticall joining of Tarbith
with Neshec, in the Law and the Prophets. Which increase and overplus coming
for the loan, either of money, or any thing which passes by number, weight or
measure, if it come merely for loan, without any other valuable
consideration: and merely for that loan which passes over the property, and
with the property the peril and adventure of the principal: and if it come
for this loan, not by way of gratuitie afterward freely given; nor in the name
of satisfaction for damage suffered by the lender without his own act and
consent; but by former covenant and voluntary contract betwixt the borrower
and the lender: and if this covenant be for lucre and gain, clear gain,
valuable gain, ratable at a certain price, either in money or money worth;
then is it that usury whereof the question moved is now to be discussed:
Whether it be a thing indifferent in it own nature, in any kind allowable;
or, whether it be simply to be condemned as a sin before God.

In this defining of Usury, and distinguishing of it from all such practices
as be only like unto it, and do border upon it; we ought so near as we can,
to cut it by a thread; and in the examining of the several branches we shall
meet with much finer and subtiller threeds, then hitherto we have: (over fine,
I confess, for so blunt an instrument.) Notwithstanding this caveat I would
gladly commend unto you before hand; that if this usury thus described, do
prove to be a sin of that nature and degree, as I am afraid it will; men
would not inure themselves in their commerce to coast over near upon it, lest
by little and little they be enticed by so sweet and pleasant a bait, as this
kind of lucre is: for the sweeter bait the devil uses, the more dangerous is
the hook. It was the wisdom of God in the training up of his Church at the
first, to make Ceremonial laws, as a pale to hedge in and compass his Moral
law, like the railes about Mount Sinay; to the end that by the observing of the
Ceremonial, men might be kept aloof from the transgression of that which is
Moral; as the abstaining from the blood of beasts taught them how far they
should be from blood-thirstines and cruelty toward man. A point so easy
that it is observed in matters most triuiall. A man will not ride so near the
brink of a pit or ditch as he can, for fear of falling, but keep a certain
distance off, that he may be the more secure. It is wisdom in iourneying, I
would to God it were so in living. For as in nature, opposites meet not
without a middle nature, so in morality, Virtue and Vice touch not without
some indifferent thing. There be certain brackish qualities which savor of
vice, yet cannot absolutely be condemned; even so for usury: there be some
contracts near upon it, which notwithstanding being filed and refined with
many distinctions and cautions, may happily prove indifferent and lawful: yet
sure it is, those men who will not abstain from some things which are lawful,
shall of necessity commit many things which are unlawful.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK PROVES VSVRIE, AS IT IS BEFORE DEFINED, TO be unlawful:
First by authority; next by reason.
CHAP. I. Wherein are propounded places of proof from authority.
ALL proof is reduced generally to two heads: Authority, and Reason. In the
former we see with other men's eyes: In the second with our own. And though it
be a wise man's part to see with his own eyes; yet must we be fools first,
that we may be wise; Cisternes, before we be Conduits: for he that will not
suffer himself to be led first and guided by others, shall never be able to
find the right way himself: and certes, good authority, never had adversary
but pride and singularity: I mean the authority of the most and the wisest.

Let us consider then in the first part of this book, what they have thought
in former ages of this point, who have been much wiser then our selves, and
have had as just occasion to look into it: for Usury is no new device, but an
ancient sin, which has been continually practiced in all ages, and in the
most famous and flourishing nations of the world. The authority therefore of
the wise and learned in former times ought to be a great motive to sway our
judgments in this point; and if there be any goodness or lawful moderation
in usury, doubtless some of them have found it out.

1 But before we come unto them, we will first lay that divine authority for a
foundation to the rest, which is beyond all exception. For the testimony of
authority, which of all arguments in Logic is the weakest, is the strongest
in Divinity.

Let us see therefore in the first place, what the Scripture says of usury,
for it, or against it. For where that Oracle vouchsafes to speak, there is
not any need of further authority for confirmation. They are therefore over
simple, who do imagine that humane authority is alleged to add authority
unto Scripture; as if that were defective: Sola sufficit ad omnia satis
superque: Vincentius Lirinensis.
It is alone alsufficient for authority, if it be not mistaken. The Church
therefore does comment upon the Scripture, only for explication of the text.
The text is absolute in it self, but obscure unto us, in regard of the
weakness of our understandings, and variety of apprehensions. We must therefore
of necessity borrow light from others, especially in these difficult cases of
conscience, which subtle wits have spun into so many fine threads, and which
depend upon so many circumstances.

2. And because consent of Churches does add great validity unto authority,
it will not be amiss first to see what the Fathers of the East Church thought
among the Grecians; and how the Western Church has seconded the same among
the Romans in her purity, before such time as corruption had ouergrowne her.

3. Afterward when corruption both in doctrine and manners had spread over, and
blemished the face of the Church, it will be obseruable, how this doctrine
concerning usury did preserve her ancient integrity.

4. But because all these are but the testimonies of several learned men in
their writings, yt which may be added as the voice of the Church jointly
assembled in Councels, will carry more weight with it.

5. Moreover, because a dwarse set upon a Giants shoulders, having the vantage
of his whole body, may happily see further then the Giant himself; we will see
what our modern writers have added unto the authority aforesaid; and whether
our reformed Churches have reformed any thing concerning this point. All these
put together (if they had a good Collector) would make so sufficient a comment
upon the law of God concerning usury, as a man of learning and modesty would
not easily gainesay.

6. But we have yet a larger field to walk in: for this is a question of that
nature, as is not only determinable by the law of God in Scripture; but also
by the law of Nature, those maxims and principles of common equity, which are
written in the hearts of men by the finger of God. Those students of Nature
therefore, the Philosophers, may of right challenge a voice in this business.

And because the experience and practife of States and Commonwealths does
add much to the twilight of Nature, especially in these matters of negotiation
and commerce between man and man; it will not be much out of the way, to
observe by the way, what such writers have observed in their Politikes, for the
publik good; which in this point is especially to be observed, even for
conscience sake.

7. Last of all, because we have not a better rule to proceed by, in the
searching of what is good and lawful in a well governed estate, then those
wholesome laws which have been established upon sage advice and deliberation,
out of long experience, and the received grounds of common equity: it will be
behooffull and material to listen a little to the Canon and Civil laws,
which have governed so many Nations, both Christian and Heathen: and finally,
to return home and note (though briefly, as becomes Divines) what the
Municipal, or Common law of this land, unto which we are subject, has decreed
concerning this matter.

Now if these authorities shall join in one against usury, they who shall
oppose themselves in defense thereof, had need to come well appointed with
strong arguments and sound reasons, or else me thinks we should hardly believe
them.

CHAP. II. The Testimony of Scripture.
IF we take our Savior Christ his division of the Scriptures, which he made to
his disciples going to Emmaus, into Luke 24. 44.
Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms; these be all three against usury.
Moses wrote five books, two of history, and three of law. In every one of his
law books, Exodus, Leuiticus, and Deuteronomie, there is an express law
against usury.

Exodus 22. 25. If thou lend money to my people, to the poor with thee, thou
shall not be as an Usurer unto him, thou shall not oppress with usury.

Leuit. 25. 35. If thy brother be impouerished or fallen into decay with thee,
thou shall relieve him, and as a stranger or a soiourner, so shall he live with
thee; thou shall take no usury of him nor vantage, or more then thou gave.
Thou shall not give him thy money for usury, nor lend him thy victuals for
increase.

Deuteronomy. 23. 29. Thou shall not give to usury to thy brother, as usury of
money, usury of meat, usury of any thing that is given to usury. Unto a
stranger thou may lend upon usury, but thou shall not lend upon usury to thy
brother, that the Lord thy God may bless thee.

Thus far is the letter of the law, which is vehemently urged by the Prophet
Chap. 18 13. 17. Cha. 22. 12
Ezechiel, by the Psalm. 15. 5
Psalmist, and his son Pro. 28. 8
Solomon. Against which law three exceptions have bin devised.

2.
The first is verbal (which we touched in the second Chapter of the first
book) in laying hold upon the biting word Neshec, avoiding the other word
Tarbith; as if that would bite the cause. This verily is hard dealing, when the
holy Ghost joins two words of purpose together, both in the law and Prophets,
to make his meaning full; that we should press the one, and leave the other.
When God is not content to forbid biting usury only in Neshec, but all
increase in Tarbith and Marbith, doubling the second from the same root, as if
he would set the Emphasis purposely upon increase; these will have it set upon
Neshec, biting usury. What is it then which they would so gladly wring out of
Neshec? Forsooth that no usury is forbidden in Gods law, but only biting
usury. And that there is no biting usury, but when it is felt and known to
bite (for we must give them that in, besides, or else they be never a whit the
nearer.) Alas good simple widows, who are taught to live securely in the fear
of God upon usury; can they tell when, or whom, or how many their usury does
bite? Nay can the wisest usurers of them all tell? For if the borrower be
bitten, he had best to keep his own counsel, and to set his best face upon
it: otherwise if the Usurers do once smell him to be down the wind, he shall
seldom find them within. Can they tell when the Commonweal is bitten? Can
they discern how many poor people shall pay a penny in the pound the dearer
for them and their fellows? No, no, usury walks in the dark, it biteth,
few know, when, where, or how. Only thus much in general we must needs know,
that the borrowers upon usury cannot afford their ware so good cheap by nine
or ten in the hundredth, as if their stocks were free; and yet must they needs
sell as the market goes. Therefore if there be not a sufficient number to
raise the market to their price, and so to cast the burden upon the people,
they themselves shall feel the weight of it. To make this more plain by the
most accustomed and modederate usury of these times. If money be lent to spend
upon necessaries, there is no manner of question made, but the borrower is sore
bitten in paying usury, when he has spent the principal. If it be lent to lay
out for gain, then must the borrower first be sure of so much clear gain, as
will pay the use, which is a reasonable gain of it self. For the Usurers of
nine or ten in the hundredth do live well of their trade and grow rich by it.
Yea many honest tradesmen will confess, that if they could with their own
free stock raise the like gain one time with another, that the Usurer does
with his moneies; and with the like security of the principal; they would
think they had made a very good market, notwithstanding all their care and
travel.

This reasonable gain then must first be raised by the borrower, to pay the
Usurer; and over and above he must exceed this reasonable gain, to maintain
himself and his servants, because this gain is none of his. If he do not
exceed then, and that in some proportion, he has lost his labor, and shall
feel himself sore bitten. If the borrower do exceed the Usurers gain to
maintain himself; I demand then who paieth this excessive gain over and
above that reasonable gain of ten in the hundred? Who but the Commonweal?
Not so (says the Usurer;) for the borrower must sell as the market goes. It
is very true. Therefore (say I) if he and his fellows be not able to raise the
market to their own price, they shall be losers: If they can inhaunce it (as
they may the more easily, because the number of such borrowers is great, and
because the rest desiring to sell as dear as they can, will most willingly
join with them) then the Commonweal must needs bear the burden, and
especially the poorer sort, who buying all by piece-meale at the last hand,
must be sore bitten, though they know not by whom. One of the biting dogs which
pincheth them sore, is usury. Yet gladly would they persuade us, that usury
in some other respect by way of amends, does lick them whole again. Because
by this means (forsooth) money is more stirring, and so by a quicker turn and
return, every commodity is more plentiful: for charity and friendship in
these days be not so common, that men would lend out their money so freely,
if they had not gain for the use. This is very true, it cannot be denied. And
the reason hereof is, because the common practice of usury has taught men to
set a price upon charity and friendship; as if he, who lent his friend or a
young beginner one hundred pound for a year, did in effect give him ten pound
clear out of his purse. But admit this dog were tied up; would rich men
prejudice the Commonweal in these days, by imprisoning their moneies in
their coffers, think you? Verily if usury were not, men would tenter their
wits, either in trading themselves, or employing others; rather then so current
and necessary a thing as money is, should take rust in these peaceable and
getting days. But who would rack his brain, and moile himself in the world,
if he may sit idle at home, and receive so sweet a gain without labor, cost,
or adventure? So that if borrowers escape, the Commonweal must bear it. If
the Commonweal go free (as seldom it does) the borrowers are bitten.
Sometime the burden is divided betwixt them; and still the Usurer is the
gainer.

Usury then biteth one or other, little or much, according to the degree of the
interest: from the biting of the morning wolf to the flea-biting: from that
Centesima, the Zeph. 3. 3.
hundredth part monthly, which Nehemiah complains of, which is twelve in the
hundred (the most that we find tolerated Nehe. 5. 11.
ever amongst the Heathen) unto that semiuncianum foenus, ten shillings in a
hundred pounds, scarce sensible: So that in every Tarbith, there is a Neshec, a
tooth in every usury: which because it cannot be always felt, or perceived,
it has pleased God to add that other term, which is more sensible, usury or
increase. The deuisers therefore of this distinction, of biting and toothlesse
usury, forced out of the word Neshec, have discovered two errors, whereupon
they seem to build as upon a sure foundation.

1. First, they presuppose, that if usury do not bite the borrower, it biteth
none at all; as if the public good were not to be regarded, but every man were
for himself, and his private commodity. Which if it might be granted, then a
man of credit might take up money enough at interest to buy up a whole
commodity, to sell it after his own price and pleasure. The Usurer and
borrower here be safe enough; for the poor people shall pay double, and make
both gainers. This is too plain.

2 Next they do imagine, that except the biting of usury be sensible and
apparent, there is no iniquity at all. But there be mysteries of iniquity,
which are not discernable to a vulgar eye at the first sight. There may be
injury without damage, and damage without sense. Therefore as the holy Ghost
has expressed the sensible biting of usury in Neshec: so has he forbidden
that which is more secret and covered in the word Tarbith; else wherefore
should Tarbith be added unto Neshec, both in the letter of the Law and the
Prophets? either it must be added by way of an (...), to make a gradation (as
if not biting usury only were forbidden, but any increase whatsoever;) or
else it must be an (...), added by way of explication, and so of equal
latitude with Neshec: only declaring what God meant by biting usury, namely,
any increase in that kind whatsoever.

It is the manner of holy Scripture after that a law is given and a sin
forbidden in a sensible term; by the addition of a more general term, to
express Gods meaning more fully; lest men should seek liberty in restraining
the former term more narrowly.

The Commandment against theft is set down in the sensible term of stealing:
the iniquity whereof is apparent and sensible, discerned at the first sight to
be injurious. But lest men should restrain the meaning of Gods law to that
theft which is so sensible; the holy Ghost adds, dealing Leu. 19. 11.
falsely, or circumuenting: teaching thereby, that the over reaching of our
brethren in bargaining and contracts, by any cunning and crafty dealing, is
included in theft, though the iniquity of it be not so apparent as that which
is properly called stealing. In like manner, lest men desiring to get
themselves some liberty in this sin, should restrain Neshec unto that
palpable biting and oppression which has no color of equity, God has
therefore added a more general term, forbidding all increase: adding that
term ever in the second place, as an explication of the former. If any man
therefore doubtful of this branch already handled, concerning the very words
of Gods law, be desirous to resolve his own conscience; let him frame his case
aright on this manner, and he may easily resolve himself of the safest way.
Seeing the Law and Prophets have simply and directly forbidden usury, under
the proper terms both of biting, and increase: and seeing on the other side,
that usury is a delicate gain desired of many; the question is no more but
this, whether we should labor by distinction to restrain the words of God to
our desires, that we might practice some moderate usury: or endeavor to
conform our desires to the words of God, that we might keep a safe
conscience.

. 3.
The second exception is personal. We are forbidden (say they) to take usury
of the poor, but not of the rich; for so Exodus 22. 15.
runs the text: If thou lend money to my people, that is, to the poor, thou
shall not be as an Usurer unto him, thou shall not oppress him. Again, If thy
brother be impouerished or fallen into decay, thou shall take no usury of him.
Whereupon they would infer, therefore of the rich thou may take.

These two answers be current in every ones mouth. First, that God for bad
only biting usury. Next, that we must not lend upon usury to the poor. Are
we forbidden then to bite the poor only? and is it lawful to bite the rich?
If thou lend money to my people, that is, to the poor, thou shall not be a
Noshec unto him; that is, a biting Usurer. May thou then be Exodus 22. 15.
a Noshec, a biting Usurer to the rich?

See then how unsuitable these conceits are, that one overthrows another. Is
it only biting and oppressing usury which Gods law forbids? then surely
there is no respect of persons, we must not bite or wrong any, be he rich or
poor.

But what is their reason, why we may lend upon usury to the rich? because
there is mention of the poor only in the text, therefore it is likely the rich
are not meant. It is true the poor are mentioned, and for that God saw great
reason, because they be most likely to borrow, and readiest to be oppressed.
And in the wilderness where this law was given, there was none borrowed but
only for need: therefore are the poor only mentioned.

Immediately before this law of usury in Exodus 22. 22. is there a law for
widows and fatherless children: Thou shall not trouble any widow, or
fatherless child. Does it therefore follow that thou may trouble a married
woman, or a child that has a father? This Logic were no good Divinity:
those are named only which are most subject to oppression. Yet this difference
is urged by the most learned of them, who seem any ways to favor usury:
Calvin. Epist. de vsura.
Quiamelius potest carere absque damno: Because the rich cannot feel the
biting so well; he may spare it better then the poor. If this were good
reasoning, what sport might thieves and robbers make with Salomons words; Prou.
22. 22.
Thou shall not rob the poor, because he is poor? Therefore we may rob
the rich because he is rich, and may well spare it.

Observe further in the very text, as if God of purpose would prevent this
cavil. In Deuteronomie there is no mention of the poor at all, but the Law is
delivered in general terms, Deuteronomy. 23. 19.
Thou shall not give upon usury to thy brother, but to the stranger thou
may. There is no limitation or toleration to any, but only to the stranger.
If he be thy brother thou may not take usury of him. Is not the rich thy
brother, as well as the poor?

Add moreover, that as when the Law was given, there was none that borrowed
but only the poor upon necessity: so afterward in the Ezekiel. 18. 13. 17. Cha.
22. 12 Psalm 15. 5. Prou. 28. 8.
Prophets, when there might be usury among the rich also, there is no mention
of the poor: but usury is absolutely forbidden without respect of persons. If
the law of God should extend no further then to the persons mentioned at the
first giving of it, we should make it very defective. For being given in the
wilderness before the peaceable establishing of Commonweals or king domes,
it was then directed unto particular families, Exodus 20.
Honor thy father and thy mother: yet by virtue of these words, do Kings and
Emperors of due challenge obedience, though at the first giving of the
Commandment there was neither King nor Emperor in Israel. So likewise though
the poor only were mentioned at the first, because none but they did then
borrow, notwithstanding this intent of the law is to be extended, even as
usury shall extend it self to all persons whatsoever.

Last of all, it shall appear that there may be as unlawful and as biting
usury in lending to the rich, because he is rich; as to the poor, because he
is poor. Therefore personal difference cannot distinguish lawful and
unlawful usury.

Because thou will not oppress the poor, thou will lend thy moneys to a rich
Merchant, who shall take no hurt, but gain largely both for himself and thee.
I demand then to what end does he borrow, being of so sufficient wealth?
Forsooth that he may compass greater matters then his own stock will reach
unto. I ask then, what warrant there is in equity and conscience, either for
him to borrow, or thee to lend?

If God has blessed him with a stock of his own, by which he may live in
good fashion, shall he out of a covetous and vain humor to become a Royal
Merchant, reach beyond his reach? Let him plough with his own heifer, and Pro.
5. 15
drink of the water of his own well: else he bewraieth a covetous and
ambitious mind, contrary to the Apostles rule: Heb. 13. 5
Be content with those things which you have. He tempts God in ventring more
then his own: whereas a Christian man's resolution should be, that whatsoever
befalls, though Jobs calamity fall upon him, yet so near as he can, he
should lose no more then his own. Gods law did intend that none should borrow
but for need. A rich man, I confess, may need upon occasion, and thou may
lend him freely to receive the like courtesy from him another time: but to
lend him that he may get double or trebble gain for thee and himself, with
thy wealth (who perhaps is of Master Dr. Wilson, fol. 5.
Gromelgainer his opinion, who thought in his conscience that a Merchants gain
is not to be stinted;) to lend to such a one, I say, is to feed a greedy and
ambitious mind in another, for which thou stand answerable; because thy
money if it come to thee on Gods name, is Gods blessing, and God has made thee
a steward of his blessings; thou must therefore give an account, when thou
give up thy stewardship, how thy money has been employed.

Lend not then to the rich, because he is rich. For as to lend him freely is no
charity, because he needs it not; so to lend him upon usury is no equity,
because thou do thereby enable, yea and encourage him the more to fat
himself by feeding upon the Commonwealth: who will be sure with thy money to
pay thy usury; to be a sweet gainer himself, and to supply all by-losses
besides, or he will want of his will.

It was not therefore the meaning of God in his law to make any such personal
limitation of lending to the poor only, seeing that by this kind of loan even
to the rich also, there may be biting and oppression in great measure: which
cases though they be not essential to the act of usury, yet are they
sufficient to demonstrate that the personal difference of poor and rich, does
make no real distinction betwixt lawful and unlawful usury; which is to the
purpose of this second exception.

Let us see further if there be any other shift which the wit of man has
devised to avoid this law of God. For neither of these two can stand by it
self: and if we join them together one overthrows another. For shall we
stick close to Neshec, and condemn only biting usury, as if there were some
which did not bite? Then must we respect no persons, but give over this
distinction of poor and rich: for verily we must bite none.

. 4.
A third exception is real, against the obligation of the law it self. For
that which is chiefly pressed, by Molineus and his fellows in this assertion,
is this: That usury is no further forbidden by that law of God in Moses, then
it is opposite to the rules of justice and charity. Which we do grant them
most freely. For no more is theft, adultery, murder, or any other
transgression of the second table forbidden any otherwise, then as it stands
in opposition to justice and charity. For charity (says the Apostle) is the
fulfilling Romans 13. 10.
of the law.

So that whosoever transgresses the law, transgresses justice or charity;
though not all alike, nor in the same degree of evidence to be discerned; but
some more obscurely then other: which thing begets so many difficult cases
of justice in laws, and of conscience in Divinity. Amongst which this case of
usury is not the least, because the iniquity of it cannot so easily be
discerned, as of theft and bare faced robbery, whose malice and injustice does
open it self to the first sight. And that usury is a thing in it self
inordinate, and so consequently opposite to justice and charity both, shall be
more fully expressed when we come to the arguments drawn from those places.
But our present business in this Chapter is to deal with the very text of
Scripture, the written law of God.

Their meaning then who would patronize usury is this: that Gods express law
against it is not moral binding Christians; but judicial or politic only,
framed peculiarly for that Commonwealth of the Jews. Which conceit likewise
overthrows that former distinction of biting usury: for if God in that law
do forbid biting and oppressing usury only, then is that law moral binding
Christians as well as Jews: except they would muzzle the Jews, and give
Christians liberty to bite and oppress their brethren. These groundless
conceits are built likewise with untempered mortar, they overthrow one another
and themselves.

When we look into the consent of Interpreters, we shall find no question
made, but the law against usury is moral and as binding as may be. Look into
the Prophets, and they ever combine this sin of usury with the
transgressions of the Moral law in the highest degree, with lying, backbiting,
deceit, wrong, briberie; Psalm 15. with Idolatry, oppression, adultery,
cruelty, unmercifulness to the poor, bloodshed and murder: Ezekiel. 18. with
the profanation of holy things; with the abomination of uncleanness; with the
unnatural sins of incest, Ezekiel. 22. Usury (says S. (...). Supplem. verse.
14.
Basil) is placed among the greatest abominations; all of them transgressions
of the Moral law.

It is true indeed there is a judicial and politic toleration annexed unto
this law, Deuteronomy. 23. 20.
that the jews might take usury of strangers; but that makes not the law it
self judicial, but rather moral. The Jews had a divorce permitted unto them
Deuteronomy. 24. 1.
in the same book of Moses, the next chapter, and yet the 7. Commandment, to
which that belongs, is moral notwithstanding: In like manner the Jews might
take usury of strangers, which was a peculiar toleration for that nation, yet
the law against usury is moral.

Of which peculiar permission there was special cause: whether we take it for
all strangers in general, or for the Cananites and those who dwelt among them
in particular.

1. If it was lawful for Jews to exact usury of all strangers that were not
Jews, that was permitted of God, as a wise lawgiuer to prevent the greater
oppression of his own Church and people. For if the Jews had not had power to
have made their part good with the wicked Gentiles, the Gentiles would have
eaten up Gods people.

Besides, such was the hardness of Jewish hearts, that if they might not have
taken usury of strangers, they also would have made a pray even of their own
brethren. Which toleration in civil respects might absolve the Jews in the
external Court, but not in the Court of Conscience; no more then the
toleration of divorce did dispense with that Mar. 10. 5
hardness of their hearts before God.

2. If by stranger in that toleration be meant only the remnant of the
Cananites, as Lib. de Tobia, cap. 15.
S. Ambrose and Lib. 6. in Ezekiel. 18.
Hierome among the ancient, Iunius and Tremellius of latter time have expounded
it: then is there a more special reason of it, that they might devour them by
piece meal, whom they could not overcome at once. Whereupon says S. Ambrose,
Lib. de Tobia, cap. 15.
Ab hoc vsuram exige, quem non sit crimen occidere: Thou may lawfully take
usury of him, whom thou may lawfully kill.

Now when the Cananites were once suppressed, we find all usury ever after
simply forbidden without any such limitation. So the Hebrews understood the 15.
Psalm, as if it were unlawful for a Jew in David's time to take usury of any
Gentile. Which In Exodus 22. 15.
Lyranus reports to be the opinion of Rabbi Solomon, and which De arcanis
Cathol. veritat. lib. 11. c. 4.
P. Galatinus notes to be the judgment of the Rabbines in general. To which
assertion S. Hierome upon Ezekiel subscribeth: Lib. 6. in Ezekiel.
In the beginning of the law usury is forbidden toward thy brethren, in this
Prophet toward all.

Which special permission of lending to a stranger (be it Cananite or stranger
in general, which for the present conclusion I leave as a thing indifferent)
does rather confirm that law whereto it belongs to be moral, then
otherwise; and so consequently usury to be simply unlawful. For lawful
things have no need of permission.

Last of all, let that permission of lending to a stranger pass as nothing
concerning Christians, because the partition wall being taken away, we are all
brethren: and then the question for the interpretation of the law depends
chiefly upon this point, how far that law of Moses against usury did bind
the Jews among themselves?

If all increase above the principal then was simply forbidden to the Jews,
as is granted by them who make this exception; I demand what warrant
Christians have in assuming greater liberty herein unto themselves, then was
granted unto the Jews? Our Christian liberty I confess is much greater then
theirs was for rites and ceremonies, which were shadows of things then to
come, as the Apostles do warrant us. But for matter of equity and charity
among brethren, God did use more toleration and conniuencie toward them, then
he does toward Christians, of right looking for more fruit at our hands then
theirs, in regard of that Gospel of grace which we do enjoy.

If that usury alone which has a Neshec or oppression in it was forbidden in
the Law, as opposite to the rules of justice and charity, then was not that
law judicial or peculiar for the Jews, but obligatorie and standing in as
full force and virtue amongst Christians, as ever it did amongst them.

So that grant them whatsoever they will demand, let them wind themselves
which way they list, yet the law of God makes strong against them both in
letter and sense, condemning all usury for a sin.

. 5.
As usury is a sin in it self by the censure of the text, so is it branded
by the holy Ghost for a sin of that nature and degree which does make
shipwreck of conscience: the continuance of which sin cannot stand with the
grace and favor of God. For God has in his law noted this sin, amongst others,
with some special marks of impiety, and has sealed his law against usury with
his own signet and great seal. The same motive which God uses by way of
preface for the keeping of all his Commandments of both tables, he has
singled cut and annexed it to this law against usury: Thou shall not give him
thy money to usury, nor lend him Leu. 25. 38.
thy victuals for increase. I am the Lord your God, which brought you out of
the land of Egypt, etc. And again, Thou verse. 36.
shall not take usury of him, nor advantage, but thou shall fear thy God. As
if usury and the fear of God could not stand together. Ezechiel also
concluding all the abominations therein mentioned with usury, he seals it
up with that fearful censure, Shall he live? he shall not live, he shall die
the Ezekiel. 18. 13
death, his blood shall be upon him.

And as David does excommunicate the Usurer out of Psalm. 15.
the Tabernacle of Gods Church, and deprive him of eternal rest in the holy
hill; so does his son Solomon menace a curse upon his wealth so gotten, and
upon his posterity, who hoped to have enjoyed the same. He that increases
Prou. 28. 8.
his riches by usury and interest, gathers the^ for him that will be
merciful to the poor. That is to say, the Usurers children shall never enjoy
them. How true that is which the painful Preacher Master Smith observed
concerning the children In the Sermon of Usury.
of such in London, who grow wealthy by interest; and that which the penitent
Merchant in D. Wilson remembers of Usurers issue, I leave to them who out of
longer experience can speak of that point.

Let every one therefore who desires to resolve his conscience for this matter
by Scripture (the only true ground of a Christian resolution) let him consider,
I say, how neither usury nor interest, biting usury nor increase is ever once
named in the book of God, but it is condemned; condemned amongst such
abominations as bring a curse in stead of a blessing: an eternal curse upon
the soul of the Usurer, and a temporal curse upon his wealth and posterity.

Let some of these tender consciences, who are so urgent to call for warrant
out of the book of God for every ceremony and matter of form in the Church,
seek a warrant for this their practice, which so nearly concerns them; and
let them seek it at the Oracle of God, who has not left it, as he has many
other things, either to the discretion of the Church, or wisdom of
Commonwealths; but has vouchsafed to determine it in his own book to our
hands: to set down an express law against it in Exodus; to renew and revive
that law again and again in Leuiticus and Deuteronomie; to ratify and
confirm it with no other words then himself used at the publishing of the
whole Moral law; to specify the only limitation which he meant to tolerate
for a time; to add the promise of blessing to the keepers of this law; and to
denounce such fearful judgments against the transgressors of the same, upon
their wealth and posterity in this world, upon their own souls in the world
to come.

Since it has pleased the Almighty God thus fully and exactly to express his
will for our resolution in this point; let us not be so ready to fly from his
express word to humane inventions; I mean those devised distinctions which
favor the service of Mammon more then the service of God; which savor the
things that be of men, to wit, the profit, the ease, the security, the sweet
gain of Interest; a trade which flesh and blood must needs affect and be
greatly inclined unto.

CHAP. III. Of the testimony of ancient Fathers.
THere be a sect of spirits in the world, who can not with patience endure to
hear any authority alleged save only Scripture: as if the very bare text it
self did speak so evidently to their understanding, that there were no need
of an Interpretour. And it falls so out in this business, as it does in few
points of question besides; that I could be very well content they would
retain their opinion still, and put all Interpretors to silence; so might we
spare further labor, and the question were at an end. For the text never
mentions any kind of usury, but with detestation, without distinction,
difference, qualification; condemning it, cursing it, denouncing plague upon
plague upon it, as upon a sin most odious. But see how strangely it is come
about of late times, that even those spirits which are most nice in these
points, now the question is come to a matter of profit and gain, are of all
others most ready to avoid the text, by new devised tricks and inventions of
men.

Against these let us ask counsel of the ancient and holy Fathers of the
Church. So does God by his Prophet direct his people of that time: Ier. 6. 16.
Ask for the old way which is the good way, and walk therein, and you shall
find rest for your souls. The way of these ancients, next to the Apostles,
was the old way, and no doubt the good way, if we had grace to walk in it. We
think our selves wiser then they; but I am sure they had more religion then
we. Of this new learning for the defense of usury, I confess they were
altogether ignorant. Though they were fathers, yet concerning naughtiness 1.
Cor. 14. 20.
they were children, as the Apostle wishes them to be; they did simply and
plainly take the holy Ghost as he spoke, conforming themselves to the
Scriptures in this point most exactly; never mentioning usury, but condemning
of it with so many inuectiues, as would fill a whole volume of themselves. But
it shall be sufficient for us only to give a taste of some few, resting our
selves upon this general observation, as for this point unanswerable, that we
find not any of them which writes of it, but writes against it, without any
mincing or qualifying of the matter.

If we reverence the judgment of reverend men, both for their learning and
sanctimonie of life, let us begin with that ancient holy Father, who has fully
expressed himself for this point: S. Basil the great, that little spark of
Religion, as In Epist. ad Basil.
Nazianzen calls him, left alone in the East, when all true professors seemed
to be extinct.

In his Supplement upon the 15. Psalm he takes this point in hand, grounding
his censure first upon the Law and Prophets, which in his understanding do
clearly sorbid usury, and account it amongst the most hamous transgressions.
To exact of the poor which borrows for need is inhumane; yet such
inhumanitie was practiced in his days. Which thing though it be not the point
now in question, yet the relation which that Father makes of it, does directly
strike at the nature of all usury whatsoever. Take Salomons rule (says Basil
to the borrower:) drink of the waters of thine own well, sell thy cattle,
thy plate, thy household stuff, thy apparel, sell any thing rather then thy
liberty. Worthily is usury termed (...), (as the same Father continues his
speech) for it breeds and brings forth so many mischiefs one in the neck
of another: an unnatural brood, like the generation of vipers, which eats
through the entrals of the mother. An unnatural and monstrous brood: for
whereas all fruits and cattle have their appointed times to engender and bring
forth to their Lord and master; money to the Usurer brings forth to day,
and begins a new travel to morrow: nay that young breed which was but
brought forth to day, begins it self to bear to morrow. And whereas other
creatures, the sooner they begin to bear, the sooner do they leave off; Money
by usury begins betimes, and increases without end. Come not therefore
under the slavery of this monster. Thou have hands, thou have some calling;
do somewhat and live accordingly. If thou be rich, thou needst not to borrow;
if thou be poor, borrowing will not relieve thee. Would thou renew Sampsons
riddle, Out of the eater came meat? Would thou gather grapes of thorns?
The thorns will wound and pearce thee: thou falst into the hands of those
(...).
monthly devils, which follow the course of the Moon to afflict poor men
with a foul ill or falling sickness. Thus and much more fully to this purpose
has that learned Father written, dehorting all men poor and rich from
borrowing in this kind, inueighing over bitterly against Usurers, not only for
their greedy cruelty against their poor debtors, but for living upon so
unnatural and unkind increase as usury is. Dogs, monsters, vipers, devils?
This is too harsh. But we must bear with him; if he lived, as they write he
did, most upon bread and salt, may be it was his humor to give such dry and
sharp censure upon the money-mongers of his time.

Let us see then what S. Chrysostom thought, who has taken great pains in
this point; his golden mouth, we hope, will utter no such bitterness.

He lamenteth much the estate of the Church in his time, In Matthew. Hom. 57.
Grauis (delectissimi) morbus, etc.
for that so grievous a disease as usury is, was then fallen upon it: yet they
were very charitable Usurers in his time; for their ordinary excuse was,
Foeneratus sum, sed pauperi obtuli; I have taken usury, but I have given it to
the poor. But God (says Chrysostom) is not delighted with such sacrifices;
thou had better not give at all then give such alms. Do not you your self
count usury sordide? Do not the laws forbid Senators and public persons to
defile themselves with such filthy lucre? This law against usury (says the
same Father) was given to the Jews in the beginning, Homil. 41. in Genes.
when they were but rude, that they should not take usury of their brother;
how can Christians then be excused who show less humanity to their brethren
then Jews, and are found worse in time of grace then the Jews were under the
law?

The author of the unfinished work upon Matthew, Homil. 12.
though it be not Chrysostomes, yet agrees with him in this; that while usury
seems to give, it takes; while it seems to succor, it oppresses; while
it delivers from one bond, it inwrappeth in many. It luls men asleep like
the poison of aspes, and as leven it conuerteth the whole substance of man into
his own nature, that is, into debt.

For Clemens Strom. (...). 2.
Alexandrinus, for Epist. ad Lato.
Greg. Nyssen. for (...).
Gregor. Nazianz. etc. it will be sufficient only to gather their voices;
because they did but taste and spit out.

. 2.
If we look Westward, Lib. 4. cont. Marcion.
Tertullian does but touch it, and reject it. De vero cultu l. 6. cap. 18.
Lactantius says, It corrupts the benefit of loan, against charity; it
takes that it never gave, against justice: and a righteous man will never be
polluted with such gain, but will ever have his lending to be reckoned amongst
his good deeds. Lib. de Tobia ca. 12
S. Ambrose says, There is nothing more horrible then an Usurer; he is an
odious man, and his money is a viper. In conclusion, he uses this argument
against it: Si licitum, est cur vocabulum refugis? cur velamen obtexis? Si
illicitum, est cur incrementum requiris? If usury be lawful, why do thou
avoid the name? why do thou put a veil over it? If it be unlawful, why
do thou receive any increase?

If we desire S. Augustine his judgment for this point, (who is in stead of
many) he is so confident that he appealeth to the Usurers themselves, who
practiced in his days: In Psalm. 36.
Quam detestabile sit, quam odiosum, quam execrandum, puto and ipsi
foeneratores norunt: How detestable a thing it is to give money upon usury,
how odious, how execrable, I suppose the Usurers themselves are not ignorant.

But he might happily speak of some excessive usury, or extortion. Observe
therefore how presently he explaineth himself in the very same place: Si
aliquid plus quam dedisti expectes accipere, foenerator es and in hoc
improbandus: If thou look to receive any thing more then thou gave, thou art
an Usurer, and therein to be condemned.

The common objection which is made for usury in the behalf of such as have a
stock of money and not skill to use it; is answered by the same Father somewhat
sharply: Audent In Psalm. 128.
etiam foeneratores dicere, non habeo vnde viuam; hoc mihi and latro diceret
deprehensus in fauce: hoc mihi and effractor diceret deprehensus circa partetem
alienum: hoc mihi and leno diceret, emens puellas ad prostitutionem: hoc mihi
and maleficus diceret, incantans mala, and vendens malitiam suam: The Usurers
also (says he) dare say they have not else whereon to live: so may the robber
say, taken in the thieves haunt: so may the burgler say, catched under another
man's wall: so may the bawd say, who buyeth young women for prostitution: and so
may the witch say, enchanting mischief, and selling even malice for money. His
final sentence is, Ad Macedon. and Habet. 14 q. 4. Can. Quid dicam.
That Usurers belong not to the Church of God.

Shall we descend any further? Leo the Great is well worth the noting: De
ieiunio. 10. mensis. seim. 6.
Quilibet sequatur euentus, mala semper est ratio foenerantis, vt aut miser sit
amittendo quod dedit, aut miserior accipiendo quod non dedit. Multiplicatur
quidem facultas iniustis and tristibus incrementis, sed mentis substantia
contabescit; quoniam foenus pecuniae funus animae: What ever the event be, bad
is the condition of the Usurer: for the wretch shall either lose that he gave,
or be more wretched in taking that he gave not. His substance indeed is
multiplied by unlawful and woeful increase, but the substance of the inward
man dies. For moneys interest is the souls funeral: a dead soul, dead and
buried in sin is the soul of the Usurer.

Let me conclude with devout Epist. 322. ad Spirenses.
S. Barnard: Taceo quod sicubi desunt Iudaei, peius Iudaizare dolemus
Christianos foeneratores. Si tamen Christianos, and non magis baptizatos
Iudaeos conuenit appellare. He writes with grief that which willingly he
would conceal; That if Jews were any where wanting, Christian Usurers did
play the Jews worse then themselves. If it be fit (says he) to call them
Christians, and not rather baptized Jews.

So far were these holy learned Fathers from moderating or qualifying this
practice of usury, that whenever any of them do meet with it, they sharpen
their pens as if their spirits were moved and stirred in them more then
ordinary. Verily they discerned some malignant and venomfull quality in
usury, which opposed it self unto that spirit by which they wrote.

CHAP. IIII. Of the later times of ignorance.
AS the body is proportionable to the head, so is the mystical body of
Christ conformable to himself, especially in his passion. For as the Church
shall be like him in glory, so must she be likewise in suffering. As Christ
therefore had first a bloody and then a cloudie passion, when Mat. 27. 45.
darkness was upon the earth, from the sixth hour to the ninth: so after
those bloody persecutions of the primitive Church were over, that she grew
from peace to security, she was strangely eclipsed with ignorance and
blindness; a mist of darkness was upon her; during which time notwithstanding
many points of morality, especially this against usury, did continue and
retain their former integrity. Which I must ascribe especially unto two
causes.

1. First, the doctrine concerning works of charity was very well preserved
and vehemently enforced in those times; because it was a profitable doctrine by
which the Church did thrive and grow full. Therefore they would be sure to
keep out those sins which strike so directly at Charity, as Usury does;
like that cambium siccum, which dries up the very root of charity and
equity.

2. Secondly, the Fathers of the Church by their inuectiues, in former times,
had made such an impression in the minds of Christians against usury, that in
time it grew so odious and detestable, as it was no fit time for the devil to
bring in that sin, unless it came very cunningly disguised: in so much as
Centur. 12. 4. Petrus Cantor.
there was scarce one Usurer to be found in a whole city. Neither would he
practice but by secret stipulation, and protestation, that he should not be
discovered. If he were but suspected (as in time he must needs be) his house
was called the Devils house; and so every thing he possessed; the Devils field,
the Devils vineyard, the Devils pit. Not any of his neighbors would
communicate with him, so far forth as to fetch fire at his house. The
children in the streets were scared at the sight of him, as if some bu^begger
had passed by: running aloof they would point at him with the finger, that
others might know him, as if some strange monster were to be seen.

When after in process of time the practice of it grew more common among
Christians; yet the learned amongst them would give most hard censure upon
Usurers in their writings and preachings. Petrus Blesens. Epist. 131.
Foenerator tristissimos habet exitus huius vitae: cuius mors detestabilis,
cuius finis interitus, cuius damnatio sine fine: Most woeful is the passage of
the Usurer out of this life; whose death is detestable, whose end is damnation,
whose damnation is without end.

The school Divines of both houses are clearly against usury; usury of all
sorts. The Thomists and Scotists have no quarrel at all for this question.

It were extreme folly to blot paper in the alleging of particulars, there
is not any of them but does absolutely condemn all usury as simply unlawful.
Where observe how the most acute and subtle wits of those times, who did set
themselves to coin distinctions, and to find out most exact differences of
things; who were able to dart an argument, as the me^ of Gibeah did stones,
Judge. 20. 16.
it an hairs breadth; yet were never so quick sighted (as some in these days
be) to spy out that case, wherein usury is lawful.

CHAP. V. Of Councels.
WE have taken a brief view of the judgment of the learned thus far, and in
them of the Church: wherein we find a full consent and harmony without any
jar at all. But as Almighty God Genesis 1. 31.
(after his particular reuiew of each days work, wherein he saw it was good)
did at the last take a more general reuiew of the whole frame of heaven and
earth, and then saw that it was very good: So if we take a general view of
the Church assembled in Councels, we shall find that this we have said is
very true.

What the Church did take usury to be, is defined in the Council of Agatha
under Symmachus. Vsura est vbi amplius Tom. 2. page 308.
requiritur quam datur: When any thing more was received then was delivered, as
the Council gives instance in money and corn.

The first Council of Nice decreed against it: Sanctum and magnum concilium
just statuit, vt si quis inuentus fuerit Can. 18.
post hanc definitionem vsuram accipiens, abijciatur a Clero, and alienus a
Canone sit. And Clergy men were never degraded but for deadly sin.

The first Council of Carthage held it filthy lucre.

The Elibertin Council degraded the Clergy, and excommunicated Can. 12. Can.
20.
the Laity for the same.

But the Lateran Council under Alexander the third Can. 1.
was most bitter; who when question was made by Panormitan an Archbishop,
whether usury might not be dispensed withal for the redemption of poor
Christians taken captive by the Saracens; returned this answer: Praesentibus
tibi literis duximus respondendum: Quod cum vsurarum crimen vtriusque
testamenti pagina detestatur, super hoc dispensationem aliquam non vidimus
admittendam: That since both old and new Testament has made usury detestable,
no dispensation was to be admitted, no not for the redeeming of Christian
captives.

It was decreed in the same Council, that manifest Usurers Ibid Salermitano
Episcop.
should be deprived of the communion and fellowship of Christians in their
life, and of Christian burial after death, till their heirs had restored
their usury.

Alexander explaneth it further, that such restitution was to be made to their
heirs, if they were dead; if heirs were not to be found, it went to the poor.

The Council of Vienna under Clement the 5. condemned all for Heretics who
held usury to be lawful.

By this that briefly has been said, we may gather what has been the
sentence and censure of the Church both in her time of purity, as also since
the time that by long standing still, she had gathered corruption.

It remains now that we examine how far she has been purged and reformed
concerning this point of usury, by our later Divines.

CHAP. VI. Of the testimony of Divines in reformed Churches.
IF there be any hope for usury, now we are come unto it. Men care not much
for antiquity, if novelty will help them to so easy and sweet a gain.

Let us begin with Luther, and see In Psalm. 15.
what he finds worthy of reformation in this point. Now we must remember
that in his time there was crept into the Church a cunning kind of masked
usury allowed of by the Pope, termed contractus redemptionis, a bargain and
sale with covenant of redemption, if the money be paid back again at such a
day. The toleration whereof is by him made a note of Antichrist. Nec sic tamen
adesse Antichristum vllus credit: He was angry with the world that men would
not believe the Pope to be Antichrist, for toleration of a little spice of
usury. So far was Luther from favoring of it. But we have very wisely of
later times left out this note. And surely if we had no greater matters to lay
to the charge of the Pope, then toleration of usury, I think we should yet
look for another Antichrist.

Melancthon proves expressly, that what gain soever is Definitiones
appellationum.
demanded for mere loan, is simply forbidden in Leuiticus and Deuteronomie;
that it is directly repugnant to equality and justice; that it does exhaust
men where it is used; that the cloaking of it under the name of honest
interest, is a mere sophistication.

That worthy writer Chemnitius has written a large treatise Loco de paupert.
cap. 6.
in his Common places against usury, answering al their arguments and
cauillations, showing what cold comfort it is for a conscience to rely upon
new devised distinctions, against such express and general prohibitions of
Scripture.

Aretius urges the same point not only out of Moses and Problem. de vsura.
Luke 6. 35.
the Prophets, but as simply forbidden by Christ, Lend, looking for nothing
again. Understanding it not of the principal, but of increase, because of the
word (...) as if it were not a lending but a free beneficence, if the
principal were not to be expected. Howsoever that place may be subject Illud
tame^ certum est, multo magis prohiberi foeneratorias pactiones. Beza in
annotat. Luc. 6. 25. Supplem. in Psalm. 15.
to other interpretation; yet by many pregnant proofs besides does he
absolutely condemn usury. And albeit Beza differ from him in expounding that
text; yet even from that text does Beza condemn usury.

Musculus likewise discharges his conscience against all usury, even that of
Orphants. But with little hope of amendment; for his conclusion is, that
Divines shall reform usury, when Physicians have cured the gowte. Both are
incurable; this as great a sin, as that a disease, and will one day rack the
conscience, as that does the sinowes, if it be not prevented in time.

What should I speak of De puritate tabern.
Erasmus, of In 6. Luc.
Zuinglius, of Cateches. in Exodus Praecept. 8.
Camerarius, of In Prophetas minor.
Oecolampadius, of a number of others, whose very names would replenish a page,
all of them simply and directly against usury.

This has been the general judgment of the Church, for above this fifteen
hundred years, without opposition, in this point. Poor silly Church of
Christ, that could never find a lawful usury, before this golden age wherein
we live.

. 2.
But yet are we not come to the maine point: for the Heluetian Divines, and
some of Geneua, are supposed to stand close by them, able to answer whatsoever
can be said against usury. They ask what we say of Calvin, Bucer, Iunius,
Zanchie, Hemingius, and others of that rank? We say they were as worthy
Divines as ever the Church enjoyed, since it enjoyed them. But the question is,
what these have said of usury.

Let us take a taste of the principal of these, upon whom Usurers do chiefly
rely as upon their chief patron. Master Calvin has said much of it: yea and
by their leaves, much against it. Writing upon the 18. of Ezechiel: Certe
foenerator semper erit latro: hoc est, qui quaestum faciet ex foenore ille
predo erit: Certainly (says Calvin) an Usurer will ever be a thief: that is,
he who will be a gainer by usury will be a spoyler. This is an unkind
salutation. But he said as he thought: for upon 15. Psalm he thinks, there
is scarce an honest man of an Usurer to be found in the whole world. Moreover,
he says where he writes most favorably: In repub. been constituta nemo
foenerator tolerabilis est, Epist. de vsura.
sed omnino debet e consortio hominum reijci: An Usurer (says Calvin) is not
tolerable in a well established Commonweal, but utterly to be rejected out
of the company of men. Certe foenerare quaestus est illiberalis and indignus
homine tam pro quam honesto: Verily (says he) to play the Usurer is an
illiberall gain, and unworthy either a godly or an honest man. But stay, is
this the great patron of usury? Surely I would wish all Usurers to bless
themselves from such patrons. Our next inquiry then will be, what is to be
found in these men's writings, which has given such encouragement to the
Usurers of our time.

CHAP. VII. Of their assertion who have most favored Usury.
HAd it not been for those banished men, who in time of persecution fled into
those parts for succor, this doctrine against usury had never been called
into question. But these exiles bringing stocks of money with them, and wanting
skill to employ it in those strange places; it was pity they should have been
driven to have spent upon the stock: therefore their money was used by others
who had skill, and some allowance made to them for the use. This practice
growing both common and public, it remained then that the wit of man out of a
tender commiseration toward those who suffered exile for Religion, must try
what it could do, if not directly to defend, yet somewhat to qualify the
matter. Thus pity brought in practice, and practice must seek apology:
Humanum est. But what apology has it found? I find that these Divines deal
with usury, as the Apothecarie does with poison, working and tempering it with
so many cautions and limitations, that in the end they make it no usury at all.

Let us begin with Master Calvin, who in this point moves the rest of the
planets; though not as Luther was wont to do before him; who like the primum
mobile carried all by violent motion: but Calvin like the eight Sphere had
certain motions of trepidation, as in diverse points, so in this of usury.

Being pressed by a friend to give answer by letter for a friend; whether
usury be simply unlawful: Good Lord, how loath he is to be brought to the
point, doubting that his friend would catch at some word, and for an inch take
an ell! Metuo ne ille verbulo quodam arrepto plus sibi multo permittat quam
vellem. Optandu^ quide^ esset omnes vsuras, ipsumque adeo nomen e mu^do iam
pride^ exulasse: et nihil magis exeptem qua^ vt mihi necessitas no^ sit
argume^tu^ istud deinceps attingere.
Wishing that the very name of usury had been long since banished the world:
desiring nothing more but that he might never more be urged to speak to that
point. And in conclusion, Tantu^ abest vt istud a te pro edicto vel axiomate
haberi velim, vel in eo plane acquiescere.
admonishing his friend in any case not to rely upon his judgment. What might
it be then that this learned man said, when he said the worst, which he was so
loath to say? Nullo testimonio scripturae mihi co^stat vsuras omnino damnatas
esse. No^du^ co^stat vsura^ omne^ esse prohibitam. Epist.
That he was not yet by any testimony of Scripture fully resolved that all
usury is altogether condemned.

And supposing Moses his law against usury to be a politic law only, he
infers that Certu^ est durius etia^ loquutos esse prophetas de vsuris, quia
nominatim inter Iudaeos ille inter dictae erant.
doubtless the Prophets did speak more hardly of usury, because it was
forbidden, especially among the Jews. Whereupon he concludes, that Nunc
igitur co^cludo iudicandu^ de vsuris esse non ex particulari aliquo scripturae
loco, sed tantum ex aequitatis regula.
we must not judge of usury by any particular place of Scripture, but only by
the rule of equity.

Where note by the way how thus much is granted. If the very text of Scripture
may be judge in this case, (as by his leave me thinks there is great reason
that it should) then is all usury utterly condemned. But if we flee from the
text unto our own rules of equity, and justice, man's wit in these days can
spin out fine subtle cobweb cases, wherein iniquity shall hardly be
discerned; and then forsooth some kind of usury may perhaps seem to be
somewhat equal. Yet for all that Master Calvin will not venture to defend any
case, except these rules following be very Exact enim attendere hic oportet.
Epist.
precisely kept.

1. The first, which he propounds by way of preface to his conditions, is,
that a man must make no custom or Non probatur si quis vsurariam quasi artem,
etc. Epist.
trade of it: once or twice and use it not. As S. Hierome says of play and
sport: Hoc potes facere, sed hoc non est opus tuum: We must not spend our life
in sport; so says Master Calvin, make a living of usury.

2. The second is, Ne exigatur ab egente: It must not be taken of the needy,
or such as be urged to borrow upon necessity.

3. The third, that thou be not so addicted to gain, but that thou be still
ready furnished, and willing to furnish thy poor neighbor in his need,
freely.

4. Fourthly, that the rule of Christ be ever thy touchstone, to deal no
otherwise then thou would be dealt with in the like case.

5. The fifth condition is, that the borrowers gain be so Tantu^dem aut plus.
much more, at the least, as thy interest comes unto.

6. The sixth is, that not only a respect be had to the borrower, Quid expediat
reip.
but to the good of the Commonweal also, that that receive no prejudice. If
he cut a few more such shreds, he will leave but small lawful usury behind.

7. The last is worst of al for English Usurers, to wit, that we never exceed
the stint set down in the Country or Commonweal where we live. For our
Satute now in force forbids even the least increase above the principal;
our law approves none, but condemns all; it suffers none, but 13.
Elizebeth preamble.
punishes all; yet with a difference, by the forfeiture of the interest, if it
be under ten in the hundred: if it be above, it is then punishable by the
forfeiture of principal and all. Calvin therefore (if we take in his
limitations and lay them together that we mistake him not) will relieve us very
little, even where he is most favorable.

And because In Epist. ad Ephesians. 48.
Zanchie, who is held another great patron of Usurers, does undertake to set
down the true meaning of Calvin, Bucer, and others that wrote before him in
favor of usury, let us hear what usury that is, which they meant.

It is lawful to covenant for lucre, but under a condition, either expressed
in the covenant, or kept in mind: that if it appear the borrower shall gain
little or nothing, thy usury shall be little or nothing: and further if he
lose of the principal, thou must bear part of the loss. Hoc enim postulat
aequitas and charitas. This is the usury which Zanchie defends, and this
(says he) was the meaning of Bucer and the rest. Yet this is nothing but a
mere partnership. If the lender take part of loss as well as of gain, it is
no usury.

If any exception be to be taken to this assertion, it is to those words: Sed
sub condition vel expressa vel tacita; atque in mente pij creditoris
confirmata: As if the bonds might run for the best security of the Creditor,
to prevent fraud in the debtor: provided that he neither exact the bonds, nor
intend to exact them: and where there is neither execution in the act, nor
intention in the heart, there seems to be no poison of sin, the serpent is
without a sting. So that upon the point Zanchie will gine a man leave to be an
Usurer in parchment, but not in heart: to covenant for his best security, yet
never intend to execute his covenant. But this, me thinks, is too too cunning,
plain dealing were the best. Verily God would have us both to be as we seem,
and to see me as we be. For, as for a bad man to be good in show, is
hypocrisy; so for a good man to be bad in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
appearance, is scandalous and offensive.

It is great reason, I confess, that the debtor should trust the charity of
the creditor, rather then the creditor should rely upon the fidelity of the
debtor: and bonds in some cases may be lawfully made, which cannot be so
lawfully exacted; as in forfeitures: exactions be commonly oppressions: but
this is only in case where custom does take away scandal, which in such a
strange device as this is cannot be.

Hemingius likewise after a flourish made, as if he meant to defend usury
against all arguments taken from Scripture and reason; in the end adds a
prouiso, which makes his usury no usury. Si cui pecuniam tuam ad vsuram
dedisti, spoliatur, adeo vt ipsa quoque sors pereat, aut alioqui nihil
lucretur: Christiani pectoris fuerit non solum sortem cum vsura remittere,
verum etiam de nouo mutuum dare quo damnum acceptum resarcire possit: If by
calamity the principal perish, it is the part of a Christian not only to
remit principal and all, but to lend him more, that he may recover himself:
which christian duty makes it no usury, seeing the lender bears the peril
of his principal against the act of God.

. 2.
All things therefore considered and laid together, these learned men seem in
their writings not so much to defend usury, as to disable some of the
arguments which are used against it; and therein I confess they may take some
advantage, which breeds a preiudicate opinion of the truth it self, even in
the best learned: for as the worst enemy is a false friend, so the greatest
adversary to a good cause, is a bad defender; for when learned men take a
point in hand to examine, they will have a special eye to the grounds
whereupon it is builded; and if they find the foundation or groundcels unsound,
they have great reason to suspect the building: the conclusion is not stronger
then the premises.

The force of the Philosophers argument taken from the barrennes of money, and
the unnatural brood of usury, being mingled with metaphors, if it be not
rightly apprehended, is obscure and doubtful. That also of spending money in
the first use, as if use and property were inseperable, so much stood upon by
school divines, is much subject to cavil: for there is sensible difference
between spending a loaf of bread, and disbursing a sum of money for gain:
for whereas a loase of bread once eaten has no second use at all, either to
him who eat it or any other; money laid out remains still, the same pieces to
be used again by other, and the same sum in the equivalent to him that laid
it out: and for the same individual pecces, which once delivered shall never
happily return again to the same person, there may be some difference in a
Philosophers brain, but not in a Merchants purse: it is all one in Commerce,
whether it be a James or an Elizabeth, whether it be the same shilling or as
good.

Chemnitius therefore in his treatise against usury, does advise us not to lay
so much weight upon these arguments as upon those reasons, which are derived
from Scripture: and albeit these also have some force in them being urged to
the right purpose (as hereafter we shall have occasion to examine;) yet I do
verily persuade my self, that the very conceit of the weakness of these
grounds, has moved many to think more favorably of usury it self then
there is just cause.

Another motive which caused these Divines somewhat to decline the beaten way
in this point; was, because in detestation of usury some lawful contracts
also have been condemned by some for usury, which do but coast upon it: so
that the very point of difference between us for the matter it self, does
only concern some cases of greater difficulty, whose equity or iniquity
can hardly be discerned. Cases of a mixed and midling nature between usury
and partnership, or some like lawful contract; in which cases, if upon
examination there be found no iniquity or inordinate thing, then I hope those
cases shall also be found to be without the compass of that received
definition before expressed.

If the question then do fall upon some particular cases which are doubtful,
whether they be usurious or not; I make little question but the maine point
will be easily agreed upon amongst the learned: That usury properly so called
is simply unlawful. I would to God the unlearned would be as easily
persuaded to make conscience of that wherein Divines of all churches in all
ages do accord; even so far as they do accord.

CHAP. VIII. Of the testimony of Philosophers and Historians.
THe testimony of Divinity is sufficient to prove usury a sin: yet if the
light of nature be able also to discover the same, it will aggrauate the matter
much more: there be moats which are not discerned but in the sunneshine, as
Romans 7. 7.
S. Paul says, He had not known that concupiscence had been a sin, except
the law had manifested the same: and suppose usury were but as a moate in the
eye, yet even that were troublesome, because the eye is tender, as the
conscience of every Christian ought to be: but if the inhabitants of the
regions of darkness, who never saw this sunneshine of revealed truth, shall
notwithstanding discern usury to be a thing inordinate and vicious; doubtless
then it is no moate. Beams may be discovered by the twilight of nature, and
so has usury ever been held even among the heathen for a gross enormitie.

De legib. 5
Plato in his laws, and his scholar Politic. 1. and 7.
Aristotle in his Politics have forbidden it as unlawful, and condemned it as
unnatural. De re rustico. Cicero Offic. 2.
Cato makes it twice as bad as theft, and does equal it with murder.

De Benef. 7.
Seneca finds a place for it in the calender, but not in nature. Histor. Not.
l. 33. 3
Pliny says, it makes idleness it self fruitful. (...).
Plutarch writes that the usurers do mock the Philosophers for that old
principle, ex nihilo nihil fit; because they can make something of nothing: yet
for all that he takes them not for Gods almighty, but terms them plain
devils; such as Plato describes in hell to be fiery executioners to torment
damned souls. So these cursed usurers (says Plutarch) being themselves turned
devils, have turned Ibidem.
the judgment hall into hell. Were he not a heathen man, I should be out of
patience with him for making so unchristian a comparison; and for laying such
imputation upon courts of Justice. But perusing it again, I find how he
makes the Usurer to cousin the law; for that he writes into his bill or
book more then he delivered. As for the purpose, lending 100. he puts in
110. so the law taking the usury to be part of the principal debt, is
deceived; and yet must do justice according to the evidence of the writings in
most strict manner. Besides (says the same author) they have sure bonds and
obligations, like the chains Ibidem.
and halters which Darius sent to Athens to bind the prisoners that should
then be taken. Now if this be laid together, the comparison holds (very
unhappily;) for unto a foolish man impouerished by usury, the judgment place
is a very hell; the law is a torment, the Usurers obligations be everlasting
chains, whereout the poor soul shall never come till he have paid the
uttermost farthing. The Philosopher therefore in all his book never directs
his speech to the Usurer, but leaves him as a desperate person and
incorrigible; aduising others to beware of him, as of some foul evil: to
dig unto the Potters earth, that is, use all means of his own, rather then
borrow of him: to avoid that quagmire (as he terms him;) for if a man once
begin to sink into his books, he will suck him up like a gulf; if he get
out one leg, the other sinkes: For a borrower (quoth he) is like a horse that
has once taken the bit, he may often change his rider, but one or other
Creditor is still upon his back. It is wonderful that learned men of all ages
should inueigh so bitterly against usury. It seems it is of a strange
devouring nature, as the Hinc vsura vorax auidumque in tempore foenus. Lucan. 1.
Poet terms it, and brings men to great extremities, when poor Aristophanes
de nubibus.
Strepsiades could devise no better shift then the hiring of a witch to pull
the Moon out of heaven, that the Usurers month might never come about. For,
(...).
Usury (says the old proverb) is swifter then Heraclitus, time seems to
run so fast.

. 2.
If usury then can find no footing, neither in Divinity nor nature;
whereupon shall it stand? Divines would excommunicate it out of the Church.
Philosophers would prove it a monster in nature. Yet for all that it has taken
deep root in Commonwealths, both Heathen and Christian. Dialog. 56
Mirarer in vrbibus politicis huic flagitio locum esse, nisi esset and
reliquis, etc. I would wonder (says Petrarch) there should be any place in
politic bodies for this grievous sin, but that there is place for the rest.
Whereas (says he) informer times Usurers were separated from the company of
men; none came near them, but such as necessity drove unto them; passengers
would avoid them as contagious persons: now they converse with Princes, and
attain to places of dignity. How pernicious Usurers be to a Commonweal, we
have heard from the pen of the best friend that Usurers have. For Master
Calvin says, Epist. de vsura.
He is by no means to be tolerated in a well governed Commonweal. Divines
profess little skill in State matters: but such as do profess, have written
that Cornel. Tacit. annal. lib. 5.
usury is an old venomous sore. And Bodin. de rep. lib. 5. cap. 11.
other of later times inueighing against it, as the Canker, or gangrene of the
Commonwealth, have condemned the Heluetians for tolerating five in the
hundred. Tutius est vsurarum non modo radices, sed and fibras omnes amputare.
It is like twichgrasse, if the least thread of a root be left, it grows and
spreads without measure. The ancient Cornel. Tacit. l. 6.
Romans were wise, who seeing the mischief of usury, would tolerate by their
twelve tables but one in the hundred; and whosoever exceeded that, should be
punished Cato de re rust. cap. 1.
four fold, as if he were a double thief: for theft by that law was punished
but two fold. After this it Bodin. l. 5 cap. 11.
was stinted at ten shillings in the hundred pounds. I hope this could not
bite much. Yet after by L. Genutius it was quite taken away: and breaking out
again, it was again suppressed by Tiberius Caesar, to his own great cost,
who relieved the borrowers with a bank of five hundred thousand pounds, of
purpose to root out Usurers. Again it sprouted up, and again was it straightly
forbidden upon the pain of the forfeiture of all goods, moveable and
immovable, to be confiscate. What should I say more out of the experience that
States have had of this mischief? Centur. 15 cap. 7.
Ludouicus banished Usurers in his time out of France. Yea and Cent. 7. cap. 7.
Mahomet himself has condemned it among the Turks. So careful have
governors ever been amongst Heathen and Barbarians to suppress this monster.
For what Country has usury been suffered in, which in time has not rued the
same? Aelian. lib. 4. cap. 1
The Indians and Germans both were counted most happy before usury was known
unto them. But what tumults it after raised in Germany, witness their own
Aretij Problem. de vsura.
writers. Sicilie was in great bondage by usury, till Cato set it at liberty.
Sparta in no less calamity, till Lycurgus redeemed it. Asia overwhelmed with
it, till Lucullus redressed it. All Egypt so plagued with it, that they were
glad to make a law, that none should borrow unless he laid his fathers corpse
to pawae. Athens infected with it, till Agis his bonefire (made of Usurers
books) had purged that City.

Those wise governors of estate when they had to deal with usury, methinkes
they had a wolf by the ear, which they could neither hold fast, nor let go
with safety: the more they labored to suppress or stint Usurers, the more
they brake out upon them again; set them once at liberty, they devoured the
Commonweal. If England were as well cleared of these, as it is of wolves, it
were so much the happier.

CHAP. IX. Of the three laws, Canon, Civil, Common.
THat which the sage governors of State out of their wisdom and experience
have distasted as hurtful to the societies of men, both Christian and
Heathenish; has been also forbidden and restrained by such laws as be not
only compulsiue to bind succeeding ages, but directive also to inform us of
the enormitie of this practice.

1. The Decret. part. 2. Causa 14. q. 3. c. 4.
Canon Law has defined usury to the same purpose, as is before expressed.
Ibid. q. 4. c. 2. Cause. 4. 6. 7.
It has forbidden it most precisely: Institut. iuris canon.
it has punished it most severely, with the note of infamy, with
excommunication both lesser and greater, with the deprivation of christian
burial, till actual restitution were made by the executors. L. 4. Tit. 7 de
vsur. Siluest. de vsura 9.
Their Wills and Testaments were nullities in law; with diverse other
penalties to terrify men from usury, as from some horrible vice.

2. For the Civil law it cannot be denied but it did sometime tolerate some
kind of usury; but never Bar. super l. cunctos populos summa trinitatis.
initio.
allowed of it. For Codic. Justinian.
Justinian in the preface wishes that men would follow the doctrine of S.
Peter; that is, of the Church, which what it was then for this point, is
manifest.

To tolerate it in some sort it was forced. Saepe enim permittitur quod non
potest corrigi aut coerceri iure civilly: It is often permitted which cannot be
corrected or restrained by the Civil law, (says Epist. de vsura.
Calvin, a Divine and Ciuilian both:) therefore we must make no arguments of
defense from the toleration of Civil law, for so we might defend the Stews
and much wickedness: Dominicus a Soto de iustit. and iure. l. 1. q. 6. art. 2.
Impune permittuntur meretricia vt adulterys obuietur, vsurae vt caueantur
furta. Whether the civil toleration of usury were lawful, is no part of our
present question; but that the lawfulnes of usury cannot be proved from any
toleration of law it is evident: because as S. Augustine says: Lex humana
multa concedit, ac impunita relinquit, quae per diuinam prouidentiam Lib. 2. de
Liber. arbitrie.
vindicantur: Many things must be passed over by man's law, punishable by Gods
hand. The law of the Lord is perfect in this, that it forbids all faults, but
man's law must be proportionable to man's frailty, and give way to many
corruptions; in some ages more, in some less. If Civil laws be over precise
without respect to the common inclinations of the people, they be as new wine
put into old vessels, the vessels burst, the wine is lost; such laws shall
never be kept.

Notwithstanding this, we may say (by the way) for that moderation which the
Civil law used in her toleration, that as the most ancient and innocent law
did tolerate the least, one in the hundred, half a one in the hundred, and
sometimes none at all: So that foenus nauticum, the most that ever was allowed,
to wit, twelve in the hundred, was no usury at all, because the leader did
bear the peril of the principal.

3. The Common law of this land intermedleth no further with usury then is
provided for, and so ordained by some special statute; but referred it wholly
to the censure of the Ecclefiasticall court, wherein a prohibition had no
place: Regist. consuliat. sol. 49.
Si praelati imponant poenitentiam pro peccato, and nihil aliud intentant, quod
cedat in laefionem Regiae dignitatis.

But if the Usurer died in this sin, so that the power of the Church could
extend no further, because he died out of the Church: yet then even the Common
law took vengeance upon him in his goods and posterity. Randulphus de
Glanduilla, Hen. 2. lib. 7. ca. 16.
Omnes res mobiles and omnia catalla quae fuerunt vsurarij mortui, ad vsus
domini regis capientur, penes quemcunque inuenianturres illae. Haeres quoque
ipsius hac eadem de causa exhaeredatur secundum ius regni, and ad dominum vel
dominos reuertetur haereditas: His goods were all forfeited to the King, and
his lands returned to the Lords of the sea. Which was not meant of any
immoderate usury above ten in the hundred. For the same author explaineth
himself: Si quis aliquid tale crediderit, si plus co recepit vsuram facit; and
si in tali crimine obierit, damnabitur tanquam vsurarius per legem terrae: If
any shall lend any such thing, and shall receive again more then that he
lent, he commits usury: and if he die in that crime, he shall be condemned
as an Usurer by the law of the land. As appears by the staire in Glanduill.
according to the Printer his direction 1604.
This agrees word for word with the ancient law of Scotland, set down in a
book called Regiam Maiestatem.

So detestable was an Usurer in the eye of Common law, before anything was
provided by statute. Which law, if it be so ancient, as we are taught by the
Sir Edw. Cook.
reverend Judges of the same; if so well grounded upon the principles of reason
and equity together, with the best customs of this Country; then the ancient
inhabitants of this land, led only by the light of the gloworme, shall condemn
us for this point, who reside in the sunneshine of the Gospel.

Edw 1.
After, of ancient, it was enacted by the statute of Iudaisme, forbidding all
usury, that if a Jew lent in that kind to a Christian, he should have no
remedy for his principal debt: yet the Christian might recover his pawn.

Ca. 6.
In the 3. of Henry 7. all cloaked usury was also forbidden, under the terms
of Ca. 5.
Damnable bargains grounded in usury, colored by the name of new cheuisans,
contrary to the law of natural justice, to the common hurt of this land, and
to the great dishonor of Almighty God. Which statute is more fully explained
by Ca. 8.
another made in anno 11. Hex. 7. that the said law did extend first to all
lending for a time, and taking for the loan any thing more, besides or above
the money lent, by way of contract or covenant made at the time of the same
loan: saving lawful penalties for the payment of the principal. 2. To the
selling of goods to any person in necessity, and buying the same again within
three months for a less sum then they were sold for. 3. To the lending of
money upon lands or bonds for the payment thereof, with covenant to receive the
revenues of the borrowers land, under pain of the forfeiture of the money,
goods or merchandise so lent, or sold.

After which, in 37. of Henry 8, all former statutes concerning usury being
repealed, the three points last before mentioned remained in force, in case the
usury did exceed ten in the hundred; thereby not allowing any usury under
ten, but leaving it only unpunished.

This law seeming over loose, was repealed in 5. and 6. of Ca. 20.
Edward 6. wherein it was enacted, that all usury, increase, lucre, gain,
interest for loan, for bearing, or giving days of any sum of money, had,
received, or hoped for, above the sum lent, given, set over, delivered, or
forborne, should be punished not only with the forfeiture of the principal and
all, but with imprisonment and ransom at the Kings will and pleasure.

This law on the other side seeming too strict for an humane law, was repealed
in 13. Elizabeth, and the former statute of Henry 8. revived, but with
additions of the restraint of usury. First, that all bonds, contracts and
assurances 1
for any intending or doing any thing against the tenor of the said statute
thus revived, should be utterly void. Secondly, that 2
all brokers, solicitors and driuers of such bargains or contracts, shall
incur the danger of a praemunire. Thirdly, that 3
the same statute revived, shall be most largely and severely urged for the
suppressing of usury against the persons offending. Fourthly, that the
Ecclesiastical censure shall also proceed against such offenders above ten
in the hundred. Fifthly, Because 4 5
all usury is forbidden by Gods law as a detestable sin, that every Usurer,
though he do not exceed ten in the hundred, shall forfeit so much as shall
be reserved by way of usury above the principal, for any money so to be lent
or forborne.

This last is the statute which England now stands subject unto, and which
we are bound to obey by the rule of the supposed patron of usury: Ne
excedatur modus constitutus Calvin. Epist. de vsura.
in quauis regione. But the law of our Country does not tolerate any at al,
and therefore by his rule it is not lawful for us to take any usury at all.

Thus much for that inartificiall argument which is taken from the testimony
of authority. An argument, I confess, very inartificiall, as I have made it:
yet is the authority so sufficient as I would desire. Authority of all sorts
divine and humane; Ecclesiastical and profane; natural and moral; of all
ages, old, new, midling; of all Churches, primitive, superstitious, reformed;
of all Commonweals, Jewish, Christian, Heathenish; of all laws, foreign,
and domestical.

It remains now that we take a view and examination of this point with our
own eyes. And though I be very hartlesse and timorous of my self; yet being
thus well backed, me thinks I am much emboldened to encounter with him, who is
most forward to confront these authorities.

First therefore I will put in order such reasons as I have learned for the
discovery of this sin, by which it shall the better appear what substance
and validity there is in these colors and apparitions which are brought in
defense of it: So that in conclusion men may the more easily resolve their
own consciences for this point, and accordingly amend their lives as God shall
move their hearts.

CHAP. X. The first argument from the nature of the question.
IF there be any (as God knows there are too many) who cannot resolve their
consciences against usury, as against a thing unlawful: yet I hope there is
none of so vnyeelding a forehead, but will give thus much to the authority
aforesaid; as to think the lawfulnes of usury very questionable and doubtful
at the least. If any shall be so singularly conceited of himself, as to make
no question after all these, but that usury is lawful; I will leave him in the
number of those wise men (whereof Prou. 26. 16.
Solomon speaks) who are wiser then seven men that can give a reason. Then
men? yea then Churches and Commonweals.

And to the rest who do make doubt and question of it, I say it is unlawful,
because it is doubtful: for the heathen man's principle, Cicer. effic.
Quod dubitas ne feceris, is likewise delivered for a rule by the Rom 14. 23.
Apostle, that Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. There be three opinions
then concerning usury: some are resolved that it is unlawful; and to them the
practice of it is a sin, a known sin, a sin against their own consciences
directly. Secondly, some are not resolved at all, but hang in suspense, and to
them it is a sin, if it were in no other respect, yet only because they
doubt of it: for that which Romans 14. 23.
S. Paul speaks of eating, is likewise appliable to all other actions: He
that doubts is condemned if he eat, because he eats not of faith. So he
that doubts of any moral action whatsoever, if he do it, is condemned,
because he does it not of faith: for what soever is not of faith is sin. If
thou doubt therefore, keep In Romans 14.
S. Augustine his rule: Tene certum, dimitte incertum: thou art most sure it is
no sin to abstain from usury: then keep that resolution firm, and thou
shall be safe: though perhaps thou think, if thou abstain thou shall have the
lighter purse, yet withal thou shall have the lighter heart, when the sorrows
of death shall make thee heavy. Though in mysteries of Divinity, the
narrowest sense is the safest: yet in matters of morality the largest sense is
the best for security; in that it keeps us farthest off from consenting unto
sin.

3. If there be a third sort who be clearly resolved that usury may be
practiced with a safe conscience, such are condemned of other sins besides
usury; but especially of pride and singularity. Of such a one therefore I
demand: First, do thou see with thine own eyes, or with other men's? If thou
be not able thy self to examine and resolve, then may thou resolve for this
point as the Church of Christ has taught thee. Neither do I herein coast upon
any controversy of believing as the Church believes: for this that we have in
hand is no principle of faith; no mystery of salvation to be apprehended in
the simplicity of belief; but a point of morality belonging to the second
table, and so determinable in reason by the rules of equity and charity, if
the Scripture herein had been silent. If thou be therefore unlearned, or not so
learned as to define such a matter by the rules of reason; then reason and
religion both will teach thee to submit thy judgment to that Church and
Commonwealth, whereof by Gods providence thou art made a member. But these
resolute spirits will be easily entreated to take the matter into their own
hands without dependence upon others. I demand then in the next place, have
thou studied the point, examined the branches of it exactly? art thou resolved
that though the letter of the text be against thee, yet the sense is with thee?
have thou taken a view of all arguments and reasons brought against Usury? art
thou so Eagle-sighted as to look through such a cloud of witnesses; and art
thou able to dispell them, and to settle thine own assertion upon infallible
grounds? art thou sure of all this, or do thou but think so? If thou but
think so; then think thou may be deceived. If thou be sure that thou have
waighed all those things in the balance of judgment; then next weigh thy self
and thy judgment: lay that upon one scoale by it self, and if thou have any
consorts and fellows in this thy resolution (as for mine own part I know
none) if thou have any, hang them all upon the same scoale with thee. Put over
against thee in the other scoale all the authorities of men, fathers and
brethren; who have not touched only, but taken in hand and sifted this point.
Add unto these the decrees of Councels, the edicts of Princes, the laws and
statutes of Commonweals: lay on, if you list, the censure of Philosophers in
their morals and politickes, the observations of Historiographers, the says of
wise and sage Senators; and the woeful experiments of many kingdoms and
nations in former ages. All which if they should be collected and expressed to
the full, I suppose a volume would not contain that which might justly be
written against Usury. Now if thou shall think thy judgment to be of such
weight, that all these together be not able to cast the scoale against thee,
yet I hope they will so much move thee, as to bring the balance to a suspense,
that thou will think Usury very questionable at the least; and if it be
questionable, then is it unlawful to be done. But if all these will not so
move thy understanding as to make it questionable; then I will say no more, and
I can say no less, but such a one thinks that he knows somewhat. And then
1. Cor. 8. 2.
Saint Paul makes up the rest, that such a one knows nothing yet as he
ought to know it.

To him therefore who knows Usury to be a sin, it is a sin, because he
knows it. To him that doubts, it is likewise a sin, because he doubts.
And to the rest it is a sin of ignorance, but of affected ignorance: whose eyes
are blinded, either with pride, because they would be singular; or with lucre
and gain, because they would not disturb their consciences by examining or
discovering that sin, wherein they have so sweetly slept, and do still repose
themselves. But such ignorance does neither excuse nor extenuate the fault, but
rather aggrauate the same, because it is wilful.

CHAP. XI. The second argument from scandal.
Howsoever there be some who make a question whether Usury be lawful or not:
and some there may be, who make little question but that it is in some sort
lawful: yet there is none but must confess that it is and ever has been of
ill report, and therefore unlawful; unlawful for any Christian to practice.
It was Saint Cap. 4. 7.
Paul his last farewell in his Epistle to the Philippians; after he had blessed
them, with the peace of God which passes all understanding shall keep your
hearts and minds in Christ Jesus: he adds, Moreover brethren, whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, what soever things pertain to charity, whatsoever
things are of good report; if there be any virtue, if there be any praise,
think on these things.

I must prove, before I have done, that Usury is neither honest. nor just, nor
pure, nor charitable, nor any of these: but if suffices for this present
argument that it is not of good report; and therefore to be avoided of
Christians. For the Gospel of Christ does not only forbid things simply
unlawful, but all color of evil: and as the Apostle conclu death his
patheticall exhortations to the Philippians, with things of good report, so
does he shut up that bundle of divine 1. These. 5. 22.
precepts to the Thessalonians, with abstain from all appearance of evil, and
then comes the blessing: Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout.

I hope I shall not need to spend time in showing what appearance of evil
there is in that, wherein there is so little show of good. What is of ill
report, but that which the best speak ill of? and what one transgression is
there committed either in Church or Commonweal, which the best writers,
Christian and profane, have inueighed more bitterly against then this of
usury? Admit then it were not simply evil, yet it has great appearance of
evil: it is of ill report, by that means very scandalous, and therefore
unlawful. That is a true scandal indeed, not taken only, but given also,
which is a provocation unto sin: as David's murder and adultery was not only
a sin against God (and in that respect upon his true repentance pardoned in
Nathans absolution) but also a scandal, because he provoked the enemies of
God to blaspheme. So that beside the sins of David as they were
transgressions of the 6. and 7. Commandments, that scandal also annexed unto
them being nothing else, but aprouocation of the enemy to blaspheme, was a
sin of it self and punished by God. 2. Sam. 12. 13.
The Lord also has put away thy sin, howbeit because by this deed thou have
caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child that is borne unto thee
shall surely die. That is the great scandal indeed which the holy Ghost does
so often inculcate, that we might take heed of it, Romans 2 24. Cap. 14. 16 1.
Tim. 6. 4. Tit. 2. 5. 2. Pet. 2. 2.
That the name of God and Gospel of Christ be not evil spoken of among
Gentiles. Does not Usury cause the enemies of God to blaspheme, and the
Gospel of Christ to be evil spoken of; when as profane persons and such as
live like Gentiles amongst us shall observe, that Christians who can call
Christ, Lord; that zealous Christians, who can say unto him, Lord, Lord, do
live in and by that sin which was wont to make both life and death so odious?
Are not our adversaries of the Church of Rome as ready to object usury to us,
as we have been to vpbraid them with single fornication? when they see it not
only practiced but patronized amongst us? And yet they may hold their peace
for that; seeing their own Colleges and Churches long since in the Molinaeus
contr. Vsurar. q. 74. numer. 584.
borders of the Borbons, and other places of France, have taken five in the
hundred: which was by them commonly held lawful, not by common right, but in
special savor to religion. For their Clergy is so holy, that the practice of
that is in Churchmen hallowed and sanctified, which in the people is most
detestable. Let them go: but let us not cause them to blaspheme by such
scandalous practices.

Plutarch sympos. lib. 4. q. 5.
The Heathen Philosopher observing the intemperance of the Jews in their
feastings, made a table question, Who was the God of the Jews? they resolved
upon Bacchus. If his pen should have light upon Christian usurers in these
days, to enquire of our God, I am afraid they would resolve upon Plutus at the
least, who was wont to come limping home: but Usury has cured him very
strangely of that infirmity, he comes now as swiftly as time it self.

What is scandalous then if this be not? provoking all sorts of people,
superstitious and profane, to speak evil of Christians, of reformed
Christians, who profess the sincerity of the Gospel of Christ.

The Prophet Jeremy lamenting his woeful case that he was cursed of the
people without a cause, brings this for his apology, that he never lent nor
borrowed upon Usury, as our books have it. Ier. 15. 10.
I have neither lent on usury, nor men have lent to me on Usury; and yet the
people curse me. Insinuating, that if he had been any ways touched either in
lending or borrowing, as accessarie to this sin; he would not have complained
though the people had cursed him. Cursed is that offense which brings the
curse of the people upon a man. Neither Jeremy nor any of the Saints of God we
can read of, that ever was tainted with Usury. Admit then that the wit of man
could pick a case so clean in Usury, as to make it lawful. What then? it is
scandalous, it is of ill report: he therefore who shall offend his brethren the
people of God, who shall cause the enemy to blaspheme, and give profane dogs
occasion to bark at Christians, by any such unchristian practice, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into
the bottom of the sea.

CHAP. XII. The third argument from our statute law.
LEt us look home into our own Country, and here we shall find a law
expressly forbidding all kind of Usury be it never so little, and withal
punishing the same, if a man be lawfully convicted. I demand then in the next
place, if we be not bound in conscienceto obey this law? I say not in court of
Justice only before man, but in conscience before God.

The Romans 13. 5.
Apostle makes a direct answer for me: Wherefore we must be subject, not
because of wrath only, but for conscience sake. A conscience so bound, as
nothing can set it at liberty in this case except only the law it self be
unlawful; and then Act. 5. 29.
we must obey God rather then men. Therefore when this kind of argument is urged
for obedience, men have used to quarrel with the law; as if that were not
agreeable to Gods law: But here is no place for any such cavil; for it is the
same law which God himself made for his own people, witness even those who
have most defended usury. Mclinaeus.


I have heard many, and some of no mean understanding, who do earnestly
endeavor to let loose their consciences, and teach us so to do, by making a
disjunctive interpretation of a penal statute. As if the meaning of the law
were but this; Either abstain, or pay thus much, if thou be convicted. Making
the penalty a branch of the law: as if either of the branches being observed,
the law were fully kept, and no offense made either to God or man. Which
because it is a point much stood upon, and as yet (for ought that I know)
unhandled, give me leave, by your patience, a little to look into it. In the
examining whereof I shall not much step out of my way. For albeit the
interpretation of a statute does belong unto another profession; yet this
particular point coasteth upon Divinity, and pitcheth directly upon the common
grounds of reason.

In every penal statute there be two things to be considered; the law and the
penalty. Which two, howsoever they be combined in the statute, yet there must
be a distinct consideration of each.

1. First, every good and just law in his own nature, as it is a law, has a
binding power; by which it is not directive only, as by way of advertisement,
but compulsiue, as proceeding from authority.

2. Secondly, this binding power of the law does not only proceed from the
nature of the thing therein commanded or forbidden, but from the powerful will
of the Commander or lawgiuer. For if a common person shall admonish me, as a
brother, of some thing which is hurtful or prejudicial, I am bound to follow
his advice, from the nature of the thing it self, because it is hurtful; else
I should offend. But if the authority of parents, Magistrates, or law, shall
moreover forbid the same, I have a second bond thereby laid upon me; which if I
shall break, then unto my former offense I shall add the sin of
disobedience. Which as it is a distinct sin from the former, so be these two
distinct obligations; the one derived from the nature of the thing prohibited;
the other from the law or persons in authority.

3. Admit then in the third place that the thing prohibited by the premised
authority, have no binding power in it own nature, without a law published
against it; but be a thing arbitrarie, and in my power to do or leave undone;
then am I freed indeed from the former bond in respect of the thing it self:
notwithstanding I stand obliged to the authority of the law for the faithful
observing of the same; except only in case the thing thereby forbidden be of
such a nature, as does dissolve this bond, by some opposition to a superior
law. For those matters therefore which be not determined by any law of God,
there is given to the wise sages and governors of Commonweals, a judicial
power, not only to discern what is for the common good, but also to enact,
impose, and establish laws and statutes, unto which we are bound both to
subscribe in judgment, and in practice to obey. Albeit such a law cannot by
evident consequence be necessarily derived from any law of God or reason, yet
if it do not cross or oppose the same, it is sufficient. As laws which are
apparently frivolous, containing matter of little moment, need not much to
trouble our consciences, because there appears some opposition between them
and the law of reason, which teaches us that a law is a matter of majesty,
and serious command; and therefore the subject of it ought to be answerably a
matter of weight and moment, as the matter of usury is. Be it therefore
proposed that those wholesome laws and statutes which carry no show of
opposition to a superior law, though they command or forbid such things as
before were held indifferent, yet even as they are laws do they bind the
conscience by virtue of Gods law.

4. Which laws thus enacted, by humane authority, be in force, not only
before the Judge to the undergoing of temporal punishment; but also to bind
the conscience before God: not by any power in themselves, for they be but
humane; but, as secondarie causes do work in the virtue of the first cause,
so do these laws work upon the conscience, by virtue of his law who alone
has the sovereign authority over the inward man. He has commanded us to
obey, not because of wrath only; not for penalties, displeasure, or outward
respect only, but for conscience sake. Romans 13. 5.
Thus much, I hope, we shall be able to prove. Whereupon it must of necessity
follow, that admit every act of usury were not simply in it self unlawful;
yet if it be simply forbidden by a law published, as a thing perilous among
Christians, or prejudicial to the common good; then are we bound in
conscience to avoid every usurious act as malum prohibitum, forbidden by a good
and wholesome law. Which law if we shall transgress, we do sin against God.

Let this therefore in the first place be propounded, that such humane laws as
be not opposite unto the law of God or nature, have a binding power: howbeit
not always from the nature of the thing it self thereby commanded, or
forbidden; but even as they be laws proceeding from that authority which is
the ordinance of God.

Which that it may the better appear, it is obseruable, that almighty God did
first assume unto himself that liberty and power of binding men's consciences
merely by his commanding authority, as he was a lawgiver. Next that he did
impart the same (though not in the same degree) to his vicegerents upon earth.

It was his divine pleasure to manifest this power even in the Genesis 2. 17.
first law that ever was given: for what hurt could there have been in eating
of the forbidden fruit, if it had not bin forbidden? why might not that tree
have been touched and tasted as well as the rest, if there had not been an
edict against it? Genesis 22. 2.
Abraham likewise after the fall was commanded to offer his son Isaac: which
commandment, if it had not bin given, Abraham could never have found any
motive for such a sacrifice: but much might he have found against it, in that
law of nature which was written in his heart.

This degree of power God as the supreme lawgiuer has reserved wholly unto
himself, so as it shall not be lawful for any created power whatsoever, to
enact a law against the law of nature; or to dispense with a divine statute.
Yet notwithstanding in case it carry no opposition to a superior law, God
has given a binding power even to the commandment of man, though not against,
yet without any obligatorie virtue in the thing commanded: he adiudging in his
divine wisdom that this was the best for the establishing of authority
amongst men, for the keeping of men in obedience, and every way for the
public good. For if men should not obey the laws and commands of their
superiors, before such time as they saw something in the thing commanded,
which should exact the same at their hands, verily the Mat. 8. 9.
Centurion did not well in approving his soldiers for coming, going, and
doing this, at a word: yea masters had better a great deal go about their
business themselves, then send many servants: and if this were our case, all
government and, humane affairs would be soon at a stand.

Wherefore God does not only allow those laws which do enact that which is
alr^^^^e enacted by his law; or which may be thence deri^^^ by necessary
consequence, as a conclusion out of the premises: but all those determinations
and particular constitutions which do not cross the law of God or nature, are
in his estimate accounted just, and to be obeyed. For as Christ in the Gospel
said of those who did cast out devils in his name, Luke 9. 50
He that is not against us is with us; so may God rightly be conceived to
esteem of all humane laws, made for the reformation of manners; those which
are not against him are with him: and therefore by his law confirmed and made
of force to bind the conscience.

This appears by the example of the Iere. 35.
Reahabites, in their obedience to their father Ionadab, the son of Rechab;
whom they obeyed, not because the things forbidden were in themselves (...)
(for houses, vineyards, and fields are the good blessings of God:) neither was
it for fear of displeasure, for 2. King. 10. 15.
Ionadab was dead three hundred years before; but only they thought themselves
bound in conscience to obey their fathers commandment. Which opinion of theirs
was justified and approved of God to be true and sound, in that he did not only
commend, but reward their obedience. Ier. 35. 18
Thus says the Lord of hosts the God of Israel, because ye have obeyed the
commandment of Ionadab your father, and kept all his precepts, and done
according to all that he has commanded you, Ionadab the son of Rechab shall
not want a man to stand before me for ever.

If a father then have such command over his sons, for so many generations as
were between the days of Iehu and the reign of Iehoiakim: how much more
shall the laws and statutes inacted by the governors of Commonweals, and
the body representative assembled for the public good, bind every subject to
the obedience of the same?

But we shall not need to go far for an instance of this point. Our law at
home is a pregnant proof, that a law does bind even as it is a law, though
the thing thereby imposed be of it self most free and indifferent. I speak of
that Common or municipall law of our Country, whose maxims are not merely
grounded upon the axioms and principles of reason and common equity, but upon
the peculiar customs of this Country. I demand then whence this law has a
binding power? Is it from the nature of the thing imposed? does it command or
forbid nothing but that which out of the principles of nature and reason may by
demonstration be proved to be good or bad in it self? Verily then were it of
as great power beyond Dover, as it is on this side: for the law of nature and
reason is every where alike.

But it is the custom of place and people which adds power: for even a
custom does bind taking upon it the nature of a law. Ligat consuetudo quatenus
interpretatiue lex est. Be it custom then, or be it a perfect law, it must
have a greater power of binding, even as it is a custom or a law, the^ can
always be raised out of the nature of the thing accustomed or imposed: For
circumstances may so alter the matter, as that which is imposed may be
sometimes not so convenient, as in common intendment a good law does presume.
Yet has it been ever though more convenient, that some particular
inconvenience should be borne, then an ancient custom or law should be
broken. And if the binding power of a law should work no further then the
thing it self, of it self, does move the conscience without a law; then were
it no power at all; but every man's private conscience should have power to
abrogate and disanull, as fast as authority does inact. A private power then
must not abrogate that which is public: Nihilagit vltra suam speciem: but
every private man does stand bound to a humane law, until the same authority
which bound him do absolve him. All things therefore considered, it is a
dangerous conceit to imagine, that the power of humane laws does extend no
further then the quality of the thing it self does carry the conscience: and
so dangerous, as if it should take palce, it would violate that authority which
is the ordinance of God; and shake the very pillars of the earth.

2.
2 Then for the penalty (which makes it a penal law) I demand what power
that has to alter the premises? Is the undergoing of such a penalty an
expiation of the sin committed in transgressing the law? God forbid. The
least sin deserves a greater punishment then man can inflict. Or has it a
power to dissolve that bond which by virtue of Gods law lies upon my
conscience? Or is it so incorporate into the law, that it leaves a free choice
unto men, indifferently either to observe such an act, or to undergo such a
penalty?

Verily this is auerred; but the contrary seems unto me very pregnant, upon
these reasons following.

1 First (to make some way to that which follows) it is much to the prejudice
and weakening of good laws; to give such interpretations, as do dispense with
the conscience, and set that at liberty. For if men be taught to make no
conscience of this kind of obedience (as God knows they make but little) such
laws shall lie as contemptible in the estimate both of good and bad; as well
of the obedient as of lawless and unruly people; every man keeping or breaking
the same, as shall seem best for his own private advantage. But I would
rather think and teach, that as God Almighty is not an idle beholder of men's
affairs, but has a powerful working in every action; either to effect it or
dispose it unto good: so sitting, as David speaks, in the parliament or
assembly of gods, he gives an influence into every good law enacted, and by
his own law binds the conscience to the obedience of the fame.

2 The end of a law is to withold men from unlawful acts, such as be thought
unfit to be done or suffered in a well established government. For if men
would of themselves refrain, there should be no use of laws, as the 1. Tim.
1. 9.
Apostle says; The law is not given to the just man, but to the laxlesse and
disobedient. They be snaffles and bridles to curb those Psalm. 32. 9.
horses and mules which will not otherwise be ruled. And consequently the end of
a penal law is by such a penalty to withhold the disobedient, that such people
might seele the smart of punishment who have no sense of conscience. First
therefore, if men would be good of themselves, there should need no laws.
Next, if men would make a conscience to obey that law which is made, there
should need no penalty to be annexed. As the law therefore is ordained for
good manners; so the penalty is a thing subordinate to the law. Now it is
premised, that every good law without the penalty by virtue of Gods law does
bind the conscience: shall the penalty then be added to disanull that bond?
shall law and penalty be so incorporate and tempered together, that the one
shall disable the other? this is no good mortar. We did rather think that
penalties were annexed to corroborate and strengthen the law, that by punishing
transgressors according to the proportion and degree of the offense, men might
be the more afraid to offend.

3 But (to speak in their language who do urge this interpretation) if a
penal law be disiunctiuely to be understood: that is, either to be obeyed, or
else to undergo such a forfeiture; I demand whether of these two is
principally intended by the law? Does the statute first intend the penalty, or
does it lie indifferent unto both alike? If either of these, then is it an
unjust law. For a good lawgiuer had rather have his law kept then broken: the
reason is, because the observation or keeping of it is simply good: but the
punishment of a transgressor has in it the nature of evil, termed malum
poenae; therefore a good intention is first moved unto that which is good; that
the law may beekept. And in the second place, a punishment is intended, as it
is a remedy against a greater evil then it self. I stand bound then even in
conscience unto a good law, according to the simple intent of it: that is to
say, not because of the penalty only, or, to speak in the phrase of the holy
Ghost: not because of wrath only, (which is all one:) but chiefly that I may
Romans 13.
perform that good thing which the law does chiefly intend: which if I shall
trangresse, the penalty is indeed a satisfaction to that law, but no expiation
of my sin of disobedience.

4 Last of all, that we may clear this statute of all such imputation, (a
statute which hitherto has had no blemish cast 13. Elizab.
upon it, being without the compass and reach of their ordinary exceptions,
the opposition to Gods law, the abridgement of Christian liberty, scandal,
and such like stones which they use to fling at laws:) If the Statute had any
such purpose to make a disjunctive law, how shall that appear? For if it be
not expressed, then is it by common intendment to be understood according to
the premised rules: and to put it out of quarrel, that the contrary is
intended, shall appear by three points within the statute.

1 First, there is a special clause in this statute of Usury that it shall
be most largely and strongly construed for the repressing of Usury against
all persons who shall offend. But this construction does contrariwise give a
liberty to commit Usury: so a man will venture the forfeiture in case he be
convicted: Like the Pharisees Corban, who if the offerings be brought, will
dispense with obedience and honor due Mark. 7. Hos. 7. 11.
to parents. This is * to eat the sins of the people, which is not
justifiable in any law.

2 The nature and extent of the penalty does import no less. For it does not
only punish excessive Usury above ten in the hundred; but all under ten, under
nine, under eight, be it never so little; it is punishable by the statute; and
therefore simply forbidden by the intent of the same. For the Usury or
overplus which is taken above the principal is not restored to the borrower;
for then were it no punishment: because every party were in statu quo prius,
as he was before the covenant: But it is all forfeited by the law to the king,
and the informer, in the name of a punishment, shall be punished in form
following: which if it be a iuft punishment must presuppose a breach of justice
in the parties punished.

3 The third is, the motive which moved the Parliament to make this act. For as
much as all Usury being forbidden by the law of God is sin, and detestable; be
it enacted, etc. It was therefore enacted against usury, because it is a sin
and detestable, forbidden by the law of God: Is there any doubt then but it was
the meaning of the statute simply to forbid it? It is true indeed, that the
preamble is no essential part of the act: yet is it as a key to open the
intention and true meaning of the law, nothing better.

But the restless wit of man, if it be once set upon contradiction, will
never give over. I have heard it objected, that whereas it is said in the
statute, For as much as all Usury being forbidden by the law of God is sin
and detestable, those words (being forbidden by the law of God) are inserted,
not as a reason of the assertion; but as a part of the subject of the
proposition: all usury being forbidden: that is to say; all Usury which is
forbidden by the law of God is sin, and detestable. As if some Usury were not
forbidden. Wit whither will thou? The sequel runs thus: For as much as all
Usury being forbidden by the law of God is sin and detestable; he it
enacted, that all Usury, loan, etc. shall be punished in form following.
Does not the consequence plainly show that the law meant honestly in the
antecedent? that for as much as all Usury is forbidden by the law of God; be
it therefore enacted that all Usury shall be punished?

Whether it be a clear case or questionable, that all Usury is forbidden by
Gods law, is not material for this argument; lay that by for another place.
This notwithstanding is clear, that the judgment of the lawmakers in that
Parliament was, that Usury is simply evil in it self; and therefore the
meaning of that law is simply to forbid it. For as they conceived it to be
forbidden by Gods law; so did they also by their judicial power and authority
adiudge and determine it to be not only scandalous, but perilous and
preiudicious to a Christian commonwealth: and thereupon enacted a law, and
prescribed a punishment against all Usury whatsoever. What hinders then why
we should not submit our selves to this act, even for conscience sake? Admit
the lawmakers did err in thinking every usurious act to be forbidden by the
law of God: shall every supposed error disanull such a solemn act? God forbid.
A man for the purpose is moved to choose such a wife, supposing her to be of so
great wealth, and of so good qualities: he is somewhat deceived in both his
motives. What then? Shall his error make his marriage void? nothing less: so
long as the error is not essential to the act it self, the act shall thereby
receive no prejudice or hurt at all.

It appears then, that these conclusions following do necessarily arise out
of the premises.

1. First, in this statute of Usury there is nothing inacted contrary to the
law of God; and therefore in Gods account it is a just law. 2. If it be a just
law, then do we stand bound in conscience to obey it according to the simple
meaning of the same. In conscience, I say, not by any inherent virtue in the
statute; but by virtue of his command who bids us obey, for conscience sake. 3.
It is the simple meaning of this statute, simply and absolutely to forbid all
Usury whatsoever; and therefore albeit in Germany and Geneua their
consciences may be free from this obligation of a positive law, because their
laws against Usury be not so precise: yet in England we are clearly
condemned for any increase or overplus whatsoever: condemned in the court of
conscience, by virtue of the law of God, for transgressing of this statute:
condemned even by the rule of master Calvin himself: Ne excedatur modus
constitutus in Epist. de Vsura.
quauis regione vel republ. Some branch of this argument is questionable: yet
is the inference clear; this being a statute for the public good.

CHAP. XIII. The fourth argument, that it is unnatural.
THat the Heathen writers, who never heard text of Scripture against usury, at
whose light notwithstanding for nature and art, we do all light our candles,
should with consent condemn it, it makes me think that there is somewhat in
nature against it; especially seeing how that sun of nature Aristotle, whom
his mother loved so dearly, that she kept few things from him, has concluded
it to be, an unnatural increase. Few things have dropped from his pen, but
with good congruity of reason: let us therefore briefly examine what we find.

1 First, it is evident that the primitive life was most natural, and
therefore the most innocent, when men lived upon that increase which God gave
by the yield of the earth and living creatures. For the first trade that ever
nature taught, was to till the ground; by which man might be fed: wherein Adam
his eldest son was trained. The Genesis 4. 2.
next was the keeping of sheep, which Abel learned, to clothe their
nakedness. And as from these two all other trades and professions, for worldly
commodity, were derived; so must they be content as from the original to take
some direction. The first in each kind is a rule. The innocence and
integrity whereof God approved in that he would be worshipped himself in the
first fruits, and have his priests maintained by the tithes and oblations of
such increase. Stipendarie maintenance was first the invention of that Idolater
Judge. 17. 10.
Micha: yet such is much better then none at all; Meat and drink, a suite of
apparel, ten shickles of silver by the year, for a Leuite it is well. But
how well the Leuits master came by those shickles, is more then ye Leuite well
knows. That which came by the sickle and sith was the best and fittest for
God; because most agreeable to nature, which the ancient Cato dear rustica.
Cicero in cato.
Doctors of nature have observed.

But after that the world was replenished with people of all sorts and
quality, necessity brought in the change and transportation of such
commodities as the condition of men did require. Non omnis fert omnia tellus.


And for the more easy and commodious transportation, buying and selling with
money, and merchandising in all kinds was practiced of all people: yea of Judah
and Israel, Ezekiel. 27. 17.
and never forbidden. Which gain, though it be greater and more royal, yet it
cannot be denied, but, as it is more remote from primitive increase, so is it
more to be suspected of iniquity. Solomon made a proverb of it: It is naught,
it is naught, says the buyer: but when he is gone apart Prou. 20. 14.
he boasts. So, it is good, it is good, says the seller; and when he has
his money he laugheth.

A Merchant is good, but it is not good to be a very Merchant. Prouerbiall
speeches be often true. So it is true, that there is as much craft under the
russet coat, as the Citizens gown. God amend us all. But the craft lies not
in husbandry, but as husbandmen play the Merchants in buying, selling, and
making of bargains. When Christ drove the buyers and sellers out of the Temple,
and charged them for making Mat. 21. 14.
his fathers house a den of thieves; he does not accuse buying and selling of
theft: but taxes the common abuse and corruption that was amongst them. For,
as he that touches pitch shall be defiled: so such as live upon negotiation,
shall have much ado to keep their hands clean. There be Ecclesiast. 13. 1.
two things (says the Wise man) which me think to be hard and perilous: A
Merchant cannot lightly keep him from wrong, and a Victualler is not without
sin.

3 If these professions be so suspiciously thought and written of, which be so
necessary and commodious for all estates; which by skill and industry enrich
kingdoms and Commonweals, with such variety of Gods blessings; which
minister to the necessities of all sorts and degrees, by transferring and
distributing such commodities as nature her self has brought forth for the
use of men: what shall we deem of such as meddle not with natures increase,
save only in consuming and devouring it; but live and enrich themselves by a
thing merely artificial; the instrument of transportation, money? which is
indeed the price of all, and so in estimate answers all, and commands al
amongst men: yet a thing of it self merely artificial. The metal of gold
and silver, I confess, is the increase of nature: but money carrying the
stamp of authority, to be the price of things, is merely artificial. Upon
this artificial thing, yet not upon this, but the use of this; as it is used,
not by themselves, but altogether by others, do these whom we call Usurers
live, maintain themselves and increase their wealth. And now me thinks I am
come to a profession so remote from the first original, that she has shaken
hands with nature, and is become a mere stranger unto her. Let us see if there
be any resemblance between them.

When they write that money is barren and unfruitful; it is to be understood
chiefly in two respects.

1. First, whereas seed cast into the ground, does by man's industry bring
forth more into the world then there was before, some thirty, some sixty,
and some an hundred fold: Mat. 13. 8.
whereas cattle do increase and multiply, that the world is the fatter for
them: whereas the labor and travel of men does enrich and replenish the
earth, money is only an instrument to shuffle wealth out of one man's hand into
an other, and to transport from place to place: but the sum of one hundred
pounds, turn it and return it as often as you can, is still the same sum
without increase, the pieces where ever they be, remain still the same without
alteration, there is not one whit more in rerum natura. Nothing is brought into
the world more then when the money was first disbursed.

2. Secondly, whereas there is nothing in nature, or art, that is worth any
thing, but has some use in it self, if it be well used: nothing whatsoever it
be, natural or artificial, but it serves either to feed, or to cloth, or to
shelter, or to heal, or to refresh, or to adorn, or to work withal, or to
play withal: yet for money, as it is current money, there is no manner of use
to be made of it, but only in parting from it; no more then of a counter; no
more then of dirt in the street, nor so much, for that will dung the ground.
Add unto this, that there is nothing in the world which does yield increase,
or has use in it self, but it is the weaker for giving increase, and the
worse for the using; even milstones will wear. So that in things which pass
between man and man for hire, the equity is apparent, both for the possessor
to pay hire, because he may have use of it while he does enjoy it; and for the
owner also to take hire, because it wears in the using and is worse for the
wearing: only money neither brings increase to the world in general, neither
is it of any use to the possessor, but only in dispossessing himself of it.
Yet this money, for this use, shall be to the Usurer fruitful, and profitable,
and never the weaker or worse for the using: for his hundred pound shall be
made good unto him, as sound and good as ever it was. It shall conceive, breed,
and bring forth unto him without travel, cost, or peril, ten young angels
once in six months at the furthest. This increase unto natural Philosophers
did seem unnatural.

Moreover, nature has established in all things under the Sun, a certain
term and pitch when they shall make stay of increase and multiplying. The land
if it want a lubele, will in time grow hartlesse: houses if they be not
reedified will decay: trees will leave bearing, and cattle breeding, when they
grow old: man's labors and skill will fail with years: only the Usurers money
does multiply infinitely; the longer the lustier: if he can but live, he may
see his moneys moneys money, even a hundred generations. Is not this (...)?
Verily, though it be no demonstration against every act of begetting money
upon money by money; yet it shows this kind of increase to be very unkind,
and to have but small resemblance unto that natural increase, which the God of
nature has established as most innocent amongst men.

CHAP. XIIII. The fifth argument, that it is ungodly.
AS nature teaches men to do that which is seemly, kind, and natural; so
religion and piety teaches Christian men, in all their affairs, to depend
upon Gods providence, and still to expect a blessing from heaven. So it ought
to be, and so it is in all professions, except usury: Nullum de Deo hominum
genus peius sentiunt quam danistarum: sudum sit an tempestas, perinde illi est:
Of all men the Usurers think worst of God, and will least trust him: be it
fair or soul, all is one; they will have their money. The husbandman looks
up to the clouds, and prays for seasonable weather: The Merchant observes
the wind, and prays God to deliver him from tempest and wrack: The tradesman
wishes the people may have money, that he may vent his wares at a reasonable
rate, and live in some good fashion: The laboring man prays for work and
health, that he may get a poor living with the sweat of his brows; only the
Usurer of all others has least need to say his prayers: be it wet or dry; be
it tempest or calm; blow the wind East, West. North or South; be he well, or
be he sick; be he goutie and lame, or be he sound of body; let him be what
he will, or do what his list; he will be sure of his money. for time only
works for him; all the days in the Calender be set a work to work out his
gain; yea Sabbaths and all; the red letter is as fit as the black for his
business, to make up the number of days, of weeks, of months; so the time
goes out and the money comes in.

I will not deny it may fall out sometime that the Usurer may lose a sum of
money, as Act. 16.
Paul and Silas were loosed out of prison, when the iailors thought they had
laid on bonds enough. So I grant there may come such an earthquake, and sometime
does, that the Usurers bonds and obligations will be of little effect: but
ordinarily, if he be his trades-master, he shall not stand in so great need
of Gods blessing as other honest men do. Can we think in conscience that God
is pleased with such a life?

Saint Paul gives a charge to Timothy, To charge the rich of this world that
they trust not in uncertain riches, but 1. Tim. 6. 17.
in the living God, who gives all things abundantly to enjoy. God has
therefore made riches uncertain, because we should not trust in them, but in
him who gives them. That contract therefore, which for lucre and gain makes
the usurers money, both principal and increase, certain unto him, which God
has made uncertain in it self; does cross his divine ordinance; and is so
far forth an ungodly contract. Beside, the more certain he makes wealth unto
himself, the more he does withdraw himself out of Gods blessing into the
warm sun: to sit quietly at home without care, and to be sure of his money:
This is ungodly.

But it will be said: if God have made riches uncertain, it is not the Usurer
can make them certain True, yet unto himself he makes them certain by
transferring their uncertainty upon others. He takes the bond of a man to
secure him against God, both for his gain and principal; against all
casualtie whatsoever, against the act of God himself: This is ungodly.

I meddle not with assurances in this place; they be no part of my question:
In them there is a more equal adventure, where the gainer bears the peril,
and where Gods hand in the loss lights upon both parties. But light it where
it will, upon the Usurer, by his own will, it shall never light. Yea but will
he, nil he, he must trust God, whose providence is over all. True, but if he
do it perforce against his will, it is nothing. Art thou willing according to
the rules of piety, to trust God with thine own goods? then tempt him not, and
thou may trust him safely. That is to say, arm thy self with all
convenient security against the fraud and deceit of men; for the world is
naught: be as provident as thou can against all casualties that may befall:
so God would have thee; else thou shall tempt him. Then if thou send out thy
goods for thine own advantage, send them out as thine own, desire a blessing
upon them; if they perish by the default of another in whose hands they be,
good reason that he should pay for his own fault; but if the hand of God be
upon them, remember they be thy goods, sent out for thy gain, as well as for
the borrowers: they be Gods blessings, it is the Lord that gave them, and the
Lord has taken them; bless his name: this is a godly and Christian
resolution: else thou do build the tower of Babel to defend thy self
against heaven; thou take security of a wretched man, both for thine own
goods and Genesis 11. 4.
gain; for Gods blessing against the hand of God himself. Montes impietatis.

This which I say unto all in general, I say unto old men in particular, who
be attentiores ad rem: who have given over trading, and begin now to repose
themselves upon Usury. Will not such a man trust God in his old days, who
has blessed and preserved him thus far? Remember the time is not long,
until thou must trust him with a far greater matter. Not the principal of thy
money; but the principal of all, even thy soul must be committed into his
hands, who is able and may justly cast it into hell fire. Admit God shall by
his own act take away some part of thy wealth; think with thy self, it may
be I have gotten some part unjustly, and God will pare it away, that he may
withal cut off my sin for my souls sake. And if it please God hereby to
try my patience; The Lord has given and the Lord has taken; as it pleases
the Lord, so comes Job 1. 21.
things to pass: blessed be the name of the Lord.

CHAP. XV. The sixth argument, that it is unjust.
THe second table is derived from the first; therefore if usury be ungodly,
how can it be just? It offends against heaven and against earth: unjust it
is, whether we consider the nature of the thing it self, as it is before
defined; or whether we respect the persons themselves whom it does concern.

Look upon the definition, and in it upon three things. 1. the Loan. 2. the
Covenant for the loan. and 3. the Lucre upon covenant: and every one of these
will prove the iniquity of it.

1 First, it is the nature of loan to be free: for as a thing is not given but
sold, unless it be freely given: so is not any thing lent, but rather let, if
it go for hire. We have defined Usury by lending or mutuation: and so has
the Scripture Exodus 22. 25. Deuteronomy. 23. 19.
likewise. Unto which our Molinaeus
adversary in this point does accord, that the object of Usury is a thing
lent, called mutuum. But lending is a work of mercy, of kindness, of bounty,
of liberality; it was ever so taken both in Scripture and common conceit.
Deuteronomy. 23 8.
Thou shall not shut up thy compassion, but shall lend. Plalm. 112. 5.
A good man is merciful and lends. Luke 6. 35.
Do good and lend. Lending, I say, is a work of mercy to the poor, of
kindness to thy friend; thou must not therefore set a price upon it.

Those are much deceived then, who think that Usury is just, because the use
of money for a time is worth money; and therefore if no more be taken then the
use is worth, there is no iniquity. This rule holds in buying and selling,
but not in acts of charity; therein it is no good rule. Thou bidst, for the
purpose, thy poor neighbors to dinner: this is money worth; for it cost thee
money, and saves them money at home: yet thou will not set a price upon it.
Why? because it is a work of charity. Thou bidst thy rich neighbor sometimes;
that which he eats is worth money: yet thou will take none; but think foul
scorn it should be offered. Why? because it is an act of kindness, of
neighborhood, of friendship: these things may not be bought and sold, the
nature of them is to be free. Lending is a work of mercy to the poor, of
kindness to thy neighbor; and therefore is ever free. It is as unjust a thing
to sell charity, or friendship, as it is to sell justice: both are naught; this
is briberie, and that is Usury; let them go together.

2 If thou look upon the Covenant for this loan, it is unequal: wherein thou
do bind the borrower to make good the principal, and to pay thee increase
for the use of the same principal, for the time it is lent.

I demand then, during the time of loan whose is the principal? thine or the
borrowers? It was thine before thou lent it, and it shall be thine at the day
of payment; but during the time of loan, it is the borrowers: for thou have by
covenant passed over both use and property to the borrower: so that during
that time thou will not own it; if it perish, it perishes to the borrower, as
to the right owner for that time. If it be none of thine then, but the
borrowers for that time; I ask, by what right can thou covenant to receive
hire for the use of that which is none of thine, during the time it is not
thine?

If thou let a horse, house, or land, thou may covenant to receive hire
because thou have passed over their use only, reserving the property of them
to thy self; so that thou art owner of horse, house and land still, during the
time they be in an other man's possession. Therefore if the possessor shall
abuse thy horse, or make waste upon thy land, thou do justly complain,
because the property of them is thine: so is it not in money. Why do thou
then covenant for hire, for the use of that wherein thou have no right or
property? Thou will happily imagine, this is but a quiditie or school trick
put upon thee. Thou think in very deed the money is thine being so lent, he
has but the use only for a time. Be it so then: Let the principal be thine
in covenant, as it is in very deed. Be thou the owner of it, during the time
the borrower uses it: so that if it miscarie, thy money miscarieth, and not
his; for every thing perishes to the right owner. Nay (quoth the Usurer) there
I leave you. Though the principal indeed be mine, yet if it miscarie it shall
be his, he shall bear the peril: I will make that in my bargain. Therefore,
say I, it is an unequal and unjust bargain. The borrower has the use only
of thy principal, and pays for the use, which alone is his: why should he
then bear the peril of thy principal, which is none of his? The use only he
has, and he pays for that which he has: why should thou burden him
then with that he has not? This is no quiditie: It is the equity of Gods law.
Exodus 22. 15.
The borrower shall not make it good, for if it be an hired thing, it came for
the hire. It is added, if the owner thereof stand by: (to wit) that it appear
to perish or be hurt, not by any fault of the borrower. So admit money could by
Usurers be made an hired thing; yet the equity of Gods law binds, that if
it appear to miscarie without the fault of the owner; the borrower shall not
make it good, because it came for hire.

3 If we consider the quantity and quality of this lucre or interest, (as
they commonly term it) it appears still worse and worse.

1 First, there is great gain, which is seldom just: Prou. 28. 20.
He that makes have to be rich shall not be innocent. What a simple fool was
Aristotle, to call money barren, which yields a double harvest at the least
every year? six months is the most; nay three months return is ordinary,
and yet still the former crop makes seed corn for the next. Let me see: Admit
one thousand might be set by free, to run at interest, and not fail, 70.
years (which is but the age of a man) it would increase to a million, a
thousand sold; a pretty proportion, to sit still and do nothing.

2 In all honest trades, the greater gain, the greater adventure still. Soft
gain is sure: the more uncertain the gain is, the greater it may be, and
good reason it should be so. When the great gain of Merchants in former time
has been objected unto them, they could say of their goods as Saint Paul
writes of himself: In perils of water, in perils of robbers, in perils of
mine own nation, in perils among the Gentiles, 2. Cor. 11. 26.
in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false
brethren: and it was thought a reasonable apology; but Usurers have the gain,
great gain, and others bear the peril, great peril.

3 Great and certain gain out of uncertainties; the great and certain gain
of the lender, out of the uncertain gain of the borrower. Uncertain, whether
it shall be little or great: uncertain, whether it shall be any at all:
uncertain, whether he save the principal: But win he or lose he, the
covenant is for a certainty: Certum lucrum ex incerta negotiatione.

4 Add unto this, that such great and certain gain out of these
uncertainties comes in without labor or cost, or trouble to speak of. Here
is a cleanly Alchymist, who can extract so much silver, and wast nothing in
smoke.

Sum all together; so have you; great gain and certain to the usurer:
sometimes out of little gain; sometimes out of no gain; sometimes out of
loss; always out of uncertainties; always out of labor and pains, out of
care and cost, out of hazard and peril to the borrower. Comes all this on
Gods name?

. 2.
Take a view of the parties whom usury does concern, they be three in number:
The Usurer, the Borrower, the Commonwealth.

1. First, let the Usurer be his own Judge. Ask him if he be an Usurer? No,
there is none free of that company. And yet it is not for want of company,
there be enough of the trade. Besides, it is an ancient trade, it is a cunning
trade, (a mystery if you will) it is a gainful trade, a sure trade. There be
men rich, wise, and very sufficient every way of the trade; for Masters, for
Wardens, for what you will. Why then have we not the Company of Usurers? I
know no reason but only this, such men are ashamed of their profession. We may
say of them as S. Paul said of an heretic, that he is perverted and sins,
being condemned of his own self. Tac. 3. 11.


If usury be an honest trade, which men need not be ashamed of, our City is
much to blame in this: for there is no trade in it so poor and mean, if it be
an honest trade, but has a Company. The laboring man, the Mason, the Tiler,
the Water man, nay the tribe of Isaker, who carries burdens amongst us, has a
mark to know, who belongs to that sold: only they have excluded the Usurer
and the Broker. I said their own hearts condemned them: me thinks the City
condemns them too. Is there no place for them? Nusquans est qui vbique. I pray
God they be not of every Company. Yet if we be asked what the Usurer is, we
must answer as our Savior Christ speaks in the parable, that he is a
certain rich man, of no calling or profession; a certain rich man, and that
is all. Luke 16. 19


2. That we may take a view of the borrowers, we do sort them into four
ranks: First, if they be poor indeed, then is it miserable and palpable
biting, the emphasis of Gods law stands upon that. Such lending is to them like
cold water powered upon a seacoale fire, or as a shower of rain upon a load of
lime; though it may seem to quench and cool, yet it kindles and inflameth
more and more.

If they be young gallants and prodigal persons, the Usurers 2
lend, and they spend. Let them look to their lands; let them beware of David's
curse; Let the Noshec, that is, Psalm. 109.
the Usurer catch all that he has. Illaqueat foenerator omnia quae ei sunt.
The spider lets them buzze and struggle till they be fast entangled, lands and
all; and then he sucketh them. One use that God makes of such Usurers in this
world, is to be a curse and a plague unto riotous persons. Against these two
sorts of borrowers that school argument is demonstratiue, that the use and
property of the principal be inseparable; that the principal is spent in the
first use: for these persons make but one use of money. It is spent to them in
the first use; the poor for necessity; the prodigal for wantonness, do send
it packing, never to return either in kind or any equivalent.

A third sort of borrowers be rich and well grounded men. A rich borrower? how
do these two agree? Does the 3 Job 6. 5.
ass bray when he has prouender, or loweth the ox when he has fodder? If
such have some present occasional need (as the richest may have) if thou can
spare it, lend in kindness and neighborhood, to receive the like courtesy
again an other time. This in such a case, is consideration enough for a
Christian, because the Heathen desired no more, but (...) for even sinners
(says Christ) lend to sinners to receive the like, Luke 6. 34.
the like kindness another time upon the like occasion. Humane society cannot
stand without lending and borrowing, as S Basil notes. Wherefore has God made
men sociable creatures, but to help one another upon such occasions? But to
lend rich men to enrich themselves more, is to power water into the sea; thou
art therein no good steward of Gods blessings, which he has given thee to
dispose of. It is not good to feed a rich man's humor too much: thou may
give him weapons to do hurt withal: for he will gain double or trebie at the
least, and some body must pay for that, who cannot so well spare it.

Besides, he does shustle thy stock amongst so much wealth of his own, that
thou can not guess which way is goes, or how it is employed; which being thy
goods thou must answer for, if thy care be not as great for the good
employment of thy money, as it is for the sure payment thereof.

The last sort are of a midling fortune, or young beginners, who make a poor
shift, but are scarce able to manage their 4
trade, for want of money. Now are we come to the proper object of the second
work of charity. For as free gift and alms belongs to such poor people,
as be not able to repay any thing back again; so free lending belongs to
such as these. Here is place for banks of Charity, that tradesmen may have
free use of money; only paying the officers fees, which is no usury. If thou
can spare it, thou may do well to pleasure such with a sum for a time
freely, that God may bless thee. Or if thou think so well of any of them to
venture some stock, by way of partnership; that way also thou may profit thy
self and them with a good conscience. Is there no way but plain usury? If
such young beginners cannot by such lawful means be relieved, they must take
it for their cross, and be content to take pains in service until they can
be masters of their trade: It may be God would not have them to come up so
hastily as they desire. Good and lawful means offered unto us, are as a
sermon from heaven to declare what the good will and pleasure of God is.

3 For the Commonweal, it be comes not a Churchman to say much. But this is
obuious and plain; that it is not good for a hiue to nourish drones; edenti,
sedenti, dormtenti, etc. Let them eat, sleep, sit, and play; do what they
will, the months go out, and the money comes in. These be the kine of Bashan
which feed upon the Commons. Hear the word ye kine that are in the mountain
of Samaria, Amos 4. 1.
which oppress the poor, and destroy the needy. Nay they be like worms and
weapons, only to devour; else what good do they? For sooth they send out
their money It is true; and that does the Common weal pay dearly for; a
hundred thousand pound for every million, at the least. But were these men in
their graves, their money would come more freely: their young fry would send
it abroad commonly most frankly, without penie of interest. And this is the
special providence of God for the common good, who (as Pro. 28. 8
Solomon observed) will bring it so about, that the Usurers money will abroad
for the good of others. For if the Usurer could make himself, as he makes his
principal, incorruptible; wealth would quickly get into a few men's hands; which
is the Rodin de rep. lib. 5. cap. 11.
present bane of a Commonweal. The Usurers money passes from hand to hand
like counters, the standing box in the end would eat up all: and then what
calamities, tumults, and seditions must needs follow? If any can but hoise a
standard, be he David, or be he 2. Sam. 22 2.
Absolon, such discontented persons as be so fast in the Usurers books, will
flock, by force to redress themselves.

What lamentations in Nehem. 5
Nehemia his time for twelve in the hundred? What beggerie amongst Dr. Wilson,
fol. 186.
Spaniards by the Genowaies, not withstanding their Indian trade? What
garboiles in Aret. problem, de vsura.
Germany by the Rusticks against Magistrates? What riots in Anno 37. Hen. 3.
England by Christians against Jews? What seditions in all Hieron. in Esa. 58.
6.
Cities has usury been the cause of?

So then which way so ever we turn our selves; whether we look upon the
Ioane, the Covenant, the lucre, in the thing it self: or whether we respect
the parties, to wit, the Usurer, the Borrower, or the Comminaltie, we find
much iniquity, but no justice; much mischief, but no good at all.

CHAP. XVI. The seventh argument, that it is uncharitable.
WHere we find no justice, what hope can there be of charity? For first there
is such a natural antipathie betwixt usury and charity, that they cannot
possibly dwell together in one breast. Which is insinuated not obscurely by
Solomon in the place before mentioned: He that increases Prou. 28. 8.
his riches by usury and interest, gathers them for him that will be
merciful to the poor. God by his unsearchable providence, will so dispose and
order things, that the Usurers wealth shall come into the hands of him who will
be as merciful as he was merciless. The antithesis of which Pro. 13. 22.
place shows that the Usurer wants the bowels of mercy, which good men
have. For as in the same book he says, the riches of sinners are laid up for
the just: so the riches of the Usurer are gathered for the merciful. Where
Solomon sets mercy in opposition unto usury. Wherefore usury may well be
termed a biting: for as without, it biteth others; so in the heart of the
Usurer, it ateth out the very bowels of compassion. It is a principal branch
of that root of all evil, which rooteth up the root of charity, struggling
with it in the very conception of the heart, as Esau did with Jacob.

2 And as even mental usury does naturally oppose it self to the affection
of mercy and compassion, and thereby hardneth the heart of the Usurer; so does
actual usury likewise pervert the act of charity, turning it into an act of
selfeloue. That renowned act of lending, which brings Psalm. 37. 26.
an heavenly reward, and a blessing upon posterity, is by vsarie exposed to a
most illiberall bargain and sale: that which was ordained of God, by the Canon
of that Charity which seeks not her own, to respect the good of others; 1.
Cor. 13. 5. Cap. 10. 24
is turned to his own proper luere and gain.

3 Last of all, experience tells us that this practice of usury, by setting
a price upon lending, as upon ware in a market, has almost displaced free
loan amongst men. So as a chief supposed patron of usury, Bucer himself,
observes: In Psalm. 15.
Eo res abyt, vt impudens habeatur, quimutuum petit citra foenoris oblationem:
He is now counted an impudent fellow, who will offer to borrow money without
proffering consideration.

Thus have I showed briefly as I could, that usury is unto all doubtful at
the least, and therefore unlawful. If not, yet it is scandalous and offensive;
and therefore unlawful. It is forbidden by a law to which we all stand bound
in conscience, and therefore unlawful. I have showed it likewise to be in it
self unnatural; ungodly against heaven; unjust toward men; and uncharitable
against the rules of mercy. Now if it be any of these, it is a sin; if it be
all these, it is an abomination.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK ANSWERS SVCH motives and proofs as are brought for Usury.
CHAP. I. Of the motives and reasons which persuade men in this age that Usury
should be lawful.
AS it is in the bodily eye, so is it proportionably in the mind: except the
apple or sight of the eye be void of all color in it self, it cannot
possibly receive colors or judge of them: but looks as through a painted
glass, coloring every object like it self. In like manner, though I were
able to fill my book, as Job did his mouth, with arguments; and to make each
argument a demonstration against usury: yet so long as such cloudie conceits
do hang in the brains of men, which cast a dye and tincture upon the
understanding; all that can be said will not any way work upon them. Which
imaginary colors that they may the better be discerned, how they do arise in
men's minds, and after may be more easily dispelled, I will place them in five
several ranks.

1 The first thing which offers it self in these usurious days, is custom
and example: which though it would not be admitted in School for an Argument;
yet it works admirablie upon vulgar understandings. For people being as
Labans sheep, lead by the eye, do conceive as they see. Seeing Usury
therefore so much practiced of all sorts; men are even thereby without further
examination much moved to think it lawful. And the rather considering the
quality of those men who do use it: who be not only carth-wormes and mere
worldlings; but men of very good respect amongst men, for their honest and
upright dealing; seeming very religious men, and zealous professors of the
Gospel of Christ; whose tender consciences will sometimes rise at a very small
offense. Now these lookers on do think themselves bound in charity to
believe, that such men as these would never venture their souls upon this
practice, had they not been well informed before, and fully resolved by good
Divines. Let them who do use it then be examined for their ground and warrant;
you shall find that some of them have resolved themselves out of their own wit
and judgment. For albeit they dare not trust themselves with their own bodies
for physic, (though happily they may have some smackering of skill that way)
neither dare they inform themselves without their learned counsel at law, for
their goods and estate: yet the estate of their own souls they dare undertake
themselves most confidently in matters of the greatest difficulty and danger.

Others who be not so conceited of their own divinity, yet very willing to be
persuaded of the lawfulness of that which is so profitable, do take the very
silence of some Ministers for a resolution; thinking as charitablie of us for
our silence, as others do of them for their practice. For observing how
friendly we converse with them whom we know to live in that kind; how we
receive daily kindnesses from them; how zealous some of us seem to be for the
reformation of such things as concern them and their souls, either nothing at
all, or nothing so much as this: hereupon they presently resolve; verily if
Usury were so damnable as some suppose; these good me^, our special friends,
would never suffer our souls to sleep so securely in such danger.

Sometimes it may be they will move the question by the way amongst other
matters; and then shall you have some pregnant wit, after a little study upon
his trencher, return a present resolution to their mind: That if it be not
Neshec, he can see no reason why it may not be allowed. This Divinity passes
from table to table very currently, amongst those who very heartily wish it
true. All this put together makes one strong motive in the minds of the
people, for the lawfulness of Usury. First, the custom of it amongst us
(which takes away the sense of sin;) and the general practice of it, even
amongst them of good note and reputation. Secondly, our sluggish modesty in
being over silent, and the conniuencie of such as are loath to disturb or
displease their friends. Last of all, those Echoes and quailpipes amongst us,
who catch friends by imitating their voice; returning answers answerable to
their desires. These things (I say) will easily drive men forward into a good
opinion and practice of Usury, who are ready to run of themselves.

2 A second motive arises out of pity and humane commiseration toward some
persons, who have stocks of money, but want skill or power to employ the same.
This affection was the first hatcher of an Usurers apology among exiles in
time of persecution: which now is also applied unto Orphans and Widows in time
of peace. For were it not pity that these should spend their stocks and
consume them? Or that their stocks should be exposed by trust to the prey of
strangers in these hungry days? Since God therefore has given in charge so
often in Scripture to provide for the fatherless and widows; is it not a safe
way by this means to allot them a certainty for the use of their moneys,
their principal being still preserved; they maintained by the interest; and
the Commonweal to enjoy both the moneys of them who want skill, and the
skill of them who want money?

3 As by these motives they would persuade; so in the third place they would
bind us by imposing a necessity of Usury upon town and city; as if traffic
and trading could not possibly be maintained without it. It is not poaring
upon a book that can determine this question. Alas (say they) can scholars,
who be hudwinckt, and brought up within the walls of a College, judge of the
state of a City? Let these bookish Clerks scribble what they list, we Citizens
do know that usury is necessary: and if it be necessary, sure it was never
Gods meaning to forbid it simply..1. Ioh. 5. 5.
The Commandments of God are not grievous.

4. After that these fantasies be once settled in men's brains: first, that
custom and the practice of good men must beget an apology out of the
charitable conceit of the vulgar: next, that that apology must be applied in
pity unto certain persons, who have most need to be relieved by it: and then,
that which is permitted to some, is in time apprehended of all sorts, as
necessary to whole incorporations; so that Usury now must be lawful, there
is no remedy. Then in the fourth place, the wit of man must be set on work
to spin out fine and subtle cases of Usury, wherein there shall appear
nothing but justice and charity: no wrong or injury unto any. And here they
will put us to it indeed: It is an easy matter to cast a stone into a poole,
which seven wise men will hardly get out. How intricate cases both in law and
equity are multiplied daily, it is too evident: and if they can find out but
one case of Usury wherein enormity can hardly be discerned; that one case
will beget many cases like unto it self. For the wit of man will work like a
moale to get into the earth. If it be lawful in one case, it shall be lawful
in many: else that one case shall be every man's case to serve for a cloak.

5 Last of all, when they have wrought thus far; some, because they would
excel, pretend proof out of the sacred text of Scripture it self. I speak
not of those reverend Divines before mentioned; who, defending Usury, no
Usury; do only mitigate and qualify the rigor of the texts with some
devised distinctions. But there is a fellow of late time, who positiuely would
prove Usury to be lawful, even by the Scripture: wringing and wresting the
text as if it would look something that way; but very strangely. This passes
from hand to hand in writing only; for I hope he is ashamed to print it,
because he is ashamed of his name: whereby it seems if he be not able to be
an Usurer himself; yet he would feign be like unto them in somewhat. Unto
these five heads we may easily refer what ever has been said with any
color, or may be imagined in the defense of this sin. Our last endeavor
then must be, to discover these in order; which to a single eye will easily
manifest themselves to be mere apparitions.

CHAP. II. An answer to the first motive, taken from the common practice of
Usury.
I Would not wish any so simple, as that the custom of any thing in these
days should move him to think it lawful. For if men shall degenerate as fast
the next age, as they have done within memory of man; we shall have a deluge
of drunkenness, and diverse enormities, not to be named amongst Christians. For
the practice of the better sort, if charity rule thy judgment, as it was
propounded in the motive; then think in charity: first, that thou may be
misinformed concerning these men. For it may be they may deal by way of
partnership, or some other lawful contract: and that these are drawn into the
number, by such as being themselves downeright Usurers, would win credit to
their trade, by reputing others like themselves.

Next, if it shall appear in some to be no false imputation, but too true (as
I fear it is in too many) then the best cover we can make for them, is the
same which charity it self made upon the cross for those grievous sinners:
Nesciunt quid faciunt: They know not what they do. For Luke 23. 34
I verily persuade my self in my soul, had some of them known how unlawful
and dangerous a practice usury is, they would never have ventured their souls
upon it. But as others are by their example, so were they by the example of
others led into this common error. Unto them therefore especially let me
address my speech; beseeching them even as they tender their own souls, to
take notice how this kind of ignorance will not excuse, but rather condemn
them, who have so good means of better resolution, if God would move their
hearts to seek after it. Be well resolved then, before you practice; lest all
turn unto the greater sin. Trust not your own resolution in this case;
Mamon is subtle to beguile you. Therefore be as diligent to take counsel for
your souls in religion, as you are for your bodies in physic, and for your
goods in law. Be as careful to make choice of your counsel in the one, as in
the other; and desire no less security for your consciences in this question
of usury, then you do for your principal in the practice of it; and then
will you respect both the ability and fidelity of them with whom you deal.
Ability of judgment, that they be able to inform you; and fidelity, to
deal truly with your souls.

Neither let our silence encourage any to practice this sin. We would be glad
that general reprehensions out of the pulpit might suffice. We are loath to
take Nathan his office upon us, and say, 2. Sam. 12. 7.
Thou art the man, except we had some special commission, as he had: It is a
thanklesse office. Besides, we take notice of those crimes only which are
written in men's foreheads, we have no warrant to examine your books of
Accounts. Let the inquiry then come from your selves, give us encouragement to
deal plainly, sincerely and directly with your consciences. If we be over soft
and indulgent with you in that business, take no advantage therefrom to the
hurt of your souls; men of the best profession will be men, and not Angels.
And for your better resolution in this particular, let me observe unto you,
that upon the best inquiry that I can make, I find not any one Divine, new or
old, of what religion or sect soever, who has ever passed the press in this
point: not any Divine, I say, (for Molinaeus was a Ciuilian,) who has
undertaken to examine this question: no not any of the supposed patrons of
usury, who has defended the same, as it is before defined, and commonly
practiced with the greatest moderation, nine, eight, or seven in the hundred. I
did think at the first I should have found some; and some I have found who do
coast over near upon it; and some who do give over much liberty in that
kind. Yet not any of the^ (let Decad. 3. sermon. 1.
Bullinger go, who writes no whit to our purpose; but most confusedly takes
and mistaketh usury for all commerce, in rents, revenues, bargain and sale,
merchandising, etc.) not any, I say, who has ever taken this question in hand
to sift and examine it; but in conclusion (their cautions, and limitations by
them added, being likewise sifted and examined) their resolution is still
contrary to your ordinary and most moderate practice. If any man therefore
shall take you aside, as Peter did Christ, to favor your dealings in this
kind; suspect that whispering to Matthew. 26. 23. 24
savor not the things that are of God, but the things that be of men.

CHAP. III. Answering the second motive for Orphans, Widows, and old men past
trading.
FRom example we pass to affection; which is as blind and perverse in
judgment, as the other is powerful to lead into error: the affection of pity
and compassion, which of all others does prevail most even among the better
sort; because it seems to arise out of charity. But charity is no charity
if it oppose justice. It is both a foolish and cruel pity, which so tendreth
the outward estate of any, to the hurt and prejudice of the soul. If usury
(say they) be not lawful for any to practice, alas what shall become of those
Orphans and Widows in these unjust days, which have stocks of money left unto
them, and want skill to employ the same? What shall become of them? By the
help of God they may do well. My greater care is, what shall become of those
Orphans and Widows in these uncharitable days, which have no stocks at all
left unto them: though I confess both the one and the other are alike in this;
that they be not so able to help themselves as others be. Therefore there be
no two estates amongst men, over whom God has a more provident and tender
care, then over widows and fatherless children. He has provided for them by
a special law: Exodus 22. 22.
Thou shall not trouble any widow, or fatherless child. His judgments lie
heavy upon the transgressors of that law. Verse. 23. 24.
If thou vex or trouble such, then my wrath shall be kindled, and I will kill
you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your children
fatherless. No one law more iterated by Deuteronomy. 10. 18. Cap. 14. 29 Cap. 18. 11
14. Cap. 24. 17 20.
Moses, and frequently urged by the Prophets, then this for the safeguard of
Orphans and widows. Whom if mortal men shall neglect, God himself in his
fatherly providence will be their protector. Psalm. 94. 6 Psalm. 146. 9. Esa. 1.
17. 23. Cap. 10. 2. Iere. 5. 28. Cap. 7. 6. Cap. 12. 2. Zach. 7. 10. Mal. 3. 5.
2. King. 4.
He is a father of the fatherless, and judge of the widow, even God in his
holy habitation. Yea God would work a miracle, rather then the poor widow of
the son of the Prophets, with her two fatherless children, should want. The
Son of God shows the like tender affection in denouncing a woe against such
as Mat. 23. 14.
devoured widows houses. And his Iam. 1. 27.
Apostle James measures pure religion and undefiled before God even the
father, by charity toward the fatherless and widows.

Has God then so many ways bound himself by promise to provide for widows
and Orphans; and shall these by usury withdraw themselves out of his fatherly
providence? Shall these be secured by usurious contracts against the act of God
himself? Verily God will take it more unkindly at their hands, then at any
other. See the difference in this point betwixt the wisdom of the world, and
of God. The world thinks usury the best and the safest way for Orphans and
widows; because it does secure them most from all casualties, which might fall
upon their stocks and estates, by any act either of God or man. The wisdom of
God contrariwise is, that these persons should most of al cast their care upon
God; because he cares most of all for them. But of all practices usury does
most withdraw them from dependence upon Gods fatherly providence, which best
beseems their condition. If usury then be a thing unlawful, in case of
Orphans it is most unlawful. And undoubtedly if Almighty God in wisdom had
thought it meet to have tolerated usury in these persons, he might as easily
have mentioned the same, as Deuteronomy. 23 19.
he does the toleration of lending to strangers. But it was so far from Gods
meaning, that in the very fame Exodus 22. 22, 23. 24.
place where he makes a law for the safeguard of Orphans and widows,
presently and Verse. 25.
immediately upon it, is annexed the law against usury. Shall these then who are
so well provided for, by a special law of God, be transgressors of the very
next law unto it? God forbid. Let them not come near unto that transgression
of all other; let not them of all others come near unto it.

Orphans are coming into the world; widows, who intend so to continue, are
going out of the world; and shall these two Ages, which of all others ought to
be most holy and heavenly; the one for innocence, and the other for
devotion, be stained with usury? Christ is Alpha and Omega unto us, the first
and the last, the beginning and the end; and shall the alpha of our nonage, and
the omega of our dotage be dedicated unto usury?

1. Christ calls himself by the name of a letter, the first letter in the
Alphabet, that children might learn Christ so soon as they be able to know
their letters; and shall we suffer our children to be died in the wool of
their infancy, with the scarlet sin of usury? The Romans 8. 15
spirit of Adoption teaches us, to cry Abba father. Abba is the Bucer. in
Romans 8. verse. 15. Abba Pater, and libeuter audiunt patres, and pueri primum
sonare discunt.
first word that children can naturally pronounce, as if God delighted to be
called Father in the child's language. Shall earthly fathers then provide no
otherwise for their babes so dearly beloved of God, but by the contagious
sin of Usury? Stamp garlic in a new mortar, and it will smell of it ever
after: give the devil possession of a child, and he will be be removed with
great difficulty. For when the Mark. 9. 20.
Disciples of Christ could not cast him out, when Christ himself saw with what
extremity he came forth; with what wallowing, foming, and renting of the
possessed; he demanded how long that had happened unto him: Answer was made;
of a child. Be it far from parents and governors to give Satan such
advantage over innocents; as to feed and nourish them; to maintain and bring
them up by the increase of Usury.

2 I write unto you widows, who profess your selves now in your latter age to
leave the world, and betake your selves to God; to be so married unto your
only husband Christ, as that you may quietly and peaceably say your prayers;
hear Sermons; read your Bibles; and live upon Usury: tell us in the name of
God, where have you learned thus to join God and Mamon together. Look into
those Bibles which you read; even that which carries the name of Geneua; which
translation in respect of the place should seem most to favor you in this
point: there have you all the terms: Exodus 22. 25.
Usury; Prou. 28. 8.
Interest; Ezec. 18. 13.
Increase; Verse. 8.
any increase, distinctly expressed; yet not any of them in any place
mentioned, but utterly condemned, absolutely forbidden amongst the people of
God, without any distinction, difference, toleration, or qualification at all:
Look into your own estate and condition. I will suppose that your husbands in
their life time did themselves employ their stocks in honest and lawful
trading, submitting themselves to all lawful adventures: sometimes enduring
great lost with patience; sometimes gaining much, as it pleased God to bless
them. Since their decease during the time of your widowhood, by this trade of
Usury, diverse of you have attained unto far greater wealth then your
husbands themselves ever could. This you cannot deny to be most true. Your
answer is, you do thank God for it, it is his blessing: whereof I do make
great doubt; and so would I wish you to do. Is it not strange that a silly
woman not able to manage her own estate, deprived of her honest and wise guide
and head, should thrive better, with greater ease and security, then her
husband with the same or better means ever could? If this came by any
extraordinary blessing of God upon you; I would lift my hands to heaven with
you, praising God in his wonderful works. But if it be known to come by the
ordinary trade of Usury; I would suspect that not to be of God: for God has
ordained your widowhood in respect of your former estate, to be an estate of
humiliation, for the outward condition of this life. But contrary to this
ordinance of God, you can make it, by the practice of Usury, to be an estate
of exaltation: for whereas in your husband his days, your stock by his honest
and painful negotiation, was subject unto manifold perils; and by peril unto
great and daily losses: your widows vocation can provide by sufficient bonds
against all these, with great increase of gain: bonds so sufficient and
absolute, that unless God dissolve them beyond all expectation (as sometimes he
does) your resolute purpose is, to be secured against any act both of God and
man.

Give me leave to deal plainly with you, and to use the Luke 10. 34.
Samaritans sharp wine as well as oil for the scouring and curing of this
wound. Look unto your charge, whom God has made Stewards of your stock of
money. It is you who stand answerable before God for the use or abuse of such
sums as you put forth into the hands of others: where you gain ten in the
hundredth, they must gain twenty clear, besides many charges and duties to be
paid out of their gain. How do you silly women know who is oppressed or
bitten by such gain? You will say that you commit it into the hands of such as
you hope to be honest conscionable men: for they keep touch, and pay you your
money: They be neither ingrossers, nor forestallers, nor oppressors, nor
unreasonable gainers; but honest and religious men: for they deal honestly,
and pay you your money. Tell me then, if they be such honest conscionable men
that you deal withal, why dare you not trust them to employ your money for
you by way of partnership; allowing them a proportion of gain for their skill
and care, and bearing answerably part of the loss? Dare you trust them with
your soul, in that wherein your selves stand answerable unto God; and not with
the use of your goods for your own profit? I beseech you meditate seriously
upon these things, which are sensible; let the tenderness of your sex work
unto a remorse in this point; take it to heart; be troubled in conscience for
this sin: Mordeat hic vt moriatur illic. Bern.
Let the worm bite here, that it may die elsewhere.

If you should be troubled, I imagine presently what comfort shall be
applied. Your children, kinsfolks, or friends who have advised you to this
trade (wherein you have not been well advised) will bid you send for such or
such, who be reverend and grave Divines; such as love you well. Be it so then;
even unto those reverend and grave Divines dare I appeal for your case:
confer with them; desire them to deal plainly with your soul; to search
the wound to the bottom; and I make no doubt, but they will tell you: First,
that the text of Scripture is directly against you: Next, that those
distinctions and interpretations which seem to qualify the matter, are but
the comments of some few learned men, who differ from the rest, and among
themselves; according to the variety of their several apprehensions. Lastly,
they can tell you, that even those Divines who seem most of all to favor you;
their cautions and limitations being added, do all of them conclude directly
against that which you practice.

And if there be any who shall use nothing but oil to heal up your present
grief, and draw a skin over it, with such indulgent toleration of Interest as
you desire; in the name of God take heed of such; suppose them to be sowers of
Pillowes. It is dangerous to rely upon them, who give most liberty in the
matters of deceitful mamon.

3 I write unto you old men, who decaying in the powers of mind and body, are
forced to leave your trade, and do ask what you shall do; who having got
some money together in a lawful calling, are not able to follow it any longer?
Do you ask Divines what you shall do for the world? We must ask that
counsel of you; we can tell what you must not do. Is there no fruit in the
garden, but only the forbidden fruit? Have you spent your strength and worn
your senses, to live at ease without labor when you are old; and have you not
taken some care for the ease of conscience, how to live without sin when you
are old? Will you entangle your souls with the practice of Usury, when you
have one foot in the grave? Has God blessed your labors in youth; and will
you forsake him in age? Will you pollute your souls with filthy lucre, when
you should be most consecrated to devotion?

Every man in his calling is a Steward; the decay of senses and memory is an
admonition that he must give over Luke 16. 1.
his Stewardship. Then he consulteth with himself what to do. Verse. 3.
Fodere nescio, mendicare erubesco: Take pains he cannot, those days be
past; to spend upon the stock will bring him to beggerie: at the last he
concludes: Verse. 4.
I know what I will do; that I may turn an hundred into an hundred and ten.
Verily I commend such a man as our Savior commended the unjust Steward, Verse.
8.
because he has done wisely: wisely, in making choice of so easy and secure a
gain, fit for his age: of so great and certain gain, fit for such seniors,
who be attentiores ad rem; Verse. 8.
for the children of this world be wiser in their generations, then the
children of light: wiser then the Patriarchs and Prophets of the old Testament:
wiser then the Apostles and Evangelists of the new Testament: Wiser then the
Fathers and Councels of succeeding ages: wiser then any of the Saints of God
that lived in former times: for we cannot read of any of them who had the
wit, either to practice Usury themselves; or by any distinction to approve of
it, or find it lawful in others.

CHAP. IIII. Answering the supposed necessity of Usury.
Necessity is lawless. If Usurers therefore can put on that coat, it will
be armor of proof against all proof by argument; against all statute and
law both of God and man. They do pretend that the state of the City cannot
stand; that traffic cannot be maintained; that tradesmen cannot live without
it. Then verily it was never Gods meaning to lay so heavy a yoke upon his
people in forbidding that which is so necessary. The right putting of the case
will give great light to the clearing of the point: whereof there be three
branches.

1 I demand first of those tradesmen, who cannot live in their trade without
taking up at interest: Is their meaning that they cannot live in that fashion
as they do; maintain their wives in those fashions that they do; drive their
trades to that height which they do? If this be the case, the answer is
easy: It may be God would not have them carry so great a sail as they do,
but to drink of the waters of their own well, and content themselves with
Prou. 5. 15.
such means as Gods fatherly providence does offer them; there is no
necessity for a man to enrich himself by such practices, as be either
forbidden or doubtful. Better is a Prou. 15. 16
little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure with trouble; trouble
of conscience at the hour of death. Thus far we do agree. Whosoever lays
this for his ground, that He will be rich, must ensnare his conscience with
many necessary evils, whereof usury is one. Necessary, I say, not to a
religious honest man, who is content with his estate; but to him who resolves
he will be rich: for they that will be 1. Tim. 6. 9
rich (says the Apostle) fall into temptations and snares, which drown men in
perdition and destruction.

2 If it be propounded, that trade and commerce between man and man cannot
be maintained in this City without borrowing and lending; that also is
granted: (...): Common society and mutual conversation (says S. Basil) does
require it of necessity. Gods law did ever intend that men should lend one to
another; in charity to the poor; in friendship to their equals, to receive
the like courtesy again. Which duty if Luke 6. 13. (...).
men would perform, there were no necessity of usury.

3 The third point then follows. Presupposing the custom and corruption of
these times wherein men will not lend freely as they ought; is there not a
necessity of usury? Admit that be granted; who did impose this necessity? If
God; then is this reason good, Usury is necessary, therefore lawful. But if
men or estates have drawn a necessity of sinning upon themselves by the
custom of sin; does this extenuate or aggrauate the fault? Woe be unto them
(says the Prophet Esaias) who draw sin, as with cart-ropes. Cities Esa. 5. 18.
and Incorporations have drawn a necessity of this sin upon themselves by
three strong cart-ropes of iniquity. First, the hardness of men's hearts, and
want of charity in those who be well able to lend and will not, have forced
many to pay usury Secondly, the covetous desire and pride of borrowers, who
out of an insatiable appetite to compass great matters, do take up great
sums of money, for money; that no money is to be spared for such as be true
borrowers indeed. Woe unto them that join land to Esa. 5. 8.
land, till there be no place for the poor to dwell in. That is the Country
woe. But upon the same ground, it is inferred: Woe unto them who join money to
money, till there be none left for the poor to borrow. This is the City woe;
which brings a necessity of borrowing upon interest. Thirdly, falsehood and
deceit in defrauding one another of their moneys at the times appointed, so as
being disappointed of their own, they are compelled to take up of others, or
to shut up their doors. These three fold cart-ropes, not easily broken, have
drawn a necessity of usury upon Cities. And shall it therefore be reputed no
sin? God forbid: It is no good consequence neither in persons nor estates.

Not in persons. S. Paul tells us of an heart that cannot Romans 2. 5.
repent, which heapeth unto it self wrath against the day of wrath. Is
impenitencie in that heart no sin, because custom has made it necessary?

A drunkard has brought his body into such an habit, that unless he drink
bountifully, even to the turning of his brain, he is sick again. Is not
drunkenness in that person sinful, because so necessary? A proud woman has
bin wedded so long unto her will, that if she be crossed in it, she will go
mad for pride, like Nebuchadnezar; or die of moodines, like a weesell in a
cage. Shall her wilfulness be excused, because her devilish stomach is grown
too strong for her wit?

The time was when amongst the borderers, to live upon robbing and the spoil
of their neighbors was a common trade: so as stealing was thought to be no
sin: but the 8. Commandment by them was deemed to be of King Henry his
putting in. Their reason was, for because that practice was so general and so
usual, as he who made scruple to do therein as others did, was himself made
a pray unto others. It must needs be granted, that the necessity of stealing
amongst them, was greater by many degrees, then the necessity of usury can
be in any Country or City whatsoever. And yet I make no question, but if the
greatest Usurer in the land had been Judge amongst them, he would even then
have condemned their theft, to be against the law both of God and man: and
condemned them also for making themselves such slaves unto that sin by their
barbarous and uncivil practices. I have learned better manners then to compare
our Usurers with those borderers: For our usury, without comparison, is a
far more civil and mannerly theft then theirs ever was. Only my desire is,
that they would be pleased to take notice of the weakness of this argument:
that we must therefore needs allow of usury, because they have made it
necessary. That they would leave those questions, What shall we do in this,
and that, and the other case? As if a good honest borderer being bred and borne
amongst them, should complain; alas what should I do! all my goods and
cattle are carried and driven away in one night, I wot not whither; I must
either shift for my self, as the fashion is, or run my country, or starve at
home. I hope in God this argument will never be so strong for usury amongst
us, as it has been for theft amongst them: God forbid it should And yet theft
and robbery has ever been a great sin, even where it has been most
necessary. In conclusion, that we may not deprive necessity of her right;
she has power to excuse the borrower, if she be urgent upon him and cannot be
prevented. The borrower, I say, may lawfully give usury, where incuitable
occasion shall enforce an invincible necessity. If he borrow not to gain by
borrowing, but to prevent a greater loss: If other lawful means be wanting,
either for the preservation of his credit and estate; or for the supply of
present wants, either of nature or person: If these occasions be imposed and
not drawn upon him, by some former negligence or default: If he attempt to
borrow no more then he shall be able to repay at the time; and if upon such
occasions he cannot borrow freely, then is he no agent in the sin, but a
mere patient in the oppression of usury. But in case he may borrow freely,
and will not, out of a scornful desire not to be beholding; or will disable
himself by covenants, which he is no ways able to perform; or relieve
himself by grating upon others for excessive gain; or pull these snares upon
himself, either by living at too high a rate, or by improuident employing of
his stock, without reserving a due proportion to defray charges and pay duties:
in these cases even the borrower himself may stand guilty as accessarie to
this sin. And well is he who can manage his estate with that provident
moderation, as he may say with the Prophet Jeremy, as we read, chap. 15. 16.
I have neither lent upon usury, nor men have lent to me upon usury. But for
the lender, which is the Usurer, there is no color or pretense of any such
necessity, which can befall him; seeing he has authority from God as Steward
of his blessings; and power amongst men as owner of his money; for variety of
lawful and undoubted employments.

CHAP. V. Of such cases as seem usurious, without appearance of iniquity, or
breach of charity.
HE that turns himself into an angel of light, can set so fair a gloss
upon a work of darkness, that the iniquity of it will hardly be discerned. He
can so cunningly twist good and evil together, that the appearance of usury
shall be presented without show of injustice. These subtle sleights do rather
exercise the wit in unfolding of them, then convince a judicious understanding;
that usury should therefore be lawful, because some cases be intricate. Be not
all Courts of justice and equity full of such difficulties, where after long
pleading and much debating, the wrong and injustice is hardly discovered? He
that shall hear our learned at the Law upon the Statute of Usury, at their
Readings, or otherwise, put and argue cases; what is within the meaning of the
statute, and what not; will never marvel at the close conueiance of injustice
in the cunning practices of this age. And may not the like Quaeries be put what
is within the meaning of the received definition of usury? Admit you may
puzzle us with some Cases so cunningly contrived, wherein we can find no
difference either in Justice or Charity from other lawful contracts: It may
be our bluntnes, who cannot pierce a hard case; or if no exception can be
taken, we shall parallel it with another quaere, whether it be within the
definition of usury before expressed or not? So that upon the matter, if it
appear just and lawful, it shall not appear usurious. It may happily border
and coast upon Usury; yet our conclusion shall still remain entire: That
Usury properly so called is simply unlawful.

For our better direction amongst these difficulties, I will propound three
rules; which being applied unto particular cases, may inlighten us for the
unfolding of the same.

1 First, That which is good and lawful, must be entire. A little enormitie
does pervert the whole action, as leven sowreth the lump. I speak not of such
infirmities which human 1. Cor. 5. 6.
frailty does cast upon our deeds; for so our best actions be imperfect: but
all the ingrediences which be essential, must be just and lawful, else the
act it self is not justifiable. It is in morality, as in Logic, the
conclusion follows the worst part. If the least part of iniquity appear in
any action moral, we thence conclude that action to be unlawful.

My neighbor is ready to forfeit his land, being morgaged to a merciless man,
who gapeth for a prey: I lend him an hundred pound for a year to redeem the
same land, being of triple value: I covenant with him for so much interest as I
am like to be admnified for want of my money. Here is justice and mercy met
together. I in mercy have relieved my neighbor in his distress; he in
equity does save me harmless: no man receiucth wrong; neither is the
commonwealth any ways prejudiced: The borrower only is redeemed from the
mouth of the Lion: and though I take nine or ten pound interest of him, it is
but as the opening of a vein to stench a greater flux, by turning the course
of blood: wherein it is a soueraign thing to part with a little goodblood, to
prevent a greater mischief.

In this case all circumstances considered, there seems to be that (...), or
equality, which the Apostle makes the ground both of Col. 4. 1.
Justice, and 2. Cor. 8. 14.
Charity. But there is one enormitie which marreth all the rest; in that a
work of charity is brought to the market, and set at a price; then which there
is nothing more offensive or opposite to the nature of charity; which will have
all her deeds to be most free. To expel one poison with another, or to prevent
a greater evil by a less, holds well in physic: But in Divinity we must
not do evil, either that good may come of it, or that evil may be prevented
by it. In peccatis error facit dilemma: It is an erroneous conceit to imagine
that one evil cannot be avoided but by committing of an other. But if thou
lend thy neighbor for his relief in this case, it may be thoushalt be
damnified, for want of thy money, more then thy estate can well bear. Be it
so: yet for all that, make no absolute covenant for interest upon what may be;
for it may be God will pay thy interest some other way within the revolution of
that year. If not: yet as thy damage being future is casual; so let thy
covenant be conditional: If thou be thus or thus damnified, that then such or
such satisfaction be made. This is equal and just interest, but no Usury.

The portion of an Orphan is put into the hands of a Company or Corporation:
the principal is fully secured: the child brought up and maintained by the
interest: That interest so easy as none has just cause to complain of
biting: many suitors for the employment of such stocks: A custom maintained by
the indulgence of the starute: the only Usury which our law does leave
unpunished: what injustice then can there be imputed to this practice? Or what
offense is it either to God or man? Verily I must greatly commend your wisdom
and providence in taking such a fatherly care for Orphans in so perverse and
crooked a generation. I must likewise most willingly subscribe to the grave
moderation of our law, which has passed over this practice of Towns and
Cities, and let it alone: (for a toleration is all that from the law can be
inferred.) Notwithstanding by your gentle patience, when the best is made of it
that can be, there is one thing in this which poisoneth all. You have so
disposed of Orphans goods by this order, that they be in far better condition
for their estate, then they could have been by the painful labors and honest
endeavors of their most wise and provident Fathers, if they had been living; in
whose hands their portion had then been subject to negotiation, by that unto
peril; by peril to decay: this you hold to be a great virtue. Indeed it is
too great for a virtue, which must ever hold a mean.

That order and practice which makes Orphans no Orphans, by yielding them a
greater security of principal and certainty of gain, then God has
ordained, must needs be a thing inordinate in it self. And, which is worse, by
this means Almighty God is turned out of office, by securing Orphans, even
against the act of God himself, who would be a father of the fatherless. For
this Usury has provided a far better fatherhood and more secure protection
upon earth for fatherless children, then their own natural fathers by their
best industry, could have blessed them withal. Let the goods of an Orphan, on
Gods name, by your faithful administration, be of equal condition in the hand
of a Company or Corporation, as it should have been in the hand of a faithful
father: and this suffices, unless it proceed out of your free bounty; else
whatwhatsoeuer is more then this, by way of administration, comes of evil.
This I write out of precise truth; leaving this your practice within the rule
of toleranda, non probanda. Let us then esteem of it as a thing tolerable, yet
with the acknowledgement of some blemish.

2 Our secondrule is, that the poison of Usury is in some contracts so closely
and cunningly conveyed, as the very turn of the intention of the mind may
alter the case, to make it just or unjust, the contract remaining one and the
same.

If the eye then be single, and the intention right, that which formally is
usurious, upon the matter may in justice be equivalent to a lawful contract.
If the intention look awry, that which in form is lawful, may in matter be
a paliat or cloaked Usury.

For A. to lend unto B. an hundred pound for ten years, the principal to be
repayed yearly by ten pound, and ten pound over and above to be given for the
use; this is plain Usury within the statute. Therefore to prevent that
statute, and to avoid this practice of an Usurer, A. does purchase of the said
B. an annual rent of twenty pound, for ten years, with the same hundred
pound. This is bargain and sale; yet upon the matter the very same under
another form of covenant: the very intention makes it Usury; insomuch as if
the intent could be discovered, by any precedent communication of borrowing, or
other pregnant circumstances, ths law would bring it within compass of the
statute for paliate or cloaked Usury. But if simply without any pretense such
annuity of rent be bought and sold, we cannot condemn it for Usury. Howbeit,
if it be an unreasonable bargain, or be injurious unto any by circumstances,
it may be a breach of justice and charitic in an other kind.

A man buyeth a piece of land at a reasonable rate for ready money; couenanting
that in case he shall repent of his purchase within one year after the
payment of the money, that then at the years end it shall be at his choice,
either to retain the land and continue his bargain, or to have that entire
sum repaid back again, which he gave for the land; and so the bargain to
be void. This case heth so indifferent between an usurious and a lawful
contract, that the very secret purpose and intention of the buyer does alter
it. For if the buyer had a simple intent to purchase the land indeed; yet
desirous to reserve a liberty to himself, by one years trial of his
bargain; and though at the years end he shall take his money again, for some
inconvenience found, which before was not perceived; or because in the mean
time he has met with some other bargain fitter for him; this is neither
Usury, nor usurious. But if this buyer having this sum of money, which
presently he cannot put to Usury, with so good security as he would; does
therefore make this purchase but a color, never intending to continue his
bargain, but only to keep the land as a pawn for his principal; and to
receive that years rent for the use; this very intention makes it gross
Usury; and so alters the case: the contract in words and in writing
remaining one and the same.

3 Our third rule is: That he who delivers a sum of money for a time, for
some special designement couenanted and agreed upon, declineth the nature of
that loan, which in the definition is properly called mutuation. For in
mutuation the money is so lent, that the property is wholly passed over to the
borrower. But when it is lent only for such an employment, the gain whereof
shall redound as well to the lender as the borrower; herein the lender does
reserve unto himself some property in the money so lent, even during the time
of the loan. Which kind of loan does bend the covenant somewhat from the
nature of Usury, toward the contract of partnership: whereupon some covenants
seeming usurious, yet withal appearing just and equal, are great inducements
to make some men think that all Usury is not simply unlawful. Whereof
instance may be given in such and such cases: whereas indeed upon due
examination it may appear, that as such contracts do begin to be
justifiable; so do they likewise decline the nature of Usury, in some part of
the definition before expressed.

A moneyed man lends to his monilesse friend an hundred pound, not to use at
his pleasure, but to purchase such a lease for ten years, which yields
twenty four pound of yearly rent: couenanting with the borrower for nine
pound a year parcel of the said rent, and for the payment of the principal,
being likewise raised out of the said yearly rent at the end of ten years. Now
what can there be in this contract against any rule either of justice or
charity? The purchase is reasonable; the interest redounding to the lender is
a reasonable portion of the borrowers gain; the borrower has ten pound
yearly coming in, which in ten years makes up the principal; he has
likewise the use of that yearly rent of ten pound freely for ten years, and
five pound certain rent overplus of clear gain. This seems to be Usury,
for that it passes under the usual terms of lending and borrowing. But upon
the matter it is rather a contract of society or partnership, for that the
proper object of usury mutuum, does here cease. For a sum of money so
delivered, is not properly lent: for that the lender continues in part the
owner of the money, reserving some power and interest in the use of the same.
In these and such like covenants, if there be any malignitie in the nature, or
scandal in the form; it proceeds of usury. If any color of equity and
justice; it borrows that from some honest and lawful contract.

But let every bird take his own feather, every neighbor contract resume
that which is proper and peculiar to it self, that the nakedness of usury might
appear by itself; I make little question but the malignitie and deformity of
it would easily be perceived. For so far as these mixed contracts do put on
the habit of honesty, they do withal relinquish and put off the nature of
usury.

These cases I have only propounded, to show that as any usurious contract does
approach unto equity; so far forth it does likewise decline the nature of
usury, and bend itself toward some lawful and honest covenant, which does
only coast upon it. All which does still fortify the maine conclusion, That
usury properly so called, is simply unlawful; and that there is still some
malignant quality in the very nature of it: which together with usury,
according to the several degrees thereof, will discover it self.

CHAP. VI. Answering some reasons and wrestings of Scripture for Usury.
THis Chapter is chiefly to be bent against the author of an English Treatise,
who in this kind of argument is singular by himself. Wherein I shall make the
more speed, because he has been heretofore By Doctor Dounham in Psalm. 15.
worthily refuted, so much of him as was thought worthy the rehearsing. If any
therefore who has seen that manuscript, be in love with his long discourse
of Mashah and Nashah, and other vagrant conceits, I refer him for his better
satisfaction to the said Page 197. etc. p. ^77. etc. p. ^^2. etc. p 284. etc.
p. ^89. etc. from 291. unto 309.
Answer.

That which most did trouble me in the perusing of the said discourse, was the
number of reasons proving the lawfulnes of usury: for I told 32. numbered
together in one place by figures in the margent; besides diverse others
scattered out of order in other places. And verily if arguments might pass by
number and not by weight, I should have been much dismayed. But upon
examination I was bold, for being tedious, to reckon them as they do siphers
in the practice of addition, naught, naught, and naught is naught; for 25. of
those 32. reasons do infer these conclusions following.

That increase is lawful: and that a man ought not to let his money take rust.
That he needs not to lend freely to him who has no need to borrow; because
that were to power water into the Sea. That a just recompense is due for the
satisfaction of wrong: as if a man falsify his word to my hindrance; if he
withhold my money against my will to my loss and his gain; if he delay
payment beyond the time limited, so as I am forced to take up at ten in the
hundred; if I stand bound for a friend for principal and interest, he saileth
and I pay it; if a father in law withhold his daughters portion to their
prejudice; that in these cases some recompense is due. That the purchase of a
seesimple, or of an Annuitie for lives, is lawful. That partnership is not to
be misliked. That a rich man ought not to increase his wealth by a poor man's
money; nor the tutor by the orphans stock, without some consideration. That a
man pleasured by the loan of money, ought to be thankful. That a Miller may
require a Bakers custom for lending him sums of money, etc.

Herein the author has taken great pains to be labor his own shadow: for I
know none who makes any question of the lawfulnes of these things. The other
seven reasons do seem as it were somewhat to look toward the point in
question.

If a poor man ought to be thankful in word for the 1
loan of money, then ought the rich man to be really thankful in his kind.
It is very true, and what then? Then (says the author) may he covenant or
promise to be thankful, if it be his duty so to be. I make no doubt but that
he may promise and perform his promise, much better then a poor man can;
many other ways beside paying of usury. But had he proved it lawful for a
rich man to be eight or ten pound thankful for the loan of an hundred, then
had he approached near the question.

It is all one to lend money and to lend a Cow freely: 2
therefore (says he) it is all one to let money and to let a Cow for hire. I
deny the consequence; many things may be lent freely, which may not be let
for hire: a quart of milk, given by that Cow, may be lent, but not let. A Cow
is worse for the milking, so is not money for the using, which shall be repaied
in as current pieces as it was lent.

But the argument which he stands much upon, is 3
Gods own example: Who paieth interest for the poor, and therefore the rich
ought to pay for themselves. God paieth it for the poor, because they be not
able to pay for themselves: the rich therefore ought to pay for themselves,
because they be able. So that usury then must needs be paid either by God or
man; by God for the poor, by the rich for themselves. Another reason to the
same purpose: That we must lend to the poor freely, and therefore must we
take usury of the rich. 4
Upon this ground (it seems) because God will not pay for the rich, therefore
they must pay for themselves. For it will not out of his head, but that usury
must be paid. Were it not for usury, he prophecieth, that the same confusion
must 5
needs fall upon us, which the Prophet Esatas threatens against Chap. 24. ver.
1. 2. 3. 4
wicked and cursed nations. That is another reason. Nay: If usury be taken
away, woe worth all the occupiers in the world. 6
That is another reason. Add them all together; they be assertions,
prophecies, execrations, which say and asseuer, but prove nothing. For Gods
example for paying usury for the poor, is taken from a metaphorical or
borrowed speech, and therefore cannot stand upon his own ground. If it could,
we might infer strange conclusions from Gods example; who returns for
giving to the poor the principal, seven fold, yea an hundred fold. Shall a
rich man therefore pay so much usury? that would prove a Neshec indeeed. Yea,
but we must lend freely to the poor; and therefore that we may enable our
selves so to do, we must take usury 7
of the rich. That is another reason, taken (as I suppose) from Standgate hole.
For such reasons do move those good fellows to take a purse, that they may
be the better able to do this and that; some of them purposing to do some
good with that they shall take. Yet all this will not make their act good, if
themselves be taken.

. 2.
By these reasons already alleged it is to be hoped, though they be many,
that this author is not much to be feared for doing the cause any great hurt.
Albeit he has presumed further in this theme then any I can find ever did
before, or I hope will do after him; in laying such violent hands upon the
book of God; wresting that holy writ for the approbation, yea and the great
commendation of usury. Being of the number of those whereof Tertullian
speaks: Qui Caedem faciunt scripturarum in materiam suam: Who do fell the
Scriptures to support a rotten building.

First, in the Lebanon of the old Testament, he has hewne down that worthy
example of Joseph: who as agent for Pharao King of Egypt, delivered to his
subjects Genes. 47. 20. 24.
(now become his servants) not only the use of the land, but seed-corne also
to sow the same; couenanting with them for the fifth part of yearly rent to the
King their Lord and master for ever. And verily the Egyptians in this case sat
at an easy rent, paying but the fifth part, and enjoying all the rest, only
for their pains in tilling the land; which by reason of Nilus was a very
tender mold, that men might water it with their feet; and therefore their
tillage was no tough labor. But how is Usury built upon this? What affinity
has this rent with interest? Forsooth you must understand, that all manner of
contract, covenant, or bargain whatsoever it be, is by him taken for Usury.
If it be unjust or oppressing, then it is Neshec: which it pleases him to
translate morsurie, not usury. If it be equal and just (as this of Joseph's
was) then is it conscionable and lawful Usury: in which sense, where (...),
is by Ezekiel. 18. 8.
all translators read, that gives not to Usury, nor takes increase: he
turns it, To give to Morsurie, or take a cutting rent. So other places
likewise, where those terms are to be found, are by him very singularly
expounded by the racking of lands and tenements, in such sort as tenants cannot
live.

And all those texts of Scripture which do warrant either Genesis 23. 16.
purchasing, or Leuit. 25. 15. Prou. 31. 16. Ezec. 21. 27. Reu. 18. 15 Exodus
2:. 15. Luke 19. 12 Iam. 5. 4. Decad. 3. sermon. 1. Deuteronomy. 15. 2.
merchandising, or c letting, or lending, or tribute, or any contract of gain,
are by him cut down to build up Usury: so as if any shall be so unmannerly as
to put any difference between these contracts and Usury; then is all this
great pains of his utterly lost. Wondering with my self who should put these
extrauagant conceits into his head; at the last I found them in Bullinger, upon
whom it seems he groundeth himself; a moist foundation to build upon. For
the same purpose the same Author makes much of Gods law for the releasing of
debtors the seventh year; because poor men, for the Sabbath of the ground
that year, wanted means to pay their debts: yet of them who were able to pay,
it might be exacted. Behold (says he) the rich man must pay principal and
usury both the seventh Verse. 4.
year; but not the poor: for there is the word Mashah, which signifies
usury; and the verb Nashah, which signifies to lend upon usury. Oportet
mendacem esse memorem. Does God release the poor, that Usury shall not be
exacted of them for that seventh year? Usury, I say, by virtue of your
Mashah? then shall it be lawful other years to exact it, even of the poor;
whom alone you labor to free from Usury. For doubtless that law did bind
only for the seventh year, and no longer time: the poor therefore will con
you little thanks for this argument.

Yea but it is a pretty reason which he has framed out of Salomons proverbs:
He that oppresses the poor to increase Pro. 22. 16.
himself, and gives to the rich, shall surely come to poverty. He notes in
the margent (a notable place to prove that the rich ought to give interest.)
How is that proved? By the rule of contraries; as if Solomon contrariwise had
said thus: He that gives to the poor freely, and lends to the rich to
increase himself, shall undoubtedly attain unto great wealth. Indeed, To
attain wealth, and to come unto poverty, be contraries. Besides, I conceive
some antithesis betwixt oppressing the poor to increase himself; and giving
unto the poor freely. Now lending to the rich upon usury, has crowded in the
midst. How lending comes in, passes my understanding: there is no mention in
the text either of Usury or loan. To give to the rich in bribes, that he may
oppress the poor, is a vice; or to oppress the poor, that he may the
better give unto the rich: but is it therefore a virtue to lend to the rich
upon Usury? and such a virtue as brings a blessing from God in stead of a
curse? So says the Author in direct terms: Now the contrary virtue has
questionles the like opposite blessing, an equal and like reward of
plentiousnesse. This is more, I dare say, then ever Usurers did hope for, or
imagine: full glad would they be, if we could prove it a thing indifferent. To
lend freely is a work of mercy and bounty: to lend unto the rich freely is
vicious; because superfluous: he compares it to pouring water into the sea;
yet to lend to the rich upon Usury, makes it very commendable. A notable place
to prove Usury? A notable wit that can extract Usury out of such a place. For
I dare say when Solomon spoke this proverb, he thought no more of any such
virtue, then he did of Alchymie.

From Proverbs descend we unto Parables. Parables and metaphors make fit
groundcels for such buildings. Our S. Christ in his parable of Talents,
compares the dispensation Mat. 25. 27
and use of spiritual gifts and graces, to the employment of moneys amongst
worldlings; where a rich man delivers sums to certain occupiers, that he
might receive his principal again, cum foenore, with Usury, or advantage.
(...).
Now it is verily thought, Christ would never have made such comparisons, if
Usury were not lawful and honest.

And I pray you, what honesty do you find in the sudden breaking in of a
thief into a man's house in the night? Mat. 24. 43
yet Christ compares his last coming even unto that. Nay more, what if the
master had commended his servant in this parable for dispensing his talents, as
the Lord commended the unjust Steward for his wisdom? Then might it safely
have been concluded, that it is as lawful and commendable a thing to take
Usury, as for that Steward to rob his master, and both alike. Nay, so far
is this parable from justifying of Usurers; that were it not a parable, I would
have used it as an argument against Usury. For whereas the servant complains
of his master, as of an hard man, reaping where he sowed not, and gathering
where he strowed not (parables being spoken after the fashion of the world,) it
should appear that Usurers in those times were hardly thought of, even of
mere worldly men, for reaping increase more then they sowed, out of talents
and pieces of money, which have no power of fructifying in themselves.

That consequent which commonly is inferred from the rule of equity, set down
by Christ, Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, do you the same
unto them, and therefore I may lawfully take so much usury of my neighbor, as
I my self in his case would give; is but a begging of the question: for it
must be understood of a just and rectified will; else it can be no rule. If I
pretend that I do no otherwise unto him then my self in his case would be done
unto; we run still upon the question, whether my desire were then as it
should be? For if I my self would borrow upon usury, either to ingrosse or
forestall, or to compass some unlawful matter, this is a corrupt will and no
rule. But if my desire to borrow be just and lawful (as in some cases before
mentioned it may be) then is it no entire will; but mixed and forced by some
necessity, for the avoiding of a greater evil; and therefore deemed in the eye
both of H^tom, de Vtur. ^5.
law and (...)st. Eth. 1. 1.
reason to be no will at all. He that would borrow, should have need to
borrow; for a needless desire is unlawful: And he who has need to borrow,
would not willingly borrow but for need; much less would he pay Usury, if
with conuenience he might borrow freely. Therefore the will of the borrower is
in this case either corrupt, or no will at all; and so consequently without the
compass of Christ his rule.

Come we now to the argument of arguments, hatched only by this Author
himself; whereupon he has bestowed great cost and pains to bring it unto
perfection; sitting upon it for three leaves together in large folio. It is
grounded upon John Baptist his answer to the Publicans: Require no more then
that which is appointed unto Luke 3. 13.
you. Mark the text well; for here comes an argument will make Usurers to
laugh and keep holy day. The Author will demonstrate out of these very words
(which a man would little think at the first) that John Baptist did allow
Usury at twelve in the hundred: a rate which our statute law would punish with
the forfeiture of principal and all. Now good Lord what a thing is this; that
humane laws inacted only to loppe and prune the supersluitie of men's actions,
should be more strict and severe then the doctrine of John Baptist in the
wilderness; who laid the axe to the root, cutting down sin, and burning up
iniquity with the spirit of Elias? Twelve in the hundred, with a quicker
return then ordinary: not six months, but Centesima is it called, that is,
one in the hundred monthly, which John Baptisi has justified.

And to prove the same, he brings a long discourse out of Tullie, both for
the approbation of Centesima, and for the great honor and estimation that the
Publicans were in amongst the Romans, who had not only authority to gather
tribute, customs, and public revenues; but also to employ them for the
public good. By reason whereof they practiced the Centesima then allowed by
the Romans. These Publicans coming to John Baptist, and demanding what they
should do; John bad them require no more then that which was appointed them.
But the practice of Centesima was allowed unto Publicans, by the Roman laws;
and therefore approved of by John, in his answer to their question. This in
brief is the very dint of his whole argument.

We will not fall out about the premises. First, be it granted that the
Centesima was allowed of by Heathenish laws in Tullie his time amongst the
Romans; and amongst the Grecians before them; and among the Persians in the
days of Nehemias. Secondly, neither can it be denied but the Chap. 5.
Publicans were much honored in their place while they lived; and for their
good services had their Images after death erected in Rome with a (...).
Thirdly, we confess likewise that such Publicans had the employment of
tributes, customs and public revenues for the best behoof of the
Commonwealth: and hereby having great store of money in likelihood, were great
practisers of usury both for the public and their own private commodities.

But what of all this? Before that John Baptist his answer do make any thing
to your purpose, two points must be proved, which lie yet untouched. First,
that those Publicans who came to John his baptism, had the like place, office
and authority for public goods, as those whereof Tullie writes. Secondly,
you must prove likewise, that this usury was an essential part of a
Publicans office; else this text will conclude nothing for you. These have you
wisely passed over in silence; for I doubt you would much have failed in the
proof of both.

The Roman Publicans had no small power committed to them for the weal
public, when Orat. pro on. Plancio.
Tullie testifies, that Flos equitum Romanorum, ornamentum ciuitatis,
firmamentum reipub. Publicanorum ordine continetur. But the Publicans which
John Bap. spoke with in Jordan, were Jews, and not Romans, as is agreed by
Hieron. epist 146. ad Damas.
old and Bez. annot. in Mat. 9. 10.
new Interpretors. Mat. 9. 10
For Christ himself, who came after John, was not sent, neither would send his
Disciples, but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Matthew an Apostle,
and therefore a Jew, was a Publican: and so were many other Jews who sat with
Christ at meat. Now these Jewish Publicans were as much debased, as the other
were honored. Abased amongst the Jews, because they were Publicans: and
amongst the Romans, because they were Jews. These were hired to assist the
Publicans in collecting of customs, or, at the most, they farmed the same of
the Romans; and did exact an overplus what they could get, for themselves: but
for employing the Emperors money in usury, or otherwise; the Romans would
look to that themselves: as appears by that which Pliny writes to Traian
the Emperor, Paecuniae publicae Domine prouidentia tua and minister to nostro,
etc. By what warrant then can you confer this charge upon Jewish Publicans,
which were but hirelings to the Romans; Qui opera^ suam ad exactionem
tributorum Romany locabat. Beza in Mat. 9. 10.
the chief of them but factors of tole and tribute? who as for their office
they were hated of their own nation; so for their extreme exactions and
forged cauillations, were they justly reputed for infamous sinners. Some of
these Publicans coming unto John Baptist, and being touched by his doctrine
with a remorse, desired salvation amongst the rest: yet doubting whether their
profession was capable, asked; What shall we do? John does not bid them give
over their calling, or cease to be Publicans: because although it seemed an
odious thing to the Jews, that those of their own nation should serve the
uncircumcised, for the abridgement of their liberty; who thought themselves so
free: yet since tribute was due unto Caesar, the office of gathering tribute
could not be unlawful. But the covetous exacting of more then was due (being
the common fault of Publicans) was the thing which John Baptist would reform
in those words, Require no more then is appointed unto you. Is not this agreed
to be the simple meaning of the text? What have we then to do with Centesima,
or any kind of Usury in this place? Our Savior Christ does testify Luke 6.
34.
of these kind of people, that they would lend freely to their friends without
Usury, for the like again. Yet I will not deny but these in all likelihood
would also take Usury: for men of their lives would make little conscience,
before their conversion, either of Usury or any other crime. What then? must
John Baptist needs approve all such faults as he does not express? He
nominateth that only which is most pertinent and proper to the office of a
Publican: including the rest in his general exhortations: wherein Saint Luke
testifies that John spoke many more things then be Luke 3. 18.
written. The exaction of more in the name of tribute or custom by forged
cauillation then of right was due, was the crime of Publicans. But was it their
only fault? were the soldiers given to no other offenses then those which
John did specify? was there want of no other virtue among the people, then
that one which John by name does commend unto them? These kind of arguments
be too too slight; and I fear I must incur the greatest blame my self, for
standing too long about them.

CHAP. VII. Arecapitulation, with an inforcement of the premises.
NOw (Christian Reader) let us advise together in cold blood, for a Christian
resolution, what is to be done in the case of usury. 2. Book, chap. 24. sect.
2. 3. 3. Book. chap. 1.
For what has been said by way of argument on either side, we have heard.
What I have read, or can imagine may with any color be alleged in defense of
it, has been urged with the best probability that I can: for I had rather
give then take advantage in this kind. But alas, we 2. Book, cap. 2. sect.
2. 3. 4. 3. Book, chap. 23. 4. 5. 6.
see the best probabilities are but as fig leaves, shapen by the device of
some few indulgent wits; to cover the nakedness of that, which the law of God,
of nature and of equity has discovered to be deformed and shameful in it
self.

For the text of Scripture in the letter it self we find no question to be
made. For albeit some have put interpretations and senses upon the text,
according to the fashion and variety of conceit and apprehension (a thing
practiced for all opinions;) yet is it granted that the letter does every where
condemn usury, both in the original, and manifold translations, even under
the term of increase and overplus, the most harmless term that is, or can
be given unto it. Not any sentence of Scripture which mentions usury, but
condemns it, without exception, distinction, limitation, qualification,
dispensation, or toleration amongst the people of God.

If we remove from the text to the 2. Book, chap. 3. 4. 5
authority of Interpretors; I suppose we might truly auerre that, concerning
this question, which the most impudent adversary that ever the Church had,
durst never pretend for his assertion: That there was never any Church or
Churchman, carrying the name of a Christian, who has defended in writing any
branch of usury, for the space of fifteen hundred years after Christ.
Neither was this for want of occasion given; for it has been both practiced
and written against in all ages. Neither can we with modesty impute it to the
ignorance of the Church: for as she is acknowledged to be most eagle-sighted in
the time of her purity; so when she was ouershadowed with superstition, her
writers in cases of conscience for matters of morality were most exact; as by
their school Divinity is evident to be seen. Yet where shall we find any
one, for so many ages of the Church, who could ever devise a distinction to
save an Usurers soul?

About the time of Luther, this mystery of iniquity began 2. Book, c. 6. sect.
1.
a little to work, but very cunningly cloaked under a new contract termed the
contract of Redemption: the very toleration whereof by the pope was reckoned by
Martin Luther amongst the notes of Antichrist; so odious was Usury unto him.

Afterward many Christians of reformed Churches being 2. Book, chap. 7.
urged to fly for persecution, and to convert their goods into money, yet
wanting skill to employ the same in a strange country; tender hearts thought
it pity that Usury in such a case were not lawful; and nimble wits began to
search, if the matter might not be so handled, and qualified by cautions and
limitations, that some such thing as that we call Usury might be practiced.
For such is the subtilty of Satan, that if he cannot hinder the growth of good
corn, yet tares shall grow up with it. He thought that when men were so busied
about the reforming of those gross abuses of superstition; that then was the
only time to begin a new seed-plot of Usury, of Sacrilege, of liberty and
profanenes in the other extreme. Which vices, howsoever they were little feared
or thought upon in those days; yet by this time we may easily perceive to what
ripeness they be grown, which then were but as seeds under the ground.

And that reverend Divine, Master Calvin, who was so 2. Book, chap. 7.
timorous to satisfy his friend by epistle, in moderating this point of
Usury; as if he would have cursed the times wherein such occasion was given:
I persuade my self if he had then imagined what advantage would after have
been taken of that little somewhat which there was said in favor of Usury;
that the dearest friend in the world should never have moved him to have moved
pen to paper in that kind. But alas, what is that which is delivered by him,
and those few Divines who join with him in that assertion, whereupon a man may
resolve? Nay, Tantum abest vt islud a te pro edicto ant axiomate baberi velim,
velin co plane acquiescere.
says Calvin, be it far from thee to resolve upon that which I write in this
kind. But admit a man will resolve more confidently upon that which he then
thought, then he himself could: Admit he will venture his soul upon whatsoever
has dropped at any time from that man's pen occasionally; what is that which
he and the rest have delivered, when they have written most favorably for
Usury? If it be demanded whether it be lawful to take interest for the use
or loan of money; answer is returned by those supposed Patrons of Usury,
that for ought they can see, it may be lawful so to do; if we make no trade
of it, but once or twice upon occasion, and use it not. If then, we deal no
worse with our brother, Calu. epist. de Vsura.
then we would in the like case be dealt withal our selves: If we take it not
of any who by poverty is urged to borrow: If the taking of it do not any ways
hinder the free loan to him that needs: If the interest be but half of the
borrowers gain at the most: If we look that the Commonweal be not bitten or
prejudiced thereby: Virel Chatechis. precept. 8.
If our Usury exceed not that which the laws do tolerate where we dwell:
Iunius in Leuit. fine. Zanch. in epist. od Ephesians. cap. 4. 8. Hemingius in Psalm.
15.
If the borrower besprinkle the creditor with some part of his increase, rather
out of his voluntary thankfulness, then by way of exaction: If the lender be
content to bear part of the borrowers loss, as well as of his gain: If in
case the principal do miscarie without the borrowers fault, we a be content
not only to remit the principal with the Usury, but to lend him afresh: Put
all these Ifs together, and here is a piece of Usury which was never practiced
since the world stood, nor never will. And yet these be the cautions of the
greatest patrons of Usury that ever writ. After they have examined the point,
and answered, as they think, the reasons which are usually brought against
Usury by the school; yet in conclusion put al their limitations together,
they agree upon no Usury at all, as it is before defined. Single them out one
from another; there is not any one of them who dares defend any such ordinary
Usury, as is amongst us practiced with y^ greatest moderation.

Alas poor simple souls, who have received it by tradition I know not how,
and do verily persuade themselves, that many very reucrend Divines have in
their writings defended ten in the hundred to be very lawful. Let the case then
be put after the common intendment of the world: A lay man comes to a Divine
and tells him; Sir, I have a sum of money lying by me and little skill to
employ it: I know diverse would be glad to borrow it, and give me good
security. May I not lawfully put it to use for eight, nine or ten in the
hundred, without so many ifs? I am no States man to know when, or how the
Commonwealth is bitten or prejudiced by Usury: Neither can I tell what the
borrowers gain or loss is; he may deceive me easily, or belly himself, that
he may borrow still: besides, I do not love to pry into other men's affairs,
how they thrive. If he gain with my money, I shall be very glad; if he lose,
it shall not be my fault; for I will not entreat him to borrow it: only my
desire is to be sure of mine own with quietness, and some certain moderate
increase for my money, until I know how to employ it otherways my self. Let
this be the case: I have not met with one Divine, new or old, extant in print,
who has taken this question in hand to sift and examine, that durst yet
determine this, or any other equivalent or like unto this, to be lawful.

Now if there be any who do animate their private friends to such practices,
I cannot better resemble them then to those pestilent Heretics, the
Carpocratians, whereof De praescript. aduers. Haer.
Tertullian and Irenaeus write, who said the Apostles committed only vulgar
points of doctrine to writing, reserving certain secret positio^s to be
imparted to their special friends, who were perfect and able to receive such
unwritten 2. Book, chap. 24. Apostolos ita tradidisse dignis tantum.
verities, as were by tradition to be delivered to some few. Now if there be
any such concealed truth concerning Usury, which none must know but our
special friends who have grace to use it well; I would to God it might be
revealed, together with the grounds whereupon it is built; that men may not
run their consciences blinfold in these practices upon their own
destruction: thinking themselves in a good way, without any warrant either from
sound reason or good authority.

. 2.
As for authority, so likewise for reason, I have done my poor endeauours to
enquire after the grounds of this point; and have found: First, that authority
is so strong against the lawfulness of Usury, as that no man of modesty 2.
Book, chap. 10.
but will pawse and make question of it; and therefore to him it must be
unlawful, because doubtful.

Next, that it is, and ever has been of ill report; and 2. Book, chap. 11.
therefore among Christians unlawful: because it causes the enemy abroad to
blaspheme our profession; and is scandalous to our brethren at home.

2. Book, chap. 12.
Thirdly, that our statute law now in force simply forbidding all Usury, or
overplus for any loan whatsoever, being a wholesome and good law without
exception, is to be obeyed by virtue of Gods law, even for conscience sake. In
the pursuit of which argument, as I have presumed to set down what I conceive
concerning the force of this penal statute of Usury: so have I touched as
necessarily incident to the same purpose, the binding power of humane laws in
general. Wherein that I be not mistaken, understand me to have taken a middle
way, between two assertions, both which seem to me extreme. First, the
Council. Trident. sess. 24. de sacram. matrimon. can. 3.
Church of Rome, that she might tyrannize over men's consciences at her
pleasure, has usurped a power, not only to dispense with the express law of
God; but in place thereof to create new laws, which shall have equal binding
power over the conscience with Gods law. For the better establishing of which
usurpation, some of her flatterers do extend this binding to all humane laws
whatsoever: making no difference betwixt them and the law of God in this; but
that the law of God and of man do both alike bind the conscience. So be their
words. * Lex humana and diuina quoad obligationem Belarm. Tom. 1. part. 2, de
laicis. lib. 3. cap. 11.
non differunt: vtraque enim obligat in conscientia, nunc ad mortale, nunc ad
veniale peccatum, prorerum ipsarum grauitate. Which assertion, if it should
take place, I see no reason but that we of the Clergy should stand bound to
study and teach the people the Civil and Canon laws of our country, as well
as the law of God; seeing their consciences do stand equally bound to both
alike, which to imagine were gross impiety. Another sort there be who Gerson.
lib. de vita spirituali, sect. 4. Almainus, quaest. 1. de potestate Eccles.
cap. 12. Vasquius, quaest. 12. 14. 29.
do auerre, that we are not any whit bound in conscience to humane laws from
the authority commanding, but merely from the matter commanded: So as if the
thing inacted by law be not contained within the law of God or nature, it is no
sin before God to transgress that statute. Humane laws (say they) be
nothing, to the conscience, but only interpretations of laws divine and
natural. So as a subject does offend in transgressing a law, no otherwise then
a patient in breaking the rule of diet prescribed by the Physician: wherein he
does offend God, not for disobeying the precept of the Physician; but for
transgressing the rule of good health, which now is made manifest to him by the
Physicians skill. In like manner, humane laws do only manifest and prescribe
that which in conscience we were bound to obey before.

Now as the former assertion does derogate from the Majesty of Divine law
which is due unto it: so does this overmuch weaken that ordinance of God, which
he has established amongst men. In medio tutissimus ibis.

We have therefore chosen the middle way, to wit, that men stand bound in
conscience to obey good and wholesome laws, not only from the nature of the
thing enacted, but also in matters merely indifferent, both because the
general observation thereof is auailable for the public good (which in
charity we are bound to respect:) And also because we must be subject to that
authority which is the ordinance of God. Romans 13. verse. 5.
Subject, I say, not only in suffering the penalty which the Apostle terms
wrath, but in obeying of lawful commands, even for conscience sake: for
conscience sake, not because of any humane authority, (which of it self has
no command at all over the inward man) but only by virtue of Gods law, which
commands us to obey authority: so as if we shall willingly and wittingly
transgress; we shall sin against God. Admit then that Usury were a thing in
it self indifferent: yet have we in England a bond lying upon us more then
other nations in regard of our positive law: Not only Ex ipsa legis vtilitate,
as Stapleton would have it; but in respect Controuer. 5. de potest. Eccl. circa
leges morum. q. ^. art. 2. expl.
of our subjection unto a lawful commanding authority, as it is the ordinance
of God.

Having enquired yet further into the nature of usurious gain, we have found
it to be most remote from that natural and most innocent increase which God
established and instituted amongst men: for that, money is not only barren 2.
Book, chap. 13.
by nature, being a thing merely artificial; but also void of all immediate
use in it self to the possessor while he does enjoy it: So as the borrower
gives hire for the use of that whereof he can have no use but in disbursing of
it, and parting from it: and the lender takes hire for the use of that, which
unto him can neither wear in the using, nor be worse for the wearing. And
which is yet more unkind; the more this gain does increase and multiply, the
more it may; contrary to all other increase both of nature, and man's industry.

Helping our eyesight by the rules of piety and godliness, 2. Book, chap. 14.
we have further found it to be an ungodly gain, which is assured against
every act of God, as Usury is. For albeit in wisdom we must secure our
selves by all lawful means against earthly casualties, and the fraud of men:
yet notwithstanding in religion we ought most willingly to depend upon Divine
providence for our gain, acknowledging all our profit and increase to be the
blessing of God.

And as the first table has condemned usury of impiety, 2. Book, chap. 15.
sect. 1.
so has the second convinced it to be most unjust. Unjust every way. It takes
hire for loan, and sets to sale that most liberal and free act of
charity. It passes over by covenant all the hazard of the principal, and yet
takes hire for the use of the same, against the equity of Gods law, which
says, the borrower must not make that good which came Exodus 22. 15.
for hire. It receives great gain without labor; clear gain without cost;
certain gain without peril; out of the industry, the charges, the mere
uncertainties of the borrower. 2. Book, c. 15. sect. 2.
All the parties whom usury does any ways concern, have condemned it to be
most wicked and odious. The Usurers themselves are ashamed of their profession:
the towns and cities where they dwell, dare not justify the trade, either of
usury or brokage; but do suffer the practice in secret only, as a work of
darkness. All sorts of borrowers condemn it, as being a cruel biting to the
poor; a cursed snare to the prodigal; an instrument of oppression to rich
borrowers; depriving them also who be of a midling fortune, of that most
bountiful work of charity (free loan) which unto them is most proper and
peculiar. The Commonweal, and in it the poor people, may rue the time, that
ever the least usury was left unpunished; for their purse in the end must pay
for all.

Yet for all this, if charity might heal where iniquity 2. Book, chap. 16.
does wound, it were the more tolerable. But usury as it peruerteth justice
every way; so does it dry up the very fountain of charity, being naturally
opposite thereunto; turning every thing to lucre and gain, and straitning the
bowels of compassion, which otherwise would dilate themselves, not only in
free giving, but especially in liberal lending, where money for a time might
be spared.

. 3.
These points have been proved in their several places; what must be the
conclusion then out of al these premises? Charity, Justice, Piety, Nature
her self; the laws of God, and of men; all authority ancient and modern,
joining their forces against the Usurer, how can he stand, environed with such
a cloud of witnesses; or justify his conscience against the day of trial?

Yet few men there be in these days who have a remorse of this sin, or do
take it to heart: their consciences be seared as with a hot iron, there is such
a thick skin grown over their hearts, as they will hardly be circumcised in
this point. Which senseless stupiditie may easily be perceived to proceed
originally from three principal causes.

1 First, the general practice of usury makes every one in particular to
think that he shall shift with his conscience, as well as others. Lord have
mercy upon us (says he) if it be such a matter to take usury, what shall
become of such, and such, who I am sure have as good souls to God as I? I
purpose not therefore to trouble my head for that matter. I pray God I have no
greater sins to answer for, and then I hope I shall do well.

See the efficacy and power of example, when it grows common. It was placed
before in the first rank of motives, persuading men that usury was lawful,
because it is so common. Now albeit example be too weak a reason to infer
any such conclusion; I hope even in the estimate of the weakest judgment: yet
thus far it does prevail with many, to keep their consciences from any
great touch in this point; for they resolve themselves undoubtedly, that it
cannot be so heinous a sin, which is so general a practice amongst them of
good account. Ah fearful temptation, thus to be drawn into sin by
imitation! It was that which turned so many legions of Angels into Devils, to
see the brighter and more glorious spirits, leave their station by
disobedience. But did that mitigate Gods wrath toward Jude 6.
them of inferior rank? Habet ordo diuinae iustitiae, etc. Divine justice
required that they who were drawn into the same fall, should be inwrapped in
the same condemnation. When there were but two in all the world to transgress,
concerning that only forbidden fruit, the example Genesis 3. 6.
of the one enticed the other. It was that which brought fire and brimstone
upon those goodly cities of the plain, when abomination grew so commonly
practiced, Genesis 19. 4.
from the young even to the old, that one drew another from the highest to the
lowest. Nay so forcible was this temptation, that a branch of unnatural sin
escaped the fire of Sodom, and light in a cave of the mountain: thus the
general example of Sodom infected the family of just Lot. But did that
extenuate the fault? Nothing less. Moab was the father of the Moabites, and
Ben-ammi of the Ammonites, for many generations. Verse. 38.


2 Secondly, men take occasion from the question of usury, even because it is
a question, to arm themselves against all remorse and touch of conscience. For
if they can once hear that it is questionable, they assume a liberty to
themselves to choose a side, and to practice according to that opinion which
likes them best. But the grossenes of their error does herein appear; that
understanding Divines to be somewhat divided about usury, they do presently
imagine the point in question to be this; whether the taking of nine, or ten
in the hundred, according to our ordinary practice, be lawful. But alas,
there is no such question amongst Divines to be found in all their writings. I
have sought with all diligence my self; I have enquired of others; and upon
examination, I find not any published upon this argument, who discussing this
point does defend any such thing. Many questions we have; what is usury, and
what not. Some there be who defend certain shreds of usury, even to the
rasing of the definition; whose reasons we have met withal in their Page 8. 9.
10. 11. 12. 14. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. 47. 99. 104. and the whole
3. Book.
places. Some also of the Jesuitical brood (who to humor the people for their
purposes, will dispense with any thing) have hatched new devices, how to defend
profit by money, as good as usury every whit, and yet no usury: cunningly
twisted of three lawful contracts; of the contract of society, or
partnership, and two kinds of assurances with the same party: defended by
Bononiae.
Io. Eckius, and notably discussed at Ann. 1581
Rome by many learned Doctors, in my presence, says Disput. 5. q. 24.
desocietate punct. 2.
Gregory de Valentia. A notable point no doubt, and well worthy the
discussing. So feign would those Divines give the world some contentment for
this practice of usury; that since they cannot with any face defend the old,
they would be glad to create a new. But for an absolute covenant for ten,
nine, or eight in the hundred, according to the custom of Cities, amongst
Divines of any Church, I cannot yet find a patron.

3 But the third and last impediment, which hinders men from taking of this
sin to heart, is of all others the most fearful to be thought upon, and yet
I fear me most auailable. When men be once seasoned with Usury, and have
entangled themselves in the same by any settled practice; they be after afraid
to call it into question for disquieting their consciences. But blessed is that
disquietnesse, which procures eternal peace: and cursed be that senseless
peace, which brings everlasting torment. A sinful soul must be disturbed
here or elsewhere, there is no remedy: If we judge not our selves before, we
shall be judged hereafter, when it will be too late to find mercy. Can men
hope for mercy under a pretense of ignorance in this point? Verily if it were
an invincible ignorance, God in mercy would pass it over, as he does many
other things, where the means of better information is wanting: But if it be
an affected and wilful ignorance, it adds sin unto sin. Now what is more
affected then to decline and avoid the means of instruction and resolution,
only because they will not disturb and awaken their consciences out of so
sweet a sleep of security, for so sweet a gain as usury? If he did
nothing but sleep out his months, the moneys would come in.

We do accuse some obstinate Recusants of wilful blindness, because they do
refuse the means of better instruction: yet the most wilful amongst them can
say thus much for themselves, that many learned men, and the Church of Rome for
many ages, have defended their cause. Which apology of theirs, though upon due
examination it be nothing; yet is it much more then ever could be said for
usury. For though the practice of it can plead antiquity, nothing more; yet
was there never any Church, Orthodox, or Heretical, which ever defended the
same since the world stood. In some places it has been tolerated. Tolerated, I
say, and therefore not approved of in any wise. As Master Beza for Geneua has
well observed: Annotat. in Mat. 19. 8.
Foenerari prohibet Christiana charitas: foenus tamen propter hominum commercia
multi magistratus vident se simpliciter prohibere non posse. Itaque (quod vnum
reliquum est) foeneris modum certum constituunt. An vero propterea foenerari
bona conscientia licet? Minime profecto. Neque enim ex legibus, sed ex dei
verbo petenda est conscientiae regula. Imo ne ciuiles quidem leges probant, sed
damnant potius, quod duntaxat tolerant, cogente hominum improbitate: Christian
charity does condemn usury: yet notwithstanding in regard of the intercourse
of merchandise, or commerce between man and man, many Magistrates do
perceive, how they cannot simply inhibit the same, therefore (that which
remains only for them to do) they stint and limit usury. But may a man
therefore take usury with a good conscience? No verily (says Beza) for the
rule of conscience is to be taken, not from the civil laws of men, but from
the word of God. Yea the Civil laws themselves, do not approve, but rather
condemn, that which they tolerate only, being urged thereunto by the
wickedness of men. These be the very words of that famous Pastor of Geneua,
which I have set down, to the end we may take notice of the censure even of
that Church wherein usury seemed most necessary, and from which men have
taken their greatest encouragement, to venture their souls upon this sin.

Take notice therefore (Christian Reader) I beseech thee, that thou do not
mistake us, and deceive thine own soul. That thou may not mistake, I have
labored to be as plain as I can: And that I might not ouerburthen or ensnare
thy conscience, I have justified such contracts and dealings with money for
money, as may stand upon just and equal grounds. The Page 19.
contract of association or partnership, where both parties are partners in
gain and loss, both depending upon divine providence for a blessing: That
lawful Page 20.
interest which properly and truly is so called, when a man's money is forced or
retained from him simply against his will to his detriment; then to receive
satisfaction answerable to his damage: Page 20. 21.
Buying and selling for time in those few cases premised: Page 27.
The thankful gratuitie returned by the borrower out of his gain freely,
without any precedent contract or agreement for the same: That Page 23. 24.
real exchange, which stands justifiable upon his own grounds; if it be not
poisoned, as commonly it is, with usury: Page 28. 29.
Those equal considerations of courtesy, where one good turn requires
another, without covenant for certainty of clear gain in money or money
worth: Page 97.
Those assurances where there is some equal adventure, and where the hand of
God in the loss lights upon both parties: Page 124.
To borrow, upon usury in such cases of necessity, as are before expressed.
Thus have I yielded as much as possibly I could, loath to entangle thy
conscience, or to cast a snare upon thee. And some few Divines (I confess)
have yielded something more, then I i Page 61. 62. 63.
can see good ground for. But that which I would have thee to take especial
notice of, is, that an absolute covenant for the loan of thy money, for ten,
or nine, or eight, or seven, or six, is without warrant or authority, even
amongst those Divines, who, upon sifting and examining this point, have
concluded most favorably for thee. Alas poor soul, whither will thou turn
thy self for succor when thy best friends forsake thee? What will thou plead
for thy self when thou come before the eternal Judge upon thy trial? How
do thou hope to die a Christian, if thou live a Usurer? Do thou hope for
remission in Christ Jesus? It must be then upon thy true repentance, in
abandoning that sin. Can thou plead ignorance? Take heed it be not wilful
and affected ignorance, then is it double iniquity, which is more fearful.

Be not obstinate then and wilfully ignorant: let not filthy lucre so blind
thine eyes, that thou should presume, either to defend or to practice that,
under a pretense of ignorance, for which thou shall find neither sound reason
nor good authority; neither approbation of God in Scripture, nor of any
Christian Church, that is, or ever was upon the face of the earth: look unto it
therefore, lest that fearful censure of our blessed Savior fall upon thee,
which fell on those accursed Jews: Seeing they do not see, and hearing they
Matthew 13. verse. 13. 14. 15.
do not hear, neither understand. So in them is fulfilled the prophecy of
Esaias, which says; By hearing ye shall hear and shall not understand, and
seeing ye shall see and shall not perceive. For this peoples heart is waxed
fat, and their ears are dull of hearing, and with their eyes they have winked,
lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and should return, that I might heal them.

A woeful censure: let him look his conscience in that glass, who will not
look into this point of usury for disquieting his conscience. I beseech the
Father of heaven, by his spirit of grace, to dispossess this age of that
spirit of slumber, which makes men like deaf adders, to stop their ears at
the voice of so many Charmers.

FINIS.

