A WORK OF IOANNES FERRARIVS Montanus, touching the good ordering of a
common weal: wherein as well magistrates, as private persons, be put in
remembrance of their duties, not as the Philosophers in their vain
tradicions have devised, but according to the godly institutions and sound
doctrine of christianity. Englished by William Bauande. 1559.

Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kingston, for Ihon Wight, dwelling in Poules
Churchyard.

TO THE MOST HIGH and virtuous Princess ELIZABETH, by the grace of God, Queen
of England, France, and Irelande, defendour of the faith. etc. long reign,
prosperous health, and perpetual felicity.
THAT ELECT VESSEL and blessed Apostle S. Romans 13.
Paul says, that all power comes from God: and that he that resists
power, resists the ordinance of God. Whereas then, it has pleased the
great Lord of Lords, and King of Kings (most gracious sovereign Lady) to
enstalle your highness by his divine providence, in the Roialle throne of
majesty, to rule over this realm of England: it behooves your grace to be
vigilaunt and careful, that the weighty administracion thereof, be by your
good gouuernemente, thoroughly executed and discharged. Which then comes to
pass, when God is in his creatures truly glorified and honored, and the
people trained up in godly learning, dece^t order, and virtuous conversation.
And although there be many wholesome Laws and ordinances, set forth and
established in your graces dominions, whereby your highness subjects be
brideled and restrained, from corrupt abuses and licenciousnesse of living, and
enduced to embrace Justice, temperaunce, upright dealing, and all kinds of
virtues: yet as soon as one vice or enormitie is rooted out and abolished, an
other more notorious and horrible arises and increases (soche is the
peruersitet of man, prone to all kind of iniquity) even as it were out of
Hydras head. So easy is the way that leads manne to perdicion: so hard is
the passage that brings him to salvation. But happy be they, yea, and most
happy that can so strongly arm them selves, that they may be able to
encounter the fearce assaults of their enemy, to neglect the wicked
allurementes of the world, to pass the streites of yearthlie vanitees, and to
provide them selves of such furniture for their journey, that from this vale
of misery and calamitee, they may be conueighed unto the high palaice of
felicity, from this mortafie and visible habitacion, unto that immortal and
invisible Jerusalem. Unto the which mansion place, not the dreams and
fancies of the old Philosophers, nor their vain supersticions and fond
tradicions (although some of them devised many good Laws and rules for
politic gouuernement) can directly lead us: but the divine institucions of
the Prophets of God, the sound doctrine of the Apostles, and the perfect
truth of Christ's Gospelle, are there unto our most sure guides and
conductours. In which pathe, soche may the better learn to walk, as will
diligently read, and willingly follow, such learned lessons and godly
instructions, as are set forth in this treatise, touching the good orderyng of
a common weal. Wherein as vices be sharply rebuked, abuses reproved, and
many exhortacio^s used, that al impietee should be utterly abandoned: So be
virtues highly commended, good customs approved, and men's minds moved, to
embrace Godly living.

Which things how profitable and necessary they be to be known, soche
shall best judge, as have respect to their own safety, and tender man's
wealth, and the common commoditee. And that your highness subjects of this
your common weal of England, might the easelier understand the same, for
their better instruccion, I have published under your graces protection, this
piece of work in our vulgar English tou^gue, wherein (as nere as I could) I
have done the duty of a faiethfull interpretour. But when these my simple
doings, and first fruictes of my study, be presented before your Majesty: it
may then please your highness, to call to your remembrance, that GOD at the
time of the erection of his tabernacle, did not only Exodus 25. and 35.
accept soche as brought to the beutifiyng and ornament thereof, gold,
silver, purple, scarlette, white silk, precious stones, sweet perfumes, and
other rich and sumptuous presents: but also he took in very good part the
good wills of the^ that offered brass, iron, goats hear, oil,
candelstickes, frankincense, and other things of like small value and
importance. So my most humble peticion unto your Maiestee is (most benyng and
gracious sovereign) that you would as well accept this my poor present, as
though it were some greater gift, or costlier jewel. And I (as my bounden
duty requires, and as it becomes al soche as owe unto your highness, their
true allegeaunce) will pray to almighty God, that your grace may long reign
over us in great honor, with victory over all your enemies: and that this
your graces common weal of England, by your Godly Laws and ordinances, and
through the comely order, and honest behavior of your highness subjects,
may be a worthy spectacle of virtue to all christendom.

At the middle Temple the. 20. day of December. 1559. YOUR highness most
humble and obedient subject. w. Bauande.

THE First Book touching the good ordering of a common weal.
The argument of the first Chapter.
That manne is then in the ready way toward true felicity when the common
weal, whereunto nature has made him framable, and he has yelden himself, is
by good government well appoincted.

Seeing mine intent is to write, of the good orderyng of a common weal, me
think it expediente to begin at man, which because he joined himself in
fellowship of life with others: caused first citees to be builded, as one, that
is among all other kinds and natures of living creatures alone receinable,
as well of reason, as also of knowledge and forecast, whereof, all other things
lack the benefit. Whereupon M. Tullius writes, that there is a certain
likeness of Lib. i. de legibus.
cousinage between God and manne: Because that God, when he had made all other
living things stoop down for food, reared up only man, and giuyng him an
high countinaunce, stirred him up to heaven, as to view the place, from whence
his ancient parentage was fet. Man therefore by nature is bent to a civility,
bent to gentleness, and so bent, that no poinct of ungentleness might stain him,
if that by sin and a continual corruption of life, he were not led to the
contrary: wherefore it is most for his behofe, to enter such a trade of
living, as whereby he may recover, and show himself by the covenant of his
society, to be borne unto the appliyng of virtue.

Not so much but the Philosophers Heathen writers by search of things
learned, that nature had laid in us certain sparcles and cherishementes of
virtues, whereby incontinent we should be moved, to honesty and goodness: to
the end that we might show the nighnes of our reason unto God, if we were not
hindered therein, by a certain inward corrupeion and untowardness, which even
within our body swarueth from goodness, forgettyng, that the everlasting father
embraced man, with so great zeal, with so great love, that for his sake when
Man is lord over yearthly things.
he had made all things, he did put all under him, declaryng by an
unreprovable reason, that all things, which be upon earth, were create and
brought furthe for man's use, and man to the glory and honor of his
creator, from the which benefit of calling, he straight degendreth, that
following ungodliness, neither attaineth the true use of things, neither
shoots or bends his mind toward the prick of this life. Wherein there is
no neade to seek foreign testimonies, seeing the holy Scriptures be so full
thereof, for the holy Moses says thus. And God created man, after the image
and likeness Genesis.i.
of himself, after the image of God he created him, male and female he created
them, and God blessed them and said: Increase and be multiplied, furnishe
the earth, and bring it under you, be ye lords over the fisshes of the sea,
and birds of the air, and al living things that be moved upon the earth,
and God said. Behold, I have given unto you all herbs, that bring furthe
seed upon the earth, and all trees that have in them selves seed* grain,
after their kind, to be unto you for sustenaunce, and to all that lives upon
the earth. etc. And an other where. Because God created man to be undestroyed,
and made him after the likeness of his own Image. Sapien. ii.


You understand the excellency of mankind, to whom it was not enough, that he
was create after the likeness of God, but also he had in charge to be
governor of all living things. Therefore man is create to have charity to be
godly and virtuous, to use the creatures subject unto him to the glory of
God, to call upon him, and finally at his departure hence, to be conveyed up to
heaven, whereunto he is ordained. For at the beginning he was Eccle. xv.
so appoincted, that counsel should be in his hand, and before him should
be life and death, water and fire, good and evil, that he might stretche his
hand: to which he would. But because he bestowing that counsel naughtely,
Oseae. viii. Soph. iii. Man's transgressio^.
chosed to fall into sin, death ensued, because man did transgress the law,
and commandment of God, which stain has issued from the first man, into
all mankind, so that in him there is no more, either any truth, mercy, or
godliness, but curse, liyng, aduoutrie, manslaughter, stealth, and all kind
of mischief.

Wherefore his glory is turned into shame, as the Prophet and the other
scripture witnesses, so that there Joan. iii. Luce. xviii.
is not one, which can direct his counsel to good, or attain unto heaven,
whereunto he is allied, for no man goes up unto heaven, but he which came
down from heaven, the soonne of man that is in heaven. Therefore none is good
but one, that is God.

Howbeeit, although in this calamity of mankind, by reason of the corrupt
nature, there is not one that of himself can do any good: yet those sparcles,
which at the beginning were laid in manne, of himself to desire honesty and
goodness, be not so utterly quenched, but that he may by study compass,
both honesty and virtue, get the name of a good liver in the common weal,
and so as it were, win a certain taste of happiness. According to which
drift, the elder Africane, me seameth, Scipios dream.
warned P. Cornelius Scipio in the dream, reported by Marcus Cicero, in the
sixte of his books, whose argument is touching a common weal, by these
words: There is a certain and appoincted place in heaven, where such, as
have saved, helpte, and enlarged their country, shall euerlastyngly enjoy
blessedness. For there is nothing more acceptable unto God, the great prince,
which rules all this world, that can be done in this world, then the
assembles and repair of men. established by law, which be called citees.
The governors and preseruers whereof, as they went hence, so they shall
return hither again. Naie, to speak the very truth, they alone do
properly live, which have taken their flight, furthe of these bodily bounds,
as it were furthe of a iaole. For your life (as you term it) is death.

And in deed the books of old writers, be full of such as have clomme above
the sterres, and been canonized among saints, either for some singularity of
justice, and stoutnesse, or showing some excellent quality, or otherwise
deseruyng well of their country: For they have used to accoumpte such as
gods in deed, which have done well to men. Hereupon rises the Proverb,
Man Manne is a God to man.
is a God to man. So greatly did they being very Painims, acknowledge only
God, to be the benefactour.

Therefore, there have alwaie been found in commonweals such, as never
ceased to embrace justice, to do both stoutly and wisely, to prefer the
common weal^, before their own private, to engraffe the discipline of good
behauier, to defend the good, to snaffle the naughty, to embrace virtue, to
support their country: which poinctes do rather belong to a civil order,
then that any man should hold them as a short way to the heavenly life, and
true happiness. And after such sort, God from time to time, has alwaie
raised up certain, which should gather men to gether into citees, frame, and
guide the same, which like good men might keep the rest in quietness. Which
poinct, seeing it comes by the very A political felicity.
motion of nature, it may not be judged to surmount nature, much less, ought
it to be rekened any poinct of civil government, and to be imputed to the
true goodness. Neither yet, although I account these, not to be any parcelles
of the very true and godly goodness, do I therefore hold it evil, in our
civil life to live virtuously, to obeie laws, not to do to other, that we
would not have done to our selves, as without which the society of men,
appoincted originally by the ordinance of God should hang stailesse, and
become rather a swarm of vilaines, then a reverent resort of good persons.

And therefore, for the eschewyng of further misunderstandyng, The diversity
of goodness.
it shall be requisite to declare the difference, which we put in goodness. The
first kind of goodness, may be called Civil, which pertains to the
honesty of life, when we do virtuous deeds, which then take place, when we
do one thing often times well, which makes good and virtuous men, and after
a sort, traineth us toward felicity and a blessed life. For thappoinctement
whereof, the Philosophers, as men that never tasted what true happiness meant,
be in variaunce. For some account the wealth of the world and outward gooddes,
happiness, led thereunto by this reason, for that, such as have them by the
profit and commodity thereof, be holden as happy, such things be, riches,
possessions, fairness of body, strength, and other kind of vanitios, whereof
Epicurus, Chrisippus, and soche like, be The Philophers disagree in difinyng
true felicity.
patt^^s and vouchers. Other drawing nigher unto nature, or rather reason do
place happiness, in the gooddes of the mind, that is, virtues, wisdom,
prudence, temperau^ce, justice, sobrenes, stoutnes, and other good properties,
consistyng in the woorkyng of the mind: and the fathers of this opinion be,
Socrates, Plato, Arisiotis, Tullie, and such as be called Stoickes; which do
hold, that there is nothing profitable, unless it be also honest. The second
kind of goodness, and that we may True goodness. Math. v^^.
more truly term good, is that comes from him, which alone is good, which
also makes the good tree, whence we look for good fruicte. For a good tree
cannot bring furthe ill fruicte, ne yet a naughty tree good fruicte. Which
we therefore call good works, because they come of faith, whereby we be
both justified, and also purchase the blessed life by Jesus Christ, made by
adoption the sons of God, and coinheritours of heaven, by whose spirit we
also cry: Abba father. Galath. iiii.


So it appears, that, according unto this division, such things, which we
do well in the common weal, be good, but ciuilly: from doing whereof we must
in no case be weried, although it further nothing to the life of bliss, unless
God do repute it unto rightuosnes, and at length croune his own work. For we
are bid without ceassyng, to doo^ that is good, to give the fruicte of our
faith, and yet, when we have done all, we must confess our selves to be
unprofitable servants. So earnestly must we continue in our duty, that we
may have in us peace, mildness, gentleness, goodness, faith, charity,
meekness, sobrenesse, and every poincte of virtue, that so we bring furthe
fruicte worthy repentance, and the more we do, the less ought we to
attribute to our selves, to the end we gather no stomach, but thank God for
all, which is the aucthour of all, which has mercy where him likes, and
bestows our works, according to his own arbitrament. Therefore saint Paul
says: Galath. vi.
Let us not be weried with doing good, for in due season we shall reap again
unwearied. Wherefore, while we have time, let us do good, to all men, but
principally to our neighbors in faith. See ye not how we be commanded to
do good, and that without any ceassyng? And he that teaches this, writes
also: we think therefore, that man is justified by faith, without the works
of the law, which in deed are good, but by them we Roma. iii.
be not justified: how beit to them that love God, all things work to good.

The more do such naughty men judge a miss, which say that good, is
not good, and do either utterly dehorte other from the honest discipline of
good behavior, and good works, or else so lightly pass the^ over, that you
shall hardely find among Christians, what is honesty of living, discipline of
good behavior, or virtue it self, if you should seek the same, as it were with
a light candle: for so much as every idle man, is given over Galath. v.
to his own desires, and in the mean while, the window is opened, not without
the offendyng of the Gentiles, to all vices of the flesh, as be aduoutrie,
horedome uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry, enemitie, strief, comparisons, The
works of the flesh.
anger, contention, sedition, heresy, envy, slaughter, dronkennes, surfait,
mistrust, and soche like, the doers whereof shall never enherite the kingdom
of God. And these so detestable vices, at this day reign in such sort in
the common weal, as neither at any time greater, ne yet ever the like.

For which cause, every good man must travail in this poinct, that the old
discipline called again, commonweals may begin to be the assemblies, and
reverent resortes of good men, wherein every man may attain the use of
things in such sort, as becomes a christian manne, wherein God may be
called upon and glorified. For life, as Marcus Varro says, is given to man,
not for his own sake, but to show some worthy faict therein, yea, to ascend
up ward, and by these transitory things, to conceive an hope, and bend his
mind to the everlasting. Much less ought we, as men allured with
Mearmaides songs, and thereby lingeryng about the rocks, where they haunt,
to spend our time in contemplative studies, till we be old, and not ones fall
to debate the cause, why we have this life lent us, to the end it may be laid
before our iyes, whereunto we be borne, how much we be bound to our
creator, how much to our neighbor, whereas the very Philosophers do teach,
that man is partly bredde for man's behoufe, that they may mutually one help
the other. And Socrates full well answered, that he was more profitable to a
common weal that taught other, and made many fit to rule therein: then he
that governed well himself.

And although it be hard to amend the evil, which Man is naturally civil
by long and old putrefiyng, has as it were ioynted it self in man, yet because
man is naturally civil, and commonable, that is, such as is ready to obeic
laws, to join in the society of life to help other, to tender his own
commodity, without any harm to other, to desire that is upright and good, to
favor honesty, to do that apperteineth to this his life, wherein he has
matched him self with others, an instruction to good life, is not to be
neglected: for he has reason, whereby he can suffer himself to be brought to
frame, he has the benefit of speech above all other living creatures, whereby
he both teaches others, such things as be best, and understands and
printeth them in his heart, when they be taught him. Yet notwithstanding
mankind, by sin and tra^sgressyng of Gods commandment, is so lost and
corrupt, that he alwaie leans to that, which is forbid him, and bends
more earnestly to evil, then that he can ones think of that is good, for that
there is not one, that can do good, no not one. For if ye understand that
kind of good, which we before called the true good, which healpeth unto the
atteignyng of the everlasting life, I do not deny, but that manne can do no
part thereof, because it is far from our reach, hanging only upon him,
which reputeth this of ours to justice, or injustice. Seeing no man, as
Hieremie says, can ones speak good, but only God, which freely justifies
us, by the mediator Jesus Christ. That therefore is Roma. iii.
good, which in our common life, we do use to call good, whereunto by nature,
how much so ever she be perished, according to my former reason, we have
certain drieseedes left in us, whereby we be moved to that is good and upright,
whereby we may be made commonable and civil. Whose contrary, the Lawyer uses
often times to term, uncivil, a word of fine and large signification,
betokenyng that, which does not agree with laws, honesty and ordinances of
a city, appoincted by the rule of justice, and vprightnes. After that kind of
goodness, do we measure the virtues, which profane writers do so much
allege, and commend unto us, and counterplace them to vices, which lurk in
man, by reason of his worn custom in cuill, no less then fire in the flint,
which unless they be practiced by discipline, teaching, perpetual labor,
and such things as be profitable, honest and worthy a good manne, both
privately and a peartly, deserve no commendations: but have that kind of life,
wherein they show no actiuitie, like brute beasts, and turn it into a kind
of death. Hereupon Pythagoras, appoinctyng the pathe of man's life, from the
beginning Lactantius li. vi. capi. iii. ^iuinarum institu.
two grained, was wont to declare the same by the letter Y, whose first
leadyng drives, either to the right or left hand, which Persius also
properly expresses in these verses.

The braunched letter of the Greeks that Ypsilon they read: Y.

His rightside representes to thee the pathe thou ought to tread.
Therefore it is profitable, well to garnishe the resortes of men, because it
is the work of God, and not of man. For So Much as ^he yearthly city, is
builded to this end, that it resemble the appearaunce of the other heavenly,
which it both must signify, and also represent, that from these visible
things, we may pass up to the unvisible, which thing saint Augustine does
properly, August. lib. xv. de ciuitate dei.
by way of allegory bring in, according to S. Paul's mind, by Abraham's two
sons, the one the handmaides, the other the frewomans child: and upon this
consideration, good men and lovers of vprightnes, have been alwaie by Gods
providence stirred up, to keep men in the society, and duty of a civil
life, to adourne the common weal it self, sensyng, gouernyng, and preserving
the same by laws. Which city is not alwaie furnished, with soche as embrace
virtue, as obeic laws, because they be good, and the rule of Justice: but it
receives also evil persons, which must be kept in, under fear of
punishment. And like as in a great house, there be many vessels, some for
one use, some for an other, according unto the Prophets words. So likewise
into Esaie. xlv. Evil men must be suffered in a common weal.
every common weal, there crepe naughty men, and despisers of laws, which,
when they can not be rooted out, must be borne withal, until the great day
of the lord do come, wherein they like cocle weaded out, shall be cast into hell
fire, and there have the reward of their wickedness. In the mean while, they
must not be driven out, but kept under, that they may not licentiously harm
others: partly because they serve for a presidente to good men, by their
filthiness, to withdraw them selves from their vices. (For as M. Cato was wont
to sais, fools do more good to wise men, then wise me^ to fools: as eme^g the
Lacedaemonians, dro^ken slaves were trailed through the city, that children
might se, what a shameful thing dronkennes was: and for that notable and open
rebuke, begin to hate that vice, whereunto Pittacus appoincted double
punishment.) Partly I do grant ill men a place in the city, that by the
beholding of the good men's life, as it were a glass, they might them selves
recover thereby, and at the length give due glory unto GOD, which is Lord
himself, and none other, to whom every knee shall bow, and by whom every
toungue shall swear.

Now ye see, how that among all living creatures, only man is commonable and
civil, which, when he himself does seek for the society of man thoroughly
(...) with the bond of good order, and decked with the beauty of good manners,
then shall be a good citizen, and member of a common weal, as one that
desires the end of a common weal, appoincted by the Philosophers, I mean
the yearthly felicity, of which sort were al those, that until the time of
fullness, and redemption of man, have been named in commonweals, and gat
renown therein, either for worthy government, or gentle obedience. But we
that have yelden our names to Christ, and through faith, be regenerate in his
holy Baptism, do not rest upon those yearthly poinctes, but look up to the
heavenly, and drive toward that city, whereunto in A true citezen has
respect to heavenly things.
these lower, and subject to corruption we he prepared, in the mean while,
wanderyng like strangers, until that we all being gathered together, by the
Gospel of Christ, be received into those habitations, which have been
euerlastyngly provided for us, which ought to be the mark, wherefore we
should be citezens, and bestow the excellent gift of reason best: that we may
win the reward of our race, which shall never decaie: and hitte the prick,
whereat hitherto, by following of Gods commandment, through blessed hope we
have shot: where no hardness shall be, no unquietness, no fear of enemies, no
wrong, no decaie, but truth, peace, honor, holiness, and everlasting life.

The argument of the second Chapter.
That many things do warn man, even from God, that he being, as it were,
stalled in the throne of honor be not in y^ mean while high minded* and that
nature has emplanted in him many things, whereby he may learn to check
hautenes* and to submit himself before his creator.

WHen we behold man's nature, he incontinente appears the most worthy,
and most excellent of all creatures, for argument whereof, we may allege
Reason, wherein, he is made after the Image and likeness of GOD: although we
speak not of the gift of tongue and speech, which he has received Man is
the worthiest of al creatures.
singular, above all other living creatures, not only for the understanding
of an others mind, but one to teach an other, to praise and glorify GOD.
Moreover, that he had in commission, to subject the earth to him self, and to
govern all living creatures, whether they be in the air, the water, or the
circuit of the yerth. And I see not, what can be more desired for his
prerogative, seeing he is shapen out with so beautiful, and comely a body, that
both deuisers of buildinges, and Mathematicalles, do use it as a president,
for well fashionyng any kind of frame, and the most perfect purtraite of all
forms. Here I make no rekenyng to recompte the state, which man Ambrosius
Hexamer. lib. vi. ca. ix.
had in Paradise, before he fell: which was, that he willed only good, yet
for all that, by the promptyng of the serpent, he did miscarie, and break Gods
commandment: which if he had not dooen, he should never have felt death, but
have brought furthe children, of the same estate to himself, without carnal
concupiscence, or any pain. Whereof you male read at large, in saint
Aag^stine, bishop of Hippo in his book, which he has entitled: Of the
citce of God. Furthermore, although for Li. xiii. and xiiii.
this his trespace, manne was sacked, and dispoiled of his former honor, so
that where he was before immortal, he then became mortal, and subject to
unquietness, in place of peace, to calamity and misery, in place of all
prosperity, for so says the holy Moses: because thou have Man is abased
through sin.
heard the voice of thy wife, and haste eaten of the tree, whereof I forbadde
thee, that thou should eat, cursed is the earth for thy work, in labor
thou shall eat of it, all the days of thy life, thorns and thistelles, shall
it bring furthe to thee, and thou shall eat the herbs of the earth, and
shalt eat thy bread, with the sweat of thy brows, until thou returnest to
the ground, whence thou wast taken, because thou art dust, and shall be turned
into dust again. Notwithstanding these, yet manne was not so abased, but that
he knew himself, to be lord and president over all things, that be upon the
earth. Whereupon he furthwith, began to set up his crest, to swell with
loftines of courage, and to turn his countenance against heaven, neither
acknowledgyng, ne yet calling upon his creator. But there were Giauntes
Giauntes.
upon the earth, yea, the mightier sort, and despisers of God, wherefore the
Poets did not improperly feign, that they assaulted heaven. Which a man may
also understand by the Philosophiers, for although they did not by plain
pretense, denounce war against heaven, yet they attempted to direct their
thoughts, and vain strength of mind thitherward, as though it had been given
the^, to sell a man clean life, and to surpass the secrets of Lucianus in
dialogo de vitarum auctione.
heaven, from the knowledge whereof, no man was further then they. While they
attempted to pass the mountains of glass, and thence were dismounted, they
were made a laughyng stock unto God, which turned their glory into shame, and
their wisdom into folly.

Sin therefore making way into man, he continued to walk after his own
flesh, loving himself, and puffed up with pride: and pitched all the thoughts
of his heart upon malice, whereupon blasphemy, unthankfulness, frowardnes,
and all ungodliness entered into him, as it were into a common sink. This
loftines of mind, God Pride alwais has a fa^^*
alwaie has punished, for which he neither forbear Angels, nor kingdoms,
nor any people. Which ought to be an ensample unto us: to lay apart pride, to
acknowledge our own frailty, to direct humbly this our commonable and civil
life, after the heavenly rule.

There be moreover many testimonies of holy scripture, whereby we be warned
with all endeavor, to eschew this detestable vice, which if they did no deal
move us, yet natureher self sets before our iyes many things, which put us
in mind of our baseness, and which do after a secret sort show us, how we
ought to know our selves. For if we behold our conceiuyng, the beginning
Nature warns us of humility*
of our birthe, the manner of our nativity, the manner of our noursyng, the race
of our life, and the necessity of death, man in few things, seems the
better then brute beasts, yea, in many poinctes, for all these excellent
qualities he is far under, much less then ought he te be stout couraged,
to neglecte Gods commanndement, or proudly to disdain any other.

Certainly if we consider, the beginning of our birth, Man's birthe.
whereby man is prepared to this life, it is unclean, and almost loathsome to
nature her self. For other beasts do openly engender, even nature as it were
mouyng them thereunto. The conceiving of man only, bears shamefastnes,
desiring rathar to be hid, then opened: because of the stain of sin,
which drives man to bashefulnes, and causes him to be ashamed of himself.
Nature brings furthe brute beasts, but sin brings forth man, the
Prophet witnessyng the same. Behold I was Psalm. ^.
conceived in iniquity, and in sin my mother conceived me.

Yea, further this weak beginning of man, the proudest of all living
creatures, is not without great danger, for if the mother, sone after she
have conceived, do either snese, or smell the snuff of a candle, she
trauaileth before her time. If besides these, you mark the time of
deliuerau^ce, you shall hardly judge, whether nature be a more loving mother,
or an heavier stepdame to man. For somuche as this one living creature, which
is borne to In pro^^^io lib. vii. Not. histor.
rule over all other, begins his life, as Pliny writes with pain, whereas
no cause why can be alleged, unless it be a fault, that he is borne into this
world: for whereas nature has bestowed upon all other things, both
couerynges and shelles, barks, skins, bristilles, hears, feathers, quilles,
fleases, scales, and also defenses, and stays of the limbs, wherewith they
may both defend, and rescew themselves from danger, that may ensue, as to
the Elephant, his snoute, to the Buck, horns, to the Hare swiftness of foot,
to the Woulfe, Man is borne in misery.
teeth, to the birds, wings, and to every thing accordingly: she has cast
furthe only man, naked upon the bare earth, fenselesse, which is compelled to
keuer him self, and hide his privy parts, by relefe of others, and to seek
himself fensible weapons of others: so that if we will signify any notable
misery, we neade no more but to note, the birthe of man into this world.
Whereupon most of y^ Thracia^s, were wont to weep in their childbed, Solinus de
Thracia.
and the parents with mournyng, to receive their child newborn into the
world, but at his death to bury him with merueilous reioisyng and gladness: as
though that he, which is new borne, were rather to be lamented, then he that
deceaseth, and departs the misery of the world. No less labor is it, to
nourishe up the child when it is borne. For other beasts, as soon as they
enter into light, by the very motion of nature, do seek after food. Some of
their own accord, run unto the dammes teates: Some with open mouths receive,
them offered by the dammes: as though that creature were in vain bred, that
requires no nourishment. To man alone she has given criyng, weepyng, and
tears, whereby he declares his want, and makes sign that he would have some
thing, but so darkly, that he knows not what, yea, and not only does not
make himself ready, to receive food. but often refuses it, when it is offered
him.

Now when he is brought up, many thousand lettes, many dangers, many kinds
of intrapmentes, declare how hard it is for him, to pass the race of his life,
and to come to his fatalle end: which if I should draw furthe in order, and
make rehersall thereof, it should not be so hard, as neadles, specially in a
thing known, not so much as but to very Barbars.

For no living creature, is in danger of mo diseases, none stands in more
hazard of privy ambushmentes, then he does, and that by man. Lions for all
their wildnes, yet do not one encountre an other, the serpent stingeth no
serpent, but man is a Woulfe to man, at whose hand he daily receives much
harm. Furthermore, none is covetous but he, none ambicious, none vncontentable
in desire of things, but he only, he is incontinuall pain wearied with
calamities, of which euilles although thou perswadest thy self, to have
discomfited one or two, and so think thy self in sauetie, yet thou must
abide a sore conflicte with nature her self, seeing thou art enforced to fear
even the lightnyng of the element, the ste^che of the earth, the Scorpions
stroke, so many kinds of poisons, and venime, which although they never
chance unto thee, yet fleshelice, fleas, crablice, and many other like
vermines shall noie thee, and declare that man is in danger of many thousand
kinds of miseries.

But also ye necessity of death, is not to be so much counted upon, seeing it
is indifferent, as well to other things, as to living creatures: for
whatsoever is borne must die, and return to that dust, whence it had his
beginning, were it not that an other kind of death had fallen to man, which
came in by sin, whereby also we have found an other beginning of life. For
there is no other living thing, but it decaieth universally, and in hole,
saving The death of a sinner, and of a godly liver. be far unlike.
man alone, whose only body perishes, the soul, which is severed from it,
continewyng euerlastyngly, so that the good be received into a blessed life,
whereas the bad be thrust down, into the everlasting torments of hell: having
in this poinct death, like to brute beasts, because they neither think the
soul immortal, neither believe that there is any resurrection, or any hell,
that thereby the death of an ox, and a man, seems like, whereof the Ecclesi.
iii.
Eccesiastes also, puts us in mind. Heap hither so many means, whereby we
either hasten our own death, or upon very triflyng occasions, lose our life,
seeing more dye by surfeit and wine, then by the sword, many, while contrary to
nature, by help of cunnyng, they labor to lengthen their years, and only
seek cause to live, cast themselves away, by vsyng to much Physic.

Here I neade not to touch, diverse kinds of sudden Sudden deaths.
deaths, whereby wondrous many have miscarried, and decayed. So died Anacreon
the Poet, choked with a reasin grain. So died Fabius the Senator, of an
here, which he did drink in milk. Coruelius Gallus, which sometime had been
Praetor: and Quintus Heterius a knight of Room, died while they were in the
very act of generation. Sophocles, and Dionisius the tyrant of Ensamples of
death.
Scicilie, both deceased for joy, when they heard tidings, of the vpperhande
of a tragedy. Yea, in Saxony, I my self saw a country man, both well spent
in years, and of honest reputacion, which, as he should have returned home,
being well tipled, fell of his horse, whereon he road, into a little puddle of
rain, and there falling on sleep, and drawyng in water at his mouth, was
therewith choked, and childishly cast away. Of which sort of ensamples, I
could rehearse a number, whereby we be put in mind of our mortality, and
that ere we wene. Sure we are to die, but by what kind of death, and in Death
is certain, but the time thereof is uncertain.
what monent we know not. We must watch therefore while we live in this civil
life, among men, lest the sudden necessity of death, find us unprovided, and
not awake, for we shall be so much the less able, to give an account of our
former life, the more we yield to wickedness, and despise the obedience of
Gods commandment.

Ye understand, if I be not deceived, the beginning of the proudest of all
other living creatures, full of most shameful baseness, ye understand his
trade of life, subject to dangers and labor, and how many and sondrie
ways, he procures his own destruction. Last of all how perilous a thing it
is, for a wicked manne to die, whereby God does as it were, pulle us by the
ear, and call us from the filth of iniquity, unto repentance, that our own
baseness, frailty, fondnes, and misery set before our iyes, we may know,
that all things, which worldly things be but vanities.
can chance unto us in this world, be but mere vanities, and much lower
estate then that, of such beginninges, we should think our selves borne unto
pride, remembryng the saying of Pythagoras, know thy self, which is
profitable, that thereby we should prepare our selves, for the civil society,
specially considering, we be borne not to our selves, our fre^des, and country
alone, but also to the glory and honor of God, to whom in all our doings, for
all our baseness and simplicity, we hold our selves bound.

The argument of the* iii. Chapter.
That the trade of living well, ought to be the beginning, both of buildyng
citees, and of adornyng common* weals.

MArcus Tullius, a man which has deserved well, not only of civil affairs,
but also Philosophical studies, in his book, which he has entitled of
duties, says: the best enheritaunce, that can be left to children by their
parents, and more worthy then The best inheritance is the renown of virtue.
any patrimony, is the renown of virtue, and noble acts* which, who so by
misdoyng defaceth, does both v^lelie and wickedly. It falls out therefore
so, that no man must stay at that honor, which he has brought with him,
from his kynne and house, but ought by his own well doing, to enlarge the same,
considering, ye worthy fame is beautified, if it light in a worshipful house
but it is no good proof to say, he is a gentleman borne, ergo a worthy man,
whereby it appears, that nothing is more disworshipfull, then to stay
worship only, upon a gentle blood, when he that so does, does not only by
active means, not increase the same* but by naughtines disgraceth it. And to
this foresaid patrimony of virtue, I said, that manne naturally is prone and
bent, if that by ill conditions, which have so thoroughly settled them selves
in him, he were not misguided. There must therefore be some means devised,
according to the which, as it were a childs leader, the life of man ought
to be fashioned, for the setting out whereof, I will apply every thing in due
place, as nere as I am able. And in deed good orderyng and disposyng of
things, in any entreatie, does require a very perfect placyng of each
matter, lest for want thereof, any thing become not euidente enough, or do not
open the way to the reader furthe right, and bring him by a compendious
means, to understand those things, which he necessary to be known.

Man therefore, naturally being co^monable, straight upon his beginning,
drives at the society and community of life, wherein filthiness of manners
set aparte, he may embrace virtue, profit others, and find out some ^onest
way, to further himself, and to advance his country. But when men at the
first, resorted together ward, the histories declare, that they wandered,
without any certain dwelling place, from wood to wood, and den to den, and
lived by acornes. Of which sort Herodotus reports: there were a kind of
straie Scithianes, which, what way so ever their cattaill straied for
pasture, thither they themselves followed, whereupon they call them, Grasiers.
And some do write, that in these new found Islands, the inhabitauntes live
like beasts. Afterward, cottages and caves forsaken (for such perchance were
their lodginges then) they began to build The first house. Plini li. vii. cap.
lvi.
houses (but of clai^). Which first of all other (as Gellius, by Plinius
report, writes) one Dorius, soonne to Gelius made, taking ensample of the
Swalloes neste, which Josephus seameth to ascribe to Caine Adams Vitrunius
lib. ii. de Architect. ca. i.
soonne, or Ioball soonne to Lameche. Afterward, according to the same writers
opinion, two brethren of Athens, Eurialus and Hyperbius, began to build houses
of brick, which Diodorus Siculus does allege, to be Vestaes doing, that was
daughter to Saturn and Rhea. Neither were men content so, when they had
builded houses, for mainteinyng their children, wives, and family: but drawyng
nigher to the society of life, joined one with an other, whereupon, Aristotle
the Stagerite, in the first of his books, written concerning the common weal,
does argew, that men in the beginning, of many farms, and vplandishe houses,
builded borough tounes, called in Latin Pagi, of the Doriane Greek word
Pages, which signifies a Spryng, because some such tounes were first planted
nigh to some sprynges, whereunto they appoincted each their shires and
liberties, that the borderers might have more quietness, and occasion of peace
whereupon, also shires of great countries, among latin Lib. i de b^^lo Gallico.
writers be called, by the name of Pagi* as Caesar writes that Swicerlande, is
divided into four Pagi, I mean shires, which be in several, after the
four principal Boroughes thereof.

But when as, by reason of the great increase of me^, Why citees were builded.
mo things were required, as necessary to a civil life, and discipline: they
thought it good to build citees, and to seek a more commodious habitacion
(which we use to term half of our life) whose enhabitauntes be called
citezens, because they repair together into a city. Now this word Ciuitas
in Latin, has diverse significatio^s. For if we take it grossly, and
materially, it shall signify nothing else, but material buildyng of walls, and
houses, which is also called V^bs in Latin, of Vrbus the crokyng of a Plough.
For tholde fathers (as Marcus Varro has left in writing) were wont after the
manner of Thetrurians, to appoincte out their citees thus: At a day thought
convenient by their Sothsaiers, they would yoke an ore and a cow together in a
Plough, which had a Brazen culter, the Cow for religion sake, on the nearer
side, and so coueryng their heads, with their gown skirtes, cast The circuit
of citees was wont to be marked out with a plowe
a furrowe, namyng the place whence they dug, and trenched up the moulde, a
ditche or trenche, on the inside whereof, they erected their walls, that their
citees might be fortified without, and strengthened, both with a ditche and a
wall. Which Ouide in his book, entitled de fastis, does pretily in these
two verses descriue.

Then up he rent a trenche with Plowe,
where he the walls would frame:
An ox and cow both white as snow,
were yoked for the same.
Whereupon it is the manner, that as citees appoincted out by the Plough, be
thought to be builded, with a certain religiousnesse, so when they be raced up
again, they be as it were profaned, by the over ru^nyng of a plough. Which
thing we read in writing, that Scipio Africanus practiced, upon the high
walls of Carthage, and Frederike the Emperor, surnamed Barbarossa, upon
Millaine, a city of Lumbardie, which both were laid flat with the ground.
Now seeing the city, retcheth no farther then the walls, it is to be
understand, that, when we give and bequethe* by legacy to any, all our
gooddes in the city, that the law means, all that is L. Na^ quod ff. de
poe. le.
within the wall, and not that is in the suburbs. There be therefore three
Latins words, which in signification, be in manner one. Ciuitas, which
takes name of the Ciuitas* Vrbs. Oppidum.
Citezes repair, Vrbs, because it begins solempnly, by the tournyng of a
Plough, Oppidum, because that being entrenched with ditche and wailes, it
healpeth to save things, that be necessary for the inhabitauntes. Man's
policy therefore, did not only build citees, because they be convenient,
for the leading of a civil life, but for a defense, against invasion of
enemies and rouers. Whereupon from the beginning, the walls were held as
holy, Walls holy
which, who so rashely in old time past over, it cost him his head. For the
which cause, we read in the Roman history, that Romulus slew his brother
Remus, and that the first walls of Room, was mortessed with In. iii. de.
O^^i^.
brothers blood. Howbeeit, Marcus Tullius thinks that deed, rather to have
come upon a desire of rule, then reuengement, for unhallowing the wall. For
Romulus Romulus wickedly slew his own brother.
seeing it to be more profitable for himself, to govern alone, then with any
other, slew his brother, prete^ding an honest cause, which was the walbreche,
being in deed neither allowable, ne yet sufficient. Because in common
government, nothing is profitable, if it be dishonest, and contrary to virtue.
This City we may call, a ioynyng A material city.
together of houses, environed with walls, fitly and commodiously erected,
both for the leadyng of a civil life, and repellyng the invasions of enemies.

Where note, that Cain builded in Eden, a country Caine builte the first city
liyng Eastward, the first city, afterward named Babylon, and called it after
the name of his son Enoch, Enochia, Gene. iiii. and. xi.
as the holy Moses witnesses, and Josephus also followyng him in his first
book of his antiquities, where afterward Nembrothe foolishlie purposyng, to
preuente the danger of water, would have builded a Toure, far retchyng above
man's sight, but by the confusion of tongues, was let of his enterprise.
Whereby it should not seem to be true, as well nigh al ye Greek and Latin
writers do fable, that Cecrops builded the first city, and named it after his
own name, Cecropia, which afterward was called Athens, unless you will
allege, that it was the first city builded in Greece. But these things do
not so much, belong unto our purpose, considering it is enough for the place
to know, that man could not so conveniently, have entered society of life,
unless he had had citees, as it were a schoolyng place, to learn virtue in.
Therefore to save our houses, to save our children and wives, and finally, for
the safety of the whole common weal, Citees must neades have been builded,
for the defendyng of whose walls, it does stand us in hand to fight, no
less then for our selves.

Now the second signification of Ciuitas, is when it betokens the people,
whereof the material city does consiste, for whose behoufe it was first
builded, and this kind of city do I most drive at, in this treatise. Which is
no other thing, but a number of men, coupled by the bond of society and law,
wherein they be trained up, by a discipline of law and manners, one to do
that is profitable to an other, and to live well. Whereof is wrought that most
comely frame, which we call a common weal. For a city must so be appoincted,
that nothing be lackyng, that may appertain to the preseruacion thereof, and
that is rekened necessary, for leadyng this our mortal life well, and honest
vsyng this society, whereunto nature inwardly has addressed us, which
Aristotle allows for the best, as for which the assembles, In. i. Polit.
repaires, and resortes of men be reserved.

The commodities and use of this city, Moses, Lycurgus, Oraco, (whose laws,
because of their severe orderyng of things, be said to be written with blood)
Zaleucus, Caro^das, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Panetius do evidently teach,
and all they, whose chief care was, to set furthe and enlarge commonweals, by
their virtue, wisdom, judgment, and good ordinances. Which use if it do
at any time light among us, one The commoditees of a well ordered city.
will profit an other, quietness of life shall ensue, it shall be easy to get
our living one by an other, laws shall be obeyed, each manne without force shall
have his own, and nothing shall be done to other, that we will not abide our
selves. So says Tullie: They which surmounted In orati. pro P. Sestio.
other in virtue, and excellency of judgment, perceiuyng the aptnes of man's
wit, and capacity in learning, where they lived scatteryng, gathered them
together into one place, and brake them from their sauagenes, unto Justice and
mildenes. Then they enclosed Commonweals.
with walls, weals (which because they contain the common profit, we call
common) then assembles of me^, which afterward they called citees, then ioinyng
of houses, which we call tounes, established both by GOD and man's law: by
them were found out. And so between this decente kind of life, and the other
brutishe, there is no further difference, then in the one violence, in the other
right. The one of these we may use, but both at one time we can not. Will ye
have violece? tha^ right is displaced, that is to say, judgments, whereupon al
right is vpholden? Mislike ye judgments? or do ye bar the^ all together:
then needs must violence bear rule. Which matter he also under a pretty
circumlocutio^, has expressed in ye fourth of his inuectiues, against
Catiline, thus: This only quarrel of dissension, has been found sense the
city was first builded, wherein all men's judgments, have agreed together
in one, saving such, as seeing they must needs perish, had rather cum to
naught with company, then alone. These men do I alwaie except, and willingly
sequestrate from the rest. But all other (good Lord) how many in number, with
what earnest minds, how stout courages do they agree, in defense of the
honor, and safegarde of their country. Whereby ye perceive a certain
shadow, or if ye list so rather to term it, a certain view or shape of
gentleness, which by the towardnes of nature, we attain unto by being in citees,
wherein, as Socrates says, we may well say: this is mine, this is thine:
wherein we ought so to desire riches, yt the poor be not over laid nor
oppressed but Wealth with out couetuousnes.
we must seek wealth to maintein a moderate port, and to releue the nedy, not to
be occasion, either of couetuousnes or pleasure, whereby less unquietness and
envy shall arise. By motion whereof, when the people of Mitilene, as Valerius
Probus mentions, did offer unto Pyttacus, many. M. acres of land, he only
took one. C. saying: give not that to me, wherefore many will envy me, and mo
desire to have from me. A deed no less wise then modest. The modesly of
Pittacus.
For he considered, that those tounes were seldom quiet, and without privy
grudge, where riches be gotten, by hook or crook, to the great loss and
hinderan^ce of good men: of which kind of ensamples, I were able to report, a
wonderful number, both wherein the Romans, and also other commonweals, by
this only fault, have been brought into great danger, were it not that I
hasten to that end, whereby is got the true honor of blessedness, and not
that only, which is accepted among men.

The argument of the iiii Chapter.
That commonweals began, when men first entered society of life: and how we
must be have our selves therein, that it may be an other framyng bouse of
blessedness, then the Philosophers teach.

BUT having now drawn out plainly, or rather slightly set furthe, the form
of a common weal, next of all it comes to hand, how therein one profits
an other, whereby we do measure the weal, which we term Common, a word
more used, then understood, yea, among such as travail in the common weal.
But for this poinct, we must first thoroughly know, what apperteineth to a
city, ere we meddle with the orderyng of a common weal. Moreover, two things
How far we ought to seek for a private commodity.
must principally be considered in a city: First of all, that a man do seek
his own commodity honestly, and without any wrong to others, which does
belong unto private profit, which we may lawfully tender, so far furthe
as we do not offend any law, or common ordinance of the city, seeing,
according to the Stoikes, and Marcus Tullius his opinion, we do not account
any thing profitable, although it be never so much to our commodity, unless
it be honest, that is, unless it be answerable to vprightnes and goodness,
and to knit up shortly, unless it does agree with the law, which reigns
amongst men.

Secondly, we must have a special regard, to those things, whereupon the
common profit depends, and such things do we term, public or common,
when as we do not only prefer honesty, before profit, but Public wealth.
also consent upon the common worship, and wealth of the whole city, with all
study of mind, all endeavor to virtue. Which thing none does, but a good
citezen, who^ notwithstanding, we do severe from a good man, who as one
passing the reach of the common wealth, for the love that he bears to
virtue, does well deserve of mankind.

For he is called a civil manne, which is studious to A civil man
keep the laws and judgments, which so far as he may, will commit
nothing, either amiss, or unadvisedly, which with his providence, religion,
and fidelity, will se to the weal, both in common, and several to each
citezen, Aristo. in. 3. Politicoru^.
which will obeie laws, defend his country, keep civil ordinances, and
the league of mankind, and finally, is skillful to live well according, to the
civil virtues. And he is called a good man, which loves honesty A good man.
without dread, which overcome with no calamity, will yield to fortune,
desires nothing, does nothing, but with great worship, according unto the
appoinctment of equity and goodness, although he do not chiefly bend his
mind, to the end of a common weal.

Now the city thus stated, we must open some way, whereby not only that,
which is commodious to every particulare man, may be dooen, but also that,
which does touch the common auailemente, and worship of the whole city:
which can not be atchiued, without both excedyng great justice, and also
great favor of the same. Which thing Lelius in Tullie, in the second of his
books of a common weal, talkyng with Scipio Aphricane, which utterly
destroyed Carthage, with no less learning then wisdom, does prove,
ouerthrowyng the opinion of such men as held, that it were not possible to
rule a city, without doing wrong. For seeing Spartianus in Adriano
the common weal, is the whole peoples weal, ^^ Adriane the Emperor meant,
which said that he would so rule the common weal, that he would take it, as
the peoples, not his own peculiare, it must neades follow, that it shall be
established, by regiment of right, and dissolved, when wrong takes place.

For I do not call every assemble of men, people, but such as be united
together, by agreement of law, and participacion of profit, which without
justice, the leader and rule of all virtues, will never come to pass. So that
saint Augustine himself, does allow the wealth, ^. de ciuitate Dei. capt. ^1.
which belongs to a people, linked by law of society, as public, albeit
improperly, and not altogether usually: whereas true justice is not, but in that
common weal whereof Christ, the fountain and original of all justice, That
common weal is ruinous, whereof Christ is not the ruler.
is the founder and governor, which no man that is well in his wits, will
deny. Let therefore all the Philosophers, all Lawmakers, all nations, be they
never so many, conceive the frame of a city, fashion it with ordinances,
fence it with laws, deck it with judgments, if they do not seek in it,
that Justice and only quickset, which is Christ, they shall have only the
shadow of a city, like them that set a fair white color upon a sepulcher,
which outwardly seems gorgious, but with in it is full of rotten, and vile
stinkyng carcases. Whereupon it comes to pass, that we may not arrogate to
our selves the name of any, either civil or christian common weal, unless it
be maintained by soche, as be given to godliness, which do worship and call
upon God. As for the civil, if it had ever been to be found, the Romans The
Romans common weal corrupted.
might have challenged it unto theimselues. But Tullie bewaileth it in his time,
as bendyng to decaie already, by reason of naughty conditions, in the first of
his books of a common weal, recityng this verse of Ennius.

The worthy common weal of Room did florishe and increase:
when customs old, and ancient men, maintained it in peace.
Which saying he wondereth at, as spoken by an Oracle: for neither the men,
unless the city had been so manered, ne yet the manners, unless those men had
governed it, could either at the first have grounded, or so long have kept
that common weal, being so great, and orderyng things so justly, and
dominatyng so largely. Therefore before our time, both the custom of our
country, received worthy men, and worthy men held in ure, the manner and
custom of our auncetours and elders. But our time receiuyng the common weal,
as an excellent picture, but fadyng and losyng the beauty thereof: for age did
not only neglecte, to renew it again with those colors, which it before
had, but did not so much as keep the very form, and outward lineamentes
thereof. Ye hear what Tullie misliked in the Roman common weal in his
days: what if he should see Commonweals bewailed, for their abuses.
ours, which now decaie, and have long time grown to ruin. Wherein for
scarcity of me^, good manners be vtterli neglected: every place is full of
sedicion, sensuality, injustice, couetuousnes, and all manner of misliuyng.
Would he not furthwith cry out, that there were nothing less in our commonweals thus abused, then any poinct of commonweals? all which things do
make, that the institucion of a common weal, which becomes the christian
people, is through forgetfulness, as it were worn out: for that there is no
where, any hoenstie of manners, any discipline, any obedience of laws, any
reverence, any love of virtue, any defense of godliness, so that we cannot se so
much, as the shadow of a common weal, much less of a perfect common
weal, and that which may become the people of Christ.

Nevertheless, we must do our endeavor to amend, and recover that is corrupt
and destroyed, by our vicious and ungodly living. For the everlasting God,
which Our commonweals must be restored in honest orders
wills not that manne should die, but live, does stir up good men,
which love justice and religion, which do gather companies of men together,
and do well enstructe them, and cease not to preserve the same, The common
weal is maintained by godly men.
in the love of godliness. That so the common weal, which is no more the
peoples, but Gods, may be preserved although not in the whole multitude, which
for the most part, uses to walk in the beaten way, and that which leads
to the left hand, yet in them, which God has elect as his own people, who
also do tender his commandments. Whereupon naughty men, although not all,
yet some of them shall take ensample of better life, and declinyng from
iniquity, shall work good, and call upon the name of God, with a sincere
heart: for God wills not the death of a sinner, but rather that he be
converted and live. For to this end we be taught, that deniyng ungodliness,
and seculare business, as S. Paul Tit. ii.
says, we may live in this world soberly, rightuously, and godly, lokyng
for blessed hope, and the glorious coming of the great God, and our savior
Jesus Christ, which gave himself for us, to redeem us from all iniquity, and
to cleanse the people, which is acceptable to him, and a follower of good
works.

Whereby it appears, that people to be the follower of good works, and
acceptable to God, which by Christ was cleansed and redeemed: which only can
glorify his creator, and look for the blessed hope of everlasting life. And
therefore we live justly in this world, and keep the community among men,
coupled both by Gods law, and man's, which is the true form, and
institution of a common weal, and public estate. Which, A true definition of
a common weal
therefore it shall be convenient to our purpose to define, thus: An assemble,
and repair of men lawfully gathered, to live well and blessedly, that being
thereunto godly brought up, they may look for everlasting life. For so may it
come to pass, that although there be many citees, and each of the^ vsyng their
own rightes, and manners, yet the form of the common weal is but one, not
that, according to which, Aristotle appoincted also one, i. Polit.
after the form of a civil estate, whose drifte and intent is only, to his
own end, but that which comes of that builder, master and auctour of all
good life: which says, I am the way, the truth and life. No man comes
unto the father, but by me. In the which common Joan. xiiii.
weal, as a shapyng house of all virtue, we must be prepared, to a better
life, which is the heavenly, and appoincted us from the beginning of the
world, that from these visible things, we may be conueighed to thinuisible,
Visible things help to attain the invisible.
whereof the Philosophers can promise us nothing for all their vain pretensed
sale of the blessed life, wherein they do no less beguile the world, then
such as make men believe that smoke is fire.

Therefore, as there is one master, one moderatour of our common weal, and one
head: so we call that properly One common weal has many me^bres
one common weal, wherein, how many parts so ever they be, how many citizens,
every of them continue in their duty: and one bears an others burden, and
alwaie goes forward to help him. So says S. Paul, Romans xii.
for as in one body we have many parts, and every part has not one office, so
we being many, be but one body in Christ, and each one has parts and members
togethers, having diverse gifts, according to the grace given unto us. So
those, which are in this common weal, think all one, every man co^te^t with
his own office, he yt can comfort the poor with his riches and goods, ought to
do it cherely. He that can teach, to teach, he that ca^ work, to work, he
that can govern, to do it carefully, he that can obeie, to be obedient, and
reverence the officer: in fine, to become all in all, that he may well bestow
that his talent, and restore it again to the good man of the house with gain,
and all to this end, that we may be received into the communion of saints,
and be enterteined in the household of God. This thing must the Smithe at his
anuile consider, the maiden at her distaffe, the plowman at his plowtaile, the
woman at her babes cradle, and every one in his vocation must wey this,
referryng al his works to the glory of God his creator and redemer, and have
in special care, that this common weal whose beginning nature has almost
wrought, may be the Image of that, which is in heaven, that the passage and
flitiyng from this to that, may be the more redily Man's governance is a
re^embla^ce of the he^^e^
had. Certainly, who so lives in a common weal, unless he do level at this
mark, and direct all his doings thereunto, with a mind lightened upward, he
is an unprofitable citizen: for he has not charity, and if he show any thing
in outward apparaunce good, because he does not place it well. it is all in
vain, and but a civil piece of work, which shall receive his own honor,
and vanishe away like the sou^dyng brass, or tinkelyng Cymball, even with the
sound thereof.

The argument of the. v. Chapter.
That a city ought so to be appoincted, that none be left idle therein, but
every man taxed to do his duty, whereby it may cause as it were an
harmony, or an agreeable note of things, of it self.

WHO so beholds the comlie proportion of this world, shall steight way see,
that all things were created and compacted together, with so great wisdom,
that neither any thing can be required more, ye yet couched in more
commendable order. Whereupon the Greeks name the world Cosmos, as who say,
The world.
an ornamente, as Plato in his dialogue, which is intuled Cratilus, does
reason, whereby our citees may take ensample to agree in one, through al their
parts, and to declare a certain ioyntmeasure, and concordaunce in themselves,
which shall then come to pass, when every man does his duty, not passing
his function, when every man brings with him, that cognisaunce and mean to
further the common weal, whereby the partyng of commodities, as well private as
public, is sought with great trust and peaceablenesse, when every man
endeavors y^ every thing may go forward, holdyng the citees profit to be
his own. For by experience we be taught, that by A civil concord.
agremente, small things increase and grow, but by disagrement, as Salust
also writes, the greatest decaie and go bacwarde: for what can be worse in a
common weal, then that any manne should prefer profit, before honesty: or be
envious or troubled with inward grudge or rancour of mind, against his fellow
citizens. Which thing, most lights among such, as do more regard their
own peculiare gain, then the general avail of the whole city: whereof, as
the world goes now, the greatest sort is, because of their corrupt
conditions, which may so much the sooner and easier, trouble the common
peace, as the discipline of the common weal is so weak, and yelden over to
the wickedness, and lust Idleness is not to be suffered in commonweals.
of naughty men. Whereupon idleness takes occasion of entry, and contempt of
laws, after which (as Pythagoras is aucthor) deliciousnes did crepe in,
straight thereon surfeit, then violence, last of all destruction.

Neither do we call him only idle, that neither does neither moves any
thing, but him also, which does not hold him self content with his own, but
is nothing ashamed to occupy his sith, in an other man's croppe of corn,
and being but a private man, will not stick to judge, examine, and co^ptroll
as him likes that, which belongs to an other man's duty, forgettyng the
common proverb: Let not the Shoemaker meddle above the latchet of his shoe,
auenturyng not only to question that he has nothing to do withal, but also
to attempt the same, which poincte is so much against the common wealth and
society, as nothing can be more. For he pitcheth his mind rather, upon the
dissoluyng, then preseruyng Dissension is the Decaie of commonweals.
the society of life. For as by temperaunce commonweals, do seamely claspe
together, so by insole^ce they perish, and be undone, which specially
chances amongst the greatest number of the people, when laws and
ordinances be had inco^tempt. And like as man is made mild, gentle, and
civil, by discipline of laws, so ye shall find him the most cruel beast of
all others, if he may ones shake of this bridle and yoke. For it is manifestly
known, that by the first sin, wherewith man was corrupted, he is of a
stubburne boldness, and unless he be kept under, of lamentable estate, as wholly
addicted to affections, which be snaffled and commannded to be obedient to the
law of the spirit, by wisdom, godliness, and government of discipline:
which thing Apuleius In li. dedec^ Socratis.
a Philosopher of Plato his sect, does after a sort mean, saying: Men
reioising in reason, eloque^t in talk, having The description of man, by
Apuleius
immortal souls, mortalle limbs, beastlike and feeble bodies, light and
uncertain minds, unlike conditions, like errors, stubburne stoutnes, hard
hope, vain travail, fickle fortune, particulerly decaiyng, yet universally,
ever living, chaungeable in the engenderyng of children, of swifte time, flow
wisdom, quick death, complainyng life, do inhabit the earth.

In which words, y^ Philosophers^ lively describes, and sets furthe
mankind in his qualities, that Augustine the Bisshoppe of Hippone, and a
great doctor 9. Lib. de ciuitate dei. Cap. viii.
of the church, could not mislike, ne dissallowe the same.

And yet for all this froward inclination, and unlikeness of manners in men,
they shall easily agree among the^ selves, if every one will continue to do his
duty in the concourse with others, neither entermeadle with other, but being
content with his own vocation, will show a proof of himself in time, that
he may ones gain the reward worthy such living: thereunto warned by these
words of saint Paul. Therefore I a prisoner Ephe. iiii.
in the Lord, do exhort you, to walk worthy the vocation, whereunto ye be
called with all humility and lowlines, with long sufferyng, one bearyng with
an other in charity, labouryng to keep the unity of the spirit, in the band
of peace. So good a thing, so holy, and Every man ought to occupte himself in
the vocation whereunto he is called.
so pleasant to God is it, that every man abide in his vocation, whereunto he
is received, with all submission. For so shall it be, that of those unlike
doings of every citezen, in particulare and sundry kinds of life, brought
into one concord, by a certain agreeable means, and uniform order, a most
sweet harmony of civil agreement shall be occasioned, which also shall
represent the image of the heavenly, co^tinuyng and keeping unshaken, both the
likeness, and also the vnityng together of manly civility. Which order, either
troubled or dissolved, it shall not go forward, much less ought it to be
called a common weal, because it is not direct to her own end, but rather a
clusteryng of such a company, as labouryng in vain, do not pass to offend
their neighbor, and to displease God.

Thus a city must no otherwise, then a certain comely frame be joined together,
not of one kind of men alone, but of such; as each woorketh his own, and is
ready to help other with an uniform agremente, to further the common weal.
And so grows the most sweet harmony, whereby the common weal both uses to
stand, and to beautify it self, which thing Cornelius Scip. o, ^e that
overcame Afrike, did finely declare by then sample of a Lute or Harp, wherein
the stringes iarryng in A similitude taken of an Harp.
sound, giuyng unlike note, by^unyng do agree and make a concord of most
pleasant no^^e, and this does he declare in Tuilie, a man which has very
well deserved of all men. Neither is the ensample, which Aristotle An example
of a ship.
shows us by a ship, much unlike unto this: wherein diverse men bear
diverse roumes, yet their whole drift is to save the ship, that it burst not,
but by cunnyng of men, saufely conueigh the things, which be put into it,
into the haven. So the Pilate has his office appoincted him, to hold the
Kudder in the stern, the foreman has his part, the rower his, to move the
whole vessel, one entendeth the tacklynges, an other in the top stands in
wait, least any rouer invade them, an other sounds the deapth of the
water: tolet go unspoken of a great number of other mariners, without whose
aid the sailyng would go but shrewdly forward, because every man works well
in that appoinctment, which he has in several to himself, in this issue they
sing all one note, that the voyage may go forewarde, and be saufe. Which
thing could not be, it one should rise against an other; hindering the other,
that he could not do his duty accordyngly, not much unlike to Lucians
Dog, which liyng in the maunger, neither would eat oats himself, ne yet
suffer the horses ones to lay their lips on them. And what face, good
Lord, of any common weal, think you can thereby, which is not compacte and
measured, out of this disagreable concord of citeze^s^ Wherein the Smith
leauyng his own occupation, will labor to play the Tailour, and contrary the
Lailour will meddle with the Forge, the Sh^maker will in hand with linne^
Draperie, the private man entermedle with the officer, and every man will go
about that, which he neither learned, ne yet is called or fit to do, but
only led on head, with a stubburn boldness and rashness, nothing strainyng
courtesy, to disturb and dissolve the work of God, that is the frame of the
common weal. Of which thing we be maruetlously well put in remembrance, by
the tale of the other parts of man's body, conspiryng ^ fa^le of the bealie
and other parts of man's body.
against the stomach. Forther saw them selves vexed with perpetual labor,
constrained to work, and only the belly, not only to be idle, but also to
consume and spend, all that they could provide. Therefore, they agreed amongst
them selves, that the hand should no more work, the feet no more go to get
any thing, the lies to refuse lookyng, the mouth to receive meat, the teath
to deny their office, the throat not to let do^n^ nourishemente, whereby
neither the stomach, which received it not, could not disperse it into every
part of y^ body, but being empty shranke from them: now when they saw that
their labor, did not only profit the stomach, but the whole body, and the^
selves also, and that the one could not stand, without aid of the other, each
returned in his office, and did the best to procure beathines with his
particulare labor, which was profitable in common.

Does ye not think this to be an ensample, in this place for us to learn,
that our endeavor which every man has taken upon him in the city, does not
only profit any particulare man, but in general al^ from which if any man
unadvisedly shrink, he desires the common weal to be dissolved, without
which he can neither be a citezen, ne yet safe, much less be a follower of
virtue, which one poinct is the greatest enemy, that can be to things well
ordered. And therefore we must enter that kind of life, which is direct unto
the common worship, and ornamente of the whole city, and therein stand in one
mind, which it behooves so to be appoincted, that every well disposed man,
may not only wonder at, but also desire to follow it, because of the honesty
of life, wherewith the company of men is united together, keeping the due
course of civil behavior, and excellyng others. Forsomuche as Plato according
to Socrates his mind, does affirm, that there is no other difference
between commonweals, then such as arises upon the diversity of men's
manners.

THE Second Book, concerning the good orderyng of a common weal.
The argument of the first Chapter.
That the common weal does stand by unlike sorts of men, but such as being
i^^^d by God and man's law, does in fine agree in one, touching the partyng
of commodities in common.

THe worthy Prince Octauian, under whose government it pleased the healthful
light of salvation, to shine to mankind, ruled his Subjects with soche
moderation, that he was wont to call him, both a citezen and a A good estate
of a common weal ought not to be changed.
good manne, which would not that the present estate of the common weal,
should be altered. And therefore y^ he himself, whereas he received the city of
Room built of Brick, would leave it all of Marble. A worthy saying of a
worthy Magistrate, which ought so to travail, that the common weal may rest
in that estate, which either cannot lightly be amended, or will not abide any
change without Alteration breadeth altrecation.
wo^derous trouble. Which form of things, it appertains most to soche to
adourne (as it is in decde a weighty matter) whose mind is set to seek the
common advancement, and to value honesty at more then profit, not for them
selves, but rather that God may be reverenced in that company of men, which
is so united together.

But because every thing does stand on certain parts, which ones known,
the whole is sooner perceived, it shall not be lost labor, to touch the
persons, to who^ we commit the whole swaie of the common weal, by whose
conditions, you may no less guess thestate thereof, then know the Lion by
his paws.

Three degrees of persons must therefore be considered, Rulers of the common
weal. The Magistrates office
the highest, mean, and lowest. To the highest degree appertain Magistrates,
which have been ordained by God, from the beginning, by whom they are also
preferued, to govern his people, to furnishe the common weal, with good laws
and ordinances, diligently to surueie the subjects living, to put them in
mind of honesty and goodness, to keep concord and peace, to defend the
good, bridle the evil, omittyng nothing, that appertains to the wealth
thereof, knowing that it is Gods people, to who^ they are appoincted
overseers, and not their own, whom they must so judge and govern, that they
may not fear to be judged, in the great day of the Lord* For the Prince is
the soul and rule, whereby the common weal, as a body must live, breathe,
and in all poinctes sta^e it self. Therefore they ^^ist feed the flock
com^^^ted unto the^^; and not at their pleasure, pill or as it were shave to the
skin, burden and afflict the same. Of whose dueti^ in due place, I will more
conveniently entreat.

Alwa^^ provided, that there be two kinds of magistrates, The higher
Magistrate.
one the head, an other the petie officer. The head officer d^^ I call ^^m,
which has the chief ^^roke in this common weal, as who by his ^wne
authority, establishes and adnulleth laws, which poinct belongs to
Kings and Princes, which have Kingdoms and Provinces of their own. But
because they can not govern all the multit^de of people alone, they must needs
have some among ^^he s^rte, which may particularely The lower officer.
bear rule, and these d^^^ I^^all petie officers, or under magistrates, which
depend^ upon the head, and refer the weightiest matters to his hearing, and
it is no small poincte in the Prince to see, that the under officers also do
their ^ueti^ accordingly. So Iethro the priest of Madiane, whom Josephus
calls Raguel, speaks to Moses Exodus xvii. Deuteronomy. 1.
his sonne-in-law^ and cousin: But hear my words and counsel, and God the
Lord shall be with thee. Be Josephus li. ii. Ant. ca. xiii
thou assistaunt to the people, in those things that pertain to God, that
thou may report, that is said unto him, and show the people the
Ceremonies, and manner of worshippyng, and the way by which they must go, and
the work that they must do. Provide for thy self out of all the people,
certain witty men, and such as fear God, in whom there is truth, and that
hate couetuousnes. And appoinct amongst them Tribunes, Capitaines of an
hundredth, fifty, and ten men a piece, which may judge the people at all
times. But if there happen any matter of great weight, let them refer it
unto thy hearing, and let them selves only judge meaner matters, so that the
burden may be the lesser, when it is parted with other. Which place I do
therefore more willingly recite, because it is a place, worthy to be written
with golden letters, in all parts of the Court and guild haules, no less
then that, which the Emperor Alexander, commanded thus to be noted: do
not that to an other, which thou would not have done to thy self. Whereby
both the officers be as it were by an oracle, naie, rather by the spirit of
GOD, put in mind of their duty, whence to swar^e is pe^ni^ious to the common
weal.

Moreover, here we may also ^eken, as a singular ornament, such, as taking
orders, be called to the administration of divine Service, whom we do not
displace The ministers of gods word, be also members of the common weal.
Roma, xii.
out of the common weal, and assemble of men, knit together, and united both
by the law of God and man, for it is but one thing* and receives one form,
which must not be severed into soundrie, but kept in the whole unity under
one head, which is Christ, none otherwise then a body, which is made of
diverse part^^: so far furthe as the commodities, both godly and manly do
retche. Of the which thing the holy Moses is a testimony, whom God seeing the
affliction of his people* and hearing their cry, ^ppoi^^ted and gave as their
prince, to lead them furthe of Egipte, in that he was commanded to join unto
him his brother Aaron with his sons, Exodus iii. and. xxviii.
furthe of the midst of the children of Israel, that they might take on them
Priesthode, bear the iniquities of the children of Israel, and late their
judgment alwaie in the sight of the Lord. Neither was he with this content,
but moreover commanded holy vestimentes to be made, whereby thoffice of
priesthod, doctrine, and truth, might be^ declared, that so nothing might be
lackyng, which should appertain, both to the bryngyng out, and feadyng of
the children of Israel. Which amounted (as it is said) to the number of six
hundred thousand footmen, besides children, women, and other people.

And we must not grudge, because that they of the clergy, being endowed with
much prerogative, and many privileges, be oftymes exempte from civil
bourdens, and ^ondes of the law. For they must not be encumbred In what
respect ministers of the church be sub^^ct to the common weal^
with foreign cares, that be appoincted for the ministering of Gods word, and
holy mysteries, for the propitiation of the people. For by this their vocation,
they be not separate from the society, which the city wherein they live
has entered. For it is an estate confirmed, both by God and man's law,
wherein we be commanded to live, according to laws, to seek honesty, to do
that to an other, which you would have done to your self, to regard godliness,
to call upon God, which they most of all teach, to consent upon the worship
and wealth of the common weal, that out of this visible city, we may prepare
our selves a passage to that, which is invisible, where unto we have
conceived a blessed hope, that we have been eternally ordained. And this is it
that we be commanded, one to pray for an other, one to bear an others
burden, to be irreprehensible, and without any blame, so many as have been
anointed with that holy ointment, and taken upon us the priesthode of Christ,
in which company who so is not, neither does acknowledge his head to be one
(as is before said) but attempteth to enter heaven an other way, and not by the
gate, which is also oue, neither by our only savior and mediator* he
runs in vain, as one that goes astraie, not having on his wedding coat.
Thus he that is appoincted to the holy ministration, is not pulled away
thence, neither is he exempt from the civil constitutions and coustomes, seeing
he goes about in no poincte, to contrary or disobeye those things, that he
ordained for good living. So such things as be privately necessary, in the
shambles, market, or other where, after the appoinctme^t of the civil
Magistrate, he provides for himself, and gets after the common manner of
other citezens, so be cease not to maintain and stay the common safety,
worthiness and wealth of the city, and so far forth as he may, for entendyng
his divine service, he keeps the^ without breach, neither spurneth against
his ordinance which is Gods, to whom all we that have life, be bound to obeie,
as the elect vessel saint Paul, in this manner Romans xiii. Every soull^ ought
to be subject to the higher powers.
witnesses. Let every soul be obedient to superior powers, for there is no
power, but it is from God. And the powers that be, he appoincted from God,
therefore who so withstandeth the powers, withstandeth Gods ordinance, but
they that withstand shall receive their own judgment. For rulers be no
fear to good doers, but to evil.

You do see how the holy ghost, wills every soul to be obedient to
superior powers, whom, who so resists he resists the ordinance of God,
and purchases himself judgment, for God will revenge his ungodliness, and so
much the sooner, the longer he forbeareth.

And it forces not much, if that they of the Clergy An Ecclesiastical
Magistrate.
have their Magistrate, I mean an Ecclesiastical person, to whom they ma^e
submit themselves* and give due honor, for so much as this common weal,
which we do now appoincte, does not only consiste in outward things, as
the Ethenikes do imagine (howbeit it is to see in Aristotle in the fifth of
his politikes, that they do not reiecte ministers and priests, from their
commonweals but is (...), from (...) as from a sch^^^ house of virtue, we
may pass to the heavenly ^^^ee, and may come and be received among the
communion of saints. Neither do we acknowledge those to be civil
Magistrates, who appoincte any thing contrary to the ordinance of GOD, much
less ought a godly Magistrate so to do, considering we ought rather to
obey God then man. But we attribute to God, that is due to God, and to Caesar,
that is due to Caesar, estemyng both the aucthorities with honor convenient,
whose intent must be to teach, and frame the Christian company, (that is
the people of God) in holiness of manners, love of Godliness, and a blessed
life, that thereby they may be brought to the true blessedness. Let no man
therefore take upon him so high a stomach, upon any prerogative, whereby he
shall allege, that he is nothing bound to any superior power, and labor to
severe himself from the society of man, the only fence of the common weal,
and worthiness of life, pronounsyng him self, a certain holy kind of living, I
know not what, if he be not alienate from that assemble of men, which God
would both should be congregate, and saved to himself. Such men Colos. ii.
the Apostle does better instruct, saying: Se that no man deceive you by
Philosophy, and vain delusion, after the ordinance of man, after the
elements of the world, and not after Christ. Because in him dwells all
fulness of the deity corporally, and in him you be complete, which is the
head of all seigniorie and power.

In the middle estate of persons in the common weal, The middle degree of
officers.
I may account, counsailours, noble men, and all such as be borne of a
worshipful stock, but yet have no authority of office: whose duty is to
obeie, and be conformable to the superior power, as a thing ordeigned by God:
Secondly, liberally to stretche their hand upon such as be in poverty, and
to honor God in their goods.

The third sort be the basest men, I mean the commonaltie, The ^owest estate.
and such as by their hiered labor, get their living, from among whom, I do
not separate such as be bond slaves and servants.

For in this common weal, neither is there free man nor bound, but Christ all
in all, whom therefore the Apostle the only master of manners, does teach,
saying: servants obeie in all things, those y^ be your masters Colos. iii.
after the flesh, not with ^ye service, studiyng to please them as men, but
with simplicitee of heart, fearyng God, and what so ever ye do, do it with all
your heart, as not unto man, but unto God. Knowing that at Gods hand, you
shall receive the reward of inheritance, for you serve the Lord Christ.
Whereby we are ^aught to obeie such, as by the flesh be appoincted over us,
as not thereby pleasyng men but God, at whose hand we must look for the reward
of the everlasting inheritance, for atteignyng whereof, all kind of men
enter society in the common weal, of what estate, or condition soever they
be, officers, or not officers.

Which common weal, I do appoinct to be but one according unto the
Philosophers opinion, as Christ the A common weal cannot be without a head.
head, whereof this our common weal, takes her form, is but one. Whereby it
is evident, that there is no common weal, where there is no head, because
Christ alwaie reiseth up some to guide his people. And yet in this saying,
that the common weal is one, there be many things to be considered.
Moreover, in one Empire or one Kingdom, although every town, and every Shire
have a kind of common weal severally, yet the whole estate is but one, in
respect of the Prince, which in all civil poinctes is the supreme head, and
the governor and preseruour of all the particulars.

The argument of the ii. Chapter.
That the office of a Prince is merueilous needful, but beard to be performed.

WE have lightly as it were tasted, of what kind of persons a city does
stand, which if they do agree in one, it can not be otherwise, but that a
civil unity do grow thereby, and allure men's minds, to the swetenes of
those things, which be above us, who be so commanded to keep the yerth, that
we do not lease heaven: after an other sort, then Demas the Philosopher warned
the Athenians, purposyng to give to Alexander the The prophecy of Demas the
Philosopher.
great, divine honors, saying: beware lest you lease the earth, while ye go
about to win heaven. And in deed he Prophesied not much amiss, for the
Macedoniane Prince, crepyng in upon this flattery by invasion, afterward
subdued the whole country of Athens.

But for so much as this general handelyng, does not so plainly set before
our ^yes, and show the thing, as if I should particularely displaie every
poincte: specially in this my book, wherein I ought to declare, for who^ I
descriue this common weal, and what becomes every man particularely: and like
as in a great house, there be diverse kinds of implementes, diverse degrees of
servants, which all must be considered of the good man of the house, which,
who so will teach and declare, must in several propone every parcel
thereof, thereby to learn how clenely, how necessary, how profitable every
thing is to furnishe his housbandrie, well and commodiously, and so may be in
love with it: in the same sort I will lay my foundation upon him, that
bears the chief swaie, naie, rather that is as it were both the stern and
forshippe of the common weal, I mean the Prince upon whom as upon a certain
rule, the rest do hang, and measure their life accordingly, which if he be a
good man, the subjects may think them selves fortunate, that they have
such a governor.

Which shortly again to recount, the common weal can neither be begone, ne yet
preserved without a prince, a chief Magistrate, unless we will have it to be
headles, which is not semely, but goes against nature. Here it Four kinds
o^ gouernemente.
is nedeles to touch the government, ruled by one, by a few, by the best
sort, and by the people, which of them might be the best kind of
government, which matter is reasoned upon in Plato, Aristotle, Dion,
Philostratus, and many others: which thing also is written of the Persians,
that they after the sleyng of the Magians, did much debate, concerning the
appoinctemente of these principal Magistrate, and at the last agreyng, that
it was the best kind of rule, where one bare the swa^e, elected Darius their
king. But whether there be but one best, or many (for we see both the kinds
of gouernementes, to have good success) if they rule well, I do require no
more. For the Roman common weal, may be alleged for an euidente proof,
that gouernemente, where the people have been Lords, seldom has gone well
forward, but given occasion of much disagrement, as which, being led after
their own affections, and moved with ambition, has caused much murder, and
much calamity. Whereupon, Cato that flue himself at ^editio^ grows in the
common weal that is ruled by the people.
Vtica, was accustomed to say, that there was nothing so pestilent, nothing so
vnconstaunte, as the peoples favor, as whose inheritance has ever been
occasion of much heuines to their succession.

Therefore, the very necessary duty of a Prince, and Sapi. vii.
above all other ordained by God, is to rule and govern his people, which
although he be naturally borne (for no ever king had any other beginning) and
from the beginning has obtained the sparcles, both of equity and of a
princelike courage, yet he must be taught, and made fit for the government,
which he shall take upon him, whereby he shall learn both to rule himself,
and to overcome those affections, which almost make a king naturally fierce,
and know himself to be such a man, in whom, yet no poinct of man must
appear, and think himself appoincted a Prince over other, not only to be
king over them, but also to feade the people, committed to his charge, and to
exhort them to virtue, wherein especially he must himself travail, to
surmount the rest.

For as Paterculus writes, a good Prince teaches Lib. ii. histo. Roman.
his Subjects to do well, when he does well himself, and whereas he is the
worthiest in rule, yet he ought to be more worthy in giuyng good ensample.
Wherefore Li. i. de Clementia.
Seneca calls the Prince, the soul of his common weal according to whose
life and mouyng, it both lives and moves. For performaunce whereof, he must
not rest at any one virtue, but join altogether, that he be, valtaunt,
chaiste, stout, liberal, modest, gentle, princelike, Princelike gifts.
free, sober, godly, rightuous, and so in all other virtues, which be required
in a noble governors life. Of which you may somewhat read in Xenopho^, in the
training up of Cyrus: in Plinic in his Panegyricque, unto the Emperor Traiane,
in Agapetus a Deacon of Room, in his preceptine sentences, unto the Emperor
Iustiniane, of the duty of a king (which book is therefore called the
kings tables) and other matters of this discipline. With which ornaments of
virtues, if the prince Hierem. iii.
be beautified, he shall hear this saying of Hieremie: and I will give you
kings after mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and learning,
and this also: the king that judges the poor in truth, his throne shall be
strengthened for ever, for he does erecte the people of God.

Yet a Prince must not rest upon this poincte, only to A Prince ought to be
careful in edifiyng his people with the word of God.
allure the people unto a civil life, concord, and society, but he must also
see to the churches, prefer the study of godliness, and the only care, that
the people be obedient unto the commandments of God. For so shall he do his
duty well, so shall he build and edify all things, to the glory of God,
so shall he not only here in earth, receive honor due to a king, but in
recompense of his watchyng and endeavor, he shall receive an immortalle reward,
to be placed among the number of the holy saints. Wherein he has Moses his
special leader, which did not only reform the people of God, with politic
ordinances, but also counseled them to the keeping of Gods commaundmentes,
without the guiding whereof* let us never trust to enter the land of promise, or
to have any profit by our civil life. For he says thus: And now Deuteronomy iiii.
Israel, hear the precepts and judgments, which I teach thee, that doing
them thou may live, and enteryng in may possess the land, which the
Lord God of your fathers, will give unto you: ye shall not add to the word,
that I speak unto you, ne yet take from it: Keep the commaundentes of the
lord your God, which Princes be Pastors of the people.
I command you, for this is the part of a Prince, to feed the flock committed
unto him, and to govern it well, of which thing Homere puts us in mind,
in namyng king Agamemnon, the peoples leader.

Howbeit, no man is so ignorant, but he knows that the prince is a man,
and sometime misledde, whose fall is the occasion of so much the more harm,
the more in sight his estate is amongst men. In whom David warns us not to
trust, but as in the sons of men, in whom there is no health. And these
mighty governors be sore corrupt, when they begin to set little by the
discipline of their life, which they do then despise, when as they ones
understand, that they be princes above laws, and have the prerogative of
honor in their own hand. For flesh and blood, whereby we be seduced, do
make us more prone to evil. In deed it much awaileth the An ungodly Prince
is an evil president to his subjects.
whole country, that he, which shall be their Lord, be well trained up, and
made fit for the taking upon him the public government, lest to their great
destruction they find this saying true, woo be to that land, whose king is a
child: and the saying of Horace, which may Eccles. x.
seem spoken, as it were by an oracle:

what ever dotyng princes do:
The subjects feel thereof the ^o.
But when the Prince has been well trained up, it is hard to keep him to do
his duty, and so much the harder, the more occasiions he has to be
seduced, so that it seameth very well said, that good princes be so few,
that they may all be wellnigh shut in one ring. For the greatness of their
liberty, and knowledge that they shall not be punished, causes them, either
not to hear good counsel, or to contempne it, and to go forward in doing
evil. Hereupon comes it, that some princes be so ravished with the fond
desire of huntyng, that they can not be kept, from ever being in the woods, or
be so given to riotuous living, that they neither take any thought, nor any
care of their people. Whereas a Magistrate should look to his people, wake
when they sleep, keep rekenyng of all men's behauiours, and to be careful,
least they despisyng the rule of law, grow to a wilfulnes. So unprofitable a
king is he, which leauyng his Princes neglecting their subjects.
people, follows other matters, and neglects his duty: for how can it be,
but that he should be naught, which by his naughty ensample, makes so many
other naught, at whose hands God will require the soalle, which so negligently
has been cast away: Hear what Hieremie says. Woe be to those shepherdes,
which do Capi xxiii.
lease, and rent the flock of my pasture, you have disperpled my flock, and
cast them out, and have not visited them. Behold I will visit over you, the
malice of your desires, says the Lord.

Then naughty courtiers, do corrupt a good prince, and make him to forsake
the way of righteousness, as Vopiseus writes in Aurelianus his life: These
things Causes of evil princes.
make evil Princes: first of all to much liberty, then wealth of things,
thirdly naughty friends, a vile guard, courtiers either foolish or detestable.
For of all this number, how many think you are they, that either can, or will
give their prince good advise. But one edgeth him to move war, and that upon
no occasion, for hereby thinks he to be enriched, though his Prince lose some
part of his lands. I need not to make mention of innocente blood, which
must be thereby shed. An other counsaileth him earnestly, when he has
mispente his goods, to charge his subjects with some exactio^ of money, or
Tares* intolerable to them, but perchance not altogether hurtful to himself.
Some, yea, though the Princes be thereto unwilling, think it best, to break
covenant with their creditours, neither to stand unto such licenses, as they
have granted, and if they obtain this, they think it a great virtue. Hereby
ensues it that the people aliene their minds from their Princes, begin to
mistruste, and fall to rebellion, so that it shall not neade to seek any
foreign enemies, considering there may be easily found enough, even within the
very walls, through occasion of the yoke of bondage, wherewith they be
pressed. For not only the common proverb, but also very experience teaches
us, that we have so many When subjects be oppressed, they saint from their
sovereigns.
enemies, as we have servants, whereby destructions of whole Kingdoms, have
ensued, as the histories declare at large, and that by such providence of
destinenie as though it fell not so undeservedly. Paterculus in the second
book of the Roman history says: for so it is, that for the most part god,
when he entendeth to change any estate, does corrupt men's counsels: and
causes such things as in deed, come by fortune (which is a piteous case)
seame to fall by deserte, and that chance shall be turned into blame.

Neither must we only impute it to the Princes, when either naughty men be
put in office, or after they be so made officers, be corrupt: but rather to
our sins, An evil Prince is given for our sins sake.
whereby we do leudely straie from the commandments of God, and be
unworthy of a good governor, but be constraigned to suffer the scourge,
wherewith, when we have been well canuazed and beaten, it self also decaieth.
Oseas: I will give thee a king in my rage, and Ose. xiii, Esaie. iii.
take him away in mine indignacion. Also Esaie, I will give them children to
there Princes, and effeminate persons, shall be Lords over them. Now therefore
ye kings understand, and be instruct you that judge the earth, least your
honor be turned into reproach, and your throne into ignominy, remember you
must look for the great day of the Lord, wherein you must make an account,
how you have governed your Princely stewardship, and that you, which now judge,
shall then be judged with a judgment as it is just, so impossible to be
avoided. And no less straightly shall it happen to the people, which has a
king after their own heart. And for that they be plagued, and rigorously
handled, their offense moves God to se it revenged. Therefore, so we ought to
live in y^ common weal, that he which has the government, rule in such
wise, that he think his function to be Gods, not his own: that be which
obeieth do it sincerely, and that both do agree to advance the common
wealth, and seek the only glory of God.

The argument of the. iii. Chapter.
That the Prince in government of the common weal must have thassistaunce of
others, and what manner of men they must be.

HOw much the higher powers do The office of a Prince is large.
surmounte and excel other men (as whom the scripture does sometime call
Gods, as who sat, benefactours of men) so much the greater is the office,
whereunto they be appoincted: for it is the duty of a governor, to rear up
that is decayed, to gather together that is dispersed, to recover the lost, to
reform the misordered, to punish the evil, to enlarge the common weal, to
releue the poor, to defend the orphane and widow, to promote virtue, to
minister justice, to keep the law, to show himself father of his country, to
hold the people committed unto him, as his own children, to embrace
godliness, faithfully and with his whole heart, to perform all that is
profitable, or needful among the people, according to his duty, no less
then if God himself were in presence. Neither can a prince cloak or color
himself in any poinct, or allege any pretenced excuse of his disabilitie, or
that he is occupied with other affairs. For he is soche a one, as It becomes
a king to hear all men's iutes
neither, may allege any stay, ne yet surmise any fained excuse. He must
tender all men, hear all men, be they just or unjust, according unto the
saying of Chilo: the king heard all matters, were they right, were they wrong.
And touching this matter, there is a famous answer of a certain woman: for a
poor old woman besought Philippe the King of Macedonia, to be gracious to
her in her suit: but he made an excuse, that he had no leisure to hear her,
then said she, very aptly: be then no longer king. But the Emperor Alexander
was much more praise worthy, which stayed all his train on horseback,
gently to hear a poor woman's complainte. Which ensamples be therefore to
be noted, that we may thereby know, how God alwaie reiseth up some, to
preserve the society of man, and to profit the common estate, yea, and that
amongst the Gentiles. And secondly, how sincerely he would have things dooen:
so that he, which (being exalted to thonour of a king) when the croune Hynges
were wo^t to wear a wreath of cloth in steed of a croune.
was offered him, said very well: O noble clothe, which who so well
considers, would not so much as take thee up from the ground.

Whereby it appears, that a prince must be every man, as the proverb is,
becommyng all to all, to do his duty toward all, and to show the way of
virtue to all, which without the aid and assistaunce of other, specially in a
great number of people, he can not do alone, but he must needs join unto
him, good and goodly men, with whom he may execute his office thoroughly.
Hitherto y^ saying of Aristotle may be referred: i. Polit. Eras. i. chili.
that kings have many ears, and many iyes. And also an other says (alludyng
to the former reason) kings have long hands. As who should say, princes need
many men's help, to look to all, and to let no thing pass, that touches
their duty. Whereupon I think it has grown in use in Courts, that Princes
in their letters, answers, and other their acts, do use to speak in the
plural number: rather to declare, that they do it by cou^saill, then sekyng
by soche form of speech any honor. So Aelius Spartianus does report, that
Adriane the Emperor, when he sat in judgment, had joined with him, not only
his friends and companio^s, but also Julius Celsus, Saluius Iulianus, Neratius
Priscus, and other Lawiers, and yet none other then the counsel had allowed.
We read also in Chronicles, that Alexaunder Seuerus, never gave answer, but
by counsel of others, which had (as Lampridius writes) no less then twenty
of the grauest Lawiers of his counsel, amongst whom The counsailours of
Adrianus and Alexander.
he rekeneth up Fabius Sabinus, Cato, that flourished in his time, Domitius
Vlpianus, Pomponius, Alphenus, Callistratus, Venuleius, and other worthy
learned counsailers of the Civil Law, scholars unto the famous Lawier
Papiniane.

Now, soche must be called to be of the counsel (a thing both very
precious, and marvelous holy) and soche must be joined in part of
government, as be known to be wise men, lovers of the truth, virtuous and
that dread God: Not coueteous, no flatterers, but Worthy counsailoues.
soche as will give no counsel but honest, and profitable to the common
weal: to whom Justice, the only stay of kyngdoms and worldly things, is
dearer then their eyes, yea, then their very lives. These be they that can
bring an evil Prince into the true way, and make him good, stablishe the
people and civil society, se that every man have his own. These be they whom
Exodus xvii^
Moses was commanded to appoinct over the people, in this sort: Provide thy
self from amongst all the people wise men, and soche as fear God, in whom
there is truth, that hate coueteousnes, and may judge the people at all
times. etc. If thou dooest this, thou shalt fulfill the Lords commandment,
and keep his precepts. Which when he had heard, Moses did all as he had
advised him, and chosyng certain stout men out of all Israel, appoincted
them Princes of the people, capitaines of Tribes, hundredes, fifty, and ten
men, which Judged the people of God at all times, Iudgyng them selves only
the light matters, and teferryng the more weighty to his decision.

When soche men bear stroke in court, that pestilent saying: if it like* it
is lawful* can take no place* But every good Prince shall say, as Antigonus
answered flatterers, which told him, that all things were lawful to
Princes, all things were honest and just, whatsoever they liked: that is a
barbarous opinion. ^ (...) ^iyng.
For they ought to think nothing to be honest, unless it be honest in deed,
nor yet just, unless it be just in deed. So fat is he thought to be
unwise, which is not wise to himself, and hates not soche things as be
vnseamly, according to the notable saying of Alexander: I hate that wise man,
which is not wise to himself. Which things, if they were set before our
Princes iyes, more justice and truth, and less flattery should reign in
their courts.

The argument of the. iii Chapter.
That it be^oueth such as be of kings counsails, or be conuers^unt in their
co^^tes, to be men of great experience in worldly affairs.

HOw then very experience does teach us, that good coun^a^llors, and good
courtiers, make a good Prince: whose business is so much the greater, the
higher the office is, whereunto they be called, and put withal in ^ruste. For
by them ^ King must ru^e, and lean upon his ^ kings scepter, is a token ^f
Justice.
scepter (which must be straight and the sign of Justice) as upon a walkyng
staff, or strong sta^e, and thereby to save himself from falling: whom
therefore the Emperors, H^norius, and Ar^adius, do name part of the^^ body*
Into which place of authority, it is not con^eniente to those y^^gl^^^es, no^
common persons, ne yet any of base estate, but soche only as be well ^^owen
in y^res, learned both in the l^^e of God and man, which have ruled their
own houses* (...) and honorably, which (...) by lo^^ (...), go^^en them
selves wisdom, which therefore men doo^ call, the daughter of Time. Then
ought we not to think, that by a superficial knowledge, in either the Law, or
Philosophy, we shall be able to understand, what is comely or profitable, for
the good orderyng of the common weal, unless we have further some use of
exercise, or practice in that behalf. For how can it be, that soche a man
should in all poinctes understand, or thoroughly search out, to what end
things would grow, that be practiced in the common weal, whereunto he must,
as it were, bend and level all the force of his mind, as unto (...)
counsailours.
a certain mark: whereas he neither can tell, what thing apperteineth to the
common profit* neither can by conjecture, ne yet by any experience, be led
to understand, what shall afterward befall. Wherefore, the sa^yng of Plato,
where he affirms, that soche commonweals be happy, where either kings
be Philosophers, or Philosophers be Kings, must be accounted as Gods own
word, if ye so understand Philosophy, that it be the knowledge of things,
touching both God and manne, joined with the desire to li^^ well* that is to
wete, soche as profits in common, frames citeze^s, and he that is learned
therein, bestows his labor, not only upon himself and his friends, but also
upon his country and common weal, to ^e^ ad^^ned in the wa^e of virtue. For I
do never make any reckenyng, of soche crabbed Philosophers, which will sooner
cause us to allow the Vtopiane common Vtopia, a ^^^ned (...). Philosop^^^s
dispute o^^^^e of the state of a comm^n weal
weal, then that whereof we have any use, or occasion of practice. For soche
be not admitted unto the common estate, but tarry in the shadow, wonderyng at
the secrets of nature, and if they happen to touch any thing concerning the
parts of a common weal, they doo^ more apply it to the inquisicion of nature,
and quiddities of subtilitie, then to open the true use of things, whereunto
the^ them selves never atteined. Here upon Monde opimo^^^.
arose it, that Socrates, and Plato (allowing him, thought it best that men's
wives should be common. Aristotle brought the po^^tike and civil life, under a
contemplative ^^udie. The Greeks hold those commonweals to be in best state,
wherein dominions be gotten by force of arms: To pass over lightly other
fantastical and idle imaginacio^s, fitter for old women to talk on, then
furtheryng in any poincte, the form of good government.

Certainly, he that is well minded toward the common weal, will endeavor as
much as lies in him, to make the subjects, if they be already good, a
great deal better, if they be already learned, a great deal better
learned, lovers of godliness, favorers of justice and equity, notable for
their virtue, and soche as will not prefer any private profit, before the
public affairs: lest that do happen, which the very children were wont
to sing: ill counsel, is worste unto the counsailour him self. For the
Phrigians, when they had received harm, fell to be wise, but to late. Neither
is it other wise to be thought, but that an honorable counsel, shall be
both profitable, and also for the honor of their Prince. And thereupon is it
that the Salomos counsailours.
counsailours, rulers, and officers of Solomon, the wisest king that ever was
in Israel, be named in the holy scripture, that all men might see, of what
dignity i^^. Reg. iiii.
those men were, by whom he purposed to support his realm. Which thing Saba
the queen of Egypt and Ethiopia, as Josephus writes, could not but highly
Iosep. li. viii antiq. ca. ix.
commend, saying: thy wisdom and thy works, be a great wa^e worthier then
the brute, which I have heard of thee. Happy ^e thy men, and happy be thy
servants, which ^^ande alwaie before thee, and hear thy wisdom. Thus
must he join unto him self, the best he can pike out, who so purposes to
rule well, to give right judgment, and to execute justice, to the end he
may in wisdom, surmounte all other Princes.

Which shall not so fall out by young counselors, ^onge counsailours.
for they be led to and fro with affections, which they be not able to
bridle, so that when they give couns^ll, it shall seem to be given neither in
due place, nor in time convenient. Besides that, either they do not reach
nere the matter by a great deal, or being misinsensed, allow that which is
not alwaie best, which shall so much the sooner please the Prince, the younger
and more licencious in life he is that gives the counsel. The Prince I say,
but such a prince, which unawarely has assembled such a counsel of his own
equales and mates, to the utter undoing of the common weal. For God uses to
draw like unto like, that the change ensuing may some by fault, not fortune,
so to have happened. Of which thing we may^ take ensample by many worthy
dominions and kingdoms in our days, which have come into their enemies
hands, either through pride of their Princes, or want of good counsel.
Amongst all, I purpose to iii. Reg. xii.
touch only one, which the holy Scripture has set before our eyes, that
governors may thereby learn, that old and wise men's counsel ought to be
preferred before young men's affections. For Roboam Salomons son, forsakyng
the counsel of the old auncientes (which st^^de in Salomons presence while
he lived) which willed him to speak gently unto y^ people followed yonglinges
adui^e, by whose counsel he answered: the least finger of my hand is
weightier then my fathers back. And now my father has put upon you an heavy
yoke, but I will put more upon your yoke. My father did beat you with whippes,
but I will beat you with Scorpio^s. For which answer the people wtdrewe their
minds from Roboam, and appointed Hieroboam Hieroboam.
the soonne of Nabache their king. God has always proponed such kind of
ensamples, to the end we might understand that it is no less noisome and
wicked to follow evil counsel, then it is to give the same. Whereof I could
pick great store out of many Kingdoms, Seigniories, and commonweals, were
it not that they be better known, then that they need to be mentioned in this
place, where as tyranny and pride ceased not, not only to throw down from
the seat of majesty the higher powers, but also to pursue their counsailours
unto utter confusion, to the verifiynge of Fabius his saiynge in Liuie: the
trial in the end is a scholemaster to fools, which do then begin A ^^rnt^
child ^r^adeth fire.
to be wise, when they have received harm, according unto the saying of
Hesiode the Greek Poet: Justice is more to be esteemed then misreport, when they
come to the trial, and the fool then waxes wise when he has felt the smarte,
because he that wants wit, then begins to be warye, when he has abidden
a displeasure.

Neither is it only for the Princes anayle, or his, whosoever is either by
birthe or other vocation called to government, to have Godly and prudent
counsailours, (...) company is m^ete for a Prince.
through whose advise he may as upon a cork safely swim, but also they
amongst whom he is brought up, must be virtuous and of good behavior, and
also such as for the guard of his body be always in presence, whose both life
must be upright, and communication honest, as whereof the life to come much
tastes. For although that naturally there be certain principles of equity
and virtue laid in man: yet only practice stirs them up, and declares how
one is borne for the furtheraunce of an other* then it is not to be thought
that we be borne either having already virtue or knowledge, but they must be
obtained by learned instruction, experience, and by the obseruacion of other
men's livings. So that the Philosopher may seem not far out of the way,
whose opinion is, that man's mind is like unto a smooth table wherein nothing
is painted, and yet it is apt to receive any kind of color. Therefore after
Platoes counsel, it is expedient that he who must be a Spectacle to the
world, should from the very beginning of his youth be committed The education
of a good prince.
to a teacher, which is not only noted for virtues, uprightness of living,
and knowledge of learning, but has also the experience of many things, to
the intent he may win good learning, and the way of good living, with
travail in foraine affairs and so from the very tenderness of infancye begin
to frame him that shall take upon him thoffice of gouernmente. Concerning which
matter, there is in Aulus Gellius an Epistle (an excellent exhortacion for Li,
ix. ca. iii.
the careful and diligent bringyng up of youth) which Philip the king of
Macedonie wrote unto the Philosopher Aristotle, wherein he declares that for
his childs birthe he much thanked God, but not so much for his birthe, as
that it was his chance to be borne in his days, hoping that being trained
and brought up under him, he should prove worthy both him his father, and the
succession of so high an estate, which is as much to say, as Alexander had his
beginning of life of Phillip his father, but he must learn the way to live
well at Aristotle. And the more necessary it is well to bring up a Prince, on
whom the whole world Princes vices ^e il examples to others.
looks, and takes as the common leader of man's life, (as it is to be learned
in Agapetus, Xenophon, Pliny the second, and many other more) so much the
more pernicious is it for him to neglect the good trade of his trainyng up, and
by naughty example of the living of others to empaire him self, Because that
as the Satyrographer writes:

So much the more offendes the fault
of men, and marked is.
As higher is the state of him*
that works ought amiss.
For the Princes fault is so much the more daungegerous, because his
misdoynges can not rest within him self, but run abroad, and make many
other to fall into the same kind of misbehauiour.

The argument of the fifth Chapter.
That there be many occasions, which mo^e Courtiers that they can not
sincerelye do their duties.

PRinces to please accounted is, (...)*
to be no little praise.

Which saiynge, nature her self in a manner proves to be true. Whereby no man
is content with the straightness of his estate, but labors to clymbe up
ward, and sometime seeks honor above other, sometime casts his hole drist
(and that insatiable) to hourd and heap up wealth, which thing is most
usual, and put in practice, each where in kings courts, specially if princes
heads be otherwise occupied, as in geuyng them selves to huntyng, dicyng,
riotte, and such other vanities, sufferyng the courtiers to play their
parts, and at their pleasures to bie and sell the sweat of the people. Which
thing although there be no cause why we should covet, yet the earnest desire
we have to grow to honor and Ambicion.
preferment, causes us to be desierous to continue in the retinue of great
Princes, even until our deaths day. Which we read that not only learned
and unlearned men have done, but also great Philosophers. For the court has
alwaie been so esteemed, that me to Courtiers li^e, preferred before private
^^udie.
make their abode therein, have been willing to leave. not only Philosophy,
but also all liberty. So Aristippus the Philosopher (whom all color, each
estate, every thing became as Horace writes) followed Dionisius ye Syracusan,
chosing rather to flatter him, the^ to take the commodity of his own
profession, so that Diogines Cinicus might well be allowed for terming him the
kings Dog. For it fortuned once that Aristippus scorned Diogenes for eating
wortes, saying: if thou would be about the king, thou should not eat
these wortes. Naie said Diogenes, if thou could find in thine heart to
eat wortes, thou would not ^^atter the king. As for Aristotle I neade not
to speak, which did not lease his good hours with Alexander, but enstructed
him in learning, and thereby got so great knowledge of all living creatures
as no Philosopher the like, which thing Pliny says, may easily be proved by
the fifty books which he has written of living creatures. So we do se that
Princes in our time do regard worthy men, not as by flattery to purchase
preferment, but if need be, sincerely to give them good counsel, from the
which he is easelye withdrawn which has not the true way of virtue set
before his eyes, but endeavors to live to him self, and turns the most
profitable kind of life, unto the most shameful use of vanity. For there be
many bypathes which do lead courtiers out of the right way, so that they
neither embrace, ne do that which they know to be both good and needful to
be done, but they se virtue, and pine away even at the sight thereof. For there
is not one of them, but he has in his mouth nothing Courtiers co^terf^^^
virtues and prad is^ collusion.
else but godliness, justice, equity, temperaunce, and the other virtues,
whereof they never put the least poinct in practice, but endeavor them selves
to use collusion, and to deceive other, by some subtle fetch, and sleighty
policy, which a man may well call Smokesellers. Smokesellers
So Vetronius Turinus (which persuaded al men that Alexander Seuerus did all
things by his counsel, for so much as he sold that which was uncertain
whether it might come to pass or no) to receive a reward worthy of his
crafty dealyng, was burned, the Crier criynge before him: he is punished with
Smoke, which sold smoke.

Flattery also and curriyng of favor is a most pernicious The inconvenience
that grows by ^att^^y.
evil, which Mamertius calls a privy poison, wherewith Princes minds
being infected, are prepared to this, that such things as be true, they will
hold as false, and such as be false, they will hold as true, wherewith a good
Prince most of all other, ought not to be lightly led. For as Epicharmus
says: the sinnowes and ioinctes of wisdom be, not to believe rashelye.
Howbeit this enormitie reigns and bears a great swaie in courts. Whereupon
certain think this latten word Adulatio, which signifies The definicion of
flattery.
flattery, to be derived from the court as it were Adaulatio, in Greek called
Colachia. Speusippus Platoes successoure defined it to be a conversation of
evil begone and attempted for pleasure and deceipte, so that for fawnynge, it is
enforced to allow that which is against nature. So Praxaspes warned Cambises
An example of flattery.
the Persian king, not so much to use drinking of wine But he afterward
swilling more then he was wont, in his dronkennes commanded his son who
had chidde him to be brought forth, and to stand with his lift hand lift
above his head, and so when he had stroke^ A cruel act committed b^ king
Cambises in his dronke^nes
him to the heart with an arrow, he commanded his breast to be opened, and the
arowe to be showed to the father, askyng him whether his hand were not stiddie
inoughe for all his drunkenness: who denied that Appollo him self could have
given a surer stripe. Ye see how that he which is stained with the vice of A
flatterer allows not the thing that he knows to be honest.
flattery, can neither speak nor answer incorruptly. Much less the^ can a
flatterer either counsel y^ he knows to be best, or affirm it to be true.
Therefore Antisthenes said, that it was better to light among ravens, then
among flatterers, for that Ravens devoured the dead, but flatterers the quick.
Neither was it improperly spoken of Nicesias, which when Alexander drove awa^e
the Flies, which as he said did bite him, Nay rather (quoth he) drive away
them which bite you sorer, in sucking out your very blood. Noting thereby
flatterers which suck a great deal more the any fly. For they be the kings
evil, so much the less to be borne withal, because that they crepyng in
priuelie, do not only bring Princes into mistrust, but they them selves
prove unfaithful, more following their own desire and gain, then caring
either for the honesty or profit of the comminaltis. And neades must y^
superior powers, as Maximus Tyrius says, oppress the subjects where
flattery takes place, which grows not only to the subversion of the^
selves, but also oftentimes to the destruction of the hole king dome. Yet some
princes there have been which would Princes un(...) ^abl^ b^ f(...)y
not give ear to this cankerde evil, to the end they would not admit any
thing, whereby they should debase their own worthiness. As were Augustus Caesar
Adrian, Alexander, Iuliane, Antoninus Pius, and certain other worthy Princes,
which deserved well of mankind: not to mention Princes of our time which so
detest this vile vice of flatterye, that they shall after their death leave a
worthy memorial of their name. For better it is (as Ecclesiastes says) to
be by a wise man rebuked, the^ by the flattery of foles to be deceived.

Secondly, ambicion causes men to neglect the execution Ambici^n.
of their duetye, not without their worthy reprehensio^. For he that is
desierous of honor and dignity does more endeavor to this end, how to get
al men's favor, then to do his duty vprightlye and honestly toward any
manne. Whereas such as do Cice. in. i, de offi*
entende to profit the common weal, must observe these peceptes of Plats.
One, that they so tender the profit of the subjects, that what soever they
do, they drive it to that end, forgetting their own commodities: the other
that they see unto the whole body of the common weal, least while they
defend any one part, they do neglect the rest, which he does not that is
led with desire of honor, for hard it is for one that desiereth honor to
keep equity. Therefore ambicion is a very pestilent thing in a common weal,
which the Romans persecuted so many ways, as infamous, because it goes
not forward by way of law but sometime attempteth by force, sometime by disceit
as Tullie says in his Oracion, against Sallust. For the most part it is
compared unto marketting assembles wherein it was wont to be exercised, for
needs must he that bieth, sell, said Alexander the Emperor, a man that could
not away with biers of offices. Wherefore there were so many laws published
amongst the Romans, concerning biynge of offices, as the Buiyng o^ offices.
laws made by Calphurnius, Tullius, Pompeius, Julius, Fauius, and Licinius,
whereby they were not only forbidden to compass any office by bribing but
also, not so much as by making a dinner for that purpose, or causing any
repaires for the obteinyng of honors and preferment, or labouryng by any
means to win the election voices by corruption. All which things do
evidently open unto us, that we ought neither to attempt, ne yet to practice
any kind of office, for desire of ambicion, but clearly vncorruptlye, and
without any stain of bryberye.

Whereupon it is more known, then profitable to B^^^er^^.
the common weal, that a third vice does arise, most detestable among them
that do bear offices, that is to we^e, taking of bribes, which may well be
placed among dishonest practices. For it is wounder to consider, how much
rewards will alter a man, so that although ye have conceived in your mind,
neither to turn on the right, ne yet on the left hand: yet ye will be more
affectionate toward a corruptour, and in a manner naturally be led, more to
favor him, then one that will not by briberie, endeavor himself to purchase
friendship. Whereof take this testimony, not of Exo. xxiii.
the mouth of man, but at God himself, which is: Neither shall thou take
bribes, which do blind the Bribes blin^^ (...)men.
wise, and subvert the words of the just. And again, God is great, mighty,
and terrible, which respects Deuteronomy. ^.
neither person, nor gifts. And in the books of the ^ Reg. viii.
Kings, of Samuelles soonnes: And his soonnes walked not in his ways, but
declined after coueteousnes, and took rewards, and perverted their
judgments. You understand, how detestable a thing it is, to be corrupt with
rewards, and to be misledde filthely by coueteousnesse, which thing is not
only by Gods Law forbidden, but also abhorred, even of the very Heathen
people. So Hesiod^s calls the^ (Dorouoroi) that is, deuourers of rewards,
which being allured by corrupcion of gifts, do not judge the truth: and
Aristophanes uses this saying: (Dorica musa) prouerbially against soche, as be
greadie in taking of rewards. Neither can he be possibly a good man, that
withholdeth not his hands, from the filthy receiving of bribes.

Hereupon Alexander the Macedonian king, entendyng An example of a bride (...)*
by treason, to compass the Athenians, sent to Phocion in reward, a thousand
talentes. But he asked the^, which brought the money, why, seeing there were so
many Athenians, Alexander sent that present to him alone, because (said they)
he judges thee only to be, both an honest and a good man. Then (que he) let
him suffer me, both to be, and to be compted ^oche a one still. As though he
had said, that he neither was in deed, ne yet was worthy to be compted a
good man, who so could not bridle himself, from taking of bribes. For this
Phocion was of soche an approved honesty among the Athenians, that he would
never suffer himself to be corrupt, with any rewards: contrariwise, Ph^s^on
and Demades.
Demades could never be satisfied. Wherefore Antipater was wont to sa^e, that
he could never persuade Phocion to take, ne ever content Demades with all his
gifts.

The argument of the. vi. Chapter.
As it is an honest part, being about the Prince, to tender the common profit,
so it is an dishonest poincte, to gape for private advantage.

WE have declared, how ge^tleman like and decente a thing it is, worthily to
live in the Court of a good Prince, where every man's endeavor is for the
common profitte, directed after the laws, both of GOD and man, wherein every
one may show himself, ready to bestow his labor upon man, and not upon
himself only. For that it is Gods common weal, into a part whereof he is
called, wherein he commanded men to be trained up, to set forth his glory,
not to serve those bealie gods, and the gredie desire of a few covetous and
ambicious persons. At which marcke, who so intends not to shoot, does
very unworthily and unhonestly, preparyng a wheel Ixion ^^ the Poets fame) is
tormented in hell upon a whele for his ^alshode.
for himself, wherewith no otherwise then Ixion does he shall abide perpetual
punishemente, for his distoyaltie, thoroughly understanding, although to late
this saying to be true: Long in court, deep in hell. Which thing ought to
dissuade all them that do cleave unto Long in court deep in hell.
that goodly kind of misery, that either they do their duty, which is
honest, godly and profitable, in common without blame, or else if they cannot
rule their affections (which bear great stroke in soche kind of men (give
place, and live privately to them selves, yet so that every one help his
christen brother, and priuatlie do that, which he cannot perform in open
place, and bear one an others burden, restoryng with gain that talente,
committed unto him by grace, which he has received from above, forasmuch as
no one man is every man, but gifts be given severally unto us, that every
one either do bear office, according to his measure given unto him, or else do
lead a private life.

But as I have said, there be many things, which (as the world now goes)
draw men out of the ready way, blind them with the fame of high promocto^,
and cause them grievously to offend, which ought not to be permitted, to be
either covered with any clokyng, or with any pretensed color to be excused
(for it is God, whose doings thou have in hand, which in the mean while
vieweth every thing, and as a just and unavoidable judge, will punish soche
unjust dealyng, God will revenge (...).
and the slower he punishes, the sorer he punishes) some think it better, to
lurk privately in the shadow, then to offer them selves abroad, into so many
thousand dangers, not only of body, but also of soul, as though he lived
well, that lurked well: and Public and private living.
not unwisely, if they understand it not every where, and of all, but of
soche only, whose shulders can neither sustain, neither without great
danger, stand under the burden. For it is a very fondnes, to undertake the
bearyng of any thing, which thou can not easily lift up.

Which things, nevertheless do not move many that be glorious, and stand to
much in their own conceit, whom in the mean while, honor nourishes, and
enforces to play the bealie gods, and hogs, Courtiers be tied with
golden chains.
as it were in the stte. Besides that those golden chains, wherewith, they
that be fettered, do serve in bondage, and delight in a gaie kind of misery
(as Diogenes was wont to say, against Aristippus the Court dog) do stay
them so long, that they can never find in their hearts, to change their
chains to dye for it. Surely, neither honor (the most vanity of all other
Honor is bu^ mere vanites.
vanities) ne yet any gold gotten by the undoing of a great meany, ought so
much to be esteemed by any man, that we should prefer an uncertainty, and a
thing of base value before that, which is everlasting, neither for a small
pleasure, to work our own undoing, and to be hurled into the dongion of
hell, there to endure perpetual tornmentes, into the which the fall is so
much the greater, the higher the degree is, from whence thou art cast down.
Therefore that honor, which thou so much desire to get, and with so great
^ain honor depends upon ^an.
peril to purchase, is but a fame of the people, whose inheritance in
succession, is most pernicious, because it stands and decaieth, at the
Princes will. For if he begin ones to cast his countinaunce frowningly upon
thee, it is wounderfull to mark, how other will incontinent epsy it, and when
thou art a little out of favor, labor utterly to disgrace thee. But a
wiseman endeavors by his virtue, to ioygne honor unto dignity, and not by
dignity to seek honor. Therefore Socrates said well, that soche men got true
honor, True honor.
whose labor was to be in deed, soche as they would seem to be. For that is
the true honor, and constante in it self, which when the high fame of
dignity decaieth, remains unstained, and follows the party.

Likewise the riches, whereat thou gapest so much Worldly wealth is but
vanity.
be vain, and shall be thy destruction, neither shall thou be suffered to use
them, neither to set thy self at liberty when thou listest. Specially
considering, the coueteous man as well lacks that he has, as that he has
not. So that Epimenides the Candian Philosopher, Money.
seemed well to have called money, a punishment to the coueteous, an ornament to
the liberal, and a murderer to the Traitor. And the wise Solomon says: he
Eccle. xxxi
that loves gold, shall not be justified. Soche a man is he, which
unjustly sueth or accuses the poor, to Prou. xxii.
enlarge his riches, which he shall give to a richer, and himself stand in
need. Woe be to them that seek after gold, seeing every vnwiseman shall therein
perish.

But there be other more discommodities, which do light upon these ragyng
rauenours, and greadie Griffons. For princes sometime wink, till this
glo^o^ous desire be filled, and sometime stand as lokers on, although not
without great spoilyng, and robbery of their subjects, until soche have
persuaded them selves, that the harvest is ripe, and the barn full (for no
sudden felicity, is of long continuance) and then they use to open their
iyes, and to gather up their feathers, declaryng in deed that to be true,
which in words is much bruted: that a Prince is like unto a young A prince^
^^^ pleasure co^pated to a bears c^^^ltie.
Bear, which at the first, uses to suffer his plaifelow so long as he
pincheth him not hardly, but at the last being provoked never so little, he
falls to good earnest, and teareth him with his paws, and declares him self
to be a cruel beast in deed: as though God warned us to take heed, lest that
counterfeict patience, be turned into reuengemente. And in deed the
benifites of Princes have been wont to be very rashelie employed, and at
adventure. For the more they be affeccionate toward any man, and that either
because they have been brought up together, and one privy to an others
missedoyng, or that flatterers have commended him to them, so that there
happens, like lips, like Let^ise, or because he has devised some new
policy, whereby the kings Treasure may be enriched, although to the great
harm of the commonaltie: So much the more they use, even to load soche a man with gifts and promocions. Otherwise, if any good luck happen unto him,
it is but the very daliyng of fortune, which is as ready to take away that,
which she has given, as she is to bestow a good turn upon a man. Herein we
may take for ensample, the act of the most sage Prince Sigismunde, which,
when a A witty device of Sigismon^
certain Courtier did vpbraied him, for that he bestowed much upon an other,
and his compaignion, but gave him nothing, said: that he should account it, to
be his ill luck, and none otherwise. For the trial Some write (two Cas^^^s.)
whereof, he commanded two small gunnes to be filled, the one with gold,
the other with stones, and badde him that he should chose, whether he would.
Which thing, although it were done deliberatly, yet it profited him nothing:
for it fortuned him to chose that which was filled with stones. Which thing
may be a certain argument, to impute princes benefits rather to fortune, then
any great affection or judgment.

But because both the rising and fall of courtiers, be for the most part in
danger of fickle and blind fortune (whom a certain writer, likeneth to a
castyng Courtiers be likened to castyng counters
counter, which placed out somewhat at length, stands for a thousand, and
again pulled back, stands scarce for one) gooddes which they have gathered
by right or wrong, be as easily plucked from them, as they were lightly
gotten. For I am able to recount many unto you, which being thus fattened,
were dispoiled, not only of all their gooddes, but also their lives. Whereby
we be warned, so to pursue honor, and matters in court, that when honor
shall be taken from thee, the true ornament of honesty, and gooddes of the
mind, may follow thee, which, if thou suffereste Shipwrake, will swim out
with thee, being even naked, and will follow thee, step by step, and
provide thee again of furniture for thy iourneye. Otherwise, as it is a
plausible and an honorable thing to be in favor among princes, so it is full
of dangers. For they be men, and subject to affections, whom he trusts
well, that is guilty in conscience of nothing, whereby he ought to fear them,
whereas they be for the most part, as ready to hurt, as to do good.
Which Ouide in these six verses, finely expressed.

If ought thou will believe thy friend, that is by trial taught:
Live to thy self and titles high, of honor set at naught.
Live to thy self, and see thou f^^e, the pomp of haughty fame,
From height descendes the thunder clappe, and fulgent flashe of flame.
The mighty men though most they may, and only help at need,
Yet wo^t they more to hurt then help: soche fruicte does honor breed.
Which must be ascribed to them, that be not endewed with the discipline of
godliness, but think it lawful that likes them, naturally fierce, although
they fain them selves gentle. Soche noughtie princes, would to God might only
light upon soche rauenours as I spoke of before, that they might have a
worthy scourge, for their coueteousnes, and not also upon good men, which
deseruyng well of the common weal as soon as they begin to warn their
prince of his duty, then perceiuyng him somewhat impacient, thereby do
incontinent learn, that he which will hold a foolish Princes favor, must
follow his will, and pleasantly frame himself to his affections: and
contrariwise, he that will keep a wise Princes good will, must do it by
counsailyng him to do that which is convenient.

THE Third Book, concerning the good ordering of a common weal.
The argument of the first Chapter.
Of such as be put in trust by rulers, and how it is much for the common
commodity that they be sincere and lovers of Godliness.

I Have somewhat declared how expedient a thing it is, that such as he about
princes be good and Godly, where at they may take the rule of their life
(which al men use to mark none otherwise, then they behold their face in a
lokynge Glass,) that thereby through example of their daiely conversation,
they may learn and understand to do that is best, and to eschew that is
contrary. For with the good thou shall be good, and with the noughtie thou
shall be naughty, which is so true, that it behooves eue^ their very words to
be honest and chaste, least the mind consent thereunto, and so be enfected:
for evil talk uses to corrupt good manners, as Menander says. Which thing
Saint Paul also recites thus: Ill conversation i. Cor. xv.
hurts good manners. And like man like talk: and that not without a cause,
seeing talk is a signification Speech is a representation of the mind.
of the mind. Therefore Socrates who^ they report to have called Philosophy,
and the discipline of manners, even out of heaven: said unto a young man, whose
towardenes he was requested to learn: Speak that I may see thee: meaning
hereby that man's mind might rather be known by his communication, then by
any view of his countenance.

But for so much as kingdoms and dominions be given to kings and potentates,
over which they have rule, neither can they alone rule all, neither be present
each where, they must needs do that by puttyng other in trust: for it is better
to do a thing by a deputy, then Officers.
quite to leave it undone, or to attempt it out of time, and so give occasion
of some unrecoverable harm. And hereby is it meant when we do say, that
kings have many eyes, and long hands. From whence it does not much
disagree, that is in the common proverb so much bruted, A great bird, must
have a wide neast. But these must also be of good conversation, and love
honesty, that they both may in their offices do their Princes honor, and
also be nothing heavy to the subjects. For an Official, or one that bears
office, Officialis.
is called so of (Officium) which the Greeks do call (To cathecon) as who say,
that belongs to us to do. 3. de finibus bo. and mal.
And that does Marcus Tullius call duty, which when it is done, we may
give a good reason why it is done, and this kind of duty has place in the
common weal. Therefore whatsoever is done by officials or deputies in the
whole kingdom and dominion, that must be uprightly and well done, so that it
do agree with place, time, the thing which ought to be done, the subjects,
the deputies office, and the honor of the high magistrate. Whereby it shall be
occasioned, that such things as be due to the officer, shall be well preserved,
and the subjects shall with all officiousnes perform and do that is their
duty, so acknowledging the majesty of him that is in office, that they shall
reverence even a staff if he do set it up before them. Whereof take this as
an example: Amasis the king of Amasis the king of the Egyptians.
the Egyptians, which neither came of royal blood, ne yet had any memorial of
his auncetours, but being of a base degree was elected to the kingdom: For
which things when as sundry men did contemn him, he bethought him self how
he might cover this belmish and wittely bring him self in reputacion among
the rude people. There was amongst the kings plate a Basen of gold, wherein
after his country fashion, he and his ghe^^es after meat were wont to wash
their feet, which he also sometime used in place of a chamber pot, as some
have used Emeraude bowls for the same purpose. This Basen did he break, and
of it made an Image of an ydole, and set it up in the midst of the market
place to be worshipped of the Egyptians, which they did very reuerentlye. Which
thing when it was reported unto the king, he assembled all the people
together, and told them the whole matter how it was, that this image which
they so highlye honored, was made of that Basen wherein he was wont to wash
his fete, piss, and vomit, and to put it to such like kind of uncleanly
uses. And so should they think of him, who although he was but of base
birthe, yet he was their king, and worthy to be reverenced with due honor.

They that be under Officers, deputies, or have the administracion of some
other officer, must be circumspect, that they fail not in their duties, nor
do any thing wrongfully. But they must especially take heed that they do
neither take bribes, ne yet suffer them selves to be seduced by corruption of
ambicion. For the room that they supplye is not man's, but Gods committed unto
the administracion of man, and their estate is so much the straighter,
because they be not only compelled to give an account of their stewardship to
god, but also to the prince or magistrate, under who^ they be appointed to
bear office, which shall also answer Princes ought to be circumspect in the
appoinctyng of officers.
for that which is done evil, because he did not appoinct a convenient man to
be his deputy, and suffered his people to take harm, specially by him whom he
knew to be an hirelyng, and reatchles in the office of feadyng. It is like, as
if a shepeheard, when he has sheep committed to his charge, while he
gathers nuttes, or otherwise spends the time idly.) does put them over
to an others keeping, and they in the mean while be ill fed and fall away,
or negligently kept, the Wolf brusteth in amongst them. What shall stay the
Lord of these sheep, but that he may examine therefore both the hirelyng, and
the shepeherd him self, and call them both to account for the loss he has
sustained, that if the one can not make amends, the other shall make it good,
and abye for his negligence, as reason and justice requires.

There be also sundry other things, which may warn them of their duties,
and cause them that they do not go astray, seeing they be appointed over a whole
people, and many: of whom they can not deserve all in like, as among whom
there are so many minds as heads. And unless they have before their eyes the
perfect rule of administration, I mean the law, temperaunce, It is a
dangerous thing that officers should be fauty.
justice, and equity, after which they may direct all the order of their
gouornement, whereby they shall not only be delivered from the stain of
error, iniquity, and naughtines, but also shall be without suspicion thereof,
there will always be some, that shall find fault with their doings be they
never so honest, never so upright, and unknowing to them, accuse them to the
head officer, and thereby bring them out of favor. For Princes be men, and
easily will be brought to suspect other men's doings, for so much as they be
very desierous thereof, and think in a great glory to cloak their own fault
by the calamity of others, and will not stick at the complaint of one that
has been evil handeled to put a man from his office, and to wipe him clean
of all his goods.

Which thing deputies and under officers in our time do not weye, which
neither knowing man's nor yet Gods law, do neither consider any percell of
equity, ne yet of Godliness, but only seek how to circumuent the pore
comminaltie, how to ouerlay them with Subsidies, how to compass all their
attemptes, be it by right, be it by wrong, thinkyng so to gratify their
Lords, if they can torcioully levy a great substance of money from their
subjects, and thereby augment Officers grow quick^l^e to great wealth.
their accoumptes. In the mean time, not forgettyng them selves, for they
handle things so finely and so craftily, that they will have store of riches,
as it were out of an horn of plenty, and after the fashion of a flowyng
water, make them come unto the^ faster and faster, till they be swellyng
ripe, like lean flies, which in the Summer season, sittyng upon a scabbed
horse, do soon fill them selves so full, that either they do fall of, or else
sometimes burst in fonder.

The Romans (whose common weal far excelled The magistrates of Rome
continued not long in one office.
all others) purposyng to remedy this sore appointed their officers, but of
short time, which thing Aristotle in his Politiques does not much
discommend. Some were for a month, some for half a year, some for a
tweluemoneth as they had laws, for requirings again soche money, as any
officer, ruler, or other put in trust with the common affairs, did against the
worship of their authority, take for false judgment, in the way of
briberie, or otherwise. Which (if he had been found guilty) he was compelled
to restore, no less ^^stit^cion.
then if he had stolen the same. And soche laws be those that were made* and
bare the names of their makers, Calphurnius, Eecilius, Seruilius, A^ilius, and
Julius, which all were laws, touching the restitucion of money* Of which you
may read much in Marcus Tullius Cicero* and other writers of the Roman
Histories.

The argument of the second Chapter.
That officers* although they do not all se^ to one thing, yet their whole
drifte must be all to one end, that is, the ornaments of the common (...).

NEither be they all of one sort, or all of one kind of function, which be
put in trust to govern the common affairs in shires. Yet not withstandyng
the mark, whereat they must all shoot, is that the body of the whole common
weal, be preserved and saved, which is but one, be the dominion or power
never so great, and so named but one, as the governor or head thereof Aristot*
in. 3 Polit.
is but one. And like as in every house, all the implementes thereof, be put to
their proper uses, and yet be directed and have respect unto the common
commodity of the whole family: so I do grant in every city, town, and
shire, a private kind of government, one not aunsweryng to an other. For the
diversity of the place, of the trafficque, of the people, and of living,
causes and receives some variety: but such as it does ioigne in one, for
the profit of the whole Country, which therefore is one, because it has
respect unto one prince, as one head, of whom it receives, laws,
ordinances, injunctions, and all soche things, as apparteine to the wealth
and dignity thereof.

And this is the cause wherefore in this earthly city we be prepared toward
that which is in heaven, wherein we acknowledge Christ our head, which must
be the goal of our race, that after the ceasing of that which is mortal, and
shall shortly decaie, we may come to that which is everlasting, the only
reward of the life past. Even so, every particular assemble has his church,
but ruled after the image of that which we call general or catholic,
wherein is the holy communion of saints, after which as a leader all other
be streightened, and receive their stay.

Again, the higher officers in every City, town, shire, and politic
gouernaunie, have other which be also under them, according unto the
diversity of their offices. The chief of those be the Shirifes, or such as
stand in room of the praetor among the Romans, whose office is to see that
judgments be upright and sincere, and that every man according to the rule
of justice have his own. For the administration The administracion of
^u(...)ce.
of Justice is so necessary, that no kingdom, no city, no assemble of men,
can either be begone, or continue without it: which is not only an ornament
to the common weal, as a garlande to a maid, but lays the foundation and
sure grou^dworke of the same. And hereupon thexecution of judgment is called
the kings handemaide, without which he ought not to come abroad or think
him self a king.

They therefore to whom thexecution of judgment is committed, ought to do
their endeavor by all means, lest their duty neglected, they either persuade
them selves a certain r^tchlesnesse, and security, or being with bribes
corrupted, or allured by parcialitie, do despise the outcrie of the people, and
do not judge vprightlie. For it is no small burden, that such a man has
undertaken and laid upon his shoulders, but the very charge of God, whereof
he shall not escape, but give a sure account in the great day of the Lord,
although by some collusion, conueyaunce, or other pretenced lie, he has
escaped the hands of his Prince, when he has done evil. For judgment is the
lords, as Esaie says. This is the way, walk in it, neither Esa^. xxx.
do ye decline either on the right or lift hand. And Iosophat appoincted
Judges of the land, in the citees of Judah, fortified in every place, and
commanded the 2. Para. xix.
Judges, saying: look what ye do: For you do not exercise the judgment of
man, but of God. And what soever ye shall judge, it shall return upon your
self. Moreover the profane powers, and soche as have been stained with
impiety, would that judgments should be undefiled. In consideracion whereof,
Cambises the Porsian king, commanded the Judge, whom he had perceived to have
judged unjustly, to be flain, and flain A judge flayne for giving corrupt
iudgeme^s
quick, and his skin to be hanged up, before the judgment seat, whereby
his soonne was enforced, uprightly to give right judgment. Alexander Seuerus
Lampridius in vita Aleandri*
likened soche men to thieves, affirmyng, that if any came to meet him, he
was ready with his finger, to pluck out his iyes. But to the entente my talk
may drive to some end, and that I may not seem, as it were to tell a tale to
a deaffe manne, I must proceed to other matters, since that this thing is so
much bewailed of many, that it cannot easily be amended.

But the estate of the Judges officers, is so much the more to be borne with
all, because they do not them selves pronounce sentence, but give judgment,
which they do take of other, but yet of their fellows in commission, they be
not to be reproved, specially if they had any knowledge in the law, and were
not led with affections. Albeit there be among them, some of singular
uprightness, which never refuse to follow equity, whereunto they be
naturally moved, and would judge that, which were good and upright, if they had
knowledge accordynglie. But what would you have them ^^learned co^mis^^oners.
to do, which never tasted, what was either upright, or just? Which (if a
thing do appear unto them, to lean upon any reason) do hold it as a law,
as just and upright, although it be wicked, and dissonaunt above all measure
from justice. But yet the woorthier they be of excuse, the more ready they be
to judge justly, if they had any certain knowledge of right and equity. Yet
they ^e not without fault, because they do meddle in a thing, which the^ never
learned, neither can practice without great annoiaunce, and endamaging of
others. And truly I know not, whether in any point I may call a Country
more unhappy, then in that it must abide those blind judgments, and which
for the most part, be unjustly pronounced through brib^^le, parcialitie, and
all kind of wicked corrupcion, and that specially in these days: wherein so
increases the civil discipline among the Germans, and men's iyes are so
opened, as never the like before: And that they I say, do less regard the
old simplicity of our predecessors, then when the exercise of judgments was
rude, and finished by the only virtue of an oath. But now the desire of Lawyng
is so great, that a man would rather be content with one iye, then one
verdite, were it never so justly and righteously pronounced.

Amongst soche as be under officers to princes, we (...).
appoincte an other place to Receivers, whom some term Purueiars, because of
their provision, I do mean soche as use to gather the Princes revenues, and
afterward give an account into the Eschequier of their receiptes and expenses,
herein necessary for that they have charge over those things, without which
the high Magistrate, can neither be maintained, ne yet be able to govern: to
whom we therefore do owe as due, rentes, tributes, and soche like subsidies,
that thereby he may do his duty, and as the scripture says: Caesar may
have, that is due unto Caesar, which thing Paul does also warn, saying:
Roma. xv.
pay you to all, that is due to all, to him, to whom tax is due, tax, to
whom custom, custom, to whom fear* fear, to whom honor, honor. These
Receivers or Treasurers have an honest and profitable Office, and apperteinyng
to the common weal. Moreover, money is the strength, or as it were s^n^wes of
the common weal, the more needful to him, whose office requires larger
administracion. Where as if you set before your iyes, the d^^^ly riot of the
court, ^^^yng, diversity of deintie dishes, the unprofitable number of
^^^^ssiue spoil (...)ces (...)es.
^^^einers, unmeasurable expenses, and as it were the outrageous waste of all
things, ye shall not but meruel, whence provision is had, for those great
spoilinges: a kind of life therefore the happier, because it has ^^ botome,
or stinte, wherein it is commanded to spare, Sera in ^undo parsimo^^a.
which in others is said, to be to late, unless they spare before all be
spente. Wherefore he spoke not vn^^tly, The (...) ^^mpa^ed to the spleen.
which likened the Exchequier to the spleen, as which will never be satisfied.

Howbeit our receivers be not only charged with (...) of Receivers.
gathering of the common money, but have also thereunto annexed power of
punishment, authority of administracion, and execution of law, specially in
such things as do appertain unto such leuiyng of rentes and revenues. Wherein
as the good do much good, so the evil, and such as be given to covetousness
and naughtines, do wondrous much harm, specially when honest dealing set
a part, they begin with new inuencio^s to burden the people, to increase
their account, and to get better allowaunce in the court. For such as do not
much trust to the favor of princes or desire without their lords knowledge to
get wealth by the pore men's sweat, do take such an order, that besides the
yearly revenues, they will bring into the treasury some sum of money,
scraped up by right or wrong, whereby they may bewitche the Princes eyes,
and cloak their own covetousness: which thing is detestable two ways. First,
because they (...)* (...)*
deceive the magistrate, shauyng hi(...) that they do pille his ^ubicaes,
whereas it is the princes commodity to have his subjects wealthy. Secondly,
because under this color, they practice a shameful biyng and sellyng of
things, so that that saying may seem true, that there is no office so small,
but a man may so behave him self in it, that he may deserve hangyng.

There be moreover diverse other, whose aid men of power do use in their
offices, sometime for their revenues and money of state, sometime for other
affairs, as be the overseers of Parkes and Woods, which W^dwar^s ^ (...)*
therefore we may call Fosters, raungers, or woodewardes, being necessary for
the provision of wood, which men by no mean may want. For if woods be
cut down or dispoyled, neither can buildinges be maintained, ne yet fuel
had for fire.

It is not apperteinynge to my purpose to touch other Huntyng.
as be the masters of the Buckhou^des, sergeantes of the lease, Rangers, and
such like officers, nor yet Faulconers, which have charge of falcones, sparrow
H^^ky^g^.
hawks, and such kind of rauenyng birds, whereupon arises the pleasure of
haukynge. Nor I will not speak of such as be overseers of fishepondes, custom
money, salt pittes, havens, and such sorts of common auailes. All profitable,
if you take away the abuse, which causes that to be hurteful to the country,
and a great charge, that otherwise is necessary, and for the common commoditte.

The argument of the.iii. Chapter.
That the manner of gouernyng commonweals, does not always belong to one
estate, but yet has always respect to one end.

THe examples both of old and late may declare that there be diverse manners
of gouernementes in commonweals, and specially of the city of Rome, which
because it was of so great power, could not have thestate of her common weal
with out change, but oftentimes fell into diverse kinds of rule, and thereby
could not continue in the dignity The Roman (...) was won b^ force of
arms.
and majesty of her predecessors. But as that empire was gotten by force of
Arms, and by wrong done to others: so i^ must needs be by force of Arms
overthrown, and fall by reason of her own hugenes, the occasion hereupon
taken, for that the people began to alter the old ordinances of their
Predecessors, and to change into an other form of r^lynge their common
weal, whereas it is not good to alter thestate of well a appointed common
weal. And therefore Augustus said well, who so wills not the present estate
of the common weal to be altered, is both a good Citezin, and also a good man.
And this is that which Aristotle In. 2. polit.
so earnestly defends, that the laws of a city be not to be altered. As by
whose change, it must needs ensue, that the state whereof they be the ground
and foundation shall shrink, which the Athenians did full well observe,
appointynge certain lawkepers, which in all commen counsels and assembles did
sit crowned with white wrethes before the head magistrates, and encountered
all attemptes against the laws all ready established. At Locrus a notable
city of the Strabo in. 6 geographie lib.
Epizephirians, which first (as Strabo writes) used certain written laws,
there was an order taken, that none should be suffered to attempt renuynge of
any law, contrary to the ancient ordinances, unless he would venture his
neck in a halter, to the end that if it might seem commodious to the common
weal, he might escape: if not, he should straightway be stranguled with the
same halter, the loope thereof being hard pulled together.

Therefore the firm and uniform order of governance makes the estate to
continue unchanged, which is the best and surest in the best kind of rule, as
most commonweals do evidently declare. Although as men be now a days minded,
it be hard to keep y^ same, because of the troubles of sedicion, and
intemperancy Change ^^ dangerous.
of the people. Wherefore in default of a governor, some free cities use to
take the emperor or some other king or foraine prince for their defendour,
whereby both the people may be kept in awe, and they them selves preserved.
Moreover, in some commonweals it has been an ancient custom, that certain
of the base people, and brotherhodes of artificers should be as assistantes to
the counsailours, to so that nothing be called contrary to the common profit
of the Citezines, and laws of the country, unknowing to the people, as the
Tribunes were wont to do among the Romans. And as it marueilously furthereth
concord and quietness in a City, and as it were nourishes the same, that the
common money, (so far as belongs to receites, and expenses) be noted to the
comminaltie: so where a few, were they never of so great estimacio^, and
deserved never so well of their country do the same after their own wills, it
stirs great troubles, and has been the utter undoing to sundry that
peradventure never offended. Therefore the wittiest counsel that I can find,
is (for so much as according to Tirence saying: sundry diet causes sundry
usage, and each day has enough for her own evil,) for a season to defer
those things, which without great disturbance can not be suddenly altered.

Therefore the administrations of commonweals, Three kinds of government
as they be now adays appointed, seem to be mixed with the three kinds of
government, that is to say: Monarchy, the best men's rule, and the peoples
guidyng. For so as it were one hand washes an other, and one man aideth an
other, specially in such things as ought not to be hid. For there be many
priuye things in Cities, and profitable in common, which must be committed
but to few, which in this point so much commends and approves the
faithfulness, dignity, and honest behavior of the officers, that they (...)
finders.
be thereby void of suspicion. Albeit no man ever yet so ruled in the world,
but he found certain felowmates, which would misconstre and find fault with
his doings, whom, the clearer a man's conscience is, The nature of good and il
reporters.
the sooner he will despise. As for good men's report, he never neadeth to
cast any such fear. For good men always take good things in good part, and as
Tullie says: The better a man is, the less does he suspect other to be
evil. Contrariwise, he that is evil, can not speak well of other, but
measures al men by him self. And then said Alexander the Macedonian,
plaiest thou the king in deed when doing well, thou art misreported: neither
yet cease God to preserve his magistrate or minister, even in the midst of
all his trouble.

Neither is it to be thought that it can naturallye come to pass that one
common weal can abide the three estates, (I mean of one alone, of the best,
and of the peoples government,) as to have so many particular heads in it,
whereof each shall have the authority: but a measure must be had, and each
regard his own private charge. Of which thing we may take an example at this
universal frame of the world, wherein the Philosophers by all their search,
could not find Aristo. in. ^. Metaphys. In. 11. de Ciuitate Dei. Capi. 25. an
example taken of B^es.
any more, but one Lord and king. And as saint Austen says: Plato did not
think that there was any more Gods but one, the aucthour of al natures. Which
thing a man may also see in Bees, which will have no more kings in their swarm
but one, about who^ they cluster, whom they compass in, and reverence, (as
Pliny full well teaches in hid natural history.) Although Aristotle led
by some greater experience, thinks that sometime they do follow diverse
guides, which being altogether, do make the number of one swarm, which thing
the Be kepers, as I my self have heard them often times say, do grant: if so
be that the hiues be able to receive diverse swarms.

Therefore how diverse so ever the estates of governors be, which rule in
one common weal, yet their eyes must look upon one as chief in authority,
to who^ in weighty affairs they must have a recourse as unto a Moses. So that
in every well governed city, none other thing is to be looked for, but that
we with most quietness that can be, being obedient to our ruler, (because he is
ordained by God) do seek the common wealth, and the only glory of God, whether
the rule be, governed by one as a king, by the better fort, by the mightier
power, or joined with diverse and sundry. Which neither Aristotle him self
does in all In. 3. polit.
poinctes disalow, but reasons as though after a sort it may be accounted as
one of the best rules in a common weal. For there is nothing so perilous, but
if a man use it well, it may be both quiet and safe: and contrariwise, there
is nothing so good, but it shall have wonderful evil hap, if you do not
cease to abuse it. Wherefore it lies in us to employ government (although
Abuse.
it be a difficult thing,) either to a good or an evil end.

The argument of the fourth book.
That in a common weal it behooves magistrates to pass other in uprightness
of life and manners, and to be favorers of the advancement of the common
profit.

THe worthy Plato; (whose companion Plato. 8. de Repub.
Tullie professes him self to be, in his books which he wrote touching a
common weal, as Pliny reports in his preface to Vaspasian,) seems well to
have said: that commonweals be distinguished according unto the nature of
men; the decent order whereof we do measure by the magistrate that rules.
Which if he be A magistrate profits much by good example of living.
good, it can not otherwise be, but that the City shall appear to be very
well ordered. But if he be unprofitable and dissolute, it straightwaies
lights upon the Citizins, whom he infecteth and makes much worse, for so
much as a naughty Raven can not but lay a naughty egg. Neither was there
ever scholemaster that made good scholars, who was him self intemperate, and
negligent in teaching. Wherefore not every one of base condition must be
admitted to bear of^ice, but must be chosen amongst such as have well governed
their own household. Like unto him that will be a Superintendent of a church,
which must be unreprovable, desierous of good things, one that has well ruled
his own house, has obedient children with all reverence. So says the
apostle Paul. A Bishop must be without fault, one that has well governed i.
Timo ^^.
his own house, having his children in obedience with all reverence. But if a
man can not tell how to rule his own house, how shall he rule the church of
God? Moreover, as a bishop must teach not only with his mouth, but also with
his holiness in life: so a magistrate ought not only to ordeine and appoinct,
but also in deed to perform that which is for the common profit. For it is
a thing to be despised and uncomely, to reason of the discipline of good
manners, or to appoinct a rule of good life, if a man be him self naughty, and
of a vicious living. Whom Diogenes Cinicus likeneth unto a Lute, which
deliteth other with the swetenes of her stringes, but it self hears nothing.
But thapostle terms them a sounding brass, i. Cor. xiii.
or a tinckelyng Cymball.

Neither can it be but that city shall be kept in very good order, wherein the
officer lets nothing pass which may appertain to the honesty of
manners, or Magistrated must have deligent respect to the peoples behavior.
emplantyng of virtue. Where he is not only content generallye to decree any
thing, or to take any thing in hand that apperteineth to a civil life, but
is careful for every particular citizen, and notes their trade of life, to
the end he may appoinct a reward to the Arist. 5 pol.
good, and set them forth to all men for the ornament of their virtue: and
dehort, drive, and bring the noughtie from their wickedness, to uprightness of
manners, and as a master of life may show to them both the communicatynge of
virtues, and true use of man's society.

And this it is whereof Marcus Tullius puts us D^ officiis. Lib. 1.
in mind: universally they that will bear rule in the common weal, must
observe two precepts of Plato. One, that they so look unto the profit of the
citezens, that they refer all their doings thereunto, forgettyng their own
commodities. The other, to se to the whole body of the common weal, that
while they look to one part, they do not ouerloke the rest. And therefore it
is the proper duetye of a magistrate to understand that he represents the
state of the whole city, whose dignity and worship he ought to sustain, keep
laws, appoint ordinances, and remember that they be committed unto his charge.

Moreover, a common weal, wherein the magistrate does as it were from a watch
tower behold the citizens manners, and does not neglect well to frame the same,
shall keep every poincte that is required in the principal common weal, that
as Lacedemon was wont, so it may be called a reverent assemble, and repair of
good men, the shop and mart of al virtues, whereunto all the Philosophers
disputacions of virtues, of the discipline of manners, offices, and other
profane treatises must be referred, as it has been by a marvelous good reason
allowed, although left in a shadow, and in schools: yet a tradicion worthy to
be uttered abroad, and to show unto men the use of the felicity which it
promises.

The argument of the fifth Chapter.
That it is the part of a wise magistrate conveniently to provide such
things as be neadefull for the Citezins to live by, without any wrong done to
others.

ALexander surnamed the great, when he had welnere brought the whole world
under his subjection, led forth his army, and being desierous of
immortality, purposed to build a City, named after his own name, and to
furnishe the same with inhabitants. Whom Dynocrates a cunnyng builder of
Macedonia Vitruuius de architectura.
following, when he had fashioned the mount Athos after the proporcio^ of a man,
in whose left hand he figured the walls of a large city, and in the right a
cup to receive the water issuinge out of all the rivers of that Hill, and so
to conduct them from it into the Sea: Alexander delighted in the fairenes of
this purtraiture, by and by enquired, whether there were any ground about to
furnishe it with store of corn: and findyng that it could not be maintened,
but by carriage from beyond the seas, said: I do well mark (Dynocrates) the
fine drawing forth of the platte, and am delighted therewith, but this do I
withal mark, that if a man would plant any company of men in such a place
city wise: the devise will not be liked. For as a young infant can not be
nourished without his nourses milk: so neither can a city, be it never so
fair, increase and maintain any number of people, without grounds liyng
thereunto for the bringynge forth of fruits, yeldyng plenteous provision for
the sustinaunce of the inhabitants. And as I allow the platteforme, so do I
disallowe the place. And so leaving this work undone, he followed the king into
Egypt, which there perceiving an haven naturallye fortified, a goodly mart
place, the fields throughout all Egipte to be of a batfull soil, and the
manifold commodities of the great river Nilus, he commanded Alexandria a
city in Egypt
Dynocrates to build a city there, named Alexandria after his own name.

Whereby it is evident, that soche as builded tounes did not only rest upon
the fairness of walls, and houses: but provided also, that they might be set
in soch a fertile place, whereas they should have ple^tie of corn, abundaunce
of victualle, the benefit of water, and all soche things, wherewith a city
should be maintained. Likewise, who sees not that his judgment, is to be
misseliked, who so therefore thinks a city to stand well, because it is
environed with walls and trenche, garnished with goodly buildings, and
situate in soch a place, whereas nothing wants, that can appertein unto the
health of the people: if it be not also institute, framed and governed by such
laws, such discipline of manners, soche a kind of rule, and that continually,
that there may be the mutual pleasuryng of one an other, the society of
life, the use of virtue, and that for whose cause the city is builded, I mean
the atteining of blessedness, without which, you shall do as they, A fair
city ill ordered to like a painted tomb
which do paint a toumbe, wherewith the lokers on, do delight their iyes,
whereas within is none other thing, but a stinkyng carcass.

In which thing, I appoincted the magistrates office Magistrates office.
to be, that he tender not only, the florishyng state of the whole city, but
also the private wealth of every man, and the very whole honor of the common
weal, to be committed unto him, as by whom it ought to be supported and
stayed. Therefore two things he shall observe: that whatsoever apperteineth
unto the furniture of meat. drink, and clothe^, or the^ necessary passing
over of life, that may be easily gotten: Secondly that it be well bestowed,
and employed to the glory of God. This must be the whole so^me and effect of
good government, forasmoche as the Magistrate must travail among the
citezeins, none otherwise, then among his own childre^n, as whose wealth he
must prefer, before his own, and declare himself, to be a father of his
country. Which name none ever obtained amongst the Romans, unless he had
marueslously well deserved Pater patriae
of the common weal. For Cicero was so named, and so was Augustus Caesar,
which is reported to have been so delighted therewith, that when Valerius
Messala, by the counsel and people of Romes commandment, called him father
of his country, weeping for very joy, he answered: Sens that, my Lords, I
have obtained my desire, what other thing have I to request at Gods hands,
but that I may deserve, that this your consent may continue, until my last
end.

With soche a mind therefore every manne must take upon him the charge of the
common weal, that he do his endeavor, to prefer the public affairs,
before private, and alwaie to have that before his iyes, and to watch alone,
when other do sleep. But more Provision of necessaries. etc.
diligently to repeat my former treatise, concerning things privately
necessary, there is no hope that the common weal can have any prosperous
success, without the supportacion of private things, which has as it were,
the form of a ground whereupon the other must be established. For what kind
of society should that be, wherein one should be compelled to be hungry, and
he and his children, as it were, to starve for famine (which is a wonderful
piteous case) either for want of things, wherewith the life should be
maintained, or y^ because of great dearth, they cannot be releiued: and an
other having his barnes full, should live at riot, or alone, as one having
quick vtteraunce of wares, should stick upon to much gain, oppress the
neadie, and seek his own commodity, to the undoing of other, contrary to the
very course of nature? In soche case is this common weal, as that household,
which will never thrive, so long as one daily swilleth, and keeps revel, an
other pineth for lack of food: the good man of the house in the mean while
either fallen as it were, into a slomber, or negligently looking to his
family. And although the common saying be, that he which enters into an
other man's house, should be both domme and deaffe, yet no honest man could
well bear with this inequality.

Neither is there one only way, to atteine unto the knowledge how a city must
be furnished with all necessaries, but good aduisement must be used in all,
according to the consideracion of the place, the men, the time, the year.
Because thus there is foresight had, to the citezeins commodity, neither yet
be the sellers endammaged. For no city can stand, without mutual trafficque,
no company of men be maintained, without provision, without open market for
sale of things, without the Shambles, and corn market, in which Things must
be sold at a reasonable price.
poincte, if soche order be taken, that Merchants or Fermours, be compelled
to sell things, which they bring in, better cheap then reason is, and
oftymes for less then they cost them, that is to be eschewed for two causes:
First, because the sellers forsakyng the city, shall seek an other market,
where they may utter their wares, to their greater commodity: Secondly,
because that when things, for the daiely use of citees, be not brought in,
the citezeins in the mean while, be compelled to stand in need, whereupon
occasion is oftimes ministered to rebellion. Therefore it were better to
ouerbuy things, that we must needs have, then to be altogether without them.
And therefore, for the sale and prices of things, soche order and rate must be
used, that it may be to each part of the city profitable, so shall it not
harm other, but stay upon a conscionable dealyng, that in buiyng and selling,
there may be on all sides some equality, and uprightness. Which none but a
wiseman, can both ordeine, and see put in prartise: and soche a one as in
governing a city, only has respect to that, which swarueth not from the
rule of equity. But that as it is presently profitable, so in continuau^ce, it
will not be unprofitable. For by long experience, soche a man has tried, that
the falling out of things (which is the scholemaster to fools) is not to be
looked at: but that things must be so foreseen, that although they be to come,
yet by forecast and cou^saill, they may grow to good effect.

Moreover) which thing must principally be considered) there is not one kind
only, nor one trade of living in all citees. For some stand upon the sea
coasts, Diverse Citees have diverse means of provision.
which be most maintained, by carriage in Ships. Some stand upon fresh
rivers, which yet be able to bear great vessels, and be famous, by reason of
some notable haven. Some have some great mart, and be enriched, by reason of
merchaundise. Other some be welthie by corn ground, or vineyardes. Besides
these, some stand by handy crafts men, which by other means provide them
selves of corn: in this poincte not in very ill ^ase, because their gain is
gotten by sittyng travail, whereby they get money, wherewith al things that
be necessary be bought, and therewith may the more easily buy what they
will, then if they should with more toil, pluck it forth of the ground.

Whereas there be sundry kinds of trades, whereby citees be supported, I have
expressed but a few of set purpose, not touching the rest, because my mind
is only to declare him to do very unwisely, that shall appoinct one kind of
living to all these, whereby they shall live all after one sort: seeing that
they, neither have all one kind of life, neither yet one way in gettyng their
livings, but in every city, consideracion must be had of the life, condition,
manners, way of getting, and soche like: and according as every thing shall
require, so must order be taken, and a civil appoinctment established. So
Serbidius Sceuola warns us, to apply laws unto the nature of things, not
things to the Laws, which thing Plutarche writes, that Solon observed in
the Atheniane common weal.

The argument of the. vi. Chapter.
Concerning the shambles, provision of eats, and victualyng houses for the
common use of the people, how they ought specially to be looked unto.

NOw it is most expedient, that those things, which we cannot lack* for the
maintenau^ce of our life, should be brought to the market, and be to be* had
in a city, where a number of people is: which is the occasion, that the
civil society may be knit together, and the dignity of the common weal,
increase and continue: besides that the people, when they be full, be more
desirous of quietness, then if they do not find whereby to have provision,
and help for their nourishmente. So Aurelian the Emperor writes unto Arabian
his Purneigher, that the people of Rome be meriest, when they be fullest.
Wherefore those things, must principally be cared for, which serve for the
daily use of meat, and drink: as for other things, which appertain unto the
riote of idle men, and their inordinate lauishing, there needs no like
provision, as without which, the people may be nourished, and the City well
enough maintained. Wherefore, Socrates, when his friend complained, that all
things were dear at Athens, as Purple silks, pearls, venison, and al kinds
of novelties, answered wisely: there is no dearth, so long as meal and oil,
necessary provision for ^^^^^ining of life, may he had good cheap

Who so therefore thinks to rule the common weal profitably, let him be
careful for the furnyture of meats and drinks, and see that they be easily
to be had, by means of corn, meal, flesh, wine, ale, hucsterie ware, and
other victuals, needful for man's life.

But first of all, respect must he had for provision of Provision of corn.
corn, that the inhabitauntes be not for lack thereof compelled either to
stand in distress, or to change their soil. And therefore commonweals
whose number is great, use to have store houses, wherein they be accustomed to
lay up corn bought with the common money, and thence when neade shall be, to
sell it good cheap, after the Romain usage, whereby two laws touching corn
made by Sempronius, and Saturninus, corn was sold to the people after the
rate of. vi. pence, and a great a busshel, until that Publius Laws for corn.
Clodius made a law in his Tribuneship* that the people should have corn
given them freely. The which as hurtefull to the Treasury, Marcus Octauius
son to Cneius, did abrogate, because it seemed that by giving the people food
plentifully, and that without any travail, it might withdraw them from honest
labor unto idelnes, as Marcus Tullius witnesses. Cicero. in orat pro P.
Sestio and li. 2. de officiis.
What a marvelous charge this division of Corn was, which the Romans used to
distribute monthlye in every ward (and thereupon termed it Menstruum) as well
the quantity thereof, as the number of men which did receive the same, will
declare. For Plutarch in Cesars life writes, that the corn which monthly was
divided amongst the common people, cost. v. Charge for provision of corn
among the Romans.
hundred and fifty millions of their coin. Which by computacion after our
reckening (as many do witness) amounts to five hundred and fifty
thousand crowns. What a number it was to whom the division was made,
Suctonius tranquillus in Cesars life by these words declares. He made
recoumpte of the people, neither after the accustomed manner, nor place, but
street by street, by the householders. And whereas there were wont to be three
hundred and twenty. M. which had corn of the common provision, he brought
them to one hundred and fifty thousand. Which I therefore have mentioned
that we should take this as a president of a well appointed City, to the end
we may the better know the benefit of God, which gave sustinaunce to so great
a noumber of people: yea, and that in a city given to the serving of ydolles.

As touching this matter, less care is had for provision, when as out of the
country near adioynyng being fruitful, pure flower, meal, wheat, ry^,
peason, barley, oats, and all such kind of grain, is wekely brought in and
sold to the Citezins after a reasonable price, as the time of the year
serves. For expedicion It to profitable that Come be brought into the
Math^^^^.
whereof, there is no better way that can be found, then to carry it into the
corn market, whereas a just price shall be set upon it, as it were by the
whole consent of all the biers, otherwise then if it were forestalled every
where in the streets, and private places, Forestallers and Regratours.
at the prising of every private person, which for the most part is
inconvenient. Wherefore there ought to be punisheme^t executed upon such
regraters as buy corn at a low price, and sell it dearer to the baser sort,
practicing thereby a kind of gaineful traffic, forbidden both by God and
man's law, and in this poincte the worsse, because they use ^^ deceive men by
false measure. Therefore order must be taken, Aediles cereales.
that their measure be not false and unjust, which office among the Romans
belonged unto the Ediles, whom Pomponius the Lawyer called Cereales, as it
were overseers of the Corn, first ordained by Julius Caesar.

And when provision is had for corn, there must Provision of Meal. etc.
foresight be had for meal, that there be no disceite used in milles and
grinding houses. Then that they fell no bread but of just weight, which shall
easily be esteemed after the forwardness of the year, which it self will
prescribe the order for the assise of bread: and this ought to be considered so
much the more circumspectly, the more marueilously the heavenly father feadeth
all mankind with a small deal of corn, and that gathered by a few. Which
benefit of God, if we should go about to diminishe, and deceiptfullye to abuse
his blessyng, it were a most wicked poinct.

And we must be careful for the shambles* left if it The shambles
be not forseene, it do bring in a dearth and scarcity of victuales. By the
name of the shambles, I mean all that which serves to our sustenaunce, saving
bread and wine, and such other things as be properly moist and serve for
drink. For to what end serves beef, porke, veale, lamb, kidd, fish, and
other such kind of cates, which we provide to be dressed for us: if that
vitaillours, bouchers, and hucksters, may at their pleasure enhaunce the
prices, and so annoy other. Which inco^moditie may thus be remedied, if that
the flesh be sold proporcionablye according to the price whereat sheep,
oxen, hogs, calves, and such other cattle be sold, and that some even
measure had, both the vittailour may not lose his labor, neither the citizins
be un provided of things necessary to be sold in the sha^bles.

After these follow other meats and drinks which do appertain to the
provision of victualles, whereof we have need for the sustinaunce of our
life, as be delicate meats, venison, wildfoule, waterfoule, wild Deintie
dishes
beasts* hens, capons, and all such kind of deintie dishes: also wine,
Ale, Beer, and such other things as we do set out of Tauerns, provided by a
civil order. Which things be al so much ye better cheap, the more discretly
they be ordered and commanded to be sold. And in this part there must needs
some order be taken for wine in Tauerns (especially where much wine (...).
is uttered be it never so dear) or else, besides that the worst by that means
is sold at as hie a price as ye best, it may be reckened as a great
inconvenience that might arise unto the city, that one or two Vinteners should
become welthier then the rest.

Of many I thought it best to recount the chiefest things which do belong
to meats and drinks, for the purneiyng whereof a magistrate must be
marvelous careful, lest in the city either such necessaries can not be
had, or at the least not at a reasonable price, which thing according to the
necessity and state of the place, each manne shall best by convenient order in
his own City establishe. For it is profitable to the common weal, that none
do use deceitful practices against the common provision of victualles,
without which we can neither live co^modiously, ne yet ciuilly.

And therefore in Rome, a penalty was appoincted for those by law, which did
any thing, for the cu^pairyng of their Corn, or conspired together, to make a
dearth: and for them likewise who stayed, or by any deceipte, caused to be
stayed, any Mariner or vessel, appoincted for victualles, whom the law names
( Dardanari^) that is, regratours and forstallours of the markettes. Regratours
and (...)
And amongst other Laws, which the Romans made for Corn, one is specially
called, after the maker, Iulia Lex.

Here I do not stick at flue dishes, or soche as do Delicate fare a noi^th
the common weal.
appertain only to diliciousnesse, and mere riot, which if things were well
weighed, ought not to be suffered in a well appoincted city. And yet not so
much to be disalowed, if only rich men use them, and not also soche as have
scarce enough to eschew very staruing for honger. Which is a mean to bring
the common weal to utter decaie. And therefore Socrates said wisely (as he did
always) that he wondered how a city could stand, wherein a fish was dearer
sold, then an ox. Which thing Licurgus perceauing to be used in Athens,
commanded soche laws as were made for victualles, to be registered in
writing: whereby a mean was appoincted for banqueting and feasting. Which
the Romans, as Ammianus Marcellinus Libr. xvi. ^eru^ ge^taru^
writes, did alter, endeuourynge by ordinance of laws (which they called
laws for expenses) to bring up again the old parcialitie, and frugalitie of
the city of Rome: whereas the law called Orchia, brought their Ten plates of
the Romans coigne called Asses, were in value our sterlyng ^ro^^.
feasts to a certain number: the law called Khamnia commanded, that no man
should spend above an hundred pieces of coigne, called ( Asses) at any banquet,
and not that neither, but upon solemn and appoincted days: and as Pliny
writes; that no foul should Plinius lib. 10. capt. 50.
be set on the table, but one Hen, and that not very fat fed. Then came
the law called Licinia, which granted that at a marriage feast, there should
be spe^te two hundredth of the same pieces called ( Asses) and at solemn Laws
for the ^^str^^ute o^ s^pt^ous ^^^^.
suppers, one hundredth, besides soche fruictes as grew naturally out of the
earth. Whereupon Festus says, that those suppers were called ( centenarie).
Then Marcus Emilius Scaurus made a law, whereby he restrained them, from the
eating of field Mise, shell fishes, and all birds brought in, forth of
foreign countries. Afterward Augustus made a law, to gratify Caesar, which he
named Iulia, and that also apperteinyng to expe^ses, whereby he granted for
work* days, two hundred pence sterling, for holy days, three hundred, for
marriages, and feastynges after the weddyng days, a thousand. Whereof Tullie,
Gellius, Macrobius, and Asconius Pedianus, one that most diligently observed
antiquitees, have made mention, Which we therefore must mark, to learn with
how great labor, with how great charines, old auncientes, have labored to
bridle riot, and to bring men to a sober diet. Whereby we followyng their
steps, may be stirred forward, to bring our commonweals, to a moderate
frugalitie.

The argument of the* vii Chapter.
That soche laws, as a city must be governed by, ought to be kept by all
men, and that it is a thing that gives an hurtful presidente, if Magistrates
do offend against the same.

TO the end therefore, the common weal may be firm, and not altered nor
transposed, according to every man's fancy: there must be some order; for
the gouerenmente thereof, appointed by laws. Whereunto we must have recourse,
as to our most sure rule, or touch stone. Whereby we may readily learn,
whether a city be well and semely adourned or not. Therefore Demosthenes (as
Marcian is aucthour) says, that the Law is a common ordinance of a city,
after which it behooves all them to live, which be in the city, which
Papinian calls the common assurance of the city.

It furthereth much, says Tullie, the wealth of Libr. ^. de Legibus.
Citezeins, the safety of Citees, and the quietness and happiness of man's
life, to have the same established by laws. Whose virtues be, to command, to
keep under, to bid, to forbid. For it is the law only, which commands
things that must be done, and forbids, that is not to be done. Thus the
law, is the rule and leader of a Civil life, whom the The Law.
Greeks do call (nomos) for that it assigns to every man his own, as who
say, a distributer. The Latins call it ( Lex) which is as much to say, as
a choice, because it is chosen and confirmed, by wiseme^nes consent, as
profitable in common.

Whereby it does appear, that the society of men The cause of making laws
was the first cause, why laws were made, which being ones begone among
men, must needs be still preserved by reason, as naturally engraffed in man,
so appoincted by wise heads. Then afterward, for that, mine, and thine,
began to breed unquietness amongst men, question began to be moved,
concerning seigniories, and dominions of things, which for the mainteinyng of
uprightness, and quietness of a City, must needs be ordered by the rule of
Justice and equity, so that thereby a great part of the law, became proper
to the Courts, the residue, which appertains to the beautifiyng of good
manners, and framyng of the common weal, was left in the city, and schools of
Philosophy.

Now if this law be a thing made by the common consent of a city, whereby
right and wrong be distinguished, it must needs be applied to things
accordingly: Laws must^ be applied to the time, place, and people.
and therefore Aristotle compares it, to the Lesbiane rule, pliable to all
measures, which thing lies most upon them, to whom the government of the
common weal is committed: which therefore must have the state of the time,
the place, and men, set before their iyes, that nothing be done, by pretense
of law against equity, which the Greeks call (Epiichia) naturally engraffed
in us. And so it is in common affairs, as in sore iyes, which must not have
all one medicine, but according unto the diverse kinds of men and matters, a
diverse kind of temperature must be applied. For to much frettyng of a sore,
rankeleth it, and provoke it to bleedyng: which Art they ought only to
exercise, that excel in wisdom, equity, justice, and godliness, and
prefer the common, alwaie before the private profit, which thing as Plato
says, linketh the common weal together. For they know, what may be most
profitablie done in each City, for most advantage, and that one Shoe is not
meet for every man's foot. Which is the only cause, that every where they
use no written laws, but in stead thereof Citees be tuled by unwritten laws.
in very extremity of things (the rigor of the law set aparte) they have
customs of Boroughes, brought in by old manners, vsages, and statutes, most
profitable for the government of the common weal, the punishment of
offenders, and defense of good men: and of no less authority, then the
written Law is, and that which is common to all men. And here upon says
the Philosopher, that every city is maintained by nature, manners, and reason.

But for so much as a common weal is a certain mean to ioygne men together
in honesty of living, grounded upon laws, which ought to touch the profit of
al, and the common advancement: not the subjects only ought to obey the
same, but also the magistrates, who have no prerogative, but such as is
honest, of it self, and profitable to all, whereby each man has his own
given unto him, and others be not har med: As to whom thou art not permitted to
do, that thou will not have done to thy self. And therefore Plato The Magisrate
is in subjection to the law.
did well say, that such a common weal must needs decay, whereas the
magistrate rules the law, and not the law the magistrate. So Theodosius and
Valentinian the emperors in their decrees use a saying, worthy the majesty of
a governor, that they confess a prince bound to the laws, and that it was a
greater thing to submit selgniourie to law, then to be a ruler. Then is not
that true which certain light and fond flatterers do beat into princes
heads, that Domitius Vlpianus sets a prince at such liberty from laws, as
though he were not bound to live according to their appointmente. Whereas he
used to counsel Alexander Seuerus, one that was as it were a keeper of records
of laws, far otherwise. This it is that Claudianus counsels, and very
properlye writes unto Theodosius in these verses.

Thou representes a Citizin, and parent of each one:
See thou provide for each estate, and not for thee alone.
Let not thine own desires thee move, each thing to take in hand,
Respect in all the wealth of all, and profit of thy land.
If ought thou vvilt proclaim abroad, that subjects should fulfill,
Submittethy self to thy behestes, and first observe thy will.
For then the people naught repines, but sekes the rightful way,
When they the aucthour see of right, in right him self obey.
The kings example frames the vvoride, the laws be not so rife,
To wrest and vvinde their vvilles so well as is the rulers life.
Unconstant are the commonsorte and wavering as the vvinde,
And with the prince to walk avvrie the rest are sone enclinde.
And this is that point wherein Aristotle holds opinion, that in effect and
substance, it is one kind The Magistrate and subject be both one in some
respect.
of discipline which the magistrate observes in gouer nyng, and the subiectcs
in obeiyng, but in manner and four me diverse, For the one thereby learneth to
obey, to do such things as he is commanded, and to frame his life to a
virtuous conversation: the other by appointment thereof, is taught to govern
other, to be an example of good life, to direct all his endeavor and labor to
the common avail. And thereby comes it to pass that both the people do
their duty in obedience, and the magistrate executes his office with a godly
carfulness, and by his vrightnesse of his, shows the right pathe of virtue,
where upon arises that ioynyng of profits which does best support a city.

From which appointment they shamefully if warn which persuade them selves
that the office of magistrates The charge of Magistrates.
is a name of dignity anely, not marking their continual travail, then
weighty charge, the present danger, the reckoning: requited for their doings,
and Gods reuengemerit which can not be eschued for such things as be
neglected, which things be comprehended under the name of a magistrate.
Whereas neither ignorance, nor any necessity of private affairs; nor men's
vicious allurementes, nor any other pretense can excuse them. For this office
is a common office, and it ought to suffer no delays, but by geuyng to much
liberty it corrupts the people, which in deed shall pearish for their
iniquity: but God in his great day shall require the destruction which
lights upon the^ at the magistrates hands, by whose means they be so cast
away. Then ought not thou to think thy self to be therefore advanced, and
lifted up into a place of dignitic and preferment, to occupy the highest
seat, that others should make thee rowme, and crouche unto thee, but to look
to thy charge, with carfulness, wisdom, earnest travel, studic for the
common profit, with a fatherly zeal to ward the citezins of whom thou must
make account, as of thine own children, and by all endeavor to she we thy
self worthy that office. Which thing because it is not well considered in
our commonweals, all things be empaired and fall to decay. The magistrate
cares not A vicious Magistrate, corrupts the people by his naughty ensample.
much for the common weal, and by his vicious life causes corrupt manners
totake rote also in the people: so that thereby that comes to pass which is
greatly to be lamented: that is, we must seek honesty of living in them where
it is not to be found. None other wise then did the old Diogenes, which with
a light Candle in a greats assemble of people (even at noone days) sought for
a man. For of all them that be made governors, how many be there that from
their heart wish the common wealth well? Which do not more esteem their own
gain, then the common profit: which will appoinct such laws and ordinances as
shall take place? Far otherwise then Lycurgus did, which indented with the
Athenians, that unless he him self revoked his laws, they should continue
for ever. And for the eschewyng of persuasion to break them, he willingly
banished him self, and so strenghthened his laws. But men of our time do
far contrary, which although they take in hand to establishe the common
weal by laws, yet either they do bring them to no effect, or be the first
that break them, and gene other occasion to traunsgresse the same, whom they
be ashamed to punish, because they first offended them selves, and stick in
the same mire. For we know that in the most part of cities, and most dominions
ere this, there have been most wholesome laws published against aduouterers,
dronkerdes, blasphemers, whorehunters, usurers, and other offenders, which be
so common, that even they of the church wink at them, and will not se them
punished, which perchance have pinched one or two of the baser sort, but if
the execution of the^ at any time has fallen upon them of the nobility, all
is hushed, and they as hornettes through the Spiders Hornettes.
web pass their ways, and escape free: and such have been the occasion why
they have not likewise taken place in other, to the grease decay of the common
weal.

The argument of the. viii. Chapter.
That it were profitable that no aldermen of cities, aldermennes deputies,
wardeins or other such officers should be chosen out of their own craftesmens
balls, because they being easelye led with affections, do use to be to
parciall toward them that be of their own companies.

HE that has rule over other, must not only be without fault, but also
without suspicion of evil, which he easily incurreth, if he be driven to
ordeine any thing touching them, to whom he is knit by order of brotherhed, or
whom at the lest he tendreth, because of the likeness of their trade, and savor
of gain, which were better to be exempte from this charge, then to
intermeddle themselves therewith, to the hinderanuce of the common weal. Where
as he is very unmeet to attempt the thing, which cannot by his means be
sincerely practiced. As Xenocrates Xenocrates.
the Chalcedonian, a Platoniste, which as Laercius writes, succeeded
Speusippus in his school, said to a certain vntowardlie fellow, and* one of
a blockishe nature, and of a simple understanding, which came to hear him:
Get thee hence, thou have not the handle of Philosophy: as though no man
should be admitted to any business, which he may not seem fit to accomplish
accordingly.

Soche way they seem to be, which be elected Aldermennes deputies, or head
officers out of the companies of crafts men, and artificers. From amongst
which although I do not deny, but that there he chosen certain singular
honest men, which tender both godliness, and the common weal (for in deed to
judge of other, and chiefly of soche as be alive, I have learned that it is an
hard thing, much less then ought we to pronounce of their life.) Yet
nevertheless, as men be now a days, there be many things, which use to
drive them a wrong way, and to make the executyng of their office, to be had
in suspicion. Because that neither Philosophy can take away, ne yet we
altogether Affections
suppress the affections, which we bear to private advantage, and to those
persons, to whom we be bound by the bond of society. So by nature,
whereby we be inclined to naughtiness, and labor to do that which is
forbid us, we be very desirous of that which is private, and reken that our
coa^e sits nigher unto us, then our cloak, whereupon it comes to pass,
that the Dog, as Luciane says in his dialogue against an unlearned manne,
is not easily driven from the skin or hide, which he has begone to gnawe,
and whereof he has ones tasted.

Neither is there any man so unskillful, but he knows with how great
wisdom the law maker endeavors to bring to an order, and to reform the
practices of engrossers, unlawful resortyng places, De^cipt in bu^ing and
selling (...).
Tavern, kepers* soche trades of Marchaundile, as be hurtful to the common
weal and all kind of trafficque that does annoie man's society, to the
intent soche things may the more easily be obtained, as be needful for the
daiely use of our life, and maintenance of a common weal. Which things can
not be so provided for, by the common Law, but that privily, and by little
and little deceiptes crepe in, and by reason of a rooted coueteousnesse do lie
in wait, sekyng to color things, as though the law permitted the same. For
there is no law of soche penalty, none so surely established, but as soon as
it is made, there is one collusion or other found against it. There must
therefore some be appoincted as ouersecrs, for the accomplishyng of laws,
whose charge must be to see that the laws be kept, which is the duty of
counsailers, or Magistrates, whom I therefore call a living Law. For in deed
the Law is dead, which is not put in A magistrateis called a living law.
execucion. Therefore to stop all startyng corners, for soche ^^chers and
booty brokers of citees, the ancient laws must be helped, by new
ordinances, according to the quality of the place, the things, and the
people, lest under the pretense of that, which is lawful, that be committed,
which is unlawful: whereby the common weal may be endamaged. Now if the
Magistrates, be of the same occupacion or trade, with those that must be
reformed, the matter shall go forward so much the slacker. So many means
seek they out, ye no poinct of their profit be diminished. For according to
the latin proverb: one Ass uses to rub an other, and a Dog will eat no
Dogs flesh.

But in wine Tauernes, some reformacion must needs be had, because badde wines
be sold for the best, of equal price, or above a reasonable rate: and corrupt
wines be uttered for pure, brued for naturalle, dreggishe for well settled,
sower for sweet. In Bakehouses Bakers, bo^chers, vinteners, and other
occupiers* prac^ise de^^y^e in their (...).
likewise be crafts used: the bread is not well baked, it is not clean, it is
ill leauened, or to dear, considering the time of the year, and not answeryng
accordingly to the price of corn. The Shambles also is much out of frame,
which seeks only for private gain, so much more hurtful to the common
weal, the less we can be without it, forsomoche as all that we buy there, is
valued, and sold unreasonable dear: rotten or carrien cattle is killed: the
flesh is mustie and stinking, the veale is not old enough, but unwholesome: the
weightes be false: the rich have that is best, the baser and common people the
worst, and all at one price.

As for Merchaundries and sellyng of wares, what collusion is daily therein
used, he only sees not, that can not see at all. For look what ware is
bought for one shillyng, that use they to sell again for two: besides that their
wares be naught, and the counterfaict, be uttered in stead of perfeicte. If
ye purpose to redress the market, be it the beast market, the Wine market, the
Fish markette, the Pultrie, the Hucsterie, or the Corn market, ye shall ever
find things, worthy of reformacion. Other fautes be better known, then
needful to be rehearsed in this place, which must also be brought to better
frame, by discrete deliberacion.

But if the Mayor, or he, to whom the charge on this behalf is committed, be
a Baker, Boutcher, Vintener, Merchaunt, Mercer, Trafficquer, or a follower of
the Markettes, it can not be told what consultacion is A Magistrate that
studieth for his own private gain can never ordein things (...).
had, how many bywaies be sought for, until that be decreed, which less
hurts the private profit, although the common people in the mean while, be
never so much endamaged, and forced even for very need to sterue. And what
soever is so ordeigned, it can not but more avail the private, then the common
estate in all poinctes: how so ever it be constrewed, to this effect will it
grow. But there is a cercain pretensed face of counterfaict administracion,
which when those affeccions, and desire of private gain, will not suffer
willingly and wholly to take place, yet by means of this cloked color, they
cast a mist before men's iyes, perswadyng them, that they tender their
commodities.

Which enormitie may in soche places more easily be remedied, where there is
so great a number of men, as beside, craftesmen, retailers, the retainers
and fellows of companies, the best men, and the best known for their
wisdom, soberness, and uprightness of living may be had, to be put in
these high offices, and charge of dooyng things, whom the innoce^cie of life
defends not only from desire of private commodity, but also from suspicion.
But if the common weal be not populous, so that for scarcity of people,
soche men can not be had (as it happens for the most part in these days)
then seeing it can not be amended, it must be patiently borne withal, and
that must be holden a virtue, which necessity, that has no law,
commands to be done, seeing we do commonly chose good officers, even from
among the In places not much replen^shed with people, the^ of the baser sort
be chosen officers,
baser meany, as artificers, handicraftesmen, kepers of hoate houses, Barbers,
and soche other, which will so see to things, as they may, and as time does
permit. Whose deutie is no less (all affections set apart) to prefer the
public, before the private profit, and to remember that the thing committed
to their charge, is not their own but the whole bodies: then it is hurtful and
detestable, for their own profits sakes, either to neglect, or to violate the
same.

THE Fowerth Book, concerning the good ordering of a common weal.
The argument of the first Chapter.
That soche as have no office of dignitee but be of a private order, do belong
unto the body of the common weal, and then how they must be profitable in
common.

IT has been declared, although but slightly, by whose care, diligence, and
labor we do so uphold this felowlie life of man, that one may by lawful
means, receive commodity by an other, and the common weal have her form,
to whom we adnered those, that be of a private order, and the basest in a
City: yet appoinctyng the number of them greater, for whose behoof we be
constrained to take the more pains. For it is Gods people, whom we ought so
to feed, and keep in doing their duties. Esaie says: Esai, xliii,
This people have I framed for my self, this people shall show forth my
praise: which saint Peter calls i. Peter. ii,
the holy nation, and gained people, which were not ones, but now be the
people of God. But because Socrates in Plato, now and then warns us, that
things of them selves commendable, may be often times repeated. I do entende
to rehearse these things somewhat more at large.

First, it was expedient to appoincte out a City, after the form of a little
world, or a man well proporcioned, Vitru lib. 3. de Architec
in whom there is an head, and many limbs: whereof the whole is perfited, and
one part uniformly agrees with an other, out of the which issues a perfect
proporcion, and comely frame, which is a singular argument of man's
quietness, and love toward God and his neighbor. Neither be all these
members, which make this one goodly body, of one kind of workynge, but they
travail in diverse Offices, that the whole may be preserved by his parts. So
there is none that is idle and superfluous, but eue^ those parts, that be of
least service, nature has provided to profit, and to do that belongs to
them, as Galene learnedlie declares. Galeus in li. de^uuamen ^^ membro rum.


So in common government, it is a kings duetye that those which be his
deputies rule well. Then they that be ministers of Gods word, and of the
church, be not exempt from the e^uill partynge of commodities, how holy
soever they hold their profession, accomptyng it almost above the estate of
man. To who^ we join them of the nobility, knights and gentlemen, and
assign them the second place in the common Subiect^ must be obedient.
weal. Last of all, follow commoners and base people, whose part is to obey
and to do that which is commanded them, with others that be not called unto
any common vocation. So says Saint Peter. Be i. Peter. ii.
ye obediente to all ordinances of man for the Lords sake. Whether it be
king as the chief, or rulers, as sent by him for the punishment of ill
doers, because Roma. xiii.
this is the will of God. By which words we be commanded to obey not only
the king and officers sent from him, but also every creature for the Lords
sake, who^ we ought to serve, and to become al in all, and that all men allured
by our christian conversation, which ought to be unreprovable, may be converted
and saved. Which must not so be understood, as though such as bear no office
ought to do nothing, but rest in continual idleness, and apply only their
private affairs, for this were a mean in deed to rote men in slothfulness,
and not to provoke them to occupy them selves in their life time with some
worthy travail, and to aid others: whereas we ought never to be less idle, as
Scipio Africanus was wont to say of him self, then when we he most of all
idle. For there be in a common weal many kinds of works whereby we may with
The^ are also bound to travail that bear no office in the common weal
bearyng office deserve well of men, and edify them to the glory of God, with
travail oftimes no less acceptable, then if we were occupied even in the
midst of the commen offices. For we being many, are but one body in
Christ, but privately one an others body and limbs, whereby we be one by an
other supported and helped, in that one bears another burden, having
diverse gifts according unto the diversity of grace given to every man. As
let him to whom lerning is given, teach: to whom substance, let him bestow it:
to whom the gift of exhortacion, let him exhort delightyng in hospitality,
rendryng to none evil for evil: but we be commanded to feed our enemy if he
be hongry, to give him drink if he be thirsty, that so we may heap hoate
coals upon his head, and provoke him to the like well doing. Hear the
apostle. Let each of you care for other, having diverse gifts according Roma.
xii.
to the grace that is given you. If any man have the gifts of prophecye, let
him have it that it be agreing to the faieth. Let him that has an office,
wait on his office. Let him that teaches, take heed to his doctrine. Let him
that exhorts, exhort well: if he do bestow any thing, let it be done
with simplicity, if he rule, let him do it with carfulness: if he have
mercy, let it be done with cheerfulness.

You see how a man being but of a private estate, is not excused but must
help others, and eat bread in the sweat of his face, and bestow that his
talente according to the grace given unto him, and restore it with gain. For
it is a detestable thing to be idle. Eze^hi. xvi.
Ezechiel. Behold this was the iniquity of Sodoma thy sister, pride, fullness
of bread, and abundance, the idleness of her self and her daughters, they
streatched not out their hands to the poor and neady, but they were puffed
with pride, and did abhominacion before men, and I took them away as thou
saw. Let every man therefore in idle times seek for him self an honest kind
of idleness, and not fitting upon stalles or common benches bestow good hours
vnfrutefullye, and be called upon a sudden to render an account for every idle
word: for occasion to do well ever offers it self.

The husband manne applies the Tillage of the The husband man.
ground, and follows his plough: if he thank God for this his doing, and
look for his blessing, count nothing profitable unless it be honest, deceive
no man, help the nedie, and bestow that his sweat to the glory of God, he
shall do much better then a religious father, which buried in deep
contemplacion, is fattened to himself, and seeks out a void place in the
Raleuder wherein is no saints day appointed, that he good happy body may
therein be canonized. The S^^^he The S(...)*
in his armarie and shop does his work, gets his living without any
wrong or detriment to others, such gain he seeks as shall not annoy any
others, that is, that neither he may seem to have labored in vain, nor be
driven to sell his work to his neighbor at an unreasonable price. Let not the
merchant set The Marchau^
his faculty forth for gain, in such sort, y^ he ever gape only for
commodity: yea, and that not honest: but so exercise it, that he in
consideracion of his travail, be recompensed with a reasonable gain and
necessary furniture, with an intent sincerely, and without any collusion to
benefit the common weal, which can not conveniently be without those
marchaundries and wares as be gotten by chapmanshippe and traffieque. The
Baulmeseller must so furnishe his shop with a Poticary
sweet oils, that there be no disceipt therein. If he be an Apothecarie, or a
confectour of soote ointemeates be shall do nothing worthy of disco^me^dacion,
or contrary to the common profit. Likewise y^ Shepeherd or swine The shepeherd
herd does good service, which lies al abroad under the open sky, and keeping
his flock, beholds the firmament, and co^sidereth the benefit of God, not
only by this houge frame of the world: but also by boughs, grass, herbs,
and other little things of that sort, to the intent he may glorify him by
whom all things were created, for whose praise yet in the mean while he must
continue in this his vocation of feading cattle to serve the world.

An housekeper must well see to his house, bring up The housekeper.
his children and family in Godliness, and govern the^ in decent order. He
must speak nothing that is filthy, much less do the same. He must chasten
his children at home whom he brings up to profit the common weal: whereby
they may furnish them selves of such provision wherewith they shall be able to
find their neadie parents their living. Which thing the ancient men did not
only hold as a Godly work, but as neadefull.

Whereupon the Lacedaemonians by law ordained Parents that provide not for
their children are unworthy to be reliued by them if they fall into poverty.
that those parents which neglected the educacion and bringyng up of their
children after such sort, as they might not have a co^petent living: should
be constrained to keep both their sons and their wives. But it is also a
Godly thing that children help to releue their parents when they be
oppressed with poverty. Certainly Alexis the Poet says, that the Athenia^s
were to be commended, because they had provided by law, that children should
not be bound to find such Parents as did not provide that they were taught
some honest art, whereby they might honestlye get their living. But to
suffer them to pine for honger it were both a wicked and a shameful deed, and
without all doubt after the same measure their children shall measure them, and
when they be pinched with poverty them selves, then shall they utterly forsake
the^, and let them even consume away with famine.

Whereof Isocrates the great master of manners does put us in remembrance,
saying: do thou so use thy parents, as thou will have thy children
afterward use thee. The good wives of houses also have The good ^^^^ of the
house.
something to do for their parts, which may well be imputed unto the^, and
benefit the common weal: that is, that when they have brought forth their
children, and brought them up well, they help to replenishe the city, and to
multiply it with their issue. Therefore if they refer to Gods honor
(whose will they fulfill) the pains suffered in the time of Birthe, the
criynge of their infantes, the sorrow and care which they bestow upon the
bringyng up of their children: they shall be in heaven nothing else, but as
frankensence, and a most pleasant odoure. Yea, servants also may profit
the common weal, by imploiyng their labor in their Servants.
masters service, without which, neither house, nor wife, nor children can
conveniently be maintained, in this praise worthy, that they know them selves
to be at commandment of their masters. The Apostle says. Collo. iii.
Ye Servants, obey in all poynctes such as be your masters after the
flesh, not with service showed outwardly to the eye, as studiyng to please
men, but with simplicity of heart, fearyng God, and whatsoever ye do, do
it from your heart, as to the Lord, not to men: Knowing that of the Lord, ye
shall receive the reward of inheritance, for ye serve the Lord i. Pet. ii.
Christ. And the Apostle Peter says. Servants, obey your masters in all
fear, not only if they be good and courteous, but also if they be froward.
After this sort if we list to search out every particular estate, and private
person, there shall none be found which can not bring something into this
Treasury of the common weal, that shall be profitable not only privately,
but also in common, and to edification, that all malice, all disceite, al
dissimulacion, and al emnitie set aside, one man may not stick (yea, with the
loss of his own gooddes) to do that to an other, which he would be content
should be done to him self, that so every man in this politic life may
prepare him self to the true felicity, and purchase a blessed life.

The argument of the second Chapter.
That learned men be as it were the fence of a common weal, as without whom it
can neither happily be appointed, ne yet be well governed.

THeophrastus Eresius, a Philosopher of singular wisdom and great Vitruuius
in. 6. de Architect.
study, who was interteined into Aristotle's schole when he went into Chalcis,
with so great delight of his Audience, that two thousand Scholars resorted to
hear him, amongst A learned man man find friends every where.
other many excellent sayings which he set forth, had this: that he
affirmed a learned man alone of all other, neither to be a stranger in
strange places, neither to be neady of friends, when he had lost his
acquaintance and familiers, but to be a citezin in every city, and such a
man as without fear may despise all hard chances of fortune. For in no kind
of thing is there a better pollicye to overcome the iniquity of fortune, then
in the excellent studies of humanity, seeing that fortune, although she can
take from us al other things, yet she leaves the ability to take good
aduisement in safety for all adversity. And therefore there is no City wherein
there ought not to be great use of learning, in so much that by the steps
of Art, as it were, we judge that there is in it an assembly of men. So
Aristippus when he had suffered ship wrack, and was cast out upon the shore at
Rhodes, and perceived certain figures of Geometry drawn in the sand, is
reported to have cried to his fellows: The steps of men.
be of good courage, for I see the steps of men. And straight way he entered
into the city of Rhodes, and went to the schole, and there reasoning of
Philosophy, he was presented with rewards, so that he did not only furnishe
him self, but provided clothing and all other necessaries for them that were
with him. But when his companions were minded to return into their country,
and asked him whether he would have any thing conveyed home, he willed them
to report this, as Vitruuius rehearses: That they ought to prepare such
possessions, and such provision for their children, as if they suffered
shippewrake, might swim to the shoore with them. For they be the true stays
of our life, which neither the storms of fortune, neither True riches.
the change of commonweals, ne yet the iniquity of war, can harm.

But how much the studies of humanity have always The studies of humanity.
from the beginnynge helped commonweals, hereby we may perceive, because no man can more perfitely reason and decide of the virtue and happiness which we
seek in the society of men, then he that has the knowledge of such things
as belong to god and manne. By the guidynge whereof he perceyueth what is
right, what conscionable, what just, what it is to help one another, and what
is required to advance the common weal: whereby not only good government is
fortified, but also laws, and the whole frame of keeping a civil order, is
established. For no man ever well adourned any City, that has not had the
knowledge of these things. So that he seemed to have answered very wiselye,
which said that this was the principal praise of Philosophers, that they
could write laws, and build cities. Such a man was Zaleucus at Locrus,
Charondas among the Catinians, Law makers.
Philolaus among the Thebanes, Plato to the Magnesians, Draco and Solon to the
Athenians, Pittacus to the Prienians, Androdamas to the Tracians, and other
law makers in other places as Aristotle has left in writynge. Moreover Horace
testifies, that the Poets were wont to call men into towns from their
wild and savage life, and to show them a trade of good living, in these
verses:

The sacred prophet of the Gods Horat. de art poetica.

sometime that Orpheus hight:
The vgglie shapen vvilde wood men,
subdued and put to flight.
Thereof up spronge the fable first
that he the Tigers tamde,
And rampyng Lions had by notes
of civil music framde.
Amphion ehe that Thebes builte,
by sound of harp was said,
To have removde the senseless stones,
and where he vvoulde, them laid.
The former wisdom taught, from private,
public things to deem:
And how we should before profane,
the sacred things esteem.
From vvanderyng lust eke to abstain,
and bridebed laws to have
To build up towns for our defense
and Laws in wood to grave.
Thus sprung up honor first to men
and high renouvmed name,
Thus first encreast the prophets praise,
and eke the Poets fame.
For this is the study, for the zeal whereof good men have not only forsaken
their riches, but also them selves, sekyng that which was for the common
profit, and might lincke men together by law, this do they call Philosophy,
unto whom Tullie does speak on Tulli. in. ^. Tusc. quest. The commeadacion of
Philosophy.
this wise: O Philosophy, the leader of our life, the emplantour of virtue,
the weeder out of vices, what should either I or the whole life of man be,
without thee. Thou have brought forth Cities, thou have assembled men
before dispersed, into a society of life, thou ioynest them first in houses,
then in marriages, last of all in the communitye of learning and languages.
Thou have been the founder of laws, thou, the maistres of manners and
discipline. Hereupon says Plato that that common weal is happy, where either
Philosophers reign, or the kings and rulers be studious of Philosophy.
Moreover, unless there be practiced in the common weal the doctrine of true
religion and Godliness, the discipline of good behauioure, and the balaunce of
Justice, what shall it be else but a conuocacion of wicked men, wherein riote,
licenciousnes, filthiness, beastliness, intemperancie, ungodliness, and all
kind of viciousnes for virtues, take place and bear swaye, which nevertheless
men of excellent learning and cleanness of life, may by conueniente means
rote out, and by opening the right way of virtue, bring men to civility
and nurture. As be Divines.
the professors of divinity, whose vocation is to set forth Gods word:
Lawyers, which decide what Lawyers.
is agreeable to reason and conscience, which show what is right and what
wrong, and foresee that men be not more senseless and savage then brute
Beasts. For the ways of men in this poincte do differ from the dens,
caves, couertes, and filthiness of other living Creatures, because they ought to
be strengthened by reason only, and so to pass forth unto the degrees of
humanity. But ymagine a city to be well peopled, fortified, fair builded,
but yet given to ydolatrie and wickedness, as Cayrum, and (the more is the
pity) Constantinople, and many other kingdoms, seigniories, and subject to
the Turks tyranny. Such be preserved, and for the most part do most
flourishe, not only by the kings power and sword, but more by the instinct
of nature, which reason frames and moves to the society of life, that is,
by ordinance of laws, whereby every man is commanded to live, and to obey
higher powers. For the Turk, although he Eue^ the Turk him sel^^ conreinneth
not laws.
has forbidden his subjects al other kind of learning, yet he suffers (as
they say) houses of law, that thereby the people may be provoked to
civility, and be kept in doing their duty.

And surely unless the zeal of furtheryng one another, and the wealth and
worship of the common weal, had been by common consent of all men
established through the setting on of such as be studious of wisdom,
justice, and humanity, neither Carthage, neither Athenes, ne yet Rome the
Lady of the whole world, nor other notable commonweals could have common
unto so great famousnesse. To the which learned men did not only prescribe
laws, and the rule of living well, but also governed the same with great
honor. Neither were they therewith content but set forth books, wherein they
wrote precepts of living not They that travail to further their posterity are
worthy to be rewarded.
only to their own Citezins, but to the profitynge of all countries, and
their whole posterity, enfourming them with like trains of learning: men
worthy to receive the reward of their travails and writings, to be well
spoken of amongst good men, and to be reported to have far passed all other.
For the learned says Daniel shall shine like the brightness of the firmament,
Dani. xii.
and they that instruct many to righteousness, as stars for ever.

Moreover, wisdom wherewith the multitude of people is knit together and
ruled, is helped by the experience of many things, me^nes natures, and worldly
affairs, which they shall the readier attain unto, who have travailed in
readyng of histories and chronicles, which God would have to be set before us,
as Readyng of histories.
an ensample of life, whereby we might understand his goodness, his love
toward mankind, some taste of virtue, and order of government, to the intent
we might learn, to receive soche things as do prepare us to blessedness,
and to eschew soche things as be dishonest, and unseemly for a civil liver.
But there be certain Touneshippes and Villages, where none dwell but such as
be unlearned, and unskillful: yet they because they be not so full of people,
neither occupied with many and intricate affairs, may the better be borne
withal. But things of greater importance and soche as must be weighed by the
ballaunce of justice and equity, must be referred to the wiser sort, that
they may be done by aduisement, and every man by right, may have that is due
unto him. There is no company of men so small, and few in namber, but they
neade the labor of learned men, and of good instruction, for the obteinyng of
that kind of life, whereby the true society, and mutual benefityng of one an
other, is preserved.

Whereunto belong all the tradicious of liberal sciences, which by the whole
discourse of learning, absolutely be received, and be as it were handmaidens
to ^outh must be brought up in learning.
all disciplines: For in them youth is trained up, and prepared to greater
things whereby they may not so much profit them selves, as their parents,
and sometimes their country. And Socrates judges him more profitable to a
common weal, which makes many fit to rule, then he that can well rule
himself. Therefore they do not well provide for the common weal, which (like
shameless and beastlike men) neither will that learned men be called to
government, neither be careful for the trainyng up and teaching of others,
that may well order the same.

The argument of the third Chapter.
That the professors of divinity, a^ they be profitable so they be needful,
and yt they neglectinge their vocacion be a great slander to their
profession.

ROmulus the builder of Rome, amongst other Laws, published this* the power
of all the divine service, let it be under the kings. Also let the fathers
keep all Ceremonies, which the ten interpretours, in Certain laws of the
twelve tables among the Romans.
the twelve tables, more at large declare. Go to the Gods ^hastile, and therein
dse Godliness. Also let there be two kinds of Priests: One, that ma^e see to
diulne-seruice and Ceremonies, an other to expound the dark answers, of
Southsaiers and Prophets, soche as the counsel and people shall allow: Let
them defer strange signs and tokens, if the counsel so command, to the
Thuscanes, and Southsaiers. Which Law Tullie says, does not only
appertain to religion, but also to the slate of a city. So sateth Valerius
Maximus: Our auncetours would that customable and solemn Ceremonies, should
be expounded by the Bisshops knowledge, by the authority of things well
done, by the obseruacion of Southsaiers, by Appollos propheciynge, by the The
answers of southsaiers.
Prophets books, by destroiyng of prodigious monsters, and by the cunnyng of
the Thuscanes. So great an opinion has it been, that the wealth of the common
estate, is preserved by the customable service and Ceremonies, wherein if any
thing had been misdoen, there were certain means of cleansyng, to pourge the
stain thereof. As we see the fashion of processions and other rites, used of
old time, for corn and grain, which custom has partly been in use, even in
our days. Aristotle also permits his Bisshops, priests ^* Polit.
and church men, touching some part of their calling, to be holden as
part of the city, that nothing ^e wantyng, that may further the profityng
thereof.

But soche things be to be considered, among the Ethenikes, who lurked as it
were, under the shadow of this blessedness of man, and could not come to that
perfection of life, which they persuaded them sclues. But we to whom the true
worshippyng of God is revealed, do admit no counterfaictyng of things, but
do so adourne this our city, that by it we may conceive the hope of the
blessed life in heaven: In the communion whereof. I do contain all soche, as
be conuersaunte therein, not considering whether they be lay men, or of the
clergy, sense that we be all but the Christ is out head.
members of one body, acknowleging one head, which is Christ, whom we obeie as
our lord, in that we do obedience to Magistrates: for ensample whereof, I
used Moses. Neither is that far out of use, which has been observed, as well
in the Greek, as the Roman The aucthour di^ideth nothing touching the
Ecclesiastical power.
Empire. In this place I do decide nothing concerning the Ecclesiastical
weal, and her prerogative power, but appo^ct the civil, according unto the
image of the heavenly, whose steps we in the mean while seek and follow.

For we be all the chosen sort, the princely priesthode, i. Petri ii. Roma.
xiii.
the holy people, the gained flock, which ones were no people, but now be
the people of God. Therefore must we be subject to every lawful ordinance of
man, for the Lord: be he king, as passing the rest, or be they his
lieutenauntes sent from him, to revenge evil doers, and to the praise of soche
as do well. Wherso with our heart. For this is the Psalterie, this is the
tenstringed Harp, which is pleasant and acceptable to God. And therefore it
is conuenicut that virtuous men, and soche as have given them selves wholly to
God, be ouersears and guides of this congregation, which may praof that
harmony arises, which Nicholas Cusan, a famous Cardinal, calls the
catholic concordau^ce and highly commends it unto us, as the peace of the
christians. For in our government we do not only seek prosperous success
in things, and a certain color of felicity, but that which is heaue^lie,
and therefore we must call upon God in it, and in our spirit say: Abba father.
Whereupon we must also agree, and continue in prayer, giving thanks to the
lord of heaven, and our redemer, not with our mouth alone, but alie for the
people, and bear their sin before the Lord, that it may be remitted, by
our propitiatour Jesus Christ: upon whom that we may fire an hole and firm
faith, which is the sure foundation of blessed hope, there must neades be
some of them, to preach unto us that everlasting word, open to us our
iniquities, and declare unto us by whose mediacion they must be forgiven,
that being well instructed to Godwarde, we may depart forth of this Civil
life, unto that communion, which the saints enjoy, and attain the
heavenly, which is the only blessedness, the only felicitee.

Which vocacion of preaching, is well committed Commend^cions of the preachers
of Gods word.
to the^ that be expounders, and professors of the Prophecies of GOD, and his
holy Gospel, which be so much the more requisite in a common weal, the
more that the soul excels the body, and the heavenly life. this yearthly.
Of whom Esaie the Prophet says: Esai. l^i.
How fair and beautiful above the mountains, be the feet of soche as tell
and preach peace, of soche as report goodness, soche as preach health, saying:
Sion thy God shall reign. The voice of the es^ialles, they have lift up their
voices, and shall also give praise, because they shall see iye to iye, when the
lord shall convert Sion. And the blessed Apostle Paul, commends Luke to
the Corinthiana, ^icause of the Gospel, li. Cor. viii.
wherein stood his praise: we sent with him also our brother, whose praise
is, because of the Gospel in all churches. And soche be then most to be
reuerenzed when they profess the doctrine of the Gospel truly, and so teach
it, living also in soche sort, that their life can not be reprehended. For so
shall it come to pass, that the whole congregation well instructed, all shall
be taught in GOD, and love virtue. With so great faith does he teach, that
does the same, and by innocence of life, lighteneth his own doctrine. For it
is a marvel to see, how the virtuous conversation and vprightnes of life in
the preacher, does move the hearers, and provoke them to embrace godliness.

Here a man may note that, which befell to Innocentius the fowerth bishop of
Rome, which by Ambassadors, moved the great Prince of Tartarie, named Batus,
to cease from the cruel persecucion of christians, to acknowledge God the
creator of al things, and to receive the christian religion. Then the
Tartarian, as they say, when he had dimissed the Bisshops Ambassadors, sent
his own to Rome, and other citees of Italy, to search the form of their
belief, the manners and conversation of the christians. Which at their return
brought him word, that they were an idle people, wicked in life, and
worshipped they knew not what Images, so much disagreyng from the doctrine
they did profess, that they appeared rather to be a flockyng together of
beasts, then an assembly of men. At which report, the Tartarian straight
way The vicious living of christians, offends even the very Heathen people.
received the Saracenes, which easily persuaded him to neglecte Christ, and to
receive into his dominions, the abominable religion of Mahomete, as a
mistress of manners, a prouoker to war, and full of profit and pleasure.

Truly, as the office of a preacher in the church, is great and commendable:
so does he hainously offend, Leude preachers.
which executes it not purely and ^inceresie, but sets light t^ neglecte
the sh^^e, which he has undertaken to feed, and leaves them to the Woulfe,
or rather the devil, which goes about alwaie sekyng subtillie, who^ he may
devour. Soche be the^, which ^npreachyng Prelates.
knowing the truth, hide it, which being blinded in their own conceiptes,
do prefer vain fables, and Philosophy, and the inuencions of men, before
the lively word of God. Which flatter the ears of the superior powers, and
do not rebuke their vices, which do not lift up their voice, against
flesh and blood, which seek by all means to please men, peruertyng the
kingdom of God, for their own bellies sake: Which if they fortune to preace
Gods word truly, yet in living they be so vicious, so wicked, and give so
pernicious an ensample, that they do not only nothing edify, but so behave
them selves, that good men be therewith greatly offended. And soche as lightly
fall into this peruersite, be either they, which have not atteined unto the
true knowledge of Gods word, or the^ that stick in Philosophy, entangled with
dreams of men, neither glorifiyng ne yet fearyng GOD, whom they know by his
creatures.

To these may be added such as even from their cradles in a manner be not
only admitted to holy administracion, but eue^ as it were thrust them selves
in amongst preachers, which be so far from showing any trial of their
manners, that they know not what the name thereof does import. For they never
had any charge on their hand neither privately, nor in the common weal,
neither had they house nor children whom they might well govern, and show
any good hope what ministers they were like to be, wherefore the church might
allow them.

These young professed churchmen have many occasions to swarne and decline from
their function, which they should with all holiness perform, as in whom
Notorious vi^es in young Ministers.
there is slippernesse of age, inconstancy of life disdain of virtue, contempt
of good manners, lack of experience in things, pride, lack of years, lack of
wisdom (which we call daughter of time) and finally, a mind prone to
drunkenness, and all kind of vice: so that of many, there is scarce one which
can so purge him self, that he do not only offend the church, but with
most filthy means stain the same. And therefore the Apostle would not in any
wise that an yonglynge* and one lately admitted into the christian religion
should be a minister in the church, lest he being puffed up with pride, fall
into condemnacion of the devil, but such a one as is sober and modest, and
will keep hospitality, no drunkarde, apt to teach, and one that has a good
report of his behauioure, even of Strangers.

For how can he ^diste the church of Christ^* which is naughty of him self,
which leads a slanderous life, is suspecte of ill ^^^^anour, and noted for
a vicious liver, even in the face of the world: which either has not the pure
doctrine, or does pollute it with naughtiness of manners, and makes it serve
for no purpose, only feadyng his ^^^ly, which neglectinge his flock, he
either prefers before the T^^eth, or makes his God, not markynge how
dangerous a thing it is in this vocation to offend, and to stumble at that
stone which is la^ed for the fall of many, but chieflye for preachers and
pastoures of the church: for Hirelinges.
they ^e but Hirelynges, and as soon as they hear but of a little broyle of
persecution* they straight turn their backs, and the flocks which have most
neade of comfort, and the ministry of the word of God, to be there with armed
against the invasion of their enemy, they drive from their pasture, th^ustinge
them into the wolves ^awes: they in the mean while fedyng the sel^^^ and that
deinte^^, rejecting the cross, and being (...) ^^ feding y^ flo^^ committed to
their charge, but not without punishment. For the souls which they neglect
shall pearishe, but the Lord of reuengement shall require this blood and
death^ at their hands. For they have charge of souls, whose loss i^ so much
the greater, the better that life is then death, whom Ezechiell the Prophet
alone might put in mind of their duty, criyng thus: Woe be unto the Pastors
of Israel which ^eade them selves: be not the flocks fed by their herdes?
Ye eat up their milk, ye were cladde with their woule, ye slew that was
fat, but ye did not feade my flock that was feable, ye did not strengthen
that was weak, ye did not heal that was sick, ye did not bind that was
broken, ye brought not again that was cast of, ye returned not home that went
astraie, ye sought not that was lost.

Also, Thou shall hear a word of my mouth, and thou shall tell it from me.
If when I say to the wicked man thou shall dye the death, and thou do not
tell it him, neither speak unto him, that he may turn from his wicked way
and live: the wicked man shall dye in his iniquity, but I will require his
blood at thy hand. But if thou tell the wicked man, and he do not turn from
his iniquity, and from his wicked way, he shall dye in his wickedness, and
thou haste delivered thy Soul.

You understand how well they deserve of the common weal, which do preach
the holy word of God therein, show the way of truth to heaven, and teach
men in this transitory life, to seek life everlasting. And contrariewise,
how sore they offend, which Preachers can make no excuse in the date of
judgment.
swerve from this way, and do not feed the flock, but leave them that the
wolf may devour the^, never setting before their iyes the reuengeme^t of the
great day of the Lord, from which no man can deliver them, whereof ^ur only
savior Christ puts us in mind saiynge* ^e must keep and ^^^e all that they
tell you, which do sit in Moses chair, but do not after their works* For
that must be understood of the Phariseis, which yet sit in Moses chair,
and (...) the law, and put great burdens upon men's shoulders, which they
w^^l neither (...) them selves, nor ^n^e touch with their finger. To whom it
is s^^ed: Woe be unto you ye Scribes and Pharisees, ye hypocrites. And yet
christians do not strain courtesy to sit in the chair of Pestilence: In the
mean while either flattering men of power, or disperpling and sowyng abroad
the tradicions of men, neglectyng the word of truth, that although the verity
be uttered, yet they dar^ken the same, both with uncleanness of life, and
contempt of the true doctrine, and suffer it not to edify. A magistrate
therefore (which is also commanded to feed,) must see that there be men to
enfourme the city well appointed, with Gods word, and to show the way of a
blessed life, which is, as it were, the only foreship and stern of the common
weal.

The argument of the ^ourth Chapter.
That the common weal can neither be beautified ne governed without the
knowledge of the law, which such men shall best practice as be learned
therein, and favor Godliness and justice.

PIndarus the chief of those Poets which were called Lirici, says: The
^^lles of Justice.
that the walls of Justice ^e high, (as Plato reports in the second book
of his common wea^e,) which (Justice I mean) being always in the presence of
Jupiter the president of Hospitality, is exercised about the preseruacion of
man, for so much as we must needs use the ordinance of the everlasting Gods
for the further understanding of the multitude and variety of things. For in
his odes which he made upon those that won the prices in the games at
Olympus he writes thus: Where justice the preserver and assistour to Iupit^r
the president of Hospitality, is practiced far above the excellency of man,
because the variety of things is such, that to judge them righteouslye, and
as the time shall require, it is hard, and a special ordinance of the
everlasting Gods.

Surely the climbynge of these walls, and maintenynge of justice in a city,
is only peculier to such as have the knowledge both of God and man's law.
To the sacred vocacion whereof, who so have yelden them selves, do profess
the art of the execution of justice, without which there is neither band of
man's life, ne yet participation of any commodity. Whereupon ^^terp^^tours ^^
the law.
Cicero calls them the expounders of the law, whom who so disaloweth, if he
so do because they be unskillful, he abaseth the men, and not the Law. But
if he grant the^ to be learned, and yet never thelesse not to be obeyed: he
hurts not the men, but weakeneth the laws and ordinances, and misconstrueth
the meaning of a perfect common weal.

And like as the common weal can neither be appointed, ne yet maintened
without the fence of good ordinances: so can it not be governed without
assistence of learned Lawyers. For who can (as Socrates warns us in Plato)
govern better then he, which sometime has obeyed gouernemente, and knows
what does belong unto government? Who can better discern that is right from
that is wrong, that is equal from that is unequal, that is good, from that is
evil, then he which has learned to examine al things according to the rule
of honesty and law? for impossible is it for a man to practice that art
wherein he has no skill. But suppose there be in a common weal some, that be
moved naturally to that which bears the face of honesty, and have learned
some what by experience how to order the government of things: but yet
without any knowledge of law (and yet who be now commonly rulers in cities and
countries but such?) which in deed ye may after a sort admit, if the
number of the people be not so great, neither the affairs so diverse, that
they require any exquisite government, but if the multitude be great, the
variety of things causes much variety of affairs, the discerninge whereof
is a very hard poincte, and requires such a perfect trial, as is fetched as
it were out of the bowels of the laws, to open the form of justice and
equity, directed according unto vprightnes. But in some poinctes which
concern the market, provision of victualles, chapmanship, the shambles, corn,
daiely charge and forcast, it may so happen, that a city be so of ordinary
appoincted, that it need not much the lawyers help. But I pray you when
Judicial sentences must be pronounced, when offenders must Iudgemente^ and
punish* ^ent^^^^ ex^^cised by the Law.
be punished according unto laws, when brotherhods must be established, that
the establishement be not contrary to laws, when statutes must be ordained
without the injury or detriment of others: Shall they do this well, which
know not what by law is forbidden, and what permitted? For according to the
laws must we examine al our doings and attemptes in the common weal, no
less then goulde is tried by the touch stone. For surely to this end be
judgments devised, that every man may come by his own, and that that is
right may be obtained in our civil course of living. Whereof I do appoinct
two kinds, one, Laws ordained for two special^ caus^^.
whereby controversies are determined: another whereby offenders be punished.

If thaccion be but even for the value of. iii. halfpe^ce if thou iudgest it
wrongfully, thou offendest as sore against the law, as if it were a weightier
thing, especially if it be a poor man's plee, which lightly is but for some
small matter. For it is not the quality of the thing, which makes the
Judges sentence right or wrong, but the rule of equity and law which must
be had at their hands that have obtained the knoweledge thereof, and have
bestowed their diligence and endeavor to save the civil society, and to
defend the honor of the common weal.

For the Lawiers house (as Lucius Crassus says in Tullie, a man well studied
in the laws touching ^^ ^. de oratore. The Lawiers house.
both divine and human things,) is as it were the oracle of the whole
City: for a witness whereof we may allege Quintus Mutius Sceuola, one that
as he was the eloquentest of Lawyers, so he was the best lawyer of all
Orators, whose gate was daiely haunted by a great number of Citizins and
worthy personages, although he him self was both vexed with sickness, and
also far strocken in age. Cneius Scipio Nasica, whom the counsel for honors
sake surnamed the Best, had an house given him by the whole city situate in
the streate called the holy way, to the intent, as Pomponius the Lawyer
writes, the access unto him for counsel might be the readier. Therefore for
the singularity of counsel, and excellent knowledge of things, that saying
of Apollo, which Ennius reports was worthily applied to Lawyers.

If ought men doubt in their affairs
What shifts were best to make,
I counsel them, I them assure,
What way were best to take.
By law, by travail such I help,
and often them vvarne of this,
That vvilfullye they do attempt,
nothing that vvrongefull is.
Ye have moreover testimonies of ancient writers, ye have the daiely
experience of things, ye have man's society, whereby the study of law is
commended unto us: without the aid whereof experience teaches us that the
common weal is as it were maimed, which then florisheth if it be executed and
practiced by such men as be honest and furtherers of justice and Godliness.
Concerning which matter Marcus Tullins properly writes in these words: A
thing Pro A. Ce^inna.
it is which we must needs remember, that in the city nothing is so much to
be maintened, as the study of the civil law. For if ye take it away, no man
can know any certainty what is his own, what is another man's. There is
nothing that can be indifferent to all, which extends generally to all. But
the law of it self is dombe, of it self without operacion, unless there be
men that may open it to others, and make it show her lively strength: to whom
in doubtful cases recourse must be had, and such be as it were a
sanctuary of counsaille. Howbeit they must needs be studious of virtue and
Godliness, to whom this function so holy and so profitable in common must be
committed, which the lawyer by his profession and worthiness makes to be more
commendable and samous: as a thing that can not be achiued without holiness,
sobernes, faithfulness, and temperaunce. For when holy things be committed unto
our charge, we must do them with holiness, least that which falls amiss by
the behavior of the person, be imputed unto the thing. But they ought to bear
in remembrasice that they by their wisdom and watchfulnes must so establishe
the city by truth in judgments, that neither an offendour may lack an
enemy, neither an innocent have any harm. As in which Actius and Titius,
There ought to be no respect of persons ^^ matters of Justice.
as they say, shall be both one, for that justice which Aristotle calls more
brighte and beautiful then the euenyng star, is in like executed upon all
men.

But in this poincte there is grown a great abuse that there be among the
students of law, some that stand to much upon their reputacion, and stick
to stiff in their own conceits, caring for nothing less Practition^^^ o^
the law abuse their profession.
then to be the true executours of equity and Justice, but only make a mart
to their own advantage of that discipline, which was first ordained for the
common wealth and preseruacion of all men, which so much the more
haynouslye offend, the worthier the profession is, which they be not ashamed
to stain and put to open sale. Whose intemperance, coueteousnes, unquietness of
mind, and study fixed upon the general calamity and sacking of al men,
causes that that profession which was given from God for the defense and
preseruacion both of private and common affairs, is compelled to serve the
lust, desire, and insolency of a great number and by this means they have a
pretense and color to work much mischief, in that they abuse that knowledge,
whereby kings ought to rule, whereby mankind ought lawfully to be coupled
together, which conteyneth all wisdom, all the rules of Philosophy. Let
them all (says Lullie) say what Cicero. i. de oratore.
they list, I will speak my fancy: the one book of our twelve Tables, if a
man will search out the original and very grounds of the laws, seems to me
in weight of authority and plentifulnes of profit, to excede all the
Philosophers libraries.

Ye have heard a worthy commendacion of the Civil The end of the Law.
law, whose end must be, the conseruacion of a lawful and accustomable
equality in men's affairs and causes: which if it be used as a thing
salable, and be turned to the anoyaunce of mankind, under the pretense of
that profession which ought only to be employed to man's behoof, it is a
great abuse, and yet many do not stick to stain their honesties in like
attemptes. Albeeit the Lawier, is therefore matched with the Aldermen, and
nombred among the chief officers, upon this consideracion, that by his
counsel and authority, the city may be well governed, ordinances made
according to equity and justice, every man might know what belo^ged to
himself, what to others, one should not do to an other, otherwise then he
would be done unto himself, and that soche respect should be had unto private
profit, that all men should no less tender the public commodity and
dignity, then their own, and direct their whole drifte and endeavor, to the
attainyng of true virtue, which is no small part of their charge, that be
elected to be rulers Learned Lawyers must be a presidence to others, of
virtuous living.
over others, whose duty is to decide what things be rightuous, profitable,
honest, agreeable to laws, and soche as train men up to a godly living: which
measure all things by the rule of equity and Justice: so that nothing is
thought to agree with the good government and wealth of the citezeins, which
is not fetched forth of the Law: and Lullies saying may well be used, that
the law is a dombe Magistrate, and the Magistrate, a speaking Law. And of all
other, he is most bounden to give best admonicio^, upon whom as one that has
gotten this knowledge of law, equity, and justice, all men's iyes be cast,
and in whom every man conceiueth a good opinion. But if he fortune to straie
from the pathe of Justice, it tourneth to the endamagyng of a great meany. Now
if they that have the public gouernemente be unlearned, and not seen in the
laws, then they stay upon the Lawiers, whom they have associated unto the^:
of whom, because it is a shame for the^, trauailyng in law, not to know what
is Law, they seek and learn what may stand Corrupt Lawyers.
with Law. Of whom if they be craftelie handeled, which is, when they
persuade their clientes things unjust as just, unequal as indifferent,
filthy as honest unlawful as lawful, they are to be reproved for many
consideracions. First, for that those men, which of the^ selves, if they had
been well enstructed, would have gone the right way, and would have swarued
neither on the right, ne yet on the left hand, they seduce, and cause them to
do and offend contrary to their allegeaunce. Secondelye they defile and deface
the whole City. Thirdely, they cast them selves into marvelous dangers, not
only because they be enforced to fear the danger of reuengement by the
civil sword, but also at Gods hand, and shall be condingly punished for
neglectyng their duty, so much the more grievously the higher the office was
wherein they misused them selves, and the more faiethfull they ought to have
declared them selves toward all men. For if through ignorance their offense
be committed, it is a great shame, saying they ought not to intermeddle in
that charge, which because it is for the common profit, can not be either
neglected, or not faithfullye administered without great harm that must of
necessity redounde to all the commoners of the same. But if that through
coueteousnes, gredy desire, of set purpose, for private advantage, or
maliciousnes of mind, they be moved to corrupt the common estate, wickedlye to
buie and sell it, and by driuynge out justice the only sense of the common
weal to dissolve the same, which they should rather save, edify, and adourne
with the comely beauty of honor and virtue: How deuelishe a thing that is,
and what an evil president, only he knows not which has no knowledge at
all, neither of right, nor honesty, nor any conscionable dealing.

Therefore they that have gotten this gift of knowledge The kowledge of the
Law ought to be well bestowed.
in the laws, must be remembered well to bestow the same. For God has not for
naught so plentifully poured his grace upon them, but to the end they should
serve mankind faithfullye and fearfully, profit the same, and direct all the
dispensation and ministerye of the law, and charge taken upon them, to the
profit of their neighbor, and glory of almighty God. Who so does this, may
wall be called an expounder of right and Laws, and he made gouernoure over
commonweals, as one that cease not to plant justice, to appoint the
limits of private and public things, help the good, punish the evil, and
bestow well the profession of equity and justice, which be has taken upon him.

The argument of the fifth Chapter.
That Judges, Justices, Sergeaunts at the Law, and other counsailers be
profitable in the common weal, who ought to be fatherly favorers of
civility, justice, and conscionable dealyng.

NEither do they laobur in vain, or unprofitably bestow their travail in the
common weal which uprightly and honestly take upon them the pleadyng and
pursuinge of other men's causes. Of whom the chief Justices which do decide
the Lawiers likened to soldiers
doubts of matters in controversy, which by the force of their defense do
oftetimes both in private and common cases erect things that be in danger to
fall, and restore things that be in hazard to be lost, do no less advance
the common commodity of man, then if they should by battle and wounds
rescue their country and parents from the brunte of enemies. For the Patrones
of actions in deed be as soldiers, which trustyng as it were unto the
artillarie of their eloquent vtteraunce, do defend the hoope, life, and
posterity or their clientes. Herupon Anastasius the Emperor calls the
office of a judge a thing praise worthy, and needful for the Judges.
Seargeauntes
life of man. Such do I call Sergeants and advocates which do not employ
their travail wholly in the administration of the common weal, but take upon
the^ the pleadynge and determinynge of other men's suits and actions for an
ordinary fee, which the Greakes call Pragmatici, as if they should say,
court pleaders, whom Lullie in his first book of his Orator calls the
expounders of law, and ministers to the Orator in judgments. We also call
the^ utter Barresters, which Utter Barresters.
the Greeks call Dicheologi, such as stand at the bar pleadynge in their
Elientes quarrel. We call them Proctours,
Proctours or Atturneis (as Vlpiane is auctour) which at the instaunce of their
Elientes do pursue and follow their suits in the courts. And therefore in
the common weal their vocacions be diverse. For in deed such be properly
called Advocates, which do inform the Pleaders, Proctours, or Attourneis what
the law is, and enstruct them how to form their actions. Yet those which I
before named Pragmatici, be more nigh unto these in their practice, all which
be both profitable and needful in a common weal. For all men can not
atteine unto the knowledge of the law, which may be compared to a place
called Corinth, whereupon Corinthe is a City in ^c^ia.
it is prouerbially said: that every man can not go to Corinthe, and
therefore we be constrained of necessity to use the help of others. As for
example: A man is fullye persuaded that there is something due unto him, or
else it is so that a man's adversary drives him to defend him self by law.
As for the matter whereupon he groundeth his suit, he seems to stand upon
right, and therefore to have the more possibility of compassynge his purpose,
for that his matter appears right. But because there be many poinctes which
make the suit to seem injurious, so that the defendaunt may have some rescue
for him self, it shall be the duty of a counselor to search out all things
by circumstaunces, and to warn his Client that he do not rashely attempt
his suit, for fear of leasyng both his labor and damages. On the other side,
the matter falls so out, that either the one must take the foil, or defend
him self by law. Wherein it must be advisedly considered whether the form
and manner of defense be just or no. Which hazardes he must adventure upon by
the advice of his learned counsel: lest that when he has once entered his
suit, he seek to be dismissed, and ask counsel to late, when he shall be
enforced to proceed according to order of law. Which vocacion, because that it
does not only tender the prinate commodity, but also the honor of the
common weal, as by mean whereof every man gets his own, and quietness
is preferued amongst men, with using indifferencye to each party, It is not
for every The property of a good lawyer.
lewd fellow, and misdemeanoured person to be planted in that room: but
only such a one as is The properties of a good Lawier.
civil, of honest life, not contencious, sober, a favorer of justice and
equity, nothing desierous of filthy gain which can discern right from
wrong, and lawefull things from unlawful, which content with his ordinary
fee does not ouercharge his clientes with briberie, and so drive them to
beggerie. Such be they which do not move debate, which procure no unjust
quarelles to be attempted for their own lucre sake, which use not to
prolonge Judgments, and to proroge Plees, even until latter Lammas as they
say, that thereby in fine they weary both the plainetife and defendaunt: but
do employe all their endeavor to finishe just quarelles, wherein they ought
to set their whole delight, to bestow their whole travel. Besides this, they
defend the orphane and widow, the poor and rich, and pronounce the law
without any respect of person: very far differyng from such Unlearned and
crafty lawier ^
unlearned and shameless practicioners as daielye in the common weal offer
them selves even unsought for, which have in them neither knowledge of law,
nor honesty of life, ne yet truth in their counsel: but a notable
conueyaunce to fill their pouches, to work wiles, and by their pratlynge and
vain talk gotten by crafty practices, they can so handle the matter that any
man which is ignorant of their subtle devises would take what so ever they
say, what so ever they go about to persuade their simple Clientes, to be some
of Appolloes Oracles, and to be even as true as the Gospel. So easy a thing
is it to stayne this holy discipline, The Law abused.
and from her true use, which was first brought in forth safegarde and wealth
of men, to turn it unto a shop as it were of detestable covetousness, to
painte it with the cancred color of copemanshippe, to make it a goodly
Gardrobe of wickedness, and a plain profession of mockery.

And therefore many good men think that common weal to be best at ease, where
there be fewest Lawyers. Many lawiers ^^use marie (...).
Because many of them can not be maynteined without breedyng many suits. For
as the number of Phisicions argue that there is much sickness: So it proves
that the people be molested with lawyng and quarrelling, where the number of
Lawyers do swarm and flock together.

In which poinct Roderike the bishop of Zamor in Castile highlye commended
Germany, because that their populous commonweals were not many years ago
ruled and governed only by honest and discrete men, as the laws of their
country, and old received customs did lead them, dispatching all their
matters in suit without trouble of court, or retayning of lawyers. Which
thing we see practiced in many places even at this day, where such Patrones
either be not interteined, or at the least for scarcity of matters in law,
can not be able to feed finely, and maintain their port. There be diverse that
affirm that certain lawyers were coueied into Hongarie in the company of
Beatrice daughter to Ferdinando king of Naples, when she was brought to
marry with Mathias the king there: which, while they pretended the clearing
of the Courts from their old simplicity and barbarous rudeness, the
appointynge of fourmes in pleadinges, the driving of all things to suit, and
entrapping the inhabitauntes with their lawlike eloquence: did so handle the
matter, that every court, every private man's house was in a great stir and
tumult by dissensious suits which those craftye marchantes flirred up, where
there was never the like seen: so that where before the name of pleadyng was
unknown, now even every boie could prate thereof. Which thing so moved the
Prince, that he was constrained Lawyers were driven out of Hungary.
to drive away those new dissencion sowers, and for the calmyng of such
stormpe tempests as rose thereon, he revoked the ancient orders and customs
of his country which had been used before. And in deed who is so
insensible, which does not think it a great deal more commodious to the
common weal, without such Pleaders to end their matters after their country
manner, or by any other reasonable means, and to get somewhat, or rather to
loose a piece of their own, without the abidyng of such anoyaunces, with out
soche great charges and expenses: then to set their minds to compass matters
of great weight, to retain to their great charge a number of counsailours,
and when a man has spente all his thrifte, and is brought even to very
extreme beggerie by followyng It were exp^^ent that matters in varia^^ should
be ended with expedi^^^
the law, then at the last either for length of his suit to give over for
very weariness: or not to have such expedicion therein, as he expected:
Seeing that things be used contrary to the order of law, that the special
fruit that grows of our pleadyng consists in the maintenance of unquietness
among the subjects. And yet they that know even as perfectly as they can
noumber their own fingers, that the matter which they attempt to follow by
suit is extreme wrong, can not be either by threatenynge enforced, or reason
persuaded, to mitigate their expenses, not to travail to get other men's
goods contrary to all conscience, not to work that against others, that they
would not have done to them selves: but they be so far paste shame, so
maliciously and mischeuously bent, that they would spend in manner all that
ever they are able to make, that they might give another an overthrow, and
drive him to yield by rygorous extremity: Specially Some practi^^ ouers
procute delays in their Cliente^ matters.
when they be pricked forward by the suggestion of one, that is both
practiced in pleadyng, and richely clothed (as Apher the Orator said, when he
espied a Lawyer more finelye appareled, then profoundely learned,) this
proudelyng promises a great victory, or rather (as it is more commonly
seen,) he brings the matter to a demurrer in law, and so prolongeth it, that
it can not be determined in many years suit.

In which extreme inconneniences it should stand with the Princes honor and
his officers to provide, that such crafty rauenours should not so greatly
annoy the common weal, and without punishment delude justice: that both
quarrellous subjects might be brid^led from their will one to trouble and
empouerishe an other, and honest men might live in rest and tranquillity. For
what matter made it if such a disqu^etour Quar^^iours deserve punishment.
which neither regards justice nor equity, but by bringinge his wife and
children to beggerye, haunteth and troubles every Court, without any
consideration of him self, to doo^ his neighbor a displeasure, (such a
wicked desire he has) were cast in prison, and taught to stand to the verdite
and awarde of good indifferent and discrete men, and so to make a end of any
further ve^inge or pursuynge the Law. Which enormitie we see most commonly
happens where the word of God is preached, at the hearing whereof all men
should frame them selves to an uprightness of living, much less ought
they to employ It is not the pa^^e of a christian to prolo^g ^^^es.
their time about such quarrelynge and suits in the law which does not
become a christen man, but such, in whom there is neither Godliness nor
goodness. Wherefore such as mind the preseruacion of the common weal, must
warely take heed, that only those be preferred to the state of counsailours in
matters in law, which be constaunt, civil, Godly, and furtherers of the
common profit: and not such as gape for gain, make a mart to utter their
marchau^dise, ^owe dissension, stir naughtye persons to unquietness, seek
their own private avail, but be unable to help their Clientes with any
wholesome counsel. And although it is common even in every Childs mo^the,
that evil counsel is worst for the counsaylour, yet in the mean while they
that follow the law abide the smart, their house is on fire, they wa^e wise
when they have bought their wit to dear, and they learn that in the end the
trial of things is the schole master of fools.

The argument of the sixth Chapter.
That Physic is marvelous necessary, and so much the sooner restores
health, the more sincerely it is practiced.

ALthough there be no kind of creature without imperfection, diseases, and
danger of sickness, yet man alone, whom Marcus Varro Mann^^ life, although
it ^ee but ^^o^^, yet ^o su^^^^^ to many d^seases.
calls a waterboble, is for weakness of body feablest of al other, and most
subject to infirmities, so that shortness of life may seem the best
benefit that nature has bestowed upon manne, although that in i^le times of
sleep, eating, drinkyng, and play, more then half the life is spente, besides
the co^mptyng* of the years of our infancy, wherein we do lack
understanding, besides our old age, wherein we wa^e impotent, because then the
limbs grow out of frame, the senses be dull, the sight, hearing, and going
fail us before death come, the teeth, which be the instruments of feedyng,
fall out, not to speak of so many kinds of sickenesses, so many doubtful
dangers, so many fears, so many cares, by occasion whereof, we be sometime so
sore vexed, that even we wish for our deaths day.

By which misery and calamity, we be necessarily enforced, so long as the
breathe is in our bodies, as it were continually to wrestle and wage a mortal
war with the very diseases and infirmities of the body. But he that
charge us with this weakness, to the end we should the better remember
our mortality, and willingly bear the cross, to the honor of our redemer,
has showed us also an art, whereby knowledge is had, either quite to dispatche
those diseases, or at the least, to abridge y^ malady thereof, which we
therefore call Phisike, the mestres of health. Whose (...) was (...) for (...).
excellency to express is nedelesse, as a thing, which nature upon whom she
waits, does commend unto us, and also the aunciente beginning thereof, the
daily curyng of diseases, and restoryng the body to health, do declare
the same. Which things if they were not of sufficient force to make us
reverence Physic, the authority of this one place, were enough to move us
there unto: for the wi^eman says: Honor Eccle. 38.
the Phisician for necessity sake, for the highest has created him. For all
health proceeds from God, and of the king he shall receive his reward: the
knowledge of the Physician shall exalte him, and he shall be honorably taken
in the sight of the great men of this world. The highest has created
medicines out of the earth, and the wisemanne shall not abh^^^ the same. And
to the foorther commendacion thereof* Constantine the Emperor commanded,
that Phisicians should have salaries and certain livings appoincted them, that
they might apply their study, and thereby cure the more pacientes. Albeit,
Princes have ever reverenced When seven (...) english (...) ^n o^nce ^^^^ was
S^^^^rt^^s out english pe^^^.
them, and rewarded them very largely. So Quintus Stertinius reputed i^ the
Princes liberality, that he had allowed him for a yearly fee, five hundred
pieces of coigne called Sestert^. Plato in his third book of his common weal
says, that the profession of Physic is neadefull for mankind, as a thing
invented for health, not riot of living: whereof there ^e ^ondrie kinds: for
one called in Greek, Methodichi Diverse (...) of (...)
searches out the causes of diseases, and leans upon soche grounds and
principles, as nature, and long experience of things, has tried to be true.
An other, Clinichi, which in Latin is termed Lectu^ria, as one should say,
bed Physic, which they do practice that visit their pacientes, liyng in
their beds, and by obseruacion of the state of their bodies, learn the
original of the disease: which all they do, that follow the practice and
exercise of the art, which be not men (...) of (...).
of the meanest reputacion. An other kind there is, called Hiatriliptichi, as
it were oyntyng Physic, which consists in annoinctyng and chasing the
body, very neadfull in ^ondrie kinds of diseases. The last of all,
Empirichi, which stands only upon experience, the more dangerous and
uncertain, because (as the Proverb goes) it uses without any searchyng of
the cause, one salve for all sores, one plaster for all impostumes.

And we stand in neade of all these parts of Physic in the common weal,
and each of them has o^e commendacion, so that they be used accordingly, and
not converted to gain only. For what is more worthy Every part of (...)
necess^^^e in the common weal.
in a city, then that art, which all men, be they never so unskillful, do
desire? For it is nature, which moves us to preuente diseases, to keep our
body, as the ma^sion house of our soul, in sauetie, that we may the better
execute that part of our duty, which is due to the common weal. So ought
we earnestly to pray, that we may have an whole mind, in an whole body. But
there be ^ondrie things which do anoie this feeble body of ours, being so
much subject to infirmities: sometime an Agew troubles us, sometime Cholere,
sometime Melancholy: I omit the extremity of fear, and that some, even upon
report of merry tidings, have ended their lives, and a thousand other kinds
of death, wherewith a man is overthrown, and yet he desires by art and
nature to be saved and restored to health from the same. Moreover, there be
impostumes, rotten isshewes, launcing of the flesh in searching the wounds,
and a number of like inconveniences, which needs must have the help of
Surgeons, Surg^^^^*
who^ we se that both princes, and the people do highly esteem. Soche a man
was Archagatus, of whom Pliny makes mention, which was the first of that
sort of Phisicions for healyng wounds that came to Rome, to whom his
enfranchisement was given, and a shop purchased by the Chamber of the city,
in Acilius street, at the first very welcome to the city, although after for
his extremity in launcyng and searyng, he was commonly called a tyrannous
tormentour, and his profession became odious.

But it can not be contraried, but that this art (as Physic and Surgerie be
much abused.
there is nothing faultlesse, and without shameful misusage in things found
out for the safety of man) is very disceitfully used, so that it appears
rather to be a color for crafty conueyaunces, then an help for man's health.
Whereby every old Witch, every cutthroate and catchepole, every unthrifty
riotter (to ouerpasse other rascalles and slauishe surgeons) seek to cloak
their prolling practices. To whom if you ioyn the Jews and other strange
trauellours, which use to minister but one herb, or one drink for all kind
of diseases, be they never of so sundry natures, and therein do promise
healpe for every sore: then it may euidentlye appear in how great danger a
man of to light credit is, how readily he may be reft of his life under the
pretenced name of art, how freely a man may be murdered. To this number ye
may associate another sort, which purchasing their grace for monei, ruffle in
their ringes, and by fair promises only, deceive such as resort unto them:
braggyng upon soche knowledge of Phisike, as they never in any Unlearned
Phisicians.
part could any thing like attain unto, as though that death had hired them to
lie in wait for men's lives, and to send more to their graves to fulfill the
measure of mortality: profitable to none but to soche, which also wish in
like for a great plague, as by diggyng of pittes in Church yardes, and other
soche like business about burialles, do get their livings: But wondrous
pernicious to the common weal, which they do for gain sake, and to come in
credit, as Marcus Cato says, and at unawares to cast away their pacie^tes.
Concerning such fellows, let us hear what Pliny Plin. lib. 29 not. histo.
capi. i.
remembers, which seems to touch them some what nearer the quick. In this
only art (says he) does it come to pass, that who so once professes him
self to be a Physician, he is incontinent had in credit, whereas there is
no like danger in any other false profession, yet we do not consider that
every manne thinks that life is sweet. And there is no law to punish such
ignoraunte mansleaers, through whom so many be brought to their graves, there
is no example of reuengemente executed upon them. They learn by our dangers
and by experimentes to play deaths part with us, only the Physician is
unpunished for murder. Moreover they play the railers, and blame their
pacientes for intemperate diete, and begin to check them, when they be choked
with death already. And the more they be, the more harm they work, when
they be not all of one judgment, but one counsaileth one way, and an other an
other, to the great discomforte and destruction of their pacientes. Which
thing as it certainly hurt the Emperor Adrian, so these words afterward
engraven upon his tomb declared the same: The rabble of Phisicions slew the
Emperor. For how can he profess that art, or by it discerue well of
mankind, which for lack of knowledge can neither attain to any taste of
perfection, ne yet use thereof. In whose handelyng I would neither come the
first, ne yet the second, that he should take any experiment of his
rashenesse upon my flesh, and (as the Proverb says,) should hurl at a
Raven, and kill her upon my carkase. For the art of it self is no less
diverse then nature, whose servant and handmaide it is well called.

Which no man could ever attain unto without exquisite study and knowledge
of natural Philosophy the use whereof it does above others show and open unto
men. It is not improperly spoken which is commonly The Physician begins
where the Philosopher ends
said: where the Philosopher ends, there the Physician begins. As though
the profession of any science were in vain attempted, whose foundation is not
laid upon the very principles of nature. Therefore Ianus Cornarius a man well
seen in both the tongues, calls him self a natural Phisiicion, as others
do, which have searched the secrets of nature by Philosophy, holdinge this
opinion, that the perfection of this art is compassed and gotten by the
contemplacion of naturalitie, and that with reason, as it were putting a
difference between the true Phisicions, and those that take upon them the name
of art, lacking the principles grounded upon causes and certainty of reason,
which can never absolutely, and without man's great destruction practice their
faculty. Neither is it convenient that upon consideracion had of any one
thing, any man should take a cure in hand, and as it were with the trippe of
a die hazard a man's life. But first he must understand what the disease is,
and the circumstaunces thereof: then the disposicion of Obseruacions of
Phisicions.
the pacient, and the part wherein the disease began first to grow: the the
cause, which being taken away, y^ disease being but an imperfection of nature,
is easily cured. Afterward must he take deliberacion in appointynge his
medicine, that it so answer in all poinctes, that it delay, not nourishe the
sickness, which requires much diligence. For the earth brings forth the
medicine: but it is our part to consider what the nature and strength of each
thing is, how each must be applied to each disease. Which thing requires no
rash judgment, but exquisite knowledge fette from very nature her self,
which has taught even brute beasts to show us what herbs be good to drive
away Brute beasts teach us the nature of herbs.
certain diseases, that therein they pass the skill of man, which yet
excels them in reason. As Pliny writes, the dear showed first how that
the Herb Plin. li. ^. ca* 2^.
Dictamus was good against the shoot of an arrowe, because that when they were
stricken, they would eat that herb, and then the arowe would fall out. The
Tortoise recouereth her strength by the eating of Maioram (which is in Latin
called Bubula) after the sting of a serpent. The Wesell heals her self with
^ue, when she fights against mise. Boares when they sele them grieved, help
them selves with Iuie. Swalowes taught us that Selandine is very wholesome for
the sight, in that they use to heal their young ones eyes there with. Dogs
also by eating an herb which they know will ease them when they have rauened
any thing that brooketh not well with them, do provoke vomit, and so find
remedy. Which al drive to this end, to prove that things medicionable grow
not in vain out of thearth, but for the health of man, which so far forth
as our reason may reach, and as we may understand by the course of nature,
we must search, and through all parts learn how to cure there with, and
to find out the causes how to apply them accordyngly, lest while we purpose
to drive away the disease, we daiely more and more nourishe and increase the
same. And therefore it were good that storehouses, and ointment sellers shoppes
were well looked unto, least the confections of their medicines be old,
strange, or counterfeite, and of things of little efficacy, not aunsweryng
the disease, whereas nothing does so much harm, neither so sone deceive the
Physician, as a medicine either disagreable to the disease, or else of no
perfect operacion.

Saying therefore it is not only for the private, but also the common profit
to have in a City such as by The charge ^^ Phisicions*
their wisdom, learning, and faithfulness, shall be able to procure by
their trauail that the people be kept safe and sound from sickness, they to
whom the government is committed must look about them, that men learned,
good, Godly, modest, and not given to covetousness be admitted to that
charge, which will faithfullye bestow their labor upon as well poor as
rich, not eieyng lucre, but the health of the people which will remember that
they be not borne for them selves alone, but are also bound to tender the
commodity of their country, wherefore they have received the gift of
knowledge, which they ought so to employ that they may seem not only to have
lived, but also to have done some excellent service to the aduaunceme^t of the
common weal. Whereby we may be in a readiness to yield an account of those
things, which have been committed to our charge, and which we have done here
on earth in our life time.

The argument of the seventh Chapter.
That it is necessary in a common weal that children be virtuously trained
up, that by their good education they may be the better able to bear rule in
the common weal, and then under what Scholemasters.

WHO so considers well the old commonweals, and chiefly of the Greakes,
amongst other things which they both wisely and worthily ordained, shall
find this very commendable, that they thought it best that young men should be
trained up, taught, and prepared to the profitynge of the common weal. For
they knew that man's life with out knowledge was not like a life, and that the
passage to virtue, so troubled with brambles and Briers, so hard to climb,
could not easelye be found out and passed. Which thing many men hold to be
signified by the notable herb Molie, which Homere so highly praises: Which
had that name given it by the Gods, and was delivered to Ulysses by Mercury,
whose rotes grew so deep into the ground, that they could not Quid. 14.
Metamopho.
be plucked up: as who say, Virtue can not be atchiued without great labor.
Therefore good enstruction is nedeful, whereby manne is framde to that
excellency which he must show in his living, for so much as he is not
bredde for him self alone. For although there he certain seeds laid in us
by nature, whereby we be moved to virtue and equity, yet they stand us in no
stead, but lie hid frutelesse, onelesse by the prouocacion of singular
study, they be fashioned after reason, and show forth amongst men some token
of learning. For the obteininge whereof, discipline and exercise are
necessary, lest manne, if those primative Art and exercise ^e means to
affai^^ t^ virtue.
mocions be once suppressed, become brutishe, and without any fruit of life,
like unto other unreasonable creatures. For man's life is like unto iron, as
Marcus Cato says, which wears by little and little if it be occupied, but
if not, it is consumed with rustines, and pearisheth without any profit had
thereof.

There is nothing then more evident then this, that citees be both brought
into order of society, and also governed by counsel, trauail and labor of
virtuous and wisemen: which estate Plato so often calls happy, when either
the Gouernoure is a Philosopher, or a Philosopher the Governor, which cease
not to follow the study of wisdom. Moreover it behooves the whole number to
be so instructed, that they may understand how to obeie, how to observe the
ordinances of civility, and how to embrace virtue. And to this Discipline.
end did I say that Discipline served, which is not borne with us, but is
learned by teaching. Thereupo^ who so ever minded to deserve well of man's
life, Learning to very expedient in every common weal.
have alwaie had an especial care to bring up their children virtuously, and
to instruct them with good and liberal Sciences, that thereby access might
be had to the attainyng of virtue. So Lycurgus when a child was borne at
Lacedemon, would not leave it to the fathers bringing up, but co^mannded that
it should be conueighed into a certain place named Lesche, where soche as were
the best of the childs aliaunce, should try out his to wardnesse, and if
they had perceived the infaunte to be well featured, and in limbs well
proporcioned, they then with charge committed him to his parents, that they
should diligently and carefully, tender his educacion. And hereupon although
Plutarke Plutarchus in vita Licurgi.
does commend the common weal ordained by Numa Pompilius, yet he does far
prefer Lycurgus, for the trainyng up and instructyng of youth, which brought
Sparta to soche a decente order, that men might look thereon none otherwise,
then as it were upon a Scholemaster, or teacher of honest life, perfect
discipline, and a dwelling place and mart of al kind of virtue and honesty,
in somoche that he checked a young man, because he knew the way to ( Pylea)
as if he should have said, no man ought to degenerate fro^thordinaunces of his
country. Solon likewise charged y^ Judges called Areopagites at Athens, y^
they should punish loiterers and vagaboundes, thereby meaning that youth
should not only be well brought up, but that order and foresight should be
had, that when they had learned their faculty, they should neither lose the
same, ne yet mispende their time in idleness. Aristotle writes, that in the
Greeks citees, there were appointed certain named Paedonomi, whose charge was
only to see that children were well trained up.

No man is in this poinct more careful then Plato, which then hops that his
common weal shall have Plato in. 4. 6. and 7. dial. de Republi.
good success, if young men well trained up, be brought by sound doctrine and
discipline, unto the mart of good literature, the discipline of manners, the
love and study of Philosophy, and finally to humanity it self, whereby they
may become fit members of a common 8. Polit.
weal. Which poinct Aristotle the great master of the Peripateciane sect, one
that as he was best learned among all the Philosophers, so was he the best
Philosopher among all the learned, in his common weal does principally
appoincte, that in every city there should ^ee soche a School for learning,
whereby the true use thereof might be obtained: whence soche men might isshewe,
as should be able well to govern the common weal, and by doing their duty,
keep it in one estate of honor. Cicero also, although he confess Pro Archi^
poeta.
that there have been many worthy men of excellent spirit and prowes,
without any knowledge of learning (as were Scipio the Aphricane conqueror,
Lelius, Furius, and the old Cato the best learned in his time) yet he thus
much affirms, that if learning light upon an excellent natural wit, then
there is like to ensue a worthy piece of work. And whereas other things be
not common to all times, ages, and places ^^^ comm^^ d(...) of (...)ning.
these studies do nourishe youth, delight old age, adourne prosperity, be a
comfort and solace to them that be in adversity, be recreatiue at home, be
no hinderaunce abroad, continue with us all night, go into strange lands
with us, dwell with us in the country. Besides this all books, all wisemennes
talk, and all old histories be full of good ensamples: which should all lie
hid in darkness, if the light of learning did not reveal the same.

For the attainyng of this aid of learning, so profitable to a common weal,
it is most neadefull that soche wits be cherished, to whom the charge
thereof must be committed. Which first of all is done by educacion, which
wise men would have so simple, so well appoincted, so upright, that they do
not allow, that the child should receive any milk, but of his own Mothers
milk is mosterpedient for a child, Noct, A^^. lib. 1^. ca. 1.
natural mother. Which thing Phauorine the Philosopher reasons finely in
Aulus Gellius, because it is an heavy part, to deprive the child of the
food of blood, which is so nere to his own, already brought in to this world,
already requiryng the duty of his mother, whom she nourished in her womb,
when she did not see it, and to put him to soche a nourse as also is both of
an other kind of blood and milk, considering that the nourses disposicion and
nature of her Milk, bears great swaie in establishyng the manners of the
child* which thing Virgile imitatyng Homere did lively express, where Dido in
her extreme anguish for Aeneas his departure, speaks unto him ^^eido^. 4.
these words.

Thy mother neither Goddess was,
(Thou traitor to thy brood)
Nor Dardan aucthour of thy kin:
nor parent of thy blood
But in the mount of Caucasus,
thou vvast begote and bredde:
And in the ragged rocks thereof,
the Tygres vvilde thee fed,
As though nature had given women their pappes, for a certain comely ornament,
and a setting for the of their breasts only, and not for the nourishyng of
their children. Then it is not conueniente, that children should be noursed
with every kind of unnatural and unclean milk, and yet of the better race
that the child is borne, the more is he used to be set forth to a strange
nourse, so that it is no maruaill though soche o^spring grow out of kind.

Moreover, the child must be so brought up, that he see none evil behavior,
neither in his mother, ^e yet in his nourse (whom Chris^ppus wished to be a
wise woman) neither yet hear or utter any naughty talk himself. For look
what lico^re a vessel is fir^^e seasoned Horat.
withal, and that it will keep long: but let him incontinent learn the
ready way to virtue, and set before him the pattern of his life to come, let
him stir up those sparcle^ which nature has lated in him, as the foundation
of reason. Then as Socrates 6. de Rep.
teaches us in Plato, when children be wained from the teate, they must enure
themselves to stronger meats, embrace the discipline of manners, and study of
wisdom, Children must be vertuoully trained up.
that thereby they ma^e be prepared toward the gouernemente of the common
weal, and Civil life, wherein they must afterward tr^uaill, that so in
process of time, the exercises wherein they spend the day, may increase, and
they them selves understand, that they be not borne only for their selves:
for the perfityng whereof* it is very necessary that liberal sciences be
taught them, as Grammar, Kethoricke, Music, and Logike which (I say
Logic) Plato would Logic^^
not should be meddled withal, till a man were paste thirty years of age,
yea, and then not to be over busy therewith* because it consists in subtle
reasonyng and arguments, even of soche things, which be in deed both
godly and honest. Aristotle adds also to the said Sciences, the arts of
Poetry and Painting, I would wish that the whole body of liberal Sciences
should be taught, which do lay and establishe the foundation to the
excellency of these arts, which help (as I have before declared) the
buildyng of citees, the assemble of men, and preseruacion of the public honor.

For the which vocacion of teaching, it is requsite ^ec^^ scholemaisters.
to have soche, as can descretly handle and well enstruct the child, even as soon as he can crepe out of his mothers lap, and is able to receive any
learning: least the ill demeanor and ignoraunte of Scholemaisters, corrupt
and hinder their pupils. For Leonidas (as Lib. i.
Diogenes the Babilonian wrote, by Quintilians report) did plant in Alexander
certain naughty conditions* which Aristotle could not root out of him, but
from his first trainyng up in his infancy, they continued still with him,
even when he was grown a s^^ute and mighty prince. Scholemaisters therefore,
must be men of a good zeal, and soche as stand not to much in their own
concept* ^halonging them selves a glorious name of profounde ^earning: but they
must be ^earned in deed, of honest conne^sacion, ^au^urers of vertuo, and
soche as can take their scholars as their children, whom the scholars must s^
much the more reverence, because they receive the beginning of their living of
their parents, but of living well, of their scholemaisters. Now in what sort
they ought to be trained up, in what tongues and authors, it is no part of my
purpose to discourse, but Quintiliane does ^^th largely and learnedly, show us
an order in that point. To whom if ye do join, I^annes Ludouicus viues, it
were In libr. de tradendis disciplinis.
both necessary and profitable. But special head must be taken, that no
child be set to any thing, wherewith his wit and nature can not agree, but we
must chiefly follow that, which Tullie full well calls, a continual and
earnest occupiyng of the mind, when it does Learning with delight.
apply it self to any thing, with delight therein. This also must be seen to,
that there be no writers taught, ^ilthy antours
which be filthy, unclean, ungodly, and little helpyng the honesty of
life. For it is very c^pediente to conside^, in what kind of arts, and what
kind of manners, young children be nusseled from their tender years, which I
would rather have (if I should needs be put to chose) honest without any
learning, then with out honesty, highl^e learned. For honesty by the
excellency and worthiness of it self, is able to adourne ^onesty excels
learning.
and set forth a man^es living, but the other although it have never so
excellent learning, with misde^ea^our it is shadowed, and as it were ^^^ utterly
darkened.

And for as much as in the School of Christians, no kind of study should be
permitted, unless it bear Such profane* authors must be red as disages
not with true ^eligion.
the cognisaunce of godliness: Profane writers must be so taught, that they
may draw as nigh as can be to our religion, neither by any kind of
construyng, swar^e one jot from it. For so shall it fall out, that good
educacion and godliness joined together, shall so prepare youth to the common
weal and civil life, and so instruct them, that they shall neither repent
them of their labor and travail, n^ yet their parents of their expe^ses.
Thus it appears that it ski^^eth much under what masters ^uicion, how, and
in what order the child be brought up, what creansers, what governors he has,
what companions he uses, as Tullie puts us in mind, and with what kind of
men he delights to be conuersaunt. Otherwise although he be learned, and
eloquent in words, and yet lack the ornament of godliness, you may well (as
Zeno Citticus the Philosopher did) compare him unto the come Come of Alexandria.
of Alexandria, fair to the iye, but dross in deed: as one which will
delight thine ears, but make th^^ never the ^onester in the end.

Therefore the governors of commonweals, must understand that it is very
expedient, that both Magistrates and other subjects, ^e^ first well
instruct, both in good learning, and honesty of manners, from whom good
laws, the band of man's society may proceed, and the common weal be
supported and s^aied. Which thing who so despises, and unadvisedly
neglects, strives ^urelye with nature, mocketh the ordinance of God, and in
the mean while, desiereth that the society of man, which is linked both
with Gods and man's law, should be dissolved.

Now concerning the erection and maintenance of Erection ^^ schools*
Schools, as it is a thing very nec^ssarie, so to touch it in long discourse,
it is no part of my enterprise, which entende not to stand in the reformation
of every enormitie, but only generally, and as it were through a lattise to
show, whereby the society of man may be united together, and the honor of
the common weal preserved. Seeing y^ many well learned me^, have sufficiently
entreated of the founding and repairing of schools, whose judgment neither I
will, ne yet can, reprove.

THE Fifth Book, concerning the good ordering of a common weal.
The argument of the first Chapter.
That bandieraft accupacio^s, and workemanships, which are exercised by the
band, and policy of wit, be a portion of the common weal, and of what parts
they do consist.

EPicurus the Athenian Philosopher very wittelie said: Epicuru^.
that one man is a sufficient spectacle to another. For there is ever some
thing, which one man looks for, at an others One man helps another.
hand, as needful, and profitable unto the^. And Tullie teaches us, that men
be borne for men's sakes, that they make profit one an other, which does
not only chance in that free leisure, which we as in vacacion do bestow
upon learning: but also in other occupacions, which be practiced by hand, not
without Handy crafts b^ so called because of their inuencion.
the help of wit, which be called Mechanica, of the Greek work Michani,
that is, inuencion. For there must be a quicknes of wit employed, that these
arts may be well and cunningly practiced: and hereupon comes it to pass,
that manne is never content with his old inuencions, but still beats upon
new devises: for ^nsample whereof, we mais take the present estate of the
world that now is, wherein those arts be grown to soche singular
finenesse, that it shall be hard iudgyng, whether we ought more to marvel
at nature her self, which does not suffer man alwaie to be in one estate, or
rather the wit of man, nothing helped with any knowledge of learning, but
exercised with only practice, and stirred thereunto by subtle inuencions.
Therefore we must not, as Alpharabius and the Saphistes do, condemn Cicero^
of.
these arts, as either dishonest, or reprouable, unless (As Tullie faieth)
they be converted to unlawful and insatiable sekyng of gain.

Philosophers also, and soche as studied for wisdom, thought alwaie these
handicraftes worthy of so much commendacion, that some when they were quietly
set at their study, took upon them the practice of these faculties, and so
thought to occupy them selves with praise. So Hippias (whom Socrates in Plato
notes in two Diologues, the one named Hippias the elder, Hippias the
Philosopher made all his own garments him self.
the other Hippias the younger, who was both a Sophister, and a man given to
an excessive bravery) once on a time when games were kept upon the hill of
Olimpus, came unto Pisa an Acha^an city, not so much gased at for his
apparaile, as for the strange workemanshippe thereof. Of whom Apuleius a
Platonist Apuleius in li* ^loridoru^
writes thus: He bought not any thing of that which he had about him, but made
all with his own hands, both his clothes which he ware on, and the shoes
wherewith he was shodde, and all his other vestures, whereby he was very much
wondered at. He had upon him as clothing for his body, a coat, and a
peticoate, which he him self had before knitte at home. He was girded with a
sword girdle diversely colored after the kind of the work of Babylon,
neither in this work had any man helped him. He had also a white cloak,
which he cast over his other garments, which also he wrought him self.
Moreover, he made his own slippers, and a golden ringe with a precious stone
of a singular virtue in the signet, which he ware on a finger of his lift hand.
He both cast the compass of the ringe, and closed up the cressance for the
stone, and set the same in the collet him self. I have not yet rehearsed all
that he had, neither shall it grieve me to recount that whereof he was not
ashamed to vaunte him self, who very boldly reported that he had made him
self an oil bottel^, which he carried about him in form like to a
Chrismatorie, round in circuit after the manner of a propor^^onate vessel,
small toward the top steple wise, having a spowte turnynge up and down with
a vice, that the same served both for an handle to hold by, and also a spowt,
whereby the oil might have his issue: Who can but commend this man so
skillful in so many seats, so erporte in so many devises, so cunning in so
many faculties? Thus much writes. Apuleius. But what neade I to seek forayne
examples, consideringe there be nearer home so many, whereby we be moved to be
affectionate toward these handicrafte occupacions: seeing by Gods (...)
commenbeth the labor of the hands.
commandment we be bid to eat our bread in the sweat of our face. So
earnestly does the very spirit of God, move us to forsake the vain and
idle spending of our time, and to travail with our hands, which the Apostle
Paul cease not to preach, who ^. Corin. iiii. ^i. Cor. xii
because he would not be troublesome to the Corinthians, chose rather to
travail with his hands, and so to get his living, whereby it was evident
that the very schole master of life did not seek for that which was for the
bealie, but for the spirit by these words: I will come unto you, but I will
not molest you, for I seek not your goods but your selves. Also we trauail and
be ouerweried workinge with our own hands. And not without cause this work
by hand has his commendacion, sense that every man's art is as it were his
passeport and furniture in his old age, and the Proverb says, that a
craftesman never dies a beggar, but has always a competent living. But it
Causes of so ^^^^ learned (...).
is not given to all men to bestow their time upon liberal studies, some want
towardness of wit, some diligence of mind, and good will: Some be hindered
by negligence of their parents and friends, some tar^e at home because they
lack exhibicion to maintain them at study: as merchants can ill buie wares
in a mart, when they have no money to drive their bargain withal.
Nevertheless, every man must endeavor to enter such a kind of life, whereby he
may have meat, drink, and clothe, to chearishe him when he draws to his
old days.

Neither would the prouidance of Nature have so effectually showed us diverse
ways how to labor for the maintenance of our selves, ^^ they had not been
profitable and necessary, and meet to have been employed Every man^^^ must
choose that trade of life, wherewith ^^^ nature best agrees.
upon some honest purpose. Yet in these there must be election had, that
every man choose him self that faculty wherewith his nature does best
agree, lest if he striu^ against Nature, he do find nothing but travail,
and never attain his purposed faculty, because his wit is inclined an other
way. So great success in things shall a man have, which thoroughly weighs
his own capacity and natural inclinacion, and in no case forces nature.
Learned men divide these handy crafts into. vij. parts: that is, husbandry,
Handy crafts divided into seven parts.
woule working, carpenters craft, laboring on y^ water, huntyng, surgerie, and
stagoplaiyng. Under which they comprehend an infinite number more, which yet be
so diverse and variable, that it is very hard to understand from whence some
of them derive their names and faculties. So husbandry contains whatsoever
Husbandry.
belongs to the tillage of the ground. For thence we seek things necessary
for man's life, not concerning meat and drink alone, but also clothinge,
and the Romans call it (res Rustica) whose principles Marcus Varro defines to
be such as Ennius appoints Varro. i. de Rerust. ca 4*
to the whole world: that is, water, earth, air, and sun, which do^e all
tend to two ends, profit, and pleasure. Hereunto appertemetly plowing of
thearth, dressynge of gardens, woods, vines, trees, keeping of Oxen, sheep,
horses, and other things which we stead for and use, and to conclude, what
thing so ever grows out of the earth, and belongs to the tillage thereof.
Woule workynge contains spinnyng, weauing, Woule working.
sewinge, and all things that be made, of flare, woule, silk, silles, here,
osier, rushe, and such other stuff, by neadle, hand, spindle, frame, whole,
and other such instruments convenient for such kind of work. Carpenters
craft which some men call the Carpenters craft.
art, of occupiyng of tools or instruments, because it is exercised
therewith, and uses to make the same, comprehends all manner of woorcke that
is made of gold, silver, tin, leadde, brass, precious stone, iron, steel,
stone, wood, plaster, and such other. Hereunto belongs Smithes craft,
founders craft, engrauinge, making of glass, plasterynge. But especially the
art of buildynge and masenrie, not only for the subtilitie of devises to be
marueiled at, but also for the semelinesse of the work to be commended, which
consists in woorkynge in stone and timber. I would have ioigned paintyng unto
these, were it not that I see Aristotle, and other of the ancient sort of
writers place it emonge the liberal Sciences, as one of that number, of the
which I will particularly entreat in due place. Trauailyng on the water,
contains all (...).
Trafficque, touching buiyng and sellyng of wares, which be brought in
Ships, or other vessels, either by Sea or River, Whereunto Aristotle
ioigneth Merchau^drie, which* I purpose to sprake of, by it self. Huntyng also
has her several kinds: one is hunting Huntyng.
with dog or net, for wild beasts that be bredde in Woods, Forestes,
Parkes, or Chases: an other is angling and fishing for freshewater ^^^^e, and
s^^ ^^sh^ the third is, haukyng and foulyng. Same refer ^^ther, Cooks,
Vitaillers. Vinteners, and all soche things as do appertain unto delicate
fare, and sumptuousnes in meats and drinks, because they chiefly are provided
by hunting, and foulyng. Physic, specially that part which stands in
practice and open racion, the old writers comprehend under the handie
crafts, whose principal office is, to search and cure wounds: named
Surgerie. But I do nominate Surgerie
it among the liberal Sciences, as one of the chifest of them. For there is no
one of them, which by the guiding of Philosophy, atteineth nigher unto the
conte^placio^ of nature, no one that requires more deliberacion, wit, and
study. For, as it is said that Affricque brings soorthe always some new
thing, so nature works still either some new kind of malady, or shows some
better kind of medecin for sickness, whereunto it is necessary always to have
a new policy, for the understanding and appliyng of the same. For testimony
whereof we may allege, that pestilente The French pockes. The English
sweat.
grief, which they call the French pockes, and the English sweat, which is
no very dangerous desease in deed, but yet the occasion of much mortality,
ere the cure for it was known. How many kinds of mourrens also have these
wars engendered, so strange and so diverse, that they would deceive, even
Hippocrates himself (if he were alive) or the cunningest Physician of them all,
ere they should find a remedy convenient for the grief, according to the
original cause of the desease? And yet the use of Physic requires practice
by hand, in making confections, receiuyng them into the body, appliyng them
to the desease, and he that exercises this with his hand, may well enough be
reckened among handie crafts men. In this order we place, Apothecaries,
Oinctmentsellers, Painting sellers, soote oinctmentmakers, Surgeons, Bainers,
Barbers, gatherers of herbs and simples for Phisicions, and soche other.

The last of all is, the exercise of Stage plaiyng, Stage^y^.
where the people use to repair to behold plays, as well private as
public, which be set forth, partly to delight, partly to move us to
embrace ensamples of virtue and goodness, and to eschew vice and filthy
living. And to this part we may refer, the recital of Comedies, Tragedies,
pronouncyng of verses, and other kinds of rehersalles and pastimes, wherein
the people in old time, received very great pleasure.

The argument of the second Chapter.
That housebandrie does yield an happy gain unto men, without which we can
not be nourished.

I Have superficially declared which be the occupacions practiced by hand,
that be needful in a common weal, as things yet but generally proponed.
But because they avail much, both in private and public affairs, I
thought it good to treat thereof somewhat more at large. Of Tillage.
which, Tillage, or as they term it by a worthier name, Housebandrie, is
nombred in the first place, without which, we can neither be able to
maintain our selves, neither any commodity can grow for the preseruacion of
the public honor. This fruitful trade is worthy very high commendacion,
not only by reason of the antiquity thereof, but because both holy men, and
such as have been renowned in the common weal, have not disdeined to exercise
them selves therein. And first of all Adam whom God first created, was sent
out of Paradise to till and work upon the earth, from whence he had his
beginnynge. Cain, Abell, Enoche, Lameche, and Noe, whom some call Ogyges (as
Marcus Varro in his third book of husbandry reports) and think that he
was the double Noble men of Romepractised Tillage.
faced Ianus, whom some think was four faced, were also tillers of the
ground. Among the Romans diverse and sondrie noble and notable men applied
tillage, as it appears in chronicles, not only for wealth sake, but because
the old fathers held Tillage, as an holy kind of life. So Pliny says:
The earth was Plini. lib. ^. capit. ^^.
tilled with the chief capitaines hands, as though (if a man may so safe) the
earth reioysed in a ploughe adouerned with Laurel, and a tiller which had
triumphed in his time, or else because they as carefully sowed their corn, as
they used to wage battle, and with like diligence ordered their fields, as
their Camps, or because all things prospere better under honest tandes, for
that they be the more circumspectly docen. They which called Serranus to
bear an honorable Serranus, a serendo.
office in Rome, found him so wyng, whereupon he gat that surname. As
Cincinnatus was in manner naked at his work, and his face all soiled with
duste, as Norbane writes, a Pursiuaunt brought him news that he was made
Dictator, and said: cover thy body, that I may accomplish the
commandment of the counsel and Senate of Rome. Soche were the Pursiuauntes.
Pursiuauntes in those dates, and thereby got their names, because they called
the Senate and capitaines ^ftsones out of the country. And Marcus Cato says:
Cato de Reiust.
But valiaunte Capitaines, and active soldiers are made of house bandmen, and
chiefly from them proceeds the most godly and surest gain, without any
kind of enmie.

And that no great company of men can be sustained, without the use of it,
the histories as well of princes, as of many other worthy men, be evident
witnesses. House(...) is necessary.
And as Columella writes: in old time, men lived happily, and so shall they
also in time to come, without any practice of plays and interludes, or
pleadyng in law, but it is manifest that men can neither live, no yet be
nourished, without soche as tille the earth. Wherefore it were a marvelous
strange thing, if that this trade of enlarging and keeping liuelihode should be
despised which is a fautles faculty: forsomoche as Cato writes, that soche
men as be herein occupied do think least harm, which is next to
wisdom, and furthest unacquainted with old age, ever flourishinge, ever
healthful, and serves both for profit and pleasure. Concerning which
matter Marcus Varro is aucthour that more then fifty Grecians have written
whole volumes, amongst whom he reakeneth ^^^ers of husbandry.
Hiero the Sicilian, Hesi^de the A^^rean, Democritus the natural Philosopher,
Xenophon scholar to Socrates, Aristotle, Theophraste, and other famous men:
also Mago the Carthaginian, a man of high parentage, which brought scatered
matters in his own natural language into. xxviij. books, which Cassius
Dionisius turned into Greek, and finallye, Decius Sillanus traunslated them
into the latin tongue by the counsels commandment. Yea, the latins also
did not omit the precepts of husbandry: as Marcus Cato the Censo^re, two
Sasernes, the father and the son, S^rof^ Tremellius, which wrote eloquently
of that argument, as Columella does report: Mar^us Terentius Varro, which in
his extreme old age, I mean being past ^ours^ore years attempted to publishe
books touching the same. Virgil, which garnished it in verse, Collumella,
Palladius, Rutilius Taurus, which added thereunto pretty notes concerning
monthly traueling about husbandry, applied to the obseruacion of the times.
And Pliny the second in his natural history has learn^dlye compacted their
precepts together. As for example: the masters iye, best Precepts of
husbandry.
husbandeth the ground. Nothing is less expedient, then to till your ground
exceadingly well: well to till it is good, but exceadinglye well is hurtefull:
as who should sa^e, there must be a mean used in all things. The Bailie^e of
a farm should be the first up, and the last in bed. And hereupon it is
said, that an husbandman should be a great seller, but no great b^ier, and
should get plentiful gain of that which he looks for out of the ground:
which fruit. S. James writing to the. xij. tribes that were dispersed,
calls preciouse, saying thus: Behold, the husbandman looks ^aco. ca. ^l^.
for the precious fruit of the earth.

For as Cato says in Tullie, those be the profits, those be the pleasures of
husbandmen, which neither be hindered by old age, and approach ^ighest unto
the life of a wise man. For they have to do with the earth which never
refuses to be subject to man's commandment, neither yeldeth that again
which she receives without increase, sometime more, sometime less: whereunto
if you add the virtue of things that The commodit^^s of husbandry.
come forth of the earth, nothing is more profitable, nothing more
sovereign, sense that we see that of so little a grain of a ^^gge, or kernel
of a grape, and the very small seeds of other kinds of fruits and trees,
there grow so great stocks and boughs: sense that the store houses of a
diligente and painful husband man be always furnished with great ple^tie
of wine, oil, honey, victualles, and to be short, every corner of his farm
place is well ^^uffed. For he has good store of porke, lamb, kidde, Oxen,
vea^e, hen, gose, chicken, and other fat Pultrie, milk, chese, butter,
honey, apples, ^eares, and all other commodities that arise of husbandry
multiplied by the blessyng of God, and coming forth in due season for men's
beho^^. To whom therefore commission was given that they should make the earth
subject unto them, that they should rule over the birds of the air, the
fisshes of God must be glorified ^^ his gi^^es.
the sea, and all other creatures which are moved upon the earth, acknowlegyng
and glorifiynge him that both created them, and all other things.

Thou must not therefore in any wise think that God has bestowed upon thee
so great blessings out of the earth, water, and air, to use the^ as
instruments of riote, but rather in the way of honesty, holiness and
sobriety. And if it fortune that thou do vntha^kfully and le^dely misuse
the same, there shall not be so much as one chicken which thou have so
riottously eaten, and superfluou^^ie consumed for thy lusts sake, By (...),
good things g^^w^ ^ll.
whereof thou shall not be compelled to give an account. For there is nothing
so good, nothing so harmeles, but by misusing, it may become hurtefull.
Moreover, how necessary and healthful a gift of the earth wine Wine.
is, it appears by the Apostle, which commands Timothe to drink
moderately thereof for the strengthenyng of his stomach.

So that it may well be said that nothing is more necessary for the bodily
strength then wine, if it be moderately taken, nothing more pernicious if it
be used immoderately, although it seem to please the appetite. And therefore
Androcides a very wise manne writing to Alexander the great, and by the way
touching his intemperanc^e, said: O king, when thou P^^ni. li 14. cap* v.
Wine is the (...) ^^ the earth.
drinkest wine, remember thou drinkest the blood of the earth. For as Hemlocke
is poison to manne, so is wine poison to Hemlocke.

Therefore ^illag^ of the ground is not so profitable as needful, the
travail whereof Marcus Tullius witnesses to be the most blessed, and most
honest of all others. Which besides the commendacion that he gave to
housebandrye in his book that he wrote concerning old age, called Cato
Mayor, in the first of his offices he writes in this manner: but of all
things whereby any thing is gotten, nothing is better, nothing more
plentiful, nothing sweeter, nothing worthier a free manne, then ^^llynge of
the ground. Which reasons moved m^n among those arts which Hou^^bandrie ^^
(...) ^^ all other ha^^^ (...).
be exercised with hand, first to place husbandry, which is so highly
esteemed not only by the labor of men of most famous renown: but has also
been used of sundry holy men, with a great deal better reason the Aristotle
and diverse others repute it, which therefore (in Gods name) do sequester it
from the number of liberal sciences, because it keeps the husbandman occupied
only in traueilynge, not permittynge him to have any leisure which he may
bestow in sekyng of true felicity, whereas in deed all his endeavor is to
help man with the plentifulnesse of his travail, and to put to his helpyng
hand, that the prosperous state of the common weal may be still maintained.

The argument of the third Chapter.
Concerning workinge of woule* and the parts belonginge theret^, which
appertain to our garments, and other like furniture of life.

NAture the mother of all things was not only contented to yield us such
necessaries whereby our bodies might be relieved, and our lives sustained: but
also bequethed us such artificial knowledge, as whereby we might lead over the
residue of our life without any either discommoditie or danger. Which
although in many things she may some a stepdame toward man, yet in this
part she is a very good and gracious mother, because she daiely brings
forth those things which be not only profitable, but also necessary for
all men, as it is evidently seen in cloth^makyng and dressing of woule,
which in handicraftes I have placed next unto tillage, because the commodity
thereof is according. For although there ^ee no want of The necessity of
garments.
food, although the earth bring forth things most plentifully, yet to go
naked, and like brute beasts, to discover those parts which nature would
have covered, it stands nether with nature, ne yet with reason. For there be
two things, which for leadinge of this their life, men do most desire, they
be so careful, they so earnestly travail, they take so great ^ar^e, they use
so mani^ occupacions, and to be short^, spend their lives in extreme toil and
drudgerie, and even like very All things in this li^e besides meat drink and
clothe, be in manner sup^^^^uous.
Galeyslaues: that is, that this their body, the house of their soul, may be
both fed and ^^adde. Other things do rather appertain to riote and
superfluity, which is the prouocacion of coueteo^^^es: for that we came naked
into the world, and thence we must return also naked. And in deed as. S.
Paul says, Godliness and a mind content with his own estate is a great
gain, for into this world nothing we brought with us, neither can we
carry any thing thence away with us, but if we have meat, drink, and
clothe, therewith we must be content. For thus says the Apostle: Godliness,
and a mind content with ^. T^^^. v.
his estate, is a great gain. For it is plain that as we brought nothing with
us into this world: so we shall carry nothing away with us, but if we be
fed and cladde, therewith we must be content. Which saying if it were
oftener before our iyes, we should not so gredely desire worldely wealth, but
should say as Diogenes did, that nature is content with very few things, as
bread, water, and clothes, although they be but simple.

Under clothemaking I do comprehend not only such things as be made of
woule, but also the working thereof, and all clothing so much as belongs to
the furniture of man in that behalf. For where as according to Plinies
saiynge: All other living creatures Nature cou^^eth all living creatures
sa^^ng m^ only.
have naturally coueringes for their bodies, as shelles, barks, skins,
prickles, heeres, bristles, feathers, quilles, scales, fleces: stocks and
tr^es* also by her provision be oftentimes fenced with double bark, from heat
and cold: She covers only man and sets him forth, with borowinge the
benifite of others. And therefore it stood him in hand to devise such a way,
as whereby clothinge and other furniture of living might be provided. As is
the craft of weauyng, spinning, Cardyng, and Sewyng, and soche as be practiced
by spindle, neadle, wheel, card, and soche like inst^^mentes, whether it be
of Woulle, Flare, S^^ke, Skins, Pearls, silver or gold, lace, or soche
other like things. Also Fullers occupacion may b^e nombred ^^llers (...)*
amongst these, which teaches the way of dressing and scouryng of Clothes
with hoate water, the use whereof, man's life not content with any kind of
arraie, does more evidently open, then is needful here to b^^ disclosed by me
that purpose not to teach the making, inuencion, and sorts of every
particular thing, but that the commodity thereof both profitable and
neadfull, may be well used, both privately and in common.

Now if I should take upon me to show the causes, why we ought so much to
esteem the woorkyng of Woolle, I would ground some of them upon necessity,
some upon Civility. Moreover, the knowledge of clothmakyng in no poincte can we
lack, because that thereby we cover this our body, which ought in deed in
most parts to be hid, which otherwise should be naked: yea, and also
fence and save the same, from the injury of Snow, Froste, tempestuous
storms, cold, and inte^peratnes of air, and heat of the sun. As for the
other reasons, they do particularly concern apparel, which should be used
in a certain measure, ^^ery man^^ ought to (...) apparel (...) for ^^^ de^ree.
that it be honest, and comely for the estate of the person, not in like to
all, but that every man be apparelled according unto the degree whereunto he
is called, which thing it were expedient, should be specially looked unto and
observed. For what is more vnseamely, then that a base personage should go
arra^^d (Cha^blet.)
in silks, Damaskes, embrodered work with gold or silver: or have his house
garnished and set forth, with cloth of Arras, and Tapestrie of soche like
estate not^yng becommyng so mean a man as he is, as though he were some
King, Prince, some p^^r^ of a Realm, or some great officer, as one that were
of an honorable house, race, or parentage? Who^ it should become to use soche
garments, apparel, and other ornaments, as did answer unto his worthiness,
degree, and estimacion. So we allow in princes their purple robes, (...) ^^
apparel.
in courtiers silks, in a head officer an honest garment, in a commoner clenly
apparel: in women, long, according to the difference of their kind, in an
vplandishe and houseband man, that is como^ly used, and so in each man,
according unto the difference of their degree convenient, and answerable to the
estate of their vocacion: and this is the apparellyng and clothyng* which
Xenophon also allowed.

In all things therefore I do utterly condem^^^, Sumptuous ^ermentes.
sumptuous and outrageous excess, as a thing that respects not the
maintenance of life, but the lightenes of mind, and a vain brag: wherein
an honest and grave man would be loathe to be reproved. For it is not possible,
that he should use the benefit of things well, which uses them otherwise
then to the end wherefore they were ordained: Specially considering, Lightness
in apparel.
that man's mind lightly alters, with the alteracion of apparel, and
chiefly if it be strange, and smells of some new trick, and outlandishe
guise, which thing Diogenes being a Philosopher, and (as it were) a preacher of
nature, perceived: for he ones espiyng a young manne, which was straungely and
unseemly disguised, said unto him: art thou not ashamed to will thy self
worse then nature has dooen? For she has made thee a man, and thou
disguisest thy self like a woman. And that the old Romans did ^ore punish
this lightness of living, their Censors may be a sufficient proof, but yet
they were not able to break them from it. Hereupon Augustus Caesar, seeing many
in Rome wearyng Clokes after the guise of the Greeks, said unto them in
mockage: behold the Romans, Lords of the world, and the nation whose upper
garments should be gounes (alludyng to Virgites verse) how much they be
altered: As though it were a dishonor for the pieres of the world, and soche
as should surmount other in constancy and uprightness of life, to receive and
embrace soche a marue^lous lightenesse in apparel, and to be so wondrous
waueryng in strange conditions, which thing, he that will thoroughly mark the
trade of Germany, shall well say, and truly affirm: where it is a wonder to
see, the daily change of apparelle, the great delight they have in strange
to^^s, and new fanglenes: in so much that if even the very ^^a^es, either of
Italy, Spain, France, or Turkey invent any new devise, that (as it were in
a common ^^^ke) settleth in Germany, and brings in with the strange facions
of apparel, vices Change of apparelle, causet^ change of co^dicions.
of greater enormitie, as be, inconstancy, intemperauncie, and lightness of
mind. Whereas if a man would call to his remembrance our aunc^tours, he
should not only praise them, but also wounder at the^ for their fortitude,
constancy, justice, fidelity, upright simplicity in their condicio^s, and
love of virtue. But now, sense they have lightly changed their good manners,
into strangeness of apparel and attire, have learned a strange language,
and have loved an outla^dishe kind of living, all things fall out otherwise:
for there is so great inconstancy, so great untruth, so great mistruste, so
great corrupcion of manners, so great injustice, so great a desire one to
ano^^ an other: that a man may long seek for a very German in Germany, ere
that perchance he can find any.

Amend therefore ye noble and worthy men, remember that ye should be very
Germans, to whom it were a great shame, to degenerate from virtuous living,
into foreign facions, and soche as nothing resemble the integrity of your
predecessors, to the utter defacyng and darkenyng of the worthy acts of
your ancestors, by your own lightness in life: it is no evil lesson that is
taught us, that we should keep ^ld^ fa^h^^n^ (...)d.
soche customs still, as our forefathers in times paste have used, for that
chaunges of estates (because of a certain new diet) be holden as suspected,
and going out of kind. And therefore Lycurgus would not that the Lacedaemonians
should be great trauailers into foreign lands, for fear least if they
should so do, they should be nusseled and infected with strange facions, and
decline from their former integrity of living.

Surely it is wonderful to see, how we alwaie bend toward that, which is
forbidden us, and how we fall in love with new conceiptes, specially soche as
touch intemperauncie of living: which enormitie is no less perceived by the
alteracion of apparel, then by our pace. For even as our mind changes in
us, and is oftentimes moved, not resting in any one place: so an unset and
unseemly pace is not manlike, but a certain resemblance and an infallible
argument of the like A comely pace is comendable
unsteadfastness and waueryng of wit. And therefore wise Chilo the
Lacedemoniane, among diverse other witty satynges, did right well counsel us,
not to be over hasty in our gate.

And me seems, nothing does less become a man, then to reiecte the virtuous
demeanor of his predecessors, and to decline into new tanglenesse,
resembling strange gestures, and light condicio^s: not only counterfaictyng a
straungenes of language after a sort, but also fondite framyng a form of his
whole body, like a common iester: wherewith he may peradventure for a time,
set a to the countenance on the matter, but in the end he shall be laughed
to scorn, for his vain brag. For an Ape, will be but an Ape still (says
Luciane) although she wear a golden coat. Therefore it stands soche in
hand, as be in authority, Reformacion to requisite.
to restrain this riottous ruffelyng, which men so much affectate, to the
great offense of others, in strange disguising them selves, and often
alteryng their apparel, thereby arguyng a certain lightness, and
inconstancy of their manners, and to see that every man use his apparelle and
vesture, according unto his calling and estate: for so shall they of the
Clergy be reverenced in their weeds, so shall the noble man use garments,
according to his estate, so shall the citezein, so shall the plain country
man be known by his coat. And this shall not only avail, to discern The
commodity that (...)weth by (...)meant (...)
one estate from an other, which thing by nature we be bound to observe,
and that there be no confuse medley in things, as they go about which I
cannot tell how licenciously endeavor, that nothing be like it self, but all
things altered with change and extreme headines, pretending thereby a
liberty of life, which they them selves are not able to attain: but also it
furthereth that we may have some taste of honesty, and that soche light
gentlemen may ones be brought, from their intemperauncie, to the decente order
of their elders, and constancy of life, Wherefore it is not mough to provide
for clothyng and woul woorkyng in a common weal: unless it be well used, and
in soche sort, as it serves the necessity of man, and was found out very
profitablie for man's society, and the great advancement of the common weal.

The argument of the. iiij. Chapter.
Of the crafts of Carpe^ters, Smithes, Ioigners, and soche like, and into how
many sorts they be divided. whereunto I do annexe also paintyng and buildyng.

MAximus Tyrius a Philosopher of Platoes sect, in his book, wherein he
treats of the active kind of life, sateth: that it is a poincte of as great
wit, to find out a perfeicte trade of living, as it is to find a perfect
man. For we like no one thing continually, but our nature is alwaie ready to
complain, Man is naturally bent to inuente new devises.
and therefore hard to please, and not content with her own estate: for that
man never rests upon soche things as he has already found out, but alwaie
sets his mind upon new inuencions. Whereupon rises the desire of emulacion,
which gives the Emulacion.
occasion why certainprincipal arts have been found: which being disparpled
among men, cause those things to appear very neadfull, which might seame to
have grown upon pleasure, for that nothing seameth so much travailed for
amongst all men, as artificial cunnyng, which we do follow, till we be
envied at for our skille, thinkyng that most perfeicte, wherein fewest things
be lackyng. For the desire of new and subtle devises, being stirred up by
nature, the maistres of art, suffers us not to atcheue to that which is
perfect, and in all poinctes absolute. Which he shall well understand, that
considers the diversity of artificious sciences among men, which without
controversy, were in the beginning very rude, and soche as well declared the
simplicity of their inuencion as evidently appears in old arms, pictures,
engrauynges, apparelle, carpettes, hangynges, buildings, and soche other
artificial poinctes of frame. For if a man list to compare them, with the
woorkemanship Our new artificers far pass the old in excellency of work.
of our time, which in deed far excels them in subtilitie of inuencion,
although he must needs give a dew reverence thereunto, considering the
auncientnes of the time, and thank the old fathers for their inuencion, yet
he shall be more ravished with the workmanship of our time, both for
singularity of cunnyng, and finenes of the same, yeldyng to them wounder, but
to these beutie, and as it were perfitnes of their work. Gyges the Lidiane (as
writers do record) first showed the art of Paintyng, but if you should
compare with his wit, the works of Apelles, Parrhasius, Albertus Durerus,
Adrianus Hollandus, and other finer woorkemen of our time, you Diversity a^
wits have invented variety of arts.
should not chose but confess, that many things be added thereunto, which
were unknown unto the first inuentours. One Chorebus an Atheniane, is reported
first to have invented Potters craft. Minerua, otherwise called Pallas, first
devised making of clothe, the way to work by Lome and nedle: Arachue, linen,
Closter her son, carpettes and hanginges: Beotius Shoomakers craft:
Veluettes and Silks (the only nourishement of all riotte) Seres a Scithiane
people: and so forth diverse men invented diverse arts, to the use of man:
with whose works if you should compare the yearthen vessel of our time, so
many ways trimly devised, rich clothe, weauing of Linen (which would hold
a man's iyes in a gase, to behold in it hauking, a kennell of hounds
following the chase, the Hunters, the fairness of Imageric) hangynges wrought
with gold and silver, richly beset as it were with precious stones, and set
forth with lively colors, Veluettes, Tisshewes, Silk, and all sumpteous
vestures (even passing the Phrigiane pomp) the lightness and vanity in
making shoes, which be trod in the mire, sometime becked, sometime double
horned, sometime round, sometime plain, dressed with I cannot tell how many
diversities of colors: you should incontinent perceive how hard a thing it
is, to please man's wit, how it is only set upon new inuencions, in so
much that despisyng the necessary use of things, by reason of unsteadfastness
in it self, it is ravished into riot and mere vanities. All sciences seem to
become servants of pleasure, opening the window whereat vice may enter, and
despisyng the perfect profit, be altogether set upon a bragging bravery.

Yet for all that, we may not find fault, with all S(...) grow incontempt
^y abusing them.
kinds of workemanships. For they be good things, found out for the use of man, and of their own nature very necessary, only degeneratyng through
the intemperauncie of soche, as do abuse the same, so that thereby they
endamage soche, to who^ they should serve for our commodity. I blame not a
garmente, which is cleanly, and well becomes a man's wearyng: but because
the pride and arrogancy of the mind, is thereby bewraied, it is found fault
withal, and holden as uncomely, much less decent in a civil order. A sword
how so ever it is made, if a man use it for his defense, of all armor it is
one of the best: for it is turned to y^ use, which nature permits to other
creatures. But if a robber, a thief, or cutthrote take it in handlyng, nothing
Abuse changes good thin ^^^ to evil.
now is worse then it, nothing does bread more unquietness among men. Thus
you see that nothing is so good, but by the abuse thereof it may become ill:
not of his own nature, but by the peruersitie and untowardness of the abuser.

Mine intent is to fashion a kind of common weal, which, forsomoche as it
depends upon diverse kinds, both of men and orders, must needs have
artificers, and specially soche as cannot be spared, and without which it is
not sufficiently furnished. We must needs Necessary handicraftes men.
herein allow Bakers, Butchers, Clothiers, Linen Drapers, Millers, Smithes,
Carpentars, Wheelewrightes, Brasiers, Slaughtermen, Saddlers, Tailers, Weauers,
Shooemakers, Cor^a^es, Coupers, Glouers, Masons, Tinkers, Daubers, Bowyers,
Goldsmithes, Apoticaries, tilers, Girdlers, Barbers White tawers, Diers,
Builders, Painters, Baulme sollers, and all soche artificers, by whose
diligence and trauaill, the body and whole preseruacion of the common weal is
established: whose continuance in labor, is both very commodious and
necessary, and whom it does become to help the civil society, and not to
live in any wise idly. For herupon arises the civil harmony and consent,
wherein not only the nobility, but also base artificers, and all other that
be without any Corporacion, or Mansion house (as they say) yea, y^ slauishest
kind of people that is, must agree and do their ductie in endeuouryng
themselves, that the whole body be not dissolved.

Whereupon it evidently appears among an infinite, which be the most
necessary parts, contained under the name of this science, of framing or
ioigning without which we can neither have food, clothyng, housyng, nor city
to dwell in: the whole treaty where Magistrates must see a ^^dresse in th^^ges
abused.
of, although I were therein skillful, yet it were not needful here to meddle
withal: but in this poincte Magistrates must be circumspecte, that they be not
both converted to gain privately, and also do harm in general. For to this
end they use to ordein, and appoint them haules and companies: although it were
nothing ^^^les and Companies*
auailable to the common wealth, to forsee every thing that might fall to their
own companies, and to neglecte the common commodity. Because forsothe the
coat sits nigher to a man, then his cloak, and every man studieth how to
help himself (soche is his insatiable desire) to the great endammagyng, and
utter undoing of other. This conceit of ours, and blind love of our selves,
causes us for our own commodities sake, to break the laws of man's
society. For so much as every man by nature, is most friendly to himself,
and wishes better to none other, then to him self. Plato says: this is it
that they say, how that every man is friend to himself naturally, and that not
with out great reason. Which we see does most of all come to pass, where
soche haules bear sweie, and by might counteruaile the Magistrate, or do
hinder and let that to be ordained, which respects a common commodity.
Neither be the multitude and common sort of artificers, wounte so much to
profit the citezeins: but if they so communicate their labor, that both The
(...) ^^^ of (...).
it may be imparted among their fellow citezeins, yea and upon a reasonable
price: that both the artificer may be contented for his pains, and the
common^r which needs it, may have it for a convenient sum of money, then do
they well serve the common weal.

Also the old builders of citees perceived, that artificers were neadefull,
but they did not in like esteem the^ all. As Phaleas the Carthaginian, which
would (...) un(...)
that they should be servants of the city. As Hippodamus the Melistane,
which appoincted his city to stand of ten thousand men, and exempted
artificers from both possessions and honors. As Diophantus which so little
esteemed them, that he would not have them to be holden as citezeins, but to
work in common. Whose opinions Aristotle (which according unto Socrates mind
uses in all his doings, to prefer the truth before the man) does finely
confute and overthrow. For that it were an unseemly poincte, to bar them
from the benefit of possessions, and the fellowship of citezeins, to forbid
them the use of all gooddes, to drive them as slaves to common woorkemanship,
whose art ought to be their purueighaunce, and they them selves represent a
great part of the city, a great deal more profitable, then soche as lie as
it were buried in sluggishe idleness, living alone to the^ selves, and nothing
profityng others. Moreover none of these uses his handie craft so, but it
tourneth to the commodity of others, and wealth of the city, and by respect
had unto godliness, tourneth to the glory of God, to whom they yield thanks,
in all for all. No iesse then if they were idle, and devised a certain kind of
felicity, praising the contemplative life. Whom if I should say, did only
live virtuously, that should be to be spoken as perilous, as to others in deed
prejudicial.

Among handicraftes do I place Paintyng, although Paintyng is nambred emo^^
the liberal sciences.
the old writers reputed it among liberal sciences, as Aristotle in his
politiques, appoincteth. ii^j. kinds of liberal sciences, wherein he would
have young men trained up, amongst which he nombreth Paintyng. A famous
science it is, and greatly desired, both of kings and other people, whose
worthiness is still preserved, through the finesse of goodly Tables, and
curious purtreitures set forth in gold. Neither is it only merueilous in
variety of colors, but also in woorkyng with one color, it so resembles
nature, that nothing is more wonderful. Soche works the Greeks call
Monocromata, that is wroughte all with one color. In Pliny and Quintiliane,
be rehearsed Plini. lib. 35. Capi. 8. Quint. li. 12 Cap. 10.
certain kinds of work, wherein Polignotus and Aglaopho^ were very notable,
which be called in Greek Catagrapha, which they say that Cimo Cleoneus first
invented, when the Images were so pictured, and their faces so fashioned, that
they would seem to look every way: as they say, the picture of the virgin
Marie is, (...).
which saint Luke, being a Physician by profession drew out: after which
there be now a days many made like. There be diverse things, which commend
Paintyng unto us, as an excellent and worthy faculty, so in old time received
among liberal Sciences, that gentlemen and worthy personages, always
exercised the same, and all servants were barred from the practice thereof, by
a special act. And whereas Paintyng and Poetry, proceade both of nature, a
Painter and a Poet, be both so borne, and both the one and the other,
mislike much curiosity, being content with the only steight, which nature
has endowed the party withal, sekyng no forther ornamente then the influence
of nature. So Plutarche writes, that Poetry is a speaking picture, and a
picture a dombe Poetry. Whereupon when Apelles woundred much Apelles and
Protogenes were excellent Painters.
at a piece of work, made by Protogenes, wrought with great labor and
diligence: said, that they were in all poinctes, in manner of like cunnyng, but
in this thing do I far (said Apelles (excelle Protogenes, that he cannot
let his work alone when it is well: declaryng that to much curiosity,
oftymes does harm, as Pliny also witnesses. In which science it is hard
to judge, whether you may more wounder at the excellency and gifts of wit,
or the sleightenesse and runnyng of the hand, whereby Apelles was known to
Protogenes, who was then at Rhodes, by a merueilous subtle line, which he
drew in his table, taking his pencill. And it was holden no less woorthines,
to be painted by a cunnyng woorkeman, then to be had in eternal memory, by
verse or other writing. And therefore Alexander commanded, as it is commonly
known, that none should paint his Image Plini. lib. 7. cap. xxxvij.
but Apelles, none carue it, but Pyrgoteles, none engraue it in brass, but
Lyfippus. There be a great number of ensamples, whereby this faculty has got
immortal fame, not by excellent works only, but also by books written of
the same. For Apelles, Antigonus, and Xenocrates, published this art in
writing: and of the Germans, Albert Durer of Nuremberge a famous Painter
wrote four books of the institucions of Geometry, very profitable to
Painters, Imagemakers, Masons, Brasiers, Carpenters, and all soche as will try
their work by Compass, Rule, Line or any other certain measure, or cunningly
handle lines, utter faces of works, or whole and massy bodies, which books
be also turned into Latin.

After this follows the art of Buildyng, which Buildyng.
he shall best atchieue, that is of a ready wit, earnest study, excellent
learning, and great experience. But this builder, whom we must have in so high
admiracion, must be grave, and of a perfect judgment, and very prompte in
devise. A science wonderful necessary, as without which there can neither
tounes, houses, nor any other frame, be erected nor edified. For Libri. 1.
Architecture. ^ Capi. i.
this feate of buildyng (as Marcus Vitriuius writes) is a science garnished
with diverse disciplines, and poinctes of learning, by the judgment whereof, al
those works be perfited, which other sciences bring forth: which has two
grounds: the frame, and devise. Buildyng is divided into two parts: frame,
and divise.
The frame we call that, which is made by hand, a continued and frequented
conceit of practice. Devise is that, which by cunnyng and reason of
proporcion, can descriue and open the things framed. So hereby it most
evidently appears, that neither a man can be a cunnyng builder, without
knowledge of learning by only experience, neither by only devise and
learning, without experience. But who so knitteth both these poinctes together
as a man, both learned by practice, and practiced by learning, shall bear the
price, and have his knowledge by authority allowed. As for learning in this
poinct, a man is then to be thought sufficiently instructed therein, if he be
skillful in painting, seen in Geometry not ignorant in the perspectiues,
learned in Arithmetike, rife in histories, and well studied in Philosophy. As
for paintyng, he shall thereby Paintyng.
be able by picture, to descriue unto you the plotte of any piece of work.
Geometry; shows the use of the Geometry.
rule and compass. The perspectiues teach him in The perspectiues.
buildyng, to cast his work after this or that aspecte of the heaven. By the
knowledge of Arithmetike, he shall Arithmetique.
readily cast, what charges his buildyng will stand him in, how by measure to
declare his reason, and finally, all the most difficulte questions of
proporcio^s. It is moreover manifest, that histories do declare many ways,
how to garnishe the woorkemanship of buildyng, whereby through diligence, the
cause of every thing may readily be opened. Which thing every manne
confesses, may more evidently be showed by Philosophy. There be diverse
other sciences, as Mustcke, Physic, Law, and Astronomy, which Vitruuius
says, and that very well, are sometime to be required in a builder, but Leo
Baptiste a Florentine, Li. iii de reaedificatoria
holds them not to be so necessary, because a singular good builder, may
well enough be without the^.

Now this knowledge of buildyng, is therefore to be had in estimacion, least the
citezens through naughty The com^^^itie of buildyng.
buildyng of their houses and manours, be enforced to sustei^ great charges:
because it is not so privately, as commonly hurtful to the comely view of a
city, by means of ruinous and imperfect buildings, desaced, which thing the
civil law does prohibit utterly: so much material it is for citezens,
well ma^cred both in life and conditions, to be planted in a fair builded
city: where houses be both artificially builded, and in ranks proporcionably
matched. For there is a wise saying: that a commodious dwelling place, is half
a man's living, so that it be not builded for a fond bravery, but for that
end, which the use of man's life, and the order of the art it self
requires. And here upon we reprove Deioces the king of the Medes, which
environed his city Ecbatana with seven walls, and so painted it with
colors, that some were Purple, some Greie, some of Silver hew, some of Gold.

All the buildings that Nero made, were covered O^^^^gious pomp in buildyng.
with gold, and trimmed with precious stones. Caligula made a stable for his
horses of Marble, and a maunger of Iuerie. But Heliogabalus surmounted all the
residue in rage of riotte, which paued his floores with gold, and was sorry that
he could not do the same with Amber. And besides these if ye list to
consider, the buildings of certain base men, as merchauntes, which by their
trade of trafficque, have gotten great riches Merchaunte ^^nes houses.
into their hands, what excessive expenses they bestow in making them fair
houses, you shall incontinente perceive, that this faculty of buildyng, being
first invented for a good end, and the necessary use of man, does not now
rest within her bounds, but with many is turned into mere fantasies and
voluptuousnes, to the endammaging and perhaps utter undoing of many more, if
the scarcity of money (the only stre^gthe of buildyng) were not the occasion
of the contrary.

The argument of the v. Chapter.
That the trade of trauailyng by water, is very profitable, both in private
and public, for sondrie good consideracions.

MArcus Cato surnamed thelder, was wount to say, that he repented him self of
three things: first, if ever he committed any secret counsel to a woman:
secondly if he traiuailed any whither by water, whereas he might have gone by
land: thirdly and last, if he suffered any day pass away without profit.
And to say the truth he does wisely, which does not commit himself to the
water, when he may Travailing by water as ^^ is profitable, so it is perilous.
travail on the land in more safety. For trauailyng by water, is no less
dangerous, and no less hazardeth our life, then it is profitable. But for as
much as there be many commodities that ensue of it, a man must compare the
perille and profit together, and coumpte necessity, a virtue. And although
the use of sailyng be in this poincte great, because that thereby men have
intercourse from Europe to Afrique and Asia, and in general from one country
to an other, yet besides that, we may pass into Islands of the Sea, emporte
so many kinds of merchaundise, where with many are enriched, and be carried,
and travail whither we list by water: Which commodity is not to be
despised: yet her chief co^mendacio^ is, because that it was the first mean to
save mankind from destruction.

For when man began more and more daily to follow Noah's Ark. Gene. 6. 7. 8.
Joseph. lib. 1 antiquitatu^ Capi. v.
malicious dealing (for that therewer on the yerth Giauntes, which despised
both God, Justice, and all manner of virtue) God almighty purposed by water,
to destroy man. But because Noe was a worthy, godly, and upright man, and one
that feared God, to the end he and his might escape the danger of the flood,
he was commanded to make himself a ship, or an house of wood, which he
named an Arc, as by which so enclosed, the water was barred that it could not
enter. This ship made he, so that it had in it four chambers, and it was
three hundredth cubits long, fifty Cubits broad, thirty in height, into the
which Noe, his wife, children, and their wives entered, taking in with them of
every kind of living creatures a match, that is male and female, besides
necessary victualles to eat and drink. This Arc until the seventh monethe
rolled upon the water: and at the last was driven into Armenia, and there
stayed upon a mountain, which Damascene reports out of Josephus, to be
called Baris Maneseae, where the rem^nauntes thereof were seen many a year
after. Wherein two things, may by the way be noted. First, that Noe was
the first that invented ship. Secondly, that the cause why it was found out,
was the prescruacio^ of man. Wherefore the Greeks, and all that do agree with
them are far deceived, which attribute the first devise of ship to their
country men. But imagine that in sundry coasts sondrie men first opened the
way of Shippyng, yet this is certain, that Noe was the first inuentour
thereof. So the saying is, y^ Neptune, when Noe made the first Ship.
he had first rigged and furnished his navy with takling, was Lord over the
Seas: that Erithras a king, after whom the red sea has her name (because
Erythri, in Greek signifies read) first innented Ships, and sailed from
Island to Island: that Danus first brought ship into Greece forth of Egypt: and
so in Strabo and Pliny in his natural history, the inuencion of Ships, is
ascribed to sondrie men.

Afterward because man's wit is always desierous of new inuencions, there
were many other things further devised concerning shippynge, as either the
more convenient making of way, or danger Plini. lib 7. Capit. 56.
of stormy weather, caused men to seek new policies. And thereupon
Philostephanus (as Pliny reports) writes, that Jason the general of the
journey Diverse ^^nne devised diverse kinds of vessels.
taken for the golden fleese into Colthos, first invented the long ship
which is called an Argosee. Diverse men devised diverse kinds of vessels. The
inhabitauntes about the red Sea, devised the vessel with two ranks of
Dares. Amocles of Corinthe the Galley with three ranks. The Copians first
found the oar. The Salaminians (as Festus judges) first invented the
Carickes, wherein horses be carried. The Luscanes the anchor. One Eupalamius the
graple or harpyng iron: to omit diverse other means, whereby this trade is
both become the more artificial and usual. As for the use and commodity
thereof, we may The commodities o^ travailing by water.
many ways perceive it. For no City, no resort of men, can be knitte and
united together without the trades of marchaundise, which lightly by sea be
brought out of forayne countries, as spices, precious stones, all kind of
clothe, and whatsoever is necessary for man's life. Like conueyaunce is had
by fresh rivers, for that things may sooner be traunsported by water, then by
land. And to pass over other commodities, it is profitable for passengers,
and cariynge of men from one place to an other. Besides that many ylandes
should have been without both civility and good religion, were it not that by
sailynge into them, they came to the knowledge thereof, and so learned to know
what was civility of life, and also truenes of religion, and grew thereby
more disciplinable in the doctrine of GOD. Yea, furthermore many kingdoms,
provinces, and commonweals which lie upon the water sides, were not able to
save them selves and their goods from Pirates and rouers which lie in wait
for spoil and pray, even in the midst of the Sea, were they not provided of
a navy, which they must bring forth by water, as an army by land,
against such spoylynge raueners.

Thus ye see how that the knowledge of sailing is profitable and neadfull, not
only for the first appointyng, but also for the safe mainteinynge of a city,
placed among the handicraft occupacions, howebeit so much the better, the more
it is practiced for the behoof of man, and not made an instrument for
coueteousnes greadines, and riote.

For what noumber do you take to be of them, which are not coutent with
that wealth which the earth a sure element and subject to man uses to bring
The abuse of Shipmennes ^^a^^^.
forth, as it were even wealth at will, and abou^dance of plentye, but by
aduenturynge cease not still to hazard by sea, to the great emperellyng of
their life, and bewraying of their own greadye desire, that it may seem to
some that it had heue better that shippyng had never been found, then to
have been used as a prouocacion and stirrynge of men to gready gain, and
insatiable coueteousnesse, concerning which matter Horace writes thus.

When first Gods prudence parted lands Horatius in i. carminu^.

with Seas, for naught it was,
If yet our wicked ships approve,
the foraine foordes to pass.
Thus boldly man each thing presumes,
and headlong falls still,
To mischief more, and most desires
The most forbidden ill.
Aurelius Propertius in a witty Elegy complains Propertius Libr. iii.
Elegiarum.
for the death of one Petus, which was drouned in the sea for his own
coueteousnes, on this manner:

COIGNE, cancred cause of careful carke, Money.

that vvorkest vvearye vvoe,
For thee our svviftened race we haste,
to headlong death we go.
Thou art the root that yeldst the sap,
and fostrest faults with food:
The seed of all our heavy hap,
it springs of thy brood.
The bended beams to ships vveframe,
to build our bane thereby,
Our hand for thee it drives our death,
in drenching seas to dye.
For slender semde to us the gain,
that we by land might find:
Except we should approve with pain,
to pass the waves with vvinde.
Thus we the doubtful steps of chance,
by art increase: much like,
As one in rage that sekes for wealth,
the pushe upon the pike.
Have thou thy fast affiaunce fixed,
in ship or ankers stay:
And whom thy house Gods could not hold,
think thou the gable may?
What Is his desert that thinks his land,
to little for his toil?
Of all thy gathered goods by seas,
the vvindes divide the spoil.
Was never bark of hautye top,
and ribs so strongely laid,
But ere the race of many years,
by storm it has decayed.
The haven it self that safest semes,
sometime thy vessel shakes,
And often the Mariner at shore,
vnfeared shipwreck makes.
Dame nature semde her trains to lay,
and set the Seas for vvile,
When first she shevvd to fools that way,
the covetous to begile
From which saying the wise manne vsyng these words, does not much
disagree: again, one purposyng to sail, and beginning to take his journey,
through the ragyng sea, calls for help unto a stock, that is far weaker
then the tree that ^eareth him. For as for it, the coveteousnes of money has
found it out. And to say the truth he is to bold, which having no neade,
commits his life to a piece of timber: who sometime is in danger of
shipwrake, in a stormy wether: sometime in perist of some extreme sickness,
by vomityng and weakness of stomach, sometime by pirates is murdered and
slain out right: as if the earth, which God gave the children of men in
possession, were not sufficient to satisfy this greadie desire: unless the
sea, which is assigned to the fishes, were attempted, and enforced to minister
occasion of gain.

But for so much as that, which by appoinctment at the beginning, is good and
commendable, because of the commodity, which thereupon ensues to man's
life, although by the natural coueteousnes of man, Ship men's craft must be
employed to a good end.
it be turned into an inordinate trade, may not therefore of it self be
called evil: it behooves men to do their endeavor in the common weal, that
both this trade of trauailyng by water be well used, and so exercised and
imparted in this community, that it may be profitable both in private and in
common affairs: and those cares, travails, watchynges, and dangers so
employed, that it may appear, that they do not lean to a private lucre
only, but that the common estate may be thereby advanced: so that by soche
means, the dignity of the common weal established, by lawful commonyng of
profits, may be preserved.

The argument of the. vj. Chapter.
That as the trade of Merchaundise is necessary, so it is a great
cherishemente of filthy lucre.

Diverse men ioigne to this art of trauailyng by water, the trade of
Merchaundise, which does also furnish The commodity of the trade o^
Marcha^dise
the life of man with sondrie commodities. For neither ca^ any company of men,
either be associate together, or be nourished, without buiyng and sellyng of
soche things as be needful for the maintenance of their life: neither yet
each apply his art and business, without those things, which their
trafficque, not only from nigh, but also far countries, by passage over the
seas, does minister and make easy to be provided. Although men of old time,
thought Merchaundise to be a thing merueilous needful for a common weal, yet
they never held the same, as a part thereof: because that Merchauntes were in
deed, more bent to seek outward goods, then that they would bestow any time
in followyng virtue, whereby they might atteigne unto the first degree of
happiness in this life, which consists in quietness, and want of trouble,
as Aristotle wittily gathers. But they which dwell in a City, do not so
embrace virtue, that they can presume upon soche quietness: forsomoche as one
follows the Anuile, an other the Lome, an other, an other trade to get his
living, so that they may not so conveniently attend upon that Philosophical
contemplacion. Yea, moreover the very course of thynnes teaches us, that no
city can either be builded, or yet maintained, by only quiet and
conte^platiue persons. For the wealth whereof, the Merchaunt carried even in
the middle of the waves, shall do as much good, as if he tariyng at home,
should only debate with himself felicities, and conceive in his mind, a Soche
as occupy them selves in worldly affairs, d^ ^lso please ^^^d in their labor
certain kind of sittyng quietness. For happy and holy is that labor wherein
thou trauailest, that it may help thy neighbor, forther the common profit,
and redounde to the glory of God: by the fruicte whereof, be we never so
busy, yet we shall live in quiet, and become scholars to God, and be
prepared to a blessed life. And this is the meaning of that saying, whereby we
be commanded, to eat our bread in the sweat of our brows, and happily to
use the blessyng of that our labor.

Let not the Philosophers therefore, and their conte^platiue life trouble us,
which in this worldly estate they may well seek, but shall never find: for
so much as it has an other mark, whereat we do not shote with our
fleshly, but spiritual iyes, which are hid from the wise of this world:
So that it makes no matter, whether he be a Merchaunte at home, or abroad,
idle, or busied: So that he bear a good and vprighte mind toward the common
weal, which without any deceipte, any guile, or unreasonable enhaunsyng the
price of things, he purposes sincerely and godlilie to help, and by honest
means to provide for his living.

And as all other occupacions were, so was this use of Merchaundise found out,
for a mean to get things necessary for man's living, which by quickenesse
of wit gathered force, and so increased beyond measure: wherein the most
part of men, rather seek for their own gain (the smell whereof is sweet,
from whence so ever it comes) then that they pass upon the aidyng and
releuyng of other men's necessities. Therefore all Merchauntes be had in a
suspicion, for Least occupiers be most suspected.
to much desire of gain, and chiefly soche as be the least occupiers. For he
that occupies but a small quantity of wares, must neades thereupon be
maintained, having none other trade to live by: and of that little, must he
neades gather so much, as will bear him out, and keep his whole household:
Yea, and so much as he could not get (taking an indifferente and reasonable
gain) although he should occupy a great deal more. And hereuppon it appears
why. Tullie disproueth Li. i. de offi.
base Merchaundrie as vile, because it is not satisfied with a mean
advantage, when he says: Merchaundrie if it be small, is to be rekened as
filthy: but if it be great and wealthy, bringing in much on every side, and
impartyng to many without liyng, it is not much to be blamed. Yea further, if
it be saciate with competent lucre, or rather content, that, as from the maine
sea, oftymes it landeth in the haven, so like wise from the haven, it grow to
lands and hereditamentes, it seameth by good right to deserve praise. Neither
is that merchaunt commended without a cause which forbeareth no manner of
trauaill, whom no cold, no heat, no danger of life does state, but that by
an allowed and commendable mean, he will apply his business, and enlarge the
common profit, and deliver himself and his, from poverty and famine. Which
matter. Horace a famous master, both in Philosophy and manners, declares in
these two verses:

The Merchant swift to fardest coast of Inde, for wealth he ronnes:
His poverty by fires, by rocks, by seas, by shelues, he shonnes.
And therefore Marcus Cato terms a Merchant Cato calls a Merchaunte Active.
active, as one that will not be weried, but watchful and diligent to work
for wealth, by these words: I take a merchant to be very active in
prouidyng substance, but subject to many dangers, and full of miseries. Whom
the Romans reputed so profitable and necessary a member of their common
weal, that if he chanced to be harmed, they would be straight ways armed,
and ready to reueng his quarrel: whereof Tullie puts us in mind, saying:
Your elders ofttimes, if their merchants or mariners had been injuriously
handled, would have waged war for their sakes. How ought you then to be
moved in your minds, saying so many thousand of your Citizens be by the
report of one messenger, and at one very time, so shamefully slain? You must
not therefore think Marchandrye to be as a thing not necessary, which the
former times have esteemed so highlye, the trade whereof is more diverse, and
more politickelye practiced, then that it can be certainly known or descriu^d
by any art. Before the battle of Troy there were exchau^ges ^^chaung^ used
in stead o^ bu^yng and selling for mo^^y
used, when also things were valued at a price, as Sabinus and Cassius do
suppose, leanyng unto Ho^ers au^thoritie, which writes, that the Greakes
bought them wine for Brass, iron, Skins, and other exchange of things.

Thence (says Homer^) the plumed Greakes ^et^e Iliad. 6.
their vintage, some for Brass, some for bright ^teele, some for felles, some
for oxen, and other some for b^ndmen. But Ner^a and Pr^culus masters of an
other schole (as Paulus the lawier affirms) hold this opinion, that the price
was made by payment of money, ^^chaung^n^ and bu^yng be ^^^ers things.
as by covenant, whereup^^ both buiyng and sellyng were supported, and that
both these kinds of contractes were several. Which their opinion they do
ground upon certain verses in the same Iliades, which do contain the
unequal exchange of Armor between Diomedes and Glaucus. Here Jupiter
Saturnes son took away Glaucus his understanding, which changed armor
with Diomede^* ^ideus son, golden for brazen, worth an hundred o^^n, for the
worth of. ix. oxen. Howbeit I will tarry no l^nger upon these poinctes, for be it
money, or be it money worth, whereby these matters do pass, all is one, so
that it be to the commodity of man's society.

But herein we ought to be more careful, le^t where as it should be a
profitable kind of Tra^fi^que, it become a shop of iniquity, and a mar^e of
c^^eteonsnesse, not only in the Merchants them selves detestable,
Engrossynges of ^ar^^ and vnl^^^u^ hau^^^ be prohibited.
but also hurtefull unto the common weal. For to what end think you drive
these private engrossinges of wares, so disceiptful, and so of^ forbidden by
the Princes constitutions. What mean these unlawful Haulles begone for the
perpetual undoing of their neighbors, but only privately to feed these
ragyng and inordinate desires, and to wipe men of their money. A most craftye
practice, which is maintained with the sweat of the neady, and cloketh her
disceipt with lies, as with an instrument of truth. Thus much avails it thee
to take all kind of travail upon thee* to leave nothing unassayed, and then
to lease thy soul: whereunto if ye will ioygne every present danger,
continual carfulness, and disquietnesse of mind, I can not see what thing
can chance more unhappy, and more full of calamity unto manne. Thus says
Ambrose. Is it not a vain thing for a merchant to Ambro. 2. de o^^ic.
travail on his journey by night and by day, to purchase him self heaps of
Treasure, to gather together wares, to be troubled at the price, for fear he
sell better cheap then he bought, to learn how the price goes Merchant (...)
abide many hazard^^*
in every place, and the^ by much brute of his great occupiyng, either stir
thieves to lie in wait for him, or else for desire of gain, abidynge no
tariaunce, hazard forth upon a storm, and so lease ship and all? Also in
an other place. O thou that buiest this world, and winnest hell, why turnest
thou the industry of nature into fraud and disceipt? Why do thou desire the
dearth of things? Why wisshest thou to the pore, barrenness, that thou may
have great plentye in thine own house, though it be craftily gotten? for thy
gain is the loss of a great meanye.

I could rehearse a number which most shamefully have converted the gain of
merchandise into disceipt, ^aine martynge, riote, coueteousnesse, and thabuse
of insatiable desire, so that thereby it has turned to the disaduauntage of
the common weal, for the advantage whereof it was first invented. Whereby it
has come to pass, that although many excellent men, as Thales Milesius,
Solon, Hippocrates, as Plutarch^ reports, and also great Princes have used
the trade Some will not ^iche to use ^e^^^^y, so that ^her^by they ^ay get ^
p^n^
of Marchaundise* yet certain vain men, those only desire and study, is
to have, which force neither of forswearynge, nor true swearynge, to make a
man believe that thing to be the best he can get, which in deed is of no value,
to thent^nt their wares which be little worth, may be uttered the dearer, so
highly^ does he which will sell his wares, praise the same, according to
the Poets saiynge: Such I say have brought it into such a contempt, that it
is accomp^ed worthy to be despised, filthye, unlawful, and void of all
honesty, in so much that the ^^ebanes (as Aristotle witnesses) decreed, that
no merchant should bear any common office, unless ten years before he had
abstained from buiynge and selling, and in that time pourged him self of the
suspicion grown of his former living. This disceipt, fraud, p^riurie,
filthiness, detestable desire of gain, dishonest spending of the time, and a
man's earnest pinchinge, only to seek his own commodity, to the great
detriment and ^inderaunce of others, has brought the name of Marchaundise into
so shameful an ignominy, that it is a comm^n saying: If a man be not apt to
be a catchepol^, or ma^e bearer: then he is ^itte to be a Merchant, or a
marchantes factour. As thoug^ that were a thing of it self ^^ident, and of her
own nature showed ^o every man a way how to beguil^ other, and a trade of
idle living. Which thing may yet be helped, if the magistrate will be
watchefull, and b^inge these market runners into an order, and prohibit the^^
that with such trifling things as they bring to sale, being ^ (...) for
^o^^yng in ^t^^^ynge of wares.
sometime counterfaite, sometime to dear, they deceive not such simple
Sou^es, as with those their loud Lies, oaths, and persuasions be allured and
driven to believe them: And that they seek not to spoil pore men of that which
they have painefully gotten. And the market being thus refo^rmed, the Citezins
may have the relie^e of those things, which otherwise if they were left free
for every craftye merchant, to use at his pleasure, might through negligence
of the officers, turn to their great ^inderaunce.

The argument of the seventh Chapter.
That buntynge dot^e not only delight, but also profite^h the common weal,
and then what parts it ^at^.

MANY Arguments may induce Princes be sometimes ^^^led Gods in scripture*
us to believe that Hunting has been a thing both of much antiquity, and
also found out by the Gods. For the scripture uses to call the mightier
sort and princes of the people, Gods, as such as be above the state of man, and be honored with divine adoration. In the. xx^. of Exodus it is
written: Thou shall not detract from the Gods, neither speak ^uill to the
prince of thy people. And because men are vain^, and without the knowledge of
God, th^i could not understand who God was, neither by markynge his works,
learned who was the workman. Therefore they took the rulers of the w^rlde to
be Gods, as the wise man says: whom they also honored as Sapi* xiii*
Gods with divine s^ruice, placed them in Heaven as them selves best liked,
and replenished it with such a multitude, that those gyantes had possessed the
same them selves alone, had not the ladders been removed, so that now they can
come no nearer to heaven, then by l^kynge toward it. But to the purpose. The
holy Scripture testifies that hunting was in use about Noes time
incontinent after the flood. But Nemrode Huntyng wa^ inu^n^^d immediately (...)
Noes stoude.
the son of chus, cosen to Noe, by whom the kingdom of Babylon is reported
to have her beginny^g, began to be mighty and a strong hunter in the sight of
the Lord, so that commonly he was called an hunter. Esau also became a skillful
hunter, and a cunning Ge^ 10. and. 25
husband man, whom Isaac his father therefore preferred before Jacob, because
he did eat of such things as he killed in hunting, whereby it might seem that
this game grew in use in Syria, after that the countries were divided amongst
Noes children: so that hereby it might appear that Eusebius of Cesarea was
moved to say, that the knowledge of hunting Eusebius. li. 1. de pre. e^.
and fisshinge began first among the Phenicians, being men of that country.
Xenophon whom they call the muse of Athens, a continual follower of Socrates
doctrine, in a notable book which he wrote of huntinge, holds opinion, that
it is worthy to be esteemed of all young men, and does among other reasons
praise it for this: that hereby they become both active in the feats of
war, and fitter for all other attempts, and also learn both to say well,
and do weil. The inuencion whereof he ascribes unto D^ana and Apollo, and
affirms that the noblest men that ever were, and greatest Iusticiers did
exercise them selves therein, as Chiron, brother to Jupiter him self, but
Such used hu^tyng as were even counted Gods for worthy acted.
not of the whole blood, because that Saturn begat him of Naiades the
Nymphe: and his folowers, Cephalus, Aesculapius, Nestor, Theseus, Hippolitus,
Palamedes, Ulysses, Diomedes, Castor, Pollux, Machaon, Podalyrius, Antilochus,
Aeneas, Achilles, which all were men of famous memory, as well for prowes in
war, as other excellent qualities. To omit an infinite number of like
sort: as for example, Marimilian duke of Austriche and emperor of worthy
memory, delited much therein. And our noble Prince Phillip the Lantgraue of
Hessia, does not yield to any other in that poincte. Furthermore this exercise
of huntinge does not only delight (albeit some The commodities of hu^ting.
think that to be the chief poinct that is sought there in,) but also it is
the cause of many commodities. For it much procures the good health of our
bodies, and by that wholesome exercise men's senses be made the more fressher,
and they less fall in age or feablenesse. For the sight is thereby made the
clearer, the hearing easier: The sentinge also does declare great cunning
herein, that by the donge the hunters sometime may perceive where the Beast
is, sometime the pursuit, and so then hallowe in the hounds the better to the
chase. Besides this, hunting is expediente for such as purpose to be
warriors. For it so enureth them that they will not fainte under Harneys, be
the journey never so long and tedious, when as they are able to endure the
continual toilynge which they abide in folowinge the game. They can the
better lie By much e(...)^i^e ^^ hunting a man may learn to be (...) expert
(...)
upon the ground, they be the readier at the general or capitaines
commandment, in encountering their enemies, they do that which is bid them
manfully, and if they be compelled to recoile, and to turn their backs upon
their enemies, they can with a number of their fellow soldiers hide them
selves in woods, brakes, and bie places, which they learned by means of
huntinge: and liynge there in wait for their ennemies that pursue them and
know not the country, do stoutely set upon them, and they ofttimes put them
to the worse, and win the field. Which commodity the old fathers
perceiving, caused young men to accustom them selves thereunto. And although
there were great penury and dearthe of corn in the country, yet they
thought it good to spare the fruits of the earth till they were full ripe, but
for all that they did not forbid hunters to refresh them selves therewith, as
men that neither hindered their work, nor yet laid in wait for any thing
that the earth brought forth of her own nature. And (to be brief) hunting,
as it were, opens the entry to valeantnesse, strength of body, enduraunce
of travail, temperaunce, modesty, continence, and all princely virtues. This
kind of exercise was at the first commen, and almost permitted to every man.
For wild beasts by the law of nature Wild beasts by the law of Nature be
(...) that first ^att^ them
be his that can first lay hands on them. So that it was lawful for every
man to hunte them, as a thing which served for the greatest part of their
vittaile and common meat. Hereupon Xenophon allowinge Lycurgus his ordinance,
would that both horses and dogs should be common, which usage in certain
commonweals is as yet of ancient time kept, where wild beasts great or
small may be taken by the inhabitauntes of the country: but the Gentlemen
do Some gentle(...)nne usurp the liberty of huntyng.
usurp that poinct now adays as a prerogative, each one in the precinct of
his lordeshippe, and do not suffer the people commonly to frequent the same.
But they be so precise therein, that sometime it is counted less offense to
hurt a husbandman of the country, then any of the gentlemennes game, the
only cause why, is, for that the noble men have a delight therein.
Nevertheless, this pastime of huntyng keeps still her dignitye, as not only
Princes and noble men do know, but also such as may lawfully use this
game, and such as be under them, and officers of the game.

This art do not I entende at this time to teach, considering it is so diverse
and so witty, as there be diverse kinds of wild beasts, which men do use
to Diverse ways (...) to (...) diverse kinds of beasts.
hunt: as there is one way used to hunt the Bear, an other the Bucke, an
other the Boar, an other the Eliphaunt, an other the Lion, an other the
Leopard, an other the Woulfe, an other the Panther, an other the roe, an other
the Do, an other the hare: and other kinds of beasts, which as they be
diuers^ie caught, so they Snares and ^ay^s.
must have diverse kinds of entrapmentes accordingly applied to each of them.
But my meaning tends to this end, that hunting may be honest, for the
common profit, and sought for to that end, wherefore it was first invented:
that Princes and noble men, may thereby be taught and strengthened, that they
may learn how to defend their own, how to repel their enemies, to advance
justice, in all things to set virtue before their eyis, and to agree upon the
worship and ornament of the common weal.

And how much the more commendable the use of huntyng is, so much y^ more
detestable is the abu^e thereof, specially in a noble man: whom to go out of
kind, and straie from that which does most bes^ame him, is The abuse of
huntyng.
very pernicious even by giuyng the very ensample. Moreover if a king, prince,
or magistrate, do delight daiely to be on huntyng, and raungyng among the
wooddes, in the mean time either neglectyng his office of administracion, or
leaving his people to be fle^sed by other, that is a detestable act, and soche
as will hardely be forgiven: for although in deed this game be both
profitable and healthful, yet so great an offense, as the neglectyng of the
people, ought not for it to be committed. Therefore soche noble men, as
delight in this goodly kind of exercise, so much that they seek only
pleasure and pastime therein, must take this for a lesson, least forgettyng
their commodities, withal they neglecte that, which can not be neglige^tly
ouerseen, without danger of the soul. Every man upon any mocion to pleasure,
what soever it be, is fully bente and ready that way, but it is a thing of
great labor and trauaill for a man to leave that, which he has ones
enured himself unto, and to reclaim virtue, if she once have taken her flight.

The learned men of our time do ioigne fishynge and foulyng unto huntyng, and
appoincte them as a Fisshinge and Foulyng.
part thereof. Which thing although it does not seem in name altogether
correspondent, yet if ye have regard to the very substance of them, there
is no great straungenes therein, forsomoche as, as well the birds of the air,
as the fishes of the sea, be subiccte to manne, which by cunnyng must be
caught. Which who so exercises for the profit of men, does not altoge*
together follow an evil thing, but the more commodious, because it belongs
to the nourishyng of the people.

The argument of the. viii. Chapter.
Concerning the Scaffoldes and Pageauntes of diverse games and plays, and how
far they be to be allowed, and set forth in a city.

FOrsomoche as mine enterprise is to declare the form of a common weal I must
needs touch those things, the ensamples whereof may turn, either to the
commodity, or corrupcion and perishment of the same: as chiefly be Plays, set
forth either upon stages, or in open M^rket places, or else where, for men
to behold. Which, as they do sometime profit, so likewise they turn to
great harm, if they be not used in soche sort, as is both civil and semely
Played should show no ensample of filthiness and dishonestie
in a city, which we do abuse, when any thing is set forth openly, that
is vncleanlie, unchaste, shameful, cruel, wicked, and not standing with
honesty. For seeing we be naturally inclined to evil, and sone corrupt with
naughty ensamples and talk, it is marvelous to consider, how that gesturing,
which Tullie elegantlie terms, the eloquence of the body, is able to move
any manne, and to prepare him to that which is evil, considering that soche
things be both disclosed to the iye and ear, as might a great deal more
godlilye be kept close, and to the greater benefit of the audience. Whereby a
double offense is committed. First, by those dissolute plaiers, which without
any respect of innocence, without any regard of honesty, be nothing
ashamed to exhibit the filthiest matters that they can devise: Secondly by the
hearers, which vouchsafe to hear and behold soche things, as only minister
occasion of volupteousnesse, to the great loss both of themselves, and time.
To whom that may well be applied, that Diogenes said to a young manne, that
made haste to come to a banquet: Tarry (quam he) for thou shall return worse:
for bankettes and feasts, be full of riotte and drunkenness. And these
scaffolde plays and pageantes, were in times past diuersely set forth, upon
sondrie consideracions, as they took their beginning. For sometime they were
exhibited in the honor of some GOD: As those that a Pisa, and Elis, two
citees of Greece, were every Olympia.
fifth year solemnized, with games of exercise in the honor of Jupiter,
worshipped on the hill Olimpus, first devised by Hercules. Plutarke also
writes, that Theseus ordeigned in like manner in the straightes of Isthmia.
Corinthe, games, solemnly to be kept every fifthe year, in the honor of
Neptune. Sometime in remembrance of some notable art, which had been dooen.
As Apollo, after that he had vainquished the foul serpent Pithii ludi.
Pytho, did not only take upon him the name of Pythius, but also ordeigned the
Pythiane games, for the foot, hand, and wheel, to the intent the memorial
of his doings, might never decaie: whereof Ouide writes on this wise:

And lest in time that all deuoures, Ovid. li. 1. metamorpli

the fame thereof might flake,
He then appoincted sacred plays,
and pastimes there to make.
Which in remembrance of his work,
then (Pythya)named were,
Agreyng to the Serpents name,
that he had vanquished there.
By force of hand, or svviftest foot,
or wheel: this was the game,
Who vvoon, a garlande had of bovves,
Reward of vvorthie fame.
The Grecians also, as Strabo writes, solemnly Nemaei ludi
kept the Nemeane games, in the honor of Hercules, which slew a wild Lion in
a chase of that name. There were also games exhibited, in the remembrance of
those that be dead, called Funeral games, first exercised Ludi funebres.
by Acastus in Iotchus, and afterward by Theseus, in the straighter of
Corinthe, according to Plinies Li. 8.
writing. S^che as Caius Curio is reported to have set forth at the buriyng of
his father, a solemn spectacle of fensoplaiers, upon two stages of wood,
erected for that purpose. The rest of these spectacles, are to be seen in
Iultus Pollux. Sometimes also games were devised for exercisyng the body, that
thereby men might be the stronger, and more fit for the wars: soche did
Pyrrhus son of Achilles, the king of the Epirotes first practice, wherein
young men daunced, al in complete harneis, to the end they might be the
nimbler, which upon this cause, they call the Pyrricall dance, although
Strabo and Dyonisius of Halycarnasse, do father it upon the Candianes.

At this day also there be sondrie games ordained, for the exercise of the
body, and preseruacion of health (of no soch dangerous labor as were the
wrastlers, Modetate exercises.
Champions, or sweard plaiers, which contended for life and death) as be the
quoites, tenesse, tops, wheels, shootyng, Iueg^ de Cano, boulyng, and a
great meany more, all for solace to drive away the time, and to keep us from
sitting and slepyng. Whereof the boule Bowlyng commended.
is commended singularelie unto us by Galene, in a book written thereof for
the same purpose, Whereof Julius Pollux in his nineth book writes thus: this
game is called the strong, youthful, and common game. The play is this:
certain are appoincted to take parts on each side, one against an other
standing a sonder, and then they draw a middle line, which they call Scyros,
at the which they hurl their Boules. etc. The profit of these plays does
appear herein, because that soche as use them, have less pleasure, and more
exercise, yea so moderate, that it keeps the body in health, and chiefly for
that thereby, we avoid excessive and riottous feastynges, and other
allurementes to vicious living.

I will not here recoumpt all the spectacles, which the glorious Greeks
inverted, either in honor of their gods, or for the memorial of their
benefactours, and cause of their preseruacion and safety, which the Romans
The Romans bestowed much cost upon pageauntes and spectacles.
labouryng to excelle, both in famousnesse of name, and finenes of matter, did
bestow so great expenses, so great substance upon Theaters, Amphitheatres,
couertes, Daunsing courts, plottes in the ground, garnishinges, plaiers
apparel, raunges, and Galaries, and finally, the very games them selves,
whose exhibiting was committed to the Aediles charge, that a man would wonder
that those men, whose ancestors were so thriftie, and so peerless for
wit, did so dearly buie pleasure. Whence proceeded the Lupercales
Lupercalia. Saturnalia. Circences ludi.
in the honor of Pan, the Saturnales in the honor of Saturn, the game of
fighting with fistes and running with horses, the Fenseplaiers, and a thousand
more devises, not for pleasure only, but also outrageous cruelty, as wherein
men were constreigned, one to run upon an other, and one to stea an other,
with deadly wounds: yea, forther to encounter with wild Beastlike exercises.
beasts, and so to look for present death. A thing so cruel, so
abominable, and so beastlike, that the ear abhors the hearing: and the iye
detesteth the sight thereof.

But for my purpose at this present, these games, whether they be on stage, or
on the ground, they ought to be among us Christians clean, chasie, civil,
and specially to be set forth by soche as mean both to delight, and profit.
For the most part of men, that be either of authority or learning, do
hold soche persons as infamous, which do either play on stages, or
exhibit other games, for lucre sake. And yet two among the Romans, ^lesopus
and Roscius (men Histriones.
wounderfull cunning on the stage) do evidently declare, what wealth and
substance, those kind of plaiers used to gain. This Roscius although Tullie
judged that he ought not to have died, because of his excellency in his art,
yet it is well known, that he practiced this dishonest trade of gain. And yet
this was a great deal more tolerable in him, being a man of great
eloquence, then that now a days a great number of bungling boorders, should be
maintained therewith, which be so far unlike to the old Roscius, that they be
not worthy to be followed of any.

Soche pastimes therefore must be set forth in a common weal, as do
minister unto us good ensamples, wherein delight and profit be matched
together: much less then ought we to give ear to mockyng plays, or
dishonest games, so mispendyng our time, Plays must be set forth to show some
good example of living.
and learning those things, that corrupt good manners, causyng the audience to
depart worse from the^, then they came to them. Albeit it is a commendable
and lawful thing to be at plays, but at soche times as when we be ^noccupied
with grave and severe affairs, not only for our pleasure and mind sake, but
that having little to do, we may learn that, which shall be our
furtheraunce in virtue. So when you hear how Pa^philus is ra^ished with
Gliceries love, and the old Cremes vexed, because his daughter was disdained,
you must incontine^t think with your self, what a shameful reproach it is to
be tied with Venus ba^des, and to trouble your parents. When you hear How we
may learn virtuous rules in hearing of co^medies and Tragedies.
the vau^tyng Pyrgopolynices, which with one stroke of his sword, slew so
many men, you must straight conceive, how indecent a thing it is, to be
puffed up with a vain pride, in bragging of those things, which will sonet
prove a man a lier, then that he may seem able to perform any part
thereof. The raging Hercules, which violently murdered both his wife and
children, may serve for a lesson, how heinous an offense it is to displease
God, and to move him to indignacion. When you see Phedra, which being moved
with the furious stinge of Stepmothers love, first caused Hippolitus to be
plucked in pieces with his own horses, and afterward sore be wailed the same, and
slew her self over his body: call to remembrance, that a man privy to his
own mischeuous doings, is unquiet, and oftimes seeks reuengement upon
himself. When Clitemnestra for the love of Aegistus, killed her housebande
Agamemnone, after his return from the siege of Troie (as the tragical Poets
do write) you may use it for an argument, that the love of an aduoutresse is
so impatient and mad, that she will not spare, neither her own housebande,
nor friends, to ease her stomach.

Followyng this order, there shall be no Tragedy, no Comedy, nor any other
kind of play, but it may increase the discipline of good manners, if by the
help of reason and zeal of honesty, it be well employed. Which then is
done, when, if thou either hear, or see any thing committed that is evil,
cruel, vilanous, and vnseamely for a good manne, thou learnest thereby to
beware, and understand that it is not only a shame to commit any soche
thing, but also that it shall be revenged with everlasting death.
Contrariwise, if thou do epsy any thing dooen or said well, manfully,
temperatly, soberly, justly, godlilye, and virtuously, thou shall diligently
bear that away, as a presidente for the adourning thine own life, that thou
may labor to do that thy self, which thou likest in an other. After this
sort every honest and well We must learn to good, and leave the evil.
disposed person, well bestows soche time as he has to spare, and by soche
pleasant pastimes, learneth how to lead a virtuous life, by ensewyng the
good, and ^schewyng the evil: not restyng in allurementes of pleasure, but
alwaie tendyng to virtue, and to the ornament of the mind, wherein he
declares himself to excel brute beasts, and to be a man partaker of reason
and civility. Concerning which matter, Tullie puts us in mind by these
words: But it is auailable in all questions of duty, to have alwaie in mind,
how much the nature of man excedeth dumb cattle, and other brute beasts.
For they perceive nothing but pleasure, whereunto their natural instincte
wholly leads them. But the mind of man is nourished by learning, and in
thought either enquireth, or does something, and is allured with the delight of
hearing and seeing.

And if any one be somewhat more then the rest, inclined to virtue, although he
be sometime moved with pleasure, yet for shamefastness he hides and
dissembleth his affeccion.

With which discrecion, who so beholds Tragedies, Comedies, Games of runnyng
or exercise, wrestling, plays of histories, holy or prephane, or any pageaunt,
on stage or on ground, shall not mispende his time. But like as a Be of
diverse flowers, that be An example of the Be.
of their own nature of small use, gathers the swetenes of her honey: so
thence gathers he that which is commodious for the trade of his life,
ioigneth it with his painful travail, and declares that soche histories and
exercises, be the eloquence of the body.

THE Sixte Book, concerning the good ordering of a common weal.
The argument of the first Chapter.
That honesty ought to be the measurer of our profits, whereunto our whole
desire of gettyng worldly wealth, ought to be referred.

Private wealth, as Tullie Li. 2. offi.
teaches be, ought to be gotten by soche means, where in appears no
dishonestie, to be kept by diligence, and moderate expenses, and thereby
likewise to be increased. Which way is one of the certainesse to keep any
city in safety, which Socrates an incomparable Schoolemaister of living
says wisely, was then well preserved, when a man could say: this is mine,
this is not mine. For what greater quietness, or commodity can there be in
any assemble of men, Every manne ought to be content with his own estate.
then when every man being content with his own, can suffer his fellow to use
that, which is his own, without any annoiaunce, when nothing is done, that is
either unhonest, or uncivil, when there is no inordinate desire of wealth:
but each so entendeth the getting, keeping, and enlarging of his own, that he
does no injury to other, but has only respect to equity and justice, and
every man thinks, that he may do so much as the authority of the Law
permits, which is as it were, entrenched with the enclosure of honesty,
whereby we measure all profits, never swaruing from righteousness. So we see
that it is a peculiare property in a rightuous man, not to harm an other,
which alone while he lives in this world, so behaueth himself, that he will
leave a worthy memorial to his posterity, that after his death, he shall no
less be desired, then in his life time, he was reuere^ced.

Howbeit for so much as by reason of the corrupt nature and frowardnes in man,
many stumblyng blocks lie in our way, that we can not in all poinctes work
that which we hold as perfect honest in word and deed, among which these
most anoie us, intemperaunce of mind, desire of wordly riches, private
profit, ^ycco withdraw us from virtues.
contempt of commen wealth, coldenesse of brotherly love, desp^synge of justice
and equitee, lothing of godliness, and such other vices (as there be an
infinite number) which lead us out of the right pathe of virtue, into the
crooked way of wickedness: We must therefore be watchefull, and take good
heed that we yealde nothing to affection, neither while we apply our minds
only to gain, we gather such wealth by the wicked and wrongful getting
whereof, we shall never attain the taste of that blessedness which we ought
only to desire, but run in an uncertain race, as men which only pursewyng
the heapyng up of riches and cherishing of riot, do not direct our endeavors
to thatteining of the reward for our good life, and that not without great
danger of our souls, which we may not then escape when we begin to repent
our selves, but in vain, because that then it is to late to fall to
amendment. For we have the apostles, we have the Prophets, we have our
Savior the master of all life and truth, which do enstruct us, and
dissuade us from filthiness of life unto Godliness and cleanness, to whom we
appeal to late when death does preuente the conueniente time of repentance.

Books therefore, as well of holy scripture, as of profane writers be full of
examples, whereby we be moved to sobriety, frugalitie, temperaunce, the study
of virtue, justice, and equity, to the intent we so should follow our
commodity, that it be not sequestered from (...) had alway^e a respect to the
honest getting of goo^^^
virtue. For all those which have appoincted laws for the government of
cities, have sought such an use of goods, as has not been contrary to
honesty, by the guidynge whereof we must also be led, when soever we
purpose to get any thing. For under the name of goods, they contain all
those things which they would have to be received among men, be they
belonginge to the body, soul, or pleasure. Moreover although the
Philosophers do not agree in those poinctes which appertain unto felicity,
and the consideracion of good things, yet there has been none solewde, as to
place this felicity, otherwise then in that which he thought to be good, so
that they seem to have given just occasion to the common saying: that man's
will, is his blessedness: because no man desires Man counts his will to be
his felicity.
any thing, but he thinks in his own conceit, that it is both good and
honest.

Hereunto we may refer that, which Epicurus Cicero in. ^. de finibus.
a notable Philosopher (by whom, not only Italy and Greece, but also all
Barbary, and the rude countries be moved) ^^eth deny, that is to say: that
there is no honesty, where there is no pleasure. For according unto the
customable saying, that does he alone hold as honest, which is most esteemed
emongst the common people: which is the more pleasant, because it is desired
for pleasure sake: as though that were dishonest, which were not praised of
the common sort. Which opinion is certainly plausible and pleasant, but
neither grounded upon any gravity, neither any thing fit for the atteining of
the civil felicity.

Therefore Aristotle, after that he had received all In. ^. po^^^. ^
the Philosophers, and Lawemakers opinions before his time, as the opinion of
Socrates and Plato, because they would that not only their goods, but also
their women should be common: of Phaleas the Cartheginiane, because that he
would that all the citezens goods were equal: of Hippodamus Milesius, because
he exempted artificers from possessions, arms, honors, and other commodities:
does moreover among sondrie other inconveniences, also reprehende the
Lacedemonsane common weal, for their feasts and banquettes, notwithstanding
they were both frugall, (...).
and solempnised in common: whereunto who so ever came, was commanded to bring
a busshell of meal, eight gallones of wine, five pounds of cheese, five
pounds and an half of Figs, and if any for want of wealth, were not able
so to do, he was not adjudged able to bear any office. He also alleged that
the Candianes did not well, in appoincting their Magistrate, who^ they call (
Cosmos) continualle, and to give judgment after his own likyng: whereof the
one opens the ready way to tyranny, the other to al wickedness. To let
pass other citees, whose customs and ordinances did not seame to him
altogether to be liked: after which discourse, he finally adds, that the end
of the civil safety is to live well, both in private The end of a (...) life.
and in common, which the communicating of profits most of all causes, as
a thing thereupon chiefly arising, because the use of things is, according
unto the authority of Law, and is maintained by honest and lawful means.

And this is very perfectly and profoundly declared in the (...) Laws, which
(all occasions of injustice taken away) do ^^ache us this one poincte: of
what things, and after what sort, we ma^e get the Honest ways to se^e
wealth.
possession, and what we be prohibited to meddle withal. Whereby we learn how
that we must abstain from divine, religious, and holy things: How all living
Instinian li. ^. Institu.
creatures, which be bredde in the sea, air, and g^arth, do naturally
belong unto soche as can take them, and so in use be common. How fresh Rivers,
the Sea coasts, and water Banks, be of common right, and apperteine to the
avail of the Prince, and of the common weal: how stages, Guild haules, Tilt
yardes, and other common places of a city, belong to the whole body, and be
not proper to any one manne. Hereby we learn how to get those things, which
may he both in our own possession, and also in the tenure of every
perticulare person, and sometime by the Law of nature, sometime by the common
Law, and sometime by the Law civil, which had then her beginning, when
citees were first founded, Magistrates chosen, and Laws written. And amongst
other Laws, this is one: that if my corn fortune to be mired with yours, that
it is not now common, no more then if my cattle be straied emongst yours, so
long as The law in certain cases.
the substance of each part remains. But if all the corn be detained by
either of us, it was then agreed for Law, that for the thing, there lies an
action, according unto the quantity of the Corn, and that an indifferent man
shall adiudge, how much corn apperteineth to either party. And therefore who
so wittinglie builds upon an other man's ground, he that is Lord of the
soil, may claim the building: as if my plauntes have taken root in an other
man's ground, they shall belong to the owner of the ground. Contrariwise, if
any manne without suspicion of deceiptfull dealing, has with his pensell
drawn a picture in an other man's Table: the better opinion of Lawiers is,
that the table shall yield to the painting, the owner of the table being paid
for the same. For it seemed a foolish reason (says Caius the Lawier) that a
picture of fine woorkemanship, drawn by Apelles, or Parrhasius, should give
place to a vile boorde. An inst^i^e number of like cases, which differ as much
in form, as in Law, may a man find in the Law, which although they be
common, and at the (...) face seame to have no doubt in them, yet
nevertheless in search, and opening the case in law, you shall incontinente
perceive, how great a business it is, to examine all difficulties by law,
and so to travail in getting and keeping things, that you incur no poincte,
neither of absurdity, nor yet dishonestie, which things we measure all by
justice, and adourne by equity.

Then can not we sequestrate justice from honesty, nor honesty from justice:
but contrary to the common That which is honest, is also ^ust, and contra^^
^^s^. etc.
custom of the people, which straieth for the moo^te part forth of the right
wa^e, I do agree with Tullie appoinctinge nothing honest, that is not just,
nor yet ius^e that is not honest. For only justice causes honesty to be
esteemed in a common weal, without which all things be accoumpted filthy,
wicked and justice is the foundation of the common weal.
unlawful, considering that justice alone is the grou^dworke, and foundation
of the common weal.

Wherefore, sense that assembles of men can not be united, unless they impart
commodities one to an other, (for that bond is knit both by the Law of God
and man) th^se commodities must be examined by justice* as by a touch stone,
for by it they become all ho^es^e. Which unless it be true, they have no
poinct of true civility and profit in them, but deserve a name and a ^ame
only, by the common opinion of the people, so The opinion of the people is
glorious, but yet p^^nicious
far from profit, as black is from white. For how can you call that
profitable unto you, which is extreme pernicious? The serpents poison which
Cleopa^ra the Queen of Egipte laid unto her ^eates, that she might not come
into the Emperor Augustus his hands, was no more profitable unto her: Neither
was Neroes swearde, wherewith he ^^^e him self, to the intent he might escape
the just punishment which he had so long deserved, co^mpted profitable,
because his act was not hones^e. We must therefore ^et some difference between
that, which is ciuillie profitable, and is allowed only of a good man: and
that which we imagine, and falsely s^r^ise to be profitable, a thing as it is
dissonaunt from all honesty, so it is embraced of soche only as be wicked
men, and given to all uncleanness of living. To be short, I ioigne profit and
honesty so nigh together, that although the subtilitie of the law, would
suffer any thing to be doo^n, yet if it were not honest, it should not be
just, seeing that extreme justice is ^niurie, and all that is lawful, is not
honest, as Paul the Lawier affirms.

You understand, how it beho^eth us to get our goods, by authority of law
and the rule of honesty, that we may define that only to be good, which is
profitable in part, and in the whole. Whence that godly imparting and civil
communicating of things, does proceed, which preserves the wealth and
worship ^^^ means to get wealth.
of a common weal. There be two kinds of ways of getting richesse: for
either they be left unto us by our parents and friends, without our trauail,
which the Philosophers reckon as more blessed, because there by we may the
easelier spend our time in quietness: So writes one to Martiale.

Friend Martiale, these are the things, that happy life attain:
The goods and treasure to us left, that are not got with pain:
Or else we provide them by our own industry, labor, and carfulness of
mind. Which Plato wisely proves to be the sweteste and pleasaunteste of al,
for those be our own, and everlasting* witnesses of Things pa^^*fully gotten
^^ most pleasant to the possessor
our own sweat. For as a man reioiseth to remember dangers that he has
escaped: so when he has gotten things to be witnesses of his labor,
watch, and travail, they be to him wounderfull pleasant. For how often do
you see a man, which for his prowess and manhood, showed either in the common
weal to Good service well reco^^^s^^.
his Prince, or in the feactes of arms, is rewarded with a cup of gold, or
other jewel or ornament, in recompense of his good service, which do^th not
declare the same to every man that he me^eth: as though a man by receiuyng soche
rewards, should no less be known for his well doing, then a Lion by his ^awes.

Neither is it a less virtue to keep that, which a man has gotten, then
to travail to get more. For this is also allowed as a poincte of virtue, to
defend our goods, which we have gotten, that if any man will wrongfully go
about to take them from us, we may withstand him, and de^eact^ him thereof,
which ^e could not challenge by any right: For herein is the rule of justice
broken, which is no less favorable to the plaintiff, then to the
defendaunt. Then ought thou not under pretense of honesty or justice, to
d^tein that from an other, which thy conscience witnesses to be his own.
Thou may herein have the help of excepcions, emparla^^es, demurrers, and
other dilatorie means, and so may stay thy adu^rsarie, which so earnestly
calls upon the justice of the Law, and may contrary to the laws, both
of God and man, d^tein that, which does not appertein unto thee: yet ^t the
last, all pretenced colors set apart, thou shalt stand naked, and in hell
shall suffer perpetual tourmentes, for the vi^lating of justice.

Who soever therefore will live w^ll amongst good men, and thoroughly persuades
him self that he must yield an account of his living, he must so bestow his
time in gettinge and kepinge goods, that he examen ^e must mo^^rate all
things a^^^^ justice and honesty
and temper all things after the rule of justice and honesty: having respect
to the which, he admits nothing, he accompteth nothing profitable unto
him self that is not honest, that is to say, not agreeable with right and
equity. Whereunto what so is done contrary, is wicked, uncivil, and against
the very duty of an honest manne. Against which enormitie, many
Philosophers decrees, many statutes and Laws have been made and published, but
through coueteousnes, and the insatiable desire of men, which as well lack
that which they have, as that which they have not, there is seen small
reformacion. But the more the filthiness there of is opened, the deeper root
it takes, and spreads further. Whereby we may certainelye learn that
justice, temperaunce, all virtue, and al zeal of honesty is cold amongst
men, whereof it ensues, that our commonweals for the most part, be rather
assembles of men congregated together to follow their own lusts, then for
any fourm^ of virtue, or uprightness of life, whereby we may hope to attain
the true felicity. For the amendmente whereof, it beho^eth such men to
travail, to whose charge the governance of men, and discipline of a better
life, is committed.

The argument of the second Chapter.
That it is an uncivil thing and contrary to nature for a man to seek his
own avail with the hinderaunce of an other, and continuallye to labor only
to r^ke riches together, howsoever he come by them.

PLATO ofttimes warns us that Good things are worthy to be often ^^^ea^*s^^.
good lessons be hard to be learned, and therefore they ought to be often
repeated. Which thing even happens to me in handelinge this argument, that
nothing is profitable, unless it be both just and honest. And that honesty
ought to be embraced amongst all estates of the common weal, he may
forthewith see, that sets the worthiness thereof before his eyes, and with
good heart, des^ereth that all men's travails may have prosperous success.

I have already a^^e^ a ^orte declared how that the consideracion of honesty
stands upon justice, equitieand conscionable dealing, whereby we measure
also such things as be profitable. The knowledge whereof has no great
commodity, without use and practice, whereby as by a perfect guide and cunning
scholemaister, it obteineth full force and effect. As if Parrhasius should
conceive the form of a notable picture in his mind, and yet not draw the
same in a table, be might well inwardely please him self, but surely he
should not delight other men's eyes, much less then deserve any commendacion
for his work.

This rule of following the true use of profit he best observes, which so
seeks to further him self, that he hinder not an other: which so regards
his private lucre, that he will not seame to have his mind only fixed
therein, but to be wary and thriftie, that this his labor may be profitable
universally, and an help to mainteigne the common worship. This is he alone,
which may gather great riches, and seek gain by order of Law permitted:
as one that night and day, without harm to any man, honestly sets his
hands to work with his wife, children, and family: upon whom the blessing
of God being bestowed, suffers not his brows to sweat in vain: But gives
him increase so abundant* that he does not only marvel at his great wealth
and prosperity, but also cease not to render thanks to GOD, which has God
blesses honest labor
vouchsafed to bless his labor. This is it that we be commanded, to eat
our bread with the sweat of our brows, which the heauenlic father ever
enlarges, and plentifully increases to his glory. So it is faled to those
that keep the commandments of God* and the Lord thy God shall bless thee
in all thy fruictes, Deute. xvi.
and in all the works of thy hands, and thou shall be in gladness. Hereupon
do we call labor holy, but not every kind of labor, but only that
wherein we travail, not with thanks giving that is feigned, but that
issheweth from the pureness of heart, and worshippeth God truly, whereupon
that came to pass, that the Lord looked upon Abell and his offerynges, but
upon Cain and his offerynges he looked not. And while Cain was very angry,
and his countenance abated, for that he despised to lift up his face to
heaven, and chosed rather to look down upon the earth, the Lord said unto
him: why art thou angry, and why is thy countenance abated? if thou dooest
well, shall there not be a promocion: and if thou dooest evil, shall not thy
sin be straight way at the doors?

You understand how it behooves him to be minded that will live well amongst
good men, and will honestly ^ene. (...).
seek gain, that is, that if he cannot openly further an other man, yet he do
not binder him, but procure as much as lies in him, that profit may be
received from one to an other. And in this sense he that harmeth not, seems to
profit, remembryng that saying, which Adrian the Emperor would have to be
written in golden letters, and to be set before every man's iyes: do not
that to an other, which thou would not have dooen to thy self: whereupon,
that both the law of God and man does depend, the only defender of all
truth, witnesses.

And this is also that, which the Civil society requires, wherein profits
be imparted from one to an other, that there be no Lionishe practice, wherein
one alone shall bear away all the gain, and an other bear only the name of
a pertener. Wherefore the Apostle saint Paul, teaches the Corinthians full
well that they must be conuersaunte one with an other, honestly and orderly:
which precepte no man doubts, but it is given to all Christians, and to
soche as do their endeavor to do well. Let all things (says he) be done
emongst you decently, and in good order. And what is it else, that a thing be
done in good order, then according to law, that is, justly and without harm
done unto others?

This matter you shall by this ensample, evidently perceive: It fortuneth so
that corn has been dearer in times paste, then it ought to be this year,
considering the seasonab^e weather, and the fertility of the How the price of
things ought to be rated.
earth: if the husband man sell it good cheap, he does honestly, both
because he has a price worth his labor, and also for that the buier has a
part of the commodity, which the earth so ple^tifully brings forth: and so
either eases other. The shambles likewise follows the price of cattle,
wherein if Veale, Beef, Lamb, Kidde, or Porke, be sold at a reasonable price,
which is assessed after the common value thereof, it is both honest and
profitable. The like order shall be taken for Bakehouses, which if they be
measured after the price of corn, it is a thing to be allowed in a city.

Handicraftes men also, when they sell their works to other no dearer then they
may well afoorth, both for their own sustenaunce, and the exercising of their
occupacion, they do it in order. Which case holds likewise in Merchauntes,
Retailours, and other trafficquers, when they sell their wares at soche a
price, as is reasonable and conueniente, in consideracion of the time,
country, mart, and journey. And so in like case, like judgment: for
universally there must a certain equality be kept. For it is a thing not to
be allowed y^ the seller should praise his own wares, or solemnly swear
that his merchandise stood him in so much money. For this is only fa^re
language, and mere fraud, wherewith the buiers are deluded, craftily caught,
and miserably deceived. I would all things were so done on every side, with
soche faithfulness, sincerity, and consta^cie of mind, that one might deserve
assured credit (...)ed merchauntes.
of an other, without any falshode, guile, or cou^tersaict coloring, vsyng
this temperature, that profits may be imparted from one to an other, and that
men may receive one of an other, the commodity of this civil life.

Contrariwise, soche as do not set this honesty before their iyes, but
mind only lucre, how vilanously, shamefully, unhonestly, and wickedly so ever
they do it (as though the smell of gain were sweet in every thing, according
to the saying of Domicianus) soche I say, do not stick to gather goods by
hook or crook, to break credit, to deceive their neighbor, to set light an
other man's harm, and finally to leave no policy unattempted, how they may
like vile money thirsters, satisfy their greadie desire, consumyng (...).
and as it were, suckyng up other men's thrifte, they them selves in the mean
time, living like gentlemen at their pleasure. Which thing sondrie ways
falls (...).
out, as by puttyng money to usury, a practice of soche subtlety, that
unless you look well about you, it will work wiles with you, and catch you
in a snare: by ouerprizing of wares, by sellyng of cor^e at an higher price, or
buiyng it when it is better cheap, to the end to sell it dearer when the
extremity of the time requires. Of whom Solomon says: he that hides grain,
Prouer. x^
shall be accursed among the people: and blessyng be upon the head of the
sellers. And the Prophet Amos: Amos. viii.
Here ye this that oppress the poor, and cause the nedie of the earth to
fainte, saying: when will the new Monethe be gone, that we may sell
victaile, and the Saboth, that we may have scarcenes of corn, to make the
bushel less, and the sicle greater? We shall set up false weightes, that we
may get the poor under us, with their money, and the neadie also for shoes:
Yea, let us sell the chafe for corn. By which words, the Prophet so
plainly descriueth the deceipte of usurers and money mongers, the common
pestilence that enfecteth all men, as though he had dwelt amongst us even in
this our time. Yea, further these handicarfte occupacions much hinder the
Common wealth, when by courts kept in their Haules, they do declare that
things shall be no cheaper sold (and therefore soche Haules be the less to
be allowed) to the entent^ things may be dear still, and intolerable unto
the commons, yet this devise do not they alwaie use, for to be the more
enriched therewith, but by the dear vtteryng Craftesmen do craftelie maintain
their drinkinge and dicing, by enhau^^r^ge their (...).
of their work, to get that again, which they have vnthriftely spent at
drinking, Dicing, hoore huntyng, riot, and by other inordinate means. Which
things how pernicious, filthy, wicked, and unmeet they are for an honest
man, he does only perceive, which lamenteth that soche good things as be
provided for the sustentacion of man, are by certain vilaines and ribaudes,
converted to his damage and undoing. To whom it may be well applied, which
Bias Prieneus sa^ed unto one, which being himself a wicked man, demanded of
him what godliness was: I will not tell thee (quam Bias) because thou inquire
of a thing, which agrees not with thee. As though that he, which as it were
being choked with couetuousnes, gapeth only after his own gain, with the
endammagyng of others, yea, and emploieth himself wholly thereunto, had nothing
to do with godliness: a man in the more calamity, because neither he, ne yet
his heirs shall enioie his ill gotten goods: but as they came, so shall they
decaie: and spedely co^ueigh the owner thereof, dispoiled of all, to Pluto his
God, and to everlasting punishment. Hereby grows the dearth of all things,
which daiely so en^rocheth upon men, that if there be any worse world then
the iron world, The (...) world.
which Hesiode descriueth, it may well seem to have light upon us, for there
is no honesty, justice, piety, nor faithfulness amongst men: considering
every manne thinks with himself, and as it were openly speaks, that saying
of Horace:

O people seek for money first, and then to virtue fall:
This lesson teach both high and low, both young, and old, and all.
And of thy goods no man does ask, from whence or how they come:
It forces not which way thou have: but needs thou must have some.
Which intemperauncie and disorder, so grows amongst men, that they fear
not in many places, to rob and reaue one from an other, under the pretense of
law: and be so affected toward forreners, that if they could pluck even
the very skin of their backs, they would conceive a great pleasure therein,
and count it a politic practice. Which thing the higher powers, The
negligence of magistrate^ hurts the commons.
and soche as be Magistrates do not prohibit, but neglige^tly lettyng things
pass vnredressed, seek a time to stuff their own bags. And it is a wu^der
to se, what occasions they find to dispoile the^ also again, so that the
wisemannes saying, may be well aplied to them: we be consumed in our own
malice: and the common saying also: consume that you may be consumed. Which
enormitie the governors and pastors the^ Sap^en. v.
selves would reform (for it can not be, that soche gripyng griefs should be
hid from them) were it not that they them selves be in the same prodicamente,
and that which they ought to amend and reform in other, would redounde upon
them selves, as the chief woorkers thereof. But we, as Domitians Dawe, which
in the Capitole used to say, all shall be well (which voice one interpreted
thus:

(The Davve that sat on Tarp^y top* but late this did she tell,
She could not say, that yet it is, She said: IT SHALL BE WELL)
hope for better hap, that is, that good and godly governors, will see soche
order taken in the common weal, that every manne seek for gain, with regard
of his neighbor, not hinderyng his commodity, but somedeale furtheryng the
same.

But the Merchaunt must sell his merchaundise to the handicraftes man, at soche
a price as he may utter his work likewise good cheap. And thus every man
doing his duty, one may be willing to succor an other, and turn these
commodities to anaile not privately alone, but likewise in common: that thereby
the honor of the common weal may be supported and maintained: which if in
our mutual life, we do not observe, it shall be uncivil and as it were a
sink of much mischief, whence it will be hard to depart, and to make our
passage toward that common weal, whereof this must be but a rese^blaunce and
preparacion.

The argument of the third Chapter.
That riches if they be well gotten, be not to be contemned, and how that if a
man have excessive wealth he is subject to many dangers.

HE that could pluck the pleasure of coueteousnesse out of men's minds,
might easelie appoinct a mean in gatherynge substance, and would say that he
were wealthy, not that He i^ rich that desiereth little.
has much in possession, but he that desiereth little. For nature (even by the
confession of Epicurus) is content with a mean estate. After whose rule who
so lives, shall not be lightlye poor. Contrariwise, if we fall to
coueteousnesse, we shall never be rich. For the coueteous man is insatiable,
not content when he has that he desiereth, as one that as well does lack
that he has, as that he has not. But because* we can not be maintained
without the help of riches, although who so has them, is never without care
and anguishe: some means must be found how to come honestly by them, and
to employe them to the commodity of many. That we as it were failynge in a
sure haven, may safely escape the storm which they manac^ and threaten, and
so counterplace profit against the present danger. For it is a greater
Virtue when you have gotten a thing, well to use it, then to seek for a new. I
have also by principles of nature declared how that nothing is profitable,
onelesse it be honest, and without harm or injury done to other^, which
only is civil, and becomes a good manne, and also how that gain may be
gotten abundantly, and yet not without commendacion. Here I do not meddle
with It behooves kings to be wealthye.
the treasure of Kings, princes, and other potentates, which although they
abound in wealth, yet all is little inoughe, much less can it be said that
they have to much. Moreover, he that shall weigh the administracion of so
many seigniories, the accomplishmente of so many offices of charge, the great
number of retinue, the large expenses in the court, and besides this, the
extraordiuarye waste, shall perceive that it is not absurdlie said, that a
great bird has need of a wide neast: and that under great wealth ofttimes
^urketh scarcity, in so much that the whole commodity of the country may
skant be sufficient.

The scripture commends Solomon, not only for 3. re. 3. and. 10
wit, but also for wealth. For the Lord says thus: Solomon (...) ^oth^
(...) an^ wea(...).
Besides this, I have given thee riches and honor which thou have not
required, so that there was never king yet in all the times paste like unto
thee. Also. Thus Solomon was magnified above all Princes of the earth for
wealth and wisdom. And that king David the Psalmist his father had great
abundance of riches* this may be an argument, because a great treasure was
hid in his Sepulcher in privy chestes, out David's wealth.
of one of the which a thousand and three hundred year after, Hircanus then
Bishop (as Josephus writes) took three thousand Talentes of gold to
deliver the city from the siege of Antiochus: which proves that it does
stand with the estate of kings to have treasure, as without which, they can
neither be kings, neither govern and defend their subjects. Yet they must
be well advised, that they do not upon light consideracions either take pore
men's goods gotten by their travail, or riottously consume the same, but
rather show them selves upright in all this wealth, and remember that so much
they may do, as the law permits.

I do here speak of those also that sit not in the throne of majesty, and
yet be commended for their great riches and substance. So the scripture
witnesses of Abraham, that he was very rich in possession of gold and Gene.
xiii.
silver. And Loath also which was in Abraham's time, Abraham was very rich.
had herdes of sheep, droues of cattle, and tabernacles, neither could the
land receive them that they might dwell together. And Jacob auaunceth the
wealth of Laban his father in law* which he had gotten by his diligence. A
little had thou, said he, before I came unto thee, and now thou art
become wealthy, and the Lord has ^lessed thee sense my coming unto thee.
Daniell also the prophet commends Ioachim Daniell. Susann^.
Susannaes husband for his possessions and wealth, by these words: Ioachim
was very substanciall, and had an Orcheyarde near unto his house, and unto
Ioachim Susans husband was ^ man of great possessions.
him resorted the Jews, because he was more honorable then the rest. I were
able to recounte ^ number of examples to prove that riches be no evil
things, but the blessing of God, I mean such as be by honest means gotten,
and this can not be unprofitable.

Thus you see that riches be not disalowed* but when they be abused. But he
which intends to live ^onestly amongst honest men, gathers nothing into
his hands that may turn to the injury and disaduauntage How we ough^ ^othe
^^ g^^ and ^^^^oy riches.
of an other, but sets the necessity of his nei^^bour before his ^ies, in
so much, that albeit he could make a great hand by forestallynge or buiynge
up things in gross, yet if he see his neighbor needful thereof, he
forbeareth, and gives place to the neadie, or if he should bu^e it, he would
selle it again for the same price, or after the same rate that he bought it.
Therefore his work, his wares, his wealth, he rekeneth so to be his own,
that he will not withdraw any deal thereof from his ^edie brother: but will
impart ^he same to other in necessity, and likewise to receive mutually
again. Therefore uses he to watch, to take pains, to apply his work, to
pray, and to glorify God (as Job did, saying: The Lord gave, the Lord took
away, the Lords name be blessed) wh^ because of the lowliness of his mind,
blesses his labor, and commands it to take increase, that the more he
gives to the poor, the more he gains to himself, and for a small pittance
of bread and ^^she, he gathers whole baske^tes full. For these in deed be
the true riches, whereunto we do not we^ our heart, which be ready for our
neighbor at his neade, and so accounted upon of us, as though we had them no^*
whereby we seek not our own glo^ie, nor an inordinate abuse, but only apply
them to that use, wherefore they were b^stowed upon us, that is to enriche
agreate number, that having nothing, we may seame to have all, according to
the saying of saint Paule^ ii. Cor. vi.
Behold, we live as poor men, but enrichyng many, having nothing, and yet
possessyng all.

Wisely does he therefore, that coumpteth soche ^ one rich or poor, not
that has much or little: but that can be content with sufficient. For hereby
it may so fall out that he which has great wealth, yea, more then ever ha^
Cresus, may be poorer then Co^r^s, and a very beggar: and he that neither
has penie nor peniworth, the welthiest of al. So at Lacedemon, neither the
use, nor the brag, nor the fru^^te, nor the face of riches, was any deal
esteemed: but in that city The God of ^ichesse.
^^^ne of all other, was the God of riches kept, which was both blind,
liyng, like a ^eade picture, and vnremouable. There the ^oore and the rich
were placed both in one ro^me: as wherein was considered not the abundance
of goods, but the desire of goodness, and a good heart: as all the Stoikes
accoumpted ^oche men rich, which although they have no yearthly wealth, yet
can ^nio^^ the benefit, both of heaven and earth. So Dioge^es Cinicus, was
wont to vau^t how far he himself surmounted the king of Persia, both in life
and goods. For the king would never have enough, but yet he desired not the
kings pleasures, wherewith he could never be satisfied: but the king could by
no mean compass to get Diogenes his pleasures. These were the Philosophers
opinions, which were not altogether absurd, for y^ they thought that wealth did
not stand in worldly possessions, but only in the qualities of the mind,
meaning thereby rather so to glorify them s^lues, then to give glory to God,
and to help the nedie: and therefore their glory was ^ourned into igno^^^ie.

Moreover all the Philosophers, of what sect soever Tuscul. quae. Libr. v.
they were, as T^llie declares, in this poincte agreed, unless it were soche*
as a naughty nature aliened from wisdom and understanding. Socrates seeing
in a Philosoph^^s ^^^^ned riches ^^^ vanities.
solemn triumph a very great sum of gold and silver carried, good Lord,
quam he, how many things be there that I lack not? Diogenes spoke more freely
unto Alexander, when he bade him tell him, what he lacked? Nothing (quam he)
but that you would stand a little way out of the Sun* for he shadowed him
as he sat a sunnyng of him. Anachar^is the S^ithian did not only re^use
Hannoes presents sent unto him, but wrote also this, in a vaunt of his
frugalitie* a Scithian rugge is my garment, the hardness of my feet, my
shoes, the earth my couche, hunger my deinties: I eat milk, chese, and
flesh: Therefore if you come to me, you shall find me quiet. But as for
these your presents, you may either bestow them upon your citizeins, or
give them to your Gods. Therefore Aristotle i. Pol^^.
the Prince of all the Philosophers (except Plato) said, that Philosophers might
have been rich, but would not, ^e^^e being thereby enforced to meddle in
worldly affairs, they should have lost the benefit of their quietness and
conte^placion. Whereupon I may conclude, that those riches alone be moderate,
both by lawful and natural possession, which we get hone^^lie, which if
Plato do so mean in his common weal, he means well: and those again
immoderate Immoderate riches be vnho^^st^.
which we cleave unto in heart, be they never so little. By which reason, a
beggar in his poor and ragged coat, in that he seeks to be praised among
men for his poverty, and to be accoumpted the happier, may b^e prouder then
he that is cladde in purple, and accompteth his riches, as though he had none,
despising no man, impartyng to the neadie, and thankyng God for all.

Now if these riches be converted from their true use, how pernicio^s they ^e,
and subject to many dangers, In^on^^^i^nces that gro^^ by riches.
many reasons there be to prove. First of all, they lead a covetous manne as a
bugle or an Ox is led with a cord, draw^n through his nosethrilles:
whereupon Themistocles sa^ed, that he had rather have a man without money, then
money without a man. And Horace eliga^tly writes thus, to one Fuscus
Ari^^ius:

Great store of coigne does rule each man, or else to him obeie,
More meet it follow man's b^h^st, then that it lead^ the ^^ai^*
Secondly, they open the window to pleasures and ri^tte, and make the nea^^e
to be despis^d, to whom those goods do properly app^^teine. Hitherto
b^lo^geth the Parable of the rich man, which was appa^elled Lucae. xv^*
in purple and silk, and da^^^e fed with delici^^s ^^ates, not v^^chsaiyng
the poor La^arus, which lay at his gate, to eat the crommes which fell
from his Table: But finally, he being buried in hell himself, saw Lazarus in
the midst of his torments, received into Abraha^s bosom. Besides these
there are s^nd^ie occasions, to lead a rich man to unrighteous, and to put
him in danger: as chiefly (...) ^e hurt ^^^ many wais
be, bodily pleasures, the love of wealth, the prouocacions of the devil, the
deliciousness of the world, impiety, contempt of honesty, hate of virtue,
and the neglectyng of justice, which when they have ones rooted them selves in
the mind of a man, they breed a great misery, and a thing that is most
unworthy an honest manne: that the deeper he is drouned in desire,
greadinesse, and soche filthiness: the harder he shall fall to amendment,
and emploie his goods to their true use. Which thing that you may not
think, that it is vain, and of light credit, our master Christ, Math* xix.
Marc. x.
the only assurer of life and health, witnesses the same, to truly to a
great number: saying, verelie I say unto you, it is hard for a rich man, to
enter into the kingdom of heaven. And again, I say unto you, it is more easy
for a Camel, to go through the iye of a nedle, then for a rich manne to enter
into the kingdom of heaven. For although he hear the word of life, yet it
is so choked with worldly cares, riches, and pleasures, that it can bring
forth no fruicte.

You understand how near a way riches can bring a man to the Devil,
which lest he vnwarelye come upon us, let him that has ears to hear, hear,
and learn to say with David: Do you not trust in Psalm. lxi.
iniquity, and do not desire rauin. If you have abou^daunce of Riches, let
them not enter into your heart. And with Solomon: Better is a pore manne which
walks in his simplicity, then a rich man in his wicked ways. Thus we ought
not to call such things as do not bless us, but traile us into Hell,
goods, neither such, riches, which make us no* richer, but to our great
misery, work that in us, which the Philosophers and other Gentile writers
do lament in the estate of man: and chiefly Pliny the second in his Lib.
7. ca. 4. ^t. li. 33. ca. ^*
natural history. How many (says he) have riches destroyed, and brought
into extreme calamity? What say you, that good things be not able to match
evils, although they be like in number? What madness is it (with a mischief)
to desire that, which either has chanced to very Slaves, or has found no
end in Princes? What did it avail Marcus Crassus, which did account no man
rich, unless he were able with his yearly revenues to maintain an army?
What did it profit Pithius the Bithiniane, which gave to king Darius a plane
tree of gold, and a vine very famous, and much spoken of, and banqueted
^erres whole army, which amounted to the number of seven hundred fourscore and
eight thousand men? were not they consumed like straw, and cast into
perpetual torments? For our ensample truly, that we should seek a moderate use
of things, and such as is honest and Godly, profitable in private and
common, and auailable toward true felicity.

The argument of the. iiij. Chapter.
That the honest emploiyng of our goods consists in communicatyng of
profits, whether we live by lands, handicraftes, or daiely wages. secondly*
that we ought one to aid and releue an other.

FOR as much as a common weal is an imperfect and deformed thing, wherein
echeman traueileth to profit him self only, not respectynge his neighbor:
to the intent a civil society may be known when it is perfect: We must
understand, that the chief thing that is required therein, is the empartinge
of commodities between man and man, which I appoincte then to come to pass,
when things are honestly used. Which argument the Philosophers did scarce
superficiallye touch, appliynge this place (that we be born not for our
selves, but that our friends and country do challenge part of our being)
rather unto their quiet life in learning and study, then unto the profitynge
of one another, thinkinge this to be the only felicity, to wounder at the
work of nature, to live a contemplative life, wherein the life being
disburdened of all thought and care, might behold the beauty of things, and
live in a certain kind of contented quietness. It may in deed come so
Apathia.
to pass, that by means of this quietness they may the more commodiouslye
apply their study, but I do not see how it is possible to attain to that
their tranquillity, while they be thus emprisonned with flesh and blood,
where only affections rule, only vanity takes place, as a thing passing
the nature of man. Wherefore lurk they may, but profit they can not, unless
it be by teaching other, and making them fit to scrue in the common weal,
by the precepts of Philosophy, and discipline of manners, so far as nature
healpeth them: herein resembling the whetstone which being it self blunte,
yet sharpeneth a knife. And how many think you are there at this day,
which professynge a Munkishe and solitary life, do Daun^^rs of a
contemplative life.
no worthy act therein, neither any thing that is profitable to other, but
only live to them selves, borne to spend vittailes, whose bealy is their
God: and yet I know not how, but they brag of a contemplative life, as
though any regard were to be had to soche a contemplative life, wherein they
take more care to frank and fatten themselves, and to nourishe affections,
then to be rapt into the company of Aungelles, and to learn that, which may
redounde to the edifiyng of man, and ornament of the church. Whose vanity, I
hold as leude as the Philosophers, considering they them selves confess,
that man is borne for man's behoof, that one may profit an other, as Tullie
says. Whereby I can not see how that this saying can be true: he that has
lurked well, has lived well, unless we do mean, that for the most part it
is a very profitable thing, not to be conuersaunt in Princes courts, nor to
delight in vain nobility. Otherwise to seek a solitary life, to fly from
the society of man, to bestow no labor upon the common weal, not to impart
commodities, not to inform other, and so to give an accoumpt of his idle time,
is the property of a swine, which alwaie walloweth in the ^ir^, not of a man,
which ought to let no day pass, without dooyng some good thing. Much more
then ought he not to lease his time, which will not be recovered, but rather
to restore with overplus, or not altogether to lose that weight, which God the
great steward, has measured unto him. Soche use of things therefore, must
be in a common weal, soche communicating of profits, that one may help an
other, one bear an others burden, and every man follow that kind of life,
wherein honestly he may profit himself, and endammage no man: for we allow
nothing in a common weal, unless it be both honest and profitable.
Wherefore the gain that grows by usury, the excessive enhaunsing of prices
in merchaundise, the pinchyng practices of artificers, although they seame
profitable to soche ravenous rakehelles as gape for soche ^nsa^iable (...).
gain, yet because they be unlawfully gotten, they be neither honest nor
profitable. For how can that be profitable, which makes the aucthour naught
and We must with all our heart wish our ^^ighbours wealth.
dishonest? For those only as citezeins and partakers of man's society, be
received for honest, which reverence justice, set conscionable dealyng before
their iyes, favor honesty, and which so get and keep their own, that they
do not only not harm their neighbor, but tender his commodity, and with
all their heart wish his furtheraunce. Such a one is he as puts not out his
money to usury, but helps the neadie: which buieth not his wares to the
hinderance of his neighbor, to sell them dearer then reason requires, which
does not hide corn and grain the blessinge of the earth, nether forstaulleth
the market, to the greafe of a great number, that it may be at an higher
price: which does not so value his own work, that it shall profit him self
only, and harm others: which uses the propriety of things with such
modesty, that he will not withdraw the same from the ^^adie, but in
extremeties be content they shall be common, which in all his affairs,
practices, and trades of living, more esteameth the common, then the pryuate
profit. Which is one part of honesty, originallie risinge of justice, which
we ought not only to esteem above our commodity, but also above our life. So
we love our neighbor as our selves, so we use other, as we would be used our
selves, and restore things committed unto us with honest increase. But now
these Fow^^ m^^er of wa^^^ to maintain our ^^yng.
riches wherewith we be supported, be not all of one sort. For some live
upon their lands and possessions, some be maintained by arts and crafts,
some by trafficque, and some by daily labor. The gain that rises of lands
is the most honest of all. For thearth tilled with hand does yield the same:
and it consists in earable ground, meadows, pastures, orchardes, and other
soil, whereof the old fathers gathered all their substance. And therefore they
were called Locupletes in latin, as who say, Pleniloci and agri, that is,
Locupletes.
wealthy because they had plenty of place and land. And therefore ill tillage
of the ground was thought among the Romans a fault under the Censours
correction: as Pliny writes: and as Cato says, it was Plini. lib. 18. Capit
iii.
thought the highest name of praise to be called a good husbandman. And yet it
was thought expedient that riches should be moderate and not to excessive:
whereupon Manius Curious said in an assemble of people, that he was a corrupt
citezin which could not content himself with seven furlonges of land:
thinking it a matter meet for the worthiness of the common weal, if every man
so seek his own advantage, that other be not enforced thereby to stand in
necessity, and to want ground to work upon, because other have to much in
their own hands and occupation. Secondlye we mentayne our selves by
practisinge of arts and faculties, which we use as our supporters and stays
of our old age, so much thonester, the nearer they draw to the rule of good
and conscyonable dealing, and be exercised not for lucre only, but that our
neighbor thereby may be relieved, and the common estate furthered. After these
come trafficques of Merchauntes, Mercers, Vintners, and such other which nature
garnished with reason, devised for the necessity of man, and so helped this
fellowlie life. Last of all be hirelinges the base sort of people, which find
them selves by their daily travail, no less profitable then necessary, as
without whom we can nether till land, plant vines, nor dress gardeyns. Now
if you will compare every kind of trade together, and match labor with
labor, and living with living, you shall understand that the ground cannot be
tilled with out the smithes help. For the housbande man must have his How one
man does help another.
plough, his rake, his forke, his coultre, and other instruments concerning
tillage. The smithe also neadeth the housband man's help: for without corn and
grain he can nether maynteyne himself, nor apply his occupacion: by him
both the shambles be furnished, and household vittayles provided. And there be
many things wherein we have need of the labourer, who for his hire helps
from day to day, as well the ploughman as thartificer, and so gets himself
a living. But also the trafficque of Merchauntes is no less profitable then
these, which bring out of forreyn countries soche necessary things as cannot
be had at home whereby they them selves also gain largely.

Of an infinite number of trades whereby we may mentayne our liuinges, I have
rehearsed a few, that by the conference with these, a man may learn the
profit of others: and so you shall perceive that every city must consiste
of sundry things and sundry kinds of men: wherein none must be idle, but
every man must apply him self in his vocation, and seek his own, and that
in order decentlye and honestlye: whereby men's offices and labors must be so
employed, that both our neighbors may be eased, and none other ouercharged,

The argument of the fifte Chapter.
That for the provision and enrichinge of a city there ought respect to be bad
to three things: the inhabitauntes, the situation, and the borderers.

MI purpose is not to draw forth the plotte of a City, to frame houses, to
erect walls, to fence it with Bulworkes, and to show an art how to build
it from the beginning, but that I leave to the workemaisters, whose diligence
extends to se that the fields about it be wholesome, large, fair, fertile,
fruitful, full of springes: that it be so frontiered, that the enemy may not
easily inunde and over throw it* that it may have as much commodity, with
as little discommoditie as may be. But this is my meaning: when a City is
once builded, then to take some order whereby the inhabitauntes may by honest
means be nourished, one help another, to defend and protect the face of the
common weak, which is the true form A perfect plotte ^^ a city.
of a city, standinge not upon Stones and timber, but established with laws
made in such sort, that they do not only respect the commodity of the
people, but also harm and endamage none other.

But as for the situacion and place, it forces much that the city be so set,
that of every thing necessary it may serve it self, without any bringynge
in of foraine wares: and that it be not so barren and grauellie, that it can
not maintain the inhabitauntes, but neadeth the provision and furniture of
other. For a fruitful ground by the benefit of nature, easily yeldeth fruit
to the sustenau^ce of the people, neither needs it many precepts to receive
commodity thereof, so that it be diligently and seasonablie tilled, which
thing the Romans highly esteemed, in so much that the Censours punished the^
that did not well tille their ground, a thing of such honest reputacion, that
sundry noble men were thereof surnamed. As Pisones were so called, because
they did employe them selves to the sowinge of Pease. Cicerones, of a pulse
called Cicer. Fabii, a fabis, that is, Beans. And Stolones were Libr. i. de re
rust. capt. 11.
so called (with which name Licinius was first surnamed in Varro) because
there could no stumpes of trees be found in his ground, for that he dug
up the roots about the Trees, which did spring forth of the ground,
which in Latin are called Stolones. Len^uli also were so named, because of the
desire they had to the pulse called Lens, that is lintelles. And Pilumni,
derived their names of this, because they gave pestilles to the Backehouses,
wherewith Grain is braied in mortares. Besides this, they would that corn
gotten by the ploughe, should be saved from spoilynge. For if any of full age
had either put his cattle to grase on it in the night time, or cut it down,
it was judged felony by the law of the twelve Tables, and that if he Ceres
the goddess of corn
had been convicted thereof, he was hanged up before Ceres, against whom
thessence was committed, and he was as sharply punished, as if he had been
cast for murder. If he had been under age, he should have Penalties for
spoilyng of corn.
been whipped, or should have recompensed the damage single or double,
according to the arbitrament of the head officer. The words of the law be
these: If one of full age do by stealth eat up or cut down corn gotten by
the plough, by night, let him be hanged up before Ceres: if he be under age,
let him be beaten, or recompense the fault single, or else double it. Neither
does the civil law spare such as spoil corn even by negligence,
although they mean no harm, which is as much in effect as the offense it
self.

And therefore Paul the Ciuiliane says: If any man set fire in his own
stubble or brambles, to the intent to burn them, and it grow further, and
burn up an other man's corn, although he did it by negligence, yet if it
were on a windy day, he is culpable, and by the law which Aquilius made, is
bound to satisfy the party: and good reason, for he that gives occasion of
harm, seems to do the harm. Secondly, How Quietness may be kept amongst
houshandemen.
provision must be had by law, that if controversy* arise concerning meeres
and bounds in grounds, measures may determine the same, so that such meers
and bounds be assigned by the arbitrament of certain honest men, whether they
he mere stones, stakes, or others, and so every man shall have and possess
quietly his own without anoiynge of any other. Then that one do not an
other injury by grasing, driving, or mowing, and such other injurious means:
neither hide any corn, for hope of a dearthe and scarcity of things, but
let every manne use the common benefit of the earth honestly, and let one
make an other partaker of his commodity, and not turn the blessyng of God
into cursinge. A man must also mark the condition and state of the people, and
the desire which they have to gain things, and accordingly temper his
ordinances and laws, which must needs be so made, that they agree
conveniently with those things which they concerue. But chiefly we must take heed, that cuerie manne so apply his own privately, that it be profitable in
general. For no man can commodiously exercise two Arts says Plato. If they
be husbandmen, and given to tillage, it has been declared after what sort
they must use them selves.

But where artificers be, there must he many things provided for their
furniture, according to the necessity of every man's faculty. For there be
such as live by clothing, which have need of woulle, wadde, chickwede,
thistles, and diyng colors, of sundry sorts to color their clothes. The
butcher without cattle can not occupy. The Couper without wood, is without
work. The ioyner must have bourdes, and the Glouer skins, without which,
the tawyer also is workelesse. Shoemakers, girdlers, sadlers, and coriers
Artificers ^^^ be furnished with such ^^^^ g^^ as apperteine to their
faculties.
must have hides. Cutlers, sawmakers, Sithsmithes, Platemakers, and Armourers,
use iron and steel. The linen weauers, taylours, woollen weauers, dyers, and
soche kind of artificers, work upon woulle, and linen, and threades of
woullen and linen, and sometime upon silk. And so likewise of all other
artificers, which use each in his faculty, some one thing, some an other, as
a trade to travail in for his living.

Neither is it enough to se^ that the city be commodiouslye served of these
things, unless order be also taken, that they may be profitable to all, and
prejudicial to no man. Which may so be well provided for, if they do agree
upon nothing privately, that does not profit in common. For the corruption
of nature makes every man wish better to him self, then to an other, and to
think that most peculiare to him self, that brings most profit. Hereupon
in their corporacions Unlawful orders be agreed upon in Haules of companies
and haules, they do ordeine and appoinct that which profits privately,
altogether against the common commodity, as a thing which might hurt their
companies. Hereupon Bakers in ill governed commonweals, agree among them
selves; that one do sell no bread so long as another has any left.
Shoemakers, taylours, and linen weauers, appoint that there be an ordinary
number of apprentices. Among the clothiers order is taken, that none make any
clothe above ordinary every year. Which incommodities do thereupon arise,
because in such corporacions for the most part the greater number is such,
that either know not their occupacions, and be ill workmen, or else spend
that they get in gamenyng, riottyng, and tippling: the lesser part be such as
travail and take great pains to get their livings, and to encraase the same
by their occupacions. Among whom the greater number lightlye prevails, and
so private gain is preferred before the common profit. Albeit these base
merchants do not consider in any wise what is profit, and when they can
not help them selves, they envy at other that be willing to thrive. And by
such means they do not only molest other and procure a common damage, but
also peruerte that that is peculiare. Whereupon many of those corporations,
besides that they be accounted unlawful, by reason of corrupt and dishonest
orders, be also pernicious to many cities and towneships. The more must be the
magistrates charge, to prevent L^^e lips, (...).
this mischief, which were an easy matter, if they were not both enfected
with a like disease.

Merchants also, mercers, adventurers, vinteners Soche as furnishe us with
necessary wares must be favored.
apothecaries, and so many as in a city do profit by their good policies
and forecastes without hand labor, must be preferred and helped in buiyng and
selling their wares. For Tullie writes that the Romans would not stick to
revenge an injury dooen to their merchants, even with the swearde. But for
as much as discciptfull wares be oftentimes fette from beyond the seas, we
must foresee as nere as we may, that nothing be sold at home in our
country, that is counterfaite, but that every thing be truly and without
all fraud or guile uttered.

And touching other, and them of the wealthier sort, which maintain them
selves upon the revenues and commodities of their lands quietlye, and
without any either occupacion, or marchandrye, there is no such great
business, because they be bound by the common law, whether they live
priuatelye or in office, whose enheritaunce must be ciuilly used. And if any
subsidy be granted, that then all the burden be not laiod upon their backs,
that it may not seem better to be a poor man then a rich in a City. For
there be some that live more wealthilye by their occupacions, then many do
by their lands and large possessions. Which commodity of wealth, saying it
comes Occupie^^ ^^^ richet then ge^tlemen.
by mean of good orderinge in the common weal, it is also requisite, that
part thereof be employed and imparted in a common necessity.

Finally respect must be had to the country about the city, whether it be
as a garner, from whence corn is conveyed to serve the city: or whether it
depend upon the aid of the city: so that if the countrymen bring in any
thing, they must needs again furnishe them selves of necessaries, out of the
city, as shoes, apparaile, wine, ale, iron, implementes of how should, spices,
vinagre, flesh, and other things: which be very necessary for men of the
country, as well for such as be buyers as sellers. And in this behalf laws
and ordinances of cities ought so to be tempered, that they do not seem
profitable to the citizens only, and hurtful to others that be forrenners,
which were a point of small honesty, albeit of many much practiced: for
justice is the foundation of every common weal, without which we cannot
appoint this or that to be honest or profitable. For justice ye queen of al
virtues does not Justice.
regard the law maker only, or any private man's commodity, but every man's
in general: according unto whose rule all laws, al ordinances be directed.
Here upon we se in many towns that victualles which men of the country
bring in, be so sore pynched and streightlie ordered, that unless they sell
them at a certain assessed price, they shall nether be permitted to sell, ne
yet to carry forth any thing: But on the other Abusc^ in be^e^ng of wa^es.
side, if they stand in need of shoes, cappes, clothes, vinegre, pepper,
girdles, knives, weightes, axes, nails, and such like wares, now it is a
marvel to se how the price shall be enhaunsed, how all shall be driven to
gain: That it cannot be said that this biyng and sellyng is between man and
man, and specially whom neighborhood and relligion owght to make equally
minded one to another, but even among wild beasts and very Turks, which
yet do not so lay one in wait of another, and use so shameful a kind of
winning and trade of living. Whereupon it evidently appears, that the chiefest
thing in a common weal is to use an honest mean in gaining-whiche will then
come to pass, when we have respect to the citizens, the place, the
occupacion, and trade of life that each man uses. For one kind of laws
agrees to such cities as be maynteyned by lands and possessions: another to
such as stand upon the sea coasts, or upon rivers, by which all things
necessary be conveyed unto them: another to such as stand upon no such like
commodities, but be maintained by occupiers and artificers. And Plato said
well, that diverse citezins served for diverse commonweals. Then according
unto the different estate of the inhabitauntes, an order and mean must be
used, how far their gain ought to exte^de, that no injury nor dishonestie
be practiced. Finally we may not for our lucre and justice and Charity be
^ou^da^^^e of the (...) ^^^^^e.
commodities sake hinder either our neighbors or forrennours, but always set
before our eyes justice and charity, consideringe we be Christen men: for
charity enuieth not, does nothing frowardly, seeks not her own, thinks
none evil, reioyseth not in iniquity, endures all things, suffers all
things, does nothing to an other, that she would not have done to her self.
By whose ensample if we direct and rule not all our doings, let us never look
for any fruit or ornament of our common weal, but we shall be taken as the
Gentiles: yea and in an estate more miserable, because a servant which knows
his masters will and does it not, shall be sharply scourged, and condinglie
punished. Then must we not include our common weal within the compass of the
Philosophical traditions: but pass those straites, and walk in the liberty
of the spirit, opening the way to the everlasting common weal which shall
never decaie.

The argument of the sixte Chapter.
As it is most convenient that there be a propriety in things: so is it a
wounderous absurdity, to appoint an equality.

WHo so will handle this kind of argument shall find many things Many be
of opinion that it were expedient to have a^ things common.
on both sides which may make him doutfull, being moved as well with a zeal
of godly living, as also considering the estate of mankind. And we do not
read truly that our savior Christ had either proprieties, or possessions, and
his doings must be our instructions, which said unto the man that told him
that he had kept the commandments of god from his youth: yet thou lackest one
thing, sell all that thou have, and distribute it to the poor and thou shall
have ^reasure in heaven. Which the faithful of the primative Church did, as
Saint Luke testifies. For there was not one pore amongst Act. iiii.
them: for that they sold their lands, houses, and other goods, and laid
the value thereof at the Apostles feet, which distributed to every man
according unto his necesiitie. Saint Lukes words be these: for there was not
one neadie among them. For so many as were possessours of lands or houses
selling the same, brought the prices of that they had sold, and laid them at
the Apostels fe^te, which distributed to every man according as he had neade.
We do also understand many ways, that the Philosophers neglected goods and
possessions. And therefore Socrates (whose opinio Plato thoroughly allows)
would in his common weal, that lands and goods were common, which he says
shall then be, when there may be said, this is mine, and this not mine, and
all things common amongst friends. Which seeing is become a proverb: All
things be common amongst friends.
that al things be common amongst friends: but it had his original of
Pythagoras as Laertius reports out of Timeus. But because it is dangerous so
to addicte a man unto an others opinion, that he shall hold this a sufficient
reason, to allege that We must not lean to much to other me^nes opinions.
such a one said so: meet it is therefore that truth take place before the
person, that that may be chose which is more probable and more agreeable with
the society of man (for although Plato be my friend, and Socrates be my
friend, yet the truth is more my friend) therefore Aristotle does full well
confute this opinion of Socrates concerning the community of things, whereby
not unquietness only, but also many absurdities might arise among men,
specially as the world now, goes, wherein it is hard so to keep a ma^s own
ground, that another do not encroche upon him, and with his ploughe pare away
some part thereof. Certainly such a community would be hurtefull
Disco^modities that woldgrow of all things were common.
does to she gods, and men: by occasion of disagrement both of tillage and
chiefly of parting the fruits of the earth. For who would be willing first
to set plough to the ground, if an other that should come last, should reap
as much as he, and chiefly of y^ ground for the tillage whereof he made none
acco^pte: So goods unregarded should profit none: and the proverb should be
fulfilled: that which is common to all, shall at le^ght be no bodies. Well then
grant the ground were quietly ploughed: yet the fruit would not be divided
with out great trouble and dissension: which as it would grow yearly, so it
would be occasion of greater debate. Besides this the neadie should bear the
bourden, and the rich would take the profit.

Therefore it were most convenient, this opinion A propriety is things is
most allowed.
rejected, that every man knew his own, that so the dominion of things
might be distinguished among men, that every man might know what were his
own, what were not, that goods might not hang in any uncertainty. Whereupon
Justinian ordained many Laws for the eschewinge of injury, for the getting
of the dominion of things, that the common weal fenced thereby, might stand in
quiet, and every man with regard to the law, should be content with his own.
And certainlye there be many reasons to prove that the pryuate dominion of
things is very necessary. First because they be more diligently seen to:
for every man is more affectionate toward his own, then to that which is
another man's, specially when we know that it shall descend to our heirs and
posterity, which was the causes, why The Emperor made a constitution that
vassalles goods, which escheted by death of the tenaunte, should be
enheritable to the posterity, that is, Children, Cosens, and heirs males. So
greatly do we delight in things that shall continewe with us, and desire that
they may be preserved. Secondlye we be taught by nature to requite such as
have deserved well of us, which by our goods may best be done. For it is
not accepted to win a friend with other men's goods. For there were no
liberality in that, according unto the Proverb: A man may cut large thonges
of an other man's leather. There be besides these many reasonable causes to
prove that there ought to be a private dominion of things: which even
experience teaches us, and there was never wise man that disproued the same.
Yea the histories are full of ensamples of holy fathers whereof every one had
his own in seueralle. For Abraham and Loath had several flocks, in so much
that when their heard men could not agree (because they did strive who
should seed their cattaill best) and the land could not suffice them to
dwell together: Loathe removed to the country about Iordane.

Yea, further this propriety seineth to prcede of very necessity, which (as
they say) has no law. And it is a civil poinct to relieve the nedy, and to
count our goods as though they were not ours. Besides this, we must not We
must so use our goods as though they ^^^^ not ours.
fix our hearts upon them, but all affections and coueteousnes set a part,
only direct our minds toward that mark at the which we may run to winue
an heavenly reward. Which thing if the rich man could have done, he would not
so saddely have departed* leaving the ben^^^te of saluacions for our
instruction that it is marvelous hard for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of heaven. And therefore in the primatyue church such as were
converted to the faieth, would rather sell their goods, and be without them
selves, then give occasion that others should lack. Which might also have
been moved with this, because the goods of the faithful were openly sold,
and by Tyrants dispoyled, which they thought more profitable to convert unto
the common and true use, that is to the cherishement of the poor. Thus we see
by presidentes of Godly men* that we may have proprieties of things, but so
that we do not abuse them, but rather use them as though they were none of
ours. There may also order be taken by common consent, that some things may
be common in a city, sometime universally, sometime amongst a certain
number. Which conuencions because they be private* do not prejudice the common
law, neither dispense with the proprietaries. As for example: Xenophon
reports that Lycurgus in the Lacedemonian common weal, ordained that the use
of horses and hounds should be common.

But when a propriety was once permitted, it could not long continue vnabused,
because man's nature is easily corrupted, and will not stand still in one
stay, but every man is led after his own fantasy, yet so much the more
to be borne withal, the less he hinders the common commodity. For Phaleas
the Carthaginian would that lands and possessions should be so divided, that
every Citizen should have like portion, which opinion Aristotle reselleth, and
by many pithie arguments proves it to be a meare absurdity. For that is
very uncertain, which is comprehended under a general law, especially,
touching such things as must be severed. Moreover, in a common weal there be
diverse sorts of Citezens, some keep great familyes, some mean: some spare
and spend Prod(...).
their goods honestly, some care for nothing so little as goods, but
lauishe and waste wilfullye: which be the most wretched sort of all,
although they be as rich as Cresus. For the more they have, the more they
devise to consume. Unworthy men to live, much less to be among good
Citizens, and to be sustained with other men's goods, as such that will
both beggar them selves and others. For if it be disalowed that a
Coueteousnes.
coueteous man should suffer one that is prodigal, evil to spend that which
he has evil gotten, it were the^ against reason, to let things well gotten,
to come into such a ryottou^s hands, and to cast a preciouse stone before a
Swyne, begilyng good husbands, and such as would thrive, of their
commodities. Moreover, if this unequal equality were kept, it would follow,
that when all were spente at Dice and bealye chere, all the citizens should be
driven to such beggerie, that they should neither be able to sustain them
selves, ne yet to maintain the dignity of the common weal. Therefore it were
no reason to establishe any such equality of things, whereupon so many
inconveniences might ensue. And therefore a lawmaker must be very circumspect
that he consider the circumstaunces of the persons, and of things convenient,
and so constitute that which is probable, and has some reason why it
should be ordained. For as the law must be grounded upon justice and
honesty: so it Decrees ought to stand with ^eason.
is not lawful to make that a Law, which is unprofitable. Wherefore if this
equality mentioned by Phaleas, had had relacion to the state of things and
persons, that every manne according unto his dignity and calling, should
have had his portion of goods, as he to have the more which had a public
office, which could not for appliynge the public affairs, entende his
private commodity: or he that had a great famelie, or that occupied some trade
of greater charge (which is the very equality of goods by lawefull
proporcion distributed, not by quantity, but by equity: and so says Plato
in the sixte book of his laws: there is an old true saiynge: that equality
causes Equality causes friendship.
frendshippe) If Phaleas I say had taken this order, these lauisshers had
either nothings, or else it had been put into their overseers hands, which
should have employed it upon their wives and children, according to their
necessities. Solon devised a far better mean, which entendyng to take away
the occasion of coueteousnes, and insatiable desire, ordained that no man
should have no more land then the law permitted. Which the old Romans
followyng in their ancient frugalitie, at the demand of Licinius Stolo,
moved that there should be some order taken, how much every man should have in
possession, that was fiftye furlonges, which was the measure used in the
common weal when it began to flourish, as Pliny and Gellius do write.

Also among the people of Locrus, where Minos (of Plin. lib. 18. Capi. iii.
Gellius lib. 7. Capi. (...)
whom Plato does always make good report) is said to have made Laws, it was
provided that no man should alien his enheritaunce, unless he were able to
declare some evident cause of his brgent and extreme necessity, and that to
the end that the families should not pearishe or decaie by conueyaunce made to
defeat No man ought to (...) inheritance.
the right heirs. Therefore it is declared in the holy scripture, that if
any man for very poverty had sold his possessions, it was ordained that for
the same value (the fruits reserved) he might recover his lands Leuit, xxv.
again, or else tarry until the fiftieth year, which they call the year of
Jubilee, when every possession should reuert to the owner, and former
possessour.

Thus we must embrace only that in a common weal which is honest and
profitable, established according unto the condition of the place, thing, and
person, and this stands with reason, wherewyth this pernicious equality of
goods can by no means agree: as a thing that does not only empouerishe
Cities, but also opens the window to all sedicion and dissencion. Whereof I
could recite many horrible examples, were it not that they be so well known
that they need not to be rehearsed in this place. Yet I can not forget one
thing which wonderfully disquieted not the common weal of Rome only, but
also all Italy, which broile the laws for division of lands did breed:
sometime appointynge a certain measure of lands, sometime a division* or other
like, which concerned the people. As were the Laws made by Spurius Cassius,
Quintius Flaminius* S^pronius (...)rs for the (...) su^^ment^ of lands.
Tiberius, and Ca^^ Gracchi, Spurius Thorius* Philippus Tribunus, Cornelius
Silla, Sextus Titius, Flauius Canul^^us, Julius Caesar, and other which
delighted to ^awne upon the people, as appears in Tullye, Liuie, Gellius,
Valerius Marimus, Dionisius Halicarnaseus, and other latin writers. But
Phaleas and his folowers did most fondely of all others in dreaming upon this
equality of goods and lands, which he could never have persuaded, unless
he would have had relacion unto a certain proporcion, and to the condition of
each man's estate, that so the distribucion might be made, as is before
mentioned. Whereupon this proporcionable equality, as a mainteiner of
quietness, might have rise^: but if goods be divided by quantity, it will never
so come to pass.

The argument of the seventh chapter*
That goods must be ciuillye used, and that the neadye ought to be partakers
thereof.

MArcus Varro says well that goods Goods.
have that name, because they use to comfort a man, or to make him happy. But
how this may be, it has been diversely heretofore reasoned. For Speusippus
the Philosopher Felicity.
defines felicity to be a good thing, plentifullye increased with all
goodness, a power in it self suffising to live well, a perfection in all
virtue, and a competencye of living wherein nothing is Goods external and
internall^.
wantynge, which they term happiness. Whereunto what thing soever in any
poincte helps, it is called good. For that is good which every man
desiereth, not of it self, but as a furtherer to blessedness, which some
appoinct in goods of the body, some in the mind, and some in riches and
wealth, as has been before declared. And as the Philosophers nature is, they
define their blessedness to be sometime the pleasure of the body, sometime
the delectation of the mind, and at length they pitche their opinions upon
quietness and contemplacion, which is the fruit of the life spent always in
study to search out the truth, to instruct the mind, and to practice honesty.
So Maximus Sermon. 6.
Tyrius judges that the wealth of the common estate stands in the well
appoincted customs, and comelye government of the city, which can not be
without help of good laws, which be preserved by the godly conversation of
the subjects, which rises upon reason: and reason, which truth makes
porfite, is strenghthened by exercise, and truth is learned by contemplacion
and study, which we employe in the searchyng out thereof. Whereby it comes
to pass, that such things as we learn, we keep* them surely in memory, and
being so kept, we use them well.

The wise men therefore of the World place their Worldly ^^^ men.
felicity in goods, which every manne desiereth, by which name we term
every thing that is created in this world for man's behoufe. For GOD saw
all things that he had created, and they were very good. But the only
peruersitie of the abusers makes Goods of themselves be good
them evil and pernicious, which of them selves be good. For they also
cause, that although a man hear the word of life, yet it seems to be thrown
among thorns, where being choked as it were with wealth and worldly
pleasures, it brings forth no fruit. Wherefore we ought all to endeavor,
that we do not corrupt that which naturally is good, and cause meat to be
poison, and life to be death everlasting. Which then we shall eschus, if we
use our goods well (for as we use the^, so they be either good or evil) and
permit them not to become evil. Considering the Philosophers plant the use
thereof in a contemplative quietness, which thereby bears a face of
blessedness, howbeit, it is but a vain ostentacion, and a thing esteemed of
worldlynges only, neither yelding hope of any blessed life, nor yet honor to
God. Therefore their contemplacion is mere vanity, as a sounding brass or
tinkeling Cimbale, whereof the Apostle ii. Cor. ii.
makes mention.

But we which as near as we may frame a common weal in a perfect order,
must lift up our minds higher, and know that we be men, and borne to profit
man, whom we be commanded no less to love then our selves, which is, when we
help him not only with counsel, and comfort him in visitation, but also
reloue him with our goods: which we ought to use in such sort, that they
may appear to be both honestly, profitably, and ciuilly employed. For it can
not be, but that he which is modest, pitiful, beneuolent, and a favorer of
the whole body politic, shall be natural and tender hearted, and pressed to
profit every man, and to hurt no body. Neither does this natural
ciuillitie, more beseme any man then a christian, which ought to regard
nothing in the world more then the furtheringe of his neighbor. For if in
old time it were rea^ened a virtue for one man to deserve well of an other
(whereupon they placed such in heaven, and named them Gods, that had
advanced their country by th^^ Prowes and worthy acts, Whereupon also the
proverb had his beginnynge: Man is a God to man.) Surely it stands with more
Ciu^^^ behavior becomes a christian.
reason, that he which has the knowledge of the truth should so do, and
declare himself to be a man of civil behavior by his liberality, and by
giving good counsel, which he ought to employ upon such as he knows not to
be his friends, as well as upon them, at whose hands he finds great
frendshippe, to gratify the one, and to win the other, and to move them
both to a like gentleness.

Therefore Pythagoras spoke not improperly when he said: All things are
common amongst friends: and yet this saiynge was more received among the
Philosophers in their schools, then among men in their livings. Also he
said, that a friend is an other my self. Howbeit, for the profitynge of a
common weal, this is not enough, to have al things common amongst friends,
but also amongst enemies, so that not my friend only, but also mine enemy
shall be another my self, without any coloring. Otherwise the saiynge of
Martiale to one Candidus, will be laid against us:

The goods of friends my friend thou say,
to friends they common are:
This boa^ting brag both night and day,
to speak thou do not spare.
But to thy friend thou geust no vvhitt,
and yet still say thou this:
My frinde each thing that friends possess,
with friends in common is.
For he with whom we have to do searches the heart, requires the heart, and
not a counterfayte countinance. And therefore we must learn our rule to live
by, not out of the Philosophers writings, but out of the word of truth. So in
the fifth of Matthew: ye have We must love our enemies.
heard that it is said, thou shall love thy neighbor and hate thine enemy:
But I say unto you, love your enemies, wish well to them that curse you, do
well to them that hate you, pray for them that hurt and accuse you, that you
may be the sons of your father which suffers the sun to rise upon the
good and evil, and sends rain upon the just and unjust. For if you love
them that love you, what reward shall you have? do not the Publicanes so?
Which saint Paul Roma. xii.
opening bids us seade our enemy, if he be hungry, and give him drink, if
he be thirsty: for so we shall heap coals of fire upon his head: these be
his words: if thine enemy be hungry, give him meat, if he be thirsty,
give him drink, for so shall thou heap coals of fire upon his head. You here
that word which nether the Philosopher could understand, nor he which bought
the ferme, nor he that married the wife, nor he that had gotten the five yoke of
oxen, so that these when they were bidden to that great supper, could not go.
But the Fisher men here it, and they that be poor in spirit, merciful,
gentle, peace makers, lowly in heart, such as thirste for justice: because
theyres is the kingdom of heaven.

Which things admit no dissimulation, but belong only to perfect men, and we
must not think that a man may be a true christian, although he suffer his
enemy to die for hunger and thirste, as they would beat into our heads
which nether be themselves partakers of the heavenly kingdom, nether suffer
other to enter into it: for it is the word of truth whereof no jot shall
pass unfulfilled. Therefore if thou do not feed thine enemy with meat
and refreshe him with drink, thou semest to be a manquellour, offending
against the laws, and if thou be found guilty in one, thou shall be guilty in
all. Which although they be hard to the world, strange and unknown to the
Philosophers: yet they be pleasant unto our heavenly father, which puts
upon us a light and sweet yoke, which who so takes upon him (as no man ought
to refuse) his goods be not only common to his friends, but also to his
enemies. For this is to deserve well of man, this is to keep the commandment
of the lord, Our goods must be comme^ to the nedy
and well to use that which is well gotten, and to empart the same to such as
be in necessity: which reken thou as true as Sybilles oracle, and let it not
fall out of thy mind, for the scripture says: thou shall not Deuteronomy. xv.
lack poor folk in the land of thine habitacion: and therefore ^ooe I
command the that thou open thine hand to thy neadie and poor brother which
dwells with the in the Laud. And Ezechiell the Prophet Ezech. xvi.
says: Behold this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodonia, pride, fulness of
meat, abundance, idelnes in her and in her daughters, they did not stretche
their haundes to the poor and neadie: and they were high minded and did
abhominaciones before me, and I destroyed them as thou saw.

Moreover Ambrose says: Consider o man whence thou had thy name, surely
from the earth, which takes nothing away from any man, but gives all to
all, and ministers diverse fruits to diverse uses of Humanitas ab humo.
al living creatures. Thereupon it is called, humanity, a special and
peculiare virtue to man, whereby one helps an other, etc. All we therefore be
but one body, and diverse parts, but altogether to this one body necessary.
This is the law of nature which binds us to all humanity, that one should
help another as parts all of one body, whereby you may easelie perceive the
form of that common weal which is grounded upon Christ, wherein there is
justice, gentelnes, mercy, modesty, humility, patience, long sufferynge,
truth, steadfastnes, faith, and charity, wherein things are used according
to a civil and honest moderation.

The argument of the. viii. Chapter.
That the invention of money is very commodious, the occupiyng whereof is then
most allowable, when it stands most upon honest dealyng.

MOney even ymediatlie after that it was first coigned began to be such a
nourishement of riot and covetousness, that it may be had in question, whether
it were better that it never had been invented, or yt with so great toil and
trouble the commodity thereof should have been received And surely that is
dear enough bought, for the obteyninge whereof we endanger our lives. It was
not enough for man by natural corruption to have been so much seduced, unless
this other pestelent poison, the ca^kred carke of money, Aurisacra sames.
had ensued: for the muckering up whereof, we try the mines, we search the
veins of every mountain, we cross the seas, we assault heaven: And we hold
all the world, be it never so wide, but small, and attempt to seek out an other
world among the Antipodes, which if we could find, yet it would not
satisfy our greedy desires. And that money is the only cause of this evil,
the insatiable appetite thereof is a sufficient argument: for have we never so
much, yet still we seek more, and be never contented. Which the Philosophers
perceyuinge, either esteemed not money beholdinge the secrets of nature, or
else clean wayned themselves from the use of it, thinkyng that wealth
consisted only in this: to desire nothing. And therefore Diogenes Cinicus a
wounder of nature, used to say that he passed the King of Persia both in
living and goods: because he never lacked any thing, but the King had never
enough. And Crates the Thebane Crates hueled gold into the Sea.
when he first entered into the study of Philosophy, is reported to have cast
a great quantity of gold into the Sea, saying: hence ye filthy affections, I
will drown you, for fear lest ye would drown me. Which be ensamples truly
whereby we may learn that it is better to be altogether moneylesse, and to
keep an vprightnes in mind, then with wealth to perish, and to be cast into
the deep pit of hell.

Which seems to be no new evil, but to have begone straight upon man's
transgression. For Josephus writes that Cain which slew his Brother, the The
antiquity of the use of money.
soonne of Adam the first manne, filled his house with money that he had
gotten by rauyne and robberye: whereby a man may gather the antiquity not
only of money, but also of covetousness. But that which was profitablye
brought in, must not be blamed because of our lust and intemperatenes of
mind: as men that procure this enormitie, and convert a good inue^tio^, to a
shameful abuse. Which I purpose not to pursue, but to commend the true use
thereof, and to bring it unto some honest mean, and by such reasons as may
appear that the profitte of money does not only counteruaile, but also far
pass the disprofite thereof.

And therefore as for this matter, many things do euidentlye declare, that
men at the first when they led a savage and rude life, did rather purchase
things by exchange, then by Trafficque of buiynge and sellinge, which tofore
I have gathered forth of Homer. But because things could not be always
matched, money by law, and will of the mightier sort, was devised, by whose
value applied to proporcion, all things might be bought. And surely it is
erpedient, that the value of money be in certain, which when it Coigne
iu^^^ted.
began to alter among the Romans, so that no man knew what he had, Marius
Gratidianus then Praetor (whether it were by a specialle act, or by
Proclamacion I know not) provided that there was no such alteracion of coigne
any more, but that the certainty thereof might be appointed, that every manne
might know what he was worth. Which law was so grateful unto the people,
that they set aultares up unto Marius in every streate, and prayed unto him
with frankensence and Tapers, as if he had been a God, as Tullie writes, and
Seneca also in his books entitled De Ira, witnesses.

Money at the first was all of Brass, and as some The first ^^sgn^^ of money
hold opinion, first stamped by Seruius king of the Romans, and called
(Pecunia) because it was signed with the image of a beast. For all the wealth of
Rome, yea, of all Italy stood in Oxen, and therefore Italye has her name of
an Ox, as Varro writes. Secondly it was made of silver, and last of all, of
gold. Some write that Ianus first coined, on the one side, his own image
which had two faces, on the other side, a ship in remembrance of Saturn,
which coming thither, first told him the manner of tillage, being receive a
geastwise into his house. Which thing Ouide testifies, saiynge:

Much have I learnde, but yet Ouidius in ^^^storum.

of money this I never spide,
Why double shapen head it bears,
and ship on the other side.
In ancient time they used for coigne,
a ship engraude in brass,
To testify the Gods receite,
that so received was.
The coyninge of money is of common right dependyng only upon the Princes
aucthoritye, which we call commonly current, because that it being received by
course of law, is commonly given and received, not only because the metal
whereupon it is made is good and of the same value, but because the common
authority so aloweth it, which makes it to be lawfully current, and in
buiyng and selling holden after that rate. Whereupon necessity in time of war
has sometime In necessity of war, Leather and brass have been coigned.
enforced leather or fine brass to be stamped, which was paid as the coigne,
or the magistrates sign, sometime for gold, sometime for silver, and in
the end of the wars, when wealth began to grow again, so much sterlynge
money was repayed for the same. Which thing was dooen at Madeburge, a noble
Anno dn^i M. D. Li.
town in the duchy of Saxonye, which in our time the Emperors power did
besiege more then a year, with many fierce assaults: that I may not rehearse
other ensamples. Now money coming abroad, laws for contractes in buiynge
and selling were in the common weal devised, as a thing that can not stand
without the agreement for the price, which must be done by ready money.
Therefore be ware that that which is sold, be not corrupt or faultye, or
otherwise not aunswerynge the promise made upon it: for faithfully and without
couyn, or any suspicion thereof, ought on^ to deal with another. Neither ought
we only to use upright dealing in getting things, but also in paiynge the
price for the same. Therefore there can be no greater inconvenience in a common
weal, then either to stamp, pay out, or to put to any man, false or
counterfaite money, for besides the infamy, he that so does, is worthy to lose
his life. Those must also be restrained which lay in wait for money, and
gather Money mongers.
up the good coigne, and by little and littlle bring in the naughtye, which ere
the falshode he known, does pass through many men's hands, and yeldeth a
shameful gain to the vtterer. And those also which have found a kind of
lucre in the converting and turning of their money to some private use. For
that which has more Silver or better mettell in it, they bestow upon corn
and grain, which they will utter dearer in an other place then they bought it.
By which fraud and disceipt every city, every common weal, is dispoiled of
her money, and that brought in, which is very base, and resembles the
exchange that Glaucus made with Diomede. I had almost forgotten another sort,
which empaire and clippe gold and silver with a file, a pair of pinsers, or
wastyng water, and by abatyng the weight, diminishe the value, whose offenses
are the greater, the more thereby they do endammage. But because money was
first invented for the common profit, heed would be taken that it were not
misused, and that those coigners sought not their own filthye gain, to the
hinderaunce of the whole multitude, lest the old saying of Solomon be found
true, that al things do obey money, and that All things be subject to money.
every man serves under her standarde. So many be there which be at her
commandment, or else do wink at and bear with those that delight in
practicing this money trafficque, and thereby do gain vnmeasurablye, which
was first devised, that every manne might for sellyng his ware, be reco^pensed
for so much in value. Wherefore the chief magistrates must be very
circumspect, that this money martyng pass not the limits of honestye, and
become the groundworke of iniquitye, not without further trouble and great
enormitie: considering in nothing else there is more alluremente to
coueteousnesse, in none more occasions of plague and perdicion, then in money.
But let some means be found that the canker of this couyn and disceipt do
creep no further, that so every manne may seek the true use of this so
profitable an inue^tion.

The argument of the ninthe Chapter.
That usury is for many consideracions pestilent in a common weal, and that
he is the less honest man, which practices it most.

WHat a mischief, what a plague, usury is, where so ever it rooteth, every
House, every City, can well declare. Which at the very beginning entered into
the Roman common weal, making the Citizins when they had been sacked of al
their money, to stand bound nevertheless for the yelding of usury, with so
great a licenciousnes, that they were glad to restrain it by law. Whereupon
it was decreed Foenus vnciarium et centesimu^.
by the law of the twelve tables, as Tacitus thinks (or rather as Liuie
judges) by a law made by Marcus Duellius and Lucius Menenius tribunes, that
thinterest should be but an ounce, and the tweuth part in the hundred: which
afterward was made but half an ounce. There was also an other kind of usury
named the hundred, because the surplusage amounted to as much as the principal
sumnie, every hundredth month: for the interest was woun^e to run from month
to month. But when this Vncelawe was made, covetousness cauelled and said, that
this was only provided for Citizins, that so she might oppress the fellows
more and more, and that usury which th^se close rauenours for feate of law
might not practice upon the Citizens, without all dread they The Roma^nes
called the f^llowes, which were the^^ friends end confederates
erercised freelye upon the Latins and the fellows. For the amendment of
which mischief, Marcus Sempronius tribune of the people, made an ordinance
that the same law should extend to all the Latins and Romayne fellows, to whom
any money should be credited. But when this kind of usury wrought
continually many inconveniences, Julius Caesar, after he had recovered the
City, for all that he held with the people, did not take away the usurers
tables and obligacions as it was expected, but proniding as well for debttours
as creditours, decreed that the creditours should be satisfied, but after the
value and rate of their possessions which they had before the civil war;
deducting all way that which was payeable and agreed upon in respect of the
lone money, and so no man could have any more in credit, then could be
raised upon Lib. 5. history Augustae
his goods: as Cornelius Tacitus writes. Where upon also they say that the
benefit of yeldyng up all the goods that a man had, granted unto the
debtours by Caesar, had his beginning: which in the civil laws Cessionis
beneficium,
is more at large treated of.

And would to god this detestable evil had rested among the Romans, a
people which could never be satisfied, neither with kingdoms nor wealth, and
among the Ethnycks, and had not entered among Christians, yea and that into
the Church it self. Where it so reigns, that it is almost counted a virtue,
to be ^surie is p^^^ised throughout christend^.
enryched by usury. In so much that the great gain which the Jews used,
seems tolerable, in comparison of that which the Christians and feigned
professors be not ashamed to practice, from whence, as by a conduite, it is
co^ueied into the laity. Which be so much the sooner allured by their
pernicious ensample, the more present occasion they have to nourishe their
desires. I have declared al ready, how that in old time they used a kind of
gain by the ownce, half ownce, hundred, and such like as occasion served
through the negligence of princes, so that every twentieth year the interest
grew to as much as the stock. But in our time the excessiuenes of usury is
so great, that the usurers may almost choose (be their stock never so
littell) what interest they will take for it. Which thing is also practiced by
them that of right ought to see it reformed. So that none will ask how ye come
by it, but have it ye must. So many ways, so many conueiaunces be used
herein, that if you would cut of one, there would an hundred more grow out
of it, as it were out of Hydras head. Whervppon would ense we not only the
great ^mp^^irishment of Cities, but also danger of their utter decay: which
Cato surnamed the elder understanding, and knowing further that the wealth of
the old Romans stood by husbandry, therefore answered (as Tully reports)
unto one that asked him what was the best point of husbandry: to feed well
quam ^^: what the Second? To feed sufficiently well: what the third* To
cloth well* Cicero in. 2. de offi.
what the fourth? To Plowe. And when as he that moved these questions asked him
further, what it was to put money forth to usury? What is it (quam C^^o) to
kill a man?

If so be that no shame, no regard of honesty, ^^ love of godliness, could
dis^^ad^ these ^^y^ie and ^^le thieves from their greedy ^age, y^t^the fear
of laws should do it, especially considering that usury is forbidden Usury
is forbidden by all ^ ^wes. Gene. xxii. Deu. xxviii
both by the law of God, nature, and man. S^ it is written in gods Law: if
thou l^^dest any Money to my poor people that* dwells with thee, thou shalt
not press them as an extorcioner* nor oppress them as an usurer. Again (...)
thou shall take no interest Ezec. xviii.
of any. Also Ezechiell says: and that man which shall l^nde nothing upon
usury, neither receyne any surplusage, which shall tu^^e away his hand
from iniquity* and deals truly, shall be holden as i^st*

All which sayings, one precepte of our Savior Lucae. vi.
Christ knitteth up, which is: do ye lend, trustyng to gain nothing thereby.
We be also prohibited by nature to enrych our selves with the endamagyng of
others. Wheruppon the civil law also is grounded, and prescribes such a
mean to get things as is just, equal, and honest, whereby every man may
get to serve him self without harmyng any other, neither abuse the same when
he has gotten it: but so temper that which aperteineth to every man upon this
lone, that if any thing be dew either by law (which is al ways grounded
upon reason) orelles above the stock, he may both obt^ine the same, and that
also which accrewyth unto him either by the name of interest or surplusage:
not in consideracion of usury, but that one may not be permitted to endamage
an other by naughty delays, contrary to his credit or agreement in covenant,
which do originallye proceed of nature: as though a sharp saul^^ were ^^^test
for a sharp^ sore. Wherefore they are in a marvelous error which seeking for
some cloked pretense for their usury and detestable gain, deny that the
civil law does forbid it: which in deed mentaineth no wrong, no dishonestie,
no absurdity, as a thing provided for the bewti^^yng of honest life.

Who so ever therefore well live well among good m^n, let him beware of this
pestilent usury, which A good li^^^, must be no usurer.
consumes poor men's goods, destroys souls* and works all kind of
misery amongst men. And although he escape the punishment of laws, yet he
shall receive the judgment which he can not eschew in that great day, when
stealth, r^^^erie, gain gotten by usury, and what so ever we have done in
this our body, shall be set before our eyes and rewarded accordinglye. And for
the better understanding of the word, I call that usury, what so ever
a^ou^teth above Usury what it is.
the stock, and that which is de^e: nether does it consiste in le^ding of
money only (as some by that means willing to color their filthy gain do
allege) but in all things that be neadfull to man's life, as Corn, Wine,
Butter, Milk, Cheese, Fruits, living creatures, whether they be bredde on
the Earth, Air, or water, which for the nourishing of man's gluttonous
appetite, use to be demanded and delivered above the dew, wherewith the poor
man is sorer charged, then if he should redeem the usury with money. Nether
thereby do I deny but that money opened the way to covetousness as Pliny
writes, whose words be these: but money was the first cause of covetousness,
Plini lib. 33. Capit. iii*
by devise of vsurye, an idle kind of trade and gain. This by little enke^dled
more and more, now not covetousness, but a gredie hunger of gold. Whereupon king
Mithridates when he had taken Aquilius a Capitain Aquilius was choked with
gold.
of an insatiable covetousness, powered Gold into his mouth, that he might at
his death be filled with gold, wherewith he could never be satisfied in his life
time.

But because we measure not avarice, and gain of vsurye, by the thing, but by
the mordinate desire and greadinesse of mind, by what means or way soever
one lays in wait for another goods, because that gain is filthy,
dishonest, and prohibited by all laws, it is usury, and unworthy an honest
man. Ambrose: meat is usury, apparel is usury, and what name so ever ye
give it, yet it is usury in deed. For these be those means whereby the pore
and neadie be beggered, whereupon these glottonous Cormerantes, and privy
pickepurses use to feed, but not to satisfy their greadie appetites. For how
can it be that where as thou art permitted after a sort by custom (but yet
by no law) to take for twenty shillinges one, in the name of interest, thou
shalt covenant with a poor man for so much wheat, rye, oats, or other
corn as will double thie money twice or thrice above the due? How cannest
thou practice this usury, which as it is forbidden, so it is detestable? do
thou not haynouslye transgress the laws both natural and civil? Go now
and seek for some thing to hide th^^ secret parts. For thou can not come
naked with a safe conscience (if thou have any) into the presence of the
Lord. Although thou haste a thousand means to color the desire of thy
mind, to cover with other men's feathers, thy most horrible Usury, and to
make it seem goodly in the sight of the world: here, her^* it will not avail
thee. God is the searcher of the mind, which enters into the secrets of*
the heart, which is not satisfied with trifles and vanities, but pacified with
an upright and simple mind, that embraces both godliness and honesty, and
that is clean and unspotted. For do not thou think that thou canste well
serve two masters.

Wherefore thou must forbear, thou must restore Soche things as be tak^ ^^
wa^e of usury, ^^ght to be restored.
that thou haste taken away, and be reconciled if thou have beguiled any man,
much less then shall thou be allowed to aledge any false pretenced excuse, and
thereby vainly to delude the almighty. For he will not be mocked without
reuengment, that beholds us from Heaven, and searches every man's heart,
whom thou must therefore the more set before thine eyes, because that unless
thou do worship him with a penitent and clean heart, he will not forget thine
offenses, but in time will lay them before thee: and the longer he forbeareth,
the sorer he punishes. Wherefore thou must show forth fruit worthy
repentance, which in this crime cannot be done, unless thou restorest that,
which thou have disc^itfully gained. For the fault is not forgeuen, unless
that which is taken away, be restored. Otherwise usury and disceite gnawe his
Conscience in the very streates where he walks, and whither so ever he
tourneth him self, he sees the face of his own villainy, remembringe the
saiynge of the Psalmist: Psalm. x^iii.
Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, or rest in thy holy hill? He which
enters without spotte, and does justice, which swears to his neighbor
and deceaueth him not, which has not given his money to vsuric, and has not
received gifts against the innocent: He that does these things, shall not
be moved for ever.

Neither will it prevail for the purgynge of this Evil gotten goods be in
^ame bestowed upon churches an^ godly uses
soul blemishe (as almost every manne that has no good hope in his evil
gotten goods, uses for a cloak of his wickedness) to say that he has given
to Churches, relieved the poor, and employed upon holy places (as they say)
a great parts of this usury that he has by robbinge and stealinge gathered.
For that were a very lewd excuse many wales. For it is none of thine
wherewith thou dooest purpose to climb up into heaven, and so to color thy
naughtiness, but it apperteineth to an other, to whom testitucion must be
made. Neither does it become thee to spoil the pore, the orphane, and the
widow, neither to pull down one altar to set up and enriche an other. But
let us Esai^. i.
hear what the Prophet Esaie says: why do ye offer to me all these
Sacrifices says the Lord. I am full. Do not offer any Sacrifice to me
from henceforthe in vain. Your assembles be wicked, your hands be full of
blood, wash your selves and be clean, and take away the naughtiness of
your thoughts from mine eyes, cease from doing ill, learn to do well, learn
judgment, relieve the oppressed. Ye see how his offering is in vain, whose
hands are full of blood, and filthy lucre. Ye see he we that we had need in time
to amend. to do well, and to de^arie from our einll thoughts. For this is
she only true and commendable Sacrifice, wherewith we appease Gods anger,
and cause him to accept our presents. Now this is an unprofitable meaning,
to give those things which when thou art dead and buried, peradventure in
hell, can not avail thee: and it is not so hard to offer that to another,
which thou art not allowed to hold in thine own possession. But thou in thus
doing causest the churches to be in danger of losing that which thou have
given to them, and the hospitalles and other places appointed to Godly uses, to
be mainteyned and enriched of that whereof thou have spoiled the pore by
unlawful practices. For y^ place where naughty gotten goods be laid up, uses
not lightly to be fortunate, and daiely there arises disturbers of the same,
so that the proverb seems true: an evil raven, an evil egg.

Finally, although these dsurers chance to convey their goods thus naughtely
gotten unto their heirs, The heirs are bonde^ to make restitucion of soche
things as their aunc^stoures have wrongfullie gotten.
yet they be never the better, but are bound to make restitucion, unless they
will abide the adventure and danger that may ensue of them. For it does
not lightly happ^, that the third insuccession enioieth such wicked wealth
gotten by thenerye and rauin. For so much as we by diners experimentes have
found this saiynge most true, as though Appollo him self had pronounced it:
That the third heir shall not enjoy ill gotten goods, but that which is ill
gotten, is commonly Who so ever had any part o^ the Gold that was taken out of
the temples of the City o^ Tolosa, came to a miserable end.
ill spente, as Plautus says. It is also an unlucky thing to have in
possession ill gotten goods, although a man do not know it. For they be even
as pernicious to keep, as the gold of Tolosa, which was the cause of much
calamity.

Mine intent was only to declare how execrable a thing it is, and pernicious
to a common weal, to practice usury, wherewith a man of conscionable dealing
will never defame him self. But by how many sorts, by what couyne and disceites
it is practiced, the books of the ctuill law do evidently declare ()

THE Seventh Book, concerning the good ordering of a common weal.
The argument of the first Chapter.
It is not enough for a City to be populous and weal thie, unless it bear it
self upon good order and Law* and that nether ill language, ne yet dronkennes
be suffered with in it.

THales the Milesiane, unto whom after long contention, as well the Coianes as
his own countreie men, gave the Golden treifoote A golden t^i^foote was
offered to Thales the philosopher
which the Fisshermen had drawn up, as to a man of most wisdom, said: that
the world was a thing of most excellent beauty, because God had made it.
Such a builder he meaned, as without any assistence of counsel ones made al
things perfectly and in best manner. After the proportion whereof a city
ought to be framed, not only furnished with in habitauntes and wealth, but
also bewtified with good orders and virtues. They therefore to who^ the charge
of governing gods people is committed, must do their ende^^^r, to bring
their City into a commendable form, that it do not (...) by the number of
inhabitauntes and rit^^^^ (for that were to buyld upon We must enure our
selves to a verteous (...).
sands) But they must more deeply weigh the matter, and minister such in
ward nurrishment, whereby the Citizens minds may be nurtured up to virtue:
which is the chief reason, wherefore we desire the company of men: to the
intent the congregation and assembly may be honest and reverent, wherein we
shoot at honesty and goodness, as it were at a mark, with all attentiuenes of
mind.

I have already spoken of most of those things which I thought convenient
for and City, that is well appointed of inhabitauntes, wealth, and
commodities, that account the nothing profitable, unless it be honest: not
therein to do any thing, which we would not have done again to our selves,
nether in our doings to commit any point of dishonestie, Which to say the
truth, falls best out, when the common weal is in quiet and peace. For
such as he of naughty and leude living, will not suffer good men to do well,
but will procure many hinderau^ces to stay the good success of virtue. For
because they themselves care not for well doing, they delight to show their
envy and spite upon such as do the contrary, h^ wheit they Horat.
do not escape scotfree. For they thereby se virtue, and in seeing it, even pine
away. Which grudge of consci^ce they do inwardly feel, but become nothing
the better thereby: wherefore the common weal must be rid of such noughtie
persons, that there be no such present occasion and open liberty given to
offend and to live viciouslie. For as Terence says: to much liberty makes
us all worse: and the nature of vice is like to a leprosy, for it infecteth,
and allureth other to do the like: and so the cockle does not only hinder
the good wheat it his growyng, but spreads it self over all the ground
where it grows, and so choketh it.

We must not therefore bear with any such vices as do cause us to decline
from honesty, as be aduolutrie, hooredome, ma^sl^ughter, spoil, usury,
baudri^* Notable vices that reign in this out ^^^^.
banqueting, glotonie, drunkenness, idleness, deceit, perjury, double
dealyng, covetousness, and other like enormities, which do so increase, that
it is holden in manner as a virtue, in some one of them to be notable. For who
is he at this day, which does not think it natural to stayne, and pollute
his bed with hooredome, and ^audrie? which does not in jest, account
spoil, usury, and deceit, as things gotten by dew loan. Which estemeth not
belly cheer, continual glotonie, drunkenness, and the vnreconuerable loss
of time, as a refresshing to his body, and one part of man's felicity?
nothing consideringe the saying of saint Paul, that the wicked shall not
possess the ^. Cor. vi. ^ph^. v.
kingdom of god: likewise, aduouterers, fornicatours, thieues, dronkardes,
couetouse men, raueners, backebiters, and idolaters, shall not enherite the
kingdom of heaven: for thus he says: do ye not know, that the unjust shall
not enherite the kingdom of God? Be not deceyuid: for nether aduouterers,
idolatres, fornicatours, weakelynges, buggerers, theiues, couetouse persons,
dronkardes, backbiters, nor pillars, shall enherite the kingdom of God. Upon,
which saying if we would earnestlye fix our eyes and minds, we should not be
so prone and ready to all kind of iniquity, and there should be no less
godly zeal, then natural love among Christians. He that is in heaven will
admit no cloak nor color, he will not be mocked, but as a rightwise judge
searches and judges the hearts. And therefore, all dissimulation, all
falshode, all forged pretenses set a part, he that has stolen, let him
steal no more: he that has been a fornicatour, let him flee fornication: he
that has been an adnouterour, let him abstain from aduoultrie, and bring
furthe fruits worthy of repentance: otherwise he can have no part of
inheritance in heaven: for it is not enough to turn from evil, and to
renown the sin of the body, unless we hartelie do that is good, and bring
forth the fruit of light in goodness, justice, and truth. Thus we see that no
man ought either to deceive or to oppress his neighbor or any other in any
kind of conference or worldly affairs. For God is he that takes reuengement
of all these things.

When a City is thus cleansed of corrupt customs, let justice (which
conteyneth all virtues) take place, the ground whereof I my self do take as
Tullie also does, to be a civil kind of credit and faiethfulnesse, in
latin called ( Fides) because that is in deed performed, Faithful promises
ought to be performed.
which was in words agreed upon: soche truth, soche constaneye, ought to be
kept in promises and couenauntes. Neither does the common weal rest in any
one thing more, then in keeping of faiethfull promise. Which word (as Cato
reports) Quintus Sceuola the high bishop did think to be taken very
largelye, and to extend to many things, as to How Far the making of
faiethfull promises exte^deth.
wardshippes of children in their nonage, to societies, assurances,
commissions, buiyng and selling, all things hired, let, set, or betrusted,
and also to al other doings, wherein the society of our life consists:
which who so breaks, does offend as much as if Wards are bound to hepe
promise.
he should uiolate his oath: a mischeuous deed, which the Greeks judged worthy
to be persecuted even with the very torments of hell. We do certainly know
that God himself does revenge perjury, and breach of fidelity. This virtue
the Romans as it should seem, Fides.
esteemed highlye, for that they did place ( Fides) that is faiethfulnesse, in
their Capitole, as neighbor unto their great and mighty God Jupiter. This,
whether it were private or public, they of old time did ordeyne by civil
laws that it should be religiously kept, yea, even to the very enemy. Which
I could set forth by diverse examples, if this present treaty would so suffer
me. Howebeit it shall not be much amiss to rehearse one or two, whereby it
may appear in how great reverence all good men have ever had the same. Valeri.
li. ^.


It fortuned in the second Carthaginiane war that Scipio Africanus the
elder, after he had subdued Ensamples of faithfulness to be kept in promises.
both the Spaines, did take a ship laden with many of the chiefest and
valeantest men of Carthage, which nevertheless he let depart with his safe
conduit, because they said that they were sense unto him in Ambassade. Albeit
there did appear many reasons, which might evidently declare, that they for
eschewynge the present danger, feigned them selves to be Ambassadors. But
Scipio would rather seem to us deceived, then unfaithful, rather to be
deiuded, when he trusted, then hard to be entreated, when he was requested. Of
Iosephe also Jacobs son the holy scripture Gene. 39.
witnesses how faiethfull y^ he did behave him self toward his master
Pu^ipher, how that he did those rather to lie in prison in chains, then after
sondrie Joseph. libr. Antiquitatum. 2. cap. 3
attempes and allucementes of his maistris, ^o polute his masters house with
aduoutrie. I need not is enlarge the steadfast stomach of Marcus Attilius
Regulus, Regulus.
which being taken by treason of Hasorubalt a Carthaginian, and sent home to
Rome that for him many other prisoners should be restored, which were lusty
young men, gave counsel to the contrary, and so returned to his most deadly
enemy, and most terrible torments. His reason was, rather to abide a most
pitiful death, then not to keep his promise.

I could recount unto you a number of ensamples, which are warnynges to us
that we perform our promises, and stand to that in deed, which in word we
have under taken. For God among the very Gentiles has alwaie raised up some,
which justice and fidelity even by the guidyng of nature have ever taught to
follow honesty, comeliness, civility, and all that to a good manne is
convenient. Therefore justice is there well maintained, where promises and
couenantes be constantly kept: which thing springs out of faiethfulnes, the
breach whereof is as much, as the breach of an oath. As though faiethfulnesse
and credit were to be kept no less assured^^e, then an oath that is taken
most religiouslye. Hereupon Tullie in his oracion for the defense of Roscius,
declares that the same punishmente is by God appoincted for him that is
peti^red, that is ordained for him that is a Lier. Whereof out Math. v.
great master, which only ^olleth the truth, puts us in mind, saiynge:
Again ye have heard what has been said to them of old time: Thou shalt
not break thine oath, but shalt perform that thou haste sworn unto the
Lord. But I say unto you, do ye not swear at all, neither by heaven, for
it is Gods throne, neither by the earth, for it is his fo^estole, neither
Swea^ing forbidden.
by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great king: neither shall thou swear
by thine own head, because thou canste not make any one here black or white.
Our talk must be, yea, yea, naie, naie.
But your communication must be yea, yea, naie, naie. Whatsoever is more then
that, it comes of evil.

Ye understand therefore that credit stands not upon the rashenesse of an
oath, but upon true keeping the same, without which, neither can any City nor
We ought to keep promise without swearyng.
civil society continue. Without any other swearing we ought to stand unto
our promises, for that we be commanded not to swear, but that it be, yea,
yea, naie, naie. Nevertheless such kind of oaths as by the laws be permitted,
are not hereby disalowed, for so much as they be so neadfull in a common
weal, that no traffic, nor other civil affairs, can pass without Rash
sweare^^
them, only the rashenesse of soche as will swear for every trifle, or
require the same of others, is hereby reproved. Howebeit it were rather to be
wished, that things might be done only upon trust and confidence without any
kind of oath, co^sideryng there is a great number so ungodly minded, that
they do account it a lighter thing to take a solemn oath, and to proteste
before God and their conscience, then to dig up rotes out of the ground,
wherein they are constrained to thrust their fingers, which in taking upon
them an Some think it less to defile their minds, then their ^ingers.
oath, they do not foul, but hold the^ upright, and yet for all that, they
do defile their minds in so doing. Which misebiefe, the civil law
entendynge to prevent, ordained that no man should be admitted to receive an
oath without the detree of the magistrate, or else of some judge, whose duty is
to weye the person, the thing, the circumstaunce, and all other ordinary
consideracions, that without special neade, and in weighty causes of
judgment, no man be compelled to swear, and thereby often times constrained to
for swear him self. Wherein the magistrate ought to be deryt circumspect in
taking head to soche oaths, that they be religiously and without any rashenes
taken, otherwise he does no less offend, then if he had committed the
persurie him self. A thing so much the more intolerable, because God him
self will not fail but revenge this sin of perjury, and so much the
sharper, because thoffence is done against him self in so temptynge him.
Neither can it be otherwise but that there must neades be much perjury, where
there is much swearyng. The ten law makers at Rome decrced thus of this
matter: The punishemente of perjury toward God, is an evil end and
destruction, toward man, utter shame and confusion.

They therefore do haynouslye offend against that sayng, let your communication
be yea, yea, naie, naie, which in every light talk upon every small occasion,
Abominable blasyhemers.
do swear continually not only by heaven, but also by God him self, and the
very blessed wou^des of our savior Christ, beside those that they use, by the
elements, by every creature, by the most holy Saints: herunto do they join
filthy talk, and give them selves to the devil, and accurse them selves
wittinglye, being enured by custom, not only to abuse, but also to slander
the name of the living God, whom all men ought to reverence, whose praise
every tou^ge ought to magnify. Which detestable blasphemy, although most
men do impute to those Ruffians and unshamefast Villains, which follow the
camps, as Children learn to swear of their parents and ^u^^es.
a special fruit of war, yet it is certain that children which can
scarcely speak do hear such oaths of their mothers, nurses, and parents,
and so learn that while they be young (as our nature is bent to al evil)
wherein they being once nusseled, can not easily be broken from it, to the great
calamity of all christendom: which by the negligence of their elders do so
degenerate, that they be glad to wynke at and to bear with such horrible
blasphemy, such ertreme vilanie, and to hold it as a virtue: a great deal
worse then any idolaters, Blasphem^^^ worse then ^ dolaters.
which did not without punishment suffer a man to vttre any idle word against
those their dead ^^nages, much lest would they se them despised.

And we do perceive by very experience, that monstrous Drunkenes bredeth
occasion of ^^^^aring.
and inordinate drunkenness has been a mother unto this mischief: so that if
it were not for other discommodities, this alone were enough to cause it to be
abandoned of all honest company for ever. If we will but a little consider the
countenance, nature, and effect thereof, who shall not incontinent perceive,
that it is the most filthy of al other, in so much that y^ brute beasts do
not use it, but abhor it as most contrary to their nature. The ass of all
four footed beasts the dullest, when he thyrsteth, of his own accord draws
to the water, but when he has once drunk enough, no stripes can drive him
again to drink any more. Only man is so mad and outrageous, that when he
has water, the licoure which to nature seems to be most wholesome, offered him
to drink, he rejects it, and does not only riottouslie misuse wine, which
nature has given as a special medicine for man most healthful to his body,
but also contrary to nature swilleth up the same, and therein takes a
meruellouse delight: And being thus drowned in drunkenes and bereyft of reason,
of all other beasts he is Drun(...) compared (...).
most like to a swyne wallowyng in the mire, and becoming a very mocking
stock even to little children. This was the cause why the Lacedemoniane
magistrates used to make the basest of their slaves, whom they called Elotae,
to be made dronken, and so to be The Lacedemonian slaves were made dru^k to be
ensample of deformity to others. Plutar. in vita Licurgi ^eleucus.
brought among young men of their City, where they did sit in banquettes, to
the end they so might declare the deformity of drunkerdes, that thereby the
youth might abhor the vice, and be more and more provoked to sobriety.
Zeleucus looked much nearer unto this enormitie: for in the Locriane common
weal he ordeigned that whosoever used to drink wine, should die for it: yet some
what in so doing to be disalowed, because he utterly forbade thuse of that
thing, which in Anacharsis.
deed is of it self most healthful. For Anacharsis the Philosopher said
that the vine brings furthe three Three properties in wine.
grapes, one for thirst, an other for mirthe, the third for madness. So the use
of wine ought to be, to drive away thirste, to help the stomach, and (if the
time do serve) to make a man's heart m^ry. Wherein if thou do pass measure,
that shall turn the to madness, and become unto th^e, not wine, but hemelocke.
So that Seneca may seem to have full well said, that Seneca.
drunkenness is nothing else but a wilful madness.

Now who so will consider the multitude of mischieues that grow of this
furious dronkennes, shall incontinent understand that it is aneuill most
disagreable with the good estate of a common weal, and that it is not worthy
to be calle^ a City, where drunkenness bears fre sweye, and brideleth not
as well the common sort, as also the governors: whose dewtie, were to be as
pastors, to correct offenders, and to punish such as with wine ouercharge
their stomachs. The inconveniences that proceed of dru^kennesse.
Not to touch the inconveniences which it breeds in our bodies, as
palenesse, hanginge cheeks, waterie eyes, the palsy, rauinge in sleep,
unquietness in the night, theheate of inordinate and filthy lust, stinking
breathe, decaie of memory* forgetfulness, and diverse other discommodities
which Pliny reverseth. Libri. xiiii. Capit. xxii.
But those cancred diseases ought to be a greatter terror unto us, wherewith
the soul is infectid, and brought to destruction: as be murder, aduoutrie,
incest, manslaughter, blasphemy, cursinge, slander, seditione, and such
other enormities which we do most certainly know to arise of drunkenness. And
therefore the Romans would not admit to an office any such, as were much
given to drinking of wine, thinking them unfit for consultations, which had
the dregs of the foredaies dronkennes in their heads, and in a manner knew
not them selves to be men. Which order if it were put in execution in our
commonweals, there would be in many of them but a sclender Senate.

What other thing could Bonosus in all his high Bonosus ^^^led Bibosus.
estate have done, which was borne to be a very swilpotte, and thereupon was
surnamed Bibosus? This man for very wearines of life hanged him self, then
did every man ^ate to his reproach: the Tonne is hanged. Tiberius Nero named
Biberius Mero.
I will not here make mention of Tiberius Nero, which because of his continual
dronckennesse, was surnamed Biberius Mero, because he droncke two whole days
and so many nights with Piso, who^ he had made his lieutenau^t of the city of
Rome: neither of any other like monstrous men, seeing it is evidently known
that the very Ethenickes did abhor the san^e. For eschewyng whereof Romulus
by law forbade women that they should drink wine. Likewise Plato thought
that wine was to be prohibited in a common weal, as a thing which perishes
the mind. But our men (I mean the true worshippers of God) Osee iiii.
do speak far better touching this matter: for the Prophet says thus:
Fornication, wine, and drunkenness, Prou. xxxi.
take away a man's understanding. Also drunkenness is a ryottous thing, and
wine is full of tumult, who so takes delight therein, shall not be wise.
Wherefore the apostle full well commands us not Roma. xiii. Galla. v.
to live in excessive eating and drinking, saying the works of the flesh be
manifest to be, murder, drunkenness, contencion, sedicion: For they that ^
do, Luc^. xxi,
shall never attain unto the kingdom of heaven. And above all other, our
master Christ the only teacher of all truth says: Take heed that your
hearts be not ouerladen with surfeites, drunkenness, and cares of this world:
lest while we sleep, the last and great day come suddenly upon us.

Therefore if we will have any certain hope of that our heavenly country, we
must withdraw our selves from the enormitie of dronkennes, lest we by our
misusage, riottously making waste of wine (the wholesome gift of nature) do
consume it away from the sick, thirsty, and our other brethren which might
be releued therewith, and so turn it to our damnacion: Which evil the more
offensive it is, the more it binds the magistrate to refourme it. Therefore
let the saying of S. Peter be always fixed before our iyes, Pet^. iiii.
which is, it is inoughe for us that in our foretyme we fulfilled the will of
the gentiles, when we were occupied in wantonness, concupiscence, dronkennes,
surfetinge, and wicked worshippynge of images.

Let every man therefore live the rest of his time in this flesh according
unto the will of God. Which thing because it happens far other wise by
means of soche manifest misdemeanour, it is evidently to be The Magisteate is
known by the subjects manners.
sens, what magistrates, what cou^saillours, what censours they be to whom the
stroke of the common weal is committed in government. Soche as do esteem
private gain or an accustomed usage, more then the common commodity, which
causes the discipline of good behavior to be neglected. Yet not without sure
reuengemente, which will be so much the more rigorous, y^ more do fall by this
incurable licenciousnes into Satan's snare, and turn their life, being thus
destitute of all honest conversation, into the deep dongeon of death.

Learn therefore and take heed ye rulers, awake out of this slo^ber, and
understand how great a charge is committed unto your government, that your
citees may be trained up with soche discipline, with soche virtuous vsages,
that every man may know, that the prosperous success thereof, does not
consiste in those outward things, but that they do tend upward to the true
blissfulness, and do their endeavor to win the price, for the which they do
run.

The argument of the second Chapter.
That injuries, which be no small prouocacion to inward hatred and
contencion, are not to be borne withal in a common weal, and further how
profitable a thing it is to forget old displeasures.

IEiurie, says Vlpiane, is so named, because it is dooen contrary to right, in
Latin called ( Ius) for generally whatsoever is done otherwise then by right
and order of law, is holden as an injury. But that which is done upon
despite, bears a peculiare name, and in Latin is called contumelia, that is
to say, a reproach or rebuke. Which Aristotle judges Arist in 4. polit.
to proceed of an open maliciousnes of mind, by these words: They that be
exceeding rich, or exceeding mighty and of great power, be for y^ most part
malicious and reproachful: but they that be very poor or base, be harmefull.
And this is certain, that the great wealthy and mighty men, be lightly
vicious and disdainful: and the poor and base, wily and deceiptfull. Labeo
Injury is committed twowaies.
says, that injury is done after two sorts, either by corporalle act, when
it passes by violence, or by words, when it is committed by way of reproach
and vilanie. Injuries, and in general all that is done contrary to right,
although they do trouble the quiet estate of a common weal, and bear a
certain counteinau^ce of violence: yet the further examinyng thereof, depends
more upon the civil Laws, then upon this treaty and argument, that I have
taken in hand. And therefore I will not meddle any further, then with soche
in^uries as be dooen, either in fact or words: which because they proceed of
a contemptuous mind, they seem to detracte somewhat from the liberty which
nature has given us: and to bring soche a grief W^^pan^^ ^ll tree up nature.
unto us, as can not otherwise ^e eased and mollified, then by aid of
judgment, and dread of punishment.

There has not been alwaie one certain kind of punishment appoincted for
injuries sense the beginning, as Sertus Cecilius in Aulus Gellius declares,
Gellius lib. 20. capi. 1.
upon a law of the twelve tables, thus: If one do an other injury, let him
pay therefore for an amercement. xxv. pieces of coigne called Asses. But who
is so Ten pieces of the Roman ^o^gne called. (...)) be in ^alue our sle^^ing
gro^^.
neadie, that he will refrain from doing of injuries, and may be quitie for
soche a small recompense? And therefore Q. Labeo mislikyng that Law, as it
does appear by his books which he wrote upon the. xij. Tables, says:
There was one Lucius Neratius a The insolency ^t Neratius.
leude fellow, and in deed a very ruffian. This roister had a great delight to
flappe free men on the face with his hand, and had a pursebearer after him,
whom he commanded to deliver to the party so beaten. xxv. Asses, according to
the ordinance of the twelve Tables Whereupon the Pretoures afterward, thought
it best to aholishe this Law: and by decree published, that there should be
appoincted commissioners thenceforth for the determinyng of injuries, which in
deed esteemed the same, according to right and reason, and made the crime to be
a notorious infamy to the offendour.

Whereupon it appears, how careful the builders of citees always have been,
to bridel soch as delited to be injurious unto other. Whose malice and
naughtines, is not to be borne with all, for that they do breed debate (...)
thing ^t (...) occa(...) at^ (...). ^.
among the subjects, and make one to fall out with another, to the a^^iau^ce
of the common tra^quilitie. For what more pestilent a thing can be stirred in a
commo^weale, then when inward hatred is by little and little rooted out of
men's hearts, to open the window to new grudges and malice, and to make one
so to mistruste another, that thereupon sedicions and much tumult ensues?
Therefore for the preseruacion and peaceable continuance of the common weal,
it is neadefull to take away the occasions of such contencions, and after that
those thorns and thistles be plucked forth, to lay the groundeworke of peace
and quietness, without which neither impartyng of commodities, ne yet the
honorable estate of the common weal, can continue. Which may he done two
manner of ways: for we appease and determine wrongs either by friendely
means, or by order of laws. But for so much as men be stiffenecked, and
desierous of reuengment, very few will be content to take wrong, without great
stir and clamor. But standing to much upon their reputacion, they will
seek either by rigorous judgment, or else by corporal punishment, to revenge
their quarrel. Howbeit, it were more commendable, to forgive y^ is trespaced
against us, then to weary every court with importunate suits, in sekyng of
reuengement, and in easiyng our boylyng stomachs.

The Ath^ntans also like wise men perceived that nothing did so disquiet the
common tra^quilitie, as injuries. Therefore when by order of entreatie they
could A Law ^^ forgetfulness of (...) mong (...)no.
not reconcile their Citizins to a mutual love: they ordained a law, called
the law of forgetfulness of wrongs: for that thereby it was commanded that
they all should forget injuries paste, and never remember any reproach
suffered or done one to another. Which law was for this consideration
commendable, for that although the enormitie of this evil spredde so large,
that it could not utterly be roted out of their minds, yet such order was
taken, that neither by unlawful language, ne yet by any presumptions attempt,
one should molest another without punishment: Tullie makes mention of this
law by these words: My trust C^^^ro. Philip. ^.
being once that the common weal and the government thereof were returned
into your counsaille and authority (my Lords) I purposed to stand as it were
in a perpetual watch due unto a Counsailoure, and one that had borne the
office of a Consul. I never departed, I never cast mine eyes from the common
estate sense the day we were all assembled in the church of Tellus. In which
church as much as lay in me, I did lay the foundation of peace, and renewed
the old ensample of the Athenians: yea, I used the Greake word which they in
appeasing of conte^^cions, were wont to use, and thought best to bury al
injuries past, in perpetual oblivion.

It is therefore expedient for a common weal, that as few injuries be in it, as
may be, consideringe they be the seed and cherishment of all inward hatred
and privy grudge: or if there be any, to calm and qualify them that they do
not wax more ragyng hot, and be suffered to breed a mortal enemitie: Which
shall more easelie be compassed if they be pacified while the perturbacion is
but fresh and even newly occasioned: for so they shall be short and light and
soon forgotten. For according to the saing of Tullie: those things be In
primo de offi.
lighter which are done upon a soden, then those which are thougt upon with
long deliberacion and counsel. But when injury is pretensedlye and
advisedly done (as Plutarche says) it comes of a weakness of Plutar. in vita
Dionis.
mind, either to hurt others, or unlawfully to obtain that a man desires:
the avoiding whereof every man sees is necessary for a common weal.

Now for private reuengement* Christians and Ethnicques use not one kind of
practice. For the Ethnicques think it even as unjust a thing not to revenge an
injury done unto them, as to do the same. Wheruppon there arises a saying:
who so reue^geth not a former wrounge, provoke another. Which drives all to
this end, that we have regard of our honor and liberty, and save our
neighbors harmless. Thus says Tullie, there be two sorts of injustice:
Lib. 1. de off.
one of such as offer it: another of those who though they be able, do not
defend wrong from them to whom it is offered. For who so unjustly does make an
assault upon any man, either stirred by choler, or any passion, he seems as
with violence to kill his fellow. And who so defends not nor withstandeth
injury, if he be able, is as far in fault as if he should forsake his
parents, his friends, or his country.

But Christianes ought rather to perdon wrongs offered them, then to work
any thing that may sownde to reuengemente: which be commanded by their
great patience to overcome the Kingdoms of the world: to show gentleness,
modesty, mildenes, lenity and sobrenes toward all men: which is no small
point of fortitude, that their affections being subdued, they will freelye remit
injuries received, yea not to be offended with the taking away of their
lives: specially if that may redound to the glory of god and edifiyng of
their neighbor: which in this our mortal life we must ever set before our
eyes and endeavor to provoke other to do the like by our good conversation:
for it is our parts to suffer, and to leau^ all reuengeme^t unto the pleasure
of god. So co^m^^ndement is given that when we take a blow o^ the one cheek, we
turn the other, by these our Sauioures words: But I say unto you: do ye no^
resist evil: but who so beats the upon the right cheek, turn also Math. v.
unto him the other. Moreover it is charity one to forgive another, as Christ
did forgive us to make us inheritours with him of the kingdom of God. So
says the Apostle: one bearinge with another and forgeuing one an other if
there be any quarrel amongst you, as Christ did forgive you.

Thus ought a common weal to be appoyncted, and to be furnished with such
subjects as have a blessed hope, that from this visible City they shall pass
unto Ad colloss. 3
that which is invisible, and shall euerlastinglye continue: far unlike in
form to that which the Philosophers do ymagen: who be of opinion that an
injury should be repelled to the shame and reproach of him that committed the
same, as tho he were an infamous person, and unworthy to bear the name of a
man, which regards not his worship, the defense of his good name to
continewe both unto his lives end, yea and afterward to his children,
friends, and country. Which yet I do account as no point of modesty so to
do, but wish rather that our reproach, folly, and whatsoever vilanie is
vntreulie reported of us, for sufferaunce and patience sake, may be turned to
the ensample of others: whereby they may amend and leave their maliciousnes,
and be at an atonement with us. This is that which our blessed master and
teacher Christ so often puts into our remembrance. That Romans 12.
we should bless those that persecute us, y^ we should bless and not
accurse, yea if our enemy be hungrye, to give him meat, if he be thirsty, to
give him drink: for in so doing we shall heap coals of fire upon his head,
that he by our good will allured, may be con^^rted unto uprightness of life,
and may begin to love them whom he before persecuted.

Which doctrine as it is true, so is it necessary, not proceeding ^^ Sibilles
oracle, but taught of gods The perfect way of putting away injury.
own mouth which we ought with all our hearts to embrace, doing that which
besemeth our profession, and declares the innocence of our conversation.
Wherein we somewhat disagre with the Philosophical precepts: which so far
forth as nature did enstructe them, thought it to be the part of an honest
man to learn sufferaunce, and not to do any wrong: and that therefore injury
was his shame which did it, with such other like sayings of wit and judgment.
But our profession is this: not only to suffer and not to provoke injury, but
by our gentle sufferaunce to move him that did us the wrounge, to newnes and
amendment of life.

The argument of the third Chapter.
That sedicion, which is the utter decay of all commonweals, ought to be
forsene, which has often times had her original cause of ambicion, private
gain, and contempt of discipline and good order.

TVllie writes that the nature of sedicion is to divide the people, and to The
fruit o^ sedition.
cause them to take parts and to cleue unto several factions: which chances
sometimes when the people are severed among them selves, sometimes when they
do make an uproar against their magistrate, with so great mischief to the
common weal, that nothing can be more pestilent, nothing more pernicious. For
it does not only breed greater discord then any malice conceived with in
the stomach through inward hatred: but for the most part it causes a
pitiful, and most miserable murder of men. Whereof if we had none other
ensample, A rebellion mo^ued in Germanye in the year of our Lord 1525.
that were a sufficient testimony which Germany has abiden by the rebellious
insurrection of the commons, wherein were slain an hundred thousand of the
base people, and soche as were accused to have been accomplices of the tumult
moved by them.

Aristotle gathers many grounds of sedicion, but inespeciall ambicion, and
coueteousnes. For if he that Ambition and covetousness be causes of ^^dition.
coueteth a public office once suffer a repulse, as he is disquieted in mind,
so he does his whole endeavor to revenge that injury, and once to confirm
the opinion which he has conceived for the atchieuynge unto to the chief
estate of government. This is certain, who so once be desirous of empire,
glory, and honor, do quite forget justice, as Tullie writes, alleging Lib.
1. de off.
this saiynge of Ennius:

There is no trust in kingly state,
Whose port neglectes an equal mate.
For what thing so ever is of such nature, that many can not therein excel,
it breeds lightly so much contention, that it will be very hard to keep an
uncorrupted society. Which thing Caius Cesars rashenesse The temeritie of
Caius C^s^^.
does euidentely declare, which ouerthrewe all the estate of the laws both
of God and man, for the atteining unto the Soueraintie, which he by a fond
opinion in him self had conceived. And therefore it is written that he had
always these two verses of Euripides in his mouth, taken out of a Tragedy
named Phenisse:

If we from right in ought may svvarue, for empires sake it is:
In other things regard thou right, and dread to work amiss.
This stout couraged Prince thought that dominion ought to be gotten by force
of arms (of which opinion there be many noble men in these our days) but
he did not remember, that nothing that is violent, is perpetual, or of any
long continuance. And that as kingdoms be gotten by arms, so they be lost
by arms, by the just judgment of God, which would have all things to be
done justly, and that nothing should be forceably attempted.

Furthermore greedy desire of gain provoke sedicions Covetousness.
through two kinds of men, the one Scapethriftes, which when they have
misspent, and lewdely wasted their goods, ^^ese the poor to enriche them
selves again. The other of those that be oppressed, and care not what they
do, so that they be set at liberty, and delivered from the heavy yoke of
bondage. As the unmeasurable greadinesse of Usurers did not only shake the
city of Rome, but also all Italy, and caused an uproar, until that first
Menenius Agrippa, then Marcus Sempronius Tribunes of the people, and last of al
Julius Caesar the dictator, brideled them with laws. Likewise, when Tiberius
Gracchus returned Lamentable ^^ pl(...) to Tiberius Gracchus.
from Numantia, where he had born the office of Questor, every where as he
went through Italy, had pitiful complaints, and heavy lamentacions of the
pore for the same cause. The women all dismayed, and welnigh dead for honger,
met him in the way, beseching him to reliue their misery, bringing for^he
their pore children, which they said that they would rather had never been
borne, then so to be consumed away, and to pearishe with soche a death of all
other most miserable. The men also showed their wounds which they had received
for the commonweals sake, saiynge, that where as they had well hoped, that
after they had taken soche pains, and spente so much of their blood in
vanquishinge of their enemies, that at the length they should have lived
peaceably and quietly at home. Where as now contrariwise, they were enforced
to fight with extreme honger, an enemy as most cruel, so most intolerable.
And that the breakinge up of the wars which was comfortable to others, as an
end of their travails, was to them the beginning of their calamity, and that
they had rather have died in the field, or upon those usurers, then to have
heard those rufull complaints of their wives and children, so perishinge and
steruinge for very famine. Where with Gracchus being moved, and having
compassion of the people, caused a law to be ordained to this effect: That no
man should have above Lex agraria
fifty Acres of land, and if any man had a son ^n^ranchised, that then he
might emparte unto him the one half thereof. As for the division of the
residue, that three men should have commission to distribute it amongst the
people. Last of all there was a Prouiso made, that no man should sell anic
soche portion, as by the Commissioners was assigned unto them.

And for so much as the sharp spear wherewith these money mongers and
wealthy muckerers pierced ^^e rebellion of the rychm^n and their complaints.
the poor men's hearts, was by this law wrested forth of their hands, they
also began to make an out cry and an hurly burlye, and to stir up a great
tumulte, alleging that they had great wrong not only to be so depryued of
their Lands, but also to lease their manours, houses, and trees builded and
planted to their great charge and expenses: Some lamented the buriyng places,
and their elders monumentes whereof they by this law should be driven to lack
the benefit. Other which had given their lands to their children, or turned
their wives douries or other pawnes into hereditamentes and lordships, sorowyd
for that thus their wives were deprived of their dowries, their children of
their fathers liberality, and they themselves of their pawnes and gages. Some
labored very earnestly to hold still such enheritaunce as of ancient
liuelyho^e fell unto them by descent of blood. Whereupon there ensewed much
dissension, for that hereby the city was as it were divided into two factions.
So that in conclusion it both cost Gracchus his life, and the law was
abrogate by the practices which the ritche devised.

Moreover contempt, fear of punishment, power, excessive wealth and
prosperity, and every such like Occasions of ^^^^tion.
thing as passes an honest mediocritie, gives occasion to seditione: for that
man's nature is such that nether it can moderate it self, ne yet well bear with
another weldoyng. Tirauntes also have moved many to rebellion: Tyranny.
which were always so much hated with all men, that in some cities rewards
were appointed for those that slew tirantes, whose children the Greckes thought
not good to be left alive. Whereof we have Plutarchus de virtutibus (...)^um.
a notable ensample of two daughters of Aris^otimus which was sometime a
tyrant of Elis: when their father was slain and they led to death, at the
mediation of Megislona wife unto Tunoleon, they were An ^^sample of two (...)es
th^^ we^e daugh^^^s of a (...)e.
brought back into their chamber and permitted to chewse their death as them
best liked: Then the elder sister untied her girdle and made a loope, wherewith
she might strangle her self: but the younger requested her sister that she
might have the first proffe of this end: which granted, she covered her
sisters body being dead as womanl^e as she could, and after turning her self
unto Megistona Timoleons wife, she besought her that after her death she would
not suffer her to lie naked dishonestlie. This said, she ended her life even as
her sister had done before. These maidens saw that they might not continue
after their father such a tiraunte: and therefore they purposed rather
honestly to die, then contrary to womanhode to have been murdered in the
executionours hands.

Immoderate exactions also and subsidies assessed by the higher powers, have
moved no small tumultes ^r^cio(...) o^^^n (...) o^ rebellion.
even in our days, when as the people at the mocion of certain seditious
persons have attempted they cared not what, rather then so to have been
ouercharge^: as though what so ever necessitte persuaded them, that were also
lawful. Whereof I could rehearse sundry ensamples, were it not that they were
both odiouse and better known, then that the^ neaded in this place to be
touched: yet to this purpose profitable, to put the officers in mind that they
doo^ not to much abuse the people of God, turnyng their authority not to the
feadyng of the flocks committed to their charge, but to the shauing and
pillyng of them: On the other side, they may enstruct the subtectes that it is
a shameful villainy to rebel against the superiors, and for lack of
obedience madlie to go about to amend that which the heavenly Father lays
upon them as a bourden for reuengement of sin, causinge us vnpacientlie to
suffer that which is appoincted us for a remedy, and to turn our medicine,
into poison.

Hereupon also oftentimes through our own sinful and naughty living, soche
officers rule over us, as be negligent, ungodly, coueteus, insolent, and very
tyrants: which neither regard discipline, ne yet any honesty of manners: but
be only sent of God for a plage, so to oppress and vex the people that they
will attempt Rebellion: but all in vain, for that as their hearts be
traitoro^s, so they have received a vicious governor. For God uses to match
like with like, and for so much as they both have contemned a good form of
living, God most justly causes the one to be the destruction of the other,
when as the princes insolentlie endeavor to fulfill their own appetites. But
because they be insatiable, and like horse leaches, the (...).
mo^e blood they suck, the more they desire, the subjects be in no less
distress. For while by rebellion they go about to deliver them selves out of
this bondage, they either fall into a more miserable state, or else come to a
rufull end.

How be it the insolency and contumacie of man's mind can not alwaie be so
brideled, but that sometime it will bruste out, and declare how wickedly it is
inclined. Therefore some politic order would be taken, that soche sedicious
tumultes might be pacified without bloodshed, chiefly of such as neither
advisedly, ne yet maliciously, but by sedicious perswasio^s, are thereunto
driven, which thing that magistrate may best do, which favors the common
weal, which bears authority for his Godliness, and is reverenced for his
virtues. Like as Neptune in Virgill, which with his scepter and three grained
maced, id calm Aeneidos. 1.
the raging seas, of whom the Poet writes thus:

And like as when of^times amidde
the people springes debate,
With fury fell their stomachs rage
and swell with irefull ^^ate.
And then both brandes and stones they ^^ing,
or what comes next to hand,
That in their furious fittes they find,
their enemies to vvithstande.
If then by chance they see approach,
a grave and ancient pear,
They vvhishe forthwith with ears attent,
and all him stands to hear.
As he then rules with words their vvilles,
and stays the peoples rage,
And eke their boilyng breasts does s^ake,
and havvtie minds assuage.
So ceast the murmr of the seas,
When up this father stood,
And rode in Chariot round about,
to vievve and calm the floode.
In which words the most famous poet declared that tumultes and sedicion
would be pacified by wisdom, gravity, and constancy of mind, lest they
cre^pyng further, work much mischief, and can not be stayed without
sheadyng of much innocent blood. After this sort was Felix governor of Jury
stirred up Egesippus de excidio Hi^ ro^olimae lib. 2. cap. ^.
to end and determine the controversy risen at Cesarea, between the Jews and
the G^tiles for their possessions, which the Jews would have kept wholly,
but the Gentiles to the contrary alleged the Romans authority, which if
they might not do it by entreatie, they would attempt it by force of arms,
as Egesippus writes.

Solon made a wonderful law among the Athenians concerning this matter,
depriuynge sothe of their office and dignity, as when any sedicion did arise,
did cleave to nether side, because good and true dealyng men would not refuse
to endaunger them selves with other their fellow citezens, and to put to their
helpinge hands to set quietness amongst them, rather then being in security,
and out of danger the^ selves, to look for a p^ceable end of soche
troublesome tumultes and furious tragedies, both for that in soch mocions they
were best able to help soche enormities which had not been occasioners
thereof, and would use wisdom in pacifiyng the same: And also for that no
man ought to sequestrate him self from the common care and charge, as though
he had nothing to do with other men's miseries and unquietness.

All men ought to forbear rebellions attemptes, were it for nothing else,
but for the very extremity of the present punishment. For they arise against
the magistrate, and against thordinaunce of God. Besides that, they do break
the public peace and tranquillity. Sedicion, in the end has been always
plagued.
And in very deed they that have stirred soche rebellion, were their pretense
never so apparent just, yet they ever have borne away the smart. For upon
what occasion so ever thou do rebel, thy attempt is heinous and wicked.
Furthermore, who so ever being un harmed is maliciously bent to sedicio^,
works a thing very detestable, odious in the sight of God, and to be
abhorred of all good men. But who so is either edged by other, or upon some
perturbacion of mind moved so to do, he can not thereby be excused, because he
breaks the peace; and seeks reuengement, which does not appertain unto him.
Who so therefore takes the sword, is worthy to dye with the sword, and abide
just punishment for his desire of reuengement.

All men know what befell at Munster a town in Westphalia, upon a sedicious
rebellion moved by certain ill dispos persons: were not as well the innocents
as the offenders after extreme famine, either slain with the sword, or
brought to extreme misery and calamity? It were neadelesse to rehearse any
more Cities, as Venice, Paris, Gaunte, Liege, Hertfurt, Prage, Vienna in
Austriche, and many other which have been euidente Spectacles of rebellions to
all the world, as by their Cronicles it does appear. Yet one there is
which for the horrible vengeance thereon taken, I may not leave untouched.
When as Chorah Number. 16. et Josephus. li. ^iii. Antiq. capit. ^. and. 3. Cora^.
Abiron.
an Hebrew borne, a man of great nobility and wealth, Likewise Dathan and
Abiron, conspired against Moses and Aaron, as though they did more justly
deserve that honor, then the other which were not comparable unto them,
neither in wealth ne yet blood and parentage, and cried out that they had
brought the people forth of Egypt, where was plenty of milk and honey, to
destroy them in the wilderness with famine and honger: GOD minding to repress
this sedicion at the first breaking out, sent down fire forth of heaven,
which so burnt up Chorah with an hundred and fifty Chorah, Dath^ and Abiro^
we^ destroyed for mouyng of sedicion.
men that took his part, that their bodies were never seen after. Moreover the
earth gapynge so devoured Dathan, Abiron, and their adherentes, with their
tents and all their substance, that they pearished from among the midst of the
people, and covered with earth, so went quick into hell.

Ensamples certainly which God would not in vain have set forth unto us in
writing; were it not that thereby we should learn to reverence the
magistrates, to submit our selves unto laws, t^ keep peace and quietness, and
to bear the burden of the cross with a suffering and patient mind. Then
ought we No cause ought to m^ue us is rebellion.
not to make any co^motions against our magistrates, be they never so evil,
ne yet against any other: but every man being content with that which God
has given him, must do his dewtie: and think him self to be a part of that
body, which God would should be vnseuered, and vnbroke^, whose true head is
Christ, in which body if either magistrates or subjects begin to go out of
kind, and to anoye the^, thou must not either violently or riottouslie go
about to amend it, and lewdlie to take upon the reuengement which is dew
only to God. But pursewe thou the matter with that armor which the holy
word of god gives the: that is: thou must advise, counsel, warn, solicit,
and earnestly charge them to cease from their enterprise as dishonest,
ungodly, and wicked: not to offend gods people: but that they repent and
work that which is good and godly. Now if they vouchsafe to hear thy good
counsel, thou haste done a Christen man's office, preserving them, which
were in the ready passage toward the Devil, so much the readier, because it
is so open and plain that a man may go thither even blindfield. But if they
shut their ears The path way to hell is open and plain.
and refuse to hear thy godly admonicio^s, thou must not therefore draw thy
swerd lest thou perish with the swe^rde. But thou must patiently remit the
cause unto him, which knows the number of the hears of thine head: and
punishes the sorer, the longer he forbeareth.

The argument of the fourth Chapter.
That such men are to be receauid into a city, as will be careful to provide
for them selves, without disturbaunce of the common concord.

Therefore not al kind of men ought to be admitted into a city, but only
What men must be received into citees
such as ^e discrete and well manered. For it forces much what manner of men
they be, whereupon the City does consiste: And therefore Socrates in Plato
gathers that Plato. in. 8. ^e Repub.
as one kind of man is fit for one kind of common weal, another for
another, so one kind of common weal, is fit for sondrie kinds of men. For
the diversity of conditions in men, causes the diversity of commonweals,
as in Hesiode the diversity of ages, was measured by the diversity of men's
behauiours. For The Golden world.
they in the Golden age lived without sorrow or grief because they were godly,
just, temperate, and only given to virtuous life. After ensued the Silver
age, The Silver world.
wherein by little and little grew injury, pride, impiety, intemperaunce, and
obstinacy. Then came the Brazen age, wherein all mischief braste out. Then
The B(...) world.
first began wars, then were the Giauntes, which despised heaven, who had
none other law then stood in arms and violences: so that it was neadful to
raise up noble men to tender the weak, and to protecte them from suffering
wrounge. Last of al is comen the iron The ^ro^ world.
world the most accursed of all other, full of labor, misery, carefulnes,
impiety, injustice, deceipte, murder, perjury: and to be short there is
scarce any wickedness on the earth which is not holden as a virtue. These
men for their iniquity be in danger of many great and terrible mischiues,
in so much that often times an whole City has been punished for one trespace:
besides that Justice sitting by God the heavenly father, continually
complains upon injustice and injuries of men, until such time as
reuengement be appoincted. So writes Hesiode:

Jupiter which casts a large view over al, does sore Hesiodus in 1. Georgico.
punish those, which delight in reproaches and naughty works. Oftentimes an
hole City fares the worse for one evil man. And further Justice, is a maid
and daughter unto Jupiter, gracious, and is revenged by all the gods in
Heaven. Yea and when as any man with unjust doings does displease her, she
sits by Jupiter her father and opens to him the wickedness of man's mind,
that he may revenge her.

As the manners of men varied, so the ages varied, until such time as their
iniquity of life came to such extremity that it might be compared even unto
iron.

Then can it not otherwise be but that a City must have in it al sorts of
men: whereof some be wardens and governors: some men of occupacio^ and
artificers, some men of liuelyhoode and possessioners: wherein let every man
learn to do his dewtie, and diligently to execute the office whereunto he is
called.

Thauncient writers make soldiers and such as Warriors.
follow the wars a portion of their City, as though it were not enough for
Citizens to live according unto their desires in peace, unless they had some
to defend them at such time as they be provoked with injury, or else
constreyned to war in their enemies land. For proof whereof we may bring
Rome, Carthage, Numa^tia, Lacedemon, Thebes, Athens, Venice, Ienua, and all
other free Cities, which never acknowledge any forreyne Prince, but live
always within their own liberties: as you may also understand by Aristotle
in his polytiques. And not Emperors Lib. 7. polit.
only and Capitaines do commend unto us the estate of warriers as very
necessary, but Tullie also him self does prefer it before the knowledge of
the civil law. His words in the oracion which he made in the defense of
Lucius Mur^na be these: And certainly (for I must neades say as I think) this
martial virtue far surmounteth all other: for this has gotten a name unto
the people of Rome, this has won eternal glory to this City, this has
compelled the whole circuit of the world to obey this our Empire: All these
civil matters, all these our excellent studies, all this our courtly and
oratorious praise and diligence, do lurk under the warrantie and defense of
warlie prowes. As soon as any suspicion of tumulte is noised, al our arts be
whisht. Then all the authority is committed to them that be best men of
war. For all thing belonginge to the empire and state of the City are
thought by them to be strengthened and fortified.

Howbeit, governors must in this paincte have a vigilant iye, that their
people and citezeins be so trained up and enured, that they may know their
true allegeaunce, and be wary in thintertainement of forriners: receiuyng none
but soche as be bent to obedience, and not accustomed to sedicious and
rebellious attemptes. For it is a wounder to see (soche is the peruersitie of
our nature) how some one sedicious person, is able to enfecte a whole number.
Whereof we may take the City of Sparta for ensample: for so long as Plutare
in vita Licurgi
there was no idleness, no sluggardie, suffered therein, it showed forth
alwaie, either some excellent president of virtue, or else some singular
reprehension of vice, and so one might take ensample of an other, which in deed
had their overseers alwaie at hand, to enstructe and teach the^ the trade of
honest living, even from their very infancy. Neither were they permitted to
straie The Spartianes favored not foreign customs.
abroad, and to travail into strange countries, for fear of bringyng
corrupt abuses, and strange customs into their country. Yea, they expelled
soche as came unto their city, and stood them in no stead: not as Thucidides
says, fearyng lest they would not follow the order of their common weal, so
well established: but lest they should thewe any le^de example, and ^ee
occasion of some sedicious enterprise. For needs it must be, that when
strange bodies come into a common weal, strange language must also ensue,
which brings in new judgments: whereupon diverse inconveniences do arise,
and every man through dissentions surmises, attempteth to break the common
tranquillity and quietness. And for so much as the greatest part of
Discipline, consists in so vsyng the people, that they may stand in
obedience and awe of their superiors: every thing must be foreseen, that
may seame to altere or empaire the good estate of a well ordered common weal.
And among other mischieues, idleness (the only loss of precious time) is
^lenes must not be suffered in a common ^^^^e.
coumpted one of the chifest, which even in the middle of the cups, deuiseth
how to amend, dispose, build, pulle down, change round to square, and
square to round, things both vnneadfull, and that do nothing appertain to
the purpose: which they do lightly most use, which when they have rioiously
spente their goods, neither will say well, nor keep silence: but as men
only occasioners of trouble, do seek daily some alteracion of things, be it
never so miserable. Wherefore it stands with a common weal, to see order
taken for soche idle loiterers, and either to appoincte those wasters of wine,
wealth, and victualles, to labor and travail, or else, in the deuilles name,
to beat them, and banishe them forth of the country.

Next to these, be soche as under pretense; either of poverty, or of some
kind of sickness, beg their almose, Loiterers and vagaboundes.
loiteryng from door so door. For oftymes upon consideracion of the
enormitie of their crime, they be commanded to avoid the country: chaungyng
the air, but not their minds. Wherefore in their banishement, they will be
nothing the better, but whersoeuer they come, they be aucthours of sedicto^,
and enfecte others with soche vilanie, wherein they them selves are most
notorious. Which when they come, if thou will not releive them, send them
incontinent away, and cause them to depart out at the same door, whereat
they entered in, for fear left their aboade be hurtful, and lest they leave
soche a contagious air behind the^, as perchance may insist the whole town.
For they be naughty vagaboundes whither soever they come, being free of
soche a compaignie, as has more ready money gathered by very beggyng, the^
many Merchants be able to get by their hole trafficque.

But with such enhabitauntes ought a City to be adourned wherein there is
co^tentio^ who may be most virtues, and vice utterly detested and trodden
under foot: where every man with his hole diligence with his hole industry,
abides in that vocation and state whereunto he is called. Nether must other
vagaboundes be admitted, oneles they can bring a testimony of their former
trade of life: which because they be so ill disposed, cannot agree with them
that be honestly enclyned, nor atteyne to any civil behavior: but do
onclie devise and wholly set their minds how to disorder and disturb those
things which are most commendabile already appointed.

The argument of the fifte Chapter.
Diligent heed must be taken that their be no beggars maynteined that go from
door to door, but that our needy neighbors may be releiued it home.

THen there be two sorts of beggars: one of them which haunt all martes,
merkettes, all solemn assemblies, yea welnigh all the coasts of the world,
using a pitiful kind of moan to gather and heap up gubbes of money: devising
moreover a language of their own, which no man understands Open begget^ be
priuytheu^^
but they theimselues, and so mock and deceive men which pity their case as
forrennours and strangers: or else do preatilie delude, yea sometime betraie
Beggars compared to Drove Bees. Plato. in 8. de republi.
the hearers by their cou^terfayte speech. These does Plato call dorres, not
flienge dorres, which spoil the bees, but walking dorres, without stinges,
lurking thieues, robbers by the high way, sacrilegers and autours of all
mischief, which ought therefore every where to be banished, for that they be
common pykers of men's purses, vsinge delusion at home and abroad by subtle
means unpunished.

I will not here make relacion how many treasons, how many sackynges and
burninges of towns have been committed under the pretense of Beggerie, for
that the very Fortes and strong Holds them selves have been opened to
beggars, and the treason so much the less suspected, the more miserable the
persons do appear which commit the same. But yet for all this, Strangers
must, be cherishe^.
when strangers come unto us and stand in need, we ought not to send them
away without aid and relief, for that should be contrary to all humanity,
and intercourse of mutual hospitality. For we our selves be here but
strangers, and have no certain nor permanente restinge place, which
therefore ought to admonish us, more gentlelie and liberally to entertayn
strangers. So says the holy lawemaker Moses: Exodi. 22.
Thou shall not make the Stranger sad or heavy, for ye your selves were
strangers in the land of Egypt. Esaiae. xiiii.
And Esate says: Strangers shall clean unto them, and get them to the house
of Jacob.

Neither be all they that walk like strangers, in like rich, but the most
part require help and succor at other men's hands, which not to bestow
upon them, were as much as to make them heavy, and in deed welnighe to kill
them, which is as much contrary to all humanity, as any thing can be.

The second kind of beggars be those that are our O^^ owncountrey beggars.
own country men, and do not come out of any other quarter, which
nevertheless be not all of one sort, but are severed into two parts. For either
idly they beg their alms from door to door, or else by sickness or some
other infirmity of body are unfit to labor for their living, and so they
are driven to soche extreme poverty, that without other men's surrour, they be
not able to keep their children. Such as be loytering ^oths^ll beggars must
be ^^nished.
and will take no pains for their living, but trouble every manne with their
begging, must needs be banished, and cast out as Dorres that profit nothing,
that for so much as they will not trauaylle for their own sustenaunce, they
may not un worthily consume other men's labor. Whose life is therefore the
more detestable, because they be a president of idleness and sluggardie, and
be therefore unworthy to enter into either city, house, or other company of
men, but either they should be put to the Ploughe and carte, or else whipped
out of the country, that so they may learn not so rashelie, peruerslie, and
unprofitably, to consume soche necessary furniture of victualles, as they
them selves despised to put to their helping hands to provide.

They be much more to be borne withal, which upon some disease, weakness of
body, or extreme poverty are constrained to beg, unless they would starve
for honger, which is the miserablest death of al others. Whose estate is
therefore the more tolerable, because that not upon any delight of idleness,
neither for slothfulness of body, they withdraw them selves Impotent and
vn^eined poor beggars, must be relieved.
from labor, but when the occupacion whereby they would get their living,
fails them, then they are constraigned to make necessity their virtue, and
to beg their bread from door to door. Soche one Lucae. xvi.
was Lazarus, whose sores the dogs did lick before the rich man's gate,
but he could not be releaued with the crummes that fell from his Table. And
the Lucae. xviii.
blind man also which fate by the high way side beggyng and cried: Jesus thou
son of David have mercy upon me, to whom he said, look up, thy faith has
saved the^: and incontinent he looked up, and followed him glorifiyng God. Many
soche ensamples there be to put us in mind to stretche for the our hands upon
the poor and neadie, wherein we can pretend no excuse, as though we knew
not where they ^e, whom we must help, for they mete us, they stand before us,
they lie in our way, requiringe help and succoure at our hands, so that if
they want, we stand in danger of impiety, because we withdraw our goods
from them, upon whom we should bestow them, and la^e them up to unlawful
uses, that is, riotte, vanity, and choice of treasure, which the mothes and
mise gnaw, and at length the devil shall devour both the treasure and
treasurer, and drown them both in Hell, and shall in all this wealth make
them very beggars. But who so shall cherelie stretche forth his hand upon
It is a deed of charitieto give to the poor, and a wicked thing ^^ withdraw
our liberality ^^om them.
the pore, shall receive the blessing of God, and shall have so good success in
all his doings, that all men shall understand that he is worthy to be
wealthye, which does acknowledge him self to be as a Stuarde, and not one in
whose possession worldly gods should alwaie continue. Of whom the wise manne
says: And retche thine hand to the pore, that thy propiciacion and blessinge
may be perfited. Also: who so gives to the pore, shall not stand in need, he
that despises Eccle. vii.
the Prayer of the pore, shall sustain poverty. You see how lively both
the persons are discribed, the geuer never to want, the withdrawer to be in
necessity* both of earthly and heavenly things.

Yet it were more convenient that order were taken that pore men might not go
begginge from door to door, or in the streets, and that for diverse
consideracions. First for that it is a poinct of a Godly zeal to be Causes
why there should be ^^ common beggars.
careful over the pore, and to relieve them with some portion of our goods,
whereby we may purchase treasure in heaven, as the rich man in. S. Mark is
commanded Marc. x.
to sell all that he has, and to provide him self treasure in heaven. And
Tobias: Because alms Tobiae. xii.
delivers from death, and ^he it is that purges sin* and causes men to
find everlasting life. But this ^ur liberality ought to come of it self, and
to proceed of a ii. Corin. ix.
free heart, as the Apostle admonishes us, saying thus: He that liberally
sows, shall also liberally reap, every Roma. xii.
man according to his hearts desire, not in sorrow, ne yet in necessity, for
God loves him that gives cherily. Also, he that deals alms merely. This
We ought to bestow our alms charitablie.
free heart and liberal mind will not suffer us to tarry until soche time as
the pore come forth to mete us in the way, or to lie at our fete criyng out
for help, and then deal halfepenie doale in the sight of the world, rather
to be praised of others, then for any good will or pitiful heart that he
bears to the impote^t. Whereas contrarily, we be commanded to give our
alms so darkelye, that the right hand may not know what the lift does,
that thereby the heavenly father which sees thee in the dark, may requite
thee in the light. We ought further to relieve the pore at home in their
houses, or in spittelles and cotages, or in other places appoincted for them
to lie in, as common hospitalles. So that hereby thou may understand, that
where there be the more common Beggars, and the more criynge out for alms, in
that city there is so much less true Godliness.

The second cause why it were good to restrain Beggerie breeds many
^^conueniences.
this begging from door to door is, for that they that use it be so enured with
idleness, yea, that if they have any business at home to do, they pass not of
it: and they do not only encumber their neighbor, but also take a delight
to raunge abroad, and do teach their wives, children, and whole family to
be beggars, and to live idlelie. Whereby upon other men's travail at the last
be nourished Bawdes, harlottes, ruffians, thieues, houseburners, and notorious
robbers. It were therefore better that soche pore men were by common charge
seen to and kept in hospitals, then to go about a beggyng, specially
consideringe the commandment of God so bids, by these express words: And
there Deuteronomy. xv.
shall not be one neady or beggar among you, that the Lord thy God may bless
thee in the land which he geneth thee in possession. Also, there shall not
want pore men in the land of thine habitacion. Therefore I command thee
that thou open thy hand to thy pore and neadye brother which is with thee in
the land.

But for so much as severally in so^drie places every poor body could not
so conveniently he provided for, our predecessors erected hospitalles for
strangers, Hospitalles and spittelles.
for sick and diseased persons, for orphans, and for beggars: which were
common houses wherein traueilours, and poor and feeble folks, were received,
and fatherless children brought up: which houses were so endowed of good
men's charity, that by their own rentes and revenues they mainteyned them
selves: privileged also by emperors with the liberties and fraunchises of the
church, and that with reason: for the church goods in old time were also
the goods of the poor. Therefore in division thauncient canonical decrees
give the fourth part thereof to the poor. Relligious houses also where men
were exercised in Monasteries.
contemplation, and Monasteries, were ordained for the common commodity, so
endowed by good men that they were able to live of them selves: which Eusebius
Cesariensis calls sometimes places of reverence, sometimes repaires of honest
men: whence young men were called sometime to the government of the common
weal, sometime to be ministers of the Church.

But because there is not always substance and wealth enough to erecte such
hospitalles for the sick, poor, strangers, and other miserable persons, it
were good they were provided for within doors priuelie, and not permitted to
beg abroad openly. But if such convenient order cannot be taken either
because of lack of pity and mercy in men, or else because the number of the
poor be so great that they can not so commodiouslie be provided for,
necessity then must take place, and that which cannot be amended, must be
borne withal. For better it were to suffer the neadie to beg, then to drive
the^ to the extremity either to starve for hunger, or to hang themselves: for
the belly must be served, tho the gallows hang over thee table, as the
proverb says.

Now there must be heed taken that every one An order must be taken for
common beggars.
be not permitted to beg so openly and to follow that loytring kind of
life. Which through negligence of magistrates is ill over seen in many places,
not without a perniciouse example to others. For youth of both kinds as soon
as they once creape out of their cradles be so enured with idle loytring, that
they will not be brought to any honest art, faculty, occupacio^ or trade,
whereby they may maintain their old age: but craftelye pretendinge feebleness of
health or body, they idly consume that which other men get with sweat of
their brows, and so spend the greatest part of the day in rauenyng,
reuelling, tippling, and such like goodly exercises. Therefore some certain
notice would be had that those might be known, which do herdlie live in
sickness, poverty, or other necessity, and be co^streyned even to fight with
famine: lest those unprofitable dorres which be unworthy to live, take away
good men's alms, or else hinder those which have neade in deed. For it is as
good to see that an alms be given where neade is, as it is to bestow it.
Moreover he that gives alms, must mark to who^ he gives it, lest while he
thinks to do a good deed, he feed idle bellies, norishing serpents in his
bosom, which afterward also will work much harm in the common weal.

The argument of the sixte Chapter.
Concerning the governors or masters of Hospitalles for strangers, the
poor, and orphans, and how they ought to be ordered.

IT is not enough to institute a thing well unless there be some to keep it
in due order, and faithfully to euersee the same: as it is an unprofitable
thing to have a good law, unless there be some to see it put in dew
execution. And therefore the magistrate is well called a living law. When houses
therefore and hospitalles, for the poor people and trauaylers be erected, and
with riches accordingly endowed: there must overseers and governors be chosen,
which must have charge over them as Ioticus had, (whom Leo the emperor by
his rescripte first deputed to that rowme in the city of Constantinople) an
office of as great profit and necessity, as to be a pastor or mynister in
the church: as a thing whose chief charge was wont to be committed to
Busshops or superintendentes, as the latin term is, that is such, to who^,
Superintendentes.
widows, orphans, and poor people were committed. whereupon Jerome says: it
is the glory of a bushop to provide for the releife of the poor. Ambrose
also: The church has no*gold to keep, but to lay out, and to help at a
neade. This also appears by S. Paul which so often wills a Bushop to keep
hospitality, to the intent that in bou^tifulnes and liberality he may
surmount all others. Christen princes also when they establishe the authority
of Bushops, preistes, other church men, and also holy churches, and
privileges: they oftimes mention the hospitalles and the masters thereof, as
things not much unlike which the Busshops be usually charged with all.

Surely in the primitive church the goods of the Act. 5. and. 6.
faithful were common. For so many of them as had possessions of lands and
tenementes sold them and brought the price thereof, and laid them before the
Apostels feet: whereof porcions were distributed among them and that by the
Apostles themselves, so that there was not one neadie among them, but when the
number of the disciples was increased, the twelve thought it not good to leave
the preaching of the word and to minister at tables: and therefore they did
chose seven men of an approved honesty, which because they were S^u^n Deacons
chosen*
deputed to this kind of ministry, were named Deacons and Ministers: for that
under the name of the Apostles they saw to the poor, yea to all the multitude,
they attended upon tables, and by great equity and holiness of life, provided
that there was no neade amongst them. But in our commonweals it were a kind
of tyranny to use any soche community of things: but every man ought to
have his own, and to give part thereof to hospitalles and other uses, for
relieuyng of the poor: whose governors ought to be circumspecte and holy,
and to execute their dewtie godlylie and without reprehension. Whose office
must be not only over the things, but also over the persons: because they be
gods stewardes whose will is that those goods be converted to thuse of the
poor, I mean such as be thankful and do vnfaynedlie acknowledge their own
necessity: which because it ought not to be done rashelie, all the house must
by order of discipline be framed to virtue and godliness, that each man take his
bread with thanksgeuyng and glorify God in his gifts. For the bread of the
children would not be hurled to the dogs, ne yet preciouse stones cast out
to the swine, nether must you think that these seven on whom the Apostles
laid their hands did only serve at tables: but they were men full of the
holy ghost and wisdom, which exhorted the people with daily preaching, to
virtue, and not so much instructing them in words as in godliness of li^e:
besides that they served them in necessaries for their living.

They therefore which be officers must mark whether those that be appointed to
be releaued in such hospitalles, be of an honest towardenes and like to be
Godly and good men, that they do not feed unprofitable members and serpents
which afterward may do much mischief. Wherefore they ought not to be received
which have spent away their goods, at vice, hoorehuntyng, glotonie,
drunkenness, and soche vicious Against soch old wretches no glory in their
former (...).
means, which although the^ have not left their old accustomed vices, yet
either the remorse of conscienc or weakness of body, does not suffer them
so much afterward to offend: so that the sin which they cannot nowin deed
practice yet boileth in their breasts, and keeps still her conceived malice,
which oftimes being uttered folishly in words, bewraieth it self: not
remembering that we must render an account for every idle word: for as it is a
pleasant thing to remember euilles paste: so dissolute persons (al
shamefastness set apart) hold it a gaie thing before honest maidens and good
men, to declare their former wickedness. But why do thou brag of thine
evil, considering thou haste no virtue nor honesty, wherewith thou may
recompense and counteruaile the same.

And because they be Stewardes over the poor, they may do well thoroughly to
examine all those that pretend poverty, left they do admit some unworthy
persons that have no need. Which thing may be prevented either by some open
certificate and denomination, or else by some testimonial, whereby they that are
received may be known. For diligent heed must be had that where all
poverty cannot be releauid in such publycke hospitalles, then open begging
must be permitted, to such as have license given the^ to beg: best children
enure themselves thereunto, and be so corrupted: or else be hardly withdrawn
from that trade through the provocation of such lewd loyterers as cannot live
without it: or at the least if they be suffered to beg, shall be never a
deal further from misery.

Here is to be noted that such things as he given to the relief of the pore,
be to none other use converted. Then ought they not to the endammagyng of the
neadie, to be let out to usury: yet many think this lawful, and hold it a
poincte of a Godly poli^^^ so to enriche hospitalles. And in deed upon this
consideracion in many Cities of Italy, a great sum of money is let forth
upon certain pledges and interest to be repaied at a certain day for the
behofe of the pore. Mons p^etaus.
and this they call, the mount of pity. But for so much as that money is lent
not for hope to receive nothing again according unto the precept of our
Savior Christ, but for interest monethlye, besides that, it is said that
merchants oftentimes have it to make a good markette, and possessioners to
bu^e lands, the pore in the mean while clean contemned: Let them consider
how holy an hill this is, which usurers may so often climb and undermine.
Further, who so either begileth the poor of their money, or tourneth it to
some unlawful use, he is the most detestable of all thieues and robbers.

Therefore those that be covetous, riotous, usurers, ungodly, and such as
study for their own gain, Soche must ^^ approved honest men, as be
appoincted governors ^^ Hospitalles.
may not in any case be made overseers of such hospitalles and government
or provision for the poor: but men of approved honesty, which have well ruled
their own houses, executinge their duty not only with diligent
superintendence, but also in holiness of life, and sincerity of doctrine,
which will not regard usury, ne yet any unlawful gain used by those wicked
usurers and greadie Moneymongers, which will not think it well done by
naughty wai^s to enriche the pore, but like Godly stewardes vprightlie to
execute the charge committed unto them, which stands not upon usury, neither
robbery, ne yet things unjustly and wickedlie gotten. For this is holili^ to
travail in that holy vocacion, and rather to adourne those reverent assembles
and resortes of honest men to the succor of a great number, and to the glory
of God, then shamefullie by ill gotten goods to make them houses of
maintenance of iniquity.

The argument of the seventh Chapter.
That where idleness is used, much unquietness must neades ensue: then that
vacant time applied to study, is to be preferred before corporal labor.

I Have sundry times before declared that a common weal must be quiet, and
void of al disorder and co^trarietie. Which shall then be, if every man be
dilligent about his business, and no man idle. As touching which matter,
although I have not much before spoken some thing, yet because it is a place
worthy to be stand in, and to be well debated, I will more at full enlarge
the same.

There be diverse kinds of quietness, whereof one is Fowee kinds of quietness.
peculier unto the learned sort: An other unto men of honor and dignity:
Another is for the ease of such as be stricken in years: The last is the
cherishement of all Idleness.
lithernes, and sluggerdie, which is the procurement often times of much
variaunce and dissencion.

This learned leisure and vacant time is ascribed unto them that employ their
time to learning, and to the study of Philosophy, in manners concerning both
GOD and manne, which have neade of soche quietness of time, that they may in
the mean while apply their studies, and so establishe their minds in
contemplacion, that they may attain unto the knowledge of the natures both of
heavenly and earthly things, so far forth as man's knoweledge will
reatche. Therefore Aristotle the chief Philosopher (Plato as Tullie thinks
only except) writes, that a man's mind, while he is fitting, is made the
wiser. For they which are wise and learned do know with how great endeavor we
must follow those sciences which are no less comfortable in adversity,
then profitable in prosperity, and everlasting witnesses of the power of God.
In consideracion whereof, we do sufficiently recompense idle time and occupy
our selves most buselye therein: according unto the saying of Seneca the
philosopher: that idle time not spente in learning, is Cato de Republi.
very death and a quick man's grave. Marcus Cato does not in vain call a man
a buble, and Cecilius the poet says: As we be borne so shall we die, and our
beginning hangs upon our ending. Which uncertain brevity of life, we may
only lengthen by the benefit of learning (as a thing invented for
posterities sake) and by virtuous living. Whereupon it so falls out that
those idle times which we do spe^de in learning, be most busy and best
employed. For even as much as the soul in excellency passes the body, so
much does that traua^le which staundeth in the stirringe of the mind, excede
this external and handie labor.

Secondlye I do note an other kind of quietness Quietness ^^^^ of men of
^^(...) and wor^^^.
somewhat unlike unto that which I spoke of before, but not so much but that
it is thereby adourned and lightened. And that is properly imputed to them
that either be in office and government, or travail in counsel and labor
of mind to profit a great number: with out whom as the common weal is not
first ordained, so it cannot afterward be preserved. Such were Numa
Pompilius, Licurgus, Solon, the Scipiones, Crassi, Q. Sceuola, the Catoes,
Brutus, Hortensius, Tullie, and all the residew of those men which did help
their Country with their wisdom, counsel, and all kinds of virtue: which
desired to leave monumentes not of their busy affairs only, but also of
their time profitabile and quietly spent: which vacant time because it is
joined with dignity, Tullie by these words affirms to be most highly
esteemed: What Pro P. Sest.
then is set before these governors of the commonweal that they ought to
took unto, and to direct their travail during the time of their authority?
that, which is most excellent and most to be wished for of all wise, honest,
and good men, I mean vacation of time with dignity. They that will this, be
all holden as principal citizens, they that cause it, be accounted worthy men
and preseruours of the common weal. For men ought not so much to be delighted
in doing things, but they must also have respect to their quietness: nether
regard any quietness which stands not with dignity and worship. Tullie
also did ever think the saiynge of M. Cato which he wrote in the beginning of
his book entitled Origenes, to be witty and worthy to be noted, that is,
that noble and worshipful me^ ought to leave behind them a memorial not of
their busy travail only, but also of their vacations: by these words: so if
I desire any praise (as I know not wherein) it has been purchased at Rome, and
sought Pro Cn. Plancio.
in the Courts: the falling out of the common affairs has proved my
counsel true, so that at home I bare the swaie of the public weal and
kept the City quiet within the City.

Whereby we may understand, how commendadable and praise worthy that
vacation is, whereupon the hole ornament and wealth of the common estate does
depend, which agrees with all such men, as think their life to be given
them not for their own sakes (for in deed according unto the opinion of
Socrates he that minds nothing but life is unworthy of life) but to do some
notable act worthy of memory which may redownde to the commodity not of
them selves only, but also of their friends and countreye. Such they be,
which be like to Epaminondas captain of the Thebanes, which watched, when
the rest were a sleep. Such they be, which have always in their mouths that
worthy saying of Scipio that is, that they be never less idle, then when they
be most idle. For they do not only spend the days, but also the nights
and a great part of their sleep in bewtifiyng and well governing the common
weal: and that which they in daily talk and contemplation de perceive,
bewraieth it self in their sleep: as Tullie writes in the sixte book of his
common weal to have chanced unto Scipio by Aphricane the elder, warning him
to omit nothing that might sound to the atteinment of any kind of virtue,
whereby such as deserved well of their country, had a plain passage made
them up to heaven.

There is a third kind of quietness, most pleasant Quietness i^ old age.
of all other, which all men do chiefly wish as the only haven of their
life, wherein they may spend the rest of their time quietly, and enter into
an account of their former doings, and finally (as all men ought to do) to
make them selves in a readiness to climb toward the way to everlasting
life, which Tullie therefore Libr. ^. de orato^e.
calls the greatest comfort of old age, because a constante man, and any of
a noble courage would take any kind of pains, once to attain unto soche
quietness. For who do ye think would entangle them selves with those
infinite cares and trauailles, sometime in Princes affairs, sometime in the
common weal, were it not for a quiet old age, although men be much therein
begiled. For after they have once wound them selves in, be their charge never
so careful, never so troublesome, they can not rid them selves of it. So I
my self have been vexed now these thirty years, in judicial Plees, often
wisshinge at Gods hand to obtain this quietness, and to hang up mine
armor at Hercules Pillar, as a Soldier weary of weapons, and clean worn
out with the wars.

The fourth and last kind of quietness do I call S^^thfulnesse.
that which is in deed very slothfulness, which seeks neither for
learning, honest exercise, nor dignity, so much the more detestable, because
it does not only cause the loss of time a most precious thing, and hurts
them that use it, but also often times it hinders the public estate, which last
kind has diverse branches. One is mere idleness, mere sluggardie, which is to
be expelled for the of all commonweals, as the Athenians used, which did no
less accuse an idle person, then an heinous offendour, as one that either
should be constrained to work, or else to avoid the country. This is in deed
to sleep as Endimion did, this is to be shaken with Palinurus his boughe, this
is to forget Ouides saying:

What else thou fool is sluggishe sleep, but form of frosen death?
By settled hours of quiet rest, approaches thy want of breath.
Furthermore, this incommoditie does idleness bring with it, that it has
always pouertye a companion, for while a man may, he refuses labor, which
when he is old and feeble, he is not able to bear. The wise Solomon bids
such take an ensample at the Prou. 12. and ^8. and 33.
Pismire how to travail and to forecaste that which is to come, and amongst
other things he says thus: He that works his land, shall be filled with
bread, and he which follows idleness, is of all other most folishe, and
shall alwaie be in poverty. Also, do not thou eat thy bread in idleness.
For we be commanded to eat our bread in the sweat of our brows, and so the
Ethnickes write, that the Gods appoincted men to travail and labor. So
says Hesiode: The Gods assigned labor to men, that they with their wives
and children might not sit idlelye, in vexacion of mind. Which fault S. Paul
r^buketh in young i. Timo. ^.
widows, for that when they be idle, they learn to go from house to house,
and not only idle, but also bablinge and curious, which he therefore
rejects from the ministry, and bids them marie.

The second branch of this vice is, that some be not content shamefullie to
live in idleness, unless they Per(...) idleneo.
annoy others, and forsaking their own vocacion, entermeddle them selves in
other men's matters, breeding in all places where they come, trouble and
conte^cion: men so much the more accursed, for that they do not only
perniciouslie, but also sed^c^^irstie mispende their time. For to say the
truth, what other thing can they either d^oe or think, which neglectyng
honest labor, hide them selves in wine tauernes, tiplinge houses, and
stews, and there waste their thrift most vainly. Then in the consuming
hereof, the^ do besides utter such enormities, in idle communication, as be the
most present nourishementes for the disquietynge of the public peace, and all
to this effect, that when they have spente all, they may live in extreme
beggerie, and at the length when they be past hope of amendment, they either go
about by sedicious means riottouslye to spend other men's wealth, or else
labor to deseei^s their creditours. For as the wiseman Ecclesias. 3^.
says, idleness teaches much evil: a thing so abominable, that the
scholemaister of all wisdom says, that we must give an account of every
idle word. And albeit this idleness seem for a time to raunge at Ezech. x^^.
liberty, yet in fine it shall be plagued. So says Ezechiell the Prophet of
the preuarication of Sodoma: Behold this was the iniquity of Sodoma thy
sister, pride, fullness of meat, abundance, and idleness, These things had
she and her daughters. And they stretched not forth their hands to the neady
and pore, but were proud, and wrought abhominacion against me, and I took them
away as thou saw.

Soche idleness therefore, which provoke men to lurkyng and loyteryng, as
the Mearmaides use to move men's minds, with their pleasant songs, ^^^^
(...).
lingering about the rocks, must be avoided, as it were a very pestilent^, of
al soche as be accustomed to spend the day idlelie, in sitting on p^nilesse
benches, and other common places: which vice is the first step to all
beggerie, yea, and oftimes is the occasion of much debate and variaunce: l^ste
while naughty persons ^ee given to sedicion and slothfulness, neither good
men shall be able to live quietly, neither the common weal be kept in
safety. Which thing although it be more in sight in great citees, where
there be great nombers of idle vagaboundes, as Plato writes: nevertheless,
among every particulare company, there be alwaie some to be found, which
will either do nothing themselves, or else hinder them that would otherwise be
well and honestly occupied,

The argument of the eight Chapter.
That there are some which for no discipline, for no love of virtue, but only
for fear of punishment, can be brought to do their duties. And also what
they of old time have attempted to encourage others to the attainment of
virtue.

Then should commonweals be fortunate, if all the inhabitauntes embracyng
virtue, with a generalle consent, did set their whole minds upon that
blessedness, for the which the life of man was first institute. For this is
according to the saying of saint Paul, not to run in vain, but to receive
i. Corin. ix.
the reward, and to win the garlande made of Roses, which will never fade
away, which will never wither, and prepared from the beginning, for them
that love God. Which apperteineth to soche as be famous for their justice,
faithfulness, wisdom, piety, fortitude, and temperaunce, and have well
deserved of mankind: and know certainly that they be but strangers here, and
must make spedie expedicion hence, to come to their own country.

But for so much, as that our deadly enemy, does It is not possible to
root up all wicked weeds out of the flock.
attempt to pervert every company, and to sow Cockle emongst the good corn,
governors and pastors must be wary, for fear least that iniquity win the
field, and a little evil leven (as they say) mar all the batche of dough.
Yet can it not be brought to pass, that the evil may be plucked out
altogether, that the estate shall be of them which be only good, but as
long as there shall be flesh and blood, so long shall preuarication be used,
and iniquity, which shall offend the good. Therefore such anoyaunces must
be taken away, which do trouble the common weal, by whose molestacion the
sweet harmony standinge upon the peaceable concord of the subjects, and the
general uniformity of their living, may be made to far, and brought clean
out of tune. Which thing must be remedied only by severity of laws, which
Draco of Dr^coes laws were written with blood.
Athenes made so straight against offenders, that they reported his laws to be
written with blood, because they so sharpelye punished malefactors. And
surely they that by wholesome precepts, daiely exhortacions, and discipline,
can not be brought to amendment of life, must in conclusion die for it,
(albeit all ways of gentleness must be used, before that this extremity be put
in execution). For better it is with an hot iron to sear up wounds when
they be fresh and raw, then wilfully to suffer the corrupcion to spreadde
abroad, and to destroy the whole body. Neither is it unprofitable in all
poinctes to join good and evil together, that the evil thereby may be
trained up to The evil be ^ president to the good.
virtue, and markinge the filthiness of their life, may learn how lewd a
thing it is to pollute that most goodly dwelling place of the soul with
corrupt vices and to make no end of naughty living. Hereupon when the
Romans debated upon the defacing of Car thage, some counseled the contrary:
alleging that if this City were destroyed, which had so renowned their
auncetours, and was a great exercise for them to valiantnes and prowess, it
might so come to pass, that when they by reason of idleness were become
careless and flouthfull, the common weal (armor set aparte) might be
debilitate and weakened, and might bring unto their posterity a dangerous
retchelesnes which in conclusion would be the destruction of the whole City.

Therefore those fond men which stick in the same mire, and set no more by
godly instruction then the mule cares for the packesaddle, do very
unadvisedly: for ^^ they se one of their neighbors offend or tread never so
little awrye, incontinent they ^ri^ but of heaven and earth, saying that the
^^^er is a sleep, that the magistrate forgets his duet^^: and that not only
in a crime which they have in deed committed, but if that whereat he finds
fault, do not agree with his mind, like a brainelesse fellow he streightwaies
turns into a rage, where as it were better for him to assuage his choler, then
so to alter himself upon every light b^^asio^. Punishemente ought rather to be
a terror to the good, then a rigor to the evil.
But he which will be a correnor of vices, whereunto we be every one subject, must
be long sufferyng, (I ever except notable crimes) less while he pulls at
the cockle, he root out the wheat and turn the medicine into poison. Hervpon
was it that ill manners caused good laws, wherewith we do not so much defend
the good, as we exhort, warn, and provoke the evil to cease from their ill
doing for virtues sake. For the nature of a law is (as Modestine says) to
command, The virtue of ^ Law.
to forbid, to permit, and to punish. And in deed nothing is more ready to a
man which is inconstant in his doings, and is destrous of truble some
innouacions, then to look upon the wallet which hangs before him, and to
mistyke that in an other which he will have holden as a virtue in himself, as
one which thinks his own perfume to be as sweet as frankencense, as though
all the world were not able to stain him with any point of dishonestie.

Respect therefore must be had to al those upon who^ the whole City does
consiste. For in deed those be goodly ornaments, whereby good men be
commended unto us, and for the same, receive their rewards, which are honor,
dignity, worthiness of fame, besides that, There ^ard^^ o^ the good, ^ the
p(...)s of the (...)
they shall never die: and finally, they shall enjoy the kingdom of heaven
which far excels all the rest. Contrarily ill men while they live, be
detested: and after their death, carry away with them not only shame and
infamy, but abide also extreme torments in hell. Whereby we may learn that
as a good name is most to be desired, so an evil name is most to be abhorred.
For what is more horrible then to call a prince Phalaris, Nero, or Herod, whose
sow Octauia^ said that he would rather have been, then his son? what is more
odious then to call a citezin, Cateline, or Barrabas. Co^trarily, what is more
pleasant then to surname a prince by the title of Salomo^, Numa, Scipio,
Camillus, or some such other famous prince. Whereby they are sometime called
fathers of their country, sometime the best governors: likewise when a
Citezin is called by the name of Decius, Brutus, Metellus, or Mutius, it is
certain that he has well deserved of the common weal.

Among the Ethnickes it was a busy mattier to procure them that were
naturally bente to vices, to leave them and to emplant in them, virtues, and to
cause them well to live among good me^: which thing they went about to move
sometime by moral and philosophical precepts, sometime by Fables, sometime
by interludes, sometime by dreams of things which were thought upon before,
and which represent unto us the very resemblance and image of such things
whereof we have been most careful: and sometime by pains and torments which are
prepared in hell for those that be ill livers here. In which point Socrates was
so diligent (be it spoken without any contempt of the other moral
philosophers) that he was therefore said to have called Philosophy even out of
heaven. Esope also the phrigian fabler went about the same thing to bring us
unto a better conformity of life, and to move us thereunto by fables of brute
beasts. And of Esopes fables ^or^e good manners.
many I will tell one or two. A certain evil disposed person went to Apollo
at Delphos and asked him whether that which he had in his hand were alive or
no: now had he a quick sparow in his hand, so that if answer had been made
that it had been alive, he would have wrong his hand together and so have
killed the pore bird: but if answer had been that it had been dead, he
would have cast it furthe a live. Therefore Apollo perceiving the maliciousnes
of the man, answered: it is in thy power whether thou will show it forth
alive or dead. And this fable has this meaning: that it is very hard for us
to deceive God which sees even our very thoughts. Another: The Lion, the
Ass, and the Fore, went on huntinge and got a pray: which the Ass was
appointed to distribute, and so did divide it into three equal parts: but the
Lion, for that he looked for the greatest portion stomaking the matter,
straight ways devoured the Ass, and bade the fox make a division: which
heaped all to one for the Lion, and reserved little for himself. Then the Lion
asked him how he learned so to do: by the Asses mishappe, quam the Fox.
Wherein Esope noted two things: one, that the lionishe society (as the lawier
terms it) which we have with men of great power and authority, is always
wicked: and that by other men's harms, we may learn to be wary and wise.

Gabrias also meant the same thing in those his fables comprised in eight
verses: The Ass cariynge an image of silver, the people ran and worshipped
it: the Ass thought the worship had been given to him, and therefore cast of
the parkesadle, and would no longer be an Ass but a God: but being often told
that he was not a God, but that which he carried, he left his statelines, and
fell again to his caryage. Which fable warns us to be content with our own
estate and not lightly to become hautie of stomach. So, it fortuned on a time
that there was a great conflicte between the beasts and the birds, then the
Ostriche (which is partly a bird and partly a beast) promised to aid
both sides, conditionallye that whether so ever of the two had the upper
hand, she might be partaker with the^ of their victory. But in the mean
while she was taken prisoner, and by her calamity taught us that one man
cannot well serve two masters, for either shall he hate the one, or
faythfullie favor neither.

In this place who so would rehearse the Poetical The fables o^ Poets be
profitable.
fables, I mean so many of them as may sound unto the betteringe of our
life, and declare the original thereof from the very ground of Philosophy,
shall in deed attempt a worthy thing, but an infinite travel. I therefore
will but reckon some of them. Lycaon Tirantes we^ ^tensformed in to Woul^es*
the king of Arcadia is said to be turned into a wolf, and not without a
cause, for he was a Tyraunte, and eruellye murdered those to whom he promised
hospitality. Which fable Plato in the eight of his books concerning the best
estate of a common weal, does not hold as vain, but writes that Princes
for their cruelty and tyranny be turned into wolves, more ravenous the^ any
other beasts. Of this Lycaon Duide writes on this manner:

Then fraied he fled, and when he found, l^b i ^^ta,

the silence of the field,
Bevvailyng aye in vain he seeks,
with tongue his plainte to yield.
For ire he waxes then so wood,
that naught may him assuage.
His frothing mouthefrettes on the foam,
and gathers in the rage.
With thirst of slaughter yet among
the beasts, he works despite.
And as then tyrant, now a vvoulfe
in bloodshed do the delight.
The Poets also sain that Vultures in belle do eats up Titius the great
Giauntes his heart, because he despised the gods, and ravished honest
Matrones. So they feign that Ta^talus is punished for his covetousness, and that
he is in perpetual thirst and hunger having water up to his chinne, and apples
hangyng down even to his upper lip: but when he labors either to take
water or appels, they flee from him: whereby we learn that the couetouse men
even in the midst of their plenty, be pinched with poverty. So Ixion,
because he did vaunte himself that he had to do with Juno, is whirled upon a
wheel continually, for our learning, that no man ought to glory in his evil
doing. So Sisiphus, because he was a robber and desirous of honor, is fained
to roll a stone to the very higheste part of an hille, which when it comes
there, and falls down to the bottom, he must still fetch it up again:
whereby we may se that thambitious, although they do not atteyne to honor,
yet their in ordinate desire is no deal the more aswaged. Of whom Ouide after
he had descriued the terrible torments and fearful passage down to Hell,
writes on this wise.

With gripyng gripes is Titius torn,
and rent his bowels be,
And Tantale in thy burning thirst,
thy river slippes fro thee.
Thou vexed art with famine eke,
and starust fast by thy meat,
The fruitful tree does shrink away,
when thou should thereof eat.
Thou Sisiphus oppressed art,
with labors many one,
While up thou throvvest and takst again
at fall, thy rollinge stone.
Ixion eke whom up and down,
the vvhirling vvhele does wrest,
Both flees and follows still himself,
and knovveth no hour of rest.
Dreams, although for the most part they be noted as vain fancies, and full
of lies, yet they put us often times in mind of many things to come: yea,
sometime Dreams do either warn us to do well, or fear us to ^o ill.
they signify that which is like to ensue, alluring us for virtues sake,
either to do our duty, or else to amend for fear of punishment. Thus we
see, that there is nothing but it may ^e turned in some part to man's behofe,
so that it be well employed either as a prouocacion to virtue, or as a lesson
to enstruct us, yt sin will not escape unpunished. For to what end Gene. 37.
can those. u. dreams of Joseph otherwise be applied? He dreamed that his
sheaf of corn stood up, and was worshipped of the sheaues of his brethren. He
dreamed also that the sun, moon, and eleven stars honored him. What
meante these, but that his brethren might understand by conjecture the
authority which he did bear with Pharao the Egipcian, and cease from so
Gene. 41.
enuiynge him. Pharao also had two dreams, whereof the one betokened, as the
same Joseph enterpreted, seven years of great plenty, and the other seven
years of great dearth. Which the king understanding, commanded that corn
should be laid up: that men might not starve for honger in such a scarcity.
Whereby Iosephes father and his bre^^re^ also were relieved by Gods provision.
Nabuchodonosors dream also ^an. 2. cap.
was of a strange signification, which Daniel expounded, that his kingdom
which was of so great power that it seemed impossible to decaie by man's
might, should be destroyed, and that an everlasting and vnthau^geable
kingdom should afterward be established.

Moreover, vis^^s in the night be a terror to the evil, that thereby they may
forsee the dangers which must ^apien. 18.
happen unto them, and being privy to their own offenses, must be the sharper
punished for the same. Of these says Solomon: Then the sight of the evil
dreams vexed them suddenly, and fearefulnes came upon them unawares. For
those visions were only to put them in mind why they did suffer those
euilles, that they should not pearishe without a warning thereof before.
Which Job (whether he were so in deed as it ^^^. ^.
is written, or else that a mean was wrought to show unto men the image of
Patience) does evidently declare: Thou will fear me says be, with dreams,
and by visions thou will astonie me.

Among the Philosophers also and Ethnicks there are many dreams specified,
which do notify unto us, that such things as men have either earnestly
thought upon, or been weried withal in the day time, do come into their
minds in the night season: of the secret and mystical interpretacion
whereof, diverse have written and their books be extant. But for this place
there is none worthier to be remembered, then that dream which Scipio (of whom
Tullie speaks) had when he was with king Masinissa in Africque, being in his
^e^^e in a dead sleep. Wherein Scipio (...).
(...)d the ^lde^, conqueror of Africque, put him as his nephew, in mind of
derine and valeauntnesse. Cicero. in 6. de Repub.
How that after he by the destroying of Carthage, and doing other service,
whereunto the common weal should call him, had well deserved of his
country, should flee out of the bands of his body, as it were out of a prison.
As though good men did then only begin to live, when they ended their lives,
and went up into immortality in heaven. For they which have behaved them
selves worthelye in wisdom, temperaunce, valiauntnes, and other virtues, must
have a greater reward then praise in this world, which they that be notorious
for vice and filthy living can not have, for they be as infamous persons both
quick and dead. But if they have committed soche heinous offenses, that men
can not easelie forget them, then it is the greatest shame to them that may
be, to have the remembrance of their former lewd and damnable state of life,
to be renewed. As Perillus the deuisour of that cruall Perillus de^^^sed a Bull
of brass into the which (being glowyng hot) men should be put to be
tormented.
forment. Dionisius Syracusanus, Nero, Domiciane, Herodes, Antipas, and many
other may be an example. Which God would therefore have to be a warning unto
us, that by them we may not only be put in mind of a better life: but also to
their great confusion, and for a reward of their wickedness, understand that
they be euerlastinglye tormented.

And to the intent men might be withdrawn from this ignominiouse and filthy
life, the old fathers were not content only to teach us with precepts of
philosophy, and to set before our eyes the deformity of vices, but they also
showed the torments, wherewith tirauntes, Cutthrotes, thieues, murderers,
periurers, aduouterers, fornicatouts, covetous, injurious, seditious persons,
despisers of justice, wicked me^, and so many as have offended in the common
weal, preferring their private gain, before the public pro^^t, and vice
before virtue, be plagued in hell with perpetual punishments. Whereof certain
be artific^allie descriued by Virgill. Which Aeneas suffered by Virgilius. in.
6. Aenei.
report of Sibilla, and told abroad at his return out of Hell.

Of which sort there is a tale in Plato, which Socrates Herus revived (...)
death to life as Plato declares. in. 10* de rep. (...).
said that one Herus Armenius a Pamphiliane borne reported on this manner. This
man was slain in the field, and the twelueth da^e after when his body was
brought to be buried, he arose from death, and told many things which he
saw while he was dead: declaringe, that when his soul was severed from his
body, he with diverse others came into the place of deuilles, where there were
four passages, two down into the lower depthe, and two upward: between the
which, they did sit which were judges over the souls departed: and thence
they that were adjudged rightwise, were commanded to go up to Heaven on the
righthand, hanging their judgment signs on their breasts: and the unjust on
the left side downwarde, bearyng the cognysaunce of all their offenses that
they had committed in their life time, on their backs. And therefore when he
came to the judges, he said that he would tell all men at his return, that
which he had seen and learned. Then they willed him diligently to vewe and
mark that which he saw there, to the intent he might thereof make a more
certain report. Then told he sundry pains, wherewith they which lived
viciouslye here, were tormented: and how that they which embraced justice and
godlynes, and deserved well of their country, after their death, were in
great honor, estimacion, and perpetuitte of glory and renown, as
benefactours of mankind.

Which sable although Tullie be sorry that it is mocked at of many, yet, (as
Macrobius tells) he willing to eschew the occasion of foolish fautefinding,
wished rather that their might one be raised up to make such a report, then
to ^e reuyued and to say nothing.

That was an ensample of to bold and monstrous superstition, when Menedemus
scholar to Colotus a Menedemus an epsy of ^^^. Diogenes in 7. de vitis
philosoph.
philosopher borne at Lampsacum went about as Laertius writes apparayled like
a fury, saying that he came from hell to epsy the faults of men, that at his
descendinge down, he might report to the f^endes, that which he saw in
middle earth. This was his attire: a long black coat gyrte unto, him with a
scarlet belte, a cappe after the usage of Arcadia on his head, having the
four elements therein engraned, tragical buskyns, a long beard, and an ashen
rod in his hand.

You now understand what labor and study our predecessors have always taken
to bring men into the way of virtue, and to turn them from wickedness to a
better life: settinge before their eyes the torments wherewith they that
offend are punished in Hell. Heavy examples, but such as may make any hard
heart to tender at the hearing of them: Howbeit Christians d^ instructed by the
holy scriptures.
we neade not to seek any foreyn ensamples for our learning, considering the
holy scripture is full of lessons whereby we are stirred to justice, piety,
and virtue. We be commanded to decline from evil and to do that which is
good. There be two ways: one going to heaven which is very narow: another
well beaten, broad, and known, so that, if a man wink he may yet hit it,
which leads us to hell, where there is weeping, and gnashing of teath: for
the approving whereof we nether need dead men, ne any fables, collusions, or
devises: but we have the lively precepts of Christ, the holy prophecies, the
doctrine of the Apostles, the traditions of the holy fathers, wherewith we may
try our doings as it were with a touchestone, and se if they answer with
our profession, that in the lasle and great day of the Lord, we may stand
on the right hand and hear with the blessed: Go ye into the Kyngedome of my
Father, which has been prepared for you sense the beginning. The attaynement
whereof we must desire even with all our hearts, lest we be accounted in the
number of them which in their mouths profess them selves to be faithful,
but in their doings show them selves clean contrary: being liers as the
devil him self their father is a lier, whom they in the mean while
acknowledge to be their leader and go^^ernour.

THE Eight Book, concerning the good ordering of a common weal.
The argument of the first Chapter.
That the government of the common weal must be so institute, that there be
no offense committed thereby against the precepts of god, after which the
ordinances and laws of man must be always measured: which to do lies in
such a magistrate as is a favorer of godliness, and endeavors to excel other
in good example of living.

THey that write of Astronomy (among whom Julius Firmicus Maternus, is not the
Firmicus libr. viii.
meanest learned) say that of al men, the Prince alone, is not so subject to
the disposition of the stars, at the time of his birthe, or to the course of
the planettes, as other men are, because that god governs his life by his own
judgment, as one, which is a Lord over the world, and upon whose destiny
the stars can not prefigurate any certainty. Which saying me think, is not
much to be disalowed, because the kings heart (as the wiseman Prou. xxi.
says) is in the hand of the Lord. And therefore it is not to be thought,
that the Prince shall happen to be, either good or evil, by consideracion of
his nativity, but by the very appoinctment of God. Which Princes be called
to government by Gods appoinct^ment.
thing nevertheless rests welnigh altogether in the people and subjects:
for if they will be obedient to laws, and embrace Godly living, they shall
have soche princes as will love them as their own children, and as will not be
negligent in thoffice of government. For they know to who^ the company
belongs, over who^ they have taken the charge upon the^: they know their
sheep, which a good shepherd will rather sede and sheare, as neade requires,
according to the trust committed unto him, then flese and clean pluck of the
skin, as the wicked pastors and hirelinges use. And on the other side,
naughty people have naughty Pastors, and so grow many inconveniences, and
one mischief still falls in the neck of an other. To them shall the Os^^*
xiii.
saying of the Prophet be uttered: I will give thee a King in my rage, and I
will take him from thee in mine indignacion. And the Prince shall be as the
people, and as the people be, so also shall be the Priste. They shall eat,
and shall not be filled.

For forgettyng the commandments of GOD, they do nothing fear to work the
worste, and therefore they can not appoincte that, which apperteineth unto a
civil order.

And accordyngly, Plato teaches in his devised common Plato in. vi. de Repub.
weal, that we ought to chose a good Magistrate as we would a very expert
Mariner. For as we commit to the one, our lives and goods in the ragyng
seas: so we trust the other, with the common health of all men, and the safety
of the whole common weal. Moreover, whether this king come by order of
succession, or by election, we must think it to be the providence of
almighty God, which sends the Prince, according unto the heart of the
people. Besides this, many of the Philosophers thought it better to have a
Prince by election, then by succession. For the elect may be taken of the
best: the borne Prince lights as the Nativity happens. But to speak
simply, soche a Prince is to be wished for, as desires nothing so much, as
so to adourne his common weal, that it may florishe in good orders and godly
living: which thing then comes to pass, when he sets forth soche laws,
and ordinances (as it were sinews to knitte men together) as are agreeable
to the institucion of Gods word, and joins the appoinctment of civil
orders, with the holy decrees of religion. This may soche a Magistrate well
do, which emploieth his mind to virtue, which prefers the common
health, A (...) Prince.
before private affairs, and the preseruacion of men, (that is, true
felicity) before the vanities of the world. By whose only guidyng, we may
be led to pass the precinctes of mortality, and to fix our minds upon
heavenly cogitacions: labouryng to climb up to that place, for the which we
have entered into this fellowship of living, and run in this yearthlie race
unwearied, for the atteinyng of an immortal reward. And although no Law
established by reason, be so unprofitable, but in some poincte it may be
profitable (sense that by the ensample of vicious livers, good men be taught,
and learn by the beholding of the dishonest behavior of others, what is to be
eschewed:) yet there is no man, which does not understand, but that soche
laws stand in force, which do yet serve to no purpose, unless they be put
in execucion, and be applied to the good instruccion, and better rulyng of the
subjects. For so shall laws both be in full strength and efficacy, and also
turn to the profit of soche as be thereby governed. Which thing Solon was
wount to say, rested most in thiem that bear office, whom in old time the
people reverenced as Gods, to the end they should deserve well of man's life,
and be as it were a president to other, whereby they might learn to live well.

Certainly, there is nothing so commodious in a common The common weal
depends upon the gouuernours.
weal, as when officers and private persons be united by authority of law,
and each one in their calling ioigne their private doings, to the common
preferme^te y^ thereby Laws may be applied, to the estate of a common weal,
which we do address and allow: a great part whereof depends upon the
Magistrates wisdom, as has heretofore been opened. For it can not be, that
that compaignie shall be brought to embrace virtue, and to agree together,
whose governors swerve on the right or left side, not respectyng the common
profit, nor yet true godliness: but only seek the bait of vainglorie, and
allurement of private gain, giving no small occasion unto the people, which of
theimselues be easily corrupted, by the naughty ensample of others, both to
fall from honest living, and also being not therefore punished, to be to
much emholdened, and to fall to wilfulness.

Therefore there must needs be a prince and magistrate Cicero in. 3. de
legibus. A head officer is most necessari^.
as without whose wisdom and diligent oversight a City can nether be, ne yet
be preserved: but is ruled and strengthened by him, as the hole body is by the
head: in whose government the hole moderation of the common weal consists,
which must not only prescribe unto the people how they owght to obey, but
also how he himself ought to rule. For who so rules well, must needs ones
have obeyed him self, and who so has been obedie^tly kept under, seems worthy
to bear rule. Therefore he that is under, must hope that he must once be
above, and he that is above, think with himself that he may perhaps once come
under. Spartian. in Adriano.
And this is it that Adrian the emperor was wount to say, that he would so rule
the common weal, as a thing not his own, but one to the hole comminaltie, naie
rather to God himself. Whereby the people do not only The law touches as well
the Officer, as the private person.
obey their magistrate, but also by order do love, reverence, and honor him.
Which thing Charondas the Cat^niane lawmaker published to his citizins among
their other laws. Plato co^pareth them to a kind of wicked Giantes called
Titanes, which withstand the Titanes.
aunciente orders of their elders. Yea, the Romayne officers called Decemuiri,
full well contained both these branches in one law, by these words: See that
the Magistrates be just, and that they that bear not office, do modestly with
all allegiance, obey them. And for The virtue of the law.
so much as the virtue of the law is, to command, to forbid, to permit, to
punish, the same things must needs accordingly agree unto the magistrate.
Whereupon Chrisippus as Martian reports, terms it the Queen, leader, and
governor of all things, which prescribes a rule for the just and unjust,
saying: The law is the governor of all things concerning God and Man. For it
must be the ouerloker of things both good and evil, the prince, the guide,
and the rule of the just and unjust. For so shall that be well done which is
for the common profit, when the magistrate diligently and watchefully
declares himself to be a living and speaking law, as without which we se the
common weal to be sinewlesse, and altogether dombe.

Yea Moses also, which knew god face to face in all his signs and miracles,
appointed wife men and such as feared God in whom there was truth, princes
and magistrates over the people, and commanded them to here him and to judge
that which was right without ante respect of persons, were he of that
country or were he forrenner, great or small: because that judgment belongs
to God and not to man. He also commanded the king already created, that when
he should sit in the seat of his kingdom, he should draw out the
Deuteronomie of the law, and have De^t. xvii.
it with him and read it all the days of his life, that he might learn to
fear the Lord his God, and to keep the words which are written in the law.
The Lord Iosuae. i.
said also to Iosue which after the death of Moses was commanded to lead the
people over Iordane: let not the book of this law depart out of thy mouth,
but thou shall think upon it day and night, to the intent thou may keep
and perform all that is written therein, then shall thou direct thy way and
understand it.

Do you not se how Kings, Princes, and governors be commanded to have the
laws of God before their iyes, to rule and govern the people after the^, and
according as their vocation requires, to direct their ways? Whereunto if you
will join those things which are commanded Christianes so do (which in our
religion must neades be done onles we ^^unes constitutions must not disagre
from ^^ord ^^unces of God.
will be secluded and banished from that heavenly kingdom which we all with a
godly and earnest desire look for) nothing then shall be waunting, which may
apperteyne to the true ornament and setting forth of the common weal. For
politicque laws and ordenaunces must so be tempered, that they be not
contrary or disagreable to the laws and ordinances of God: for that city
may ill seem sufficiently fenced, which is only led by constitutions of
man, and casts her hole eye only upon her own profit without respect of
her neighbor: not regarding those things which by gods mouth are ordained as
neadfull both for them that rule, and for them that obey.

Certainly it may well be a whited toumbe set forth with colors to delight
the beholders: but it shall be no common weal truly institute, as in which
those precepts of living be chiefelie lackyng which the society of our life
chiefelye requires. For so must we enter with a mutual consent into this
politicque order of life, and keep us in the same, that we may not swerve from
the communion of the holy church, whose head is Christ, and we his members.
Wherefore we ought not to stickein the all^reme^tes or vain tri^^es of this
wicked world, but refo^^me our life i^^ewnes of mind, as saint Paul writes,
that we may proud what is the good, well likyng, and perfect will of god our
father, to whose only pleasure we be bound to live, through Jesus christ our
only redeamer and Savior: which cannot (...)es we keep his commandments.
And therefore in every part of our life must we set them before our eyes, that
we may learn to obey his will, and to exercise charity one to an other,
which does nothing wrongfully, nothing that i. Co^^. ^^^.
is contrary to a politicque order, whereby we shall truly and face to face
afterward see that which we now in this mortal life (^beyng honestly and
godlily associated) see obscurelye and as it were in a glass.

Therefore, so must civil ordinances be proponed, No common weal can long
continue without Laws.
that they be not severed from the laws of God. And like as no house, no
city, no country, no kind of men can long continue without the defend of
laws politicque: so can they not stand without the knowledge, tutele and
protection of gods law: for to discern a man from a brute beast, to cause
him to lead his life agreeable to reason and nature, it may certainly be
brought to pass by ordinance of civil laws: for so much as men desirous of
wisdom and understanding be reported by the pleasantnes of their persuasions
and doctrine, first to have moved men from their lodging abroad in caves and
dens, none otherwise then they did stones, and to have revoked them into
Cities, into a civil communion of life, and as it were into a league of
amity. But for the entring^ in and the leadyng of that trade of life for the
which man was commanded to live here, that is to conceive an hope of the
eternal and heavenly life, that can he not do unless he alwaie have the
commandments of God before his eyes and behold them as it were in a glass,
to perfect that by the laws given from heaven, which is imperfect in man's
tradiciones: and to provide himself a passage by lawful way in this mortal
life and civil society, unto the true felicity.

All which things shall well come to pass if such a magistrate as loves and
tendreth godliness, will fashion his government according unto the laws of
God, and the^by as by a touch stone, examine and prove all his doings whether
they be allowable or no. For it cannot be but that such government shall
Godly Magistrates make (...)dly subjects
procure, or desire to have such subjects, as will not only be willing to
obey, but by followyng their magistrate will the more by his good ensample, be
moved to virtuous living. So that we may well say with Tullie, that this
has always ben the opinion of the Cicero. 3. de legibus.
wisest, that the law is nether a thing devised by wit of men, nether any
ordinance of people, but an everlasting thing, which rules the hole world, a
wisdom which consists in bidding and forbidding. For who Laws had their
beginning from God.
doubts but that Moses the holy lawmaker received those his laws from
above? Also Numa Pompilius, to the end he might bring the people of Rome to a
civility by relligion, who were in his time rude, stubburne, and wilful,
after appointment of ceremonies, made many laws and those very profitable,
which he mothered upon the goddess and nimphe Egeria. Minos also ordained
laws among them of Candie, whereof Socrates in Plato alleges this to be one:
Plato in mince suo.
drink not until you be drunk: which engraued in tables of brass, Tallus
every year thrice making his progress through the tounes, carried about with
him, as being by Jupiter himself delivered unto Minos: whom Hesiode therefore
says that he had Jupiters scepter, that was his doctrine, wherewith he ruled
all Candie. In so much that the very Ethnikes affirm that the laws yshew
out of Jupiters head, and so by a reverence borne toward the first fownder,
they induce men to be the more ready to obey them: which although they set
light by man's laws, yet let them dread the plague of God, who as all men do
know, will revenge him self upon him that despises his laws, and will not
wincke at man's wickedness, and suffer it to escape unpunished.

The argument of the second Chapter.
That it is most pernicious to a common weal for a magistrate despising the
law, to affectate Tyranny, beco^ming of a pastoure a very woulf, and also how
that no tyrant can long continue.

SOlon the Athenian Lawemaker which devised many goodly ordinances,
specially the remitting of debte, whereby the dettours had bound their bodies
to their creditours, (which he therefore called Sisachthia, as who say, the
easinge of a burden) the autour also as many deem of that wise saying: Excede
in nothing: this Solon was wount to say, that commonweals should then
prosper, when A good Prince lives according to the laws.
the princes and magistrates therein live according unto the prescript of
law, and thereafter address the order of their government. As the it were a
thing of to much anoyaunce (the majesty of the law despised) to affectate a
supreme seigniorie, and to do al things by force of arms according unto their
own will and pleasure. Therefore it is most convenient, as the philosophers
and teachers of manners do counsel us, and as I before have made mention, that
he which must be a prince, be virtuously brought up, and enured as well to
obedience of laws, as godliness. Yea he that is so trained up in his youth and
called to rule in the common weal, shall be the better able to do his duty in
his vocation, as one that is taught by God, remembering that saing: So must thou
rule others, that thou must know that god rules over the: as whose people it
is, over whom he has taken the charge upon him, whose office must be, to
me^taine that which is right, to revenge and punish that which is wroung:
indifferently to defend, rich and poor, fatherless children and widoes, not
to pass the prescript of the Law, the rule as well of his gouernemente as of
his life: not to do any thing unadvisedly, but willingly here him that
warns him of any thing that is honest and reasonable. Such a one is he alone
which in good life excels his subjects, provoking and alluring them to
virtue by his good ensample.

He that declineth from this order of living and leaving the equity of law is
led after his own will, does easily lease the name of a prince, so that
from thencefurth he can nether deserve to be called, king, keeper, our pastor,
but rather a tiraunt and a woulfe, because he cannot refrain himself from
cruelty, but blodieth his hands with the slaughter of innocents, deuoureth
up with his unclean mouth the next blood of his kinredde: which is the
property of a Evil Magistrates be tra^sformed into Woulues. Plato. in. 7. de
Repub.
woulfe, and not of a man, much less of a magistrate. The original of which
monstrous change Socrates in Plato seems to refer unto a preaty fable:
that like as in Arcadie about the church of Jupiter Licaeus, whosoever had
eaten man's bowelles minsed with the entrailles of beasts that were killed for
sacrifices, was turned into a woulfe: so who so ever delights to do all
things by violence, to set upon other men's lives forceably, to oppress his
subjects, to condemn a man ere his cause be known, seems not improperly to
be transformed into a wouluishe and tirannicall nature, to the destruction of a
great noumbre. For what other thing may we think that Caius Caesar thought
upon, when as he being turned from Cesars wicked wish.
a Prince to a Monster, and destroyer of mankind, oftimes in his fury
pronounced these wicked words? would to God that the people of Rome had but
one neck.

Neither be they altogether always men of nobility, which fall from their
office of feeding, and become treaterous Tirauntes arise also of the commons.
tyrants, but we also se that such pestelent poisons of the common weal,
have risen of the baser and abject sort. Soche be those which for y^ mad
peoples favor, expelling their lawful Magistrate, do the^ selves win the
upper hand in their common weal, sadiciously and furiously rule it after
their own pleasure, the best of the nobility either banished, or put to
death. A number of ensamples in this poincte, might be gathered out of
Germany, Italy, France, England, Denmark, and many other commonweals,
were it not that it were not needful to rehearse them, which we see so
commonly practiced.

But if ye list to mark the state of Rome, which was oftener then ones
altered, how oftentimes I pray you did soche Hoploftes as Cateline, Statilius,
Cethegus, Gracchus, and other wicked traitors go about to win the Empire,
by suppressio^ and destruction of the nobles? I will not meddle with the
A^neobarbes, men of much fame for robbyng by Sea, sp^lling, and other
outrages, which have not only won the kingdom of Circelle, Tremisiue, and a
great part of Barbary, but also the dominion of Tunise, expellyng Muleasses,
whose predecessors are reported Apud Paulum Iouiu^.
to have had the gouernemente there above seven hundred years. There were
moreover sundry, that when they attempted to invade the Romain Empire, suffered
them selves to be called Augusti, as Ciriades, Marius the Smithe, who being
made Emperor on one day, took upon him to play the Emperor on the next,
and on the third day was he s^aine with a sword of his own making, as
Trebellius Pollio left in writing. Our Chronicles report the like in a manner,
of one Frederick, which when the Emperor Frederick ^^ surped the Empire.
Frederick, the second of that name, was reported as yet to be on live, and to
be enprisoned at Nussia, falsely persuaded diverse citees, that he was the
Emperor Frederike, and by that means caused Colmaria a City of Alsatia, and
diverse others to / cleave unto him, and to promise him true alleageaunce, and
at the last at Witz^iaria, where he stayed to take up soldiers, he was
apprehended by Kudolphus the Emperor, and so burnt to ashes.

But whether it be a Magistrate of the nobility, which setting a part all
humanity, is clean altered into a Woulfe, as the tale goes by Licaon the king
of Arcadia: or it be one which arises from among the people, that attempteth
this tirannie, it is in like miserable and mischievous to the society, wherein
one Titanni^ is always mischeuous.
should live peaceably with another. For tirannie is so deadly a thing, that
it brings all out of order, and suffers nothing to be in safety. Sometime
also it pretends a title by Law, meaning thereby to coner the violence and
lust thereof, as though that should be lawful unto a man, whatsoever he
maliciously and deceiptfully attempteth. For what other thing had Appius
Claudius, one of the ten that were appoinned for reformyng the Laws that
were among the Romans, in his brain, when as he being entangled in love with
a poor maiden, daughter to one Lucius Virginius, because he could not compass
his will, cause done to challenge her as his bondmaide, borne in his house, and
he sittyng in judgment, gave sentence upon her accordingly? This coloring
must be used, when it is dangerous openly to commit any soche violence, y^ a
cloak may be had to make it seem lawful.

But with what color soever, he that so intemperatlie rules, does endeavor
to hide his Wouluishe stomach, yet ^e is a beast, chaungyng per adventure his
hears, but not his mind. For in the beginning none but worthy men, and soche
as were of an approved honesty, governed in commonweals: which came not
unto that dignity, through pride and ambicion, but by their humility and
modesty of mind, and were sometime called kings, sometime tirauntes for
their fortitude and the kingdom committed unto their charge. But afterward,
malice and contempt of laws encreasyng, when they began to rule Now (...) ^^^
go(...) (...).
arrogantlie, and to do every thing as them best seemed, they swarued from the
office of a pastor, and for the outrageous government which they used, were
called tirauntes, and had in so great suspicion amongst honest men, that the
Romans after the banishmente of Tarquinius, surnamed Superbus, did ever hate
the name of a King. Whereupon Cato said: That kings be fierce and tirauntes
naturally, what humanity so ever they pretend.

Whatsoever Magistrate therefore abuses the rule committed unto him, to the
prejudice of his subjects, whether he do it by cruelty, and contrary to
equity and justice, or by extreme compulsion vex them with He is a tiraune
that forcibl^e oue^ charge his subjects.
exactions and extraordinary charges, he does a wicked act, and leaves
behind him a naughty president, and worthily is accused as a tiraunt: which
enormitie the Philosophers do think hereupon to arise, because that
whatsoever the insolente fury of their Plato. in. 8. de Repu. and Arist. in.
v. politi.
mind moves, that they judge lawful, to be extreme upon the better sort, to
bring their subjects into servitude and bondage, to receive into their favor,
soch as be most licencious, and to attempt whatsouer is most rigorous: So
far is this vice of princes spread, that there is a common Proverb: Rulers
know not the rules of Godliness.

Yet perchance some comfort may be had, in that they pretend a color of
popularitie and gentleness: No, no, that profits no deal, for that soche be
only cautelles and mistes, which can not so blind even the most simple, but
that they perceive soche to be only entrapmentes, to bring soche as believe
the same into the snare, and danger of their lives. Besides this, Cato
Vticensts was wounte to say, that there was The peoples favor to dangerous.
nothing so hurtful, nothing so inconstant, as was the peoples favor,
thenheritaunce whereof was ever pernicious to their posterity. So that they
may seem very unwise, which despisyng or castyng out the nobility, had
rather hang upon the people, and commonaltie, then follow them, by whom they
mate take profit. For it is the Princes advantage, to have his subtectes, and
those by whom his Princelike port is maintained, to be wealthy, and not soche
a meany of rascalles, which be pinched with poverty them selves, and more
ready to make an uproar, then reuere^tly and godlily to obeie their Magistrate.
For they know well enough, although they be but simple, how daungerously a man thrusts himself into a tirauntes hands, with who^, although you live
in high favor, yet you always stand in fear, because he thinks that no man ought to be spared, but either put to death, or brought into thraldom.

Moreover, who so ever comes to a tirantes house, becomes his bondsman,
although he came thither fre, according to the saying of Sophocles: which
saying, the great Pompey used to his wife and son, when as he after the
field foughten in Pharsalia entered in to the Fishers boat, sent unto him from
the king of Egipte, therein to escape his way forth of danger: at the very
going forth of his vessel, as forseyng his destruction, he spoke as ensues:
Who so ever goes unto a tiraunte, becomes his slave, although he came to him
free. For which reason, it is better to be without acquaintance of soche a
one, whose favor is very death to the party: to whom nothing is pleasant,
nothing delectable, but that which is the utter destruction of men: As Hiero
the king of Sicile confesses to Simonides in Xenopho^, in a long discourse.

But ones to conclude, whether it be the desire of superiority, or the fained
favor of the people, or a lustyng for wealth and pleasure, or a fury bente
to be the bane of many, which has thus bewitched the (...) proceadetg of
impiety.
Prince, and caused him to turn all humanity into cruelty, and to take
upon him a Woluishe nature, all this evil must be imputed to ungodliness,
from whence it isshewed. Whence hate of honesty, contempt of justice, love of
iniquity, and the utter disdain of the common weal, nate, I would say of al
mankind, is derived. So little goodness or sincerity is there to be hoped for
at his hands, that is not fortified with the ra^pier of piety: much less
the^ can he well govern, and by good ensample of life, lead others. But what
so ever he atte^pteth, whatsoever he does, he passes the bonds of honesty:
and as the ballaunce falls, is carried either to the right hand, or to the
left, evidently bewrayng the insolent intemperauncie, which he uses in his
government. For this is the life of tirauntes, says Tullie, that is, soche,
wherein there is no faith, Cicero in Lelio.
noloue, neither can therebe any stedsast confidence of good will, nor any
place for friendship, when al things be had in gelows^e and suspicion. For who
can love him who^ he fears, or by whom he thinks himself to be feared?
Friendship therefore, which is the greatest treasure amongst men, ones being
lost, what can there be either loueable or pleasant? Therefore it is a good
consequente, that he which is thought un worthy of all men's love, is
subject to all men's hatred, and that only fear is the cause of his
safety, which is but a slender warraunte of continuance. For it is a In. 2.
de officiis.
worthy saying, which Tullie recites out of Ennius: All men hate him whom
they fear, and him who^ every man hates, every man wishes out of the way.

Soche enormities do spring of not regardyng the bringyng up of youth,
despisyng godly discipline, cherishyng at home naughty packes and flatterers.
For it is a wonder, how our nature being of it self corupt, The con(...)pt of
godly (...), causes in(...) pri(...)
is prone to al evil. And if soche men as think al things to be lawful, be
left to their own orderyng, and be not brought to the way of virtue: they
will forthwith bewraie their own lack of modesty, and like horses unbroken
will praunce, wax headdie and courageous, insolently troublyng and tumblyng
all things vpside down. So that a Prince may rather seem to be a beast,
sent in by Ate, of who^ Homer speaks, to trouble man's life, then a right
noble man, which either desires to deserve well of men, or can show any
fruicte of his gentle blood, according unto his calling. This licenciousnes,
whereby (as Terence says) we become all the worse, if it be supported by
wealth, it is the first degree to just and riotous living: then the company
of naughty acquaintance, whose evil disposed talk, uses to corrupt well
disposed conditions: then a guard ready to all unhappiness: and a detestable
compaignie of Courtiers: Finally, thus you can lack nothing, that can further
you to wickedness, and provoke you to apply your self to tirannie. For this is
the very trainyng up of a vicious prince, whereupon many, as it were from the
Trojan horse, do isshewe, which delight not only to anoie the common
wealth, but also to set all the world on a fire: which deseruyng so ill of
men, can not look to be well reported of. For it lies in the Prince, says
Philip the king of Macedonie, whether he will be well or ill spoken of. But it
is princelike for well deyng, to be misreported.

Surely I know nothing that is more pernicious ^latte^ie ^o a pestilent poison
to noble m^nut.
then flatterers about a Prince, which under the color of friendship use
themselves as very foes: as men whose only drifte is to move the prince to
that which is neither honest nor honorable, alwaie by false suggestions and
slanders endeavoring to bring good and profitable members of the common weal,
into displeasure, that there may be none left to disclose their falsehoode,
and to put the king in mind of better government. For these be they which
alone can play the courtiers: which use to offer venym sweetened with honey:
to turn white into black and black into white: altering themselves as
Protheus did (of whom they write) into every shape^men of skill how to learn
the princes mind, that they may behave them selves accordingly, repeting and
as it were still stnging that which he shall be delighted to hear: not to
apease him in his wrath, but by their sleightie pollices to deceive him, and to
take advantage of him in his indignacio^. For they only look to be rewarded
and recompensed for their persuasions and flattery, without any care of the
good success of the common weal. Yea further abusinge the Princes gentleness
by their fawning officiousnes, they will not stick through occasion of
familiarity, to sell for soms of money his good will, and to promise to bring
things to pass of great importance. As Helius Lampridius writes of one
Zoticus which misusing the name of familiarity sold all Heliogabalus his
words and deeds, like as if a man would sell smooke, hoping to have been
thereby highly rewarded, and thus promising many, beguiled all. The same
reports an history not unlike to this of one Verconius Turinus, which used
to sell soche vain hazardes, whom Alexander ^aine pro^^sers.
Seuerus after he had convicted thereof, caused to be tied to a stake in the
common market place, and there with the smoke of straw and grene wood, to be
choked, the crier alwaie saying: he that soulde nothing but smoke, is punished
with smoke.

Flattery therefore is a pernicious thing, and does as often overthrow a
Princes power, as his enemy: and it is better as Antisthenes says, to fall
among ravens, then flatterers: for they only spoil and devour the dead, but
these devour the living. And therefore Mamertius commended Iulianus the Emperor
for that he was armed against al entisementes of flatterers, nether could be
miscarried for all their colored venim. Which if many princes would likewise
do, their should be much more justice and quietness in the common weal, and
less iniquity.

But let those Princes be fully persuaded, which either by naughtines of
nature, or by suggestion of others, do not stinte to oppress their subjects,
and to practice tira^nie, that this in deed must be borne with all, but it will
not escape unpunished at gods hand, because he dieweth the earth from heaven
above, and suffers the world because of the enormitie of sin, to be vexed
not by good, but by ill men: but he in the mean while will not forget the
vexour, nether let him go scotfree, but will cause him to perish with condign
punishment, either by the sword, or with some miserable and horrible kind of
death. So must the rod that is laid upon the people, at length be laid
upon the fire. Furthermore these vicious princes be not in safeguard of their
guard, no not of their own wives and children, but alwaie dread lest that
violence which they extend upon other, shall be returned upon them selves: but
in vain, when as they cannot eschew the necessity of their fatal end. In
place of many, note well this one example: In what mind do we think says
Tullie, that Alexander Phereus Cicero in. 2. de off. I tiraunt is never in
safegarde.
lived, which dearly louinge his wife Thebe, yet when he came from
banqueting to her chamber, he commanded a Ruffiane, and as they say, one
burned in the hand, to go before him with a naked sword: and sent before him
also a certain of his guard to ransake his Ladies coffers, and to search
whether she had any weapon hid amongst her apparel? Oh wretched man that
he was, who thought a Ruffiane and one marked with an hot iron, more trusty
then his own wife. Nether yet was he beguiled, for she slew him in deed at
the length for suspicion of horedome. Dionisius also the Siciliane by this
example proved that very great danger does hang over Princes heads, when
as Democles a flatterer had commended the estate of Princes, he caused a
costlye supper to be made, and Democles in princely robes to be set at the
table, and honge over his head by a small threede, a double edged and sharp
sword: for fear whereof le^t it might hap to fall upon him, Democles forgote
to eat his meat: and so at length understood that to be false, which he had
imagined, and that the life of tirauntes was most miserable.

Such men therefore ought to leave their insolency which do in like esteem
honesty and dishonestie, good and evil, thinking every thing lawful, what
soever they dare adventure upon, as tho their will were a sufficient reason,
which shall ever have some that will put the^ in mind of the barbarous saying
of Iulia the Emperesse: if you list, it is lawful: considering god will revenge
their tirannie as an vnauoyable judge, and the flower he wreaketh himself, yt
sorer is his plague.

Moreover not only while they be a live they be reviled as the vndoers of
others, but also after their death, whether they dye by cruelty or by any
other destiny, A tiraunt has an ill name even after him death.
no man delights in the memorial of the^. From which inconuenie^ce not the
whole route of the guard, not y^ trust of Ganimedes, which tastes the drinks
and meats lest any poison be in them, shall save them: but the ame^dement of
life, that they turn and do good works which hitherto they have forslowed to
do, that they embrace godliness, and if that by ensample of life they have
purposed to commit any heinous act, it most be satisfied and purged by
virtuous living. For this is the comfort which Simonides the poet^ used unto
Hiero the Sciciliane tiraunt, being in despeyre of his health, that is, that he
should fall from his intemperancie, wax mild from madness, defend the good
citizens, and by his diligence, make their wealth to increase, expel the evil
disposed, regard justice and piety, prefer the common profit before his
own private, hold the City as his own house, and the Citizens as his
Cosins, Frie^des, and Childerne, and his own childerne as his own soul, and
all these must a man labor to win by a diligent carefulnes in executing his
duty.

Whereunto if a Prince do join piety, and make all men his friends by well
deserving of them, he shall be well called a father of his country as Augustus
was, and the best, as was Traiane: he shall account the wealth that his
friends have, to be in his own treasure, they that be present, shall favor
him, they that be absent, shall be desirous to se him: finally all these shall
he have, not only pertakers in peril, but also most earnest protectours: A
man in this life after a sort happy, as one at whom no man enuieth, but all
men wounder and commend his virtues, with soche good success of things, that
the common weal cannot but be fortunate, which has light upon soche a
magistrate, soche a governor of so sincere an affection: which renouncing all
insolen^cie of life, and becomminge civil of nature, does for his duties sake
look unto the people, and by ensample of better life^, conducte them into the
ready way, not as his own, but as committed unto his government by
almighty God, to whom the propriety thereof does appertain.

The argument of the third Chapter.
That if a naughty magistrate happen unto the people, it is for their
iniquities sake: and how the sword ought not to be drawn against him: but
that earnest prayers ought to be made to God, that be may either convert and
amend, or else give place to another that may govern better.

I Have already after a sort declared, y^ a wicked Magistrate, whose study
is to do harm in the common weal, and estemeth more his private benefit
then the safety of his cou^treie, is a thing of all other most perniciouse:
and so much the more to be detested, for that he hides his wouluish stomach
under a lambs skin, and dissembling his wickedness, shows him self mild
and gentle. Moreover as Aristotle witnesses, what so ever he does he will
pretend Arist. ^. polity
a color of honesty: and whereas if his tirannie were manifest to the world,
every man would abhor it, he so practices the same that he pretends the
necessite of government, and that he cannot conveniently do otherwise: So
under the color of power, he plaieth the tiraunt, and pretending the
punishment of the evil, he extends his fury upon the good: yea and
peradventure suffers his under officers to do it in the mean while winking at
it himself. For those be the eyes, those be the long hands which soche
tyrannous princes do so abuse, whereby they utter their hatred, which they have
conceived against a man. Now when they have spent up and wasted their treasure
in riot, dicing, banqueting, pompes, menteynance of reteiners, hoorehunting,
and soche vanities, it is a wounder to se what charges they will allege that
the prince must sustain for the repulsion of enemies, the preseruacion of
justice, and sauetie of the hole countreie, by the which lure and practice the
poor people be not only pilled, but the woulfe enters into their bowelles,
and sucketh up all the blood and juice that is there, ceassinge not until all
the breathe be drawn out of their bodies. By which wily delusio^ these
ravening monsters would cloak their tirannie, doing nothing openly, but al
things couuertlie, showing in the one hand bread, in the other hiding a
stone. And for this cause they reteyne certain of the best sort into their
service and feign that they do favor them: not because that by them they will
be put in remembrance of honesty and justice: but to make the people believe
that it cannot be but soche do mean well toward the common weal which have
those men in their retine we: where as their drifte is nothing less, but only
they mind by this pretensed favor of the people, to allure them, to win
them (which may the sooner be procured when they be so bare already that
littell or nothing can be taken from them by any eraction) and so being guarded
by them, they do not so much fear the nobility, and being supported by them,
they more frelie exercise their tirannie.

Neither those that be tirauntes at home, can forbear sorenners. But as they
be of nature cruel, mankine, and haters of men, so they can not by this evil
example, but all ways suck up blood, and show in A tiraunt atte^^teth all
ways of cruelty.
their doyngs all poinctes of fearcenes. I shall not here neade to make any
report of Phalaris the tyraunte, which caused a brazen Bull to be made,
wherein men A brazen Bull was devised ^^ P^^laris into the which men were put
to be, tormented.
might be tormented after it had been made hot, to the end that in their pain,
they might bellowe like beasts, and not cry like men, and so move their
execucioner to pity: yet in this poincts not so cruel, for that he caused
Perillus first to be put therein, which was the first deviser of the same
ingine. Neither is it needful to rehearse the rigorous rage of Alexander
Phereus, Ensamples of (...).
which was wont to bury quick men, ones face turned toward an other:
and had a delight to cover them with the skins of Bears, and of other brute
beasts, that being thus transformed into Bears and beasts, the hunters and
their hounds might rent them in pieces. A number of ensamples of like
cruelty, could I mention in these our days, which were nothing inferior to
these that be paste in old time, if I thought it expedient, or would give any
occasion to the Sarazen, to detest christianity. But this comes better in
place, which Thrasibulus wrote unto his friend Periander of Corinthe: that if
he intended to compass the estate of a Prince in his common weal, and to be
strengthened therein, he should destroy the chifest of the city, were they
friends, were they foes: for that tirauntes lightly have even their frie^des
also in suspicio^. But it was as nedeles to suggeste these things to
Periander, as it were to hurl water into the mean sea, or to spur an horse
that is to fearce of his own nature, or as much in effect, as the scholar to
teach the scholemaster: For Periander, as Aristotle writes, gave this
counsel to Thrasibulus, that he should cut of the highest of y^ corn ears,
that is, should slay the chifest citezeins, and establishe the kingdom to
himself alone. Hereunto also agrees that which Tarquinius the last of the
Romain kings, surnamed Superbus, counseled his son to do, being received of
the Gabianes, as a fugitive from his father: when as he demanded of his
father, what was best to be dooen concerning the citezeins: he by striking
of the poppie tops, insinuated priuelie, that the chief men of the city
should be flaine. Which ensamples, although they be wonderful monstrous,
and not worthy to come to any man's knowledge: yet they be left unto us in
writing, not without Gods providence, that they might be a terror to
princes and magistrates, that they should not attempt the like: but should
persuade themselves to be men, and that they ought to affectate nothing, but
ma^like atte^ptes, that they might not turn their government to the peoples
destruction, and their own commodity, but to the honor of their country,
and to the glory of God, as men to be reuerenzed, not only for majesty, but
also for humanity.

Howbeit, by what mean sotuer these Woulues, do endenour to change their
hear into Woulle, and like to Vertumnus, to transform theimselues into
sondrie shapes: yet they can not change their nature, but that it will burste
out, and disclose the mind, as No (...) of long co^t(...).
Midas was bewraied by his ears. Whereby it came also to pass that men, when
they could no longer abide the vilanie, contempt, wrong, insolency, and more
then servile yoke, thought it best ones to shake of this fear, and to make
an end of soche odious dominacion: which devise had soche success, that there
has not ben one tiraunte, which has not had some miserable end: and if
that, because that the people has been wicked, he has escaped reuengement of
hand, yet he has died soche a death, as has been grateful, and wished for of
all men, but most shameful and reproachful of all other to himself after his
death. Which things the Chronicles do men^ion, that Herod which killed all
the infauntes in Bethleem of Josephus. 17. antiq. libr. cap. 9. and de bello
iudaico libr. 1. cap. 2.
two years old and under, neither forbear his own son (whereupon Augustus
Caesar said, that he would rather be Herodes s^we, then his soonne) did forsee:
which liyng at the poinct of death, commanded Saloma his sister, and her
housebande Ale^ius, that they should assemble all the chief of the Jews, and
shut them up together in a Tiltyarde, and as soon as he were dead, should slay
them, to thentent the Jews which he knew would rejoice at his death, might
mourn against their wills. A miserable kind of men truly, which even at
their death, have this only comfort, that no man may love them, but turn
all men's hearts against them, that when they lack breathe, they may yet
do mischief, and so satisfy their furious hatred, which they have conceived
against mankind.

Whereupon it has been thought a godly and good deed, and for the commonweals behofe, to banishe those wicked generacio^s, and with their children
utterly to expel them, as though not one whelpe of an evil beast, ought to
remain alive. For as Tullie says, Cicero. pro m^lone*
we have no sure society of life with tirauntes, but rather extreme danger
and disagremente. For it is a pestilent and wicked kind of men, and worthy to
be rejected out of all men's company: in so much that the Citees of Greece
used, when any man had slean a tiraunt, to give him the same honor that was due
to their gods, to ordein divine service for him, to make ballades and songs
in his praise, as though soch that It (...) the (...) to (...).
saved the people, and revenged soche wickedness, deserved immortal fame and
renoume. Albeit, we must impute this unto the Ethenickes ordinances, which
only had respect to that society, which natural honesty reveled unto
them: seeing that to take any thing from an other, and peruersely to advantage
a man's self, to an others harm, is thought more to be against nature and
civil order, then death it self, or any other calamity that can chance,
either to our bodies or goods. Tullie also witnesses that the same
constitucion Lib. ^. d^ off.
is in every civil law, by which in each city, commonweals be governed,
that it is thought natural to sustain all kind of trauaill, all kind of
trouble, all danger, for the safety of our citezeins, naie, rather for the
preseruacion of all people.

Since that therefore, this Giau^tlyke kind of tirantes is in all poinctes so
noisome, so unhonest, and so wicked, that for their own advantage, they make
no end of robbyng and spoilyng others, and of heaping wrong upon wrong, they
suffer not the society of y^ subtectes to be in safety, but dissolve it,
which is a poinct of extreme enemitie. Therefore as the profit which comes
to every particulare man, and to all in general, is one, so every man ought to
rise, and draw out his weapon against a naughty Magistrate, and to quench
that flame, wherewith the common weal is set on fire: to the intent that there
may be a mutual impartyng of commodities, which causes that one man is
moved with an others harm and injury, and is willing to his power to aid the
same. And therefore it was compted an honest and godly act, for any private
man, to slay Phalaris, or any soche tyrant, and to deliver the people out of
bondage.

Moreover, as certain rotten and putrified parts of our body, be either
cut of, or seared with an hoate iron, for fear lest they infecte the whole:
so they thought it good, that soche slaughtermen and blood suckers, should be
severed from the society of al other. Hereupon Marcus Brutus vaunteth himself
unto A st^^^^ stomach of Brutus.
Tullie so often, for the killyng of Caesar, as though that he had delivered not
the city of Rome only, but also all the wide world from his tirannie, which
he usurped more then the laws and counsel would permit him: which he
said, he would not suffer in his own father, if he should return to life
again: and that being content with the remembrance of his weldooyng, and the
liberty which he had gotten by the tirauntes death, did set light by all that
could chance unto him in this world. Neither would he become suppliaunt,
either to Octauius, who was both his heir and a child, or to Antonie, which
labored to invade the common weal, in his place that was dead. What other
thing may we think, that Marcus Scenola pretended, when as for the
deliverance of his country, to the great danger of his own life, he entered
into Porsennas camp who then besieged the town, and taking his ame amiss,
slew one of the Kings pieres, in stead of the king himself: wherefore being
apprehended, he thrust his hand into the fire, and shranke not for any fear,
insomoche that the King was dismaide to see his constancy, specially
understanding by him, that three hundred young men of the city, had likewise
sworn his death. Which ensample therefore resembles piety the more, because
the conspiracy was made against him, that was their professed enemy, and
would have brought again Tarquinius, surnamed Superbus, because of his
insolent conditions, and would also have taken away the liberty of the City.
But we which have prosessed Christ, have an other rule of religion to work
by, which measure the law of nature, after the discipline of godliness,
thinkyng every thing so far to be lawful unto us, as it does not repugne
against the order of our religion, but answers Gods will, whereunto we
ought to refer our selves, in all our troubles and adversities. Now it is
certain that Gods will is soche, that he will not suffer his people to be
misledde, and his comaundemente despised, without punishment. For he is the
God of reuengement, which if he do straight seek, while men be alive, it is
to be rekened as a special benefit, because he therein declares, that he
would not the death of a sinner, but rather that he convert and live. And
therefore he sends into the world, hunger, barrenness of the earth, so
many kinds of diseases, pestilence, war, tirannous Magistrates, and al soche
calamities, that man should convert, and acknowledgyng his offense, learn to
reverence and worship his creator. We see a figure hereof in the Prophet
Ezechiel, where God threateneth Ezechiel. 2^.
Samaria and Jerusalem, under the name of. ^^. sisters, which had committed
fornicacion in Egipte, that he would raise up the Chaldees, and tyrauntes
against them, which should spitefully deal with the^, and at the last he
says: Thy mischief and fornicacio^s have done this against the. Esdras also
the restorer of Neemie. 9.
the five books of Moses, a man of great knowledge in the Law, whom some
suppose to be Malachie the Prophet, complainyng of the iniquity, as well of
the Princes, as of the people, says: Behold, we are in bondage this day,
and so is the land, which thou gave unto our fathers, that they should eat
the bread of it and all the good therein: Behold, there are we bondmen, and
the fruictes of it be multiplied unto the kings, whom thou have set over us,
because of our sins, which rule over our bodies and our cattle, after their
own wills, and we be in great trouble.

This is it that God threateneth to send children Esaiae. ^ Oseae. 1^.
to rule over us, and to be our kings, even in his fury. Whereby it evidently
appears, that wicked magistrates be sent into the world, as that Ate which
Homere speaks of, for man's vicious living, that one evil may be expelled
with an other and that evil men may be persued by soche, as be no less evil
then they theimselues, Which thing Attila, that brought Attila called him
self the scourge of god
an army of three hundred thousand men forth of Hu^garie, into Germany,
and anoied almost all Europe, usurped in his pride, calling himself the
scourge of God, and thereby pretending an honest cause, why he was so furious.
Tamerlanes also the great prince Tamerlanes.
of Tartaria, which when he had taken Baiazete the Turk prisoner, and carried
him about in a cage, as a spectacle of man's mutable estate, when one asked
him, why he used soche cruelty against any man, he answered: thou iudgest
madlie to think me to be a man, I am the anger of GOD, and the destruction of
the whole world.

Nether is it so that God alwaie stirs up cruel men and tirantes to revenge
man's wickedness, that one mischief should be expelled with another: but sometimes
therein he uses his own angels, sometimes he works by men of sincere
living, sometimes he sends floudes and abundance of waters, as we do read
in the scripture: so likewise for the malice of man he Genesis. 12.
plagueth us with famine, pestilence, and war. As the Lord in one night smote
all the first borne in Egypt 4 Regu^. 19. Esaie. 37.
and where blood was found on the upper threshold, he suffered not the smiter
to enter and to hurt the houses of the children of Israel: And in one night
thaungell Iosue 10.
of the Lord came and smote in the Assirian camp an hundred fourscore and
five thousand. Iosue also smote all the Hilly and southe country beyond
Iordane not leaving one a live therein, but slew every thing that had breath
as the Lord had commanded him, from Cades of Barna unto Gazan. Saul also was
commanded to smite king Amaleck, and to destroy 1. Regu^. 15.
all that was his, so that he should not spare him but kill man and woman,
infaunte and suckling, ore and sheep, camel, and ass, nether desire any
portion of his goods.

God likewise uses the elements oftimes for the reue^gment of man's iniquity.
For seeing the malice of man to be great in the earth, it repented him that he
had made man, and be said to Noe: Behold I will bring the waters of the floude
upon the earth, and I will destroy all flesh wherein there is any spirit of
life under Heaven, and all things that be on the Earth shall be consumed.

There be many soche ensamples which daily come in ure, with great terror, to
warn us that for our sins we be sore plagued: and that unless we amend our
lives, the axe is laid to the root of the tree, and the vengeance of God
hangs over our heads.

To return unto the wicked Magistrate, it is most certain that he is sent
unto us for our vicious living sake, to anoye and vex us, and to make us
remember our Creator. Therefore we must take him in good part, whether we be
good (for that is grace when a man contrary to his desert suffers misery)
or evil: understanding this to be our remedy in time to bewail our
misdoynges, and thereby to be put in mind to amend. So we be commanded to be
obedient to every ordinance of man, to the King as excellyng the rest, to
his head rulers as officers sent from him 1. Petri. 2.
for the punishment of the evil doers, but for the praise of them that do well.
For that is the will of God, nether is there any difference put, be he good
Magistrate or evil: seeing servants be commanded to obey their Masters, not
only if they be gentle and good, but also if they be froward and evil,
according unto saint Peter's doctrine.

Then ought not we to draw our weapon, and forcibly to labor to depose him
which is sent unto us to visit over our iniquity, by gods appointment. For
if we do, we shall be ordered as children which fly from their parents when
they show them the rod, but afterward if they be caught, they bear away
the more stripes. But we must defend us with those weapons which are appointed
us, that is, we must turn from our sins to virtue and better life: we must
call upon God and pray daily that he will either convert those evil officers
and make them more gentle, or displace them and set better in their roumes. And
that must be done sincerely and with a full purpose of amendment: otherwise
we shall have some worse hap. As we read of a Siracusane woman named Himera, A
woman pr^^^d for the long continuance of Dionisius the ^^^ant.
which being wounderfull old, when all the Syracusans wished daily for
Dionisius the tirauntes death, earelie every morninge prayed for his long
continuance: Which when he understood he commanded her to be called, and
demanded why she so did, and Valerius max. libr. 6.
for what deserte of his: she answered, my reason is good, for when I was a
wenche we had a tiraunte, and I desired to be quickly rid of him, but
after he was slain, there came a worse then he: Then I would also gladly have
seen an end of his tirannie. Now after all the rest be dispatched, thou art
come, worse then any of thy predecessors, and for fear of a worse to succeed
after thee, I daiely pray, that thou may continue still amongst us.

We therefore must pray, that God will graciously hear us. As when
Sennacherib king of the Assirians, in the time of Ezechias king of the Jews,
sent Ecclesi. 48.
Rhapsaces the tiraunt against the Jews, which liftyng his hand over Sion,
was proud in stomach, whereupon the peoples hearts were moved, and they
called upon the Lord of mercy, which quickly hearing their prayers, threw
down the Assirian ca^pe, and consumed Ecclesia. 11. Oleae. 13.
them up by his angel. For it is he that plucketh down y^ seat of proud
princes, and exalts the meeker in their places: which can in his
indignacion, take away the king, whom he gave them in his fury.

The argument of the fourth Chapter.
That it is a most execrable thing that wars should be moved amongst
Christians as forbidden and most disagreable to our relligion.

IF a man will consider with himself all the mischieues, all the calamities,
which fall unto mankind by occasion of wars insolentlie moved: he shall
straight understand the deadly cruelty thereof, and that they be most
disagreable with our profession of Christianite. But none shall more clearlie
perceive this then such as delight in all men's weldoyngs, in the love of
honesty and godliness, and wish the honor of all Christendom. For what thing
can move an honest heart more to lament the estate of our relligion and the
extirpacion of all humanity, then this outrage of wars? for the incumbraunce
whereof no society of men, no common weal, can be either co^stitute or
preserved in sauetie, but all things be set out of order, al things be brought
to ruin and decaie. As tho the destinies so ran, that what kingdom so ever
should decaie, should first be provoked with wars, that by her own euilles
she might understand that no misery goes alone, but one draws another with
it, that all soche calamities may seem to have fortuned to the people for
their deserts. For so (says Velleius) is it, when god purposes to alter any
state, he corrupts men's counselles, and causes that seem to have fallen upon
desert, which only has happened by chance (a miserable case) and so chance
bears the name of an offense.

Howbeit, it is no part of my purpose, to declare all kinds of sight, but
only briefly to touch, why christen men, which hope for the blessed life
to come, ought to cease and abstain from wars. Besides this (...) (...)
(...)* ^^^.
if we would weigh with our selves, the false surmised pretenses of war, the
mocioners and mainteigners thereof, and finally the doleful spoil that
ensues thereupon, we shall understand that nothing like detestable, nothing
like horrible can befalle to man's life. For the first permission to wage
battaill was, not to do injury, but to repel it, that conditions of peace on
both sides, might be the surer confirmed: or else as the Ethenikes used it, to
recover things taken away, which represents a just cause of defense.
Which pretense of wrongful war, although the most part in these days
allege, that thereby they may move unquietness, and cloak their own impiety
under a lawful color: yet there is an other Helene, that weaueth this web,
conspiryng and setting her whole mind upon the general destruction of the
world: which is, the desire of enlargyng dominions, against Gods and man's
laws, a natural empoisoned drift to do injury, a study to subvert justice,
and finally, a continual delight to trouble and disquiete all things.

They be therefore deceived, which under pretense to defend themselves, move
wars. For allthough ^^^ procurers of ^^^^^s, be ^^^ authors of ^^^^dnes.
they delude men, pretending a face of honesty, where they mean nothing
less, yet they can not escape the hands of God, which searches the secrets
of their hearts, but that he in way of reuengemente, will require an accoumpte
at their hands, of this spoil of christendom, and bloodshed of the innocent.
You do know the great David, to whom the Lord said: Thou shalt feed my
people of Israel, and shalt be 2. Regu^. ca. 7 ^. paralip. ca. 1^. and 28.
Prince over them. I took thee, when thou did follow the cattle in the
pasture, that thou should be governor of my people. I have been with thee,
whither soever thou have walked, I have destroyed al thine enemies before thee:
and I have made thee a name, as the name of one of the greatest me^ that are in
y^ earth. Who was not ashamed to confess this also of himself. and the lord
said unto me, thou shall not build an house to me, because thou art a man of
war, and shedest blood.

If David being by God commanded to war, yet hear this at Gods hand,
what shall betide the^ which delight to move wars every where, be their
title never so unjust, to shed every man's blood, be it brother, be it
citezein, not markyng that our god, Romans 5. 1. Cor. 14.
is the GOD that desires peace and charitee, and not dissencion and war:
which the Devil alwaie planteth in the Giauntes hearts, which despise God,
because they be full of concupiscence, and recheth to them the brande of
dissension, wherewith they may set all the world on fire, murder one an
other, and leave nothing unshaken. Wherein we need not to allege any feined
fable out of any Poet, but hear what the prophet Baruch. 3.
says: There were soche as were called Giauntes from the beginning, tall in
stature, and expert in Philipp. 13.
war: the Lord chosed them not, neither found they the way of discipline,
and therefore they perished. Marcus Tullius therefore said both wisely and
worthily: the name of peace is sweet: but the thing it self, is both pleasant
and healthful. For it can not be, that he loves his own house, the laws of
his country, the rightes of fredome, which is delighted in discord, in
slaughter of citezeins, in civil war, and him do I think worthy to be
banished from the number of men, and bonds of man's nature. And that not
without cause: for he is easily alienated from the company of man, which of
himself is ungentle, a bloodsucker, and only desires the destruction of men.
Whose desire is as far from God, as heaven is from hell. Considering that
enemitie, sedicion, and murder, be the works of the flesh, naie, rather of
the devil, and the doers thereof shall not be enheritours of the kingdom of
God. For they trouble the Christian society, and therefore they shall abide
judgment, who so ever they be, as Saint Paul writes: He that troubles
Galath. 5.
you, who so ever he be, shall abide judgment.

If we ioigne to these soche malicious edgers and promoters which stir
Princes forward to vex The impiety ^^ Soldiers.
mankind, as though they were borne to destroy all, then could there no more
mischief and impiette be devised. For a naughty manne is wont to delight in
naughty compaignie, and God leads like to like, as Penelopes wowers in
Homere do testify: now one Odiss.
evil draws very nigh to an other: So God alwaie leads like to like.

Let no man therefore persuade himself, that they do well, which fight not to
defend their country, wives and children, not because they wish the sauetie
and quietness of the common weal: but leauyng their houses, despisyng the law
both of God and manne, reiectyng all right and godliness, only wish
Proclamacion for wars, that all the world may be in an uproar, that they
being notified for murder, burning, robbery, and all deuelishnes, may make
some hand, get some prays and booties, and live an idle and dissolute life in
all viciousnes, after they have spoiled, not so much their enemies as their
friends: the more also to be noted, for that they be not faithful, even to
their capitaines, unless they have liberal intertainement, and large wages.
So that Lucian seemed to say pretelie:

No dread of God remains in tents,
nor faith in men of arms:
That set for hire their hands to sale,
to work most heinous harms.
Where greatest stipende does them call,
there think they right to go:
And lightly led with little price,
much mischief for to do.
For as Tullie writes: All soche men haunt the Ad A^ti^^
wars, as live in fear and evil hope, all condemned persons, all
notorious offenders, all forlorn cutthrotes, all rascalles, all soche as be
far endebtted, all soche as will not live with the sweat of their faces, but
rather chose to loiter, thirstyng other men's W(...) (...).
deaths, then seeking that which is honest, and which becomes a man in
deed. Hereupon can neither the housebandman find one to hold his plough, nor
the bamekeper, one to heat his hoathouse: but if they fortune ones to retain
any into service, yea, and give them large wages, yet as soon as they hear the
trumpette sound, they are gone, and reiectyng that blessed kind of labor,
where unto God has called them, they follow that cursed kind of life,
although they serve as baggegers, and be admitted into the basest wages of the
camp.

You understand, who be the mainteiners of wars, by whose aid the whole
conspiracy against ma^kinde is intended, which mean nothing less, then to
defend the oppressed, and to help them that be iniuried (which should be the
only cause of wars) but heaping murder upon robbery, so break up the
wars, that in the end, it has more endammaged the conquerours, then the
conquered: for not only the victours commandment is not accomplished, but if
his soldiers which helpte him unto the victory, may not have their mind,
they will rebel against both the general, and all his peticapitaines, yea,
and if they be The unfaithfulness ^^ (...) (...) (...) their C^p^t(...)es.
not content with the spoil, they fall to robbyng them of whom they received
wages and hire, yea, ottymes for doing no service. Ensamples whereof be a
number, but I will not mention any more then one, which for cruelty and
impiety, is infertour to none of the rest. All we know, with how great
danger, both of body and goods. Vienna the chief city of Aust^ich was
defended not long ago, against the siege of Soliman, the twelueth Emperor of
the Turks. After An example of disloyalty at Vienna.
the breakyng up whereof, the City stood in great danger, by reason of the
soldiers, which by the Empire were sent to defend it, then it did any time
during the Turks continual assaults. For they would needs have their wages
doubled, and at their departure, have some reward given the^ toward their
journey: which if they might not obtain, they threatened to ransacke the
town, and to burn and destroy all with the sword. There was no help, but
either money, or blood, and if the capitaines in this extremity, ^ad not
doubled their wages, and given them passage money, they would have put all
in a great hazard. Yet when they had their requests granted the^, scarce
could the town be left vnspoiled: for that they priuelie attempted the same
still, unless their fellows stipendes might also be doubled: but all that were
honest of them, would not agree to that, as a thing unlawful, and more then
their duty.

By whose perverse ouerth wartnesse, you may understand, what bloodsuckers,
what wicked murderers they be, to whom so many kingdoms, so many
seigniories, yea, welnigh all christendom, be in danger to be over run,
riffled, and utterly consumed. Whose unfaithfulness, cruelty, and insatiable
desire of spoil, no man be he never so barbarous, can not but detest, much
less ought he to follow the same. To whom the saying of Plautus may very
well be applied: The sea is not the sea, but ye be the most outrageous sea
that can be: whence few, or rather none, if they ones have fallen into it,
have had any power to escape. Yea, that manne might hold himself happy,
which being wiped of all his worldly wealth, could save his wives honesty,
and his daughters, from those vilaines. Which argues, that no war can be
well waged, where the Law of arms is not well used: ^herein the soldiers
have neither regard to honesty, nor godliness: but measure both right and
law, by rauine, waste, and destruction.

But here peradventure some man will (although it be to small purpose) obiecte
unto me, that there be The Law of arms ^^ not kept in the wars*
orders and laws appoincted for the wars, wherewith the soldiers may be
kept under, and punished for spoils and robberies. In deed in old time,
there was used a kind of Discipline, not only to govern men at home, but
also in the wars, that every man should do his duty, that every man
should do no more then by ordinance was adjudged lawful, that every
vagabond and light person should not become a soldier, but only soche, as
could be content to obeie their captain, defend their country, val^auntly
encounter their enemy, save their freindes harmless, and finally, in all
their doings, submit theimselues to the law of arms. Whereby it was so used,
that as no war was allowed or thought just, unless it were lawfully
denounced, and openly proclaimed: and that either for defense of their
country, or else to recover things that tofore were unjustly taken away: So
every thing was solemnly observed, according to the laws prescribed by the
Haroldes. Justice being had in this estimacion, Capitaines were Cicero de
o^^icus.
wount, as patrones, to protecte soche citees and countries, as they had
conquered: neither would they have suffered them to be over run, unless it
had been for some singular unfaithfulness, and stubburne resistance.

But in the wars of our time al smacke of justice, which Plato calls the
fence or band of a City, all In. 5. delegibus.
respect of relligion, all fear of God, is so fallen out of men's breasts,
that many have no greater delight then to devise how to rob both friend and
foe. To which insolency not the common Soldiers only, but also the most
part of the Capitaines, heads, and rulers, be given: whose misdemeanour is
the less to be borne withal, because it is a perniciouse president to the
common soldier, to commit that, which nether the law of arms, ne any right,
nor very nature, both permit, not considering the saying of him which ^rieth
in the deserte: We must at the length bring furthe fruit worthy of repentance:
for as much as the following of wars and ^ncamping of Soldiers is lawful,
so far, as every man is content with his wages: without any further vexation
of other. Which thing is at this day so much contemned, that every man almost
had rather lack both his eyes, yea even his life, then soche things as he
gets by rauine and robbery: which their doings escape not unpunished: for
besides the reuengement at gods hand, which they cannot eschew, they be in
so great danger, that they cannot enjoy any ^onge time those Things (...)
gotten never have good success.
goods which they so violently and rauenouslie have taken from Widows,
orpha^s, the innocent, and the neadie: or else liyng pitifully sick, be
constrained to spend the same upon surgerie, plasters, balun^^s, and
oyntmentes, until soche time as in fell torments they at length miserably
end their lives. Which mischief albeit they fortune to avoid, yet soche
goods shall never come to their heirs. Besides that they shall be enforced in
hell after their death to abide extreme punishment and torture convenient to
their so wicked and detestable thieuerie, yea until they have answered the
uttermost farthing, and that by the just judgment of God: that no man may
think that he may enriche him self and do others injury, unpunished, nether
to make so many Widows and fatherles Children only, but most vtlely to take
from them both things necessary for the maintenance of their l^ues, and also
to uncover such things as nature and honesty would have to be covered.

Which spoil of men and waste of things, the piety and ^lemencie of Kings
and Princes (which be their chiefs gifts of grace) may only prevent. For so
it behooves a Prince to do his d^utie both at home ^l^^^^cie ^^ ^^^^et^ ^
Princ^.
and in the wars, nether to draw forth his sword upon the good, but upon
the evil only. Whereupon Diocletian for all that he was a wicked tiraunt, yet
by nature understood that it was a wounderfull hard matter to govern well: so
that many men think that good princes be so rare that they may be all as it
were enclosed in one ringe. Which therefore must oftimes be put in remembrance
that the good may learn by the evil, how shameful and dishonest a thing it is
not duly to execute that high vocation, which is appointed them from God, to
replenishe every place with blood and manslaughter, to regard a subject no more
then an enemy. Whereas every good Prince would rather according unto the good
zeal of Scipio Africanus the elder, save a thousand enemies, then ^^ase one
subject. This therefore is very ma^hoode, this is very clemency which makes
the Prince diligently to consider that if he must neades war, it belongs to
God and not to him: much less ought he either him self, or permit any other
to attempt any cruel, unlawful, or tirannicall enterprise, and which were
contrary to clemency. For God knows the number of our hears which is the
least thing in man: and will require the harm of one that is iniuried, at his
hands which does the injury. Herupon we do read that the whole reign of
Alexander Seuerus was continued without The emperor Alexander ^as no blood
^^^^^^
bloodshed, for that he was very wary that no innocent and giltles person
were murdered. Would to god that christenne men would so use themselves: for
so Christendom might rest in more quiet, and suffer less spoil.

Learn therefore ye that be advanced to so high an estate by God, that ye
may both stand in the stead of gods, which are renoumed for the benefits
employed upon men, and also may govern his people with justice, meakenes, and
clemency (which most becomme princes) as experience teaches: and learn also
that ye be men your selves which in the great day of the Lord must yield the
greater account, the higher the vocation is whereunto ye be called, when it
shall be no excuse to say: I thought not so. Much less then ought you to
think that he which pulls down the proud and high minded and places the
humble in their seats, will suffer himself to be deluded. Let clemency
therefore and piety the only ornament of a prince, stand before your eyes, for
it does always esteem the common profit before the private, it causes a good
prince to be desirous not only to be called a father of his country, but
also a Citezein. As Claudian writes to the Emperor Theodosius:

Thou citezen and parent art,
care thou for each degree:
Not for thy self, nor yet thine own,
but public profit see.
Be merciful: for when in all
the rest we are far odd,
This only thing aduaunceth us,
and equal makes to God.
So surely a good Prince, which remembers his duty, piety, and cleme^cie,
must maintein tranquillity and quietness, and rather adventure the loss of
his wealth, treasure, and estimacion among naughty A Prince must be a
mentainer of quietness.
men, then to move unjust war, and give occasion of shedyng innocente
bloodde, which is so precious a thing, that it can not be raunsomed. An
ensample whereof, may conveniently be taken from among the Ethenikes. For
Alexander of Macedonie, surnamed the Great, when his mother Olimpias required
him at her instaunce, to condemn an innocent, said unto her: Mother, ask
some other gift, for man's health and life, can not be counteruailled with any
recompense. Much more Princely answered, then those Giauntes used to do,
which little regardyng the fear of God, did esteem the life and health of a man, no more the^ a fly or a flea. Far disagreyng from soche as ought not
unadvisedly to cast their subjects into present danger, into the mouth of
their enemies, but to govern them in tranquillity, to train them up in
virtue, to give the^ ensample how to worship God truly: which spend many a
night without sleep for their subjects sakes, which do defend their bodies
and goods. That the common weal being well governed, they may live well in
the same: as Homer writes In. 9. Iliados
of Achilles in Greek, which the famous Clerk Elius Eobanus Hessus,
thanslated into Latin, thus:

As for her brood yet fetherles,
the bird does well prepare,
That flees for food to foster them,
and toileth eke in care.
So for the Greeks how many nights
watch I, and travails take?
What sharp assaults and bloody days,
In battle do I make?
Such a prince is he that loves quietness, that does not send forth his
power, but against riotous robbers, against the enemies of GOD, and disturbers
of the common peace, not seeking for any pray, waste of citees, or desire of
bloodshedde, but only that his country may be defended, his subjects safe
from invasion of enemies, and the common weal firmly established. For which
end every good man will arm him self, that his household, wife, and children,
may live in sauetie, and that the name of God may be called upon in this
quietness.

Here we need not much to speak of the Romans, which rather for enlarging
their Empire, or for keeping it being ones gotten by force, did so ofte^tymes
wage battaill, then for any zeal of Godliness. But there be other noble men,
which have showed theimselues mirrours of fortitude, temperaunce, reuengemente
of impiety, safegarde of the common wealth and clemency, which did not
denounce war upon any pride or hautenesse of stomach, nor contrary to the
Laws both of God and man, invade others and enlarge the bounds of their
Empire, but rather employed the power of the sweard given them from heaven, to
the punishment of the ill, the advancement of the good, and the glory of
God. Such were Iosue, David, Ezechias, Josias, Matathias, Judas Machabeus,
Charles the great, Mathias Huniades, Ladislaus Polonus, George Castriot
surnamed Scanderbegus, Lord of Epirus and Albanie: Lazarus Despotus Prince of
Seruia: of whose race and kindred, one Miloschus Kau^lonicus attempted a more
hardy enterprise, Amurathes.
then did Mutius Sceuola. For when Amurathes the eight Emperor of the Turks
had invaded Seruia and Croacia, with a mighty army, he entered into his
camp, and slew him with a dagger, which he had priuelie under his garment:
and so delivered that people from a most cruel enemy, and for the
preseruacion of his country, and for the safety of his lord and master, he
voluntarily cast away himself.

I could here rehearse above six hundred princes and nobles, of no less
godliness and courage, some living, some dead, which for the worthiness of
their doings, have gotten themselves immortal fame: but because mine intent
is not to make an history, I thought it good of an infinite number to mention
a few, by whose ensample soche as denounce war, might be admonished, that
they do not falsely persuade theimselues, that they may do it for the
destruction of citees and kingdoms, and slaughter of men: but in Gods
quarrel to defend piety, to overthrow the disturbers ^o^^ quarrelles.
of the common peace, to save our goods, wives, children, and country, that
the name of God may be called upon, without any fear of enemies. For they can
not with safe conscience, pitche any thought upon pray or spoil: unless they
will be accounted among those, whom God sends for plagues and scourges
against ill people, as were Ar^axerres, Attila, Tamerlanes, and soch^ other:
and to slande in danger not only of temperall punishment, but also of the
terrible torments of hell. For a good parent uses to cast the rod, wherwt he
beated his child, when it is old and dry, into the fire.

The argument of the fifth Chapter.
what calamity, what misery has fallen upon all Christendom, by soche
wars and rebellions, as have been unjustly moved.

ARchimedes Syracusanus, which beside his great knowledge in Geometry
Vitruuius lib. 9. cap. ^.
and Astronomy, has left behind him diverse and notable inuencions of
buildyng: at what time as he sittyng in a bathe, by measuryng of water, had
perceived how mo^he silver one which had undertaken the making of a croune of
gold, that he had vowed to be offered unto the gods, had priuelie mingled
with the gold: leapt for joy, and ran home naked, saying many times, in
Greek, I have found, I have found. Declaryng that he had conveniently found
that, which he had so earnestly sought. So surely may he say, yea, and as
the old fathers used, offer up a Sacrifice of an hundred oxen, which can
fully descriue the miseries, and calamities that come by wars. For they be
so many and so horrible, that a man might sooner A^gias stable.
cleanse A^gias Stable (as they say) then reckon up the mischeues that grow
thereof.

But to say something y^ may grow to the common commodity of me^, I think it
good of many thousand inco^modities, to declare a few, and judge it not far
amiss, to show how vnseamelie a thing it is, for that manne, which
pretends an hope of the heavenly life, to encoumber the world with martial
affairs: and The Devil is the author of war.
specially considering it proceadeth of concupiscence, which the devil
causes to reign in our members: a worthy egg for soche a bird. For as he
is a murderer, so he stirs other to murder, and the less godliness is
used, the more followers he has. So says saint James: whense come these
wars and contencions Iacobi. 4.
among you? Do not they proceed from the very concupiscence which warreth in
your members? you fight and make war: you have not, because you ask not.
Paul also the chosen vessel, does teach us evidently, Ad Gala^has, 5.
that these be the works of the flesh, aduoutrie, hoorehuntyng,
uncleanness, wantonness, worshipping of Images, enemitie, strief, emulacion,
sedicion, slaughter, and soche like, the doers whereof shall not enherite the
kingdom of God. Do you not hear with how great danger of our souls we
move wars, and run headlong upon manslaughter: while we labor to harm
others, while we endeavor by right or wrong to seek booties and prays, do
not we lease heaven? Let us see now if these good fellows, which delight to
be accounted good men of war, which when they have wasted their goods, in
riotte or gamnyng, labor to recover it again, upon other men's thrifte, can
escape reuengement at gods hand, which undoubtedlie in prepared for soche
wicked warriers.

Yea, I accoumpte wars among us Christians Wars among christen men are to
be abhorred.
detestable, because they be even within our own bowelles, among brethren,
and more then civil. Moreover, admit we were not v^i^ed in Christ, yet by
the constitucions of Emperors, they be al, as it were, of Rome is the last
monarchy.
one city, that acknowledge y^ Romain Empire, wherein there is neither any law
to receius those things again which be lost in the wars, nor any Law of
arms. Then ought we not to think, that we may justly and lawfully, one
invade an other, break the band of charity upon a pretenced quarrel, one
subject draw his sweard against an other, without breach of this society.
Among the Ethenikes there was nothing cou^pted more detestable, nothing more
miserable, then civil war, which ends so, that as Tullie Cicero ad
cornific^u^.
says, not only the victours will must stand for a law: but they must also
be obeyed, by whose aid the victory has been gotten: that is, that laws
abolished, justice expelled, al things may lie open to slaughter, spoil,
covetousness, and insolency, and that the son may fight against the father,
and brother against brother, whereby the society of men, the face of the
common weal, the co^municatyng of profits, may decaie, and be brought to
utter ruin. How much more danger hangs over them, which by regeneracion
in Baptism, have professed themselves to Christ, the GOD and aucthour, not of
war and disse^cion, but of peace and quietness, so couenaunting that one
should bear an others burden, not doing that to an other, which he would not
have done to himself, to embrace one an other with mutual love: and not to
provoke any to fight which is prohibited, not to bring any to their utter
undoing, and to make no end of molestacions, contrary unto Gods
commandment, which we ought not in any poincte to transgress.

You understand how detestable a thing it is, that wars should be stirred up
among us, not only contrary to Gods commandment, and to the order of our
profession, but also against thordinaunces of men. Whereunto if it please you
to knitte, the doleful and heavy end, which ensues hereupon, it shall
appear that there is nothing more pernicious, nothing more to be eschewed. And
to know the Lion by his paws, who is there which sees not that David, who by
Gods commandment did so often war against the wicked, did perceive the
incommodities of war, not by barrenness and hunger only, but also by
pestilence. Wherefore having his choice of these three, War is ^^^^e ^^en
fa^^^^ or pesti^^^^^.
he choosed pestilence, as the most tolerable, which he labored to turn
away, lamentyng in the sight of God, for his offense. And shortly to
conclude, war is even Ate her self, and a brande sent from hell, to consume
the world: which leaves nothing in safety, nothing out of hazard, nothing
vnspoiled, whereupon ungodliness the root of all evil, blasphemy, the
contempt of God and manne, robbery, rauine, slaughter, burning, violente
defilyng of married women, widows, and virgins, injustice, dissolucion of the
common weal, destruction of all things, do issue H^^^^ was a mo^ster that
had s^u^^ ^e^dee w^^h w^^ he^cu^^s tought, and as soon as he ^ad stro^^n of
one he^d an other s^r^g up immediately.
as it were forth of the Marshe of Lerna, with the serpent of so many heads,
and that not without the just judgment of God, which so oftymes in his
anger, reuengeth the sins of his people, according unto the saying of Esaie:
And they would not walk in his ways, neither heard they his law. And he
po^ted upon him the indignacion of his fury, and strong battaill, and brent
him, and he knew not, and set him Esaiae. 42.
on fire round about, and he perceived not.

And that not without a cause. For God, when he purposes to change the state
of any dominion, which leans toward decaie, for transgressing his
commandment, uses to permit both the Magistrate and the people to do that,
whereby they may learn (although to late) that they be justly punished,
which sometime might be forseen, if it were considered that the scourge which
this offense deserves is soche, as may by prayer and amendment of life, be
turned away. But we in the mean while live in security, trustyng in our
own strength, until we be overthrown, and given over in pray to our
enemies. Many kingedomes have be^ utterly destroyed by war.


For proof whereof, I could rehearse unto you, not one kingdom only, but six
hundred countries, which, as we read in histories, in the midst of their
roialtie, in their highest ruff, have been utterly subverted. For God uses to
set them before our iyes, for example, that it is vain hopyng for victory in
horses, wagons, and soldiers, but that we must cease from sin, learn
to call upon him alone, which mercifully and speedily hears the voice of
his suppliauntes, overthrows the enemies camp, and destroieth the adversary.

Man from the beginning has been inclined to civility, who ought by honesty
of manners and justice to keep himself within the compass of laws, and emparting
of commodities, and looking up to heaven, to acknowledge and glorify his only
creator. Wherefore it was appointed, that men should mete in assemblies, which
might grow in one as it were into one body, to be governed by most wise and
valiant kings and Princes. Whervppon the Monarchies began, The monarchy of
the Assirians.
the first whereof was assigned to the Assirians: where Ninus, Semiramis, and
Sardanapalus the vicious Prince, did reign: under whom when the Medes and
Babilonians refused to serve, because of his riot and filthiness of living, and
had in open battaill vanquessed him, he burned himself miserably in a toure
in Babilonia. This Monarchy dissolved, the kingdom of Babylon increased above
measure, whose king Balthazar, when he had blasphemed the God of Israel, and
had prophanelie used the holy vessel of the The monarchy of the persians.
temple in riot and banqueting, the Persianes dispoyled of his Kingdom,
which also erected another Monarchy, wherein Cirus, Ca^bises, diverse Daries,
Xerxes, and Artaxerxes, were governors. But when Darius being none of the
kings blood, had taken upon him the princely estate, Alexander the great slew
him, which after the loss of al his dominions, at ones lost both life and
monarchy. Where upon Carrion The monarchy of the Greeks.
appoints the third Monarchy to be of the Greeks which did not long
continue. For by division made by Alexander unto his successors, Seleucus
reigned in Syria, Ptolomey in Egipte, Antigonus in Asia, Ca^^ander in Macedonia
and Grecia: whose government although it were somewhat bloody, yet it endured
until the Romans purposing to obtain the Empire of the hole world, in deed
overcame the The Roman Empire.
hole, yet not unpunished. For the kingdom which they had gotten by force and
swerd, they l^st again by the swerd, and that not so much by forreyne, as by
civil wars and soche rebellio^s as rose amongst them selves. Wherewith when
they had well beaten and weried them selves, they perceived that ambition and
contempt of the common weal (the rule of many of the mightier sort being
dissolved) were the occasion that Julius Caesar after many sore bruntes and
lamentable miseries of the City, at the length got the hole Empire. Which
after his pitiful murder, deuolued to Augustus, and so to other, until it came
to forreyners, as they were by their soldiers aduau^ced: till at the last it
was divided into the east and weaste. And finally by reason y^ the bounds of
Christendom were negligently defended, it was brought by Charles the great
into Germany: the Egle so dispoyled of her feathers as some think, that she
were not able to find posts and post horses, if the Peers of the Empire did
not otherwise provide.

I could here also declare many flourishing kingdoms which bare great stroke
while these Monarchies yet endured, and many commonweals worthily advanced,
which persuading themselves to be in sauetie, and contemnyng other in
comparison of them, by their great fall even in their greatest pomp, learned
how inconstant fortune is. Moreover who The distructio^ of many notable
countries and (...)es has grown of (...)e.
so will consider the kingdom of Israel and the Jews over whom God himself
set anointed Kings and judges, and would that they should be a terror to the
gentiles (to pass over the dominions of Samaria, Egipte, Macedonie, the
Goths, which brought an hundred thousand men out of Hungary into Germany,
the Vandales, which fraied not Affrike only, but also Germany, and many
other Seigniories) who so further will remember, how the Rome the Lady of all
the world, has been so often taken, and sacked, that Carthage so famous and
match to Rome, was so destroyed: that Jerusalem was so often taken, and last
of all utterly defaced: that Athenes and Lacedemone, the two iyes of Greece,
were brought to ruin and raced even to the ground: shall easelie perceive
what calamity ensues upon wars, and that the iniquity, deliciousness, and
unthankfulness of man, toward his creator, riotte and impiety, be
scourged with that whip, which argues the just vengeance of God, that they
may well say with the Prophet: Behold, this day we be servants, our
Nehemie. 9.
corn is multiplied unto the princes, which thou have set over us for our
sins, which be Lords over our bodies, yea, over our wives and daughters.

Neither need we to seek foreign examples, considering that Germany and other
Countries adioigned to the Empire, have store thereof, and mo then in deed be
requisite. For (not to make mention of antiquities) who can sufficiently
declare what calamity, waste, and spoil, most part of men have tasted in our
time? For intelligence whereof, ask Saxony, Gelderland, Friselande, Brabant,
Flaunders, all the low countries, France, Italy, specially Lombardie, and a
great part of East France, which has been pitifully wasted: and they by
experience can tell you, how sore the smart of war pincheth, how sharp a
rod it is, to punish the iniquity of the world. Which, soche shall sone
turn away, as will fall to prayer, and call upon God, even from the botome
of their hearts.

But although God would even from the beginning, that these examples should be
written, and kept in memory, that men might learn thereby, to look upon
theimselues, and to amend their lives, considering how they ought to convert
from their sins, if they will avoid the great plague of heaven, I mean the
stroke of (...)es: yet the Jews alone were sufficient to put us in mind, of
reformyng our lives, and to declare The Jews were plagued.
unto us, that the transgressyng of Gods commandment, has never escaped
unrevenged. For this is the people which he loved above all other, to whom the
promise of redemption was made from heaven, which by a thousand figures and
miracles was delivered from the heavy yoke of bondage, which passed the sea
drifoote, which saw Pharao that persued them with a great army, drouned at
the closyng of the waters, which should have been conueighed into the land of
the wicked which had abundance of Milk and Honey, which received drink
out of the rock, and bread from heaven. But because they would not hear god,
which so often warned the^, they were so plagued, that in those fowrtie years,
wherein they were constrained to wander in the deserte among serpents and wild
beasts, all they that were brought forth of Egipte, to the n^mber of six
hundred thousand Numeri. 14. Iosue. 14.
men, were destruied and slain every one, saving Iosue and Calephe, by whose
guiding and counsel, the rest were conveyed into the land of promise. Who^
God so dearly loved, that he would his only soonne our savior, to be borne
amongst them, to teach, to work miracles, and last of all, by his death,
to purchase unto us life. Whom, when they being wickedly ^^nt, would not
acknowledge, either by war he destroyed, or by captivity dispersed into the
whole world, and gave them over to be despised of all the world, for
ensample of Gods vengeance, which is ordained for soche as will not repent
for their sins.

The outrage of war is so pestiferous an evil, so contagious and cankryng:
that she pours her poison, both upon forriners and a far of, and ere she
be The Cocatrice perceth (...) poison
seen, she pearceth more deadly then any Cocatrice. For who is so blind that
he does not see, that these wars kept among christen Princes for private
quarelles, have given a merueilous encouragemente and hope to the enemies of
the Empire, to encroche upon that, whereunto they have no right title, and what
decaie they have been unto all christendom. And for ensample, to make mention
but of one, which has been an Helene, or principal cause of the most part
of this trouble (whereunto if ye do add the disagremente of The (...) out of
Christian Princes encourages the Turk to enuade Christendom.
Princes, and civil debates, you shall perceive nothing lackyng that may tend
to the common destruction of the whole world) how many of the Lumbardes have
had occasion hereby, to fall to murder, robbery, manslaughter, spoil, besides
the making of widows, the undoing of fatherless children, and de^^ouring of
maidens, beside the profaning of sacred things, and a thousand other kinds
of impiety? How many kingdoms has the Turk, an vnapeasable and mortal
enemy to all Christians, hereby conquered? That all good men complain,
saying: that the ambicion of our Princes, ministereth occasion to the Turk of
victory. Now if we will accoumpt from the year of our Lord, M. D. when Jews
the French king first invaded Milaine, the chief town in Lumbardie, and
drove out the Duke thereof, you shall understand how greatly Christendom
has been endammaged, sense the most mighty Princes have co^tended who should
have the most just title to the same. Belligrade, the only Bulwark of
Hungary, was violently won: Rhodes, which could not be lightly assaulted,
was taken: the countries of Bachie and Syrmie were wasted: Varadine by siege
lost, Jews the king slain in the field, Buda sacked, a great part of
Hungary and Transs^luania ouerrunne: besides y^ Austriche was by thassaultyng
of Vienna sore shaken.

Whereunto if ye reckon that which we lost before, two great dominions
were spoiled by that Idolater the Turk, Constantinople and Trapezus, twelve
kingdoms taken from us, among which were Chalcis, Scodra, and many other
Islands, Hidru^tum with two hundred citees. Neither did other less desire to
augment their dominions. By all whose tirannicall attemptes it is comen to
pass, that the Turk has enlarged his Empire Eastwarde, unto Euphrates,
Westwarde to the Sea of Ionia, Southwarde to Ethiopia, Northward to the sea
called Euxinum: and Euxinum mare deuideth Europe from Asia.
unless the nobility moved with Gods love, and outcrie of the selie people,
which be reserved to the pitiful yoke of servitude, or else be next to the
danger of death, do withstand it, nether the countries which are borderyng
upon the River Dunowe, which yet remain entier, shall continue safe, neither
will he cease Danubius.
continually to enlarge his dominions.

But he were not so much to be feared, if our bodies and goods only were in
danger of him, and not also our souls, in neglecting the doctrine of our
faith. For he causes the children in their tender age, to drink the
Mahometicall poison, and leads the elder sort to hell fire, by forsakyng the
cross of Christ. Where is that famous city Constantinople, which was so
highly renoumed by so many Patriarchs, which were soche holy fathers, and
wherein the Sinode and general counsel was kept, by an hundred and fifty
Bisshoppes against Macedonius, which denied the holy Ghost to be God. Where
is Nicea a city of Bithinia, where three hundred four score and eight
bisshops, conde^pned the heresy of the Arrianes? Where is Ephesus the great
Town, where the mart was kept for all the hetherside of Asia: to whom
Saint Paul preached the Gospel: wherein Nestorius appoincting two natures
in Christ, was accursed by the Judicial sentence of two hundred bisshops?
Where is Chalcedon, situate upon y^ streites of Thracia, whose name is blased
welnigh through the world, for that there six hundred and thirty fathers
gathered in counsel, did condemn Eutiches and Dioscorus his scholar, one of
the same sect, which held opinion, that the nature of the word of God
incarnate, and the flesh which Christ took, were but all one? Where be the
Galathia^s, Corinthe of Achaia, Philippi, and Thessalonice, two citees of
Macedonia, and Athenes the city Athens.
of wisdom, of whence was Dionisius Areopagita? Which when the Apostle had
regenerated, he did partly by his writing set forth for a perpetual memory?
Be not they through extreme rigor of wars brought to naught, and have so
swarued from the true God, that of al, there can scarce one or two be found,
that will stand to the confession of the cross of Christ, and call upon the
God of heaven?

And that ambition, discord, civil wars, impiety, study of private gain,
and unfaithfulness, have given no small occasion to this mischief, the histories
of christen Princes to declare, and we by experience to late and to our great
calamity, be taught the same.

Learn therefore ye anointed Kings, ye good Princes, to whom the government
of the common weal is committed, spare your subjects, spare those that have
entered into the same Baptism with you, which do acknowledge one God, one
Savior, which be one with you in Christ, by whom we be all Brethren, all
enheritours of Heaven, wherein there is nether Hebrew, nor Greake, nether
Lord, nor Subject, but every one shall give an account of that he has done
in his body. Demas the Philosopher perceiving the Athenians very busy to
appoint divine honors to Alexander, willed them to beware lest while they
minded Heaven, they lost the Earth. But take you heed lest you lose Heaven,
while you keep the earth. Consider with your selves that all wars be
dangerous and deadly even to the first authors, because of Robberies,
Theifte, unrecoverable loss of body and soul, inordinate des^ouring of
maidens and widows, burning, spoil of all things, the oppression and
rigorous handeling of innoce^tes, so many kind of blasphemies, whereas no
drop of innocent blood unjustly shed, shall be left unrevenged, but that
the just and everlasting judge, which knows the certain number of our hears,
will require it at their hands.

Note besides here so many ma^slaughters, so much hooredome, so much vilanie,
the loss of so many soulles, Wars work the death both of body and soul.
whereby a great weight of account lies on their hands, whereas the burden of
every man's own iniquity is so great that he neadeth not to be laden with
other men's mischieues. Wherefore if any man respectinge godliness, louinge
peace, and because God commands his servants to turn their swords into
culters, and their speires into mattocks, that the Micheae. 4. Esaiae. 11.
Woulfe may dwell with the Lamb, the Leopard lie down with the Goat, the
Calfe, Lion, and sheep, keep company together, so that one nation do not arise
and fight against another, but do forget hencefurth the name of war, will
not for all this cease, but continue still we out fear of correction, to walk
after his own lust, he shall one day find that he shall not escape unpunished.

If we will needs show our selves valiant, yonder is the Turk, you^der be
thenemies of Christ's cross, any man may arm himself against the^, and go to
recover that part of christendom, which they have subdued and infected with
impiety, by the negligence of our princes, and to rescew from cruel servitude
and the jaws of hell, the poor people that cry for help: and let every man so
show himself stout in his quarrel, that it may appear that he fights for
his country, for his brethren, for the glory of Christ: and so he shall be not
only commended among men, but shall also receive a reward of him, which
leaves no evil unpunished, nor no good deed unrewarded.

THE Ninthe Book, concerning the good ordering of a common weal.
The argument of the first Chapter.
That the keeping of peace and quietness in a Common weal, is a great
furtheraunce to felicity.

AS it is extreme impiety alwaie to mind wars, and to turn al things
vpside down: So it is a singular virtue, an excellent poinct of wisdom, to be
quiet, and to maintain in a common weal, peace, the only stay thereof. For
Seneca borne at Corduba the Seneca li. 3. de beneficiis.
Great Master of good manners, seems to have said not much amiss: That it
is the property of a very king in deed, not to exercise his authority ever
when he may. And the very end and knittyng up of the wars, by experience
teach us, that it is not so expedient alwaie (although we may The
commodities of pe^^e ought to ^o^^ Princes to quietness.
sometime provoke others with wars justly) to break peace, and disturb
quietness. So that it may seame much better to sustain any loss, either of
goods, yea, or estimacion (because some do think their honor and
estimacion stained, if they do not wreake themselves upon the insolency of
others, and cause an burly burly in the common weal) then to yield unto
maliciousnes, and to disquiet heaven and earth with war: considering the
gain is not small, that is gotten by the common preseruacion of men. For as
small things by concord have good success, and increase: so great things
by discord, decaie and fall away (...).
to nothing. Further upon the conference of the commodities of peace, with the
misery and calamity of war (be it permitted and lawful) it shall straight
appear, how much the one excels the other, how much more it becomes a
magistrate, to govern the common weal in quietness in his goune, then in
disquietnesse in armor, upon every light occasion.

Neither did Marcus Portius Cato say unadvisedly, that the common weal ought
rather to be enlarged by virtue, then arms, in these words: do not you
think, that our predecessors made this common weal, where it was small,
great, by force of arms: for if it so were, it should be now much more
enlarged, considering we be better furnished with fellows, citezeins,
harneis, and horses, then they were.

Let us therefore set before our iyes, the end of our We must shoot at the
true mark of this life.
life, whereat we ought to shoot, and to bend all our courage in the common
weal: which should be obedience, modesty, shamefastnes, temperaunce,
mildnes, gentleness, long sufferyng, patience in adversity, sobriety,
mercifulnes, charity, chastity, justice, finally, all virtue and honesty: by
which kind of life, we shall both have certain hope to come to heaven, and
also to be remembered emonge our posterity, as men that so worthily have
behaved our selves in this life. This is that which the Wiseman mencioneth,
saying: A good name is better then precious ointementes. Ecclesia. 7.
Which he can hardly obtain, which being given to war, delights wholly
in doing harm, ragyng like a mad beast, and seeking to power out his
poison upon his neighbor: as well not beleuyng that there is a God, and a
blessedness of life, as he does wickedlie hasten to send himself to the
Devil, and to cast away his soul.

And like as in time of war, justice and equity ^e subverted, so in time of
peace, the true use of laws is put in ure: whereof justice the very fortress
of every city proceeds, more clear then the euenyng Sterre (as Aristotle
writes) in this, that she does not only Arist. in^^, Ethicorum*
favor him that embraces her, but also profits him to whom she is showed,
besides that she is the only mean to perfect all the other virtues. She
certainly The excellency of Justice.
is the only cause, why that the imparting of commodities in a City, is
constante, whereby every manne minds his own, and so emploieth his diligence,
that he will not harm his neighbor, but rather further him, so that (as
Socrates in Plato says) one may well say to an other: brother assiste me:
and thus he declares, that man in part is created for manne, the help
whereof both nature counsaileth, and the holy scripture commands. Thus
where one helps an One good turn asks ^^ other.
other, the saying is true, which affirms, that thank alwaie breadeth
thank, and every manne abides in his vocacion, not medlyng with foreign
matters, and soche as be as good unattempted, according unto the saying of
Nazianzene: a thing dooen, which were as good vndooen, is to be reputed as
nothing: for soche as be as good undone, be to be rejected. For as Xenophon
says: it is not possible to handle many matters at ones, and to do them all
well.

Ye now understand, what commodity ensues to a common weal, upon a quiet
life, and how that quietness The co^mo(...) of quietness.
does most behoue the society of men: which is the more to be desired,
because it does as it were, engender civility among men, which only makes
the difference between men and beasts, and causes the natural inclinacion in
man to all virtue, to increase and to drive more conformablie to a politic
kind of life. So may an Ethenicke ioigne the goods of the mind, and fortune
together, and live blameles among men: whom most of the Philosophers thought
therefore to be blessed, not because he did not entermedle in warrelike
affairs, but for that he being content with his own estate, being stout in
defense of his country, being modest and temperate, favored equitee and
justice, furthered men not only by virtuous conversation, but also by wise
counsaille, and discipline of manners, and brought them unto a better trade of
living.

Which kind of life, the exhortacions used in holy scriptures, require to be
in us, that one do not offend an other, nor circumuent him in his doings: but
that by vprightnes of life, we provoke the evil disposed to a better
judgment: not as though there were no further respect to be had, then to a
politic and civil kind of life, but that we also look for the fruict of
the spirit, which is charitee, peace, justice, godliness, and finally, then
heritaunce of heaven. All which are better compassed in that city, and among
those men, which do not delight in war, but quietly to live one with an
other, then otherwise. For in soche a common weal, every manne may use his
own liberty, and call upon God with a clean heart.

If war may be attempted for obteining peace (otherwise I se not how it can
be safely done) it is more to be wished, without war, to establish and keep
peace: a thing of soche holiness that nothing does more become christianes,
which are so much the worthier Peace without war.
then other men, for that others be unlike them selves during the time of
wars, vexed and miserably troubled with great perplexities, sore bruntes, and
many dangers. But Christianes, which so regard outward goods and wealth as
though they had none, what persecution so ever they abide, what damage so
ever they sustain, yet they hang still upon God whom they through their faith
in Jesus Christ, have put on, and esteem nothing in this world, because they
have received soche grace, that in the very midst of those storms, they yet
in their bodies feel great peace and comfort of life: knowinge that they
Psalm. n8.
which love God, ^e in great quietness, and that the kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, but justice and peace. And therefore in Esaie there is said
unto Roma. 14.
the people of Israel: I am the Lord thy God, which teach the profitable
lessons, which govern the in y^ way wherein thou do walk: I would thou
had marked my commandments, thy peace had been as a floode, and thy
justice as the goulfes of the Sea. They only have this peace which upon good
purpose Esaie. 48.
perform gods will: for the wicked, al tho they live in the most civil
tranquillity and greatest quietness that can be, yet they have not the true
benefit of peace: but they have always a gnawing in their conscience, their
mind is always vexed and disquietted more then with the enemies violence and
cruelty, which is a thing more terrible and extreme, then any war ca^ be.
Yet nevertheless god wills that this peace shall be preserved in a common
weal, whereby he that lives virtuously, may attain unto y^ true knowledge and
glorifiyng of him, and so by the politicque peace come unto the everlasting,
which is the fruit of the spirit, and that so the peacemakers may be
blessed.

We must therefore understand, that even every holy Every ma^^ has war
within him self.
and just man, al tho he be by none outwardly vered, does yet find in him
self an inward war: he has soche perpetual strife with his flesh and
affections, which so moleste every good man: that they cannot be taken away
ne yett appeazed by any philosophy, ne by any moral learning but be overcome
only by repentance and godly prayers. For be is our redemour which gives
us peace, not as the world gives, which has respect to outward wealth and
ease of the body, but to that which gives rest unto the soul, and cannot by
any extremity be disturbed. For that although the war be never so fearce, we
yet do live thereby in peace. For he comes not to send peace, but the
sword: and whether we be enforced thereunto by persecucion of enemies,
prouocacion of the flesh, or mocions of the Devil, every man must take his
cross, and follow him our only conduct our and savior.

Do not think that saint Paul (the chosen vessel, Romans 7.
which saw the secrets of heaven) had a light and small contencion, when
he perceived a law in his body, which withstoode the law of his mind,
whereby he was constreined to do the evil which he hated, and not the good
which he loved. After this manner we have peace given unto us, which we ought
not to convert to deliciousnes and pleasure: but therein to seek soche
quietness, as may likewise move us, to take like delight in the law of GOD, by
grace in Christ.

The argument of the second Chapter.
That Laws can not be made absolute in all poinctes, for the well gouernyng of
a common weal, but that the Magistrate must supply many things: then how
that consultacio^ is very profitable.

PLato, as he does all things, so this ^ib. 8. Politic.
does he learnedly declare, that there be so many diverse kinds of commonweals, as there be diverse conditions of men: and that therefore diverse men
do agree to diverse Citees. To whose opinion to assente herein, there neadeth
no great persuasion. For who so does but lightly note the alteracion of
things, the circumstaunces and qualities of every place and country, and the
trade how they maintain them selves: shall perceive that a general rule may
indede be applied to the government of al, but it can not in all poinctes be
sufficient in all. So says Tere^ce: Sondrie diettes cause sondrie kinds of
living. Neither is it to be thought that man's mind will alwaie stand in
one stay: for it bursteth out, and counterfectyng nature, causes diverse
shapes, and moves the alteracion of gouernemente in commonweals. There
falls ou^ always something in the common weal worthy of reformation.
Wherewith if ye also consider, the variety and chau^ges of things, ye shall
perceive general Laws to help, and to be, as it were, an entrance and
introduccio^ unto good government, but when new matters and new business
arise, they be not sufficient thoroughly, but there is required the politic
practice, wisdom, and forecaste of a Magistrate, which is a conscionable and
just dealer, which desires to use indifferency toward all men, which
brings all things into soche an order, that every man will seek his own
advantage, without annoiaunce to any other, and do nothing either unhonest,
or contrary unto the civil society. Yea, Justinian has thought it
expediente, that when any controversy happens, which can not be ruled by
the old laws, new should be then ordained in that case.

Furthermore, he that instituteth and forms a common weal by prescribed
ordinances, has regard to those things, which would presently be reformed,
nothing estemyng nor careful over those mischieues that may chance, as
things then of no like certainty. As Solon the Salaminian which ruled
Athenes by laws of his own making, being asked the question, why he made no
special law for aduoutrie: I thought not, quam he, that any soche heinous
offense would ever have been committed in this common weal. So many things as
well unprofitable as profitable, do in process of time, crepe into the common
weal, which must be speedily seen to, either that they may be turned to
good, or else redressed in season. As for ensample: An example cake^ of
victualle.
victualle, how necessary a nourishemente it is for man, all men know, and
therefore by ordinances of long time, there has been provision made, that it
might easily be had from one to an other. And although there be certain prices
set upon victualles, nevertheless when dearthe comes, that constitucion must
needs lose his force: which if y^ victuallers may use as there list, al
things shall rise to an intolerable price, yea and peradventure thereby may
much sedicio^ ensue, because it is a misery to dye for lack of food: and
hunger (as there say) breaks the hard wall. For auoydaunce whereof, a
magistrate ought to provide in time, and to set the prices at soche an assise,
as both the sellers may not be endammaged, but their travail and expenses
considered, and the other citezens served, according unto the time of the year.
Which stands chiefly in corn and flesh. For if they be good cheap, Corn
and flesh be counted the chietest provision of victualles.
nothing is accounted dear. As Socrates, when one complained unto him that all
things were dear at Athenes, as Purple, Wine, and soche deinties, said, that
there could no dearthe be rekened on, when Meal and Oil were sold good
cheap. So likewise, when the craftines of Merchauntes, Artificers and other
occupiers, begins to be prejudicial to the citezens (as at this day, upon
a gridie desire many do practice, pretending equity and law) then must a
magistrate be diligente in restraining soche inordinate gain, and the
occasion of soche privy conueighaunces, whereby these enormities burste out
into man's life, to bring all things to an equal proporcion, and by wisdom
foresee, that no soche coueteous appetite be satisfied. Wherein he must neither
have respect to person, coustome, cousinage, nor freindshippe. Our
kinsfolks, freindes, and benefactours, be in deed dear unto us, but we
must love the common weal, far above them all. The other happen unto us by
nature, but god commits this unto us to be well governed. The contempt
whereof, in respect of any person, or through negligence, is to be coumpted a
more unnatural act, then to stain our hands with man's blood.

Neither shall this be a sufficient excuse, that he has no knowledge in the
law, whereby he must examine his government, be it right or wrong, as by a
touch Even an unlearned man may geuer^^ well.
stone: considering that nature has emplanted in us certain principles,
whence not only the knowledge of making laws proceeds, but also the order of
good government, by justice and equity, is reueiled to the society and
civil life of man. Whence to swerve were a mere wickedness, and not so much
to regard a public matter planted by nature her self, as a private, and for
affection sake, as it were, to set to sale the impartyng of commodities.
Whereupon Plato wishes, that the common weal be never committed to the
government of a simple or inconstant wit: but to him alone that is of an
high courage, vnfearfull, incorrupt, loving equity and goodness, which
regards no more one then an other: of whom there has been diverse, and we
also at this day have many testimonies, that they have both well instituted,
and well ruled sondrie commonweals. But let us only consider the
Lacedemoniane common weal, which was so well governed, that it was accounted
the perfect The Lacedaemonians used. no written Laws.
Image of all virtue: yet never used they there any written laws: In so much
that this is reported to be one of the aunsweres that Lycurgus brought from
Delphos, as an oracle, that they should use no written Laws. But all those
things, which might seem to further their common weaie to an happy estate,
and their people to virtue, they established in the manners of their citezeins
and order of life, whereby they continued without any change, and that in
soche success, that the common saying was: The Athenians be always writing
of Laws, but they never keep any: But the Lacedaemonians never write Laws,
but always keep them.

I could also here recounte diverse other commonweals, which be ruled more by
old aunciet customs then by any forreyne law, and yet be well governed: And
which (considering the corruption of the time) are kept in decent order and
civility of ma^ners: were it not that the shortness of this my treatise moves
me to drive to an end, and to give occasion to other to seek and set forth
soche things as might further advance the common weal.

Moreover a magistrate ought to be politicque and civil, whose function, Plate,
Xenophon, Aristotle, Heraclides Ponticus, Cicero, and so many philosophers as
have written of commonweals, will sufficiently declare, although that nether
nature did move a man thereunto, nor that there were any precepts of law
written. Yet this must be added as a final consummating of our doings and
travail, which apperteyneth unto the scriptures, and Christian life: That
Gods laws must be ioygned with man's ordinances, the ten
commandments must be kept, idolatry Politic ordinances must not
disagree with the laws of God.
and wicked worshipping, must be rooted out, Gods word must every where be
preached in churches instituted for godly purposes, moral discipline must be
observed, schools must be diligently seen to, that youth may be trained up
in good learning and knowledge of the tounges, for the understanding of gods
word, for the rulyng and governing of the common weal, and specially for the
setting furthe of gods glory. Which is the chief cause why God would that
man's life should be civil, and commanded the magistrate as a more honorable
person, to be the keeper and preserver thereof, upon whom as upon a glass, we
are bound to look, to learn of him a perfect trade of life, and to embrace
with all our hearts that which he ordeineth for the common commodity.

And surely I cannot find that their is any thing more profitable for the
establishment of soche things whereby a common weal is adourned, and daily
helped, then a parlemente godlily assembled. Which forseeth y^ nothing be done
with temeritie, nothing without a special consideracion, whereof either any
man may have cause to repent, or afterward lamente that things have no
better success. For in Monarchies, although the estate consiste upon one alone,
yet y^ one must Princes ought to use consultacion in their doings.
not be so rash, as to contemn the Counsel of good men, and by himself to
enacte, and appoint those things to be done which appertain to government,
and wheruppon an ensample given to be followed of a great number, depends. And
this is the meaning, whereas I said before that a Prince has many eyes: and
the common saying is, that many eyes see more then one: as though when a
thing is on all sides thoroughly known, and all circumstaunces well debated,
it were more easy to take order for it.

So we se that saying which Socrates highely commends in Plato, allowed as
true: counsel is an holy Council is an holy thing.
thing: in so much that there can be no good success, no comelines in a
common weal, unless counsel be wisely and religiously used. For there is
health says Solomon, where there is much counsel. And Prouer. 24.
what other thing do ye think, did advance the Romans, and other commonweals, but much and sincere consultacion? Whereupon if any ambassadors,
either of foreign nations, or if an enemy had been permitted to have entered
into the Roman Senate, their The Roman Senate.
report was, that they saw a Session of soche Majesty, as was not wont to be
in an assemble of men, but rather might be resembled, to a parliament of Gods.

But it is no need to make any great praise of consultacion besides this, that
at home in all services it is comfortable, abroad profitable, in every thing
that is dooen, needful, whereby commonweals have been wonderfully
strengthened, and for lack thereof not alittle decayed. Which appears now a
days in sonderie commonweals, which fall to utter ruin, either because
they be not supported by counsel, or else in government use soche things, as
be wicked and full of impiety.

Therefore if the histories were not, even experience ^^od me^ give always good
council.
would teach us, that they ought to be good men, to whom the government of
things is committed. For how can he make an ordinance concerning honesty,
which is himself vicious and contempneth honesty, concerning the common
profit, which seeks only his own gain, concerning sobriety, which is
alwaie reelyng ripe, and drouned in drunkenness, concerning godliness, which
is himself ungodly, and has no sign of virtue in him? Which things Solomon
wills us to observe in all men, of whom we entende to ask counsel. Save
thy soul (says he) from Ecclesia. 37.
an evil counsailour: first know what his necessitte is, what he thinks in
his mind. Nether co^sult thou of godliness, with the ungodly, nor of honesty,
with the dishonest. But be thou alwaie in compaignie with an holy man, and him
whom thou know to stand in the fear of God.

Then can not the wicked, and soche as seek only their own commodity,
covetous, dronkardes, vnfaiethfull, hoorehunters, unjust, and ungodly
persons, ever give any good counsel, unless it be against them selves, as
Caiphas did to the Jews, that it was Joan. 19.
expedient that one man should dye for the people. For it may so happen (but
not without the inspiracion of An evil man sometime gives good counsel.
the spirit of god) that a naughty manne, may speak wisely of a good matter:
and oftymes otherwise then he either conceived in mind: or thought that it
would come to pass. Whereof we read a plain example of Aman in holy
scripture: for when Assuerus asked him Hester. 6. and 7.
what were to be done to that manne, whom the king would feign bring to honor,
he answered: he must be araied with the kings royal garments. etc. Thinkyng
it to be himself, whereas in deed it was Mardocheus: and therefore Aman was
hanged on the galiswes, which he had prepared for Mardocheus.

Many soche things, which I could rehearse, I must let pass, for that my
meaning is only, that if you will have any thing go happily forward in the
common weal, you must use good deliberacion, lest you be compelled as
fools do, to say, had I wist, and learn wit when you have suffered a
displeasure. For they which do not much regard the common estate, use Plato
i^ Symposio*
without deliberacion to attempt things, and rather to expect what will
thereon ensue in the end, then to have any respect to present counsel, and
to apply al things according unto it: specially seeing the falling out of
things, in the end, is the fools scholemaster, which causes the unwise to
wax wary, when it is to late, and when they have abiden harm, then to lament
their rashenes: at the beholding of whose danger, he that is wise, will learn
to beware.

It is therefore very expedi^nt in a common weal, that counsel be often had
for good government: which we may better understand, not by the number of
Sentences, but by those which debatyng well Council mu^^ be well weyed and
not always measured after the greater part of men's opinions.
and thoroughly the estate of the common weal, do decide that which is
honest, just, godly, and besemyng a Christen company: that men's
judgments be rather well waighed, then any respect had to the number of
opinions, lest the bigger part overcome the better, and the greater number be
judged the wiser. Neither here do I allow any soche, as neither for
unskillfulness, neither for lack of wit, give unwise counsel: but either
being corrupt or moved with viciousnes of mind, counsel that which is
wicked, ungodly, and not agreyng with a man of honesty. Which counsel
bisides that it hurts the common weal, it uses to light worste upon the
counsaillour himself, according unto the common proverb: with which the
Wisemannes saying agrees: evil counsel shall he returned upon him that
gives it, and he shall not know Ecclesia. 27.
how it happened unto him, and at the ^ast the counsel of the wicked shall be
dispersed.

Which things ought to be an evident argument unto us, that no common weal
can be well gouuerned, without good counsaills, which they that tender
the same, must often put in ure, that those ways, which their people as yet
have walked in with the Gentiles and unfaithful, ones left, they may receive
soche ordinances of their Magistrates, as upon counsaille are thought,
honest, just, profitable, and hurtful to none: which being instituted as it
were even in the schole of godliness, may open the way unto the heavenly
city through him, which is our only guide, way, truth, and life.

The argument of the third Chapter.
That soche a Magistrate does his duty, and governs a common weal in good
order, which rooteth all vice out of it, and reduces it unto integrity of
manners.

IT is not unwisely said, that a man may as well know the magistrate by the
subject, as the Lion by his paws: for that most of the people be ruled and
affectionated, according as the Magistrate gives the^ an example. Which
vocacion he does well execute, which is him self a good man, and minds the
common aduauncemente of all: not in fair words, but in very deed, which
one thing chiefly commends an Officer. For that shall edify nothing in the
congregation, which thaduouterer speaks in commendacion of chastity, the
dronkarde, of sobriety, the usurer of honest gain, the covetous man, of
despisyng riches, the wicked, of virtue, and the lier, of truth. Shall not he
rather find some, that will laugh him to scorn, then be reformed by his
talk, which proceeds not from his heart, but only from his lips? For in
deed he is no good teacher, which teaches only by words, and does not use
himself honest in life, that he may be without fault himself, that will
find fault with other. For so shall his speech be lively, and his words
the shadow of his deeds, as Democritus the Milesian says. For whereupon
comes the corrupcion of Citees, the liberty of life, but by the Magistrates
negligence? Which oftymes sets his mind more upon common banquetyng and
feastyng, then that he will ones waighe what belongs to honest living, and
good gouernemente. Likewise may one judge of man's impiety, which daiely
more and more increases, because the word of God is not lively in us, but
when it is heard, it is not regarded: but our business lies, in feastyng,
hoorehuntyng, riottyng, bachityng, blasphemy, and a thousand kinds of fond
vanities. And in the mean while they wink hereat, whose duty were to lift
up their voices, to counsaille us, to move us, to correct us, and not to
cease, until soche time as they saw either amendment of life, or else
iniquity after a sort, vanquished in their Church.

Which enormitie scholemaisters also increase, for Unapt scholemaisters.
they suffer the youth committed to their charge, to do what they list: they
use no moral discipline for the amendment, well framyng and fashionyng of
their conditions, but mindyng only their wages, they suffer the children to
run at will, and become worse then they were, when they first took them in
hand. And if they take to their tuicio^ any well nurtered and tractable
children of the parents, they send them home evil manered, and more
dissolute then they were when they came to them: so that it were as good in
manner, that the child were brought up in an house of bauderie, or taught some
light occupacion, without expense of money, then so dearly to buy soche
corrupcion of manners. For there be certain principles of virtue naturally laid
in manne, but unless they be stirred up by discipline and godly exercise,
concupiscence of the flesh, destroieth them, and makes man prone to evil,
and a follower of wickedness.

And what common weal is there at this day wherein good and civil ordinances
be not despised, and in their place, murder, usury, covetousness, deceit,
injury, All wickedness reigns through the negligence of magistrates.
robbery, fraud, unjust dealyng, aduoutrie, blasphemy, drunkenness, contempt
of Laws, and all wickedness, do reign? whereby their can little civility be
found in man's life. But admit there be some good (as there is no assembly so
deuelishe wherein are not some which favor virtue) soche horrible iniquity
bears swaie, that what virtue so ever be mixed there with, it lies shadowed
as a rose among brambles: so that it makes a show only of vice, and of no
virtue. Hereupon come these miseries, heruppon good men complain, that there
is no justice nor equity amongst men. But that all things bend to decay and
ruin, which as accessaries and handmaides of iniquity, these mischieues
incontinent follow: pestilence, famine, war, robberyes, slaughter, wast of
all things, and all kind of plagues that we se fall upon us.

Which calamity as it comes by the peoples sin, so by amendment of life
and earnest calling upon God, it may be turned from them. A magistrate
therefore must be vigilaunt in his office, and do his endeavor all that he can
to suppress the wicked, for which cause he bears the sword. The good men
which stay upon virtue, must call upon God, and procure the preseruacion of
the hole, for so much as oftymes hole Cities for one or two good men's sakes,
have been saved from destruction. Let the magistrate follow the advice of expert
Phisicians, which when they see that any rotten member cannot be healed, then
they cut of and sear up that part, to the end it may not enfecte the rest,
and at length destroy the hole body. For he is an evil and an vprofitable
membre, which first by ill ensample offends his neighbor, and after
expressly Such as will not be (...)d, ^^st not to suffered in a ^o^men weal.
despises the good order of the common weal. This is the perfect office of
good government, which god requires of him whom he would have to go before
his people: this is the manner of rule contained in the book of the law, which
ought not to depart from the governors Iosue. 1.
mouth.

Nether let us stick in this print, because the evil may well be suppressed,
but not rooted out: which no man requires, considering that the corruptnes of
nature, and the number of the wicked be greatter, then that they can quite be
dispatched and bannished. For when Hercules himself cut of one of Hidras
heads, an hundred sprange up in place of that one. Yet a magistrate
Magistrates must be watchful.
must not cease, but watch, that as soon as he sees this fire begin to
flame, he have in redines his axes, ladders, buckettes and soch other
necessaries, where by he may turn away this present danger, that his City be
not burned up. Let him do like a good housbandman, which perceauing that all the
cockle cannot be plukt up with out loss and decay also of his wheat, among
which it grows: commands only so much to be weeded out as shall let the
wheat from growing, and so lets the rest alone until harvest: so he that
will be called a faithful favorer and father of his country, as he is wise,
vigilaunt, and incorrupt, so he must think this commission to be given him,
that he keep the common weal uncorrupted, prevent inconveniences that may
grow, so rule his subjects, that it be honestly, and uprightly done without
any offense to others. So will each man behave himself toward other, as he
would other should behave themselves toward him: so shall the hole body
become godly, and desirous to fulfill gods will: that this common weal may be
called not only a con^ention of men united and knit by laws, but also the
true rule of virtue, and a perfect leader to a better life.

The argument of the fourth Chapter.
That they which d^ profess Christianity, ought to be more perfect in
politicque government, then the Philosophical ordinances do prescribe.

HE that will consider the old tradicions of the Philosophers, whereby they
dehorted me^ from their savage conditions, and led them to an order of
civility, that by their honest demeanor, they might auau^ce the dignity of
the common weal, ^^^tu^ is naturallye ^ngraffed in man
shall understand that it is nature which sets before our eyes the
purtrayture of virtue, whereby principally we ought to frame our selves to
goodness, and honesty, by whose prouocatione there be reported among the
ethnikes many that lived well, which did not only deserve renoume at home, but
also abroad would not spare to spend their lives for the preseruacion of their
countreye: men, which as they did well deserve of men, so in this one thing
they are blame worthy: because that they for their good deeds and integrity
of manners, devising a certain feigned ^elicirie, only sought their own
praise, only an everlasting fame of their own name, and being unthankful did
not give glory to God, whose gifts those are, and unto whom all that is
worthily done among men, is to be attributed.

But Plato wisely said that commonweals differ according to the diversity of
men's manners: and that for sondrie kinds of life, sondrie kinds of discipline
be most agreeable. Which thing must needs take place in us Christians, which
forsaking utterly all the delusions of the Devil, when we were first Baptized,
have entered into an everlasting covenant with God our creator and father
through Jesus Christ* our only Savior, the breach whereof is not only an
heinous offense, but the ready wa^e to the devil.

And if ye list to consider the vet^e end of all the old Philosophy, ye shall
see none other thing, but such a glittering life, as in deed delights a
politic man and contenteth his mind, which if ye compare with the true
virtue, ye shall find it without, a fair painted Toumbe, but within full of
filthy and rotten bones. Wherefore we must do our endeavor, to avoid Our
civil life ^ere must be a preparation to the heavenly.
those worldly allurementes, not content with those civil ordinances,
which in deed be requisite in a common weal, but are not fully aunswerable
to virtue, and the blessed estate of life. Forsomuche as we^ ought not to
spend our time, according to that outward conversation, but in newnes of mind
to be reformed, to know the wilt of God our father, and keep his
commandments. So shall we live according unto those principles, which
nature has laid in us, and Philosophy has more and more stirred up, which
move us to be obedient unto laws, to be modest, just, temperate, sober,
upright, valiant, virtuous: not doing that to other, which we would not have
dooen unto our selves, which in a manner is the order to preserve civil
estates, even among those which do not truly worship God, but live to them
selves, seek and appoincte for themselves felicitee in this world. And
although most of them devise herein a possibilitee to live well, a perfect use
of virtue, and sufficient commodity of life (which Speusippus the
Philosopher, calls the most blessed estate of all other) from whence they
think to pass and asce^de up into heaven: yet heaven is so pestered with
people that have been conueighed into it by these means, that there seameth
not one place empty for any more, although a man would never so feign be
caconized.

But we must not rest at these external and visible things, whose
conversation ^ught to be without reprehension among men, and adourned with
politic orders, lest we offend our brethren: that they which live in the
world, although they b^e not of the same mind with us, yet they may by our
good demeanor be gained to be of us: but me ought so to travail in this
outward and visible city, that nevertheless we alwaie conceive the form of
the heavenly. And in so doing this our life shall stand, as it were a second
offering, to pourge our iniquitee, and to be a mean for the attainyng of a
better life, through our preconcei^ed hope. And as Plato makes Socrates like
to Alcibiades his Sileni, base and simple to see to outwardly, but inwardly
altogether divine and heavenly: So must we become abiecte, all to all, and
with contempt of this life, conceive an hol^e hope of an other: as men
commanded to keep those virtues, whereby civil orders be maintained, but not
as though they were alon^ sufficiets an happy estate of life, or could make us
to live perfectly well. For if they ^e compared with the true happiness of life,
they be but simple, and more base then that any man ought thereby to wax
arrogant, or to make any great account of the^. Whereby we as it were through
a casement, do see in those civil virtues, our i(...)o, in that justice which
is even brighter then the ^u^^yng Star, our ^eble^es, in that heroical
valiauntnes* our ^ntemperau^ce, in that temperaunce, and what soever else
imperfection or weakness is in us: which it lies in our power to use well or
evil, for that they be indifferent. For who so thinks himself ^^ste,
because ^e gives to every man his own, and (...), because by moderate
bridelyng himself, ^e vanqu^sheth ^^brideled affections, surely he lives not
evil among men, h^ wheit not yet happily. For in that he fashioneth* him
self to the world, he compasses not felicity: which he only ^^^^igneth,
that has the true use of virtue, knows God, and ke^eth his commandments.
Which es^emeth all things be they never so great, never so plausible, (...).
but as vile and frivolous. And although he has riches, comeliness, beauty,
honor, and all worldly wealth at will, yet because he sets not his mind
on them, they be his, as though he had them not.

Which saying, although it be hard in many men's ears, for that they be
addicted to the world, and seek not to have any taste of heavenly things:
yet it is necessary, and without it no society of life can continue sound,
no constitucion of the common weal ca^ be profitable, or ^an be well applied
to that end, for the which it was first ordained? For what profits it to
bring men to civil order, to make laws for them, and to induce them to s^rue
the common wealth, if they be without the knowledge of GOD? Look me through
all those commonweals and Citees, which do vaunte them selves so m^che, that
the^ have received the true word of God, as it were new springing again to
the world, and you shall scarce find one, which is not either given to
inordinate covetousness, or that emploieth not that which he has gotten, to
usury and unlawful lucre: whereas the people even as soon as they are
returned from hearing the preacher, think it but a light matter, to devise
how they may craftily convey away their neighbors goods. To whom that
saying of the Prophet Hieremie, is very fitly applied: Because there are
found among Hierem. 5.
my people certain wicked men, liyng ^^ wait setting snares like foulers, and
trappes ^o^^tangle men: as a nett is full of birds, so is their house full of
deceit. Certainly so much the worse, because they do^e not frame them
selves to live according unto the will of God, which they hear preached unto
them, which is Styffe nec^^d people.
daiely beaten into their ears: but wickedlie cleave unto that kind of life,
whereunto at the (...) gave them selves in their youth thr^^gh c(...)e, and be
as it were grown in it by ^^st^^^. And yet nevertheless, they promise
theimselues, a certain hope and prerogative of christianity, as though they
were written in the same regestre, wherein they be conteigned, 1. P^tri. 2.
which are the elect kind, the princely priestbode, the holy generation, and
the reserved people, which understanding the will of their Master do it
not, but being nusseled in iniquity, commonly become worse and worse: which
naughty and wicked sort, the prophet exhorts to amend, and warns them
thus: Cease from doing peruersely, learn to do well: seek Esaiae. 1.
judgment, help the oppressed, judge for the orphane, defend the widow, and
if your finnes be as red as Scarlet, I will make them as white as snow. This
is also saint Paul's precepte, that we should not fashion Ad Romans 12
our selves after this world* but altere in newe^esse of mind, (...) what is
y^ good, well playsed, and perfi^e will of God. For we m^st be made so humble
^^ the mighty ^^nde of God, that we may he exalted in the time of his
visitation.

Then can not we both serve God and Mammon, for there is a great confusion
between them two, as we can not serve (...) masters. And therefore they be
deceived, which being overwhelmed with desires and worldly cares, do not
once examine theirliues, no^ bring forth fruicte worthy repentance, bearyng
themselves upon the name of Christianity, and per^wadyng theimselues to be of
those, whom GOD loue^h* where(...)* God knows, like blind bu^sardes walk in
thick (...)rkenesse, declaryng by their ungodly doyn (...) how little ^h^i
see in the Christian doctrine, h^^d (...) of Gods word, not received into
the good earth, and inward parts of their hearts, but fa^^yng among thorns,
is by deliciousness of living, desire ^^r^thes, coueteousnes, vain care, and
other (...)* choked, that it can not bring forth (...)y (...) ^e like unto
soche as run in games, but can not ^^^^he the G^wle, whereupon the price is
laid: not remembryng the Apostles precepte, do ye not know, that they
which run in a course, run all, but yet one receives the reward. Paul.
1. cor. 9.
Run you so, that you may win the game.

Which surely be lessons for us, how to travail in this civil common weal,
to what end of life we ought to direct our doings: lest if we run in
vain, the talent which is committed unto every man, return without increase,
and it be said unto us: thou evil and slothful servant, thou know how
that I shall Math ^^.
reap where I did never sow: thou should therefore have delivered out my
money to the Exchau^gers, and I at my coming should have received mine own
with advantage. Take therefore away from him the Talente, and cast the
unprofitable servant into utter ^^rkenes, there shall be mournyng and gnashyng
of teeth. Soche be those, which the Apostle Prophecteth 2. Timoth. ^
shall come in the latter days, men that love the^ selves, coueteous, proud,
bachiters, unthankful; wicked, unkind, tru^e breakers, unmerciful, despisers
of honesty, Traitors, high minded, lovers of pleasure rather then GOD: having
a simil^tude and color of godliness, but deniyng the power thereof. Soche may a
man find not only in those commonweals, that bear a pretense of Religion
but also in those which have the word of god sincerely preached unto them:
whose fault is the greater, because they continue not in that lively
doctrine, which is of all other most necessary: but prefer the broad way
which leads to hell, which is so much beaten of many, before that pathe,
which guides to virtue and to our true country. Like unto Rapotus the king
of Friselande: which Rapotus pla^ked his foot out of the font when he should
have been christ^^^d.
when he had his right foot in the Font, to be Baptized, stayed and enquired
whither all his aunces^ours went that were not baptized: then Will^prode the
bishop answered: according unto the scriptures, they went to hell* then (quam
he) will I alter nothing, but will observe soche ordinances, as my ancestors
have used: and with that pulled his foot out of the water: rather desiryng by
stickynge still in his predecessors steps, to be cast into everlasting
torments, then to change worldly vanities and old supers^icions, for the
enheritaunce of heaven.

Let them beware therefore, that they run not headlong to the devil,
which being nusseled in vicious living, do alwaie one thing, and be entangled
with the world, that is, with co^eupiscence of the flesh, co^etousnes,
voluptuous desires, pride of life, and the snares of impiety, and let them
take heed, that they flatter not them selves, and devise a long year of
amidement, yea that peradventure which Plato does We must use ^o delay in
amending our lives.
appoincte: which may be compared unto the rich man, who setting his whole
mind upon worldly wealth, fills his Barnes, but hears not the voice that
says unto him: to morrow shall thou dye. So vain a thing it is to seek any
other occasion of repentance then that which is even now at hand and not to
be lightly regarded, for fear lest we be separated and rejected from that
holy communion of saints.

Further if we say, that we be in Gods favor, and yet walk in darkness,
and keep not his commandments, we lie and the truth is not in us. So says
Ihon the Apostle: if we say that we have to do 1. Joan. 1. ^. Joan. 1.
with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and say not the truth. Yea,
moreover he warns us, that those which do offend and continue not in
Gods doctrine, have not God with them. In so much that if any come unto us
without this doctrine, we ought nether to receive him into our house, nor to
salute him. For who so receives him, in so doing becomes partaker of his
wickedness.

Do you not se how politic tradicions be of them selves honest and
profitable for good government, but not suffy^inge a Christian, unless the
^^e ioigned with gods commandment? Therefore we ought Me^^ tradicions
v(...) they b^ ag^^^b^e unto the laws of God w^^^^ our (...).
so to address our common weal, that it be a president and as a scholemaister
unto us, that therein we may frame our selves to be apt scolers and disciples
unto God. Moreover as Solon the Salaminian was wont to say, that laws do
profit, as the officer governs: if he govern well, then be they profitable:
if he govern ill, then be they unprofitable: so may we call these civil
ordinances indifferent. For if we will stand upon them, so far furthe as
the civil society extends, I confess they be good and honest, and as it
were conveyed even from nature her self to profit the fellowship of men. But if
ye understand that they be disagreable to that trade of life, wherein we be
commanded to forgive injuries, to leave our cloak unto him that takes away
our coat, to do well unto our enemy, and to give him meat when he is
hungry, to give him drink when he is thirsty, to bless them which do
perse^ute us, to render good for evil, to have peace with all men, and to love
our neighbor as our selves: now they shall appear to be as unlawful and
ungodly: that unless they be sea^oned, stirred up and quickened with the true
doctrine of relligion, all their buildinge is upon sand, and in danger
continually of ruin and decay.

Let therefore the inhabitauntes of any City be never so renoumed, never so
famous for integrity of manners, if they do not reverence godliness, do not that
to others which they would have done to themselves, do not direct all their
doings to further their neighbor, and to advance the glory of God, do not
truly and even from the bottom of their hearts, worship ^^ue god^^n^s.
god, be they (I say) of never so great estimacion among men, yet in the sight
of God they be abominable, for that in this world they seek nothing else
but that which is of the world: which as it is manifest, passes away with all the glory, with all the pomp thereof* but he that does the will of god,
stands for ever, and for his well living in this world which is subject to
corruption, he shall receive a blessed reward in heaven, which shall never
perish.

Do not we know that the Jews were a people (...)ple of ^^^ Iewe^ miserably
dispersed.
whom God loved above all other, men very precise in keaping of fastes, good
order in their ceremonies, and in fulfilling the holy law, yea in so much
that they conceived a pride therein, so that by laying abroad their scrolles
wherein the commandments were contained, and magnifiyng them selves because
that they had the law written on the outward hemmes of their garments, they
delited in vauntyng them of their works to men, and yet we hear that by
gods own mouth it was said unto them: woe be unto this finful nation, a
people of great iniquity, a wicked generation, unnatural childerne. Offer me
no more ^blacions, Esaiae. 1.
for it is but lost labor. Incense is an ab^ominable thing unto me, I may not
away with your new moons, your Sabothes, and solemn days, and the more ye
multiply your prayers, the less will I give ear^: for your hands be full of
blood. Wash your selves, be ye clean, take away the evil of your thoughts
from mine eyes, cease to do peruerselie, and learn to do well. And in another
place: Behold in Esaiae. 58.
the day of your fasting your lust remains still, for ye do no less violence
to your debtours: behold ye fast to scrife and debate, and strike with your
fiste wickedly. Do not you fast as you have done until this day, that The
Jews cer^monies and fastinges.
your cry may be heard on high. Will you call this fasting and a day
acceptable to the lord? Does not this fasting rather please me, that thou
louse him out of bondage that is in thy danger? dissolve the bands of
impiety: break the bread to the h^ngrye, the neady and wandering people bring
into thine house: when thou see one naked cover him, and despise not thiue
own flesh: then shall thy light break furthe as the morning, and thy health
shall arise the sooner.

Whereby we ma^e gather how that those holy people which were voutchsafed to
have the promis of salvation made unto them, even in y^ midst of al their
civil ordinances, for all the gainesse thereof, yet heard themselves called,
the wicked company, the naughty seed, that their hands were full of blood,
whose customs in ceremonies were altogether abhominacio^ in the sight of God:
and were bidden at the length to learn to do well, which bragged so much that
they did direct all their ways according unto the laws given from god above.
But when as they continued still in their outward ceremonies, and transgressed
the law of God, whereupon their salvation did depend, and were brought even
to y^ very point of destruction, they heard this said unto them: Jerusalem,
Jerusalem Math. 23.
how often would I have gathered thy children, as the hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, and thou would not? Behold therefore your house
shall be left unto you desolate. etc.

We need not here to make any general discourse through all worthy commonweals, as well Greeks as Latins, established by so great wisdom, adourned
with soche commendable customs, that they were to be thought not to have been
peopled with men, but eue^ the very gods to have descended from heaven there
Many flourishing commonweals have fallen to ruin for lack of the knowledge
of God.
to inhabit: but because they received not the true doctrine of man, the law
given concerning regeneracion, they were brought to naught, and did not attain
unto that felicity and happy estate, whereof they assured themselves: nether
did they know God, but declining into a reproved sense, be decayed utterly,
and be become clean desolate. Which lest it do also chance unto us that do
use our commonweals to much addict unto the ordinances of m^n, good heed
ought to be taken, that our race may be soche, that we may win the price,
and bear that for our cognisaunce, for the end whereof this our civil life
was first institute and ordained. Which opens this passage, from this
corruptible city, unto the incorruptible, and will declare, that we have not
been idle workmen in the vineyarde of our heavenly father. For so ought we to
spend our time, so to seek to beautify our commonweals: that we do not
forget the will of God: so ought we to hear Gods word, that it be fixed in
our hearts, and bring forth fruicte, that it be not choked with any worldly
cares.

After this sort shall the Merchaunte, when he sells his wares, remember his
brother, by whose hinderau^ce he ought not to be furthered. The Ploughman, as
he Means to live well in a common weal.
is earyng the ground, shall sing the glory of God, and do his daiely endeavor
to tille the earth, and to provide corn and grain for the sustenaunce of his
neighbor. He that has riches, shall bestow them upon the neady, and shall
esteem the^ as though he had none, showing himself cheerful when he gives,
having the^ alwaie ready to releive his brother withal in his necessity. The
poor shall thank God for his poverty, he shall be content with bread and
water, as Diogenes was, and give thanks for the same: which is therefore
judged to be wealthy, because he measures wealth not by possessions, but by
a mind that is free from all coueteous desires.

Thus we may discourse through all the gifts of body and mind, and all
men's doings, and take heed that in these outward and visible things, we do
not seek only that, which is external and corruptible, but rather that
whereby we may have steadfast hope, to attain the true blessedness after this
life.

The argument of the fifth Chapter.
That our civil life ought to tend toward the true felicitee, that by the
uniformity of all our doings, a brotherly love and perfect peace may reign
^mongest ^s. with a general repeticion of things necessary.

LVciane that famous Clerk, In dialogo qui vita^u^ auctio inscribitur.
albeeit he was not earnestly bent to any religion, yet was he very subtle
in discernyng men's manners, and in iudgyng of their errors, by accusyng all
the sects of Philosophers as vain, may stand for a proof, that the mos^e
of their tradicions be grounded upon vncertenties and mere fantasies. For
Pithagoras, Pithagoras.
gloriyng in his own devised passing of souls, bragged that he should be
immortalle, and take upon him sondrie kinds of shapes. Diogenes called him
Diogenes.
self a citezein of the world, he willed men to be free, to cast of their
fine raimentes, and to put on a cloak like his, to profess poverty, to
labor, to lie on the ground, to drink water, to eat soche meat as came
Dain^ treditio^s of the philosophers.
to hand, to neglecte money, to care neither for wife, children, nor country:
to dwell in a Tun, to have a scrippe full of hoppes, and books written on the
backsides: and being in this estate, he held himself more fortunate, then the
king of Persia. The Cyrenaikes, Cyrenaic^.
although they professed the contempt of all things, yet by all means they
sought carnal delectacion, they were riottous banquetters, and inordinate
swilpottes. Democritus coumpted all that men did, as Democritus.
vain, and always laughed. Heraclitus contrariwise Heraclitus.
always wept, because he saw the estate of man so miserable, and subject
to fortune, wherein is always some thing that deliteth, some thing that
offends, knowledge and ignorance, greatenes and smalnes, hautenes and
baseness, constancy and inconstancy: and he said that all things in the
world, were but as a spectacle of vanity, and therefore he willed all men to
weep still even from their childhoode.

Socrates, deuisyng a new common weal, whereunto Socrates.
he made also Laws, after his own mind, thought it best that women should
be common. And therefore he taught that the figures and forms which he
imagined of the earth, the heaven, the sea, and all other things, were
without this universal frame of the world, and that so they were no where:
which he did only see with the iyes of his mind, and thereby thought that
there were two sorts of all things.

Luciane reprehendeth Epicurus, saying, that he was Epicurus.
more vicious, then either Cyreneus, or Democritus his masters, because he was
a man that was delicious, and given only to belyioie, and had a great
delight in eating sweet and licorous things. But Chrisippus Chrysippus.
the Stoike, in subtilitie of disputacione, was very captious against his
adversaries, teaching what was an accident, and what more then an accidente: as
he that limpeth on one leg, and then hurts his foot against a stone: this
limpehaulte is an accidente, but the hurt, more then an accident: he also
teaches that the wiseman alone practices usury, and usury upon usury,
which thing he attempteth to prove by a formal argument. What should I
speak of the Sceptikes, Sceptici.
of whom Pirrhias was the chief: For he leasted at them, as men without all
sense and judgment, which neither could hear nor see any thing: as men that
thought that there was nothing, whereof they could pronounce any certainty:
but waighed men's reasons in an even balance, and when they had tried that
they were al of one weight, they could not tell which was the truest. But this
one thing he said they knew very well, that they knew nothing in very
deed. Neither did he much spare the Peripatetikes, Peripatetici.
which were Aristoteles scholars, who used to teach walkyng in his school,
as men that vaunted that they had a singular sharpnes of wit above others,
declaryng that man was a living creature, naturally risible, but that an Ass
was a beast, which could neither laugh, build, nor sail: How long a G^a^te
lives: how far the sun beams pearce into the sea: how the infaunte is
shapen in the mothers womb, and what kind of soul Oisters have: whether
heaven be wtin any limitacio^ of place or no? Whether the celestial Spheires,
have any mouers or no. Here if ye list to recou^pt all the philosophers
fantastical opinions, you shall understand, that their doctrine is very vain,
and easy to bring men into a fools paradise of whom the Apostle bids us to
beware, which himself reasoned Ad. Colo 2. Actuu^. 17.
against the Epicures and Stoike Philosophers at Athenes, which contraried the
word of God: and he declared all their tradicions, to be mere vanities.

But I will not reprehend all the Philosophers doctrine, as unprofitable and
altogether deceiptfull: for somoche as they invented many things, both
profitable and necessary, for the help of men's wits, the search of
nature, and civility of life. But al soche The Philosophers fond traditions
require a long study to understand them.
opinions be well reproved, which made way, for the inducyng of heresies and
sects, so diverse and dangerous, that if a wiseman might live two hundred
years, he were not able to have a perfect judgment in them: things rather
worthy to be called darkeninges, then lightenynges of men's minds. Whereupon
in the orderyng of commonweals, those fond suggestions, and disagrement of
doctrines, did breed very much disquietnesse and trouble: so that they which
took upon them to reduce the people to a civil order of life, and to keep
them under the obedience of law, were not able to do their duties, and so to
frame things by their witty policies, that the worse might be rejected, and
the better take place, I mean, that the truth might be preferred before the
man. Aristotle (as Aristot. in. ^ politicoru^.
Lycurgus also did at Sparta) disalowed that common weal, appoincted by
Socrates, wherein he would that women and goods should be common: neither
does he forbear Plato, which in that poincte allowed Socrates, saying:
Socrates is my freinde; and Plato is my friend, but the truth is more my
friend. One Philosopher found fault with the opinion of an other.
The same way he works against Phaleas, which was the Lawmaker of Carthage,
and would that no one citezen, should have more then an other. Likewise he
declares that Hippodamus was in an error, which appoincted a certain number
of citezeins, and would not that artificers should meddle with possessions,
arms, or honors. He blamed also the Lacedaemonians, because that they suffered
soche to be chosen their chief officers called Ephori, and their other
magistrates also, as were men of extreme poverty: not considering that very
necessity, might drive soch to be corrupted, and persuaded to take bribes.
They of Crete also appoincted their head Officers, named Cosmi, for term of
life: which many judge to be the readiest way to have moved them to
tirannie. Neither did there ever lack somethyng, which the deuisers of commonweals, would not improve in their predecessors ordinances, and would not
reiecte the same as inconvenient.

The Philosophers therefore and lawmakers disagreyng thus not in teaching
^nelie, but also in instituting commonweals, I do not se how by their
precepts we can atteine to their devised happy estate, which all do confess
to be the very end proponed to civil government. For so much as we do not
seek a common weal, which being grounded upon diverse traditiones of men,
bears a goodly outward show and appara^ce, whereas in deed it has in it no
perfection. For Drato shows one way to felicity, Solon another, Pithagoras
another, Socrates another, No certei^tie ^^ be gathered by the Philosophers, ^^
p(...)city.
Chrisippus another, Epicurus another, Aristotle another, Tullie another, and
so diverse heads, diverse minds. Well admit they did consent all in one, yet
it should be imperfect, because it apperteigneth only to that blessedness of
life which is outward, and after our death carries with it no more but a bare
name. For what did it avail Hercules that he slew so many Monsters* Hector,
that he died for his countries sake? Solon, that by the judgment of the gods
he was named the wise? Curtius, that he also for the zeal that he bore toward
his country, wilfully cast him self into a gaping quaue of the earth?
Finally many and infinite other worthy men, which were of great name and
fame, for wisdom, valiantness, temperaunce, modesty, sobernes, counsel,
politic governance, justice, watchfulnes, and to be brief, for all virtues:
which never ceased, as tho they had been gods in deed, to deserve well and to
benefit mankind: what other perpetuity got they, saving a famous name which
they most desired while they were here in this world? They might have been
placed among the ^ai^^e tit^^s: of ho^ou^.
sterres in heaven, as, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, Saturn, Orion, and
others were? They might even by act of Parliament have been dei^ied, and
canonized among saints, which (as the cronicles do testify) the very
vilest and the most wicked men on the earth achieued. They might have borne
the names of the months of the year, and might have limited the times, as
January, May, Iulie, August: and they might have had many soche like
fantastical prerogatives: But for all their glory they obtained only this,
that some of their names be kept in remembrance, but al their worthy acts
be clean forgotten.

But we which have learned a better lesson, do search for that way which
leads us straight unto virtue, endowed with true gifts, which is but one
and that certain, declared and opened not by man's laws and Philosophical
tradicions or by uncertainty of opinions, but being framed according to
gods will, brings us into that pathe of life, whereby we may safely pass
unto the true end, which is the enheritaunce of the heavenly kingdom, for
which we enter into this world, and join together in society, for which we
be commanded to love our neighbor, to worship God, and to obey his
commandments. The perfect path to true felicite.
And therefore we be exalted above other earthely creatures, not far under
Angels in degree, unto us all other worldly things be subject, either for
sustina^ce of body, or for some other use, and declare the fatherly love of
our Creator toward us.

From which lore and trade of living, how much soche princes as had even a
certain zeal of virtue in them, declined, it does appear by many examples.
For they sought only the enlarging of their dominions, the beautifiyng of
their Cities with fair buildinges, that they might be as marteplaces for the
increase of worldly wealth: and if there were any point of virtue required
therein, that did they use in outward ordinances. And to this end tended Julius
Cesares saying: if Law ought to be broken, for rule sake it ought to be
broken. Augustus Caesar also vau^ted that whereas he received the City of Rome
builded with brick, he left it richely adourned with marble. And Adriane the
Emperor most modestly of all said, that he would so rule the common weal, as
one that knew the estate thereof not to belong to himself, but to the people,
whereas in deed it did nether belong to him, nor to the people, but to God.
Which thing is comenly seen in most commonweals at this day, whose special
care is, that their tounes be well waulled and entreanched, that they be fair
builded, that the Citizens may have a ready vent and a continual trade to
enriche themselves, although it be to their neighbors great hinderance, as men
that regard themselves more then any other: that they have peculiar laws, be
they right, be they wrong: for there is no soche great respect had to Justice,
which in deed tendereth all in general, not understandings that soche civil
laws be but vain: and that it is said: woe be unto them which make wicked
laws: for their only desire is that one halfpenio may make another, and that
usury may grow upon usury. And as Pisinires do gather all their provision
unto one heap, so they craftily circumuenting other men, pike from the^ their
goods, and late the together. So unsavory be they that they have no taste, no
delight in true honesty, nor in gods holy precepts.

Whereupon it so falls out, that every one walks after his own
concupiscence, for all the Philososophers doctrine, which is I grant neadfull
for politic governance, but yet must be seazoned with gods law, otherwise
it shall be the way to death and not to life. For thus says Christ, the only
teacher of Math. 19. and 15.
truth, the only master of our life: if thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments of God. Also: they worship me in vain, teaching doctrines
and commandments of men. And Hieremie says: because Hierem. 9.
they have left my law, which I gave them, and have not heard my voice, but
followed the wickedness of their own hearts: behold, I will feed this people
with wormewoode, and will send a sword among the^, to persecute them, until
I bring the^ to naught. Again in Matthew: The ill be will destroy, and he will
let Math. 21.
forth his vineyard to other house bandmen, which shall deliver him the
fruicte in due seasons, and the kingdom of God shall be taken away from you.

Hereupon do we se so many kinds of iniquity, so many sorts of
abhominacion, daily more and more to arise emongst the very christian professed
people: as be aduoutrie, fornicacion, robbery, theiuerie, ma^slaughter, Vices
that reign among Christians.
usury, dronkenes, blasphemy, perjury, deceipte, couine, contempt of
Justice, intemperaunce, lack of modesty, injury, contencion for very
trifles, poisoning, and other no less, but rather more detestable vices: and
that not only among the baser and lower sort, but also among the nobles and
magistrates, so common and familiar, that neither they be accoumpted as
faults, neither the doers thereof, as evil men. For what prince is there at
this day, what magistrate, what notable teacher, or what ^^a^er personage
which does not in aduoutrie, fornicacion, slaughter, dronkennes, and sothe
other notorious vices; misp^n^ either a good part of his time; until the very
impotencie of nature drives him to leave the^, and then when he can not do
ill, he glories in the rehearsal thereof, even before soche to whom it is
loathsome to here ^t it: or else when he is a very crople, and has the one
foot in his grane, he ca^ no more forbear his accustomed viciousnes, tha^ a
sow the mire: yet the difference is this, for that the higher powers be not
uns^iuers without great office to others, as men that ought to she we furthe
their vprightnes in life, which the people must look on as in a glass, and
accordingly frame their own manners, which if they refuse to do doluntarily,
and for virtues sake, they must use the sharpnes of the sword, and enforce
the^ to leave that, from which they will not be broken willingly. For se shall
the magistrate do his duty worthily, 1. Paralip. 2. Esa ae. 32. 1. Macha. 3.
so shall he feed the^, and be the peoples governor, that they do not fall to
ruin: represe^ting therein Judas Machabeus, which went through the citees of
Judah, and destroyed the ill, and turned away y^ wrath of god from Israel.

Which because they that have the charge of the common weal, do not put in
execucion, let no man wonder, if every thing go backward, and the common weal
be in danger of utter decate. For if godliness be not ones rekened on, there
can be no constancy nor upright integrity in civil ordinances: as a thing
that both springs and depends upon piety. Neither does S. Paul in vain
call that thastisei^e^t or discipline, which Hebrae. 12.
requiteth present disquietnes with the quiet fruicte of justice afterward,
which who so know not, be very bastardes, and ^^ true enheritours of heaven:
but if ye be not (says he) under correction, whereof al be partakers, ye be
then bastardes, and not true sons. Again: No chastesing for the present ti^^e
se ureth to be ioious, but grievous, but afterward to soche as be exercized
therein, it brings forth the quiet fruict of righteousness. This discipline
makes y^ magistrate to love the light The duty of governors.
of wisdom, to embrace justice, not to wink at vices, to defend the
fathorles and widow, to keep the peace, to have no respect of person, to erect
churches, to maintain Gods ministers, to support true doctrine, that the
subjects may worship God with a godly heart, and bring forth fruict worthy
of repentance, not suffering the Prophets saying to be applied to him: the
priests Hiere. 2.
said not: where is the lord: and they that had the law in their hands,
knew me not: and the the pherdes offended against me. But my people turned
their glory into an Idoile. For that shall never be unpunished, which is
wickedly committed against the law of god.

Also the people thus taught, will begin to be obedient Paul. ad Philip. 3.
to their magistrates, knowing that our conversation is in heaven, whence we
do look for our lord and savior Jesus Christ: which will tranfforme ou^
The subiecte^ duty.
abject and vile body, and make it like unto his most glorious body: which
benefit they shall not receive whose end is perdicion, whose belly is their
God, and who glory in their ignominy: because they only care for earthly
things, and cleaving to the world and outward vanities, do altogether the
works of the flesh, and shall pass a way with the pride of the world: with
whom we ought not in any wise to have any thing to do: receiving that doctrine
which is sound, and lively, which by the ears entering into the heart, does
move us to do Gods will, to seek thaduauncement of the common weal: to declare
by the fruict of our life, that we have lived unto God our father: each man in
his vocacion, and according unto the tale^t committed to his charge.

So Masters, which have authority over their servants, Masters.
ought not to handle the^ unjustly, or ungently, knowing also that they have a
master in heaven, which can number every hear of their heads, and in his
great day will revenge the rigor used against them, according unto the
Apostles words, which all Colloss. 4.
men ought to observe: ye masters, do that is right and just to your
servants, knowing this that ye your selves, have a master over you in heaven.
On the other Se^uauntes.
side, servants ought to honor their masters, and obeie them with
tremblyng, fear, and simplicity Paul. ad Ephesians. 6.
of heart, as they would do to Christ himself: doing that which God wills
the^ to do, with good will: seeing, they be not man's but Gods servants:
knowing this, that every man must look for reward of his well doing, at Gods
hand. It becomes old men, who are Old men.
to be reuere^ced for their hoar hears, to be sober, grave modeste, wise, not
covetous, not ambicious, not envious: but an example of faithfulness, charity,
patience, and virtue, which will exhort young men to sobriety, chastity, and
good behavior. Young men also must Young men.
be obedient, virtuous, and well minded toward the furtheraunce of the common
profit. Fathers ought Fathers.
to bring up their children, in doctrine and chastiseme^t of the lord whom
they must instruct at home within their own houses, with discipline of
honesty and virtue: training them up in soche sciences, whereby they
Childerne.
may be able to maintein themselves, their wives, and children, and restmble
their parents in good ensample of living. Likewise the Apostle commands
Timothe, to bid those that be rich in this world, that 1. Timoth. 6
they be not high minded, nor put any confidence in riches, which be uncertain:
but in the living god, which gives us al things pl^tifully. But that they do
well, Wourdlye riches be but vanities.
that they be rich in good works, that they be not streite in empacting to
others, communicating willingly, and laiyng the foundation whereupon they may
in time to come, build the purchase of everlasting life.

Ye understand by the incomparable master of manners, what the use of riches
ought to be, that they be well employed, and stay us not from the entrance
into the kingdom of heaven. For somoche as there be many things in the
world, which hinder the rich, and let them from the fruit of godliness, so
that they are driven to hear the words of saint James: Go to now ye rich
men, weep, and houle on your wrotchednes, Iacobi 5.
which shall come upon you. Your riches be putrified, your garmenies be mothe
eaten. Your Gold and silver is corrupt with canker, and their ruste shall be
a testimony against you, and shall consume your flesh, as it were fire. Ye
have heaped up treasure even in your last days. Behold the hire of your
laborers, which have reaped down your fields, and has not been paid them,
cries out against you, and the cry of these reapers, be entered into the ears
of the lord Sabbath. Ye have lived in pleasure upon the earth, and have
played the wantons: you have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter.
Ye have condemned and slain the just, and he has not resisted you.

There be also many poor people, in every City, Poor people.
whom we ought not to neglecte, because they supply a great part of the
multitude, who^ we therefore ought to have in remembrance, because god has
appoincted the^ to live emongst us, that through well doing unto the^, we might
exercise the works of peitie, and purchase the favor of God. I was hungry,
says our Savior, Math. 25.
and you gave me to eat, I was thirsty, and you gave me to drink. I was
naked, and you did rouer me. These be they of whom saint James speaks:
Harken (says Iacobi. 2*
he) my derely beloved brethren. Has not God chosen the poor of this world,
soche as are rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he promised to
them that love him? Now if your brother or sister be naked, and do lack
their daily sustenaunce, and one of you say unto them: go your way in
peace, warm you, and fill your bellies, and you do not give them that is
necessary for their body, what avails this?

You do see here that there be two kinds of poverty: one which co^sisleth
in spirit, which may happen Two kinde^ of poverty.
even to him that is rich, which estemeth his riches as though he had none,
which sixeth not his heart upon them; which distributeth them amongst the
nedie and poor, because his end ^^ to be rich in faith, that he may hear
that saying: blessed be thy poor in spirit. There is an other kind of
poverty, which in deed proceadeth upon lack of substance, which is
suspected and contempned in the common weal for many consideracions: as for
not being allowed for sufficient witness hearing, for not being able to hear
offices, for the easy prouocacions to offend, and soche like, as a man may
find in the civil laws. Through Ecclesi. 27.
poverty says Solomon, many have offended, Further, poverty is an
allurement to rebellion. For Abimelech when he consented to the sleyng of his
brethren, and getting the kingdom, took money out of Baales church, and hired
therewith the poor people and vagaboundes, which (being driven to get
something) took his part. When Ieptes the Gileadite was acoused Iudicum. 9.
and 11.
of bastardie by his own children, and driven away, the poor men followed him
as their guide, robbing and reauing by the way.

This kind of poverty we must not forsake and despise, as a thing commended to
us by God, that poor men may always be in our sight, to who^ we should
fireatche forth our hands cheerfully, and fulfill gods holy will.

Here it were tedious to recite and so often repete unto the reader al kind of
persons which are necessary in a common weal: as be they of the clergy,
students of Necessary me^(...) of a com(...) w^^le.
learning, housbandmen, Smithes, Paincters, Mariners, Builders, Merchauntes,
Purueiours for corn, Bakers, Vinteners, Apothecaries, Boutchers, and all soche
as be as it were members in perfectinge this civil body. Whose deutie is so
to behave themselves in their vocations, arts, and acts, that they be
agreeable with the Christian doctrine, and employed to the love of their
neighbor and to the glory of God: Then must not he which while he is in this
world trusts to atteine the blessed life in heaven, beguile any, or in
crafty dealing circu^uent him. For he whose word endures for Math. 7.
ever says thus: do you that to others which you would that others should
do unto you: for this is the law and the Prophets.

When a common weal is thus in all points furnished, it cannot otherwise be
but that commodities shall be truly emparted among men: and that those
corruptable things being converted to a better use, shall further us to that
which is incorruptible, and by those The true use of man's life.
fruits of light shall declare that our conversation is in heaven. So they
that be spiritual ought to seek spiritual things, whereunto he that is
addicte only to 1. Cor. 11.
the world and man's tradicions (pretend he never soche an vprightnes of
living) shall never atteyn. For he sows in the flesh, and soche seade as
shall perish, and M^ns constitutions ought not to va^^^ (...) the ordinances
o(...)d.
therefore he shall reap in the flesh: for every man shall receive his reward
according to the labor which he has dooen: and each man's work shall be made
manifest and open. And this is that which as S. Hierome says, Pinitus
Cretensis Bishop of Gnosos, does write unto Dionisius, that y^ people must not
alwaie be nourished with milk, lest the latter day come upon them as upon
little suckelinges: but with strong meats, that they may come unto a
spiritual old age.

Which things truly every man must observe that has any hope of
everlasting life. For the doctrine of piety is committed unto us from Christ
Jesus our Lord, the master of all truth, by his blessed Apostle, by which
alone we be enstructed and made heirs of the eternal kingdom of heaven.
After the rule whereof who so frames not himself, is arrogant, knowing
nothing, but doting in his own conceit about vain questions, cauillacions
and constitutiones of man: whereupon their arises envy, contention, evil
language, naughty suspicions, neadles quarreling of corrupt persons, from
whom the truth is taken, which think godliness, to be gain or lucre.

They that understand this doctrine do easily know that it is not only a mere
vanity, but also perniciouse, to spend the time in that common weal which
the Ethnikes and Philosophers do erecte: and not to look up unto Heaven, and
to hasten to that end of felicity which decaieth not with the body: for so
much as it is plain that there is but one Lord, one Faith, Ephesians. 4.
one Baptism, one God and father of al: and so be we many members in one
body, but occupiyng soundry Romans 12.
offices: and likewise must we each one be part of an other, that we may
hear that blessed saying: well my good and faithful servant, because thou
have ben faithful Math. 25.
over few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: Enter thou into
the joy of thy Lord. (?)

A brief Collection of the chiefest matters touched in this Treatise.
The first Book.
MAN, as he is of all other living creatures the most excellent and most
civil of nature: so he is prone to all vices and subject to many dangers and
calamities. A common weal is kept in very good order, if none be suffered
to be idle therein, but every one occupy him self in the vocation whereunto
he is called.
The second Book.
There be three degrees of men: the highest, the mean, and the lowest. The
office of a Prince what it is. What manner of men be meetest to be of Princes
counsayles. The Courtiers duties. That three notorious vices raygne in Kings
Courts: flattery, ambition, and bryberie. The public profit ought to be
preferred before private advantage.
The third Book.
Magistrates must be of sincere living and lovers of virtue. Provision must
be made for such things as be necessary for man's life. Especial respect
must be had to the shambles and other furniture of victualles. Magistrates
must live according to order of law
The fourth Book.
Both officers and private persons ought to tender the common commodity. How
necessary learned men be in a common weal. Of professors of divinity, and
of their high and sacred vocation. How it behooves lawiers to be mentayners of
equity and justice, and to be void of covetousness and unjust dealyng. The
commodity of Physic, and how expedient it is that it be sincerely
practiced. Of the education of childern, and of their Scolemaisters: and how
they ought to be trained up in virtue and honest qualities.
The fifth Book.
Of mechanical sciences, and how necessary they are in a common weal. Of
seven kinds of handicraftes, that is to say: Husbandry, Woulworking,
Carpenters craft, Labouryng on the water, Hunting, Surgerie, and Stageplaiyng:
and of the true use and abuse of each of them. Of the riottous excess used in
apparaile, and that men of all estates ought to were their garments according
to their degrees. As the trade of merchandise is necessary: So it may be a
great cherishment of filthy lucre.
The sixte Book.
Nothing is profitable in deed, unless it be honest. It is against the course
of nature to enrych our selves by the hinderaunce of other. Goods well gotten,
are commendable: and men of greatest wealth, be subject to most casualties.
One Christian is bound to releyue another. There be four manner of ways to
mentayne our living: that is: either by lands and possessions, by crafts and
sciences, by buying and selling, or else by daily labor. For y^ enriching of
a city there ought respect to be had to three things: the inhabitauntes, the
situacion, and the borderers. As a propriety in things is most convenient, So
to appoint an equality, were a meare absurdity The invention of money and the
true use thereof. Usury is prohibited by all laws, and how pestilent a mischief
it is to be practiced in a common weal.
The seventh Book.
Great wealth ought not so much to be esteemed in a City, as godly laws and
good orders. Blasphemous swears and drunkerdes ought not to be suffered in a
common weal. Injuries, how far they are to be borne withal: and that it
becomes christians to forget old displeasures. How a pernicious a thing
sedition is, and the chief causes that move men to rebellion. Loyterers and
idle vagaboundes must either be forced to work for their living, or else be
banished the country. Provision must be had in hospitalles, spittelles, and
other convenient places, for the relief of poor people. We be allured by
many means to embrace virtues. Dreams, although they be most comenlye but
mere fancies, yet sometimes we be warned thereby to do that is good, and to
eschew that is evil.
The eight Book.
Man's constitucions must not disagre from Gods ordinances. What a plague it is
to y^ people to have a tiraunt to be their governor. Tyranny proceeds of
impiety. Iuill magistrates be set to rule over the people, for their
iniquities sake. No tyranny is of long co^tinuaunce. What miseries and
mischieues wars do bread amongst Christians. What calamity has fallen upon
al christendom, by such wars and rebellions as have been unjustly moved.
Wars work the death both of body and soul.
The ninthe Book.
The manifold commodities of peace and quietness. No Law can be made so
absolute, but that many things must needs be referred to the Magistrates
discretion. Princes ought to publish nothing, but upon good deliberacion and
counsel. It is the office of a good magistrate, to root out all vices, and
to ^^plant virtues in a Common weal. Christians ought to be more perfect in
politic government, then the philosophers traditions do appoint. Many
flourishing commonweals have fall^n to ruin, for lack of the knowledge of
God. The whole course of our life in this world ought to tend toward the true
felicity, that by the uniformity of all our doings, a brotherly love and
perfect peace may reign amongst us.
FINIS.
Fautes escaped in the Printing.
Leaf. Page. Margent. Line. Read. 4. 2. 16. Injustice. 6 1 29 Purtrayture. 9
1 10 and of much lower. 9 2 14 treatise 11 1 2 were embrued 11 1 30 for this
place. etc. 12 1 18 with how stout. 17 1 20 Pylote 17 2 26 Healthines 22 2 21
no king had ever. 25 2 22 godly 29 1 1 Princes vices be 29 1 35 dangerous.
30 2 23 left hand. 32 1 1 bribe. 37 1 10 reason 37 1 28 it 41 2 1 decreed 44
1 13 plotte 51 1 1 Galenus 64 2 10 preach 65 2 5 to 68 1 1 labor 68 1 19 of
70 2 16 an 89 5 15 as though 95 1 27 things 96 2 2 exchaungyng. 108 2 37 it
112 2 14 flocks of sheep. 147 1 31 reverenced of. etc.

FINIS.

