Fennes Fruits: WHICH WORK IS divided into three several parts; The first,
A Dialogue between Fame and the Scholar, no less pleasant than pithie:
wherein is decyphered the property of Temperance, the mutablitie of Honor, the
inconstancy of Fortune, the uncertainty of Life, and the reward of aspiring
minds: proved both by the examples of sundry Princes, and sayings of worthy
Philosophers.

The second, entreats of the lamentable ruins which attend on War: also,
what politic Stratagemes have been used in times past: necessary for these
our dangerous days.

The third, that it is not requisite to derive our pedigree from the
unfaithful Trojans, who were chief causes of their own destruction:
whereunto is added Hecubaes mishaps, discoursed by way of apparition.

Qui nuclium esse vult, nucem frangat, oportet.

Imprinted at London for Richard Oliffe: and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Crane. 1590.

To the Worshipful Robert Spencer Esquire, Son and heir to the Right
Worshipful Sir John Spencer Knight: Thomas Fenne wishes increase of Worship,
with the preservation of desired health, etc.
THE Persians in time past, and also, by credible report at this day (right
Worshipful) at vacant and idle times, when they are not busied in the affairs
of their common wealth, nor troubled in their own private matters, use commonly
to whittle small twigs of birch, to keep them selves from vain imaginations
and idle cogitations, but nothing either profitable to the weal public, or
to their private persons. In like manner, Domitianus an Emperor of Rome, was
wont to busy himself with pricking and thrusting flies through with needles,
in his window: so that this reproachful proverb sprang up of his so vain
spending the time: for when any of his subjects demanded who was in the
Emperors presence (if he then were not about his foolish labor) his servants
would answer, ne musca quidem, not so much as a fly: which commonly was
spoken after a reproachful sense. Therefore Sir, for the avoiding of such
unprofitable labors, and also for the shunning of blameable idleness, in
spending my time about such fruiteles toys, and friuelous toils, I trust I
have after a better sort employed my vacant times, not in whitling or shauing
of sticks, nor in killing of flies, neither as Myrmecidas Milesius, or
Callicrates Lacedemonius did, who spent and consumed a great time in making a
small wagon, to be drawn with two couples of horses, which might easily be
hidden under the compass of a slye, and wrote in a little small bery, no
bigger than a bean, a posie of two verses in letters of gold: which fruiteles
toil (although it was finished with diligent care, and cunning hand) was
wonderfully scoffed and derided at amongst the wiser sort of men, for wasting
the time so vainly about such toys, as neither profited themselves, nor was
any commodity at all to the common wealth. It is further reported (right
worshipful) that Satyrus, a certain bagpiper, being present at the Philosopher
Aristos disputations, finding what sweet method, and pithie sentences, were
included in his learned sayings, said: Cur ego non ignitrado, hoc mihi inutile
telum?
Why do not I vile hairebraine fool,
Commit to fire this fruitles tool?


In like sort my self conferring with my books, at convenient leisure, finding
what proffit is reaped thereby, and taking pleasure in the sweet harmony and
pleasant melody of the wise sayings of the learned Philosophers, am constrained
with Satyrus to lay a side and cast of all vain toys, and superfluous toils,
until my mind be sufficiently satisfied with their learned conference. But
for that convenient leisure, and vacant times always at will are not commonly
incident to my coat (as your Worship right well knows:) wherefore I am
forced to write, as the Aegiptian dogs do lap their water: the curs of that
country by a natural inclination, do know, that in Nilus, and in other
Rivers and floods of Egypt, certain venymous beasts, and stinging Serpents
do lie closely hid under the water, waighting for their pray, and therefore
they to shun that perrill do run a long the shores and banks of the streams,
and lap their water (as the old saying is) by sniches, and catches, as they
may without danger come by it. So my self being compelled to take such
uncertain leisure, as conveniently I may: wherein I have by fits, penned this
my slender work, hoping that your Worship will be to the book, as Achilles
shield was to Ulysses, or as Hercules club was to the Daughter of King Euritus:
Ulysses thought himself safe under the shield of noble Achilles, which he knew
(for the Masters sake) would terrify the beholder, Iole the Daughter of
Euritus did make the knees of mighty men to stoop, by holding in her hand the
weapon of the most renowned Conqueror Hercules. So I craving your Worships
patronage; whose noble nature, virtuous government, and learned experience, I
know to be of sufficient force, to shield and cover this my homely and rude
style, from the hateful hand of all repiners, from whose mouth it is as hard a
thing to get a good word, as to wrest perforce the club out of Hercules hands:
and would willingly that a man should reap for his painful labor the
thankelesse crop of Cholchos soil, which is to the weary tiller present
destruction. It may be that your Worship does rather expect at my hand a badge
or token of my profession, coming so lately from the Hawks perch, than to treat
of matters too high for my learning and skill: Notwithstanding, when I call to
mind your wonted courtesies and accustomable affability, I imbolden my self
to solicit your Worship with this my slender muse, hoping that you will with
Artaxerxes, receive the good will of the simple meaner; not expecting cloquence
so abundantly to flow from the Hawks perch, as from Aristotle's School. But
if I may perceive that this my diligent pain is recompensed with friendly
acceptance, I shall rest right happy and well contented, and my Book shall
think self as safely shrouded and defended under your favorable
protection, as under the patronage of a far higher State: for that both your
Worships virtue, good government, learned disposition and courteous behavior,
is sufficiently known in this our Country, amongst your loving neighbors,
where your countenance will make the simple work to carry more credit, than
of it self it deserves, thorough the good affection that our Countrie-men do
bear to your name.

Thus being forced to leave off from further touching your worthy merit,
least that you should blame my pen, for over much flattering, which thing (I
know) you heartily detest, and also fearing that I have too boldly presumed in
craving your assistance, leaving at the length to abuse your patience, with
overmuch tediousness, I end: wishing increase of worship, and whatsoever, (in
this world) your heart can wish or desire, to fall upon you.

Yours in all, to command, Thomas Fenne.
R Regard not riches if they rise, but for to serve thy need;
remember what was Craesus fall, and how the wretch did speed.
O On Catos words consider well, then rich, when once content:
of Crates think, who sure was rich, when all his wealth was spent.
B Bear Titus mind that Roman peer whose noble heart did bend
before the sun went down each day, to purchase him a friend,
E Ere angry mood do make the strike, first play upon thy lute:
each day Achilles would do so, and Clinius on the Flute,
R Revenge not unadvisedly, call Phocion first to mind:
rather take thou wrong with him, than show thy self unkind.
T To wise Themistocles give ear, that loud his Country well:
true subjects liude (as often we read) when wretched traitors fell.
V Use not by fear to awe each man, least thou repent too late:
urge none (says Tully) by such means, for fear procures hate.
S See that thy Countrymen have right, the poor man do not fleece:
so may thou have in this our soil, as Solon had in Greece.
S Shun Caesar's pride, beware of that for he himself was slain:
such haps do greet aspiring minds, when worlds they think to gain.
P Pompey could abide no mate, nor Caesar any peer:
pride brought them to untimely death, their state was bought so dear.
E Endeavor to digest abuse, on wise Pericles think:
else follow sage Zenocrites, at injuries to wink.
N Nestor liude with great renown, in Pilos well esteemd:
now lead a life that thou in fine, a second he, be deemd.
C Call to thy mind King Darius, that used often remorce:
could Nero live, when he began to rule in Rome perforce.
E Erst Hiero of Siracusa, for learning still would strive:
err not but spend some time therein, whilst here thou art alive.
R Read what wise Seneca does say, of Cicero go learn:
run not with unadvised have, and thou shall right discern.


To the Reader.
RIght courteous, gentle, and learned Reader, as duty binds me, I am
determined to inuit thee to a base and simple banquet: for knowing that thou
art daily invited and bidden to many more curious and dainty dishes, that thy
appetite is sufficed with all kind of delicates: therefore, in mine opinion,
by staying thee from thy delicious meats, by inuiting thee to more homely
fare, thy stomach may be the more whetted and sharpened to take thy repast of
those dainties, when occasion serves. It may be, that when thou shall perceive
my principal and chiefest Guest, for whom this banquet was first provided,
(whose mouth is daily used to the sweetest delicates, and whose tongue is of
sufficient judgment to make a difference betwixt the sower taste of unpleasant
cates, and the sweet relish and sauer of well seasoned meats:) for manner
sake to commend the dishes, and gratefully accept the good will of the inuiter:
that then thou will accordingly take in good part and well like of such homely
cheer, as the willing bidder has provided for thee. But if it should so fall
out, that thy mouth being so often accustomed with the sweet taste and relish
of dainty fare, that thy stomach can hardly digest the homelines of my rear
supper: yet I assure thee, that the cates themselves be as dainty and neweltie
as the best, though not so well dressed by the unskillfulness of the Cook.
Therefore I beseech thee to use the part of a friendly guest, in taking it in
good worth and reporting the best: and further I request thee, if thou find
fault or mislikest any dish, being not well dressed, rather to wink priuelie
at the Cook, than openly to discredit his workmanship Perhaps, it may be
further objected to the discredit of the workman, saying, It was great pity
that such dainty delicates happened to be bought of so simple a cater, to carry
to so homely a cook, to be dressed in so smokie a kitchen: whereby the dishes
have not their right, and their taste and relish spoiled, by reason of the
baseness of the room. To which objection, with reason I thus may reply: that
the unskillful cook may sometime take in hand to dress the daintiest dish, as
well as the cunning and finest workman to learn experience: for he that
ventreth not the marring or making, shall never attain to good workmanship. Thus
(gentle Reader) having invited thee to this base banquet, play thou not like
the dog in a manger, that will eat no hay, nor suffer those that would:
wherefore I pray thee either fall too thy self, or give others leave to
satisfy their hunger, whose stomachs are sufficiently prepared to feed. I
would not have it thought, that I thorough a vainglorious mind, go about to
edify and instruct the learned, whose ripe judgments, wise conceits, and
learned experience, is of sufficient force to teach better Scholars than my
self, for then should I go about, arenas in littus fundere: but for that I
right well know, there are diverse, whose learning is not of that profunditie,
but they may take both pleasure and profit, by reading this homely work. Is
it not reported, that Aeneas coming to Carthage (there viewing and perusing
the destruction of Troy, being painted on the wall of Didoes pallaice) with his
faithful companion Achates, to have more imaginations and thoughts in his
mind concerning the effect and substance, than the wall by painting could
signify, yet notwithstanding the picture first caused those thoghts (by
representing the matter) to reuolue in his experienced mind: so that the
setting down of a part, causes the wise to conceive the whole: and by penning
a brief, the learned coniectureth a volume. Therefore (courteous Reader) I am
content to appeal to thy learned judgment: for Appelles setting forth his
picture to hear each man's opinion in his work begun, was very well content,
when the shoemaker found fault with the shoe, and the tailor with the hose:
knowing these men to be artificers in the Science which they had reprehended,
did willingly reform his error. But when the unskillful intruded themselves
to the judgment of the legs, arms, and other parts of the body: then he
drew in his picture, knowing that he should never please and satisfy the
humor and fancy of all men. Thus, Fare thee well.

Thy friend in what I may. T. F.

Fennes fruits.
A Dialogue between Fame and the Scholar, no less pleasant, than profitable:
wherein the bad behauiours, and lewd demeanours of man, is rightly discyphered.
Scholar. SIR you are well met, I rejoice greatly that my good fortune is such
to meet with you so happily; of whom I have so often heard, but never as yet
could meet until this time to use conference with all.


Fame. It is great marvel, that you could never find me out before this
time, traueling in all Coasts and Kingdoms as I do; hearing also all Nations
of the earth report of me, so that the uttermost borders of the world has had
my presence: therefore truly hard was your hap in deed, not to speak with me
before this time.


Scho. True it is in deed, but the messengers of uncertainty did daily so
flout and mock me, that I despaired whether ever I should speak with your
person or no; so many of your abusers did represent your presence: but now
hoping to be certified with the true reports of your own mouth, of those
things and doubts wherein you have been so often abused. For it is credibly
reported, that you are the greatest traveler in the world, and have seen all
Kingdoms and nations of the earth, by your unspeakable swiftnes; the
uttermost Isles in the maine Ocean has had your presence: the mightiest Kings
and Princes of the earth, can neither stop or hinder your appointed travail;
you pass their privy chambers, and know their secret counsels; your eyes
have seen the uncertainty of time, the mutabilitie of honor, the inconstancy
of fortune, the instabilitie and variety of the life of man, the subversion of
kingdoms, the overthrow of empires, the ruin and destruction of stately
towns and cities: your eyes has seen, your ears has heard, and your
understanding does remember from the creation of the world, and shall remain
vsque ad consummationem seculi: therefore, seeing your travail so wonderful,
your continuance so ancient, and your memory so notable, I shall request you
to unfold and relate part of those things, which your self are a witness of,
and have with present eyes beheld, as, the nature of things, the condition of
people, with the inconveniences of this transitory life, and what calamities,
miseries, troubles, enormities and vexations, does commonly happen, and
incidently fall to man.


Fa. My good friend, if the speeches of my mouth may challenge such credit with
you, I am content to make you partaker of my great travail, and what I know
concerning the state of the world; on this condition, that your mind shall
detain, carry away, and perceive, with more liuelines of sense the effect of
my words, tha^ my tongue by vttring can express: so with your willing audience
I shall be content to resolve you in any part wherein you shall demand.


Scho. Sir, I most heartily thank you, the condition shall be observed and kept
to the uttermost of my power, mine ears shall also be attendant in silent sort,
to uote your speeches well, therefore I pray you begin while I am armed with
audience.


Fa. Well then my good friend, it is requisite that I first begin with the
enormities and inconveniences of the life and state of man, which he falls
often into, by the defalt of temperance; without which gift he runs headlong
to his own ruin and destruction: for Seneca says, Seneca.
If thou will esteem and judge truly what man is, then set him naked before
thee, and behold him well, setting aside, and laying a part from him
possessions, authority, and all other gifts subject to fortune, then shall
you see what he has proper of himself, and what he borrows of other, then
shall you well perceive, this naked life of man; without which gift it cannot
well be preserved or governed, but of necessity must needs soon perish and
decay.


Scho. Sir, then by your leave, is temperance such a special necessary to the
life of man.


Fa. Yea truly, for on that, hangs and depends all other virtues requisite
to the state and life of man: it is the good ground of al government, a right
direction to honest living, and the true nurse and fosterer of provident
wisdom, it keeps the insatiable appetites of ambition under the yoke of
reason, and holds down the immoderate desires of superiority: to be short,
I refer thee to the definition of Cicero, Cicero.
who defines it on this manner, The property of temperance, says he, is, to
covet nothing that afterward may be repented, so that thorough the want
thereof, man falls into infinite miseries.


Scho. Well sir, then I perceive, that this gift is a most necessary and
special maxim, to the life and government of man, wherein I trust to be
better instructed hereafter, by some familiar examples, which does show the
fall and destruction in the wanters thereof, and the quiet state and
contentment to the possessors of the same.


Fa. Friend, I will rehearse a very brief example in the mean time, for your
better understanding, which shall show a difference betwixt the insatiable
appetite of aspiring minds, and the quiet state and peaceable contentment:
which is thoroughly to be perceived, in the life of Aleaxnder the Great, and
Diogenes the philosopher.


Scho. First sir, craving pardon for interrupting your speeches, me think this
comparison is very unfit, and unseemly, and the difference of virtue and vice
will hardly be made manifest by the lives of these two, the one being a great
Prince and Emperor of many stately countries and kingdoms, the other a poor
seely beggar, who lived by the alms of the people, having for his house a
simple tun or barrel to harbor himself in, without any other wealth or
substance at all.


Fa. Nay then, my good friend, you will drive me from the matter, and cause me
to make digression for argument sake; but before I proceed any further, it
shall not be amiss to manifest the state of these two, and descry your error;
Alexander indeed was a great Prince, and Emperor of the most part of the
world, and yet not so rich as Diogenes was: for whereas you think the
comparison altogether unfit, the one being a beggar and wonderful poor, the
other a king, and inestimable rich, therefore I refer thee to the wise saying
of Marcus Cato, Cato.
who says, Qui contentus est sua sort, Dives est, He that is content with
his own estate and calling, is sufficient rich: We find that Diogenes was
content with his poor estate, and Alexander not satisfied with all his
kingdoms; wherefore, according unto the opinion of Cato Diogenes was rich, and
Alexander poor: for truly he can not be rich which is not satisfied, neither
can he be poor that is contented. And further, to confirm this argument,
Mandanus a wise philosopher of India, to whom this Alexander sent messengers,
In vita Philosopho.
commanding him to come to the feast of Jupiters son, which was holden at
Babylon, (meaning himself to be the son of Jove) declaring further, That if
he would come, he should have great rewards and riches given him, but if he
refused, and would not obey his commandment, he should be put to a most cruel
death: whereunto the grave Philosopher answered stoutly, saying, That Alexander
was neither the son of God, nor yet certain lord of any part or parcel of
the earth, but was as mortal as himself, and as for the gifts and rewards of
him that was himself so insatiable covetous, he nothing regarded, returning
this answer, That if it would please him to receive and accept a gift at his
hand, he would willingly give it, and might very conveniently spare it, which
was, his good counsel, that he should hold himself content and satisfied with
sufficient, and to covet no more than were necessary, saying, That his ability
was better able to give than Alexanders: for (says he) he would give me
that which himself wants, whereof I have sufficient, but I will send him
that which he lacks, and I my self have abundantly: and as for threats and
menaces, I nothing at al regard; for if I live (says he) my country will
bring forth things sufficiently, to furnish my life withal, so that I shall
not need his rewards; as for death I do nothing fear, but exceedingly desire
it, which shall deliver me from my old withered carkas. Thus you may perceive,
that this wise philosopher accounted them poor which were not satisfied, and
those rich which were contented.


Scho. Sir, I do very well perceive my error, and do acknowledge it; for it
stands with good reason, that the riches of this world is contentment, and
that a coveting and discontented mind is extreme poverty: therefore if it
please you to proceed forward according to your pretense, I shall according to
my promise be attentive.


Fa. Well seeing you are satisfied herein, I will proceed further; The
Philosopher Diogenes (as I said before) perceiving the inconstancy of
unfriendly fortune, Elianus in lib. 6.
the mutability of honor, with the uncertainty of life; so much contemned and
despised the vain preferments and promotions of this transitory life, that he
lived content and satisfied with a small portion of possession, which was but
his bare tub or tun, wherein he was Lord and King without controlment, craving
neither territories or confines to enlarge this his quiet kingdom, finding this
his poor patrimony so void of all incumbraunces, vexations, and invasions,
that he contented himself with this life until his end; turning his tub in the
summer toward the North (for the coolness and shade) from the Sun; in
winter to the South for the heat and warmnes thereof: making his vaunt merely
that he could rule his Lordship and possession as he listed from the invasions
of his enemies, which was the sharp and bitter winds, by turning his tumbling
pallaice. Thus living in contentment, it chanced that Alexander the great king
of Macedony, hearing the rare fame of this Philosopher, thought good to visit
Diognes in his tub, to hear his wisdom and the cause of his so solitary
living, came unto him being set in his tun, saying; My friend I have long
desired to see thee, and to enrich thee being so a poor a philosopher:
therefore ask of me what goods or living thou need, and I will enrich thee
with it to thy great contentment. To whom, when Diogenes had given thanks for
his great courtesy offered: he said, If thou will do me this favor as thou
say, Laertius in lib. 7.
then I pray thee take not that from me which thou can not give me; but stand
from before the mouth of my tun, that I may have the light and warmnes of the
Sun, which is to me great riches; for now thou detainest that from me and
can not give me the like: therefore do me but this favor, and I will crave
of thee no other substance. Then said Alexander, My friend, how much
possession, lands, and revenues would satisfy and content thee, if now I
should give thee thyful contentment: to whom Diogenes answered, Even as much,
Alexander, as thou must be thy self contented with all in the end: But at the
first he misconstrued the meaning of Diogenes, and thought him wonderful
covetous, knowing, that he himself had now most part of the world in
possession, and daily striued to get the whole, therefore he thought it an
insatiable appetite of him not to be contented with less: but after
consideration on the cause, he perceived that Diogenes meant his length of
ground to be sufficient patrimony for himself, which in the end the greatest
king of the earth must be contented withal: then said Alexander to him again,
My good friend, what thing best contenteth thee in this world? to whom Diogenes
replied, saying, That thing, sir King, which thou art most discontented withal
in the world, which is a satisfied and contented mind, to covet for no more
than suffices, which in thee, says he, I find contrary. Alexander was
nothing at all offended at the reprehension of the wise Philosopher, but rather
smelling his own folly said at that time, Truly, if I were not Alexander I
would be Diogenes. But we see that he was Alexander, therefore he could not be
Diogenes; he was covetous, therefore he could not be contented, wherefore it
appears that Diogenes had the gift of temperance not to covet his own
destruction as Alexander did, but being rich in contentment despised fortune,
for that her force could not molest or touch him, rejecting honor, because of
the mutablitie and variety of the same, regarding not life for the
uncertainty of it, but lived as a man contented fearing no calamity nor
adversity whatsoever might happen to him, but was ready with patience to
digest it.


Sch. Truly, it does appear most plain, that this man had the gift of
temperance sufficiently, and that he was nothing subject to the wavering wheel
of fortune, neither passing of her smooth countenance, nor louring look,
living a stranger to her, whereby he kept himself free from her force,
notwithstanding I would feign know if the end and death of him were as worthy
as his life: for No man is called happy before his end, which being
answerable, I must needs confess the man deserved merit.


Fa. Indeed you say true, it is good in our conference, orderly to proceed,
for the life of man cannot be so clear, but that it may be much dimmed and
dusked by an ill end, making digression from the former life: but truly
Diogenes continued a sound Philosopher until his end, Diogenes. Lacitius lib.
2.
and at his death, it is said, that he lying grievously sick, perceiving it a
thing impossible for him to recover his former health, by feeling his aged body
so much weakened, and having in this great extremity of sickness small friends
to comfort or relieve him, threw himself down tumbling from the top of a
bridge, abutting near to the common place of excercises, and commanded the
keeper or ouer-seer of the bridge; that when life failed and breath was quite
departed, he should cast his carcass into the river Ilissus. Adeo pro nihilo
duxit mortem and sepulturam Diogenes. So little regarded Diogenes the invasion
of death, or the tranquillity and quietness of his body in the grave. But I
say not that this end was commendable in a Christian, for he was long before
the incarnation of Christ being an heathen man: notwithstanding endued with
wonderful wisdom. Again, some report of his death after this sort; saying,
he died when he was 90. years old: and being at the point of death willed his
body to be left unburied; saying, That he would not be troublesome to his
friends to dig and delue for him, who had no pleasure in their pain; unless
they would do it to avoid the smell and stinking savor, whereby he were
likely to annoy them: but when his friends asked him whether he would lie above
the ground, to be devoured of birds and beasts; No friends (says he) but lay
you by me a little staff that I may fear and keep them away: therein
deriding their foolish curiosity, that seemed to be so careful to bury the
dead carcass, as though there had been great difference whether it had been
devoured of birds and beasts in the field, or eaten and consumed of worms in
the ground; and so rebuking their folly he died. The wise Philosophers so
little regarded their dead carcasses; knowing by their natural wisdom what the
substance thereof was, making also no account or reckoning of life, whose state
was so frail and fickle: the learned Horace, Horace.
going about to quip and reprehend the fearful minds of those that so much
feared death said; Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas, regumque
turries: that pale death did as well visit the rich, as the poor: therefore
(says he) it is a foolish thing so much to fear that, which no man knows
when it shall happen; neither can it be avoided or shunned by any prayers or
gifts, nor by the force or strength of man repelled or driven back. Whereunto
also Homer replieth, Homer de morte.
saying, Nec vis Herculea fatum enitauit acerbum: neither could Hercules
strength resist or withstand death. The wise Socrates when he was to suffer
punishment, namely loss of life; Apollodorus his familiar friend coming to
the prison where he was laid up, Elianus liber 5.
brought unto him a very fine coat of costly wool, well wouen and wrought;
and therewithal a cloak of no courser stuff; desiring him to put them on,
and to wear them when he drunk the poison that should procure his death: For
(says he) Socrates cannot want a rich and honorable burial, if he being
attired with those gorgeous garments yield up the sweet pledge of his life:
nor that he should lie dead, altogether indecently being decked with such
beautiful and comely furniture. These words uttered Apollodorus to Socrates,
but he not allowing thereof: said to Crito, Simmias, and Phoedon; O what a
notable opinion does Apollodorus conceive of us, if he hope to see Socrates in
such bravery, after he has drunk up the poisoned potion ministered to him by
the hands of the Athenians: but if he did consider and believe that shortly
after I should droupe down, grouel on the ground, and at last lie like a lump
of lead under feet: he would not vouchsafe to know me. Not long before the
time of his death, also he being at liberty was very sick and feeble in
body; so that his friends asked him how it fared with him; very well (said
he) how so ever the world shall wag, for if I have my life prolonged I shall
increase mine enemies to bait me with rebukes: again if death shorten my
days, I shall win more friends to crown me with commendation. In vita
Platonis.
In like manner Plato at what time the Academy was reported to be infected with
the pestilence, the Phisicians gave him counsel to remove his school from
the Academy, into Lyceus, but he never a whit agreed to their counsel: but
said, Sed ego producendae vitae causa, ne in Atho quidem summitatem
transmigare velim, I would not remove to the high tops of the maine mountain
Athos, for the prolonging of my days, and the preserving of my mortal life:
so little also, feared or regarded that wise Philosopher, the fatal end.


Sch. Truly ye philosophers in this point, do show themselves the folowers of
wisdom indeed, for by birth they perceive themselves to be mortal,
therefore make they no great account of their uncertain life, but truly I
could wish, that there were many Philosophers now living amongst us, to
instruct us thoroughly by their great wisdom, whereby we might as well learn
to die as to live.


Fa. Surely, in mine opinion, it were in vain, for the nature of man is rather
to credit and follow the precepts and doctrine of those that are dead, than
to give audience, or be instructed at the mouth of the wise who lives; for
Diogenes himself in his life was forsaken of al his friends, because he used
to reprehend them most sharply, therefore they termed him a Cinike, or doggish
Philosopher, but after his death, his deeds were recorded and had in great
reverence. Socrates also was hated amongst his countrymen because he would tell
them thoroughly of their faults: Wherefore in the end he was accused and put to
death, but after had in great reverence and admiration, following his rules and
precepts, in governing their common wealth. In like sort, Aristotle,
Demosthenes, Plato, Callisthenes, and diverse other, were had in greater
estimation after their death, than they were in their life time. If Christ
himself did live at this day, amongst you as he did amongst the Jews, and
his miracles showed to you as they were in Iewry, it is hardly to be thought,
whether you would have believed so soundly on him, being bodily living amongst
you, as you do now by the certain reports of his passion and miracles. But if
the Philosophers would have given themselves, to please men, to flatter their
folly, and to maintain their vice, they should have been in great estimation
in their life, but they should never have purchased the name of Philosophers.
Eli. lib. 7.
Xenophon says, that Socrates upon a time had conference with the harlot
Caliste, who uttered these words in course of talk to Socrates, Ego tibi
Socrates, multum presto, nam cum tu neminem a me possis abalienare, ego cum
libitum est, tuos omnes a te auoco. I excel thee Socrates many degrees, for
when thou can not allure men from me, I can entise any of thine from thee,
when soever I list. To whom Socrates shaped this answer, Quid mirum est,
siquidem tu ad decline? etc. What wonder is that, for thou dooest traile men
down in the dale of vice and destruction, but I hale them up the hill of
virtue and eternity, whereunto is no easy passage, or common climing:
meaning, that the nature of man were more easier to be entised by flattery to
lewdness, than by sharp reprehension drawn to virtue. The wise Philosophers
also were of this mind and opinion, that the most blessed and happiest thing
which might fall and happen to man, was death, the end and conclusion of all
miseries. In like manner, the ancient Poets, in diverse of their works have
confirmed the same opinion, as a general and universal judgment: insomuch,
that it has been reported, Eli lib. 9.
that Biton and Cleobis, the sons of Araia, when their mother, being
ministresse in a Temple of a goddess, should have gone to the Temple in a
chariot with great speed, as the manner was, and her horses could not be
found, her two sons of childly pity vouchsafed themselves to bend their
bodies and draw their mother with speed to the Temple: for which gentle
affection the mother desired of the goddess whom she served, to give her
children the greatest benefit which GOD might give to man. After the feast, in
the night when the mother did take rest with her children, in the morning her
two sons were found dead: whereby it was gathered, that the greatest benefit
that man could have, was, in the midst of his glory and praise, to end his
frail life, that the inconstancy of fickle fortune might not blot out any
part of that which he had before gotten. Croesus the rich King of Lydia,
Croesus.
demanding on a time of Solon who was the happiest man that ever he did see,
thinking that he would say Croesus, for his great riches and wealth: but Solon
said, Tellus, a man of Athens, who had honest and good sons, and they also
had good children, all which he saw in his life, and when he had lived a good
time honestly, at the last fighting against, and vanquishing the enemies of his
country, he died a fair death, and was in the same place honorably buried of
the Athenians. When Croesus asked, who was most happy next Tellus, Solon named
those whom he knew to live and die most happiest, not naming Croesus at al,
where at he being abashed said unto Solon, My friend of Athens, set thou so
little by our felicity, that thou preferrest before us, these private persons?
Solo^ answered Truly Croesus in process of time, many things are seen that men
would not see, and many things are suffered that men would not suffer: and
speaking much of man's calamity, at the last he concluded, Solon.
saying, Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera foelix, No man is happy, or
thoroughly blessed before his last and uttermost end: and that the end of every
thing is to be looked on, where to it shall come; for God plucketh up many men
by the roots, unto whom he gave all things at pleasure: therefore I cannot
account any man happy before his end be known. Croesus made hereto no
countenance at al, but esteeming Solon for a fool, considering he passed so
lightly upon things which appeared good, let him depart. A good space after,
Croesus attempting war against Cyrus king of Persia, was at the last taken of
him, who caused a great pile of wood to be made ready, and Croesus to be gyued,
and set on the top thereof to be burned. Then forthwith Croesus remembering the
words of Solon, that no man living was blessed, or on all parts happy,
lamenting cried, O Solon, Solon, Solon: which Cyrus hearing, caused it to be
demanded of him who it was that he named, Croesus with much difficulty told
who it was, and declared all that was before rehearsed, which when Cyrus had
heard, remembering himself to be also a man, sore repented that he went about
to burn him, which was equal to himself in honor and riches, and commanded
him to be taken from the fire, which then began to flame, so with great
difficulty he was delivered: who could not perceive his own error, before
experience had made him wise; wherefore in such causes, it may aptly be said,
Phryx plagis emendatur, he bethought himself too late.


Scho. It is sufficiently apparent by your examples, that the life of man
cannot be happy until his end, and that man ought to live accordingly, to
attain to that happiness, but the nature of men is so far from that
consideration, that they rather think themselves immortal, and without end,
as does appear by their lives most evident, for they live now in these our
days, according as the Agragentines did in times past: for the wise Plato said
of them, Dictum Platonis.
They b^^ded as if they would live ever, and fedd as if they should always
die, because of their costlines in building, and their delicatenes in eating,
the one showing the immortal mind of man, and by the other, contrary to their
meaning they run headlong to an untimely death: which surfeiting end,
according to the opinion of the wise Philosophers can not be accounted happy:
but whereas temperance has been the original ground of our conference, it
shall be also expedient, that you would make manifest, what the want thereof is,
as well in princes and high estates, as in the meanest subject, and what by
their insatiable coveting they gain.


Fa. It is very requisite and necessary truly, to show the insatiable appetite
of aspiring minds, and what by their inordinate coveting they gain, which
comes by the want of the aforesaid gift, whereof I am right well content (my
good friend) so that you will diligently mark what I shall say herein; I will
first begin with a king of the Hebrews, whose name was Amasius, Amasius king
of Judea.
and lived before the incarnation of Christ 853. years; who although he lived
well and contentedly for a space, yet in the end he forgot himself, and
especially he forgot the living GOD, whom he before had served, which happened by
his successes and innumerable riches, where withal he grew so proud, that not
contenting himself, he wrote to Ioas king of the Israelites, commanding him
and his people to be under his obedience and government. But Ioas, after
defiance, gathered an army and went against Amasius, whose people fled before
they came to strokes, for fear of Ioas: himself being taken and brought to
the king, who threatened to kill him, except he caused the gates of Jerusalem to
be opened, that he with his army might enter in: there Amasius was forced to
break down of his own City walls four hundred cubits, by which way his
enemy Ioas might enter in, being also led as prisoner by his foe, into his
own, where his adversary spoiled and robbed him before his face of all the
treasure of his house and city, with the treasure of the temple, which he
commanded to be carried to Samaria, and afterward being delivered, his own
people slew him. This gained he for his coffeehouse. M. Antonius, in gesta
Romano. and Liuius lib. 5.
In like sort Marcus Antonius a noble Roman, whom Augustus the Emperor highly
favored, making him companion in the Roman Empire with himself, using him so
lovingly and friendly, that he wholly ruled and commanded the Empire so far
forth as Augustus himself: in consideration whereof Antonius by the lewd
enticement of Cleopatra Q. of Egypt aspired to the whole Empire, and to put
down his true and trusty friend Augustus, who before had advanced him to that
dignity: for which insatiable appetite he was destroyed of his very loving and
faithful friend. Also if Caesar, Pompey, Cyrus, Alexander, Hanniball, and
diverse other great Princes had been coutented with their own large kingdoms
and possessions, they had never bin driven to those extreme and shameful ends
as they were: Prouerbium.
so that it may well be prouerbially spoken, Aurum Tolosanum habem, they died
most miserably, whose lives and ends I would sufficiently relate and unfold, to
the better understanding and perceiving of the quiet state of contentment, and
the shameful fall and destruction of covetous and aspiring minds: but it may
be, that I should ouer-weary your ears with tediousness, for where a brief
will serve, it were mere folly to make a volume. Therefore for the avoiding of
the blameable cause of over much tediousness in examples, I am content in this
point to be short, referring it to your own judgment and consideration.


Scho. Not so Sir, I beseech you, for then should you offer me great
coffeehouse, in naming the princes which should be examples in our aforesaid
conference, referring them to my judgment and consideration, who as yet am
altogether ignorant and unacquainted either of their lives, or ends,
contentment or coffeehouse: wherefore my consideration herein can be but to
small effect, unless I knew the certainty. And although it would seem tedious
and troublesome to the ears of those who before do know their histories
sufficiently; yet notwithstanding because of mine ignorance herein, and for the
better perceiving of the aforesaid difference, I am very desirous to hear
you, and shall have great pleasure thereby rather than trouble; and let those
who are already perfect herein, stop their ears, until you confer of other
causes, which shall please and content them better.


Fa. With very good will my good friend, being also glad that you will not
plead perfectnes, wherein you are ignorant; nor refuse the name of a Scholar, to
learn further experience: for the wise Plato being demanded how long he would
be a Scholar, and learn. So long (said he) as I repent not to be wiser. But
to our purpose. I will proceed according to promise, first beginning with the
most renowned Caius Julius Caesar, Caesar in comment.
a most victorious Roman, who lived 40. years before the Incarnation of
Christ, and in 10. years space made many mighty Nations submit themselves;
first winning the whole Countries of Spain, Gallia, and Germany, conquering
also the Heluetians, the Latobrigians, Tulingians, Sedutians, Harudes,
Tribockes, with the Kauratians, and the warlike Boyans; he also overcame the
Marcomans, the Sueuians, Nemets, Seduns, Veragrines, Ambiliats, Venets,
Diablinters, Digerons, Farbels, and the Naunets; in like manner he vanquished
the Osisenes, Tarrasats, Vocats, Pretians, Flustrates, Garites, Garumnes, with
the famous Ansians, the Sibusites, Cocasats, Aulerkes, and compelled the stout
Viridouix to yield himself; slaying also an infinite number of the Morines,
Treuites, Mennapians, Lexobians; he also slew the strong and valiant Captain
Indutiomares with his own hand; he subdued the Belges, the Neruians, the
Aduatickes, with Occo the great Prince of the Senons; he beat down the
Condrosces, Segemes, and Eburons; he also overcame the Britons with Cassibelan
their King, and made them become tributaries unto him.


Scho. Sir (by your patience) let me cause you to stay there a while until I
be certefied in this one point: The English chronicle.
the Britones whom Caesar conquered with their King Cassibelan, I take to be
the English Nation now, which at the first time of his coming and inuading
their Land (if ancient Records may challenge credit) gave him a shameful
repulse, and slew a number of his men, causing him also to fly the Land with
great speed into Gallia to save his life; where amongst the Galls he
practiced by treacherous means to obtain their Land. Which in the end he
easily achieved, for having corrupted their Nobles and chief States, he
entered the Land the second time, and made a conquest thereof. But at his first
coming, the Britons so fiercely encountered with him, that he was caused
perforce to fly the Field; and therefore where as he was wont to certefie the
Senate of Rome by his letters briefly saying and concluding, Vt veni, vidi,
vici: So soon as I came, I saw, and I overcame. Thus for brevity sake,
certifying the Romans of his prosperous succes and good fortune: meaning
thereby that no people or nation did or would withstand him, himself being
present, but yielded themselves to his mercy at his very first coming.
Notwithstanding he was at this time deceived, and caused to stay his letters
from Rome, for he could not say, So soon as I saw I overcame: for the Britons
at his first coming had driven him out of their Country, joining battle
with the Romans, and drove the^ back with great slaughter; and in the same
conflict a Britain, named Nennius, matched hand to hand with Caesar, and
chased him in the field with great hazard and peril of his life; for catching
the impoysoned sword of Julius Caesar in his target, with the which he caused
him to fly the field, as a hare before the hound to save his life: but Nennius
not preuayling because of the wonderful swiftnes of Caesar, retired into the
battle again, and slew the chief friend and Legate to Caesar, (whose name
was Labienus) with ye sword which he had taken from his Master. Also by the
reports of Caesar's own pen in his Commentaries, that he never got Land with
more difficulty, than he did the Britain I Will, chiefly praising the Kentishmen
both for their courtesy, manliness, and constancy, in the aforesaid
Commentaries, which were written with his own hand.


Fa. I must needs confess it is true, yet notwithstanding he was called the
victorious Caesar, for that he vanquished in the end whomsoever he warred
against. After the conquest of the Britones, he forced the great Catiuulcus to
poison him self, subduing the noble Lytauicus, taking at the same time the
great City Genabum, and the Cities Valundunum, Noniodunum, battering down to
the very ground Auaricum, and slew in the same City 40000. people: also he
vanquished Theutomatus, Camalogeus, and slew Eporidouix, where in the same
fight Cotus and Canarell were taken prisoners, Sedulius prince of Lemnouix was
by him slain at Alexea: he took a live Vergasilaunus with three score baners,
and four and thirty thousand prisoners, with many a noble man, he overcame
Drapes, Surus, Suturuate, and chased so narrowly the noble Prince Luctarius,
that he miserably dyed by famishment. The great king Etorix also, he made to
be brought by his own People to him as Prisoner: he ouerthrewe great Pompey
the Roman Prince in many a battle, discomfiting in one day al his power at
Pharsalia, and caused him to fly in poor array out of the camp into Egypt,
afterward displacing the king of Egypt, and placing his sister Cleopatra in
his stead, whom he dearly loved* Iuba king of Africa, and Pharnaces king of
Pontus, he made submit themselves to his will. The sounes of great Pompey which
came to revenge their fathers quarrel in like sort he put to shameful foil.
Thus highly fortune favored him, that he marched Conqueror through out all
Europa. For the hautie mind of Caesar, as the ancient Romans report, could
abide no equal, neither could Pompey abide or tolerate any peer or superior,
whereby the whole world was troubled by their dissension and strife, not only
with the loss of many thousands of soldiers, but also with a great number of
worthy, valiant, and noble men of great fame and renown. After these great
victories and huge slaughters of so many thousands, Caesar marched home to the
gates of Rome, with the conquest of 300. several nations, and 800. stately
towns at the least: yet not contented with the proy of his victory, nor
filled with so many blodie slaughters, spared not, but beat down the stately
walls of his own native City Rome, because his countriemen, fearing his
cruelty at the first, would not open the gates of the City unto him: for
which cause he made the Romans yield themselves on their knees, to become his
faithful and true subjects, making himself Emperor over the Roman State,
which was never subject to Emperor before his time. Thus did the pride of his
mind still clime for dignity, not being satisfied but catching at the very
heavens, if his power had extended so far, being fleshed with so many
bloody broils, and animated with such lordly stateliness, that no Roman
peer or potentate might stir or speak against his wilfulnes. Therefore, true
is the saying of Tully, Cicero, in offi.
who says, Quem metuunt oderunt, quem quisque odit, perijsse expetit, Whom
they fear they hate: whom every man does hate, his death is wished for.
Which saying was truly verefied in him: for he grew in such detestable hate
daily amongst the Romans, that they continually wished and heartely desired
his destruction and confusion: which came thorough his great pride, and in that
he would so much be feared. Neither was it unknown to him, that by his
aspiring mind and stately behauior, he was grown into deadly hate amongst the
Romans: for which cause fearing the destruction of expected hap, he made a
law, and instituted a decree, that no Roman should come into the Senate house
with any weapon at all under pain of death: (which was where he most commonly
sat in judgment, and where the States of the Romans assembled themselves
together, to confer and determine of causes: yet notwithstanding in the end
Cassius and Brutus extremely hating the unquenchable pride of his aspiring
mind, brought privily into the Senate (in their pockets and sleeves) small
bodkins, Mors Caesaris.
little knives, and such other fit instruments for their purpose, and suddenly
in the Senate house set upon him unlooked for, stabbing him into the body most
miserably until he died. This was the end of mighty Caesar, which happened
through the default of Temperance: which gift if he had possessed, he had not
so died.


Scho. O good God, what meant the insatiable Caesar by his inordinate coveting,
and by the incessant climing for vain superiority had he delight and pleasure
in such cruel slaughters, and miserable murders of so many destressed people:
was his greedy appetite, so hungry after honor, that his mind could never
be satisfied: would not so many pitiful murders, so many lamentable chances,
so many cruel acts, so many hard escapes in his wars, which he both beheld
in others, and also felt himself, mollify and abate the hautie pride, and
lofty courage of his aspiring mind, wherein he might have perceived himself
as mortal as the rest? Surely I much marvel how he could register and set
down with his own pen the whole discourse of his wars and victories,
compiled in a volume called Caesar's Commentaries, without blushing cheeks,
wonderful shedding of tears, and deep sighs from the heart, to think that
for his own vain glory and pride of heart, so many Nations were subdued, so
many stately Towns beaten down and sacked, so many people slain and murdered
most lamentably, that all Europa stood floating with ye blood of his
slaughters. He might have considered the nature of man by the disposition of
himself: for before their Country should be sacked, spoiled, robbed and
destroyed by the invasions and forces of foreign enemies, they will most
willingly venture life, and run with desperate minds to death in defense of
Country and liberty: Distum Catonis.
but the wise Cato says, Sic facias alteri, quod tibi vis fieri: So do unto
another, as thou would thy self be done unto. Even such measure as he gave
to others, such measure was heaped to him again. For when he had depraved
diverse kings of their kingdoms, spoiled them of their lives, and wrested from
them their goods, in the end, as it seems, he was in one hour depraved of
his Empire, which he had made firm to himself perforce, despoyled of his
princely regiment, and most miserably murdered by the hands of his own
subjects. O most unhappy end.


Fa. If we shall go forward according to promise, it is not convenient to
stand long upon this one example: but to proceed. Alexander the Great, who was
the son of Philip King of Macedonie: Alexander magnus, vt Plutarchus scripsit
in like manner; was one whom fortune highly favored; for being but twenty
years old, when first he began his reign: at which time he set forward to
conquer the whole World, and at the first subduing the Athenians, Getes,
Lacedaemonians, Argeans, Thalants: with all the whole country of Greece; from
thence he went to Hellespont where he conquered all the countries there about,
marching from thence into Asia, where at the first he slew in one day of
Persians, 20200. causing also many Cities, and strong towns, in the same
country to yield to his mercy, as Sardis, Lydia, Magnesia, Phrygia, Ephilos,
Pamphilia, Caria, Pysidia, Lysia, Gordin, Helicarnus, Melyton, Selenas, Aucyre,
Paphlagony, Solos, Malon, Lernesus, Islon, Sebestus, with strong Castabulon.
Then passing to the large country, Cilicia, where he took prisoners the mother
and wife of King Darius, putting him to flight, sleying of the Persians,
100000. compelling also Strato the great King of Arade, with all the Kings of
Syria, to yield themselves on their knees to his mercy: he put to sack the
stately and strong City Tire, that never before, since the beginning of the
World had been conquered: then sailed he into Egypt, and so over the river
Nilo: where he subdued all the country, marching forward to Araby, where he
slew the mighty King Darius, with many thousand of his people: from thence he
passed to the great City Babylon, which was presently yielded to him: then he
conquered the whole country of Armenia, Atrapine, Persepolis, Paralacen;
marching to the huge Nation of the Mardons: where he vanguished the Medes,
Parthians, Spartans, Thracians, Acabians, Boetians, Cannians, Besyrians,
Nisans, Pisides, with many more, until he was let by the Caspian seas: the
country of Amazon he also subdued, and utterly destroyed the great Province of
Dranga, compelling their King to fly into India to save his life; he overcame
the whole land of Aracosia, sacking the Cities, Acadera, Bactria, Cyroposis,
Scythia, Bubacen, Basannes, Duhanes, and the Maurians, from thence he conveyed
his army into India, that never was invaded by any one before, but by
Hercules: passing over and conquering the high and steep Mountains of Meroae
and Dedala, with rich Amzaga; Mount Arum he long besiedged, and in the end gat
it, which Hercules before him could not subdue: making the Kings of India
Omphis, Abiazaris, and Gamaxus, to yield themselves on their knees; then passed
he over Hidaspis streams, where he vanquished the great King Porus, and slew
all his army, still marching to the Sabians, Sugdrians, and Mallians, which he
also conquered; then to the Oxidricans, whom he utterly overthrew, marching
on to the uttermost coasts of all the Orient, until the mighty seas denied
him further to pass: then prepared he a Navy of ships and sailed on the
great Ocean sea: where he saw many strange and wonderful sightes, and found
out many barbarous Nations, which he also subdued with the sword, not
offering to make return until the cruel seas denied his further passage;
then returned he to Babylon wonderfully weeping by the way as he went, for
that he had heard Anaxarchus and Democrites affirm, Democrites, ita dixit.
that there were many and diverse worlds; for which cause, Heu me, inquit
miserum, qui nec vna quidem sum potitus, Woe is me (says he) miserable
wretch, that am not possessor as yet of any one: neither do they feel or know
my power and might nor have my banners been spread in their Coasts and countries
whereby they might have known me their Lord and King. Thus continuing in
sorrow until he came to the City of Babylon, where he held a great
Parliament, (for all the Kings of the Orient were sommoned, to come and do
their homage, to the great King,) sitting there as it were in the heart and
middle of the earth, to the intent the greatest part of Kings and Princes of
the whole world might with speed come to honor him: who caused himself to be
called the son of Jupiter: for being lifted up with the pride of his
victories, attributing the chance thereof to his own worthiness, thought
himself in deed the son of God, commanding his people upon pain of death
so to call him, willing also that all Nations of the earth should adore and
worship him, by the name of the son of Jupiter: but see, the high and mighty
God immortal would not suffer this proud King any longer to live, but cut off
his days in the most flourishing time of his prosperity. For those whom
Alexander put most trust and confidence in, first of all betrayed their proud
mortal God: Justinius, in lib. 12.
for at such time as he was bidden to a banquet in the house of his friend
Thesalus Medus, he was miserably poisoned by the hands of Cassander, Philip,
and Iola, which was by the consent of his own Lieftenant Antipater, and
Aristotle sometime his master and Tuter; which happned by his insatiable
appetite of coveting, with the unmeasureable thirst after dignity: and also
the intolerable vice of pride through which he caused himself to be called a
God: all which they deadly detesting, consented to the poisoning of their King.
Then was the saying of Diogenes verefied in Alexander: who said, That his
length of ground were sufficient patrimony for himself which in the end the
greatest Prince of the world must be contented withal. Notwithstanding
Alexander regarded not the saying of the wise Philosopher, but coueted still
after the whole world, yt when he needed but so much possession as Diogenes
before spoke of, he could not possess it, but wanted the rites of his burial:
for he was kept above the ground unburied, by reason of the great strife and
discentions which were amongst the Lords and peers of Macedonie about the
succession; whereof when Olympias his mother had heard; Diodorus Siculus, in
lib 8.
she took on very pitifully, and made this mourneful lamentation: saying. O
fili, fili, tu cum in deorum numerum referri volueris, and id perficere summo
studio conatus sis, nunc neque illorum quidem, quorum omnibus mortalibus
aequale and par, ius est, particeps fieri potes, terrae and sepulturae. My
son, my sweet son, needs would thou be recounted among the Gods
immortal: and did what thou could to accomplish thy purpose, but now my
son, my sweet son, thou art so far from being heavenly, that thou art most
vile, wanting the common benefit of burial, whereof not so much as the lousy
beggar is deprived. Thus did she bewail her ill luck and froward fortune,
detecting also the pride and vanity of her son Alexander in her bitter
lamentation. For truly the body of her son had wanted the rights of burial,
had not his friend Aristander Telmisensis invented a crafty mean to bring his
carrion carkas to the earth, for lying above the ground unburied the space of
thirty days: this his faithful friend coming to the lords and peers, which
were at variance about the succession of his kingdom, made this fained
protestation, as though he had been pricked thereunto by some extraordinary or
heavenly motion, to say these words as follows, Eli. lib. 10.
Omnes omnium seculorum reges Alexander foelicitate superauit, tam viuus quam
mortuus: Etenim dij immortales mihi notum fecerunt, in quacunque terra ipsius
anima requiem primum esset habitura, eam foelicitate abundantem, and ab omni
hostili vastatione in perpetuum fore liberam. Alexander, when he was living,
and also now being dead, excelled al kings of all ages, in felicity,
happiness, beatitude, and prosperity: for the gods everlasting have revealed
and made manifest to me, that in what region soever the soul of Alexander
first did rest, the same should be crowned with plenty and abundance, it
should not fear the wasting of foreign force, nor be subject to the violent
invasion of the spiteful adversary. When the peers and nobles had heard
these words pronounced by Aristander, they presently cut off all quarelling
for supremacy, and every one of them put too his helping hand, with no less
desire than duty, to convey the dead carcass of Alexander into his own
Empire, that they might possess their treasure and all things in peace:
notwithstanding, behold the immortal God would not suffer the dead carcass of
this god, to take as yet any rest in the ground, nor to have the rights of
burial, but caused dissension to arise, whereby his body was tossed from place
to place. For Ptolomeus king of Egypt made inquisition and search after the
dead body of Alexander, Diodorus Siculus, de morte Alexand.
and found it out at Alexandria: as for the Macedonians they were calm,
quiet, and still, Perdicas only excepted, who pursued Ptolomeus with might and
maine, not so much for the love, duty, and reverence which he had to
Alexander, as for the words which Aristander pronounced, neither truly did
Ptolomeus bestow that great pains, for the very love he bare to Alexander,
so much as he did for the same devotion as Perdicas had: but Perdicas in the
end ouertaking Ptolomey, stayed him: in which encounter, Ptolomey suppressed
the power of Perdicas, and committed a great slaughter of the Macedonians, who
sought so earnestly to recover the dead body of the Macedonian Monarch, and
were also at the last flouted after this sort: for Ptolomeus had made an image
which resembled Alexander the puissant, and decked it gloriously, beautifyeng
it with garments of princelinesse, he also adorned it with Epigrams and
inscriptions, and poesies of high honor, he laid it in a Persian chariot, and
decked the coffin bravely with gold and silver, as became the estate of an
Emperor, as for the carkas it self, it was but homely handled, for it was
wrapped in no costly gear, but very basely used, and as present occasion craved,
privily sent away by secret and unknown ways, to the intent it might not be
intercepted or stayed. Now when Perdicas had espied the sumptuous simulachre of
dead Alexander, and saw every thing as he thought roially executed and
pompously performed, he pawsed from his speedy pursuit after Ptolomey,
persuading himself, that he had obtained the thing, namely, the body of
Alexander, wherabout such strife and contention kindled and burned betwixt them
both so egerly: but he was deluded and mocked for all that, and understood the
truth somewhat too late, and perceived that he was craftily circumuented, and
was forced in the end to retire back, being shamefully flowted. This was the
end of this earthly god, and the unquietness which fell to his dead carcass,
which could not for a time obtain the rights of burial: and also after it was
committed to the ground it could not rest, but was tossed and removed from
place to place, for whereas he in his life time despised to be counted mortal,
he was at his death denied the common benefit of a mortal man. Of whose life
and manners, hereafter shall be more sufficiently spoken, according as the
cause shall require, and occasion be offered.


Scho. O most unhappy Prince that ever lived, would he needs be a god? Was
there no remedy: Well, therefore as it seems he could not enjoy the common
benefit of a man, what meant he by this vain wish, when he heartily wished
that his arms might reach from the orient to the occident, and that he might
bear his banners displayed in all kingdoms and nations of the earth, to the
intent he might be known their Lord and King? nay rather what meant he when
that he could not satisfy himself, with so great a part of the world as he
had already gotten and won, but mourned for the other worlds which he heard
of, which he thought impossible for him to get? Was his appetite so
unquenchable? O insatiable mind that hearkened not to the wise saying of
Diogenes, who said; His length of ground were sufficient patrimony for him?
which in the end the greatest prince and peer of the earth must be contented
withal: but he being kept so long above the ground (as seems) less than his
length in his life might contain his dead rotten carkas. For a small hole
would serve to crowd and thrust the remain of the decayed and putrified corpse
with ease: wherefore he needed not so large measure of ground, as Diogenes
spoke of before. But see the power of the immortal God in shortning the arms
of this mortal God so much, that so small a rowme would with ease hold and
contain him; which before groped in a manner after the very heavens, the
upper face of the earth not contenting his greedy appetite. Therefore truly in
my opinion he needed not to write upon his grave, or Tomb, Carmina Ennij.
as Ennius did, who ingraued these verses, be cause the people should not
bewail his death, saying: Nemo me lacrimis decoret, neque funerafletu
Faxit, cur? volito docta per ora virum.
No man shall bewail me with tears, nor shall make sad my funeral with
weeping. For Alexander might well assure himself, having so much troubled and
molested the world, that his name which in his life time was both odious and
detestable: should not at his death be bewailed and deplored: but rather that
his funeral should turn the whole world to great gladness and common joy.


Fa. Cyrus the Persian King, although he lived a while contented and in favor
and good liking of his people, yet notwithstanding in the end he was drowned
in covetousness, giving himself to the vain pride of the world: hunting
after honor, climing after superiority, Justinius, lib. 1.
striving incessantly for the kingdoms of his neighbors, whereby he grew
both odious to his countrymen, and also intolerable to his confines and
borderers: neither could he take example by Croesus the rich King of Lydia,
whom he had taken prisoner before, with all his people; which happned through
his coveting and insatiable mind: and yet for all that he gave himself so
much to the conquering of the kingdoms of others; that in the end he lost both
his own patrimony and life also. But first to show the preserving, election,
and establishing of this King, it shall not much digress from our purpose.
Digressio.
Astyages King of the Medeans, in the night dreamed, Plu. de vita Cyri.
that out of his daughters loins should spring a vine: whose branches should
over shadow al Asia. The King being fearful asked counsel of ye Southsaiers
concerning ye event of his troublesome dream, whose answers were yt his
daughter should bring forth to him a nephewe, which should take his kingdom
from him. Thus being terrified with this answer; he would neither give his
daughter to any foreign Prince, or worthy state, nor to his own countriemen
which descended or came of any honorable parentage: to the intent that no stock
or race of nobility might breed or bring up such a nephewe to him. But at the
last he gave her in marriage to Cambises a Persian, which was at that time a
most obscure Nation: notwithstanding fearing the future hap of his dream, he
sent for his daughter being great with child, under color of being
graundfather, that he might look well and carefully to his daughters Child,
when it should be borne. Not long after the young Child his nephew was borne;
and then forthwith Astiages the Graundfather gave it to Harpagus chief Lord
of his counsel to be presently slain: but Harpagus fearing least after the
death of his Lord Astiages, his daughter and mother to that child should reign
in the kingdom, and so revenge the murder of the innocent on him; wherefore he
gave it to one of the kings shepherds, to be priuelie brought up, returning
this answer to the King that he had slain the child his nephew: therefore he
should not need to fear his dream. But in time the boy growing up to a
pretty stripling, being in company with his fellow shepherd boys in the
field, and by lot was chosen King in their childish sportes and plays, when
certain of his little subjects had transgressed his commandment, he caused
them to be holden up in jest whilst he whipped them in earnest: the boys
complained of this abuse to their parents and they in like sort taking in hard
part such whipping, complained of it also to the King: how that the son of a
hired servant had scorged and whipped their children, which they took
grieuousely: then Astiages sending for the boy, demanding of him the cause?
Where with the boy with a bold and manly face, Fecisse se vt regem respondit,
he answered; That he had done as became a King, and no otherwise Astiages
hearing this maiesticall answer of the pretty boy, called to mind his
forepassed dream, viewing well the lad: he asuredly thought that ye boy much
favored his daughter whose Child he had caused to be slain; but both by the
face and similitude of the youth, and by the confession of the shepherd, and
the time of the receipt thereof. He then knew that he was his right Nephew;
vanishing all fear from himself of the aforesaid Dream and Prophecy, for
thinking himself to be as a dead man in his sleep, and his Nephew to be King
and as the Southsayers had declared he should be, thought himself clearelie
freede from all peril. But Harpagus escaped not unpunished for breaking the
kings commandment; for Astiages catching the son of Harpagus slew him, Actum
terribile.
and caused his cooks to dress the mangled boy, inuiting after the father of
the child, causing him unawares to eat his own flesh. Which thing being
afterward known unto Harpagus, he dissembled the matter until he might with
fit opportunity revenge this villainy forthwith, sending privily into Persia
to Cyrus, showing him how his grandfather had dealt with him, for saving his
life, wishing him also to prepare an army, and come to challenge his kingdom
which his grandfather meant to defraud him of. Cyrus having received the
letters, considering the ancient wrongs that his grandfather had offered him
before: and now also how greatly he had abused him, who had preserved his
life, wherefore he presently gathered an army, minding now to challenge his
right whilst that he had such a faithful friend as Harpagus was, who offered
himself to do his uttermost in the behalf of Cyrus. But Astiages hearing of
such great preparation against him by his nephew, in like sort also provided a
mighty hand against him, the conduction whereof he committed wholly to the
government of his counselor Harpagus, who presently when he had received
them, yielded up the whole army to Cyrus, to revenge himself on the king for
the great injury he had offered him: the king having knowledge thereof,
gathered a new power of men, and went himself against his nephew, marching on
to the borders of Persia, where was fought betwixt the grandfather and the
nephew a most cruel and bitter fight, in which conflict this notable courage
in the Persian women is remembered, for the battle, being planted on both
parts wonderful strong. And Astiages to the intent his soldiers should
fight manfully, had divided his army in such sort, that he placed at the
backs of those that should fight the battle, an other army of soldiers,
saying, Unless they overcame, and went forward, they should find as hard fight
behind them, as their enemies were before them. If in case they should offer
to retire back: the battelles on both sides being come to handstrokes, and
deadly blows, the Persian army at the first began to flee back and retire,
which sorrowful sight, the Persian women had soon espied, wherefore
forthwith the matrons, wives, and daughters assembled themselves in haste, and
running to meet them, who came fleeing before Astiages and the Medeans, as men
despairing of their good fortune, plucking and folding up their clothes,
showing the privy secrets of their bodies, asking them whether or no they
would flee for succor into the wombs of their mothers or wives, requesting them
ernestly to return into the battle and fight for their lives, saying, That if
they would needs run home, they could neither succor or help them any
otherwise than by what means they had already showed them. By which
castigation of the women, the Persian soldiers retired into the battle
again, and put their enemies to shameful flight, taking also prisoner
Astiages the Medean king. Thus far digressing from our purpose, to show both
the cruelty of Astiages, the valiantness of the Persian women, and the good
hap of Cyrus, in attaining unto the crown. Ad causam
But now to return to our purpose again. Cyrus possessing all Persia and
Medea, was not contented with those large kingdoms and dominions, but still
coueted to enlarge his possessions, delighting in bloody battles, rejoicing
at the ruin and destruction of stately Towns and Cities. For after many
cruel fightes and bloody broils, he entered into Lydia: where in a great
battle he took Croesus the rich King thereof. Notwithstanding he was not
satisfied with all the treasure and Kingdom of Lydia, which was then the most
richest Region under the heavens: but marched forward into Asia, conquering
that also; returning at the last with all the East part of the world, which he
held under the subjection. Yet being not filled with bloody fight, nor
satisfied with victory, he waged war with the Scythians, who at that time
were governed by Queen Thomyris; which sent her Son with a great Army to
defend her Country: but the subtle Captain Cyrus, perceiving the young man to
be but a fresh water soldier, fraughted his Tents well with wine and fresh
vittaile (in which he knew the Scythians much delighted) and after faining a
flight as if thorough fear of the Scythian Army, he departed, leaving his
Tents wholly furnished to entrap the Scythians withal: which fell out
accordingly, for the lusty youth (over rashly and without good consideration)
seized on those Tents being forsaken of the enemy, and (according to their
accustomed manner) fell to such excessive quaffing and bibbing, that the whole
Army was soon drunken therewith, being void of all fear, for that they
supposed the Enemy to be fled. But Cyrus being advertised thereof, returned in
the night to his tents again, finding the Scythians overcome with his wine; so
that he easily slew the Son of Thomyris and the whole Scythian Army. The
Queen hearing of the loss of her dear Son, and also of her Army, did not
spend the time in weeping, but presently sought means to revenge her self on
that insatiable wretch, and with such like subtlety as Cyrus beguyled her
son, with such policy she trained him to his destruction: for the Persians
greatly rejoicing in their first victory, and happy success in the
beginning; and the Scythians contrariwise, making show as if they were greatly
discomfited with the loss of their Army and former foil, Mors Cyri.
retiring still back from their enemies, to train them in like sort into the
marshes and straight places of their Country, where the enemy was entangled
before they knew of any such practice, or suspected any such craft at all.
There was Cyrus slain with 200000. Persians, whereof there remained not one to
carry news or message back into Persia how they had sped in Scythia; in which
great conflict and slaughter, when Thomyris had found out the dead body of
Cyrus, she caused the head to be cut from the carcass, flinging the head into
a tub of man's blood, which was filled for the same purpose: saying; Satia te
sanguine quem sit isti, cuiusque insatiabilis semper fuisti: Dictum Thomiris.
Cyrus now satisfy thy self with blood, which thou have long thirsted after,
whereof thou could never have thy fill. Thus died Cyrus when he had reigned
30. (...) Pompeius Magnus (so called for his incomparable Uictories, Pompeius
magnus. Vt Liuius scripsit li. 3.
being the son of Pompeius Strabo) in like case wanted the gift of
temperance: for being wonderfully beloved of the Romans, and honored
exceedingly for his happy successes in his wars, grew in the end so proud,
that he disdained any superior: which ambitious mind caused his shameful
destruction. First being but a youth, he entered into Afric, committing there
most horrible slaughters of the Africans, subduing their Country to the Roman
Empire, returning to Rome: from thence, he speedely marched into Spain; where
he overcame in Battle the most valiant Captain Sertorius, being then an
Exile in Spain, and before invincible. He also vanquished the great king of
Pontus called Mithridates, with a mighty number of people. For which great
victories he triumphed in Rome twice, not being filled with these great
conquests and murders of distressed people, nor satisfied with his stately
triumphs, but forthwith invaded and conquered these realms and nations, as
Armenia, Cappadocia, Paphlagonia, Media, Cilicia, Mesopotamia, Judea, Arabia,
Colchis, Iberia, Albania, and Syria, for the which also he triumphed in Rome.
In these wars he gathered a mighty mass of treasure, whereby he both
enriched the common treasure-house of Rome, and also himself, the gold which
he brought to Rome from the spoils of these wars, was 2000. talents, which
amounts of our money to 28026600. pounds, beside that which he gave to every
private souldior, which was six pounds to every man: therefore it is to be
thought, that in so great an host as pertained to the co^quests of so many
countries, must needs extend to a wonderful sum of money. If then the sum
which was preserved did amount to such a mighty mass. It is also to be
supposed the private spoils and booties of the common soldiers did arise to a
great quantity, which was not openly declared. Wherefore it is to be
considered, how that Pompey thorough his insatiable appetite did spoil and
sack on infinite number of stately Cities and rich towns, with the sheding of
huge streams of blood, in the gathering together of this mucke, for which cause
also many thousands of his people lost their lives. Returning to Rome with the
rich spoils, his haughty pride much more increased; in so much, that no Roman
(in what office soever) might be his peer, no nor scant his equal, and to
establish his estate the better, he married Iulia the daughter of Julius Caesar
a mighty Roman: but this friendship not long continued, for Iulia died: then
could not Caesar and Pompey agree, for the stately pride of the one could not
brook or digest the haughty mind of the other, whereby there grew amongst the
Romans great controversy and debate, insomuch, that in the end, it came to
bloody blows and mighty slaughters, as well of Romans themselves, as of
infinite thousands of strange nations, and foreign people: but at the last
Pompey was vanquished and forced to fly privily by sea into Egypt, Mors Pom.
where by the conduct of king Ptolomeus he was slain in a boat, his head being
stricken off, and his body cast on the stround, where it was but poorly
buried. Thus died Pompey when he had lived three score years, spending his
time in sheding blood, whose proud mind in his aged time, would not suffer
his body to rest, but in striving and contending for superiority, he most
shamefully lost his life. Thus (good friend (it is manifest what aspiring
minds gain in the end. For further proof whereof, it might more sufficiently
be proved by the fall of diverse other kings and princes, which at this time I
omit, hoping, that these few examples shall as well suffice, as if I had more
amply related, or apparently expressed them by further examples.


Scho. Sir, for your great courtesy herein, I yield you most hearty thanks,
not being willing to trouble you any further in these examples, for you have
most plainly manifested the reward of coffeehouse, the incident end of
aspiring minds, the imminent peril which does daily hang over the climers
for superiority, so that first from the beginning being certified of the state
of man, wherein is showed, that he holds nothing proper of himself, but
borrows what he has of others by reason of his nakedness; then also what an
uncertain thing life it self is in this naked body of man: so that man being
of this bare and base mettell, ought not to think himself immortal; then
also what was more necessary to govern the frail life and naked body of man,
than temperance, showing the quietness and happy state to the possessors
thereof. And now in like sort in these your last examples: what troubles,
vexations, perilles, and utter confusion does happen and fall consequently to
the wanters of the before said gift: therefore as you have orderly begun, so
my request is that you will accordingly proceed forward.


Fa. Truly friend there are many enemies to the life of man, which for their
pleasantness at the first, are taken as dear friends: for the nature of man,
is to account that a friendly pleasure which fully satisfies his lewd vain
and greedy appetite; although after it shortly turns him to destruction. The
wise Marcus Cato, finding out and perceiving that worldly muck, Mar. Cato.
(as heaps of gould and silver, which is but mettle of the earth) was one of
the chiefest enemies and adversaries to the quiet state and peaceable rest of
man: when he came from the conquest of Spain, having gathered a great mass
of treasure together. First considered to himself what inconvenience this
money and coin might purchase, either to himself or to any of his friends
which might possess too great a quantity thereof; also fearing that if he
should bring it into the tresurie of Rome, it would trouble and disquiet the
whole body of the Senate, who having sufficient before (as Cato thought) might
therewith purchase the death and destruction of many thousands of Romans and
other people: for as he thought, if they had such a huge mass of treasure,
they would have provided to conquer the world, if it had bin possible for them.
Which thing he might well conceive, for that he at that time was commanded and
sent by the Senate, to make a conquest of Spain: but wise Cato foreseeing all
these evils and expected harms; at his return out of Spain toward Rome,
gave to every one of his Soldiers, (which were a mighty number) a pound
weight of silver, because he would dissolve and separate the suspected
mischief; knowing also that the money was vnreuocable again out of so many
holders hands (saying) better it were that many should return to Rome with
silver; then a few with gold: which as Cato supposes is one of the most
speciallest enemies to the quiet state and government of man; breeding trouble
and vexation to the mind, (...) fo. 215.
which otherwise would be in quiet rest. In like manner Crates a Philosopher,
perceiving what unquietness, the goods of this world bred to the mind of man,
threw his riches and treasure into the sea because they should neither molest
or trouble himself, nor otherwise infect his friends with avarice: (saying;)
Pack hence, you ungracious appetites, I had rather down you, than you should
drown me: also further saying, se non posse virtutes and diuitias simul
possidere, that he could not possess virtue and riches together. Bias
Prienaeus, a learned man of Greece, seeing his country taken by enemies, fled;
Bias Prienaeus.
other men taking with them such goods, as they might bear: but he carried
nothing with him, and being afterward demanded why he took not his riches and
treasure with him, but left it as a pray for the enemy? Made this answer
(saying;) Omnia mecum porto, I carry all mine with me, meaning virtue and
doctrine; reputing the goods of fortune, none of his: saying further: I am but
ouersharplie revenged on my foes in leuing that behind me, which will so sore
trouble and molest the^. In like case, the wise and learned Philosopher
Democritus, when he returned to Athens, gave his possessions and riches to the
weal public, Ehanus. l. 6.
which was very great; to be as maintenance and relief to the poorest
Citizens: saving a little garden which he reserved to walk in for recreation
sake. Also when he beheld the City of Athens, he continually laughed at their
foolish diligence, which spared no pains to get authority and riches, that
they were not sure to keep; which also labored to get their children great
possessions, who either died before their fathers, or (ouerliuing them) shortly
spent away all their fathers left them. But the Athenians being angry
therewith, sent Hippocrates to Democritus, to demand what he meant by his
foolish laughing; thinking him to be mad. But Hippocrates when he perceived
what he meant, returned again to the Athenians, saying, Surely Democritus is
not mad, but truly I rather think those mad whom he laugheth at. On a tune a
certain man demanded of Agesilaus King of Lacedemonia, why he being so
mighty a Prince did live no richer, fare no better, and lie with no more
estate, than he did? Who answered, It does my friend (says he) become a King
to excel in moderate and temperate living, Dictum Agesilai.
and not in delicacie, and after a superfluous manner. Neither (says he) do I
mean by my spare living, to hoord up treasure to purchase the heavens: but
rather to give example to my subjects to live and continue in contentment. Then
no doubt, if princes ought to excel in temperance, but that their subjects
ought much more to imitate those good Princes, considering by the aforesaid
examples, that superfluity of wealth is an enemy alwaie repugnant, as well to
virtue, as to the quiet state and government of man. Anthenodorus a Stoicke
Philosopher was wont to say, Dictum Anthe.
Thou may think thy self free from covetousness, when thou art come to
this point that thou will desire nothing of GOD, but that thou may openly
crave. Thinking although the heart of man were never so covetous of inordinate
wealth, yet his tung durst not openly pronounce it: then according to this
opinion, if man would not wish privily for more, than he would openly crave for
his credit, no doubt then man would not be unsatiable; but many Princes have
been so insatiable themselves, and their subjects so rightly and justly have
imitated and followed their proceedings, that it is grounded with sure hold and
root in man. I am surely persuaded, that there are more in these our days,
which have more rightly followed the Roman Emperor Vespasianus; than have
imitated Agesilaus the Lacedemonian King, which is before spoken of: Sextus
Aurelius so. 54
for Vespasianus the Emperor, gave himself to such immoderate coveting, that
he preferred to dignity those that were wonderful covetous: to this end, that
when they had by their insatiable appetites whoorded up much treasure, he
might cavil and quarrel against them, and take their goods from them which
they had gotten by vile extortion. He also ordained a tribute or tax to be
paid him of the quantity of stale made in every house: for which, because it
was evil spoken of, his son Titus would have dissuaded him earnestly from
that filthy and stinking gain: to whom at that time Vespasianus said little.
But when the money of the tax was next brought in, he taking his handful of
the money, and calling his son Titus unto him, held it to his nose saying;
Does this money savor well or no? He answered, It sauoured well. Why (said he)
and this comes of the urine and piss: wherefore thou may see that the
savor of gain is sweet, whereof soever it comes. But such sweet may soon
turn to sower, and sudden haps may fall to the coveting mind, as fell on
Brennus Captain of the Galls, who builded the City Brennon by Venice,
Liuius. lib. 2
which now is called Verona: who being not contented with a rich pray and
booty, but gaped after more, lost all in the end. For having overcome the
City of Rome, and caused the youth of the noble men to fly into the Capitol,
having also overthrown the whole Army of the Romans before at the river
Allia, and now having closed the chief of the Romans in the Capitol or
Castle of Rome, conditioned that for a great sum of money he forthwith
would remove his siege and depart: the Romans granted thereunto and as they
were a weighing the money, he pulled forth his sword, and commanded them also
to counterpoise that with gold, but the Romans refused that, as a matter
unjust, and Brennus stood in controversy with them: In the mean time
Camillus a banished Roman that was made Dictator in his absence, had gathered a
company of them that fled out of the City before, and then suddenly set upon
the Galls. Brennus then upon the sudden being abashed, flet, and left the
whole treasure behind him, Camillus not resting until he had freeed Italy of
them: whereat Brennus chafing at the loss received by his own folly, thought
to recover as much money in some other place, before he would dismiss his
army, insomuch, that he thorough his desparate mind, set on the Temple of
Apollo at Delphos, to have spoiled it for the great treasure therein: for which
attempt of sacrilege he was sharply punished, with great extremity, his
people slaying each other, and himself at the last was slain by his own hand.
Then consider what peril and danger man does run into, by striving to get
those goods and mucke of the earth, which being gotten is more perilous in
possessing and keeping, than is danger in getting which falls out often with
the loss of life, for enioyeng of a mount of money, or a mass of treasure
with great abundance of worldly wealth, does often make the mind of man so
haughty and proud, that he will not know his inferior; nay the mind of man is
in those prosperities to make the whole earth to stoop and be obedient to his
will: and not fully contented with that in the end snatcheth after the very
heavens, and as it were despising the earth as a place unworthy of them,
causing themselves to be called gods, and honored amongst all nations and
people, as their most principal and chiefest gods, commanding the whole world
to stoop and be obedient to no other gods but themselves, despising to hear
of their mortality, accounting themselves immortal: which vile error, and
abominable opinion proceeds, and is first stirred up, by the proud aspiring
mind and insatiable appetite of man, in coveting so inordinatly after
kingdoms, authority, worldly wealth, and such superfluous desire, whereby his
mind is elevated to such lordly stateliness.


Scho. Truly sir, I must needs confess, that in these our days, gold is
accounted a special and chief friend to man: yea, one of the nearest, and
most surest at the time of need; going through with all causes, when other
friends do often fail: the force whereof when the learned and pleasant Poet
Ovid had thoroughly by experience found out, and sufficiently tried, at the last
being banished Rome, living in exile, and being utterly forsaken of his dearest
friends, with sorrow from the heart repeated these verses, saying; En ego non
paucis quondam munitus amicis, Ouidius de tristibus.

dum slauit velis aura secunda meis.
Vt fera nymboso tumuerunt aequora vento,
in medijs lacera puppe relinquor aquis.
Which well may be englished after this sort. Behold how many friends were pressed,
while wealth did me support:
And golden gale did drive my sail,
so long would they resort.
But when both winds and seas did rage,
and fortune frowned grimme:
My friends soon left me in the floods,
to sink or else to swim.
In like manner, we daily see that the friendship of many men continues so
long, as fortune remains; and are as companions and friends to fortune,
following the table of the rich, proffering dear friendship, where gain is to
be hoped after. Insomuch that it is aparantly perceived they are friends to
fortune and folowers of wealth, and not sure ayders of distressed persons, so
that it may be rightly said; Donec eris felix multos numerabis amicos:
Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes.
Which I English in this sort, When riches rise of friends be sure
to have at need great store:
But wealth once lost, such friends pass bie
as faund on thee before.
For where goods are, be sure there friendship cannot be wanting and where
substance is decayed, there no longer is friendship to be hoped for: but as the
old saying is, No longer penie, no longer paternoster. Again when such
hunters after fortune chance to pass bie either town or villedge, spying some
house of account: they straight way demand who dwells there; saying, What is
he rich, what store of possessions has he, will he play the good fellow, and
spend frankly amongst good companions? But very few will ask how he came
by his goods whether by good means or no: not demanding whether he be wise,
learned, or what good government he has to order or govern his possessions
with all, Vnde habeas nemo quaerit sed oportet habere; From whence he had it,
or how he came by it, no man enquires, but that if he have it, it suffiseth:
saying further, Quantum quisque sua nummorum seruat in arca, tantum habet and
fidei: Even so much money as every man keeps in his chest or coffer, even so
much credit he shall be sure to purchase at all times: being thoroughly
persuaded, that what so ever is wanting, by money it may be obtained: in so
much that they are not ashamed to say, Et genus and formam regina pecunia
donat, Lady money does give both noble birth and comlie shape, and also it
makes the brown and hardfauored maid, to be a tricksie and penie white
wench. Which blind error, being sufficiently perceived by the wise
philosophers, who were wont after a flouting and scoffing manner to deride and
mock them; saying, O ciues ciues quaerenda pecunia primum, virtus post nu^mos,
O ye Citizens, first of all money is to be sought for, virtue is to be followed
after money is gotten. Yet notwithstanding Sir, although I manifest the common
custom and vsiall tradition of men in these our days: yet do I not forget
your examples, which of late showed the great unquietness that daily happened to
the possessors of such superfluous wealth and treasure, by daily disturbing and
molesting their quiet state and peaceable life: which otherwise without such
worldly muck, would be free at liberty from such care and trouble as often
happens thereby, wherefore it is said, Pauca licet ports argenti vascula puri,
Nocte iter ingressus gladium contumque timebis
Et motae ad lunam trepidabis arundinis vmbram,
Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator.
Which I English thus. Although of coin small store you bear
yet traueling in the night,
Both sword and spear you fear, and think
each bush is pressed to fight:
And starting at a shaking reed,
by fear do stop and stay:
But he that wants the coin does sing
before the chief all way.
Who can sing so merry a note
As he that cannot change a grote,
But now sir, coming to your last conclusion, Is it possible that by any
quantity of worldly goods, or by any honor and duty done to man, or by any
felicity, or happy success in this world, so to eleuate the mind of man
with such stately pride, that he will not acknowledge himself to be a mortal
man, but command himself to be honored as an immortal God. Truly, I had
thought the metal whereof man is made, could not have yielded forth that
mind: but surely in mine opinion, they have neither the gift of temperance,
nor of any other virtue, that so far run beyond the bounds of reason:
clyming for that which their mortal carkases shall never attain unto. Truly
I am hardly persuaded, but that the very nature of man it self, would abhor
and detest such a mighty error, and most monstrous sin. Wherefore my request
is, that you especially would unfold and relate this at large, as the most
necessariest note to man of all the rest.


Fame. Doubt not my friend, but that the proud mind of man has aspired as
high as the heavens, coveting the place of a God. Nay, have thought themselves
in the very place of the highest, commanding themselves accordingly to be
adored and worshipped. Neither could diverse proud kings of ye earth, abide to
hear of their mortality. For the Lacedemonian king Pausanias, being bidden to
a banquet, Simonides, a learned Poet of Greece, Eli. lib. 4.
being at the same time thither also invited, who was requested by Pausanias
the king, that he should speak somewhat which sauoured of wisdom, wherein he
might take pleasure. Whereat the good old man laughed, and said, Tunc memento
te hominem esse. Then remember thou art a man. But Pausanias took it in very
hard part, that he saucily would undertake to tell him of his mortality,
accounted Simonides but a fool for his labor, thinking him to be drunk, or
not well in his wits. But not long after, this proud king was taken prisoner
in a great battle, and was committed to a strong prison in Chalciaeco, where
he was miserably starued to death. But before he died, wrestling with hunger,
and fighting for life and death with famishment: further, seeing before his
face a most miserable, lamentable, and woeful end, remembered upon a sudden,
the saying of Simonides, crying out with a loud and pitiful voice, three
several times in this sort, saying; O Simonides, magnum quiddam in tuo sermon
inerat, ego vero inani persuasione sum adductus, vt eum nullius momenti
putarem. O friend Simonides, in thy watchword was a great and weighty matter
included; but as for me, I was carried away with vain persuasions, and made
small account, Plutarchus, de vita Craesi.
of thy wise warning. Also, Craesus the rich king of Lydia, because Solon would
not account of him above all mortal men then living, but rather preferred
other honest men, in beautitude and happy estate, far above Crasus, nothing
regarding the huge heaps of money, and mighty masses of treasure which he then
possessed. Wherewith he was so elevated with pride, that he far excelled and
exceeded all earthly and mortal creatures in his own conceit. Most sharply
reprehending Solon, for that he so little regarded his mighty power, as to
prefer any man in blessed estate above him, whom he ought not so much as once
to compare with any mortal man: but rather to have lifted and extolled him to
the heavens, and recounted him amongst the Gods immortal. For which his
stately pride, and vain folly, he was accordingly punished, as is before
rehearsed. Where he most heartily repented himself of his foolish vanity. Nay
there were diverse kings, which not only contented themselves with the stately
style of immortal Gods, or satisfied themselves when their subjects both
separated, and made a difference betwixt them, as far as the heavens from the
earth: but also commanded themselves to be adored and worshipped as the very
living God, and that all knees should bow, and be obedient at the hearing of
their names: as Nabuchodonozer, the great and mighty King of Babylon, when he
perceived that his power made the world to shrink, grew so proud that he
would be a God on the earth, setting up his picture or image, commanding those
to be slain, which would not fall down and worship it: but see how the high
God plagued him most justly for his proud folly, taking his kingdom from him
for a time, to the intent he might know and perceive a difference betwixt the
living God and his mortal carcass, being also transformed to an ugly shape of
a beast, whose head was like the head of an Ox, his feet like to the feet of
a Bear, his tail like the tail of a Lion, and every hair on his body as
big as an Eagles feather: and he that would be a God before, thinking the earth
too vile and base for him to tread on, was now feign to lay his flapping lips
to the ground to gather his food, and did eat hay the space of 7. years
together, being at the last again restored both to his former shape and
dignity. Alexander Magnus when he had conquered most part of the world, Plut.
de vita Alex.
returned to Babylon, holding there his Parliament, summoning the Kings of the
earth to come and worship the son of Jupiter, making such account of
himself, putting diverse to most cruel death, who would not consent to his vile
folly, nor adore him as a God: yea and those that were his very friends, who
had before time preserved him from death, and also from diverse dangers, which
otherwise had greatly annoyed and molested him, he plagued with most vile
torments, because they would not uphold and maintain his monstrous error.
Notwithstanding (for all these grievous punishments) there were that could not
brook his stately pride, but sharply reprehended and laughed him openly to
scorn: for the wise Anaxarchus hearing that this God fell sick on some
sudden sickness, Dictum Anaxarchi.
and that the Physicians were sent for to him, who ministered purgations unto
him, and prescribed certain receipts and potions for the recovery of his
health; whereat he floutingly said thus: At deo nostro spes omnis in
sorbilatione patellae pofita est? What? is all the hope of our goodly God come
now to the sipping of a platter: for in such vessels were the confections and
sirops given by the Physicians. Further saying after a scoffing manner, It had
been necessary first, that he should have been Gods fellow, before he
presumed to be a God in deed: for so perhaps he might have purchased and
obtained the good will of the Gods, in attaining to his desired seat. But he
escaped not unpunished, to show the difference betwixt God and man, whose
miserable death is needless to repeat, being before spoken of. Also Agrippa
the son of Aristobolus, Plu de vita Agrippae.
after his good successes, by the lewd entisement of his flattering
counsailors, and thorough the foolish persuasions of servants, was content to
have such honor done to him as was due to a God, yea and also to suffer
himself to be called by the name of a God, notwithstanding he had before been
taken prisoner by Tiberius, and used most cruelly in prison, not like a man,
for he was gyued and chayned with mighty chains to iron. But being afterward
delivered by Caligula, who made him King of the Jews, setting a crown of
gold on his head, giving him a chain of gold of the same weight that he had
before worn in prison of iron: so that by such sudden changes, his mind was
so elevated and lifted up with pride, that he no longer would be man, but
suffered himself to be wondered at by the people as a God, causing himself so
to be termed and called by his subjects: but in the end he was stricken with
an Angel in the sight of an infinite number of people, wherewith his body
smelled, and worms issued out with intolerable pains and horrible stench. In
the which torments and grievous pains he looked on his evil counsailors and
flattring servants, Dictum Agrippae. and mors eius.
saying; Lo, I whom you called a God, am now in the pains of death. And so
most miserably he died. In like sort, Menecrates being but a Physician,
because he had cured diverse and sundry diseases to his great fame and
commendation did so swell in pride, Eli. lib, 4.
that he called himself Jupiter, or Iuuans Pater; this arrogant ass sent
upon a time to Philip king of Macedony, a letter wherein was written this
saucy salutation. Epist. Menecratis. and responsio Philippi.
Menecrates Jupiter, Philipo salutem, etc. Menecrates Jupiter to Philip sends
greeting, etc. Whose vaunting vain the King perceiving, wrote back again in
this manner and form following, Philippus Menecrati sanitatem, etc. Philip
Macedo to Menecrates wishes well fare, etc. Consulo vt ad Anticyram te
conferas, I counsel thee to take thy journey to Anticyra, meaning by this dry
frump, that the man was moonesick, and besides his wits; Eli. lib. 7.
the aforesaid Philip on a time made a sumptuous and costly banquet whereunto
he invited and bad Menecrates, commanding his servants that there should be a
table provided and set by it self in a place several and that a cubbord
should be furnished with dew preparation, and sweet perfumes tempered, burned,
and scattered against the coming of the said Menecrates, all which costs was
expended and laid out to pleasure the fine nosed gentleman, who sat solitary
and alone at a side boorde by himself, whilst all the company that were
bidden guests, tasted of the toothsome cheer and sumptuous feast which wanted
no variety of delicates: but nothing was served unto the table where he sat by
himself: notwithstanding he held him content for a season, and greatly
delighted in the worship and honor which was exhibited to him being in a
manner regal; saving that he was kept fasting, which was after a sort
servile. But after that hunger griped his guts; and appetite whetted his
stomach, insomuch that his teeth watered at the cates he saw brought in, and
none fell to his share; then was he taught by experience that he was not
Menecrates Jupiter, but Menecrates mortalis: and forthwith he arose from the
table and went his way complaining on the injury which he suffered, being a
bidden guest to that banquet whereof he not once tasted; thus did Philip cut
Menecrates his comb, and detected the mad man's vanity with a notable flout.
King Herod because he stood still to show himself to the people, when they
magnified him as a God; Herod.
was wonderfully slain for his proud mind, for when on a time he had made a
certain oration in the hearing of a number of people, he so pleased the
company by his eloquence, that they made a great showte and cry: saying, It
was the voice of a God, and not of a man, by reason whereof he was so elevated
and lifted up with stately pride that he stood vaunting himself before the
multitude, taking himself to be no less than they had termed him. For which
proud folly, the living God to show that he was but man, did strike him in the
presence of them all, in so much that he died with most grievous pains,
living worms issuing out of his body, to the great terror of all the
beholders: thus does the immortal God revenge himself on those mortal and
earthly gods, to make them know they are but men and soon shall turn to
dust. Yet notwithstanding although they are taught by experience, and daily do
see most plain and evidently, that man is mortal both from the Prince and
Peer to the poorest people, yet for all that, when they do perceive their
mortal carcasses must needs to the ground perforce, they covet to leave behind
them at least, their name and fame to be immortal: for which cause they strive
mightily in their life time. And truly so in princes it comes often to pass,
for they are long time remembered either for their virtue, liberality,
courtesy, patience, and constancy: which no doubt, but is both to the
pleasing of God and drawing on of their successors to imitate and follow their
virtue. But if their immortal fame be purchased by their great tyranny,
cruelty, insatiable appetites, dronkennes, monsterous pride, or such like
horrible vices; no doubt but they have registered themselves to everlasting
ignomie, and perpetual infamy. But diverse (so that they may after their death
attain to perpetual remembrance) care not by what means they purchase that
immortality. For, Herostratus a private Citizen, lived not contented, for that
no man talked much of him. wherefore he thought that after his death he should
be buried in the grave of oblivion, Actum Herostrati.
and fully be forgotten. In so much as when he heard the daily fame of worthy
men set forth, some for virtue, some for valor: yea and again, some daily
spoken of for their great cruelty, avarice, dronkennes, and such like vices,
whose fame be also perceived to live after their death, grew in the end
himself so desirous of perpetual remembrance, and that his name might come in
question, to be as much noted in the City as the rest were. But when he had
long time studied, and could not bring to pass any notable thing worthy to be
talked of, at the last he went privily and set on fire ye stately temple of
Diana in the City, and utterly consumed it down to the ground. Thus when the
most sumptuous and gallant temple was so vilely defaced, great inquisition was
made in the City who should do that notorious fact, talking much of the
matter, but none did know the man. For which cause Herostratus much repining in
himself, that although the matter was spoken of in every part of the City,
yet notwithstanding, his name was in no admiration amongst them. Wherefore he
went presently to the Citizens and detected himself. For which cause be
forthwith was most cruelly put to death. Then in truth he was therefore
wonderfully spoken of, and is in remembrance at this day.


Scho. In mine opinion he has very well deserved perpetual remembrance, who
was of that mad mind to register such mere folly, to his everlasting reproach
and ignomie, which is worthy to be noted throughout all ages. But it seems
that the vices of men do much longer continue, and are of more ancient
antiquity than their virtues. For a few special vices do dim and ouershadow
a great number of good qualities, and shall longer be remembered to their
reproachful infamy, than the other to their praise and merit. We also read of
diverse notable Princes, who by a few inordinate follies, have drowned a number
of their especial virtues, as most plainly appears in your last examples.
For what good virtues are to be picked out of the lives of those, that for
their mad pride would be accounted as Gods on the earth: although indeed
diverse good qualities, and examples of virtue proceed from them before. Yet
notwithstanding, this most monstrous pride, obscured and blotted out their
meritorious remembrance: shadowing, as it were with a thick and dark veil,
their notable virtues from the face of the earth. Therefore I beseech you to
unfold and lay open part of those monstrous vices, which are such enemies, and
so repugnant to virtue, which suffers not the worthy fame of man to rise and
flourish, but croudeth, and thrusts it down into the dark grave of
oblivion, wherein is drowned his worthy merits, by the ouerflowing of his
foolish folly.


Fa. There is remaining in man (my good friend) many notable vices, and
sundry misgouernments, which are altogether repugnant to virtue; as the
insatiable pride of the mind, which is already spoken of, as the most
monstrous folly and vice in man. The filthy vice of drunkenness is also most
odious and detestable, and a great enemy to the quiet government of man, De
ebrieta^e.
it brings also with it many vexations, troubles, enormities, and great
inco^ueniences, being a disturber and daily breaker of peaceable amity and
friendly tranquillity, purchasing both reproachful rebukes and sharp
reprehensions in their life time, and also perpetual infamy and everlasting
ignominy after their death. For as it is most certainly reported, Sextus
Aurelius de vita Bonosij.
that Bonosus a Roman Emperor was such an exceeding quaffer and bibber of
wine, that Aurelius writes of him in this sort, saying, that He was not borne
to lead a life, but to lift a pot. In the end, for his misgouernment by reason
of his insatiable quaffing, he was disinherited of his Empire by Probus, who
succeeded him: for which cause he went and most shamefully hanged himself; who
being beheld of many, they scoffed and flouted at him, saying, It was a
tankard or wine pot did hang there, and not a man. In like sort, Tiberius the
3. Emperor of Rome, delighting in such inordinate quaffing and sucking of
wine, Aur. de Tiberio.
and being so immoderately taken, would lie so disorderly drunk, that his own
subjects reproachfully and despitefully termed him (whose name was Claudius
Tiberius Nero) to be, Caldius Biberius Mero, which is, a most monstrous quaffer
and greedy deuourer of liquor. Also Philip King of Macedonia, son to
Amyntas, and father to Alexander the great; who although he had many good and
most singular virtues, yet notwithstanding the vice of drunkenness so drowned
all the rest of his good qualities and courteous behauiours; that the reproach
of one vice was more often spoken of after his death, to the great slander of
his noble acts, than all the rest of his most worthy merits could be noted to
his everlasting praise. His property was (being either in garrison or camp)
after a banquet or merry making, his head somewhat drowned in wine, as his
common custom was, would set out on his enemies, and fight with them presently
in that brave mood; which often turned to his great loss, and also made his
body receive many a wound, which easily he might have prevented in his
soberness. In his drunkenness he was always found a truce breaker, keeping
neither promise nor faith which before he had plighted: insomuch as on a time
being demanded why he kept not the league which he was sworn unto at Melitus,
which indeed he had broken being in his accustomed folly, and not much better
when he was asked the question. Dictum Philippi.
Tush (said he) as children are trained and beguiled with trisles, even so are
men to be deluded and mocked with oaths. Of which doings and sayings, being
sober he would greatly repent himself, and govern his proceedings wonderful
wisely. For at what time he had gotten a great victory and conquest against
the Athenians at Cheronea, doubting least that he should grow too proud of this
his great good hap, provided a bridle to keep under such inordinate pride,
causing a boy every day in the morning without failing to come to his chamber
door calling aloud saying, Philip remember thou art a man mortal. Thus he used
to hear the boy thrice every morning before he would permit or suffer any
suitors or others whatsoever, to tread over his chamber threshold, or come near
his presence. He was also a man of great humility and patience; for on a time
the Athenians sending an Ambassade to him, whom he patiently heard: and at
their departure said; Know ye (said he) any thing wherein I may be beneficial
to you, or your country: for that I greatly desire both to pleasure your
selves, and also to do the Town of Athens some good. Democrates at that time
being companion in the Athenian embassage, said; Yes mary Philip, if thou will
hang up thy self. Which answer sore troubled his companions. But Philip most
gently and coollie answered, saying; Say ye to the Athenians, that they which
for anger cannot abstain from such words, are much prowder of courage than
they which suffer it spoken without punishment, and do easily digest so proud
an injury. He had also like patience at Meton. For when he had long besieged
the City, and could not get it, at last he gave a sharp alarm, and fierce
assault on the City. In which conflict he lost his eye, to his great grief
and pain. But when the Citizens of Meton humbly requested mercy at his hands
when their town could hold out no longer, he (notwithstanding his grief and
great injury) remitted their trespass upon their duetifull submission. In
justice also (when he was sober) he was very upright: for on a time sitting in
judgment, and hearing a matter in controversy before him, taking at that time
little regard what was spoken, and sometime stumbring, at the last gave
judgment against one Machetas, who crying out with a loud voice, said; O
Philip I appeal. Whereat he being sore moved, with an angry look said; To
whom do thou appeal? I appeal (said Machetas) to Philip being thoroughly
awaked, and not to thee, O king, when thou sleep. Whereat he thoroughly
awaking himself, perceived that Machetas had manifest wrong, after that he had
heard the matter openly explaned and related: giving thereunto good ear what
was spoken. Yet notwithstanding, by no means he would reuerse his judgment,
but the sum of money wherein he was condemned, he paid it of his treasure
himself. Yet again in the end he fell to his accustomed cups, forgetting
himself, satisfiing his greedy appetite in unmeasurable swilling and bibbing:
insomuch, that when Pausanias, a lusty young Gentleman, came to him to
complain of a great and vile injury which he had suffered by one of the kings
noblemen, when he was but a youth and kept in the Court by reason of his
nonage. And now craving for justice and equity at his hand, and to stand an
upright king, and just governor betwixt them both. The abuse was, Attalus a
nobleman in the Court, which was then counselor to Philip the king, had taken
the youth Pausanias, being a propper young boy, to his house; where he ordained
a costly banquette, upon purpose making Pausanias dronken, and afterward abused
his body most filthely, after the detestable manner of the Sodomites. Which vile
villainy the youth took grievously, and now being at man's estate, came to the
king to complain of this most mo^sterous abuse which Attalus had offered him
being but a boy. Whereat Philip (being at that time as it seems somewhat
merry in his cups) deriding and mocking him for his labor with great
laughter, nothing entering into the cause of the abuse. Wherewith Pausanias
being sore moved, finding no redress of the king who should have showed him
true justice. Wherefore he turned his anger from Attalus to the king himself:
and as Philip came walking along in the midst of his friends, not once
suspecting the matter, this Pausanias stabbed him through with a sword. So that
Philip the king of Macedonia forthwith died. Thus ended this Prince by not
ministering true justice to his Subjects, which especially proceeded by his
accustomed folly in such excessive quaffing, who otherwise might well have been
called the good Prince of Macedonia. In like case his son Alexander, surnamed
the great, nothing digressing from the steps of his father Philippe, Eli.
lib. 3.
but rather excelled him in this vile and detestable quality of quaffing.
insomuch, that it is certainly reported of him, being free and at liberty from
war, or at least having but a time of leisure from his affairs, would so
continually use and frequent immoderate swilling and inordinate sucking of
wine, Ebrietas Alexandri.
that a man should hardly find him sober, but more like a beast than so noble a
King. For upon the first day of one month (as the report runs) he drunk so
much at Eumenes Manor, that he was quite overcome, sleeping out his beastly
surfeit all the next day, wherein he did nothing at all but rise a little from
his dronken pillowe, and gave commandment of the morrowes voyage, saying,
that it should be the next morning at the spring of the day. The 7. day of the
same month in like sort, he feasted at the Lord Perdicas his house, at what
time he so pampered his panch like an Epicure, with choice of cheer and change
of wines, over drinking himself in such insatiable sort, that all the 8. day
next following was consumed in drowsy sleep. Furthermore upon the 15. he fell
to wine bibbing again, and spent the next day after in sleep to digest his
surfeiting folly. The xxiiii. day of the same month he supped at Bagoas
table, whose Pallaice was distant from the Court above 10. furlongs: there
swallowing wine as swine do their swill, was consequently drunk after a most
odious and detestable manner, not ceasing until his unmeasurable appetite had
abused and over loaded his vital senses, insomuch that drowsinesse and sleep
followed his intemperance successively. Again this is also remembered of him,
that at what time (in the honor of Calanus Brachmanus the Indian Sophister,
who burned his own body to powder) he appointed games of music, games of
wrestling and such like spectacles; being desirous to show the Indians a
pleasure. Adjoining to those former pageants the usual practice of himself,
which was a common game of swilling wine, and troling the cup and the can from
hand to mouth, wherein he that did best received for reward a whole talent;
the second received for his guerdon 30. li. and the third received the sum of
10. li. for a recompense of his labor. In this exercise none could carry away
the spurs from him, he himself was so peerlesse in Poto, potaui, and potatus
sum, In troll the boale to me. But see what consequently follows such
insatiable swilling, but only mad drunkenness, wherein he often committed most
shameful and horrible deeds, which after he most heartely repented: for at
such time as in his wars he had gotten and achieved to his glory, Justin.
li. 12
many great and notable victories, he commanded a solemn banquet to be
prepared, inuiting thither all his Princes and Nobles, to rejoice and be
merry with him for his great and happy successes, finding occasion at that
time to extol himself to the heavens, being in his cups, in which fond vain
he would not that any man should be compared to his mightiness, but still
maintaining his own proud argument, saying, that there was no comparison with
Alexander; to whose arrogancy the most part of the Nobility consented after a
most flattering and pleasing manner. But in the end, one of the most grauest
counsailors, and chiefest Noble man, whom Alexander held full dear, hearing
the great vanity of his Lord, in boasting himself after such a ridiculous
sort, put forth himself, and maintained the noble acts and deeds of King
Philip, father to Alexander his Lord, extolling also his praise and worthiness;
meaning thereby to make Alexander perceive, that there were, or else in time
might be as worthy and valiant men as himself, not thinking he should offend
the K. his master, by setting forth the praise of his father Philip. But
Alexander being in a great rage that he preferred him not before all men, so
fretted at the cause, that he snatched a weapon from one of his guard, and there
to finish up the banquet, he thrust his old friend Clitus thorough that he
presently died, rejoicing over the dead body of his slain friend, kicking and
spurning the carcass, vauntingly saying; Now praise my father Philip, and
extol his actions, and let the merits and worthiness of Alexander thy master
pass. But after he had long beheld the body of his dear friend, his mind
being somewhat quieted and pacified, and in the place of mad anger, mild and
cool consideration had entered, calling to mind the person whom he had slain,
and also the cause why he slew him, he at last began greatly to repent the
deed, in that he had so vilely taken the praise of his father, Alex. se valde
penitet.
and slain his old friend so dishonorably in his dronken mood: turning now
his anger into repentance, taking it so heauely, that he would die for sorrow,
there was no remedy, being so mightily ashamed of his folly. First of all
falling into most pitiful weepings casting himself on the carkas of his dead
friend; embracing the corpse, feeling and handling the wounds which he had made
in his frantique mood, filling them with his tears, making most pitiful and
lamentable moan, as if the carcass should have heard his sorrowful outcries,
plucking out the weapon, turning it to his own breast, and would forthwith
have slain himself, had not the standers by hindered and prevented his
purpose. Then also came to his mind his Nurse, who was sister to this Clitus
whom he had so cruelly slain, being greatly ashamed, that he should requite and
recompense her pains for nourishing and bringing him up, with the slaughter of
her dear brother, by him most shamefully slain. These considerations caused
him to remain in that obstinate mind, to die, and not to live any longer: for
that also at ye same time (to increase his sorrow) he called to mind the
slaughter of many other right noble and valiant men, which he had before slain
in his dronkennes: as namely, Parmenion, and Philotas, Aminthas and Attalus,
Eurilochus, Pausanias, with diverse other noble Macedonians, the shame and
grief whereof did so gripe and prick his gilty conscience, that by no means
he would be persuaded, but that forthwith he would die for the great grief
thereof conceived; continuing certain days following in such sorrow, that he
would receive no food or sustenance to preserve his life, not suffering his
noblemen to dissuade him from his purpose: but remained in that obstinate
mind for a certain space, notwithstanding his whole army came to him with
pitiful cries, praying and beseeching him, that he would not so sorrow at the
death of one, as thereby to lose all the rest of his army, which he had now
conducted and brought so far from their home, into strange Regions, and
barbarous Countries, amongst fierce and cruel people. Yet for all this, their
humble petitions took none effect, until the wise Philosopher Calisthenes (who
before had been fellow scholar with Alexander under Aristotle their Tutor)
took on him with wise precepts of philosophy to alter and turn the mind of
the king his dear friend. And in the end, by his great pains and industry
brought it to pass, through the familiar acquaintance and ancient love which
had been by their long fellowship. Now the courageous mind of Alexander being
stirred up by the good persuasions of his dear friend Calisthenes, in so much
that he presently again fell to war, and conquered many kingdoms, whereby
he grew to such hautie pride, after the manner of the proud Persians and
Parthians, as is before spoken of: for then, Non salutari, sed adorari se
iubet. He would no longer be worshipped as a man, but adored as a God. For
which cause when diverse of the noble Macedonians would have dissuaded him from
that foolish folly, he put them to most cruel and strange death and torments.
But then again Calisthenes thought to persuade Alexander from such a mighty
error, bearing himself somewhat bolder on the king than ye rest, both for his
approved wisdom, and wholesome counsel, which the king often had tried and
felt, as also on the ancient familiarity, and long acquaintance which had
been betwixt the king and him, so that he began earnestly to dissuade him from
this arrogant and fond vain. But Alexander being so puffed up with pride, and
desiring so vnmeasurably to be a God, that he would not hear the admonition
and wise counsel of his approved friend, Justin. l. 15.
but was wonderfully moved against him for his labor: in so much that he
caused him, who before had preserved and saved his life, Actum horribile.
to be most miserably martyred: cutting off his nose, lips, ears, hands, and
other members of his body, to the pitiful pain and great deformity of poor
distressed Calisthenes: commanding him also to be cast into a most vile and
stinking dike or pit, there to languish until he died. But the noble
Lysimachus greatly pitying the miserable pain and foul deformity of the wise
Philosopher, gave him poison, whereby he ended his grievous smart. Wherewith
Alexander being greatly offended, caused the said Lysimachus to be thrown into
the Lions den, to be devoured of those cruel and fierce beasts.
Notwithstanding, he was delivered by the mighty hand of God, which as the
common saying is, was no gramercie to the King.


Scho. O most barbarous and uncivil deed. But what other fruits are to be
expected or hoped for at the hands of such immoderate quaffers, and insatiable
suckers of wine, than (in recompense of their good service) such cruel and
outrageous dealings? Truly sir, as you have said, either he was wonderfully
drowned in the pride of the Parthians, or else miserably overcome in his
accustomed swilling, for otherwise such barbarous cruelty could never have
proceeded from temperate government. The most wise and learned Erasmus having
somewhat touched and nipped the monstrous vice of drunkenness, at last to make
manifest that such horrible beastlines was intolerable, and mightily detested,
meaning to quippe the whole company and crewe of such insatiable ale-tasters,
concluded in the end with this saying; Aphthoni us de castigatione ebriorum.
Vereor plurimum ne quisobrij sunt operam hanc meam in ebrios dicendi, ceu
superuacaneam rideant dicent enim sobrijs castigatione hac nihil opus esse.
Ebrios autem sic vino sepultos, vt nullius vocem exaudiant, etc. I fear me
greatly says he, lest the wise and sober will deride and laugh at this my
superfluous and needles pains, in speaking so far against dronkards. For
they may say there needs no reprehension or castigation to the sober, and
persons of good government. And as for those that are drunk, they are so
buried in wine, and so drowned in their filthy folly, by keeping company with
such good cup-companions, that they ca^ hear no man's voice, understand no
admonition of the wise, perceive no rebuke or sharp reprehension. Therefore
says he, as the body of a dead man does seem not to be stirred by pricking or
sharp pinching, so in like sort, no marvel though the mind and sense of a
dronken man can by no honest warnings or good means be stirred up, or brought
to amendment, for that his whole pleasure and delight is in such gulling and
swilling. That most commonly, as Erasmus says; Neque pes neque manus satis
suum officium facit. Neither feet nor hands can well do their office. The legs
not able to support and bear the weight of his body, nor his hands with the
help of a staff able to support himself, but that he tumbleth and walloweth
in his own vomit, and filth, more like a beast then man: which most filthy
use and order, the wise Seneca perceiving, Seneca.
Ebrietatem nihil ait esse, quam voluntariam insaniam, said that Drunkenness
was nothing else but a voluntary madness and wilful fransinesse; which with
good government might easily be avoided and shunned: saying further, that
Nothing did more better become and beautify man than soberness: so in like
manner, nothing did seem more filthy nor more to be detested than a drunken
man, as already you have set down and manifested as it were to the beholders
eye, showing the wilful folly, and desperate madness, which the insatiable
bibbers of wine, do over rashly commit to their everlasting reproach and
ignomie, and also in the end to their great sorrow and displeasure: for it does
not only cause their infamy to be perpetually registered, but also their own
hands to commit most horrible and shameful murders, whereby they often embrewe
themselves in the blood of the innocent and hurtlesse person, which no doubt
but in the end is most sharply punished on the committers.


Fa. My good friend, first I beseech you to mark diligently our purposed
proceedings, then shall you right well perceive to what end our conference
tends, and also to note that he who lives not in contentme^t, does run
headlong to insatiable covetousness, from that greedy appetite to monstrous
pride; from that intolerable vice to most lascivious and licentious living;
from that vile and detestable sin to most odious and filthy quaffing and
imimoderate bibbing; which bad life and disordered government, does soon
purchase to the practisers thereof most condign punishment, as by our
aforesaid conference does most evidently appear: were it possible that the
blood of the innocent should not be revenged, or that the murdering hand
should escape unpunished: No, there is no doubt, but that the living God does
as well plague the Prince and peer as the meanest person for such cruel and
tyranous deeds, and will be sharply revenged on their intemperancie. For first
it is to be considered, that for lack of temperance man runs headlong to
those wilful murders, either by an over coveting mind, or by desperate
quarrelling, or otherwise being overcome by inordinate swilling and insatiable
quaffing of liquor, al which proceeds through the default of the aforesaid
gift. Iezabel wife to Ahab King of Samaria, when ye King her husband had
required Naboth to part with his vineyard, which lay very convenient for his
use, profering him as great possession in some other place, but Naboth denying
his suit as a thing unjust, saying, God for bid that I should pass over my
patrimony which my Father left me: but be contented therewith, and leave it to
my son, as it was left me. Wherewith the king being not content went home
sorowing, remaining very pensive and heavy for that he could not lawfully or
without great shame take away the vineyard of Naboth: but when Iezabel fully
perceived the cause of the Kings sorowing and heaviness, she directed letters to
ye Rulers of ye place where Naboth dwelt, making them privy of her bloody
practice, wishing and commanding them to proclaim a fast in their City, and
then to hire and suborne two witnesses, that should falsely accuse him before
the Judges, and presently thereupon to lead him out of the City, and stone him
to death: which cruel doom and execrable murder was forthwith accordingly
executed. But notwithstanding, although for a time reuengement was deferred,
yet could she not escape unpunished: for so soon as Iehu was anointed King, he
was straightly commanded from the very mouth of God, to persecute the house of
King Ahab with great cruelty, and not to leave any one living that should
piss against the wall; wherefore he presently warred on the City of Iezrael,
and spoiled the house and friends of Ahab, until he came where Iezabel lodged,
who was most cruelly used, in consideration of her former trespass: for she
was thrown and tumbled down headlong from a lofty window to the hard
pauements of the street, wherewith her blood sprung about the posts and
walls of the street, so that dogs came and licked up her blood, and eat her
flesh, the rest being trodden to dirt with horsefeete and marching soldiers:
insomuch that there remained no more unspoiled and defaced, but only the
palms of her hands. Thus was Iezabel most cruelly slain and miserably used by
the very commandment of God, for the murdering and sheading of innocent
blood. Also Olimpias wife to Philip the Macedonian king, and mother to
Alexander the great, committed diverse most horrible and shameful murders:
Diodorus Siculus. fol. 253
namely, first it was suspected and laid to her charge the consenting to the
murder of her husband king Philip, who was slain by the hand of Pausanias.
For after this Pausanias had traitorously slain the king her husband, and had
received just punishment for his villainy, she openly mourned for the death of
the said murderer. And also it was well known that she had provided horses
ready against the deed was committed, to the end the slayer of her husband
might the better escape. Further, when his body did hang on the galous, she
came thither the first night and crowned the dead head of Pausanias with a
crown of gold, taking also the carcass from the tree, burying it most nobly,
and made a famous Tomb in the same place for his remembrance. Which causes
being thoroughly considered, can import no otherwise than an accessory and guilty
mind. This Olimpias after the death both of Philip her husband, and Alexander
her son, in the time that the Macedonian Princes, and successors to her son
Alexander, did contend and strive for the superiority and regiment of their
dead master, came down into Macedon with a great power, to war on Philip king
thereof, and Euridice his wife, who at that time were lawful inheritors of
that kingdom, and gave them battle: In which conflict she took the King
prisoner, and all his whole family. But Euridice his wife fled for her safety
into the City Amphipolis, where not long after she also was taken. Then seized
Queen Olimpias into her hand, all the whole Realm of Macedon: howbeit she very
ungently entreated these her prisoners. For first she caused the king and
Euridice his wife to be put into a strait prison, that they could hardly turn
themselves within, and had their meat given the^ in at a little hole: but after
they had been there awhile thus miserably dealt withal, Olympias perceiving
that the Macedonians for very compassion they had of the said captives, greatly
maliced and hated her, wherefore she caused King Philip by certain soldiers
of Thrace to be slain, after he had reigned king six years and four
months. And for because that Euridice not well digesting her shameful
cruelty in so treacherously betraying her dead husband, and also somewhat
insolently spoke, and said that she had better right and title to the crown
and realm of Macedonia than Olympias had: she therefore either without regard
of the late dignity royal that the said Euridice had been in, or yet the
common mutability and variety of fortune, sent her three liberal gifts to make
her choice thereof: which was, a sword, a halter, and poison, to end her life
withal, who of necessity was forced to take one. Thus when the woeful Queen,
had received this present of Olympias, seeing no remedy, but that needs she
must take and accept of one, she said, The Gods grant like choice to this
cruel Olympias, and that she may receive like guerdon for her liberality
herein. Thus when she had adorned the body of her husband Philip slain in
her presence, and stopped up the wounds to cover the deformity of them; then
refusing the aforesaid presents of the courteous Queen, in the best manner she
could with her own girdle stra^gled her self, and so died. Yet was not
Olympias satisfied with these lamentable and execrable murders, but soon after
she had thus shamefully put them to death, she made Nicanor Cassanders brother
to be slain, and spitefully defaced the tomb of Iolas his other brother. Over
and besides this, she picked and weeded out an hundred noble men of Macedonie,
which were friends to Cassander, and caused their throats to be cut: for which
cruel and barbarous deed, Cassander being moved, gathered an Army minding to
revenge himself on the Queen for her great cruelty, and drove her at the last
to the City Pidue, where he besieged her long, until such time that vittaile
failed her: yet notwithstanding she would not yield, although both her company
and the Citizens dyed wonderfully by famine and grievous plagues; which chanced
to them, by reason of the dead bodies which lay in the town diches unburied
most horribly stinking: insomuch that there dyed daily in the town through
these two causes aforesaid, very many citizens and soldiors. Being also forced
thorough extreme and miserable hunger to feed on the dead carcasses of the
pined men. The townsmen seeing their lamentable estate, yielded up the City
against Olympias will, and humbled themselves willingly to the mercy of
Cassander. Then after this Queen was taken prisoner, Cassander caused all the
friends of them whom she had murdered, to accuse her in the common place of
judgment before the assembly of the Macedonians. Which thing they accordingly
did: where the Macedonians in the absence of Olympias having there neither any
patron or advocate to defend her unjust cause, condemned her to death. For
execution whereof Cassander sent 200. of his trustiest soldiers to kill her,
which entered her Palace where she was. Streightway so soon as she perceived
them coming, she marched courageously toward the^, willing them to execute
their office. With which boldness the soldiers were all astonished, saving
certain of the friends of those whom she had slain before, which stabbed her
through the body, whereof she presently died. Yet this manly courage is to be
noted in her, that after she felt the wound to be mortal, and that she
fainted, ready to yield up her life, she nesled her garments about her body,
plucking down her nether skirts to her feet, Justin. li. 14
having a woma^ly care in all respects, least that by striving with life and
death, she might show or uncover the indecent parts of her body. Thus dyed
the mightiest Princess under the heavens, for a just revenge of her former
cruelties and merciles murders; she was daughter to Neoptolome King of Epyre,
sister to Alexander then King of Epyre, wife to Philip King of Macedon, mother
to Alexander the great: and yet for all these high and mighty alliances, the
living God would not suffer her to escape unpunished, but caused such measure to
be given to her, which she before had meated to other. In like sort Agrippina
daughter to the noble Germanicus, first being married to Domitius, and had by
him Nero, Plu. de vita Neronia.
and afterward was married to Claudius, whom she poisoned with his son
Britannicus, to ye end she might make her first son Nero Emperor; which
indeed came accordingly to pass: but now her son Nero being Emperor, and
possessing the crown, by means of his mothers bloody act; whether it were
that the living God would not suffer her to escape unpunished, or the wicked
inclination of Nero; but howsoever the case stood she received like reward; for
her son caused her to be most cruelly tormented, commanding her womb to be
opened and cut up, that he might see the place wherein he lay: and in the mean
time while she was suffering such miserable torture, he gave so little regard
to the woeful mournings and pitiful cries of his natural mother, that he
played on a cistern ye destruction of Troy, and sung most pleasantly to his
instrument. Notwithstanding although he was ordained to scourge and plague his
mother, for the aforesaid horrible fact, yet escaped not he unrevenged for so
vile a deed. For when he had a time reigned in Rome, persecuting the guilties
and innocent, the Romans at last detesting his bloody disposition, seeing yt
his whole delight was in tormenting his native Country men, began so deadly to
hate him for his cruelty, that by the whole consent of the Romans, the Senate
decreed this sharp sentence against him, Vt more maiorum, collo in furca^
coniecto, virgis adnecem caederetur: his neck being fastened in a yoke or forke,
after the vilest order, (which was a most monstrous reproach, and servile
slavery, amongst the Romans) should be beaten to death with rods. But Nero
having intelligence of their decree, fled in the middle of the night out of the
city, taking with him not past one or two of his lewd companions, who also
perished with him for fear of the Romans. Thus being escaped from the
punishment which was appointed for him, he now determined to die a desperate
death, requiring one of his friends which was with him to stab him through with
his sword, that he might end his misery. Who when he had denied his suit as a
thing unjust, Aurelius fol. 153.
Nero cried out saying; Itane nec amicum habeo, nec inimicum: dedecorose vixi,
turpius periam. Surely, neither have I friend nor enemy, (meaning no friend in
the City, to defend his cause; nor enemy now with him to end his life) I
have lived vilely, I will perish as filthely: and therewithal thrust himself
through, and so died. Thus miserably ended Domitius Nero, after he had
revenged the cruel murder which his Mother committted, and in the end
himself was driven to the same shore, and forced to arrive at the same Port
of miserable Destiny, to be cut off with untimely death for his most vile
slaughters and cruelties. Also Aristobulus, son to Hircanus, unnaturally
committed to prison his mother, and his brother Antigonus, and after most
cruelly slew his said brother in prison; for which grievous offense, God so
struck him, that all his bowels rent in his belly, and he vomited up all the
blood in his body, and so most pitifully he dyed in recompense of his former
cruelty. In like manner, Antiochus Illustris son of the great Antiochus, did
also imbrew his hands in the blood of his friends. For giving his sister in
marriage to Ptolomaeus King of Egypt, and under pretense of familiarity came
to visit his brother in law, under the color of alliance, and that he might
by treacherous means take from him the Kingdom of Aegipt: and finding him
sitting at supper saluted him with his sword, which presently he thrust through
his sides: thus traitorously he slew his brother Ptolome, and ceazed on all
Aegipt to his own use. And after he had done many other cruelties, at last
he was stricken with a most horrible sickness, that his body stanke, and his
flesh was so corrupt and putrified, that no body could abide the savor
thereof, living worms creeping and scrauling out of his body: insomuch, that
in his great extremity, he was forsaken of all his friends and servants, and
so died; as a just recompense for his villainy. It is farther well known, that
Archelaus King of Macedonia was murdered by the hands of Cratenas his
Paramour, who sore thirsted after his said kingdom: which shameful act being
committed, and Cratenas placed in the regal Throne, according to his long
desire, reigned King not past three or four days, but was himself slain in
semblable manner by other men's means, whereunto this saying may be well
applied; Qui struit insidias alijs: sibi damna dat ipse.
Who seeks other men to ensnare,
Nets for himself he does prepare.
So that this man possessed his princely seat but a short space, which he had
purchased by wilful murder. I trust it is very well known also to the English
Nation, what cruel murders and miserable slaughters were committed by King
Richard the third, brother to Edward the fourth, and son to the Duke of
York, for that the Chronicles do make mention thereof at large. First
bringing his own brother the Duke of Clarence to untimely death, then showing
his tyranny on the Barons and Nobles of the Land; and after that his brother
Edward the fourth died, he miserably smoothered the two sons of his said
brother Edward, which were committed to his tuition and government, not sparing
the nearest of his kin, but imbrewing himself in their blood, to the end he
himself might possess the Crown and Diadem of the Realm: which in deed
consequently came to pass. But were it possible that such pitiful murders,
and execrable slaughters as he committed, both in slaying of the Nobles of the
Land, and also in the deprauing of his sweet Nephews of life and Kingdom,
should escape unrevenged: No truly, it were altogether wonderful, and very
unlikely, but that the living GOD (who punishes with shame such shameful
murderers) would be sharply revenged on him for his monstrous cruelty in so
slaying of the innocent. For not long after, he was slain in Battle by the
right noble Henry Earl of Richmond: where his mangled corpse was laid (being
first despoyled of arms and stripped naked) over a horse back, hanging down
in such sort, that the filthy dirt and mire did both spot and sprinkle the ill
shaped carcass of this abhorred Tyrant; which was a most odious and detestable
sight, yet too worthy a funeral, for so murderous a wretch. This recompense
happened to him, for his intolerable cruelty. Thus it plainly appears, that
murder is sharply punished, as well in the Prince and Peer, as in the silliest
sot, and poorest slave: for further proof whereof, to show the just
reuengement of God on meaner personages, this one example shall suffice.

The true and certain report goes, that one Macharcus a sacrificing Priest of
God Bacchus, dwelling in Mityline, in his exterior countenance and favor
resembled great gentleness and courtesy, yet in life, manners, and inward
practices no man that lived could be more wicked or abominable. It fortuned
on a time yt a certain soiorner lodged at his house, and committed to his
credit a certain sum of money in gold: this Machareus being assaulted with
avarice, and carried as it were into captivity to covetousness, makes a hole
in a secret place of the temple with a mattocke, and therein hides the gold
which he was put in trust withal. After a few days were expired, the
soiourner desired to have his own again: upon which request, Machareus led the
man (mistrusting no mischief, nor doubting any danger) into the temple:
where, under pretense, cloak, and color to restore the man his right, and
having (as he thought) opportunity, time, and place to work his villainy.
murdered the man; which being compassed to his contentation, he took up the
gold, and laid the right owner thereof (whom he had injuriously slain) in
the self same place, covering him over with earth, and damd up the pit, in
such sort as all things in his thinking were cock sure, persuaded himself that
as men be deceived and mocked, so the powers supernall (the eternal God I
mean) might be deluded and blinded. But the matter fell out unhappily enough,
and had another event than was hoped for on Machareus part; for after a few
days were passed, the solemn Service and Obsequies of GOD Bacchus (which were
yearly) approached, and was celebrated according to ancient custom: wherein
Machareus behauing himself after a gorgeous and glorious estate, being very
busy in the festival Ceremony, it chanced that his two sons which were
left at home as that day, did imitate their Fathers order in holy service, in
such sort and effectual manner, that the younger brother cast himself
prostrate on the ground, and laid his head upon a block very meekely, which
the elder brother with an old rustie whinyeard or cankred wood-knife did chop
off from the shoulders. Anon came in the servant which dwelled in the house,
and seeing the childish murder that was committed, gave a great shoute, making
a terrible outcrie and pitiful noise, as men meruailously confounded and
amazed at sight of so strange and bloody a spectacle. The vehemency of which
lamentable clamor and outrageous roaring, speedely pierced the ears of the
frighted mother, who came like a mad woman to understand the meaning of the
matter: and then seeing one of her sons slaughtered, and weltering in
streams of blood, and the other holding still a rustie glaue in his hand, and
all to be stained with the crimsen blood of his brothers flesh, she caught up a
firebrand very fiercely, and in the heat of her great rigor did so thumpe and
souse her living son, that he died the death in her presence. Then was
tidings brought to Macareus, what butcheries were committed at home in his
private house, who immediately upon the report thereof left the holy service, and
like a man moonesick, or rather a fiend of hell, ran home with might and
maine, having in his hand at the same instant a burning torche or taper, where
with he did so beat, bounce, and baste his wife over every limme and joint,
that she in like case was soon dispatched of life. Thus when the multitude had
intelligence of these rare and lamentable murders, they forthwith apprehended
Macareus, and urged him through examination and torment to confess each
circumstance of this bloody Tragedy: and as he was opening the matter, and
discovering the mischief which he had committed in the holy temple, profaning
a several and sacred Chapel, with two notorious and inexpiable trespasses,
the pains of death oppressed him, insomuch that he died suddenly before the
whole assembly of people. These miserable chances happened to Macareus by reason
of his monsterous murders, as a terrible and most fearful example to the
followers and imitators of his horrible profession.


Scho. O miserable end, and yet deserved hap: no better success is to be
hoped for than such ruin and cruel destruction to those that do imbrue their
hands in the blood of the innocent, contrary to the law of God and nature.
Besides these your examples, we see daily what reuengement falls to the share
of those bloody minded persons, though their villainies for a time he did, yet
in the end the true God will not suffer them to escape unpunished. For I think
is no people of civil government so void of good and wholesome laws in this
cause, but that they provide a sharp punishment for wicked murderers,
provided always, that whosoever shall transgress, or willingly break the
said ordinances and decrees, that then such persons by virtue of the law shall
suffer worthy punishment: namely, loss of life. In your exaumples it is also
manifest that those whose power and person far exceeds and surmounteth a
law, and whose high dignity disdayneth to stoop to the law and decree of the
land notwithstanding, when neither people nor Peers may decree sentence
against them for such detestable sin and cruel murders, the living God
plagueth them in the end with most sharp and grievous punishments without
remorse, being much higher above them, then they above their law, whereby it
seems that if Princes by reason of their high estate and dignity, do escape
the punishment and decreed sentence of a law, yet the very providence of the
highest brings them in the end to open confusion and utter destruction, as
your aforesaid examples have verified it. Further it remains to us, that at
what time the people craved answer of the Oracles, expecting from thence the
very flat determination of their God, heard often most sharp decrees against
murderers, by their divine Oracles pronounced: for at such time as a certain
Musicion who played on the harp singularly well, did both play and sing at
Sybaris in a solemn feast, made and set forth in the honor of Juno, there at
that time arose about him a great variance amongst the Sybarites, some saying
they never heard his equal, other affirming they have often heard his Peer
and and better thus diversely contending, in the end it grew amongst them to be
a great quarrel, and the contention could no otherwise be ended but by harnes
and weapon, the giltlesse Harper seeing the controversy like to come to such
issue, knowing he had offended neither party, nor willing to stand in their
presence any longer to move their patience, meekly departed from thence to the
alter of Juno, thinking thereby to be safe from their fury, but the Sybarites
being mightily moved against the original cause of their argument, though he
indeed had nothing offended them, yet notwithstanding some of them ran to
the altar, laying hands on the Musicion, and there without respect of the
place, or pity of his giltlesse person, they with murdering hands most
cruelly slew him. For which monstrous deed their God whom they served, in
sign of wrath, caused the Temple to flow with blood like streams of water
from a river immediately after that slaughter, then the Sybarites sending to the
Oracle for counsel in this case of cruelty, received this sharp and bitter
answer, saying; Cede meis mensis manibus nam sanguis adhaerens,
Distillansque recens prohibet tibi limina templi.
Non tibi fata canam, magnae Iunonis ad aram
Musarum innocuum strauisti, caede ministrum.
Non immortales hoc dij patienter inulum,
Si quis enim prius scelerata e mente profectum
Committat facinus, grauis hunc prope poena sequetur.
Non exorabit, neque si genus ab Jove summo
Duceret ipse suo collo, collisque nepotum
Hoc luit, and generis cumulatum damna ferentur.


Which may be englished after this manner. My table come not near, for hands
with blood imbrude
Which flows fresh, from temple gates does thee exclude.
Thy fate I will not tell, by Iunos altar thou have slain
A giltlesse soul, unto the muses nine who did retain.
The immortal gods on this foul fact shall sharp reuengement take.
For he which wilfully offends and does a mischief make
Of mind malicious, torments strong shall be his hoped hire.
No suit may serve but smart he must, though Jove be blazd his sire
His head, and al his childrens heads, upon a bloody block
From shoulders shall be chopped, ill luck shall light upon his stock.


Wherefore it is manifest, that the very Oracles cried out, and prophesied
reuengement to those cruel murderers, excluding them from the very thresholde
of the holy temple, as men not worthy to tread on sacred ground: yet
notwithstanding, the hand of the giltlesse man may shed the blood of the
innocent person against his will, and not be holden as culpable or guilty in
murdering his friend; for it is certainly reported, that at what time three
young men being all of one City, went to Delphos to ask counsel, and to be
advertised by the Oracle of a weighty cause, falling into the hands of thieves,
one of the three tendering his own life, took his heels and ran away, and
so escaped peril. Another (after all the villayns were hackt, he wen, and
killed, except one, whom he also invaded with might and maine) bent his force
to have slain the thief which then lived: but it fortuned (ah grievous
chance) that as he foyned with his sword at the villain, thinking to have
thrust him through, he missed his mark, and smote his own fellow with such a
bloody blow, that he gave him his deaths wound. To him therefore that by
flight avoided danger this answer was made by the Oracle, pronouncing him
guilty of the murder of his fellow, and therefore not worthy to come into
holy Temple, saying; Occidi socium presens and passus amicum,
Non tibi vaticinor, sacro te proripe templo.
Thou being present did abide thy fellow to be slain:
To thee I do not prophecy, my holy place refrain.


And to the other asking advice of the Oracle, this answer was rendered, for
all that his hand had committed the act. Defendens socium, verso mucrone
necasti,
Purior es manibus nunc quam esse solebas.
Thou seeking to defend thy mate, did kill him with thy blade
Thy hands the^ they were wo^t to be are now much cleaner made


Wherefore it seems that the accessarie is in as damnable a case as the
executor himself, of such villainy: for here the Oracle pronounces him as
guilty, and not worthy to stand in the Temple, for seeing his fellow slain
which he might easily have saved: being adjudged guilty in this; then much
more if he had consented willingly to the murder of his fellow which was
slain, but through his negligence. See again what a comfortable answer the
other received, who committed the slaughter with his own hand, and for that
his mind was free from the very thought to hurt his loving friend and fellow,
was adjudged by the Oracle the true defender of his slain friend. To
conclude, according to the answer of the Oracle, it is lesser offense and
easier to be pardoned when the hand does slaye, the mind being giltlesse, and
not consenting to the murder, than if the mind do willingly stay although
the hands cannot execute the act, Vt ait Cicero pro Roscio Amerino.
but suffers the party to live. Solon when he had made many good and
wholesome laws, ordeining diverse institutions and decrees in his commonwealth
to maintain and support virtue, and also sharply to correct and reprehend
vice, lewd persons, and such disordered fellows as contrary to the law
viciously lived in the weal public. Having thus (as he thought) confirmed
and established his Country in civil government by the virtue of his decrees
and statutes, this question was demanded of him, saying; Why had he not among
so many good institutions, wholesome laws, and prescribed directions, set
also down, what punishment should fall to the share of those, who with willing
consent murdered or deprived father or mother of life, and so should be found
guilty of parricide? Whereunto he answered, saying; Truly it falls out not
through negligence and forgetfulness herein: but rather when I had thoroughly
considered on the cause, I bethought me, that such offenses were mightily
repugnant to nature, and therefore it could not be that any so unnatural
should commit such wicked and detestable villainy, contrary to the law of God
and nature, on those whom first procreated and made them of nothing: and
therefore (said he) as a needless thing have I left it out from the other
decrees. But the ancient Romans when they had perceived, that this odious and
detestable sin began to be practiced amongst them, and in other Regions and
Dominions under their jurisdiction and government, (as most commonly the wicked
inclination of man's nature is so apt and prone to commit such villainies how far
so ever they be repugnant to nature, that no unnatural act or villainy can
remain unaccomplished) they then seeing such impiety and unnatural actions
proceed and daily to go forward among them, that in that behalf they were
forced to constitute and ordain this sharp sentence and punishment against
all such wicked offenders, provided always that whosoever should be found
guilty of parricide, Pena parricidij.
should thus be used; He should be put into a sack or hollow thing, and
therein also should be put a Dog, a Cock, a Viper, and an Ape; which thing
being shut up, and closed fast together again, should be thrown into the
next Sea, River, or Flood thereunto adjoining, there most miserably to die in
the hateful company of those, which by nature could never abide or brook
each other. And wherefore: Et enim ei repent coelum, solemn, aquam and terram
adimerunt, vt qui eum necasset, vnde ipse natus esset, careret quoque ijs
rebus, ex quibus omnia nata esse dicuntur. Because he should want or be
deprived of both the sun, air, water and earth, for that he had slain or
murdered him, who first was the cause of his life: therefore he should want the
benefit of such necessaries, from whence all things are said to be procreated
and ingendered. For next under God, the four Elements are said to have the
chiefest regiment and government of all natural and earthly things.


Fame. Well friend, I perceive that you are herein certefied, that murder is a
most monstrous and heinous offense, and that also from one degree to another,
the wilful committer scapeth not unpunished. For if (as you say) the Oracles
have pronounced such sharp sentence against them, not permitting such to come
into the temple: then no doubt but that the living God will much more and with
far greater punishment, torment such wilful and malicious offenders; and
therefore (as I say) seeing you are herein so well satisfied, perceiving so
effectually the tenor of our conference, I will with a more willinger mind
proceed and go forward according to forepassed promise. But I greatly fear
me, least that already I have passed and far gone beyond the bonds of decorum,
in being so tedious and over troublesome in so many superfluous examples,
which well might have bin related and made manifest in a much more breefer
sort, less troubling the ears of the willing hearer whose quick conceit and
capacity, soon by a part coniectureth and discerns the whole: which error
and troublesome cause, I shall right willingly be content hereafter to reform,
using in the blameable place of tediousness, a more brief and shorter order.


Scho. Sir then, as I have said before, you should offer to me great
coffeehouse, for that I as greatly delight in the histories and tragical
reports, as no other conference can so well please me (your intent and meaning
therewithal being thoroughly perceived) therefore sir I beseech you, not to
think, that you so far exceed the bonds of decorum, as that hereafter you
should with brevity discourse of causes, whereby I might remain altogether
unacquainted, of so many especial notes and good examples, wherein I shall
never be tired or ouer-wearied, but rather impute that fault to mine
importunacie: and so shall you clearly free your self from any such supposed
blameable suspicion.


Fame. With very good will, I shall be content accordingly to proceed, and if
you in like manner refuse not to bear the blame of the aforesaid suspicion:
therefore whereas we have already sufficiently touched the monstrous pride of
man's mind, and what in the end is gained thereby; yet notwithstanding there is
another kind of pride in the garments and wearing apparel: for the ancient
Proverb is, Vetus Prouerbium.
Per exteriora, interius cognoscamus, By the outward show of brave apparel,
we may know the inward vainglorious mind. But by the way, this rule is no
certain consequence, but as we see does often fail and deceive us: for
many will wear a brave cloak, whose coat and inward apparel is velvet, I
mean pride to be covered with a simple garment, and a meek and humble mind
shadowed with rich array. Eli. li. 6.
The wise Socrates when he marked the stately pride of the arrogant Antisthenes
for he did always wear the ragged piece of his thredbare cloak outward in
sight, being a wonderful proud minded fellow, making show as though he had been
contented with base and homely raiment; being openly known that he might have
had better if he would, was thus quipped for the pride of his mind, by
Socrates; Quin desinis, arrogantiam tuam nobis prodere? Will thou never (says
he) leave bewraying unto us thy vain pride and foolish folly? As who would
say, we know the arrogancy of thy mind by this thy counterfeit baseness.
Also Diogenes when he was come to Olympia, and saw certain young men of
Rhodes, gorgeously decked, and sumptuously apparailed, laughed at them, and
said; Hoc nihil est preter fastum; This is nothing else but mere pride and
haughtiness. The same Diogenes again chancing at the same time to see
certain Lacedaemonians in ragged, ragged, rent, riuen, slovenly and loathsome
garments, said; Haec long alia est superbia: This also is a kind of pride,
but far different from the former. Laer. f. 586.
This also is to be remembered, that at what time an ancient and grave Father
of Ceus came to Lacedemonia: being puffed up with pride, and swelling with
insolency, was for his fatherly old age had in reverence and honor: insomuch
that he colored his hoarie head ouergrowen with graye hairs. This old man
coming into an Assembly of the Lacedaemonians, discovered his head for them to
behold, and made a declaration of such matter whereabout he came, But
Archidamus King of the Lacedaemonians rising up, said in this wise; What sound
or true tale can the tongue of this fellow report, whose heart is stained with
the spots of hypocrisy and double dealing, and whose head is colored with
counterfeit comeliness? Thus would he in no case allow the words of the old
man, but utterly rejecting them, taunted the evil inclination of the old man's
nature, by those circumstances which were object to sight, and apparent to the
eye.

It is also certainly reported, that Condalus the Lieutenant of Mausolus King
of Caria, perceiving the people of Lysia (wherein he was Lieutenaunt) to have
a great pride in their trim bushes and long hair, Plu. de vita Mausoli.
on a time fained that he had received letters from his Master the King, that
the People of Lysia should cut off their bushes of hair, and send them to him.
Wherewith (perceiving they were all astonished, fearing least that they should
loose their bravery wherein they much delighted,) he said, If they would
charge themselves with a piece of money, that then he would not doubt, but to
find out means, that men's hair should be bought in Greece, and sent to the
King his Master, therewithal to satisfy his mind, and they should keep and
wear still all their trim locks and bushes: which folly and pride to
maintain, they presently collected an infinite sum of money, which every
private man disbursed willingly.

Therefore my good friend, we see that this vain and foolish pride hurts
none so much as themselves: wherefore it is more tolerable than the other
though in both very bad: for the stately pride of the mind far surmounteth
the foolish pride of apparel (as is before more sufficiently spoken of) the
boy with his golden shoes, his gilden pouche, his cap and feather, and such
other his childish toys, thinks himself and peerless person, thrusting
himself into the sight and view of his companions and childish mates, craving
no other Kingdom or glory than such peacocks pride, offends none nor
abuses any so much, as his own vain conceit and foolish fantasy. But the
pride of the mind lies hid covertly, being shrouded and shadowed in base and
simple gear, reaching and catching after kingdoms, to the great hurt and
prejudice of many. For when as a certain Roman professing meeknes under the
color of homely garments, being a man of good account in his country, and had
in great reverence and estimation, yet notwithstanding would always go
barefooted, and in wonderful simple attire, having also his table where he
dined always covered with a net, to make a further show of his meek mind
far to differ from statelines. By which counterfeit humility be attained to
diverse stately offices among the Romans which were of great and high dignity.
In the end the Romans thinking none more fit than he to govern, by reason of
his humility and meekness, insomuch that they preferred him to the chiefest
seat and highest place of the Roman commonwealth. But now being settled in
this place of Majesty, and soundly confirmed in the seat of authority, being
now come to the very top of his long hoped for desire, thought it not good to
counterfette any longer with the Romans, but turned his meeknes to most hautie
statelines, and in stead of his base attire he had the most gorgeous apparel
and costliest garments, with precious jewels, and rich stones that might any
where be found. And when his servants came according to their accustomed manner
to spread the net on his table where he should feed or dine, thinking that the
same meeknes had still been in their master, he said; Away with the net ye
fools, for the fish is already caught.


Scho. Truly a pretty jest, the fish being caught, to what end serves the
net. The old proverb before rehearsed, was not verified in him: for the Romans
(belike) trusted over much to that old saying, By the outward show ye shall
know the inward conversation. Wherein they clearly deceived themselves: for
after he possessed his place, Honores mutabant mores, Honor and dignity
changed his former manners. Surely the stately pride of this man being so
secretly covered with meeknes, far more offends than the meek and simple
mind whose body is richly furnished with costly apparel of all vain and fond
colors. For surely in mine opinion the wearing of such gorgeous and painted
garments, with other such plumes of peacocks pride, may well be called a vain
and foolish folly, but no such stately pride as the other: for it does
represent to the beholder a mere weakness of the wearers mind, and no deep
conceated fellow, but such a one as had rather stand in the middle of his goods
presently, than by any deep reach or cunning practice to purchase himself
authority or dignity. Which mind no doubt is altogether hurtles to other,
though private reproach to his person. There is also a kind of pride in diverse
proudly to vaunt them selves, boasting of their ancient pedigree, noble
parentage, standing on their generositie, as though the noble acts of their
auncesters were sufficient to color, shadow and hide their vain and lewd
life by their vaunting vanity, not considering that the good qualities,
courteous behauiours, and gentle demeanours of a man, makes him to become a
Gentleman: but rather will challenge their gentilitie from their ancient
Parents, if any of them had either name or fame by any good virtue or act,
although diverse of the same race and stock, were both wicked, vain and lewd.
This also in my judgment is in man's nature a proud vanity and ridiculous
error. The wise Aristole hearing a certain man boast and vaunt that he came
and descended from a noble and famous City, and therefore arrogantly challenged
a kind of duetifulnes to be given him by reason of the noble fame thereof,
Aristotle.
said; Brag not my friend of that, but first see thou be worthy to be of so
noble a City, and not digress from and shame so ancient a stock. Truly they
deserve dispraise and extreme laughter, which brag and boast of their
progenitors, and think themselves trim men because their forefathers were
famous. Who was the sire of noble Marius? assuredly no great state: his
valiantnes and puisance is recorded in sundry histories, but yet who begat him
remains doubtful and unknown. The same we affirm of Cato, Seruilius,
Hostilius, Romulus, all notable and puisant peers in the Roman Empire: neither
indeed makes it any matter from whence they spring or descend, if their
virtue be of sufficient force to defend their parentage. Was not king Darius
son of the mean man Histaspis, first quiuerbearer to Cyrus, and yet became
noble and honorable? The last Darius whom Alexander vanquished, was borne of
the body of a bondwoman, notwithstanding in the end became a mighty Prince.
Archelaus the Macedonian king came of the loins of Smicha, a poor
maydseruant, Menelaus the Gra^dfather of Philip was nu^bred among bastards, and
Amyntas was but a seruingman, who was grandfather to Alexander the great, and
waited upon Aeropa. Eumenes had but a poor fellow to his father. Antigonus the
son of Philip first served for salarie. The great Captain Themistocles was
the son of a very simple and poor woman named Abrotone. Phocion surnamed
Iustus, was at the first but a spoonemaker, or ladlemaker. Also the nobleman
Epamino^das had but a poor and simple man to his father. Demetrius, Phalareus,
Hiperbolus, Cleophon, and Demadus descended but of poor parentage, and became
in the end right noble and famous. The learned Lycurgus seeing some of the
hautie Lacedaemonians daily sticking and standing on their ancient parentage and
generositie, thereby digressing from good manners; made a law, wherein was
granted that such as continued their children in good exercises, which was no
less profitable to the common estate, then necessary to their private
persons, should be called Gentleman, and have this prerogative before others to
have free passage, without interturbance, to offices of dignity in the
Lacedemonian commonwealth. On a time the wise Demosthenes had this cast in his
dish, that although he was now a man of great fame, and had in estimation and
reverence, yet notwithstanding, his father was but a base and obscure fellow,
and glad to get his living by playing the master of fence, as indeed he was as
Valerius reports. Whereunto Demosthenes was not ashamed thus to reply,
saying; Qui parentibus obscuris nati, ad decus praeclarnm virrute propria
ascenderunt, non inferiorem laudem merentur, quam qui nobilitate maiorum
superbise iactant. Mayor enim est gloria virtutibus proprijs niti, quam alienis
intumescere. They which are borne but of mean and base Parents, and rise to
high honor by their own proper virtues, deserve or merit no less praise,
when they which brag and boast of their right noble Progenitors. Therefore far
better is that baunt to stick and cleave fast to their own proper virtues,
than overmuch to swell with the pride of another ma^s glory. But Iuuenalis
reports of this man's father otherwise, saying; Iuuenal.
Plebeius ab officina gladiorum fuit. He was free of the Cutlers, and lived by
that trade. Which also was far from the credit and calling of his son
Demosthenes.


Fa. It is very true indeed, such vaunting vanity remains in many: but it
is very hard to find such a one as is risen to great honor and dignity in
his Country, being descended from mean and base parentage, to vaunt and brag
in causes of controversy, of his poor Progenitors: much less ought he who is
descended and sprung from the stock of generositie, being poor or in base
estate, over proudly to vaunt thereof, for that either his fall was by the
vicious vice of his predecessors, whereof he ought rather to blush than brag. Or
else it proceeds of his own lascivious or licencious vanity, whereof he
ought greatly to be ashamed. Well let this suffice, that virtue makes a
Gentleman, and the want thereof causes the stock and graffe to wither and fall
down. And whereas we have already sufficiently touched the misdemeanors and bad
behauiours of noble Peers and high estates, and what they gain by such
disordered government: now again we will show and make manifest how much good
government is commended, what praise it deserves, and what perpetual memory
it registreth to the eye of immortal fame: and also how far clemency,
courtesy, humility, and mercy in Princes and high estates avails and is of
force, where neither cruelty, tyranny, or other rigorous dealing can prevail.
First concerning modesty and the fruits thereof, Demetrius the son of
Philip king of Macedon, being sent by his father to Rome to answer the
grievous complaint of the Grecians, Plu. in uita Demetrij.
who made a great and heinous complaint against him to the Romans, for certain
abuses which he had offered them in Greece, when this Demetrius was in the
Senate of Rome hearing his father grievously complained on, would forthwith
have executed the office, for which cause he came, wherefore he stood up and
began to answer to the accusations which they so vrgently objected against his
father. But the Ambassadors of Greece so vehemently interrupted and interturbed
his speech with unpleasant babbling and railing, insomuch that the young
Gentleman could not be heard by reason of their great importunacie: for which
cause, the young Demetrius being greatly abashed, with blushing cheeks in most
modest manner sat him down (being greatly ashamed at their outrageous railing)
pleaded his cause with silence, because he would not be troublesome to the
grave Senators, he gave the Ambassadors his adversaries leave to scolde and
rail their fill. Which when the grave Bench of the Senators perceived, they
also commanded the antragious Grecians to silence, and dismissed them the
Senate, suffering them to return home to Greece without reformation of their
wrongs, pardoning the offense of the young man's Father, sending letters into
Macedon to this effect; Philip King of Macedon, we the Senators of Rome pardon
thine offense, remit the trespasses of thee done against the Cities of Greece:
not for thy sake Philip, but for the modest behavior of Demetrius thy Son
showed here in the Senate of Rome before us, to the great wealth and good of
thy Country, and to his perpetual remembrance. What praise and commendation
also did young P. Cornelius Seipio, (otherwise called Scipio Africanus) purchase
by his singular clemency, notable courtesy, and bountiful liberality: for at
such time as he had taken the City of new Carthage in Spain, with a number
of prisoners and captives, and also great quantity of riches and jewels:
there at that time also was taken among the rest, a virgin of rare and
singular beauty: who with diverse other were brought before Scipio, after whom
the people wonderfully thronged and thrusted, delighting to see her for the
rareness of her beauty. But the noble Scipio enquiring of her, of what
Country she was, and of what kindred she was descended, and perceiving by her
that she was betroathed or made sure to a young Prince of the Celtiberians,
Polib. li. 10
whose name was Luceius. Whereupon (when he had committed the other Matrones
and Maids to right worthy and honest persons, to the intent their chastity
might be both honestly and carefully preserved) he presently sent for the said
young man, and also for her parents. At whose coming, knowing that the young
Prince was sore enamored of her, he thus said to him, Sir, I being a young man,
have sent for you that are also a young man, to come to me: the cause is, for
that when this young maid being fianced or ensured to you, was brought to me by
my soldiers, I heard say that you entirely loved her, as her beauty
witnesses you had good cause so to do. If I might lawfully enjoy her pleasant
love, and were not otherwise occupied in my mind about the affairs of the
Common wealth, I could perchance bear her my love, and desire to enjoy the
same. But now I will bear favor to your love, that of right ought to have
her. She has been here with me as well and honorably kept, and her virginity
as carefully preserved, as though she had dwelled still with her own parents,
To this intent I might make of her a present to you most acceptable, and also
for the preservation of mine honor. And for this my gift, I require of you but
only this one reward, that is, that you from henceforth become a loving,
true, and faithful friend to the Romans, and if you esteem me to be a good
and honorable man, as my father and uncle before me were reputed to be, then
think that there are in the noble City of Rome, many like unto us, and trust
me never, if any people this day can be found on the earth, that you will be
more glad to have the love and friendship of, or that you would be more sorry to
have the displeasure of. The young man after great thanks given to him, prayed
the Gods to reward him for all his goodness, where his power sufficed not. Then
were the parents of the maid called forth, who had brought with them a great
sum of gold for the ransom of their child. But when they perceived that
the noble Scipio had given her freely to her husband, then they desired him to
take and accept a part thereof, as of their gift, for the better declaration
of their good hearts toward him, affirming that his receiving thereof should be
as joyful unto them, as the restitution of their daughter undefiled. Then
Scipio being overcome with their long and vehement intercession, caused the
said sum to be laid on the ground before his feet, and calling Lucius
again to him, he said; Beside the dowry that you shall receive of your
Father in law for the marriage of his daughter, ye also shall take this gift at
my hand. With which his great gift, and also much honor done to him beside, he
returned home to his house and country, declaring to every man the honor and
magnificence of noble Scipio, saying; There was a young man come most like a
God, who both with his power in war, and also with his gentleness and
liberality in peace, had overcome all the country. Not long after, this young
Gentleman leaving his house and family in good order, returned to Scipio,
bringing with him 1400. good horsemen to the aid and succor of the Romans.
Thus first Scipio began with mercy, lenity, and gentle courtesy, which was the
cause that he got in the end to the Romans such notable and mighty
victories. The great Pompey never gate the like renown in all his conquest of
Spain and Affrike, nor in the subduing of the valiant Sertorius, neither in
the victories of Armenia, Cappadocia, Arabia, Iberia, Mesopotamia, with diverse
other Provinces and Kingdoms, as he did by his great courtesy. For when in
his wars against Mithridates, he had taken certain noble matrons, and
beutifulll virgins, he carried a vigilant eye over them, neither abusing any of
them himself, nor suffering his captains or soldiers to dishonor or
dishonest them in any case, calling them all together before him, comforting
them with sweet words in the best manner he could, saying; That none under
pain of death should offer them villainy, granting forth his safeconduct to
them, that they might be conveyed to their husbands, parents and friends with
honor undefiled, richly rewarding them with jewels which he had taken in his
wars, protesting also unto them, that he for his part, was most heartely
sorry that it was his hap so to fright and terrify such hurtlesse creatures,
requesting them to take it in good part, for such was the chance and casualtie
of war: for which gentle behauiours, (had it not been for certain other lewd
vices which are before mentioned) he had attained to peerlesse praise.

Alexander the great king of Macedon, although he frequented a number of most
notable and bad vices, yet were it no reason to bury in oblivion and
forgetfulness, covering, as it were in the grave of silence, the gentle
courtesy and manly piety which he showed in most ample manner to the
distressed household and family of king Darius. For even at such time as the
mighty Wars began between these two Princes, In the second Battle and
conflict, Alexander had a great victory against Darius and the Persians,
taking the tents with all the bag and baggage appertaining to the King and the
Persians, and also for a pray (amongst other booties) he took prisoners the
mother, wife, sister, and the two daughters of King Darius, his enemy: whom
when Alexander came to comfort, being in great sorrow and distress: they
beholding him coming with an armed troop, pitifully schritched and lamentably
cried out, as if they then should presently have been slain: falling down
prostrate at the feet of Alexander, beseeching him that they might before they
died, bury the dead body of their Lord Darius, whom they supposed to be
slain in that bloody fight: and that now, whereas he was a man, and had at
this time gotten a most noble and manly victory against Darius their Lord and
King; so to behave himself toward those poor distressed creatures, who were
altogether vnguiltie of that pitiful slaughter, being as it were present in the
Army with their friend, for their countries cause, and in defense of their
liberty, in which also their Lord and King Darius was now slain: therefore
now that he would vouchsafe to bestow the body of their slain friend on them,
that they might do to him in their life the rights of burial; and then, said
they, O Alexander, our lives be at thy commandment. Alexander being greatly
moved with pity, seeing their bitter tears, and considering the hard hap and
bad destiny of so noble Dames, bewailed their distressed case with weeping,
further comforting them saying, that Darius their Lord and King was alive, and
at liberty still with his own force and power; and although he was overcome
in that fight, yet was he ready to give new battle again (as in deed he
did) causing them to banish fear from them, for that no injury or wrong
should happen to them, giving also commandment that they should be provided
for and used, as to their high estate and dignity appertained, giving good
words and comfort unto the two young Daughters of Darius, wishing them assuredly
to think, and firmly to persuade themselves, that he would have as great
care to bestow them in marriage (if King Darius their father did die and
perish in these wars) as he living with a fatherly care would provide for
them, and that with no base or obscure mates. Which thing when Darius was
truly certified of, and of the courteous entertainment of his mother, wife
and sister, being all prisoners and captives, at the hands of Alexander his
enemy, although he then was able to give battle to the strongest king of the
earth (for he again had gathered a most mighty and huge army) was already
overcome and conquered with the gentle courtesies of his enemy, altogether
unwilling to fight against so friendly a foe, wherefore he sent his letters to
Alexander, requiring him that he might redeem his captives, promising a
mighty sum and mass of money for their ransom. Notwithstanding Alexander
would receive no money, but required his whole kingdom for their redemption.
Darius not willing to fight with so frie^dly an enemy, sent his letters to
Alexander the second time, offering one of his daughters in marriage, with part
of his kingdom to him, if it might please him to accept thereof. But the
insatiable Alexander could not be content with part, unless he might have all
the whole. And as for the offer of his daughters, he returned this answer,
saying; He had them already, and could do with them his pleasure. Now was
Darius forced to go against his friendly foe the third time, hoping to get
his prisoners, and yet notwithstanding loving and honoring the very name of
Alexander, for the great courtesy and lenity he had showed to his family.
The army and power of Darius was at this time four hundred thousand footmen,
and an hundred thousand horsemen, thus marching toward his enemy Alexander, it
was told him in his journey that his wife was dead, whose death Alexander
lamented with tears, and caused a noble funeral to be appointed, doing to her
the greatest honor he could devise, comforting the rest, requesting them not so
heauely to take the death of their friend, whose life by no means he could
save or preserve. Now was Darius overcome (when his power was most strongest)
with the benefits and friendlinesse of his foe, so honoring in his heart his
adversary, that for love he bare him, he could not arange his battle against
him, rejoicing greatly in himself, and also saying to his friends, If I am
overcome in this war, yet notwithstanding I have great cause to rejoice that
I shall be conquered by so noble a minded prince. Wherefore again he sent his
letters to Alexander, offering him the greater part of his kingdom, to the
river of Euphrates, with his other daughter: and for the other captives he
offered three hundred thousand talents. But Alexander returned this answer,
refusing the compositio^, saying; It was need lessethankes of his enemy, for
he always had used to revenge himself on armed men, and on his fighting foe,
and not upon hurtlesse women. Thus by the hautie courage of Alexander, Darius,
was forced and drawn into the field unwillingly to fight against his enemy,
whom he esteemed as a friendly foe, notwithstanding there was fought betwixt
them a fierce and cruel battle, the Persians in the end being overthrown
with great slaughter, for that Darius their Captain could not encourage or
stir them up to fight against his friend. In which conflict certain of the
friends and alliance of Darius, seeing the battle utterly lost, and that
Alexander was like presently to be Lord of the field, sought to betray their
king into the hands of Alexander, thereby to pick a thank, or as they say, to
currie favor. In acco^plishing of which thing Darius was sore wounded by his
allies, notwithstanding he escaped and prevented their purpose. But Alexander
not hearing of Darius, sent out seven thousand horsemen to prosecute after him,
who^ when they could not find, they requested leave to rest themselves and
their over wearied horses: then one of the soldiers going to water his horse
at a certain river thereby, by chance found out Darius lying in a coach or
chariot, being mortally wounded with many grievous hurtes, ready to yield up
his life, and coming near to the coach, he did plainly perceive that it was
Darius, and Darius did well know that he was one of the crewe or band of
Alexander, wherefore he called him to his coache, saying; My good friend, I
greatly rejoice that it is my good fortune before I die, to have so fit a
messenger as yourselfe, to carry these my last words, not to my enemy, but to
my good friend Alexander, at whose hands I have found great favor: say thou
my friend, that I confess I die greatly indebted unto him, being altogether
unable to requite the very least of his courtesies showed to my mother, wife
and children, and that I have of him a more happier enemy, than my kinsmen are
friendly. For my mother, wife, and children have found both favor and life at
the hand of mine enemy: and I my self am deprived of life by my kinsmen and
allies, to whom I gave both life and land. Wherefore I wish as great happiness
to fall on him, as he being victor can wish or desire: and that I even now
dying, do wholly commit and betake both myself, my lands and goods, into the
hands of so noble a minded prince, praying both to the high Gods, and also to
the infernal powers, that he may be victor against whomsoever he wageth war:
and that all blessings may happen to him according to his own hearts desire.
And for the further acknowledging of my unfeigned love, and well wishing desire
toward Alexander my approved friend, take here of me this my right hand
(which thou see me cut of willingly being alive) and carry it to thy Lord
and master my good friend, as a sure seal and firm pledge of my unfeigned good
will and hearty well wishing toward him. Thus died Darius, when he could no
otherwise gratify and recompense his friendly foe, for the great favors and
courtesies showed to his family, than by the acknowledging of his clemency
and and gentleness. This friendly favor of Alexander was soon spread through the
world, and more often repeated to his high praise and commendation, than the
great and famous victory which he had against the Persians, which was a most
wonderful conquest, and remains at this day the very chief and most
principal praise and merit to Alexander.

Was there not likewise singular courtesy, and wonderful gentleness in King
Darius, which Alexander conquered. For at such time as certain of his noble
men sought to entangle and take him by treason, which were of no small account
amongst the Persians, Darius the King having intelligence of their wicked
practice, thus considered with himself, and brake it unto his secret friend,
saying; Here are diverse noble men which traitorously have conspired my death:
if now I should put them all to the sword, there is no doubt but that I
should stir up against me many of their friends and allies, and so be forced
to make great effusion of blood, which truly is contrary and repugnant to my
nature. The cause surely to me is unknown, why they should thus wickedly work
my hurt. It may be they would be better content with another king to reign over
them, than with me now their present prince: yet truly I rather choose to have
it registered of their disloyalty toward their Prince, by my death, than to
purchase to my self the name of a cruel tyrant, by their bloody slaughters.
With these considerations he concealed the matter, making a show as though he
nothing mistrusted any such thing: on a time riding forth a hunting, these
noblemen which had conspired against him, flocked together, hoping now to get
some convenient time and place for their purpose, riding with the king to the
forest, making a show of great joy and gladness, to the end the king should
suspect no evil: but he full well knew their intent though he dissembled the
matter. Thus following their game they trouped together, hoping that the king
would come that way which they had laid and stauled for him, which indeed he
did. The King seeing their intent, and spying their order, singled himself from
the rest of his company, going directly to the traitors, who stood in ambush
ready to fulfill and accomplish that for which cause they came. The king boldly
rushed into the midst of them, saying; Now ye traitors, dispatch and commit
that which ye are determined to do, I have long time known your intent, and
for because I would not be counted a bloody prince I have spared you all,
rather choosing that your hands should be unbrued in the blood of your
giltlesse Prince, to your everlasting infamy and dishonor, than my sword
should be stained with the slaughter of so many Subjects, wishing rather here
to die and free your troubled minds, than to live and remain such an eyesore
to so many noble estates, though traitors to their Prince. Therefore, said he,
Quid igitur non exequimini id cuius gratia venistis? Why do ye not dispatch
your purpose in respect of the accomplishment whereof you be resorted hither?
Then they all looked on each other in the face, being troubled in their minds,
greatly repenting their enterprise, that ever they went about to work such
villainy to so noble a minded Prince, who knew their practice before, and yet
spared to punish them, rather choosing himself to die, than to use tyranny on
his subjects (which indeed had been no cruelty but upright justice) wherefore
they all with one accord threw down their spears, and lighted from their
saddles, confessing their trespass, humbly submitting themselves on their
knees, craving mercy at the hands of Darius, proffering their voluntary
service to do whatsoever he henceforth gave them in commandment.

Thus with the great mercy and clemency of Darius without bloodshed, the
unbridled stomachs of his nobles were pacified and made quiet, which by a
bloody hand he could never have brought to pass. And from that time forth
they were mindful of so gracious a benefit, remaining ever after most
faithful, obedient, and full of duty to Darius their mild and gentle
Prince. In like manner Titus a Roman Emperor, son to Vespasianus, Aurel. li. 7.
excelled in humility, clemency and courtesy: for at such time as two of his
chiefest Peers had consented and conspired to the murdering of their master
the king. Titus having knowledge thereof, first calling them into a privy
chamber, telling them home of their wicked intent, wishing them (by mild and
gentle means) to become better Subjects to their hurtles Prince, who, so
far as he knew, had not deserved at their hands the very thought of such a
wicked invention. And afterward taking them both with him to a common game or
play, setting himself between them both, willing them to sit near his
person; and so soon as the sword-players came out with their glittering
swords, Titus called for one of them, which was presently delivered to him:
then he forthwith gave it to the one, and after to the other, under color of
feeling how sharp it was, beholding them with a smiling countenance, saying;
Videtisne potestates fato dari, frustraque tentari facinus potiundi spe, vel
admittendi metu? See ye not says he, that authority and power is given by
destiny, therefore it is vain to try by wicked practice to possess the
place, and as vain it is to fear the losing thereof? Meaning thereby, that
although they had the sword in their hands, yet could they not displace him
who^ God had settled. Thus courteously did Titus entreat his Nobles, saying
that he had greater pleasure, and more delight to correct offenders with
lenity, than to chastise them with cruelty, which caused him to reign more
quietly in his life, and also at his death to be bewailed through the whole
earth, calling him the darling and delight of mankind. He was wont to say ye
night, that the day before he had not given well to the poor, or been
liberal amongst his friends; Amici, perdidimus diem. Friends, we have lost a
day. Gelon king of Syracusa behaved himself wonderful mildly, Eli. li. 6.
gently, and peaceably in his kingdom, yet notwithstanding he was of some
termed a tyrant. But this is most certain, that when diverse of his
commonwealth sought ways to shorten his life by cruel murder, waiting for
fit occasion to execute and accomplish their vile pretended villainy. Whereof
when Gelon was informed and certified, he called a court, and sommoned an
assembly of Syracusians, which being done, in the presence and countenance of
them all, he went up, into an hauty and high place, in manner of a pulpit,
having on his body harness, and in his hands weapons bright and glistring. In
which sort and order he stood before them, making a declaration of his
faithful care which he always had over the weal public, tendering the
welfare of them all even as his own life. Having thus done he unarmed
himself, laying down both armor and weapon at his feet, and uttered these
words to the congregation which was there assembled, saying; En amictus
tunicula, nudus armorum asto, dedo me vobis, vt pro voluntate, libitoque mecum
agatis. Behold, I stand before you naked, unarmed, in a thin wastcote, I
yeald my life into your hands, my body is at your commandment, deal with me
according to your pleasure. For, says he, I detest the place if you despise my
person, neither do I wish any longer to live in my calling than you shall well
like of my government. When Gelon had thus yealded himself to his subjects,
the whole assembly of the Syracusians were much amassed, and thereupon were so
affectioned in mind, that needs they would (there was no way to the contrary)
deliver those traitorous varlets, and rebellious villains to the kings power,
to punish them according to the proportion of their offense, and gave him their
suffrages and universal consents to continue over them his dominion and
government: yet not withstanding would not Gelon correct those offenders, but
freely forgave the^ their trespasses, counselling them ever after to become
better subjects, and to wish to him in their hearts no otherwise than he would
deserve at their hands. Which great mercy and favor of Gelon the king, made the
Syracusians to honor and duetifully obey him so long as he lived among them,
and after his death to have him in perpetual remembrance for his singular
courtesy, and notable clemency. They erected and planted a standing image
wearing a single peticote, representing to the beholder that this king did
reign and rule by gentle and courteous means, more safer, and far stronger
than he that should reign like a tyrant, with harnes and armor of proof.


Scho. Truly Sir, it is now in these our days most manifest how mightily the
lenity and gentleness of Princes is of force, and avails: and with what
willing hearts their subjects will venture both life, land and limme in the
service and defense of their so mild and gentle a Prince: yea if it were
possible that one body should venture the loss of life ten times, or presently
to run to ten deaths for the preservation ^o safety of such a noble and
merciful Prince, no doubt they could make no curiosity in the cause, nor
scrupulositie on the matter, but with willing and fierce minds boldly venture
themselves. Contrariwise, we both daily see and read, that cruel tyrants by
their tyranny cannot compel their Subjects to bear or carry toward them a
duetifull mind, and loving heart, neither willingly to venture themselves in
their causes, but drawn, as it were by the ears to their defense, or else they
should fight in their own quarrels: the people also delight and rejoice to
hear of the ruin and destruction of such tyrannical Princes, yea and that
which is worse, do often conspire and practice unnaturally the death and
destruction of such tyrants. We read of the cruel tyrant Clearchus, King of
the Heraclians, that when by no persuasions he could be restrained from his
accustomed tyranny, Laer. li. 6.
two of the most noblest young Gentlemen of the City conspired his death,
venturing their own lives to deliver and set free their Commonwealth from
such a tyrannous enemy, never resting until they had freed their Countrymen
from his cruel tyranny. For Clearchus unmercifully tormenting his guiltles
subjects with most cruel torture, sharp punishment, and extreme banishment,
taking pleasure in the intolerable pains of his distressed people, finding
out most sharp and cruel inventions to plague and torment his miserable
Subjects withal. At the last these two young Gentlemen, Chion and Leonides,
being both brought up under the tutorship and government of the wise and
learned Philosopher Plato, tendering their Countries liberty, and detesting
the cruel tyranny of the wicked Tyrant, fained themselves to be at variance
and earnest controversy in the Kings presence, insomuch that they drew their
Daggers one at the other in the Kings sight, and so betwixt them both they
stabbed the Tyrant to death, and delivered their Common wealth from such a
bloody minded butcher.

It is also reported, that after Pisistratus was dead, who usurped the crown,
and reigned by force and cruelty, that then his son Diocles, excelling his
Father in all kind of tyranny, was soon after him slain for his wickedness;
and especially for that he had dishonourably ravished and with violence
entreated a young Maid, whose brother in reuengement thereof slew the King. Plu
devita Hipp.
Then reigned his Brother Hippias, who also was a most wicked and bloody
Tyrant: this Hippias caused the young man that had slain his brother to be
racked, to confess who were the counselors of him to that deed: who named
all the Tyrants friends. Whom, so soon as they were apprehended, were presently
put to death as chief ayders in the conspiracy, whereof they were altogether
ignorant and vnguiltie, but the youngman appeached them for mainteining the
tyrant in his wickedness. Thus the tyrants friends being slain, the young man was
again demanded if he knew any other that was consenting to the death and
murder of his Brother? The young man answered; No truly Hippias, there is none
living that I would have dead, but thou thy self, O thou Tyrant. Saying
further, That he greatly rejoiced, that he had caused one Tyrant to execute
tyranny on another, whereby he had freed his Country from a great number of
them: wishing and earnestly exhorting his Country men to have as great a care
in wishing well to their Country (by rooting out of all such Tyrants, which
deed would sort the common good of their Countrymen) as they had or should
have of their own private Estates.

Did Nero purchase to himself the favor and friendly hearts of his Country men
by such monstrous cruelty as he commonly used? No truly, but their disdainful
hate was thereby obtained. He had such care over his Country, and so tendered
the welfare of his Countrymen, that to satisfy and please his tyrannous
mind, on a time he would needs set the stately City of Rome on fire, to
see how rightly it would resemble the burning and overthrow of Troy, when the
Greeks had taken it: by which cruel deed, he was the spoil of many a
thousand Roman: for the fire continued burning in the City the space of five
days, wonderfully consuming the goods and treasure of the Citizens, to the
great impouerishing of the whole Common wealth. For which impious cruelties
(when he had committed other outrageous tyrannies, which before are specified)
he was by the common consent of his subjects condemned to be beaten to death
with whips and rods: but the execution was not done accordingly, Aureli. li.
7.
for the prevented their sharp sentence with the murder of himself.

Diomedes the bloody Thracian Tyrant, escaped not unrevenged for his monstrous
and abominable murders, in giving to his horses the bodies of living men to
be devoured of those ravenous iades, Plu. de vita Diomed.
which he kept for the same purpose; executing daily his accustomed tyranny
upon the poor distressed Thracians his Countrymen, delighting to embrewe
himself in the blood of his subjects: but in the end, the noble Hercules,
disdaining to suffer so vile a wretch a live, made war against him, and took
the cruel Tyrant Diomedes prisoner, giving him to his own horses, who
devoured him as their wonted pray. For being before by accustomed manner made
fierce and fell in their iadish cruelty, they were now the more apt and ready
to tear in pieces, and pluck lim-meale the body of the bloody Tyrant.

Also the most odious and detestable Tyrant Phalaris in semblable manner
received like reward: for when he had long time studied and invented for
strange and cruel torments to plague and pain his poor subjects withal: at
last Perillus a notable and expert workman came to Phalaris (hoping to receive
such reward as the Tyrants proclamation before had promised) and said; Plu. de
vita Phale.
Sir King, I have invented and made a most strange, rare and cruel punishment,
to torment whom it shall please you, after a most wonderful and extreme
order. The engine was like a Bull made and shaped of brass in every respect,
having in the side thereof a door right artificially contrived, to put in naked
men, which door being closed up fast again with the man in the middle, fire
should be put under the belly of the brazen Bull, and so soon as the Engine
began thoroughly to heat, it would so scorch and burn the living man within,
that he should not choose but mainly and extremely cry out, whose voice by
coming thorough certain hollow holes in the Bulls throat, (made for that
purpose) should seem like to the cruel roaring of a mad Bull, or some other
bedlam Beast, which was sharply goared or pricked. Phalaris beholding this
strange device, greatly rejoicing at the rareness thereof, thought it long
until he might see the effect thereof put in execution. Wherefore calling to
him the running work man who had taken great pains in framing and contriuing
that strange and rare torment, saying, Friend Perillus, I most heartely thank
thee for this device, and for because I would saine be satisfied, and see some
experience proved in this thy hollow device, I command that thou prove the
first experience of thine own handie craft. Which without stay was forced to
be done, to the great terrifying of all the beholders. Thus was Perillus
beaten with his own rod; for that which he made for gain to crucify land
torment others, he first of all tasted himself. Yet notwithstanding Phalaris
was not to be commended herein, for that he had no respect to the cause, but
according to his accustomed manner of cruelty, used the Engine afterward to
the punishment of his subjects, therewithal to delight and satisfy his
tyrannous and bloody mind: until his Country men detesting such outrageous
cruelty, could not suffer his tyranny any longer, but rose up against him,
and took the bloody Tyrant, putting him into the brazen Bull to make him taste
the torment of his own cruelty. Thus also died the notable Tyrant Phalaris,
Mors Phalaris.
who always took pleasure in tormenting and persecuting his poor Subjects,
wishing rather to be feared than loved, coveting to rule and govern his Weal
public by cruel and tyrannous means: for which his unsatiate and
bloudthirstie intemperancie, he felt the desert of his own folly.

Therefore Sir, I right well perceive, that the Prince rules with more safety
(as you said before) in a thin and single wastcoate, than in strong armor,
much more auayling by gentle and courteous means over their loving Subjects,
than with a bloody and tyrannous hand, which oftentimes turns them to hate,
not to love; preferrring him to death, not to life. And whereas you have showed
examples, what great honor and renown falls to the share of such Princes,
which have showed both merciful pity, gentle courtesy, and manly clemency
on poor distressed creatures in time of victory: and also what love they gate
even of their enemies, for the chaste preserving of Matrones and Uirgines, for
their gentle courtesy in entertaining them, and for their liberal hearts in
voluntarily freeing and dismissing them being such hurtlesse captives: noting
contrariwise the deserved ruin of such, as have unjustly tyrannized over their
innocence, for of such Tyrants falls, all Histories are full.

It is certainly reported, Aurelius de vita and moribus imperatorum.
that Dionysius Junior in his victories used great cruelty by abusing of
Matrones, rauishing young Uirgines and deflowring of Maidens, for when on a time
he came to the Locreans, he took up, possessed, occupied, used, or rather
abused the greatest, largest, and fairest houses that were in all the City,
strewing them with damask roses, lauender, sauorie, and such like odoriferous
flowers, and sweet smelling herbs, sending for the young Damsels of the
Locreans, to come to him; with whom he had fleshly pleasure and delight, past
all shame, honesty, or regard of chastity. Which filthiness and most loathsome
offense abounding in him escaped not unpunished: for when his kingdom was rent
and torn from him by Dion, the Locreans rewarded like with like, dealing
carnally with the Wife and Daughters of Dionysius, enforcing upon them (for his
offense) most abominable fornication without any intermission or ceasing, and
such specially as were of the lineage consanguinitie and kindred of those young
maids and virgins whom Dionysius defloured, were most eager and fierce to be
so revenged. After they had satisfied and staunched the lust of their flesh
with the bodies of Dionysius his wife and daughters, they took needles and
thrust them into their fingers and toes, under the naples, in such lamentable
order murdering them, and stamped their bones in morters, from the which they
had launced and cut collops of flesh, offering the gobbets to be eaten: whereof
who so refused to taste, such they abused most villainously, and handled worse
than helhounds. The remnant of slaughtered and dismembered carcases was cast
into the sea, there to be consumed with whirling waves, or to be devoured by
monstrous fishes; and as for Dionysius himself, after he had endured manifold
mischances, and sustained sundry distresses of life and estate, at Corinth,
being pinched with extreme need, he became a stark beggar, and went from
place to place playing on a Timbrel and Flute, and singing Ballades in the
company of such as hired him, and gave him for his labor: going also into
Barbers shops to jest, and to make the people merry and pleasant when they came
thither to be notted and shaven. This was the end of Dionysius, and after this
sort he finished the course of his life, in no less beggary than infamy, who
no doubt was but plagued according to his desert.


Fame. Now do I right well perceive that our conference does much profit you,
and that you have well noted and marked the tenor of my purpose, in going about
to discipher the difference betwixt virtue and vice, which you sufficiently
discern, and are able to give examples to the contrary: therefore I nothing
repent me of my pain and labor herein, but will with willing mind proceed
to pleasure you in what I may: and whereas now in this my last speech I showed
unto you what honor and renown was purchased and obtained through mercy and
clemency, and also what noble fame and eternal praise remains to those, who
do show both manly pity, gentle courtesy, and merciful favor to the
conquered, and to those who are under their power to dispose at their pleasure.
Contrariwise, you have declared what inconvenience does often fall to those
who seek to rule and reign through tyranny, and by bloody means, and also
what misery happens often to those who have had neither regard of their own
honesty, the preservation of chastity, nor any pitiful consideration of them
in adversity. Well now again I will proceed, beginning where last you
interrupted me, which was, where Princes tendered, and carefully loved their
subjects, and welfare of their commonwealth, there also what a duetifull care
and obedient mind the subjects ought to have for the preservation of their so
good a Prince, and happy weal public, for that commonwealth which is
governed by a wise and prudent Prince, cannot choose but be called and termed
right happy and fortunate.

The wise and learned Philosopher Plato was wont to say Tum demum beatum
terrarum orbem futurum, Dictum Ciceronis.
cum aut sapientes regnare, aut reges sapere caepissent. Yet at length a happy
and blessed time shall fall on the earth, when either wisemen begin to reign,
orels Kings begin to wax wise. For there, says he, the Common wealth is on
all parts blessed. Then having such a wise Prince and settled Commonwealth, the
Subjects ought to have a special and duetifull care in mainteyning,
defending, upholding, and preserving both Prince and Country to the uttermost
of their power, yea if it were with the loss of their lives, in the just
quartell and good cause of their Prince and Country. Valor. li; and Liuius in
prelatione belloium punicorum.
Cicero says, Non nobis solum nati sumus, sed etiam pro patria. We are not
only borne, says he, to pleasure our selves, but also to the profit and
commodity of our country. For at such time as Attilius Regulus a noble
Consul of Rome, having oftentimes vanquished the Carthaginians, was at the
last of them taken prisoner by a certain subtle slight, yet notwithstanding,
because the Romans had also taken certain prisoners of the Carthaginians, and
those most noble and valiant Captains and Soldiers, wherefore Regulus was
sent home to Rome, to make exchange for the other prisoners. But when this
ancient Father was come to Rome, he called a Convocation of the Senators, and
there in the Senate before them all, he thus began, Most learned and grave
fathers, whom I right well know have always wished well, and tendered the
welfare and common good of our country, knowing also, that at this time you
are not ignorant of my late chance and mishap, which now being past remedy is
not to be sorowed, and also that you have here in the city certain prisoners
of the Carthaginians, being both expert, active, and valiant captains, whom
they crave to have again by way of exchange, and so may you have me again
here at liberty in Rome: notwithstanding, first for my ancient authority in
this our commonwealth, then for my approved good will toward my country, and
last, in respect of my grave and aged years, and here by the virtue and
dignity of my place in the Senate house, I am to determine causes, confer
about the good of our weal public; and to have as great a care for the
preservation both of our City and Country, in as ample manner as the rest of
you my fellow Senators: therefore, most honorable Fathers, being thus
strongly warred upon by so mighty a people, who seek daily to subvert our
state, throw down our city, and spoil our commonwealth: the cause is
therefore wisely to be considered on. First for mine own part, as you all do
know, I am old, decrepite, and of little force of body, not like long to
continue. Again, the Captains whom you hold of the Carthaginians, are both
lusty, valiant, and courageous gentlemen, likely to perform and do great
service against you, to the great hurt of the Commonwealth, Therefore, Fathers
conscript, by the virtue of may aforsaid authorities, I will never consent to
the redeliuering or redeeming of such perilous enemies, but will with a willing
heart return to the Carthaginians from whence I came, to save both the honor
of my country, and the credit of my name, from perpetual infamy, lest that
we should be hereafter by the Carthaginians our enemies, accounted, and
reprochfully termed the confringers of martial rights. Thus the grave
Senators by no means could persuade the good old man to make such exchange as
the Carthaginians offered, but would needs return for his countries sake,
although he knew he went to present death and cruel torment Thus went Attilus
Regulus to the enemy, who after they had bound him, cut of his eye lids, and
set him in a hollow tree upright, filled full of sharp and pricking nails,
there continuing in most horrible pain until he died. Thus did he carry a
faithful heart and noble courage in his countries cause, willing to lose his
life for the profit and welfare of his weal public. In like sort, Gobrias a
Persian, holding in his arms by force in a dark chamber him who was a traitor
to his country; insomuch that when one of his fellows came to his aid to
help to slaye the traitor, Plu. devita Codri.
he cried out to his friend, saying; Stay not thy blow, but thrust him through,
although thereby thou do kill me also, so that he escape not from us, to the
further hurt of our Country, therefore presently run thy sword through him,
and so shall our Commonwealth be freed from a wicked traitor. Thus Gobrias
esteemed not his life in delivering his country from an enemy. Codrus king of
Athens, for the sauegard of his public weal, went to present death willingly
and with a valiant courage. For at such time as there was wars betwixt him
and the Dorians, the Dorians went to the oracle of Apollo at Delphos, to know
who should be victors in that war begun: to whom this answer was made, That
they should be coquerors if they killed not the king of Athens. Then was
proclamation made in all the Dorian camp, to spare and preserve alive the
Athenian king. But Codrus hearing of the answer of Apollo, and being
advertised of their proclamation, did forthwith change his garments in most
deformed manner, with a wallet full of bread on his shoulders, and went privily
to the camp of the Dorians, and wounded a certain od fellow among their
Tents, with a sharp hook or sickle which he had prepared for the nonce. In
revenge whereof the wounded fellow slew Codrus the king: but after when the
body was known, and the order of his death, the Dorians departed without
battle, remembering the divine answer of the Oracle, whereby the Athenian king
freed his country from peril, Diogenes. Laer. li. 4
which otherwise had been in great danger. It is also reported that Lycurgus,
after he had made diverse good laws (to be observed and kept of his
cou^treime^) fained that they were made by the consent of the Oracle at
Delphos. And when he perceived that these laws and statutes were to the great
benefit of his country, feigned that he would go to Delphos for further
counsel. And to the intent they should keep those laws until he returned from
thence, firm and sure, he made the whole body of the commonwealth to swear,
and bind themselves by oath, to keep unviolated and unbroken those laws
which then he had set down, until such time that he returned again from
Delphos, but because he would have those statutes remain and be of force for
ever in his Country, he went the next way to Creete, and not to Delphos,
where he lived in exile, banishing himself from his Country so long as he
lived: and at his death (because his bones should not be carried into his
Country, whereby his Countrymen might think themselves discharged of their
oaths, and full freed from their vow) he caused his bones to be burned, and
the ashes thereof to be thrown into the sea, to the intent that neither he
himself nor any part of him being left, should be brought back into his
Country, by which means he caused his Countrymen perpetually to keep those
good and wholesome laws, to the unspeakable profit of the Commonwealth.

Plu. in vita Darij.
Zopirus a nobleman of Persia also, tendering his Prince and Country, insomuch
that when the great City of Babylon rebelled against Darius his Lord and king,
to the great trouble and vexation of the whole commonwealth, and could by no
means be subdued, he then in favor of his prince and country, privily and
unawares went and cut off his own nose, lips, ears, and in other deformed
manner pitifully mangling his body, fled into the City of Babylon, saying that
Darius his master and certain other of his cruel Countrymen, had so
shamefully disfigured and martyred him, because (says he) I persuaded him to
have peace with your city. Which when they heard, greatly pitying his
distressed case, and in recompense thereof made him chief captain and governor
of their town, by which means he yielded up the rebellious Babylonians to his
sovereign Lord the king, Li. in bello Punico.
to the great good and quieting of his country. Did not Sceuola that noble
Roman, when the city of Rome was besieged by the mighty Porsena king of
Tuscane, willingly run to desperate death to purchase liberty to his country:
for he apparreled him self in beggars clothes, came forth of the city by
night, and ranged in the enemies camp, till he had found out the Tent of
Persena the king, minding to slay that mighty Tuscane, who then so strongly
compassed and environed their city. But he mistaking the king, slew his
Secretary, and missed his mark, who being thereupon presently taken, and his
pretended purpose further known, Porsena the king caused a great fire to be
made to burn Sceuola in, which when he came to the place, he thrust his right
hand willingly into the fire, first suffering it to burn to ashes,
courageously saying; I willingly commit this my hand to the fire, which
failed to kill Porsena the tyrant. Further affirming at his death, that there
were three hundredth Romans more ready pressed, which had also sworn the death of
the king, if he failed, and would as willingly venture themselves in their
Countries cause, as he before them had done: and as it were among themselves
striving who first should do that good service to their country. Which when
Porsena had heard, he did not much discommend their faithfulness toward their
Commonwealth, but with all speed removed his siege, and departed from the
walls of Rome, to the great reioising of the citizens. Thus ought every man to
have a special care and regard to preserve his native country and
commonwealth. For when both Princes and noble estates have willingly ventured
life, nay run to present death, for the sauegard of the weal public, much
more then ought every private person and mean subject in Prince and Countries
cause valiantly to venture both life and lim, with right courageous minds in
defense of so honest and good a cause.


Scho. I confess that every subject ought willingly to offer his body in
defense of his Prince and native Soil, and not to have so great a care for the
preservation of his private person, as for the benefit and welfare of his
Prince and Commonwealth. Were it not a vile reproach and ignomie to those
people that should by their cowardlines suffer their king to be slain in the
field, and they themselves to remain alive and give the looking on?
Contrariwise, is it not great honor to him that shall hazard his life, yea or
run to right desperate exploites in the good cause or quarrel of his Prince?
To conclude, it is the part of every good prince to have a care of the welfare
of his commonwealth, and of the preservation of his subjects: and also the part
of all honest Subjects to have a duetiful care to preserve their prince and a
manly courage to defend their country. Truly we read in most ancient
histories, of diverse who by their noble valor, wise policy, and manly
courage, have defended (from the inuation of foreign foes) both their weal
public from subversion, their stately towns and cities from ruin and decay,
and also the whole body of their countrymen from most cruel murder and
pitiful slaughter, and yet in the end have been most vilely recompensed by
their unkind countrymen. Was not Manlius a Roman, Q Curtius fo. 280.
surnamed Capitolinus, who preserved the Capitol or castle of Rome from the
cruel force of the Gauls, and did many other noble acts in his Countries
cause, thrown down from the top of the same Castle, headlong, by his own
unkind countreimen, whom he many times both manfully and courageously had
defended and saved. Also Miltiades, a noble man of Athens, Justin. li. 15
which in the field of Marathaon with 10000. Greeks discomfited and put to
flight 600000. Persians, and so by his great wisdom and prudent policy, saved
and delivered his country from being ouerrun with such a mighty and huge
host, which otherwise had been utterly subdued and overthrown, but after
being cast in arrerage of a certain sum of money, he was by his ungrateful
Countrymen, condemned into most cruel prison, and there died in fetters, and
being dead, he might not be suffered to be buried, until his son had put on
him the gives that his father did wear. Plu. de Themistocle.
In like sort Themistocles a noble captain of the same ungrateful town of
Athens, after he had delivered his Country from the huge and terrible power of
Xerxes, putting him to flight and al his great host, making yt mighty king
(by his circumspect wisdom and policy) shamefully to fly home in a
Fishermans boat unknown, for the safety and preservation of himself;
notwithstanding, was at the last driven his Country, and forced to fly (by
the unkind Citizens) to his enemy Xerxes, who^ before he had driven from the
walls of Athens, but Xerxes willingly received such a friend with great
intertainment, and sent him again with a mighty army, to war on his own
country, hoping now that he would be sharply revenged on his unkind citizens.
But Themistocles being now Lord General against his native country, having in
his power the whole destruction and overthrow of his dear commonwealth: yet
notwithstanding for all that the Athenians had dealt so extremely with him, he
rather chose to die, than any way to hurt his country. And because he would
not show himself a traitor to Xerxes, who had put his whole power into his
hand, and received him so courteously in his extremity, nor that he would
torment the bowels of his ungrateful city, and unmercifully to spoil (with
foreign people) his unkind countreime^; to free himself of these two
inconveniences, he poisoned him self, Valor. li. 9.
and so died a more faithful friend to his countreyme^ than they had deserved.
After that Demetrius son of Philip, king of Macedon, whom before I spoke of,
had obtained pardon for his father and whole country, by his great modesty
and temperance showed in the Senate of Rome, because the Senators did write to
his father the king in this manner; We the Senators of Rome do not pardon thee
for thy own sake, but for the modest demeanor of thy son, showed here before
us in the Senate. Which thing Philip (by the instigation of certain of his
flattering Subjects) did take so displeasantly and greeuouslie that his son
was in such estimation, and better accounted of than himself, and therefore so
hated his son for his great pains and diligent care, whereby he preserved
both his father and Country from the revenge of the Romans. At whose good hap
also certain of his unkind Countrymen, with the help of his unnatural
brother Perses, so repined, insomuch that they procured false witness, to accuse
him to his father, being willing to hear any cause against his son. Thus by
the surmise of his unnatural Countrymen he was condemned to death by his
unkind father, who before had both studied to preserve the honor of his
father, and also to maintain the flourishing estate of his country. Did not
the Romans banish and exile the noble and worthy Cicero, by the procurement
of Clodius, Liui. li. 3.
when he had preserved and defended his Country from ruin and utter
destruction, Polib. in bello Roma norum co^tra Carthaginenses.
and saved the noble City of Rome from the fury of Cataline, even for because
he had put to death the chief traitors and enemies of the Commonwealth in that
dangerous conspiracy, who sought to spoil, sack, take and burn their native
City Rome. Was not the same ungrateful City Rome found unkind to her most
dear friend and preserver the worthy Scipio; for when the Romans were in
great distress through the bitter and sharp wars which the Carthaginians
long time most grievously held against them, being also mightily ouermatched
with the subtle and wily Hanniball, chief General of the host of the
Carthaginians, who came marching to the very walls of Rome, conquering the
Romans, staying their Consuls, and beating down their strongest powers: whose
force and policy made the city of Rome to shake for fear, the Senators and
grave fathers to tremble in despair, the noble matrones and young damsels to
cry out and lament most pitifully, as if the City even then should have been
sacked, knowing not how by any means to repel the enemy, being in this
distress, and ready to be spoiled by their mortal foe, when all their
flourishing young Gentlemen were almost slain, and their chiefest Captains
and most noble warriors put to the sword. Now in this great extremity, the
noble Scipio required leave of the sorrowful Romans to revenge their injuries
on the bloody minded Carthaginians, not doubting but that with a lusty courage,
and circumspect care, to encounter the power and policy of fierce Hanniball.
Thus when the grave Senators, and the rest of the distressed Romans did see
such willingness in the noble youth Scipio, knowing that both his father and
uncle were slain in the same war before, also seeing such invincible courage
in the brave minded Gentleman, they all with willing consent made him governor
almost over their conquered band: requiring him with lamentable tears,
(hanging about his neck) that at this time he would remember their miserable
and distressed estate, and seek to hold up and maintain their wavering Common
wealth, which was now ready to fall into the hands of their cruel enemy.
Thus Scipio having taken his Countries cause on him, with a noble heart marched
against the hardy Hanniball, and drove him (as well by policy as by force)
out of the borders and confines of Italy, ouercomming him in diverse notable
battles in Spain, getting also the whole Country of Spain again, which
the Carthaginians had lately won from the Romans, not resting until he had
chased and driven Haniball back into his own country of Affricke, yea and in
the end penned him up hard to the very walls of Carthage, which was his
chiefest defense and refuge, where was fought a cruel and bloody battle
betwixt two of the most noblest captains of the world, contending in that
fight for the Empire of the whole world, watching to who^ now it should fall.
For the pride of these two empires of Rome and Carthage, could never digest or
brook the statelines of each other, which first was the cause of this bloody
war, but now at this time it was turned to a whole Monarchy, for Scipio in
this battle overcame the Carthaginians, and caused stately Carthage to be
yielded to his mercy. Now when Scipio had finished this perilous war, he
returned with the conquest of Africa and Spain, making the stout captain
Hanniball to fly for his safety, causing the hautie Carthaginians to yield
them selves on their knees to the mercy of the Romans, returning into Rome
with the Empire (in a manner) of the whole world, to the great joy and
everlasting fame of the Romans. Surely a great and sudden change, to see the
Romans reign as victors, when that not long before the dreadful Captain
Hanniball had ranged all Italy over, and driven the Romans into their city
of Rome, who every day expected the destruction of themselves and their City;
and now not only to be Lords again over their own Empire, but also over the
stately Carthaginians, who before had sought their subuersio^ and confusion,
which happened by the wise government, and valiant courage of noble Scipio. The
Romans being now freed from all miseries and calamities, and again ruling as
kings over the whole world, could not choose but defile themselves with notable
ingratitude, and spot themselves with wonderful unkind dealing: for Scipio who
had thus pleasured his country, because the world had him in great honor and
admiration, coming daily from far to the city of Rome to behold and do
honor to so valiant and fortunate a Gentleman, who had so manfully defended
his country, and gotten such peereles praise to the Romans: wherefore the
Romans disdayning that the honor of Scipio should daily so increase, repining
and grudging at him, seeking by all means possible to hunt him from the city,
because they would not acknowledge themselves to be beholding unto him for his
noble acts, despising that any one should live among them, that should be
accounted the preserver or vpholder of their common wealth, which was by reason
of their intolerable pride: therefore they sought by all means to banish and
exile him from the City; (which was by his means preserved, as the world at
this day can well witness) inuenting against him strange and diverse
accusations. First he was charged with the old matter betwixt the Locrenses
and Pleminius, wherein (as they say) he being Consul was corrupted with money,
and therefore ministered not true Justice. Again, they laid to his charge, that
his son being prisoner to Antiochus (their enemy) was delivered to him
without ransom, which they thought was very suspicious. For these small
causes, he was called before the Senate to answer to their objections, which
were but of small importance, even as if he had been a mean man and base
person, urging causes against him with extremity, without favor, or having
any respect to his noble acts done for the Common wealth; which ingratitude
he took so displesantly, that he departed from the Court, and went into the
country to the town of Lytarne, where he dwelled as long as he lived, exiling
himself from Rome for ever: and at his death he commanded his body to be
buried there also, that his bones might not rest in that unkind City. The most
worthy Captain Hannibal was also banished Carthage by his unkind country
men, when he had done wonderful exploytes in his Countries cause: and although
he was in the end conquered by Scipio, yet was he well known to be the most
famous and worthiest Captain living in the world at that time, notwithstanding
Fortune favored him not. Thus we see, that diverse are most vile and hardly
recompensed by their unkind country men, for their good service done.


Fame. Yet notwithstanding, my good friend, although diverse Countries have been
unkind and ungrateful to their noble Country men, it is no consequent that
any Country man should be untrue to his native soil and Commonwealth: for the
fault is much more heinous and far more grievous, for the man to be untrue to
his Common wealth, than for the country to show an unkind part to the man,
although it be bad in both. But now again to our purpose, though we have
somewhat digressed from the matter, in showing what man ought to do for his
Country, and with what willingness he ought to hazard life for the
preservation thereof; it shall not seem unfit to retire again to our former
conference, concerning the government of man, which altogether ought to be
grounded on temperance, as our former speech has hitherto tended. There is an
inconvenience which brings to man wonderful miseries and manifold calamities,
which is fond and doting Love: I speak not of that Love, which is
commendable, and lawfully allowed, but of such doting love as shall hereafter
more manifestly be explaned. Magna est profecto Latmorum poetarum cohors, quae
solebant dicere, Omnia vincit amor. Surely great is the number of Roman Poets,
which were wont to say, Love vanquisheth and overcomes all things: and truly,
I must needs confess, great is the force and fury of love; but much to be
quallified by the aforesaid gift: Hesiodus.
notwithstanding, Hesiodus is of this mind, Omnium primum natus est chaos,
inde terra, tartara and amor. First of all things the Heavens were made, then
the earth, then hell, and next after love. Parmenides quoque, Parmenides.
ante deos omnes natum amorem autumat. Parmenides also does affirm, that love
was created before the Gods themselves. Euripides, Euripides.
omnium deorum supremum esse Amorem. Love (says Euripides) is the highest of
all the Gods. Ovid de Amore.
Ovid being about to speak of Love, says; Regnat, and in dominos, ius habet
ille deos. Love does reign and has a dominion and regiment in the very Gods
themselves. All which sayings of the Poets, are but to show the piercing force
and ancient antiquity of Love: faining also, that Jupiter being chief of all the Gods, could not withstand the fury of Love, (much less then could any of
the inferior Gods) but often did change his shape to have his pleasure, Nam Iouem
ipsum, modo in Cygnum, modo in Taurum transformauit, quandoque in aurum
conslauit: Neptunum equi, Quidius de Meta.
Mercurium Hirci formam induere coegit: Apollinem vt Admeti pasceret armenta
compnlit. For Jove: transformed himself sometime into a Swanne, sometime into
a Bull, and again sometime into a golden shower: Neptune to a Horse, Mercury
to the shape of a Goat, Apollo that he might feed the flocks of Admetus,
did also change his shape and form. If the Gods (as the Poets affirm) have
been thus enflamed with Love, after so vain and fond a sort, then no doubt but
mortal men are more entangled in her traps and snares, and blindly without
consideration do fall to foolish fancy, and doting desire. But this no doubt
is but foolish babble of the prating Poets, rather encouraging fond men to go
forward in their folly: for that (say they) the Gods could not bridle their
affections from the force of love, therefore much less men. Well let this
suffice, what greater calamity has happened to man than such as has been
procured by inordinate and insatiable love. Was not Paris, son to Priamus
king of Troy, the very cause by his inordinat love, that brought to pass such
cruel wars betwixt the Greeks and Troyans, wherein both his aged father and
brethren were slain, his country spoiled, and the city of Troy mightily
defaced with fire, and thrown flat to the ground, with the slaughter of many
thousands of his cou^treyme^. What was the first occasion of the great war
betwixt the Thebanes and Phoceans, which could hardly be ended in ten years,
but ye fond love of a certain Phocean, who took perforce a Theban woman out
of the hands of a Theban. What also was the cause that Philip king of Macedon
so often and suddenly returned from his wars, leaving all, as the proverb
says, at six and seven, with out order, to his reproach and wonderful loss,
but only the importunate love he bare to Cleopater. Did not noble Achilles
purchase great dishonor by doting love? For when he lay at the siege of Troy,
because Atridas had taken his sweet love and green sleeves from him, he would
no longer fight in his countries cause which was the death of many a thousand
Greek, until his sweet heart Briseis was restored again, or else (as some say)
because Hector had slain his loving companion Patroclus in his own armor.
Wise Ulysses was in like sort entangled in the same snare, for when Agamemnon
and the other captains of Greece called for him to go to Troy to revenge the
villainy which the Troyans had offered, enrolling his name as a chief Peer of
the Greeks: but Ulysses newly married to Penelope, was not willing to go to
Troy in his countries cause, but to play and daily with his late love at home,
insomuch that when the king and captains of the Greeks were fully prepared
and ready to go to Troy, Ulysses feigned himself mad, and out of his wits, and
because he would the better persuade them of his madness, he coupled dogs
together, and ran with a plowe raging over the fields sowing salt, making as
though he were stark mad without either wit or sense, but Palamides loathing
to loose so fit a mate as Ulysses was, took Thelemacus the son of Ulysses,
and laid him in the way as his father came running with his plow: but Ulysses
not so mad, but lifted up the plow, and missed the child, whereby Palamides
perceived that he dissembled the matter, and cried out, thy craft and subtlety
Ulysses is bewrayed and found out, therefore leave off thy counterfaite madness,
and go with us to Troy. Thus when Ulysses had disgraced himself (by his
doting folly) to his shame and reproach, was in the end forced to go to Troy
with a flea in his ear. Hercules that noble champion and Conqueror of the
world, when he had done many notable and worthy exploites, whereof the world
at this day bears witness; at the last to the utter defacing of all his
former actions he fell to doting in such fond sort, that he laid his weapons at
the foot of Iole his love, and became her spinning slave, refusing no toil
whereunto she commanded him, which thing (notwithstanding his valiant deeds)
at this day remains a vile reproach and blot to his dead carcass. What was
the cause that the most valiant Sampson lost his great force and strength, but
by the peevish love he bare to Dalila, who had oftentimes attempted his
destruction, but could never bring her purpose to effect, until such time,
that he thorough inordinate and doting love, must needs reveal his secrets,
which was the chief cause of his utter confusion: for these causes did the
Poets feign, that women are to men an evil, yet notwithstanding they owe them
this favor, to say, they are necessary euilles, Homerus says, Homerus.
Vsque adeonihilimprobius velmuliere peius, that nothing is more vile or bad
than a woman: and diverse other Poets, Foemina nihil pestilentius esse
confirmarunt, and mulierem omnem esse malam, do affirm that nothing is more
pestilent or wicked than a woman, and that every woman is bad and evil. Upon
which occasion of the Poets babbling, Lacon.
this merry jest sprang first: Lacon cum vxorem duxisset perpusillam, dicebate
malis quod minimum esset eligendum: Lacon, when he had married a very little
and small wife, did say, out of many euilles the least is to be chosen. But
surely the vain babbling of the prating Poets, in this cause is utterly to be
condemned: for under the color that all women are evil, they go about to
hide and cloak the foolish folly of mad doting men, making women a veil or
shadow to hide and cover the doting fondnes of insatiable men. Indeed the old
proverb is, Ignis, mare, mulier, tria sunt mala. That sire, the sea, and a
woman, are three evils. Truly a strong reason, then may it like wise be said
that men are evil, for that one man has killed another: and surely by this
reason the former three are also evil. For if a man will cast himself into the
fire, no doubt but that he shall burn, or into the sea, where he may be
drowned, or else into the calamities of such a marriage, or otherwise over fondly
to dote, which he well knew before would purchase his trouble and vexation. But
my good friend, my purpose is not to exclaim on, or blame faultlesse women,
who cannot bridle the fond affection of their importunate lovers: wherefore I
will somewhat more amply speak of fond and doting love, which is as well in
the one as in the other, and what inconvenience does consequently follow their
doting folly. Semiramis being the most amiable Lady of the world, Plu. de vita
Semiramis. Et Just.
by reason of her surpassing beauty, was sent for into Assiria, to the king of
that region, that he might satisfy himself with the sight of her peerles
pulchritude: before whose presence she came according to the tenor of his
message. The king had no sooner cast his wanton eye upon her passing beauty,
but was forthwith inflamed with the fire of affection toward her: then after
certain circumstances ouerpassed, she required of the doting king a rich
reward, namely a robe of estate, the government of Assiria for five days
continuance, and the absolute authority in all things that were done in the
kingdom. Which petition of Semiramis was granted by the king, no denial made
to the contrary. In conclusion, when things (without exception) were in the
gripes of her aspiring mind, she commanded the fond king to be slain,
whereby he was dispossessed of his dominion, and she presently thereupon
enjoyed the scepter, ^lu de vita Candauli.
and crown imperial over all Assiria. Did not Candaulus king of Sardis dote
in foolish and fond love over his wife, insomuch that he thought her the
fairest creature in the world: yet not content to satisfy himself with her
beauty, but in fond and doting sort must needs show his wife naked to his
friend, to make him partaker of her surpassing beauty and peereles person: and
therefore he called his fre^d Giges to his chamber, and hid him secretly
against his wife should come to bed: but his friend Giges dissuading him from
his folly, notwithstanding Candaulus would have no nay in his importunate
suite, but that his friend should both know and see his his privy benefit: so
that he was constrained to obey his fond request. Now when the wife of
Candaulus perceived herself so betrayed by the invention of her husband (for
Giges incontine^tly discloased himself) she was mightily abashed, and
wonderfully ashamed, for in that country it was counted a most wonderful
dishonesty and reproach, that a woman should be seen naked of any man, saving
of her husband: yet for all that, she disse^bled the matter for a time, meaning
in the end to take sharp revenge on her husband, for the great villainy he had
offered her. At the last she called Giges to her chamber, who before had seen
her naked, to the end to have slain him: threatening him, that unless he
would presently revenge the wrong and great abuse which her husband had offered
her in his presence, which he consequently consented unto for the sauegard of
his life, with firm oaths, and solemn vows, which was, that he should kill
the king her husband, and take her to wife, with the kingdom, hoping that he
would be content to possess so good a benefit, and not to make any other
privy or partaker of that which he best esteemed. Thus whether it were for
the sauegard of his life, which he stood in peril to lose, or for the coveting
of so beautiful a Queen, and large a kingdom which now was offered him, it
rests doubtful, but he forthwith executed the Queens pleasure on his
doting master, which happened through his own fond folly. What inconuenie^ce
also happened to Artaxerxes, Eli. li. 10.
king of Persia, by such foolish folly, in doting over his son so fondly, yt
he must make him his master in his life time. For being drowned in such fond
affection toward his son Darius, (not content himself with his scepter and
kingdom which he quietly possessed) he presently advanced him to taste the
secretnes and sweet of his kingdom, not satisfieng himself to be a commander
over his people, but would be a servant, and be commanded by his son, and so
it happened to him as he deserved, for this princox his son, being established
in the kingdom by his doting father, became at the last so lordly over his
foolish father that he would command him in all causes as his duetifull and
obedient subject, it chanced that his father Artaxerxes had married the
concubine which he before had taken in his wars, who at that time was
peerless in beauty. Now Darius being in possession of his fathers kingdom,
by virtue of his authority he called his father before his presence as a
common subject, saying, Father, as you have put the kingdom into my hand, and
made me absolute King thereof: so whosoever this kingdom contains, is also
my subject, and under my authority, therefore sir, my pleasure is, that you
deliver and yield into my hands, your wife (which was the concubine) for she
is fair in my sight, and therefore I greatly desire to have her, and by virtue
of my authority I straightly command, no resistance to the contrary. But
Artaxerxes, although he had made his son King, knew that he was his father,
wherefore he contrary to his sons mind, detained Aspasia his new married
wife; which denial caused his son Darius to conspire the death of his
resisting father, because (as he thought) he was not absolute King to
command, as after the death of his father he should be, and also did
associate in this his unnatural confederacy, fifty brothers which were
begotten by his own father Artaxerxes, by diverse concubines. But this doting
King (as it chanced) although he had made himself a subject to his proud
son, yet by good help of his nobles, he detected the cause, and found out
the treason. And in the same day that Darius made account to accomplish his
wicked enterprise, he was himself and all the rest of the confederates taken,
and fell into the same snare that they had prepared for their aged father: for
Artaxerxes put both them, their wives and children to the sword, that none of
that wicked race should remain alive, the aged King for very grief that he
had conceived by his own folly, soon ended his life, a more happier King
than a father. It were but a tragical history of Leyr, sometime King of this
land, which is so sufficiently set down and made manifest in their English
Chronicles, what enormities, calamities and infinite miseries, happened to him,
by the fond and doting love which he bare toward his daughters. For by a
foolish conceit which he had taken toward them, so far doting in an
unmeasurable sort, and as it were being over much blinded with a fond conceit
and foolish affection toward the young nice wenches, that he must needs
(forsooth) divide his Kingdom betwixt them in his life, and willingly
dispossess himself, standing ever after to their reward and courtesy. Thus
when he had displaced himself, and division of the Kingdom was made jointly
to the use of his daughters, being bestowed and married in several parts of
the Land, he himself thought good to remain a time with the one, and as long
a space with the other, until the good old King had tired both his daughters;
who soon began to be weary of their aged Father, denying and abbridging him
in a manner of things necessary and needful: so that the poor old King was
forced thorough extreme need to seek redres at his youngest daughters hand,
whom he never could well fancy, neither had ever given any thing unto;
remaining out of his Kingdom, because he had bequeathed her no part thereof:
at whose hand the poor distressed King found relief and also redress of his
wrongs, to his great comfort in his old age. Thus it remains evident and
extant at this day, what miseries, calamities, enormities, infinite troubles and
daily vexations, consequently do fall to man by that fond conceit in doting
folly, inordinately loving and immoderately fonding over wife, son, daughter,
or others whosoever, as the tenor of our conference has hethertoo tended and
expressed: therefore my good friend, leaving to your consideration our former
speeches, to be well and diligently noted, whereby I may somewhat hereafter
perceive that you are profited, and then I shall think my pains well
bestowed, and our first meeting right happy. And now in the mean time for the
better recovery of your memory, and also being loath to trouble your senses
with over much tediousnes, I willingly crave pardon to rest, until our next
meeting, expecting at this time no further replication, but committing our
conference to the safe tuition of your memory. Farewell.


FINIS.
The miserable calamities, and lamentable distresses of bloody Battle and
ruinous War, with the unspeakable mischiefs that consequently follows
disdainful envy.
WHereas diverse calamities and miseries incident to man, are already
sufficiently explayned and set down; wherein he wilfully runs to perdition
and present destruction, by his inordinate and insatiable appetites: not
withstanding there remains as yet unspoken of the grievous enormities of
despitefull War, with the infinite miseries and distressed calamities
thereunto belonging, which also happens to man by his immoderate and
intolerable pride. But now first to decipher the cruel state of ruinous
War, it has been most vainly proved by Logical probations, that War is
incident and inevitable to a Common wealth. For (as they say) War brings
ruin, ruin brings poverty, poverty procures peace, and peace in time
increases riches, riches causes stateliness, stateliness increases envy,
envy in the end procures deadly malice, mortal malice proclaims open
war and battle: and from war again as before is rehearsed: so that by
this argument, the weal public must either be in poverty or else in war,
(which truly we oftentimes see to fall out accordingly). But is this
sophistical argument of sufficient force to blind and cloak the badde
corruption of man's nature, as though riches were master to the man, and not the
man over his riches; either is it consequently incident unto him that is rich,
to carry malice, envy and mortal hatred in his mind, or otherwise to him
that is in poverty to seek for peace; Then let us attribute it to the wheel
wherein one thing successively follows another, and not to be redressed by
the provident government of man. Surely I am not of that mind, although riches
does often abuse the man, and the man his riches yet notwithstanding it is no
general consequent, that all rich men are malicious persons, seeking after
ruinous war and bloody battle: for then should I think it a vain thing
for a man to strive with the corruption of his nature, to prevent and
disappoint such miserable calamities by his provident wisdom, as may after
incidently happen and fall out; but rather wish him to run headlong with his
unbridled affections to such casual chances, as may (howsoever the world
falls out) come to pass. But truly I am of this opinion, that whosoever has
the gift of temperance, can neither be proud in authority and high dignity,
whereby malice and envy may grow and increase; nor in poverty to be so
insatiable covetous, that sufficient shall not serve him; but whether riches
increase, continue, or diminish, no doubt but that Temperance has such a
provident foresight and prudent care to hold it self content without
battle. Wherefore to make frustrate this former fond Argument, War is not
so incident to man, but that by wisdom it may easily be prevented.

But now to return to our purpose again concerning the calamity of war;
Justin. li. 1.
the ancient Historiographer Trogus Pompeius reports, that Ninus King of
Assyria first made war, being stirred up with pride and covetousness, and
first of all others assayed to bring other Nations and Regions under his
subjection, fighting with his neighbors and confines for superiority, wherein
he made great effusion of blood and mighty slaughters of people. Yet
notwithstanding the same Trogus affirms, that there were certain Kings
before him, who invaded barbarous Nations and rude Regions, to the intent to
bring them to be civil people. For (says he) Fuere quidem temporibus
antiquiores Vexores rex Aegypti, and Scythiae rex Tanais, quorum alter in
Pontum, alter in Aegyptum excessit: sed longinqua, non finitima bella gerebant;
nec imperium sibi, sed populis suis gloriam tenebant, contentique victoria,
imperio abstinebant. There were before him, Vexores King of Egypt, and Tanais
King of Scythia, the one going into Po^tus, the other into Egypt, and making
war a far off, and not on their neighbors: neither did they seek to get
principality to themselves, but perpetual glory to their Country men,
contenting themselves with victory, refrained to hold them under subjection,
saving in repressing their barbarous manners. Therefore says Pompeius; Ninus was
the first that made war, because he invaded his confines and borderers,
striving for regiment, fighting for superiority, and earnestly going about to
get the Kingdoms of his neighbors under his subjection; and not these Kings
who sent their power into foreign countries, to tame and make civil such
barbarous people, and to bring them to good government, and then to leave their
kingdoms to their own authority. But Ninus has been so rightly imitated and
justly followed, that at this day war increases of trifling causes, to most
bloody battle. Did not the cruel war of the Persians grow of a small
occasion and grudge betwixt Mena^der Samius, and the Athenians. Also the
bloody conflict called Praelium sacrum, began about the exaction of the
judgment of the Amphictions? the Cheronean war bred of a light occasion
betwixt Philip and the Athenians. Which wars, although they sprang but of
frivolous causes, could not be ended without great slaughters. Therefore it is
an easier thing to begin war, than to end it: wherefore a man ought first to
have a care how to finish that which he takes in hand, or else he runs
blindly to his enterprise, having also consideration, that whosoever shall first
begin war, sounding the trumpe of defiance upon small occasions, does as it
were open his gate to be spoiled, as well of the foreign as domestique enemy;
such misgouernment and disorder there is in war: for the rude and unbridled
rascal does gape after so fit an opportunity, to devour, spoil and rob the
honest and true subject, boystrously intruding himself into the houses, and
arrogantly challenging to be partakers of the goods and substance of the quiet
people, which they have long time traveled for with great pains and careful
toil, so that he who cannot be content to enjoy and possess his own proper
goods privately with quietness, let him proclaim open war, and he shall
soon be rid of that grief. Who is so prone to bloody broils, as such as
have by euillhusbandrie (as they term it) spent their lands, Salustius libro.
2.
goods and substance, in vain pleasures and vile follies? Was not Rome in
great peril to have been spoiled by a notable crew of bankrupts. For Lucius
Sergius Cataline, a noble man of Rome, when he had by riot spend his
patrimony, being altogether unable to maintain his prodigality and wanton
vain in immoderate spending, went about to spoil, sack, and destroy his own
native city and countrymen, associating to him in this his grievous
conspiracy, such outlawes and bankrouts as either stood in fear of a law, or
else such unthrifts as himself, as had wantonly and most vainly spent and
consumed their goods and possessions, which presently were as soon allured, as
himself was ready to entise, hoping to be made rich by the spoil of their
own countrymen, when they had vnthriftely wasted their own. This rabble rout
of unbridled riotors had wrought their mischievous purpose to such effect,
that their wicked enterprice had taken place, if by the provident and wise
foresight of Cicero it had not been prevented, neither was it known that any
one Roman of good government, or any one that lived orderly in the
commonwealth, without riot or other bad and lewd conversation, was found
culpable or gilty in this dangerous conspiracy, although diverse principal and
chief men at the first were suspected, notwithstanding they were in the end
clearly defended, and apparently freed from that slanderous reproach and
ignomie by their own Citizens. Liu. li. 5.
Did not Brennus in like manner lead and conduct a mighty and huge band of
Gauls, who had before spent their goods by riot, prodigality, and disordering
themselves in many bad and vile misdemeanors, spoiling and robbing most
unmercifully the countries as they marched, committing sacrilege, with a
number of most vile villains, to recover again their former vain expe^ces?
Did they not in the end after many cruel acts, insatiable spoils, and
shameful robberies, most miserably perish, to the wonderful example of such
spoiling outlawes? What was the cause that the Troyans invaded Italy, making
such hauock and spoil in what country soever they arrived, but their greedy
and covetous minds to recover their unthrifty losses? For when they had by
their own unfaithfulness greatly abused their friends the Greeks, with a most
shameful abuse, the Greeks in reuengement thereof sacked and spoiled their
city, slaying and murdering the unfaithful Troyans; saving certain which
afterward made wars in Italy, which were saved at the destruction of Troy,
for betraying their king and city into the hands of the Grecians, this remain
of the disloyal Troyans so scoured and pilled the coasts of diverse
countries, to get and take perforce whatsoever they could finger, arrived at
the last in Italy, where they made sharp war, spoiling the people, and
wasting the Country, until such time as they had taken the whole region from
the lawful inhabitors thereof. Thus it is most evident, that first war is
begun and set forward either by the insatiable person, or else by the rebel,
bankrout, or outlaw: the one to satisfy his unbridled appetite, plaguing
diverse for his own private gain: the other for his misgouernment and
disobedience both to Prince and law, to whom war is sweet and most pleasant
to answer their greedy expectation withal. But war to the contented person
and quiet subject, is a hell, and the very scourge of God, the name whereof is
most odious and terrible to the quiet mind, for it brings all miseries and
calamities to man, as namely, plague, pestilence, sudden death, murder, bloody
battle, cruel slaughters, miserable destruction of many towns, overthrow of
stately cities, sword, fire and famine, with a thousand miseries incidert to
man by such a spiteful guest. The old proverb says, Dulce bellum inexpertis,
sed acerbum experientibus. War is sweet and pleasant to the unskillful and
ignorant, but bitter and unsavory to the skilful. Yet notwithstanding,
although war be most fierce and cruel, yet is it stoutly to be maintained
against the insatiable and inuading enemy, and with might and maine to be
followed, to the beating down and suppressing of such spiteful foes, as are
ever ready pressed and bent to disturb a quiet and peaceable kingdom, and being
blinded with avarice, do right soon consent to lamentable slaughters and
effusion of blood: it is much more easier to defend a kingdom being already
possessed, and to repel the adversary, than to invade other regions, or
conquer foreign countries, for it is to be thought that the people will fight
more courageously, both for their prince, country, liberty, wives and
children, house and family, than the proud inuading enemy, who fights to
satisfy his vainglorious mind, and insatiable appetite. Was not Xerxes king
of Persia (when he invaded Greece with such an innumerable power, who also
perceiving the strength of his multitude, commanded both sea and laud to obey
his pleasure) driven back out of Greece by a small company of the defending
Grecians, causing him to fly with speed home to his own Country again to
his great shame and dishonor. Polib. li. 6.
Was not such inuading the very chief and original cause that the Romans
subdued Carthage, for if the proud and insatiable Carthaginia^s had not first
invaded Italy and the Romans, their own City and commonwealth could never
have been overthrown, and subdued. For when first the Carthaginians entered
Italy, minding to make a whole conquest of the Roman empire, without cause at
that time offered by the Romans, the Romans then seeing their Empire in
danger, their whole state in peril, their wives and children likely to be
spoiled, the City defaced, and their country utterly to be ruinated and
destroyed: they then with manly courage, and specially by the good help of the
wise and valiant Scipio, repelled them Italy, drove them home into Affrike,
and in the end to the very walls of their chiefest refuge, which was to the
stately town and city of Carthage: and there in the last battle they were
overcome by the Romans, and forced to sue for favor at the hands of them
whom before they had invaded. The noble Scipio considering that in that
battle did consist and depend the victory and whole overthrow of one of
those who stately Empires of Rome and Carthage. And thus in this battle they
on both sides were stirred and pricked forward in hope of possessing each
others Empire, had no other means to animate and encourage his soldiers, than
by repeating and reiterating unto them the peril of their own estate, and
with what cruel and bloody minds the greedy Carthagiginians had invaded them
before. Promising them futher (to the intent to prick their minds forward
more willingly to fight) that if at that time and in that fight they did get
the victory, the^ they should return home to their own country, carrying with
them liberty for ever, and never again to fear such cruel invasion as before
they had tasted of. For says he, Adesse finem belli in manibus esse predam
Carthagenis, si forte pugnauerint, etc. The war is even now at an end, the pray
and spoil of the Carthaginians were already in their hands, and leave should
be given them, after this victory, to return home to their country, parents,
wives and children, and to their household Gods,

So by the encouragement of the worthy Scipio, they obtained a most triumphant
victory, returning to Rome, having conquered the causers of that bloody war;
Just. li. 1.
which they could never have done, if the Carthaginians first had not made them
desperate by inuading their Region. Also in the great wars and sharp fight
betwixt the Medians and the Persians, in the time of Cirus and Astiages, there
happened a notable thing, which in this cause does merit remembrance. For when
the Persians under the conduct of king Cyrus, were driven back, and forced by
Astiages and the Medes to retire, being most eagerly chased by the fierce
inuading foe, with cruel force and bloody minds, until the Persian women
rebuked the cowardlines of their flying men, in this sort; Nam matres and
vxores eorum obuiam occurrunt, orant in prelium reuertantur, cunctantibus
sublata vest, obscoena corporis ostendunt, rogantes number in vteros matrum vel
vxorum velint refugere. The men by this sharp reprehension of the women, went
back again into the battle, and put unto shameful flight those who before
had caused them to retire. For then they bethought themselves whether they
should fly if they lost their own kingdom, thinking it very hard to live
and inhabit under the rule and dominions of other, when as they could not
enjoy and quietly possess their own patrimony: and also when they looked
back toward their women, who came upon them in such indecent sort as has
before been showed, they were greatly ashamed considering their own
cowardlines, who were feign to be stirred up, and put in mind by their valiant
women to defend their country and family. Therefore the art of war is to
be exercised, and the feats and acts of chiualry highly to be commended, not
so much for the inuading of others, Valor. f. 345
as for the defending of their own, and beating down of the proud vaunting
foe. This was an ancient order and custom amongst the Romans, to set open the
Temple gates of Ianus in the time of war, and in peace to close them up
again, for when they had thoroughly seen the mutabilitie and uncertainty of
frowning battle, and the casualties of cruel war, being ouerwearied and
tired with the calamities and miseries thereof, at last they erected and
builded a temple in their city, placing therein the image and picture of Ianus,
which was pictured with a bifronce or double forhead, looking plainly and
sensibly both ways, the temple doors and gates being closely bolted, locked
and shut up in time of peace and tranquillity; and in the time of war (either
foreign or civil) they commanded to unlock and set open the gates of the same
temple: to this end and purpose, that the people of the City, might thoroughly
behold the double face and backward look of Ianus, which signified and
represented to the beholder, a foresight of future things finally to happen,
as well as for the provision of the present state. Thus it was continually used
in peace to be shut, and in wars to be open, whereby both the Senators,
Centurions, Captains and other Officers and Governors of the people, were put
in mind (in the time of war) to have a provident foresight and circumspect
care what might happen thereby, therein, or thereafter, as well as what seemed
to stand good by their present knowledge. Which prudent policy caused the wise
Romans to prevent diverse inconveniences: for it is not good over blindly to
go forward in such causes, trusting to their own force, nor to fickle fortune,
who commonly deceives those that trust her. It fortuned upon a time that
Dionysius the second, Eli. lib. 5.
and Philip the son of Amyntas met together, and falling into communication
of many matters (as the use and custom is in conference and circular talk)
they harped both upon this string, Philip asked this question of Dionysius
Quando cum tantum regnum accepisset a parente, non id defendisset and
conseruasset; How it chanced, that he having received so ample a patrimony of
his Father, did not defend and maintain the same. Whereunto he made this
answer; Non mirum, Responsio Dionysij.
quoniam omnia relinquens, fortunam solum qua ea parauerat, and tutus fuerat,
pater non mihi tradidit. No marvel (says he) for my father leaving all things
to me in abundance, did not deliver to me withal his flourishing fortune,
whereby he obtained, and maintained the same. But truly where fortune (most
commonly) is present and waighteth at will and pleasure, Pol. li. 7.
there is wanting a satisfied mind, which was verefied by the Legates of
Carthage. For when the Romans had utterly ouerthrown and subdued them, they
were forced to sue to the Senate of Rome for peace, in which ambassade their
was a grave Father of Carthage who boldly stood forth in the ^^ the Romans
(as thy first motion was) rather than to move war, which does so happily
fall out to the great honor of the Carthaginians, no Hanno, now I warrant thee,
we shall hear a Senator of Rome speak here in the Senate house of Carthage,
most humbly craving peace at our hands for their distressed Country and
Commonwealth, or else far greater spoils of Rome shall come to Carthage.
Whereunto the grave Hanno made this sober answer; I was determined (says he)
Fathers conscript, at this time, in your so great and common joy to have
spoken nothing which might have been displeasaunt to you: but I can now do no
less but answer the rash Senator, that enquireth whether the wars begun
against the Romans forethinke me or no? To him I answer that I still
forethinke it, and blame our victorious Captain, until I see the war taken
up and finished by some tolerable condition, neither shall any other thing
cause me desist from desiring our ancient peace, save only a new league
confirmed betwixt us. This news which Mago has blazed abroad, are very
joyful to Hamilco and other of Hannibals friends and servants, and to me also
if we take our good fortune while it is offered: but if we let it pass and the
time also, in which we may be thought rather to grant peace than crave it, I
doubt lest this joy will deceive us and come to nothing. With these, and such
like speeches by him vttred in the Senate, he quietly made an end: but Hamilco
and the rest of the Senators gave no regard to his Oration, for that they
thought it either proceeded of mere malice betwixt Hanniball and him, or else
to hold down or keep under the glory and renown of flourishing Carthage,
which in deed was not any thing so.

Thus, for the true meaning of Hanno, he was openly checked in the Senate by
the vainglorious Senators: who afterward (but not in time) remembered his
counsel, believing nothing that he said at the first, until experience had
made them thoroughly feel their own folly. On the other part, after diverse
great overthrows and bloody slaughters of the half vanquished Romans, Poli.
lib 5.
the distressed Senators did choose for their chief Captain to fight against
Hannibal and the Carthaginians, Q. Fabius Maximus, a most noble and prudent
Senator: also at that time with him a young Gentleman of Rome, named Minutius,
who was in like sort by the Senate made master of the horsemen, being a
hotspur, an over desperate youth, which afterward turned the Romans to much
displeasure and misery. Now Fabius being thus unequally paired with a wilful
fellow marched forward toward the Carthaginians, and had always a circumspect
care least that he should commit any thing over rashly, being not willing
desperately to hazard his charge, and the whole state of the Roman Empire at
the first brunte, or in one battle, with so valiant a Captain and worthy
soldier as Hanniball was, wherefore he led his army by easy iorneyes, and
good espies, into the field against his enemy, pitching his camp in the high
places of the high hills not far from the Carthaginian camp: whereupon
Hannibal seeing anew captain of the Romans, thought good also to offer him
present battle, to welcome him at his first coming, brought his men forth
into the fields, in order of battle, and good array to fight: but wary Fabius
all the day kept him self close in his Camp, and would not suffer his men to
fight, for that he knew Hanniball went about to prove him, if in case he might
find him rash, and unadvised, as he had found the other captains before:
therefore in like case by holding his men from battle, he went about to try
and prove the patience of Hanniball, which indeed he right wisely found out:
for Hanniball, when he perceived that Fabius would not rashly venture battle,
he forthwith retired out of the field into his camp again, fearing greatly
in his mind the sobernes of the wise Roman Captain, being in his judgment a
man much unlike to Sempronius, or Flaminius, whom before he had overthrown by
their rashness and desperate folly. Sem^ronius.
But Minutius master of the horsemen, when he had espied the Carthaginians
marching in order of battle, would needs have issued out on the brauado, and
given them downeright battle* in this his rash and desperate mood, hazarding
all at one time, had not the wise Fabius withholden and persuaded him to the
contrary. For which cause he openly exclaimed on, and dispraysed the slacknes
of Quintus Fabius, sending word to Rome what a coward they had placed in
office. Yet notwithstanding, for all the inventions of Minutius, who had so
earnestly maligned and inueied against him, both openly by Orations in the
Camp, and also by letters sent to Rome, on set purpose spitefully to work him
displeasure at home with the Senators. He followed still his wise course and
proceeding, in following the enemy from place to place, camping alwais him
self as near to Hanniball as conveniently he might, to wait on him at all
assayes. Which thing was as unpleasant to Ha^niball his foe, as to Minutius his
fellow. For he right well did know, that unless the Romans would venture
battle, he could not long remain In Italy, which thing also the wise
Fabius diligently heeded and noted. But now, although Fabius had saved many
thousand of the Romans from the cruel slaughtering hand of Hanniball, by his
great wisdom in abstayning from battle, and in daily preventing of the
enemy from their purposes, which otherwise would have turned the State to
great damage and peril: nevertheless it was thought at Rome that his heart
failed him, and that he trifled out ye time only to the intent his honor and
dignity might the longer continue, and that he cared not what cost the City
was at, so that he still might be in office, and live with honor. Thus by his
provident wisdom and careful foresight he had gotten many enemies at Rome,
and especially by the means of this young hotespur Minutius, insomuch that he
departed from the camp, and went to the City to answer the ouer-light
believing Senators, who so hardly had conceived of him. It so fortuned at that
time when he was in Rome, that word was brought to the Senate from Minutius, who
gouerued the army in the absence of Fabius, that he by his valor and policy
had given Hanniball a great overthrow: which indeed was partly true, for the
wily Hanniball had gotten certain knowledge by his espials, how the case stood
betwixt Fabius and Minutius, and also that Fabius was now in some displeasure
at Rome, by the means of Minutius their young Captain, wherefore he began to
practice wholly to thrust Fabius (whom he feared) into utter hatred and
displeasure with the chief Senators and governors of Rome.

By which means the Romans (peradventure) might commit the whole army to
the government of Minutius, and so displace Fabius, whose wisdom and policy
always made the enemy to fear and dread him. Wherefore the subtle Hanniball
knowing that already the Romans had conceived a very good opinion, and good
liking of their young courageous Captain, if now therefore he should give in
the absence of Fabius some small victory to Minutius, that then the Romans
would be in further liking of him, insomuch that they would repose further
trust in him: by which means he hoped soon to be the Lord over all Italy.
With these considerations Hanniball brought forth his army, for he knew full
well that Minutius would presently fight, which fell out accordingly. Hanniball
had in that fight slain six thousand men, and so gave ground and retired
into his Camp, before the fierce pursuing Minutius. Notwithstanding, it was no
great victory to the Romans, for they lost in the same fight five thousand.
But Minutius being right joyful of this his good fortune, forthwith sent
vaunting word thereof to Rome, that they might perceive, this he had done in
the absence of Fabius, and greater exploites he would have done, if he had not
been hindered heretofore by the slacknes of Fabius. By means of these his
boasting letters the whole City was much comforted, notwithstanding Fabius
(when all the City was merry and in common joy) would nether credit the
news, nor believe the letters. At the last he said; If all were true that was
reported, he rather greatly feared their prosperous and fortunate adventure,
than any way rejoiced therein. For he was assured of (he said) and very well
knew the subtle sleightes and policies of crafty Hanniball.

For which words he was even in the Senate house among them all openly rebuked
by Marcus Metellus, who said and affirmed, That he kept his Soldiers and men
of war in their Camps, more like Captives and Prisoners, than men of war.
And especially it was not to be suffered, that he himself (their chief
governor and General) being present amongst them, would not only permit
and suffer any thing to be done valiantly against the enemies, but now also
being absent, held against the thing that was well done by the master of his
Horsemen.

Fabius at that time answered few words, for he thought they would be evil
heard, but this he said; Whereas two years past the City had sustained great
harms and losses, through the foolish hardines of the desperate governors,
that now he doubted not but if he might bear rule, and have his mind
without controlment, he would make it evident and manifest to all men, that
Fortune could little do or work against a good Captain, but that Wisdom and
Reason should have the dominion over all her chances. Yet for all that, the
Senates determination at that time was, that Minutius, who had so nobly behaved
himself, and governed the army in his absence, should be half ruler of the
host with him, and the whole governance thereof to be parted betwixt them
both. This fell out right to the expectation of Hanniball, but a heavy and
lamentable hap to Fabius, who tenderly favored the welfare of the Roman
Commonwealth, and although he could very willingly have yielded and resigned up
the whole army, and his authority there withal to the Romans, who had
offered him this disgrace, yet notwithstanding, the duetifull care which he had
over his country, and the present peril which he saw the whole army to
stand in, caused him to take and accept the half, hoping to preserve them at
the least. But Minutius perceiving himself to be had in such estimation at
Rome, as well of the common people, as of the Senators themselves, wherefore he
was not a little proud, he then began to take much more on him, prowdly
boasting and vaunting on himself, saying; That in their great heaviness and
calamity, he alone was found out a Captain able to match with courageous
Hanniball. Now fell Quintus Fabius and Minutius to conference about the
government of the army committed to both their charges. Q Fabius
Minutius would have it so parted, that he might bear rule one day or one
week, and then Fabius to take place the like time accordingly. But this order
liked not Fabius, for that he knew how the sequel would fall out, which he
might easily conjecture by the inequality which was betwixt wilful Minutius
and wily Hanniball, therefore Fabius would needs have it divided between
them, saying; That if in case he could not by his counsel save the whole
host, yet he would assay to save and preserve half thereof as well as he
might. Minutius possessing half the Army according to their agreement,
disdained to Camp near to the Camp of his fellow Fabius: but Fabius although
he made as light account of Minutius, yet notwithstanding he always carried a
vigilant eye whereabout his rash fellow went, that he might be ready if need
should be, for he thought he would soon need his help, (which forthwith
accordingly fell out) for Ha^niball being thoroughly certefied of these things,
presently conceived a double joy; one was, for that he thought to vanquish the
foolish hardines of Minutius, even as he would himself; the other was, for
that half the power and strength of Fabius was minished, by reason of parting
the host. Wherefore he neglected no time to entrap and ensnare this over
venterous Youth, who had been fleshed before with a final victory; knowing
that he could no sooner offer, but Minutius would he ready to attempt.
Whereupon, when he thought that Fabius had bin far enough from his fellow, so
that he could not aid him on the sudden, he trained forth to battle the
rash and desperate youth, compassing him round about in places of great
disadvantage to the Romans, minding there to give an utter overthrow to
Minutius, (which indeed he had done, if present succor had not bin.) Now
Minutius seeing himself in great danger, thinking it impossible that he should
escape that present peril; also, seeing his men slain on every side, so that
the field was utterly lost on his part, had not this happy chance happened, as
follows; Fabius was not so much displeased with the overthwart dealing of
Minutius, but that he carried a watchful care to the welfare of his Country:
for when he espied his fellow and the Romans in such danger and distress, he
said; Fortune has caught their follieno sooner than I feared she would; now he
that is joined with Fabius in the Empire, has found Hannibal ouerhard for him
both in power and also in fortune: but it is not now time (said he) to chide,
I will refer that till more opportunity. Then presently caused he his men
to display his Banners behind a hill (for neither his fellows nor the
Carthaginians deemed that he had been so near them) coming suddenly to the
aid of his despairing fellow and the Romans, whereof some were fled, some
slain, and other some flying to save themselves, in great distress; so that
they all thought he came as it were a man sent from heaven to their succors:
and before he could join battle with the Carthaginians, Hannibal called
back his men from chasing any further the enemy that fled, being so afraid
at the present approaching of Fabius. Insomuch that he suddenly withdrew
himself into his Camp, saying; That he had overcome Minutius, but that he
was also overcome by Fabius. Then some of the dispersed Romans ran to the
camp of Fabius, and the rest that fled before went to Minutius, where the
remnant of the discomfited succors were. Thus when the wilful Minutius had
seen himself so deceived by the flights of Hannibal, and tried the friendly
succor of his fellow (whom by all means he had sought to discredit,) he
called the remainder of his host about him, saying; I oftentimes, loving
soldiers and friends, have heard say, that he is most wise that can give good
counsel, and tell what is to be done in weighty causes; and that he is next
wise, that can obey him that gives good counsel: but he that can neither
give good counsel himself, nor hearken to the grave advice of the wise, is of
al other most foolish; now therefore, seeing that the first of these gifts
fortune has denied us, let us keep the second, and while we learn to rule,
let us also purpose with our selves to obey them that be wise. Wherefore I
pray you, let us now (though too late) ioyn our tents with Fabius, and when you
hear me salute him as my father, salute you his soldiers likewise as your
noble patrones, by whose strength and hardines this day ye are preserved.
Incontinently, they removed to the Camp of Fabius, whereat he meruailed not a
little: now when their legions were met together, and salutations had, after
long protestation made by Minutius to Fabius, they took either other by the
hand, and the soldiers of either doing the like, Minutius submitted himself,
and all the authority of the Empire (which was committed to him by the
Senators) into the hands of Fabius, as a man far more worthy thereof,
accounting it rather a burden to himself than honor: desiring Fabius that he
might be in the office of the master of the horsemen, as before he was. When
this was known at Rome, and affirmed to be true, not only by the letters of
the Captains, but also by the reports of the soldiers of both parties, the
praise of Fabius was extolled to the very heavens, repenting their hard
opinion which they had conceived against him before, confessing openly that
they had greatly abused him, in rejecting and condemning his wise and approved
counsel so foolishly, whose words they had found to be too true, wishing that
they had been ruled by so grave and wise a counsailor, now submitting
themselves as it were at his feet, requiring him to defend their Country by
his approved policy and wisdom in so perilous a time, and against so
dangerous a foe as Hannibal was: but first they felt their own folly, before
they would give any credit or audience to the admonition of the wise. Not
long after, Paulus Aemilius was chosen Consul, and was to fight against
Hannibal: but before he departed the Senate, Fabius made an Oration unto him,
in the conclusion whereof, he said thus to the new chosen Consul; Paulus, if
thou do any thing, do it soberly and according to reason, not rashly
trusting to fortune: follow not the occasion that thy enemy will give thee,
neither be too hasty; for have is blind, and works vnsurely.
Notwithstanding, Aemilius at that time gave little heed to the wise precepts of
the grave Fabius, saying (for a fashion sake) Indeed they were more true, than
easy to be followed. At the last, this Paulus Aemilius was ouerthrown at the
great fight of Cannas, where he lost all his power, and was himself sore
wounded, whereof he soon died. But before he ended his life, C. Cornelius (a
noble Roman) had found him out in the field being half covered with blood:
who forthwith required him if he felt any hope of life, to amount himself,
and depart the field, and not to make the battle more doleful by the death
of a Consul. To whom Paulus made this answer; C. Cornelius, be thou increased
in virtue, but beware least while thou bewail this chance, thou have small
time to escape thy self: go thou therefore to the City, and bid the Senate,
that they make strong their walls before this Conqueror come unto them: and
secretly aduertize Quintus Fabius, that Paulus Aemilius does firmly remember
his friendly precepts and wise admonitions, yea and lives in them, and finally
dies in them. Wherewithal he presently died by reason of his mortal wound.

Wherefore it was well known, that if the Romans at the first had been
directed by the prudent counsel of wise Fabius, they had never tasted of so
many calamities and miseries as happened to their distressed State: but their
wilfulnes would not be warned before experience had sharply corrected their
folly. In like manner, what blame did Cassandra daughter to Priamus king of
Troy purchase, Dictys Cretensis lib. 3. and Dares Phrigius. li. 1.
when first her over wild Brother went to Greece to fetch by stealth fair
Helen away, the wife of R. Menelaus: for she mainly cried out and prophesied,
saying; Why ye Troyans, will ye suffer my brother Paris to go fetch fire in
Greece to burn the stately town of Troy: think ye that the Greeks will
digest so proud an injury, O ye foolish Troyans. And again, when he returned
from Greece to Troy with his desired pray, she with might and maine cried, Away
with Helen, away again with Menelaus wife: for she smells of the Grecian
fire that for her cause shall destroy the city of my father: me think I see
for her sake, my aged sier slain, and the City of Troy to flow with Phrygian
blood, with heaps of the slain Troyans lying in the streets, for defending
her unjust quarrel. Therefore says she, away with this fire spark, least it
consume our town, and make desolate our stately buildings. Whereat the blind
Troyans laughed, saying, What, is Cassandra mad? knows she what she says?
are not the Troyans able to resist the pride of Greece? Let them pick what
quarrel they will, we have the beautiful Helen within our walls, and will keep
her in the despite of the proud Greeks, betide what may or will. Thus was
Cassandra openly blamed both of her brother, and also of the whole Citizens for
her wise counsel, when she most rightly had prophesied. For not long after,
the Greeks loathing to suffer the Troyans so to abuse them, in detaining King
Menelaus wife, came with a mighty and huge army, and besieged their City,
and in time took it, slaying the people, and utterly defacing Troy with fire:
so that the stateliest City of the world, lay flat on the ground. Then could
the Troyans say, O Cassandra, rightly have thou said, we find thy words most
true, but we despised thy admonitions, and rejected thy friendly warnings:
therefore is now this plague justly fallen on us. But then as the old saying
is, Sero sapiunt Phryges, they bethought themselves too late: being mad
themselves with pride, when first they thought Cassandra mad with folly. Thus
somewhat digressing though not altogether from our purpose, in making manifest
what the vainglorious and wilful persons gain in the end, by not hearkening
to the grave advice and wise counsel of the prudent, but contemning and
rejecting the friendly warnings of those, who before have tried the mutabilitie
of unfriendly Fortune, until such time that experience has caught their
folly. But now again to our purposed proceedings. Has it not been seen that
the stately pride and lofty lordlinesse of diverse, has purchased to others
great quietness? Is it not sufficiently known, that before this last war
betwixt the Carthaginians and the Romans, there was an ancient peace and
league taken and agreed upon betwixt them, dividing their Empires with the
river of Iberius, and that their two Segniories should jointly be known the
one from the other; for that the haughty pride and lofty stateliness of them
both, could not brook the controlment each of other: therefore they thus
divided their Empires, not tollerating the imperial minds of each other,
because they were both a strong and mighty people, still contending until
that agreement, which of them both should enjoy and possess the whole. This at
that time happened thorough the stately pride of them both; There were a
people, namely the Saguntines, who dwelt betwixt both their Empires, and
divided their Segniories in equal sort; which people before were under the
obedience of the Romans: but now in great controversy which of those stately
Empires should enjoy and possess them, for that it did lie so convenient for
them both. Thus after long contending, when neither party would yield that the
other should enjoy it, at the last this was agreed upon betwixt them both; that
the Saguntines lying so in the middle, should be a border and bank to both
their Empires, remaining a tree people, at liberty from both their powers,
neither of them meddling with the government of their Common wealth, nor
troubling their Country in respect, upon pain of the breach of ancient
amity: but should let them wholly alone to their own rule and government.
Pol. lib. 2.
Thus was Sagunt freed from her proud neighbors, who for a long time had kept
her under subjection and servitude, by reason of their imperial minds, and
now again through their stately pride set at liberty and freed from such
slavery, as before they were holden in. In like case, when the Athenians and
Megarences had many times fought together in diverse most cruel and bloody
battles for the superiority and regiment of the Isle Salamina: having on
both parts well tired themselves with the daily slaughters and lamentable
losses of their people: in the end, being so wearied with the calamities of
war, they were willing on either sior to constitute and ordain a law, that
none under pain of death should dare (on either part) to speak or move war
against Salamina, but that it should be at free liberty from them both.
Diodorus Siculus libro 7
Did not Ptolome King of Egypt, and Antigone Prince of the Phrigians, so
malice and contemn one the other, that to despite and displease each other,
they restored to liberty many Cities of Greece, which were quietly possessed
by them before: so that the Grecians although for a time they were restrained
from their liberty, yet notwithstanding they were in the end again clearly
freed from such servitude, by the malicious and proud contending of those
Imperial minded Princes. Now whereas our purpose is to show the
inconveniences of cruel war, rather commending the peaceable and quiet state
of the weal public, than the bitterness of war and bloody fight; neither
is my intent so to dissuade a Common wealth from the provision of war, that
in time of need they should altogether be destitute of armor, men and weapon,
to beat down and keep back the proud inuading foe, but rather exhorting and
earnestly wishing them to use and practice all manner of commendable actions in
military and martial affairs, to become both expert and skillful in warlike
prowess, only to the end to defend their own quiet and well governed Common
wealth: but forasmuch as the hazard of battle and the stay whereon the whole
state depends, ought not to be given and yielded into the hands of such
desperate youths, such fresh water soldiers, and such proud minded perfons, as
will neither hear any friendly counsel, wise advice, nor sage warning, of
him who has been before taught by experience; but will with an ouerrash and
unbridled self will (as they say) with a flantarowe and all a brauado, run
headlong without any good or government, hazarding the spoil of their
soldiers, ieoparding the subversion of a Kingdom, venturing the whole state
to them committed in one hour, to the mutable and unsteadfast chance of
frowning Fortune. There (I say) is to be expected as great calamity, as
Minutius brought to the Romans, Hanniball to the Carthaginians, and Paris to
the Trojans, who by their wilful follies wrought great misery to their
Countries: neither is the Enemy to be repelled, nor battle to be provided
for, with superfluous and excessive bravery, as though they would contend with
feathers, scarffes, trim knackes, and such other painted and gilded stuff,
hoping to daunt and fear the foe with such vain toys: Nay surely, it does
incoruage the Enemy, hoping to recover that rich pray and spoil: persuading
themselves that such vain pride proceeds from a fond and foolish wit,
through which conceit, the enemy is the more better stirred to battle. It
may be, that some will object this, saying; It is not wisdom nor by any
means tolerable, to dissuade the young soldier from that which does
increase his courage, more willingly to follow martial feats, and warlike
affairs, saying also, it is for the honor of his Country to come to the
field like a brave soldier, meaning by his outward brave attire, gorgeous
furniture, and other their ordinary bravery by them used?

Whereunto I answer after this manner. Hanniball, after he had contended in
sharp and mortal wars long time against the Romans, and was in conclusion
beaten out of Italy by the prudence of the valiant Scipio, he fled to King
Antiochus, who at that time had gathered a great power to war on the Romans.
The Army being in a readiness, Antiochus called the wife and politic
Captain Hanniball to the top of a very high hill, showing him all his whole
power (being gathered together from all parts of his Dominions, for the same
purpose) This Army was exceeding sure in the Kings opinion for the Soldiers
targets glittered all with Orient gold, their armours also wonderfully
furnished with gold and rich pearl, to conclude every thing marvelous
sumptuous and brave. Pol. lib. 2.


Antiochus heereat greatly boasting said unto Hanniball; My good friend, do
thou not think this my rich and mighty Army to be enough and sufficient for
the proud Romans? Who presently fell into a great laughter, laughing Antiochus
to scorn for his superfluous vanity, and foolish folly, saving in slouting
sort, Responsio Hannibalis Antiocho.
Yes truly Antiochus, although the Romans were the most insatiable people,
and discontented Nation of the world. Meaning that their rich booties and
spoils would be sufficient and enough again for the Romans, knowing
notwithstanding that their power would prove small enough to match with them,
for that he himself before had well tried and felt their force and strength in
war. Therefore I say, that may not be allowed to encourage the soldiors, which
the world may laugh to scorn: the soldior does get more glory to his Country
and greater praise to himself through his victorious conquest, than by his
ridiculous and superfluous bravery. Wherefore in my judgment it were far
more necessary, that what cost and charge were bestowed in time of war,
should only be to the preservation of both Commonwealth and souldior, which
cannot be so well defended with vain toys, as with good and warlike
furniture. What was the cause that Alexander the great, with so small a number
of men, subdued and conquered such a great part of the world? Was it through
the youthfulness of his Captains and bravery of his soldiers? No truly,
but it came to pass by their brave minds and ableness of body, who had
hardened themselves to the war of purpose; and not through their nice bravery
in apparel. For when Alexander first set forth to such a mighty enterprise,
his Army was but 32000. footmen, Justinius libro 10.
and 4500. horsemen: which was miraculous, that so small a handful of men
should do such mighty exployts, and go through so many strong Nations
unconquered. The cause why is easily coniectured: for that Alexander always had
this provident care and foresight in placing officers in his Army; insomuch
that he by no means would admit or suffer any one, to bear rule as a
Captain or Leader in his Army, unless he were well known to be a man of
great gravity, wisdom, policy, and good government: provided always,
that he should be a man of the age of 60. years, to the intent he might have
all these aforesaid qualities the better: and also, Ordines quoque nemo nisi
sexagenarius duxit.
that no common souldior should be admitted into the host, unless he were
thirty years old at the least, which was especially to this end, that he
might have both wise leaders, and valiant soldiers, joining both policy and
force together. Did not he in the wars betwixt him and Darius do mighty and
invincible exploits by the wise and circumspect guiding of his small army: For
in the first battle betwixt them, Darius lost the field, and had his great
army put to flight and slain, which was six hundred thousand strong fighting
men in the fields of Adrastis, Diodorus resert.
where Alexander lost but nine footmen, and an hundred horsemen: and in the
second fight betwixt them, Darius led forth against Alexander three hundred
thousand footmen, and of horsemen an hundred thousand, in which conflict the
Macedonians slew of the Persians one and forty thousand footmen, and of
horsemen ten thousand, and took prisoners forty thousand, there were slain
of the Macedonians a hundred and thirty footmen, Sic Quintus Curtius scribit.
of horsemen a hundred and fifty. Also in the last fight when Alexander won
the whole Empire of Persia, Darius brought into the field against him four
hundred thousand footmen, and a hundred thousand horsemen which were in this
last fight utterly subdued and overthrown by the wonderful policy of the
circumspect Alexander. In like sort the Greeks, when Xerxes King of Persia
invaded them with seven hundred thousand of his own people, Justin. lib. 2
and three hundred thousand strange soldiors, and had on the sea a most mighty
and invincible navy of ships; by their wise and careful government in
leading their small host, put the mighty Xerxes to flight and all his huge
army, causing him to flee privily and unknown, in a small fisher boat home to
his country again, to save his life, to his great reproach and infamy, and to
their perpetual praise and glory. Plu. de Antiocho.
Also Machabaeus, the first of that name, with three thousand men overcame and
utterly subdued Lysias the Lieutenant of Antiochus, with forty thousand
footmen and six thousand horsemen, which happened through the the circumspect
guiding and careful leading of so small a power, and not by his rash wilfulnes
and unadvised ventring, therefore these examples do partly purport unto us,
that the hope and hazard of battle does wholly consist and depend in the
careful placing of Officers in the army, knowing the captains to be men of
experience, and grave in wisdom, the Soldiers at man's estate, with modest
government expelling out of the army all riotous drunkards, lewd companions,
disordered fellows, breeders of quarrels and dissension, being prone and apt
to move vproares, mutinies, rebellions, disobeying their Captains and
leaders, to the whole subversion and clear overthrow of the host: for,
whereas either the army is governed by a drunken disordered Captain, or the
Captain troubled with a band or crew of disordered drunkards, there can
neither any good exployt go forward, nor any happy event be hoped after, the
learned wise Erasmus says: Citius enim ex pumice aquam hauseris, quam ebrio,
sobrium aut dictum aut factum extorseris. For a man may sooner (says he) draw
water out of a hard stone, than to wrest from a drunken man either any sober
saying or sober deed. And whereas rashness is, there temperance wants, and
therefore whatsoever happens by such unadvised wilfulness, cannot be
accounted to chance thorough valor, courageous minds, valiant manliness,
and such like, but rather by desperate madness, wilful foolishness, and such
like ouer-rash attempts, as commonly has more oftener bad success than happy
event. Alexander, as does appear in these former examples, does rather
tolerate a young soldier, than a young Captain, for that the Macedonian
Captains were three score, and the Soldiers but thirty, because the leader
should be able both in gravity, policy and wise government with experience,
to direct and guide the Soldier, and the Soldier also by those manly
years be able to abide the brunt and calamity of war the better, and all
boyish toys, and wilful rashness being laid apart, shall be better
furnished to obey his Captain and leader. Yet notwithstanding, I do not say,
that grave wisdom, wise policy, Laertius lib. 7.
sage government and provident foresight, wholly consists and depends in
gray hairs, for then it might well be objected to me, as it was to the old
Emperor of Greece. Who when the States of Athens had picked out certain of
the most wisest men of their City, and sent them as Ambassadors to him, to
treat of certain causes of their common wealth: but the old doting Emperor,
hearing that the Athenians which were come, were young men of middle years, and
not grave and old fathers, refused to confer with them about their message,
not suffering them to be brought unto his presence, nothing at all considering
on the matter, whether they were wise or no. But by no means he would hear
them, by reason of their years, yet he full well knew, that they were the
most wisest that the Athenians could find out, notwithstanding upon their
earnest intercession to have access to his presence, he always returned this
answer, saying, That he would not confer with such unwise beardlesse boys,
who by outward view had but small experience; Condemning them by his doting
judgment before he had made trial of their wisdom. But the wise Athenians
seeing the blind conceit of the old Emperor, feigned, that they would not at
all speak any thing of their message, if it would please the Emperor but to
do them this favor, as to suffer them for to come into his presence to
behold his person, of whom they had before time so often heard, they would
think their pains right well bestowed, although they had no answer at all of
their Embassade. Unto which request the old Emperor soon granted, sitting
in great majesty for the Athenians to behold him. Thus when they were brought
before him, they began after this manner to flow the old doting Emperor for
his rash judgment, saying, Most renowned sir, if the states of Athens, Plus
menti, quam mentis.
had thought that wisdom had co^sisted in gray beards and whitish hairs,
they (no dout) would have sent for Ambassadors to you gray bearded Buckes and
Goats, and detained those in Athens still, whose approved wisdom has as
well been tried at home in Athens, as also in thy countries of Greece, O thou
aged Emperor.

Wherefore, as I have said, not altogether condemning young men as insufficient
for to have any rule or charge committed to them by reason of their young
years, for that oftentimes we see vain folly to be covered and shadowed with
gray hairs, and also wisdom to spring and proceed from beardlesse cheeks. Yet
truly, in mine opinion, grave years is partly a sign that all youthful
folly, wilful rashness, and childish government, is well ouerpassed and laid
aside, so no doubt but that there are diverse young Gentlemen of sufficient
experience, gravity and wisdom, to take charge and authority in an army:
notwithstanding it is necessary, that both their lives, manners, conversation
and usual dealings be thoroughly looked into, before they have any charge
committed to them, to the end, they may be the better able to punish vice,
execute true justice, and rule with good government in the army, for no
remedy but that there must be sharp punishment, severe justice, and martial
law, in such a multitude of people, to correct the malefactor and lewd
fellow without partiality for example sake, and to cherish the honest, true,
and painful soldier, with friendly and good usage, to encourage others to
live in the army accordingly. The ancient Romans did always use sharply to
punish and correct the intolerable abuses committed in the host, Poli. lib. 6.
Furti poena in castris Roman.
for whosoever had stolen, purloyned, or filched from his fellow any of his
goods, furniture, or other necessaries, which thing being openly proved by
some honest witness, the offender was presently judged to die without
partiality in this sort; the party being lawfully condemned by the Tribune,
he brought forth a club, and therewithal strikes the offender, not hurting
the party himself, but as it were in token of lawful conviction and
guiltiness. Which, when the Tribune had done, the whole army and company
with great fury do strike and lay on with clubbes, slaves and stones, until
they have utterly slain and dismembered the offender: and if that in the whole
Camp there be any found that refuse, or would not put too his helping hand
so to punish vice in the malefactor, after the Tribune had stricken him with his
club, such persons for their so refusing, were judged as aiders and maintainers
of such disordered fellows, so that they ever after were forbidden on pain of
death, not to return into their country any more, to their parents, wives or
children, being also unlawful for them to crave or demand any necessaries out
of their country for their maintenance in other places. The Romans also
punished with death him that lacked in the watch, he that forsook the place
that was given him to fight, he that carried any trifle hid out of the camp, if
any man should say he had done some worthy thing in fight, and had not done
it, if any for fear had cast away his weapon: and when it happened that a Legion
had committed the like fault, because they would not put all to death, their
names were taken, and put together in a bag, and so by lot they drew out the
tenth person, and put those to death. And again for lesser faults which
deserved not death, they sharply punished by whippings, continual standing,
appointed fastings, and such other pains which they provided for that purpose.
But the good and honest Soldier was courteously entertained, gently used, and
much made of, lacking nothing that appertayned necessary to men: whereby it
appears, that the honest Soldier is friendly to be cherished, and the lewd
and disordered sharply to be punished. Which order in every host is carefully
to be observed and kept, and used with great discretion and good government by
the wise Captain. But now it may be objected concerning the hardines of young
Captains, saying; Have we not known or heard of such lusty young Gentlemen,
or youthful Captains, who by their valiant prowes, and courageous minds,
have bravely and desperately set upon such a strong Castle, Town, or Fort, and
being as eager on the enemy as a hawk on her pray, have achieved most
wonderful and notable exploites by their lusty brave courages. And therefore,
say ye, what are young Captains to be disalowed, and not worthy to bear
charge? Whereunto I answer, that although some brave Gentleman, or youthful
Captain, have by his desperate boldness, or over hardy valor obtained or
achieved some notable victory or great exploite, to the great glory and fame
both of his Country and himself, yet for all that, it is commonly no
consequent, that victory follows desperate boldness, nor conquest rash
hardines. For although that Fortune at some one time does favor rash
atte^pts, yet presume not over much on her, for she is mutable and unsteadfast,
least that subtle Hanniball may ensnare wilful Minutius: Achilles desperate
Troylus: and circumspect Themistocles entrap unadvised Xerxes: Paulus Aemilius,
a noble State of Rome, was always wont to say when Fortune favored and
smiled most of all on him, Liu li 7. and Val. li. 3
that then he mistrusted and feared her mutabilitie most of all. Insomuch that
when he triumphed in the City of Rome for certain noble actions by him most
happily achieved, seeing the people so woonderfully praise and extol his
name, clapping of their hands, flinging up their caps, and honoring him in
such maiesticall sort, seeing Fortune so sweetly smile and favor him, after
such an extraordinary manner, he turned to the people, and said with a
lamentable voice, I greatly sear me least that Fortune does mean highly to
displease and disquiet me after this her unaccustomed flattery. Which indeed
fell out accordingly. For the same time returning to his own house, in this
most sumptuous manner, he found his sweet sons suddenly dead. The wise and
learned Cicero, thoroughly perceiving the uncertainty and mutable estate of
unfriendly fortune, seeing likewise by his provident wisdom, how much more
prudent counsel and wise government avails, than force and strength of the
body, was not ashamed boldly to pronounce and declare in his own behalf,
saying; Plus ego togatus, quam armati december. I did (says he) more by my
counsel in the Senate, than ten armed men in the field. Cicero in Offic.
And in maintaining of his argument he further said; Dux Agamemnon Greciae
nunquam optat, vt Aiacis similes december habeat, at vt Nestoris quandoque. We
never read (says he) that Agamemnon the chief ringleader and Captain of the
Greeks, did ever wish that he had ten strong and forcible men like to Ajax,
but sometime he would wish that he had ten prudent and wise Counselors like
to provident Nestor. And according to the opinion of learned Cicero, provident
wisdom, and circumspect carfulness is rather to be expected in grave and
aged years, than in green and youthful heads. For in his book de Senectute
he does allege these authorities, Cicero de Senectute.
Apud Lacedemonios quidem ij, qui amplissimum magistratum gerunt, vt sunt, sic
etiam nominantur senes. Amongst the ancient Lacedaemonians (says he) those
which did bear any high authority, were called aged Fathers, as indeed they
were, otherwise they could not be admitted to such offices. And again upon
the same occasion he says thus; Quod silegere aut audire voletis externa,
maximas respublicas ab adolescentibus labefactatas, a senibus sustentatas
reperietis. If (says he) either ye will read or hear outward and foreign
examples, ye shall find that great Commonwealthes and mighty Kingdoms have
fallen and decayed through young men's government, and again how they have been
vpholden and maintained by the grave, government of old men. Val. li. 5.
When the Romans were thoroughly wearied by the wilful rawnes of their
youthful Captains, buying experience (by their daily sufferance) with
extreme losses, and lamentable slaughters of their people, then in the end,
for redres thereof, they al with one consent constituted and made a decree,
that if any Captain or Leader in time of war, should unadvisedly or suddenly
set on the enemy, without the consent or appointment of the Centurion or
Captain general, yea although he utterly vanquished and ouerthrewe the
adversary: yet notwithstanding, his over rash attempt and wilful boldness
should as grievously be punished, as if he had been enemy to his country, for
that Fortune might as well have caught their folly, as favored their rash
enterprise. Pap. Curtius being Dictator, commanded that F. Rutilius master of
his horsemen should be beaten with rods, and after beheaded, for fighting
against his commandment, though he had the victory. Neither would Papirius
forgive the punishment at the intercession of the Soldiers: and when as he Head
to Rome, he also pursued him, neither would he there remit the dreadful
punishment, until that Fabius and his father fell down on their knees, and
that also the Senate and people made intercession for him. Manlius caused his
son, (which against his commandment had fought with his enemy that had
challenged him, though he got the victory) to be beaten with rods, and have his
head stricken of. Thus the Romans prevented many miseries, which otherwise
might have happened to their common sorrow and heaviness. I would not it should be
thought I altogether disalow young captains, condenming them al with unadvised
judgment (as the Emperor of Greece did the young ambassadors of Athens) to be
either rash, wilful, or foolish hardy, or void of any good government: for then
should I speak fondly and unadvisedly, in over rashly condemning their secret
and unknown qualities. When diverse of the aged Consuls and grave leaders,
Poll. li. 7.
with other worthy Captains of great experience of Rome, were slain in the
Carthaginian war, and that the whole Roman Empire did shake for fear, having
none left alive unto whom they might trust in this perilous war to fight
against so subtle and crafty a foe as Hanniball was, who before had slain
such a mighty number of their worthy men. Thus being in such perplexity,
lamenting sore their distressed state, and fearing the present subuersio^ of
their City, then in this their great extremity, young P. Cornelius Scipio, the
son of that Scipio which before was slain in Spain in the same war by the
Carthaginians, being but three and twenty years old, earnestly craved of the
Senate that he might have the office and authority to fight against wily
Hanniball, who had done them such high displeasure, and made their whole state
so pensive and sad, not doubting but to be revenged on their enemies for their
forepassed cruelty. But the distressed Romans seeing the tender years of the
young Gentleman, were doubtful to commit such a weighty cause into his
hand, some of them speaking against his years, as a man not alowable in such
extremity: and again some for that his father and uncle were both slain in
the same war, wherefore, said they, it is greatly to be feared, considering
his youthful years, and also the death of his Father, least that he should be
over rash in seeking speedy revenge, to his own peril, and their loss.
Notwithstanding, the grave Senators wisely considering on the cause, seeing the
willingness of the young man, and his witty Oration uttered there before them
all, at the same time, committed their whole state into his hand, who governed
it with such wise policy, and careful foresight, that he did not only match
the worthy Hannibal, but also drove him out of Italy and Spain, who before
had viewed the Roman walls, minding forthwith to have taken their city,
forcing him also to fly into his country of Africa, and at the last home to
the very walls of Carthage, where he utterly vanquished him, seizing on the
whole Empire of Carthage, to the use of the Romans. Thus when the grave and
valiant captains were some slain, some put to flight, and other some not
daring to encounter with such a victorious Captain as Hanniball was, the young
Scipio by his manly valor, wise policy and circumspect leading of his army,
both freeed his Country from such a perilous enemy, and also made the
stately Empire of Carthage subject to the Romans, to the great glory and
renown of his Country, and to the everlasting remembrance of his name. In
like sort, Alexander the great, the most famous Captain and leader that ever
lived, was but twenty years old when he ouerthrewe most mighty Kings and
strong Princes, with a very small number; therefore wisdom and policy
consists not in gray hairs, nor victory altogether depends in old age,
notwithstanding youth ought to have a special care to ground all their actions
upon temperance, with an open ear to sage advise and wise counsel, and then,
no doubt, victory will not altogether consist and depend on fickle fortune.
But before I proceed any further to show the calamities and miseries of
ruinous war, it shall not seem amiss to show what subtle sleights, wise
policies, and cunning Stratagems have been in ancient time used, to delude and
mock the enemy withal, being also things very necessary, diligently to be
noted in these our troublesome days.

Certain Stratagems, and politic practices of worthy warriors, and expert
soldiers.
BY as Priennius, Vt Diodorus resert.
when the City of Priennia was besieged by the mighty Aliattes, used this
Stratageme or policy; when the town could not hold out any longer for want
of vittaile for their men, and forage for their horses, he turned out of the
City into the enemies Camp certain horses and mules which were wonderful
fat, for they were for the nonce fed for that purpose, whereby the enemy might
think, and know, that they in the town had sufficient forage and prouender
for their horses, insomuch, that when Aliattes the Captain of the enemy did
see this, he thought indeed, that the citizens had plenty of all things,
sending a spy privily into the City to view their ability in all respects.
Which when Byas had intelligence of, he caused great heaps of sand to be piled
up together, and poured thereon wheat and other grain to make a show of plenty,
giving further commandment, that no man should trouble or molest the spy, nor
make as once they suspected him, but let him have liberty to pass and repasse
at his pleasure; the spy having well viewed all things, soon returned to his
Captain, showing him of their great plenty and abundance of all things; which
so soon as Aliattes heard, he presently removed his siege and departed,
thinking it a thing impossible to get the town before their vittaile failed,
knowing, that he should want for his company before those heaps of corn
were spent in the City, therefore he with speed marched from the town, which
in short time might have been taken by reason of the great scarcity in the
City, for the people dyed very fast by famine, crying out daily to Priennius to
yield the City and save their lives, but by this subtle policy they were
clearly freeed, to the wonderful joy of the distressed Citizens. Also when
Quin. Fabius Maximus, Poli. lib. 8
had wisely enclosed the wily Hanniball within the straits of Falernia.
Formiana keeping the mouth of the strait passages so surely, that Hanniball
could not pass out, the country also being stony and barren not able to
relieve his army long, fearing least that if he should spend yt provision which
he had already, he might perish with ye whole host before he could get any more
in that place, Hanniball seeing himself in such extremity, knowing that he could
not give battle to ye Romans without hazarding his whole power, for that their
enemies lay so strongly on the hill tops, being so well backed with fresh
supplies if occasion served, wherefore he was forced to use this slight and
mockery to beguile and deceive the Romans, having gathered a great quantity of
dry rotten sticks with rubbish thorns, and such other stuff fit for his
purpose, commanding his men to fetch into the camp so privily as they could,
that the enemy might not perceive whereabout they went, Stratagema contra
Romanos.
all the oxen and lusty beasts that they could find. Now having brought into
their camp the number of two thousand lusty beasts, they with speed fastened
unto their horns the aforesaid dry sticks, keeping them privily until the
dark night, so that their invention by no means might be espied, being once
very dark, he caused his army to be in a readiness, marching circumspectly
up toward the straights which were strongly kept by the Romans, making as
little noise as they could; being come near where the enemy lay, he caused
those fagots which were on the ox horns to be set on fire, still driving them
before toward the strait, which fire so mightily incresed by the swift running
of the beasts, for feeling the heat to come so near the quick, they ran
forward as if they had been stark mad, puffing and blowing, making such a
noise, flinging and tossing the flame and sparks, after a most terrible manner,
so that it was a wonderful strange and fearful sight. The frighted Romans
beholding such a miraculous wonder, being much amassed on the sudden, for that
they suspected no such Stratageme, began to bussel and run for fear, because
that horrible sight came still furiously on them, insomuch, that they were
dispersed and scattred abroad by the great fright and fear thereof, leaving the
narrow places wide open without any force or guard at all, so that Hanniball
coming after in good order, did with great ease pass through without any
resistance; which when the Romans perceived, they could in no case pursue him,
for that their men were so disordered, by running away: thus at last (but too
late) they knew how they were deluded and mocked by the craft of wily
Hanniball. Also Hanniball used this policy to bring the wise Captain Q.
Fabius Maximus, in mistrust with the Romans, for that he perceived the sobernes
of Fabius, did much indamage him, who before had tired and wearied him with
daliance, committing nothing over rashly to fortune; which wise dealing of
Fabius, seemed to Hanniball displeasant and altogether repugnant to his nature:
wherefore at such time as he knew very well the Romans did bear no great good
liking to Fabius, by reason of the overthrow which Minutius had given to
Hanniball in his absence, knowing also that he was openly condemned in the
Senate, either that he durst not fight with Hanniball, Stratagema Hannibalis
in Fabi.
or else that he did bear goodwill and favor to the Carthaginians, and
therefore to bring him in further cause of mistrust with the Romans, that also
the Senate might easily think there were some conspiracy or confederacy
betwixt him and Hanniball, he used this crafty practice, sending out a great
number of soldiors to spoil and rob the Country of Italy in diverse places,
straightly commanding them, that they should spare and not once touch the goods,
cattells and lands which were known to be the possessions of Fabius, but
spoiling and wasting round about them, they should leave them whole vnminished,
to the end, that the Romans should conceive such displeasure against him, as
that they might in no case permit or suffer him to deal in their affairs,
which thing would been most pleasant to Hanniball. And surely, this subtle
practice, sounded much to the discredit of Fabius; and had taken further
effect, if he by his wise policy had not somewhat qualified their hard conceit
by this means, presently thereupon he sent his son into the country to sell
and make away those lands and goods which Hannibal had spared, for little or
nothing, despising to possess any thing which Hannibal preserved; which deed
made the Romans somewhat better to think of him. Notwithstanding, though
Hanniball was the wisest captain that in those days lived, mocking and
deceiving the Romans at his pleasure, yet in the end, he himself was kindly
flouted by a Roman Captain, suspecting no stratagem or policy at all to be
practiced, insomuch, that on a time when he had long besieged the great city
Cassilinum, and could by no means take the Town, he assayed to famish them and
make the city perforce yield to his mercy, not suffering any necessaries to be
brought them. Gracchus then captain of a band of Romans which lay thereabout,
waiting if Hanniball would remove his siege, seeing what great extremity they
suffered, receiving letters daily from them, which signified in what
lamentable case they stood and what mortality was in the city, for want of
sustenance, so that they were feign to eat their boots and other straps and
thongs of leather, being much moved with these great miseries, and also seeing
the Citizens to stand on the walls, to the end, that some dart, shot, or other
weapon might abridge and shorten their grief; yet for all this he might not
fight with Hanniball, although he surely thought he might with ease have
rescued the Town, for that he was commanded to the contrary by the
Dictatour, now seeing the City in such distress, and that he might not fight
for their succors, he gathered certain corn, and put it into barrels and
hogsheads, sending privy word to the town, that the next night he would send
them down the river with the tide, willing the^ to be ready to receive the
barrels as they came, for the river came close to their city. Thus at diverse
times he beguiled Hanniball, until at last the craft was bewrayed, and then
again the city disappointed of vittaile. Which when the cownesmen perceived,
they then had no other shift, but secretly to steal out of the town, and get
grass and roots such as they could find, and bring it in for their relief.
Which Hanniball had soon espied, therefore he caused the ground thereabout to
be plowed up, to prevent them of that hope also. Then the Citizens seeing there
was no way to hold the town, and save their lives from the fury of the enemy,
sent word to Gracchus, that they perforce must yield the city to Hanniball.
Whereat Gracchus seeing their great necessity, requested them to have patience
yet for two or three days, also showing them, that it in case they would
follow his his advice and counsel, he doubted not but shortly to free their
city, and set them at liberty, willing them to take parsnipseede and sow it
on the plowed ground without the City, defending themselves manfully for that
time if need should be. They all being willing to try what effect this could
work, sowed a great quantity of parsnipseede on the ground which was plowed
up about the city. Of which thing when Hanniball was advertised, he
forthwith removed his siege, and departed from the town, saying; What, shall
I stay here until these seeds be roots, that will I not for ten such Cities
as Cassilinum is. Thinking that they had sufficient in the town to relieve
them in the mean time, or else they would never have been so fond to sow
their seed. Thus was subtle Hanniball drylie flouted himself, who in
se^blable sort had often beguyled others: for the city could not have endured
the siege four days longer at the uttermost. Young Pub. Cornelius Scipio being
made somewhat wise by the subtle sleights that Hanniball had used before in
Italy, remembering the crafty policy which was put in practice to bring Q.
Fabius into mistrust with the Romans, by Hanniball, now in the end plagued him
with such like practice. For when the Carthaginians were driven out of Italy,
and lost their own Empire of Africa, and Hanniball their chief captain
forced to fly to Antiochus, who then had prepared a great army to war on
the Romans. At the same time this young Scipio was sent by the Senate to
Antiochus, to know why he prepared himself to war on the Romans, his
friends, and being there arrived, he perceived that it was much by the
instigation and pricking on of Hanniball their ancient enemy, who already had
gotten full grant to lead and conduct half the power of Antiochus against
the Romans, both for his great wisdom, and policy and also for his approved
experience, as well in the country of Italy, as of the Romans themselves.
Which thing young Scipio diligently noted, fearing least the Romans should be
again troubled with such a cunning warrior and approved Captain as Hanniball
was. To prevent which cause he practiced this mean: He would often frequent
the company of Hanniball, falling into friendly conference about the battles
fought betwixt them before in Italy, and Africa, feeding and pleasing the
humor of Hanniball, least that he might leese his company, and so fail of
his purpose: for his meaning was, by privy speech and communication with him,
to bring Antiochus in mistrust of him, to the end he should not commit his
power into his hand. Thus daily Scipio used the company of Hanniball, coming
privily to his lodging, secretly talking and conferring with him, making as
though Antiochus or his company should not once suspect him, wherefore he would
most commonly come in the night, yet he would ever choose and pick out such a
time, that he would be seen by some of Antiochus his friends, to the end the
cause might the more be suspected, and also if in the day Hanniball and he had
been in any conference of causes, so soon as he had espied either Antiochus
himself, or any other of his friends, then he forthwith would hold his
peace, and suddenly depart, as though he would not have them to hear what
conference they had: which indeed was nothing but what they might have heard
very well without offense.

This invention of last fell out accordingly, and happy for the Romans, for
Antiochus grew greatly to suspect their privy meetings, and secret
whisperinges, fearing least there were some compounded trecheries agreed upon
betwixt them. And further, for that Scipio had always so praised the wisdom,
policy, and circumspect carefulnes of Hanniball openly, to be both the wisest
captain, carefullest Leader, and valiantest man that then lived, saying;
Happy were the Soldiers that marched under his conduct. Which thing Antiochus
liked not well of, thinking that Scipio did it for this purpose, that he should
commit his army into the hands of Hanniball, and then to be betrayed, as
their secret meetings argued. Wherefore he would not that Hannibal should bear
any charge of his, being so co^uersant with his enemy, saying he was glad he
had so found out their practice, before it took effect, and that yet it rested
in him to prevent their invention. By this stratageme Scipio set free the
Romans from such a politic captain, that had so spoiled their country before,
which otherwise by quarreliing against him, could never have been brought to
pass, but would have turned ye Romans to much sorrow. Strategem. contra Ap.
Poli.
Also Hasdruball used this subtlety to escape the hands of Appius Claudius,
the Roman Consal: for being environed with difficult passages, the mouth and
easiest way whereof the Romans held and possessed, so that Hasdruball and his
army could not escape out any way without great danger of losing his whole
host. Wherefore he sent to Appius, showing him that if they could agree upon
certain articles, he would be content to depart the country, and render into
his hands other towns and castles which he had in keeping. Which thing pleased
Claudius well, hoping to free that country without battle from so dangerous a
foe. Wherefore he willingly consented to the parle, appointing time and place
for their meeting, where there were books and articles drawn between them,
for the assurance of both their promises. Their meeting thus continuing three
or four days together, Appius Claudius suspecting no craft, for that the
motion came first by Hasdruball himself, thinking that all things were plainly
and simply meant, without fraud or deceit.

Now Hasdruball in the mean time every night sent part of his army with their
gross cariages, over certain strait and perilous places, which could never
have been passed, if the Romans had known thereof, himself every day came
forth of the Camp to meet Claudius, where they argued of weighty causes, and
were at a full composition, saving that their agreements were not confirmed and
sealed, which Hasdrubal shifted off in this sort, saying that he would be so
bold with Claudius, as to confer with his friends the next day in his Camp,
which day also, he said, was ever kept holy among the Carthaginians, and
therefore he craved such like favor at the hands of Appius, with this knot
also, that they might be suffered quietly to peruse and confer on those
covenants and agreements, without any skirmish or battle offered for that
time, promising the like for his part, that his army should neither invade the
Romans, nor trouble any of their friends as that day of truce, protesting
further, that the next day his determination should be plainly declared to
Appius and the Romans. Now was Appius well quieted in his mind, for that he
hoped every thing would effectually fall out; yet for all that, he gave no
great trust to the promise of Hasdruball, for not inuading his men the next
day. Wherefore he caused watch and ward with good order to be kept
circumspectly in his camp, to be ready if need should require. But Hasdruball
minded nothing less, than to invade the camp of the Romans, but rather
sought how to deliver himself and his people out of that dangerous place:
therefore he neglected no time in following so weighty a cause. Insomuch, that
the same night he stole out of his camp, with the rest that remained behind,
as close and privily without noise as they might, ayding and helping one
another over those hard passages, which was wonderful difficult to them by
reason of the darkness of the night. But in the end they well escaped the
danger, and were by the daylight safe enough from the Romans.

Appius having intelligence in the morning of the escape of Hasdruball, did
then presently pursue after him, but all in vain; seeing himself thus flouted
by Hasdruball, then he thought full well that he might cancel the agreements,
and burn the bands, repenting his folly too late in suffering his enemy so
easily to escape out of such a perilous straight. L. Silla in the wars
against Archelaus, Mithridates lieutenant at Pirea, perceiving his soldiers
had little courage to fight, he so wearied them with continual labor, that
they were glad to desire to fight, that the wars might be ended. Also Cyrus
king of Persia in the wars betwixt him and Astyages king of the Medes, Justin.
li. ^.
minding to stir up the minds of his soldiers fiercely to give battle to
their enemy, used this policy, he wearied them with paineful labor all one
day, in hewing down a certain wood, and on the morrow after, he made a
plenteous feast for them, demanding in the feast time, which day liked them
best; and when they all allowed the pastime of the day present, and yet (quoth
he) this pleasure must be obtained by the other days pain, Plu. de (...)
Agesi.
for except ye first overcome the Medes, ye can never live in freedom and at
pleasure, whereby they took great courage to fight. When Agesilaus had pitched
his field not far from Orchomeno, a City that was in league with him, and
perceiving that many of the army had their treasure and chief riches in the
Camp, he commanded the townsmen to receive nothing into the Town belonging
to his army, to the intent his Soldiers might fight the more fiercely,
knowing they should fight both for their lives and goods. Gelon king of
Syracusa entering war against the Persians, after he had taken many of them,
brought forth the weakest and most uncomely persons naked, in the sight of all
his army, to persuade them that their enemies were but wretches and men worthy
to be despised. Epaminondas being ready to give battle to the Lacedaemonians,
seeing the courage of his soldiers began somewhat to quail, Valor. sol. 257.
he used this mean to animate their minds furiously to fight, pronouncing in
an oration to them, how that the Lacedaemonians had determined, if they gate the
victory to slay all their men, to make their wives and children bond-slaues for
ever, and to beat down the City of Thebes flat to the ground. With which
words the Thebans were so moved and agreeued, that at the first brunt they
overcame the Lacedaemonians. Thus we see oftentimes, that subtle policy
avails, where force and strength can hardly resist, therefore it is both
convenient and necessary, that the Stratagems of war be exercised and
studied against needful times, but in my opinion the force of money is great
in causes of war, and wins by corruption strong castells and invincible
towns, insomuch, that the wise Erasmus seeing the wonderful force of money,
so strong and available says thus thereof, Porro nihil est iam sanctum, quod
non violari, nihil tam munitum, quodnon expugnari pecunia possit. Nothing
(says he) is so holy and sacred, but by money it may be violated, neither is
any thing so strong, but by the corruption of money it may be taken and subdued.
Philip king of Macedon having by practice and experience found out the
vnincounterable force thereof, at such time in his wars, as he minded to take
a certain City perforce, it was told him, that the passage thereto was very
difficult and hard, and the town by common judgment invincible. Dictum
Philippi.
An praesidium tam esset difficile accessu, rogauit vt asinus auro onustus
accedere non posset. Whereunto he demanded this, Whether or no is the way or
straight so difficult in passing, that an ass being laden with gold cannot
pass and enter in? making then a trifle of it, when he heard, that there were
but such sufficient passage, accounting all things possible enough to be won,
where only there were but place for money to pass. For (says he) Pecuniae
obediunt omnia, All things are obedient to money. Yet notwithstanding it is to
be wished, that whosoever will violate or break sacred rites, or betray things
committed to his charge on trust, by corruption of money or for avarice sake,
that we had (as the old saying is) his skin full of angels.

The miserable murders and deadly debates, that happened between the
successors of Alexander, with the utter desolation of their state.
ALexander surnamed the Great, lying very sick on his death bed, at Babylon,
was asked of his friends in the very extreme and last article of death, to
whom he would leave his realm and royal dignities, whereunto he answered, to
the most worthy of the government thereof, Vt Diodorus relert.
which answer caused great dissension to arise betwixt the successors,
insomuch, that open hostility and war was presently proclaimed among them,
every one thinking himself as worthy as the rest, the one through his stately
pride would not suffer himself to be subject or inferior to the other, so
that the whole Captains and peers (being commonly called the successors of
Alexander) fell to cruel war the one against the other, utterly spoiling and
bereuing each other both of life and goods, not ceasing until they had rooted
out the whole stock and line of Alexander their master, and also through greedy
avarice murdered and consumed themselves. But first it is necessary, that we
orderly proceed in the history for the better understanding of the Reader.
Alexander now being dead, the Princes presently upon his decease fell to
sedition, controversy and disagreement amongst themselves: for the regiment
of the footmen were wholly determined to advance Aride to the kingdom, who
although son to Philip, and brother unto Alexander, yet notwithstanding he
was attained with the incurable disease of the mind, by reason whereof, the
rest of the Princes and Captains which guarded Alexander his body, having with
them the horsemen, condescended and agreed by one whole common consent, to
rear war against the footmen, rather than they would suffer their insolent
boldness, for they would have Perdicas advanced, whom Alexander at the
hour of his death gave his ring, which deputed him as Governor, but before
they enterpriced the matter, they thought best is send certain of the chiefest
and most honorable personages in their company with an Embassade to the
footmen, among whom one Meleager was appointed chief and principal
Ambassador, to dissuade them to desist and leave off their attempt; but so
soon as Meleager was come amongst them he never made mention of the
Embassade committed to him, but contrariwise approving and allowing their
attempt and enterprise did all that in him lay to maintain and support them
against the horsemen and the other Princes, so that the footmen having good
liking of his counsel and courage, ordained him foorthwyth their Coronell,
and thereuppon armed themselves to give battle unto the adversary; howbeit
certain of the wisest and most circumspect, deeply weying and considering the
case how it did stand, he concluded a final peace, wherein in was agreed, that
Aride brother to Alexander should be established King, and Perdicas thief of
the Macedonian Princes, and also governor to Aride the King, and unto the rest
of the Princes and chief of the army were divided and given, the
administrations and gouernements of the provinces lately under the subjection
of Alexander their Master, which administrations and presidentships, the
Greeks called Satrapies, and the Governors of the same Provinces Satrapes,
conditionally, that every of the said Princes at all times should be subject
and obedient unto Aride the King, and also to Perdicas his Governor. Now when
Perdicas, by reason of his Gouernorship had taken upon him the rule over the
rest, he forthwith assembled all the Princes and chief Captains, and assigned
to every of them certain Provinces to govern, namely, first he bestowed the
government of Egypt, on Ptolome the son of Lage, on Laomedo^ Syria, on
Philotes Cilicia, on Phiton Media, on Eumenes Paphlagonia and Cappadocia, on
Antigone Pamphilia and Licia, on Cassander Caria, on Meleager Lydia, and on
Leonat the lesser Phrygia, which bordereth about Hellespont. In this sort was
divided the provinces of Asia. In Europe was appointed to Lysimachus, the
country of Thrace, to Antipater Macedonia: besides al these he constituted and
ordained Seleucus Captain general of the horsemen called the soldiors, being
the chief office and most honorable in the army, which charge Ephestion first
had, whom Alexander entirely loved, and after him Perdicas. Craterus also whom
Alexander dearly loved, was appointed chief Captain over ten thousand in the
army royal: and as touching the transporting of Alexander his body unto the
Temple of Jupiter Hammon, the setting up of his toombe, the apparelling
thereof, with the furniture and solemnization of the funerals, the most charge
was committed unto Aride the king and brother to Alexander. Thus when Perdicas
had placed these Princes, and diverse other in such Provinces and places as
himself thought good. He also assembled them together, making them privy of
the marvelous enterprises and ordinances of their master Alexander deceased,
Determinatio Alexandri^.
which things are worthy remembrance: for he showed unto them what things
Alexander in his life had appointed to be done, and purposed to have done if he
had lived, and therefore now at his death required him and the rest of the
Paeres to accomplish these his determinations with all speed and expedition,
which ordinances were wonderful, and of great charges. And because that
Perdicas himself would not go about to derogate the authority and honor of
Alexander, his dead master, he committed the matter to the deliberation of them
all being present, craving their consents to the frustrating of those escripts
and appointments, which seemed so difficult, and almost impossible to be
brought to pass. For first he ordained that a thousand tal galleys should be
built, longer and bigger than any where in Phenicia, Syria, Cilicia, or Ciprus,
to war against the Carthaginians, and certain other regions bordering upon the
Lybian and Spanish seas, to the end he would have been Lord over all those seas
hard to the pillars of Hercules. He also ordained, that there should be erected
five royal and honorable temples to the value of 500. talents every of them:
and further, that there should be cut out large and wide harborowes in places
fit and for ye purpose, to ride at harborow the said navy of galleys: that
done, he commanded diverse great and mighty cities to be built, and those to be
peopled as follows. First, that the inahbitants of Asia should be brought into
Europe, and the inahbitants of Europe into Asia, to the end that they being
conjoined in marriage and affinity, they should always continue in amity
together: and for the places where the temples should be erected, he appointed
that one should be at Delos in the honor of Jupiter Dodone, one in Macedon to
Jupiter Nidie, one in Amphipolis to the Goddess Diana of Scythia, the other
two of the honor of the goddess Pallas, the one in Syrene, the other in Illy,
which Temple in Illy he would should be so excellent and sumptuous, that ye
like no where should be found. Besides al these, he appointed a to^be to be
built in fashion of a Pyramide or brooch, in ye honor of his father Philip, far
excelling them in Egypt, which are thought to be the most excellent things in
the world that ever were seen or heard of. Now when all these ordinances of
Alexander were red by Perdicas, and heard by the Macedonian Princes, although
they loved their master maruellously, yet when they saw his enterprices to be
such, and of so great charge, they all agreed with one consent, that nothing
should be done therein, departing every man to his Province whereunto he was
appointed by the governor Perdicas. Shortly after they were all departed, and
separated one from another, Perdicas thought good (having so fit opportunity) to
revenge himself on those that first hindered him from being king. Mors Meleag.
And for because that Meleager now prince of Lydia, when he was sent ambassador
to the footme^, did earnestly stand against his desire, and altogether
prevented his intent, therefore Perdicas (in revenge) first of all other most
cruelly slew him, with 30. of the most principal soldiers that were against
his proceedings. The other princes soon had intelligence of the things Perdicas
had done, fearing he would show the like cruelty on them, hearing also what
their master Alexander had said on his deathbed which was, that his kingdoms
and possessions should be possessed of the most worthy: wherefore every of them
enjoying so large provinces and territories, Discordia inter successores
Alexandri.
thought themselves as worthy personages as either Aride the king, or Perdicas
his governor, insomuch that the most part of them would be subject to neither,
but seniorized their Provinces to their own uses, chalenging the name and
title of kings, dividing themselves, taking part one against the other, every
one striving who should be worthiest. Which words of Alexander, together with
their stately pride, was the original cause that the whole number of Princes
and captains (successors to Alexander) perished, and were utterly destroyed,
for they earnestly coueted each others kingdom, raising among themselves
bloody war, and cruel strife, snatching after the most worthy place, not
forcing of cruel murders, or lamentable slaughters, but with eger minds
bu^ted after ye goods and life of each other, until they had utterly rooted out
and consumed themselves: for Perdicas (having slain Meleager, and other of his
fellow seruitors in Alexanders wars) took upon him to go into Egypt, Mors
Perd.
to dispossess Ptolome, whom before he had placed in that Province. But there,
because he behaved himself so proudly, dismissing his captains upon small
occasions at his pleasure, his soldiers set upon him most fiercely, and slew
him: the greatest part of his army being gone to Ptolome. Mors Philippi and
Euridicae vxor eius.
King Philip and Euridice his wife, were most cruelly murdered by Olympias,
Alexanders mother. Craterus coming against Eumenes in open battle, was by him
slain. Eumenes also was slain in fight by Antigonus. Craterus ce ciditur ab
Eumene.
Antigonus likewise put to death Python, and gave his province to another.
Antigonus going to batel against Antioch. the son of Seleucus, was himself
slain by default of his son Demetrius. Mors quoque Eume. Mors Anti.
It was credebly reported that the night before Antigonus was slain, his son
Demetrius dreamed that Alexander (who before was dead) came and stood before
him with his sword drawn saying; I will take part with thy enemies against thy
father and thee, and in the morning also when Antigonus aranged his phalange or
square battle of footmen, coming forth of his Tent to fight, he stumbled and
sell down flat to the ground, and after he was lifted up again, holding up
his hands to heaven, he said, I know hard fortune and evil success drawethny,
but I pray the immortal Gods rather suffer me to be slain in this battle,
than shamefully before mine enemy to fly. Also old Antipater falling sick on
a surfeit which he had taken in these wars, deceased, and left the kingdom of
Macedon to Polispercon his friend, and not to Cassander his own son, which
also caused great controversy to arise betwixt his son Cassander, and his
friend Polispercon. But in the end Cassander expelled Polispercon his fathers
kingdom. Not long after he himself came to untimely death, leaving behind him
two sons, the eldest hight Alexander, the other Antipater, which Antipater
after he had slain his own mother, sought means to drive his brother
Alexander out of Macedon. For which cause Alexander sent for aid to king
Pirrhus in Cyprus, and to Demetrius Antigone his son in Peloponnesus, howbeit
Demetrius being so occupied about the estate and affairs of Pelopo^nesus, when
the Ambassadors of Alexander came, that he could by no means help him. In the
mean time Pirrhus with a great army came thither, and in recompense of his
aid and charge, took possession of so large a piece of Macedon, laying it to
his own country of Epyre, that Alexander greatly dreaded him. And while he
abode in this fear, he was advertised that Demetrius was with his whole power
coming to his aid.

Whereupon he considering the authority and great renown of Demetrius, and
also the worthiness of his deeds, for which causes he was highly honored
through the whole world, did now more than before fear his estate if he
entered his realm, wherefore he forthwith went to meet him: whom at their first
meeting he right courteously and honorably entreated, greatly thanking him for
his courtesy and travel, in that he would leave his own affairs of great
importance, and with so mighty an army come to his aid: further telling him,
that he already had well quieted and established his estate, so that he should
not need any further to travel. Nevertheless he thought himself so much
bound, as if he had come at his first sending for, or that all things had been
by his means quieted. To these words Demetrius answered, that he was right
glad of his quietness, and that he had now no need of his help, besides many
other loving and gentle words: which greeting ended, either of the^ for that
night returned into his tent. During which time there arose such matters
betwixt the^, that the one greatly suspected the other; for as Demetrius was
bid to supper with Alexander, he was willed to take heed to himself, for
Alexander had practiced by treason to slay him: notwithstanding he by no mean
showed any countenance of mistrust, but meant to go to the banquet, to whose
lodging Alexander was coming to bring him on his way. But Demetrius diversely
detracted the time, and went a soft and easy pace, to ye end his soldiers
might have leisure to arm them: and comanded his guard, being a greater
number than Alexanders, to enter with him, and also to wait near his person,
but when Alexanders soldiers saw themselves the weaker part, they durst not
attempt it at that time. And after supper, because Demetrius would have some
honest cause to depart, he feigned he was some what ill in his body, and
therefore forthwith took leave of Alexander, and went thence. The next day
Demetrius feined that he had received letters out of his country of great
importance, so that he with his army must presently return into Peloponnese
from whence he came, praying Alexander to have him excused, offering him help
when he needed, desiring to use him as one in who^ he might repose his trust.
Now was Alexander glad that of his own accord he would return, and because he
would better let him understand some sign of good will and hearty love, he
accompanied him into Thessaly. but after they were arrived in the City of
Larissa, they a fresh began to practice new treason one against another: and
first Alexander to put Demetrius quite out of suspicion, either without armor
or weapon, or any guard to attend on his person, would often visit him, hoping
thereby to make him do the like: but he was in his so thinking greatly
deceived; for as Alexander one night came to supper to Demetrius without guard
according to his accustomed wont, and that they were in the chief of their
supper, Demetrius suddenly arose from the table, whereat Alexander was sore
abashed, insomuch that he arose also and followed him to the hall door:
Interitus Alex.
but so soon as Demetrius was without, he gave sign and token to his
soldiers, who incontinently fell upon Alexander and slew him, and certain of
his men, which would have defended him: among whom, a certain fellow before he
was killed, said; Demetrius has prevented us but a day only. Now was
Demetrius King of Macedon, and the Macedonians right glad of their change; Mors
Demetri^.
but not long after this Demetrius was taken prisoner by Seleuchus in battle,
and committed to prison, where he continued until he died. Then was the great
fight betwixt Seleucus and Lysimachus, which was the very last battle that
was fought betwixt the successors of Alexander; in which conflict Lysimachus
was slain, and Seleucus victor. Mors Lysima. vt lustinus scribit,
But Seleucus inioyed his victory not long; for he was shortly after slain by
Ptolome, whose sister Lysimachus had married. Also Olympias mother to Alexander
the Great, Mors quoque Seleuchi.
when she had slain King Philip and his wife Euridice; then to despite
Cassander she put to death an 100. noble men of Macedon at one time; also she
made Nicanor brother to Cassander to be slain, and defaced the tomb and
monument of Iole his other Brother, Factum terribile.
to revenge the death of Alexander her son (as she said) because it was
suspected that he had poisoned him in giving him drink. About the same time
when Ptolome Lord of the Isle of Cypres, understood that Nicocles King of
Paphos, had secretly allied with Antigone, he sent two of his chief friends,
to wit, Argey and Calicrate into Cypres, charging them to kill the said
Nicocles, fearing that if he should leave him unpunished, the rest would not
stick to do the like. When these messengers were arrived in Cypres, having
with them the soldiers of Ptolome, they encompassed the house of Nicocles,
signifying to him their charge from Ptolome, and therefore they exhorted him to
kill himself; who from the beginning used many words in the excusing of the
fact: but when he did see there was no account made of his tale, he at the
last slew himself: and after that Axithia his wife understood of his death,
she first slew two young maids her daughters, Lamentabile actum.
whom she had by him, to the end they should not come into the hands of her
husbands enemies: and after exhorted Nicocles brothers wives willingly to die
with her, which indeed they did. In this sort also was the pallaice royal of
Paphos full of murders and wilful slaughters, and after in manner of a tragedy
burnt: for immediately after the brothers wives of Nicocles were dead, they
shut up the doors of the houses and set them on fire, and forthwith they that
then lived in the pallaice killed themselves, and so finished that lamentable
murder. In the same season, while these things were done in Cypres, great
controversy arose in the Country of Pontus, Discordia inter fratres
after the death of Parisade sometime King of Bosphorus, betwixt Satyr,
Eumele, and Pritame, Parisade his sons, for the succession of the said
Realm: insomuch, that the brothers made sharp war one against the other. So
it fortuned, that Satyr and Pritame were both slain in that war: wherefore
the other Brother Eumele to assure himself of the Realm, caused all the
wives, children, and friends of Pritame and Satyr his brethren, to be slain:
and not long after was himself cruelly slain by misfortune. Now to return to
Alexander the Great and his line; it was reported and partly believed that he
himself consented with Olympias his mother to the death and murder of Philip
his father: for which grievous offense he himself with his whole line and
stock was punished accordingly. For first it is to be considered, that old
Antipater who in Alexanders life was his Lieutenant, and after his death first
had the Satrape of Macedon bestowed on him by Perdicas the Governor. Which
Antipater and Olympias could never agree, but still were at contention and
strife, both in the life time of her son Alexander and also after his death,
insomuch that when Alexander was coming from the conquest of the world, making
his abode in Babylon for a time, and after minding to return home into Macedon
to visit his mother Olympias; Antipater being then Lieutenant of Macedon,
considered with himself, that if in case Alexander should return home, that
then his mother Olympias would make grievous complaints against him, which
thing he so much feared, that he caused poison to be given to Alexander at
Babylon whereof he presently died. Thus when Alexander was dead, and old
Antipater deceased, there grew a new grudge and quarrel betwixt Olympias and
Cassander son to Antipater, Interitus O lympij matter Alex.
insomuch that he took Olympias prisoner, and in the end caused her to be
slain. Aslo he slew Alexander son of Alexander the Great, and Roxana his
mother, and afterward he put to death Hercules the other son of Alexander
with Arsinne his mother, yet notwithstanding Cassander espoused Thessalonica
one of the Sisters of Alexander the great, who after the death of Cassander was
also slain by her own son Antipater, Cleopatra also the other Sister of
Alexander was also slain by the commandment of Antigonus. After this sort
was the whole line of Alexander for all his mighty conquests, gained with
lamentable slaughters and wonderful effusion of blood, Extinctus vniversals
successores Alex.
utterly extinguished by Antipater and his Successors. Also what gained his
Successors by the large Kingdoms and possessions he left? For they were al by
envy deprived both of life and lands in miserable sort. Insomuch that their
remained not one, that could justly vaunt and brag of his happy success: but
had rather good cause to mourn and bewail the cruel murders, manifold
slaughters, and wastfull ruins, both of themselves, their wives, children and
friends; having also right good cause to wish that Alexander had never been
borne, or else that he had never conquered so great a part of the world to leave
the possession thereof to them; whereby they were all driven to untimely death,
with the murder of infinite thousands of their people: so that the whole whole
world did lament and grieve at their mserable perdition and destruction.
Whereby it is manifest, whatsoever Alexander had gathered together in foreign
wars with the slaughter and destruction of diverse people, was lost again by
civil dissension, with the lamentable murder of his friends, children and
allies, neither in the end was there any thing else gained (by his insatiable
mind) saving only dolor, lamentation, sorrow, and distressed wretchedness,
which is a most common consequent and incident hap inevitable to ruinous war.

The cause why stately Carthage lost her Empire, and what miserable slaughters
of men, happened to be betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians; which first
chanced through the envious minds of the Affricans themselves.
WHen the two stately Empires of Rome and Carthage had long contended in war,
and fought many fierce Battles and perilous conflicts, to the great
slaughter and perishing of many thousands on both sides; they in the end
being tired and over wearied with the miserable murders and calamities of
cruel war, were on both parts willing to have a league and peace concluded
and agreed upon between them for certain years, and places limited for
division betwixt their Empires, whereby they might know each others Countries
apart. Which thing being done and confirmed on both parts, by solemn vow to
remain unuiolated and unbroken betwixt them during the same limited time. But
not long after, when both wealth and power began to increase in their
Countries, then the stately pride of the one, began likewise to malign and
disdain at the flourishing estate of the other, and also that Hannibal son
of Hamilcar was come to man's estate; who had sworn before his father being
but a boy, that he from thencefoorth would become a deadly foe to the Romans
(as before has partly been showen). Now forasmuch as the forefathers and
diverse other friends of Hannibal had been cruelly dealt withal by the Romans,
in the first war; wherefore his mind was the more whetted on, to take
reuengement of such cruelty. Insomuch, that being come to man's estate, and
also having authority and power committed to him by the Senate of Carthage, to
be the chief Leader and Captain against the Romans, as his father Hamilcar
had been before him in the first war, remembered now afresh the ancient
injuries, that the Romans had offered to the Carthaginians and his
predecessors, that in token of his malice toward them he stroke his foot
into the ground, Dictum Hannibalis, vt Pol. refert
and therewithal took up the fragments of dust and earth, scattering them
about saying; Tum belli finis erit, cum alterutra pars in habitum pulueris
redacta fuerit. Then shall the war betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians
end (says he) when every part and parcel of this dust shall return into
one clod and lump again. Departing from Africa with 90000. footmen, and
12000. horsemen to invade the Romans their ancient adversaries, not doubting
but to enlarge theirs with the Roman Empire, and to reign as Kings over the
earth: for that no Nation in the world did come near them in stateliness, but
only the Romans, whom now they minded to suppress. Thus when Hannibal had
obtained an Army, and also firmly had assured to him the faithful friendship
of diverse of the Senators, at all times to favor his proceedings, and also to
supply his wants, he then with banner displayed first warred on their friends,
and after marched into Italy, to make sharp war on the Romans themselves,
where he fought many cruel and bloody battles, slaying and murdring many
thousands of their people, gaining daily in their country, subduing their
cities and towns, winning from them their anexed provinces, marching at the
last to the very walls of Rome, viewing the situation thereof, minding where it
was weakest to make a breach, and to bend his greatest forces against it, to
the end he might with more ease take the City; which indeed he had done, if
the immortal Gods had not prevented his purpose, as the Romans themselves do
witness: for when he had slain diverse of their Consulls, with a number of
their ancient Senators, and in many battles discomfited their valiauntest
Captains and Leaders, so that there were none almost left living, that durst
incou^ter the victorious Carthaginian; so terrible was the name of Hannibal
unto the Romans. Insomuch, that now when he approached their walls, they were
all stricken with such fear and terror, that their streets were filled with
lamentations and pitiful howlings of the terrified and over frighted people
shutting their windows and doors in all the City, mourning and making such
lamentable dole and pitiful wayling, as if then the executioner had bin
present within the walls of their City. Notwithstanding Fuluius Flaccus then
being Consul, hearing the doleful cries of the distressed Citizens, being
moved with their present misery, gathered a sufficient Army of the trembling
Romans and marched out of the City in good order against his enemy Hannibal,
aranging his battles ready to encounter the fierce foe, which also came
marching against them, to give down right battle to Flaccus the Consul, but
the tre^bling Romans being so terrefied with the name of Hannibal, were now at
the sight of his displayed banners and presence of his mighty person, so
wounded with an unspeakable fear and terror, that their hearts quite failed
them, standing all as if they were more ready to fly than fight: which the
Consul right well perceived to his great grief and sorrow. But thus well it
happened to the distressed Romans, before the Armies could could join
battle, there fell a wonderful storm, with such violence and mighty force,
that both the Armies were driven into their holds without battle. The next
day also, when they likewise came forth to fight, they were in like manner
separated and driven back with another mighty storm; so that Ha^nibal was
forced to retire from the City: which (as both the Romans themselves and also
the Carthaginians affirm) was by the providence of the immortal Gods, not to
suffer Hannibal at that time to fight with the fearful Romans, but
protracting the time that the Carthaginians might be plaged for their
unfaithfulness. For if (by common judgment) they had at that time fought,
Rome had bin sacked, their Empire lost, and their lives under the mercy of
Hannibal. Therefore said Hanno a Carthaginian: As the immortal Gods provided
for the safety of the Romans, so in like sort, they provided grievously to
plague our unfaithfulness, for breaking of our sacred vow and plighted
promise. For when all hope of the Romans were taken away, their chief forces
and powers diminished, their prudent Consulls and Senators slain, their
valiant Captains and soldiers consumed, their Country wasted and destroyed
with the continuance of war; insomuch that they despaired for ever to recover
their liberty, or hold the Carthaginians from conquest of their Country.
Now in this great extremity, young P.C. Scipio craved of the remnant of the
Senators, which were left alive, that he might have an Army to fight against
Hannibal and the Carthaginians, not doubting, but that he would both revenge
their injuries, and also expel Hanniball out of Italy. The ancient Senators
seeing the valiantnes of his mind, willingly granted his request, and most
pitifully with weeping eyes and lamentable voices, earnestly required him to
stand manfully to the defense of their Emyire, City and liberty, beseeching
him also to remember the mournful cries and pitiful waylings of their wives
and children, with other miserable and distressed Citizens, which had already
tasted the cruelty of the Carthaginians by the loss of their dear friends.
P. Scipio having received his charge, being not willing to defer the time from
doing good to his Country, presently set upon the Carthaginians with such
circumspect policy and manly courage, that he not only drove them out of
Italy and Spain, but also ouerthrewe them in many great battles, and in the
end went with his power into Africa, where he also got diverse victories of the
Carthaginians, who before had mightily plagued the Romans. Now began fortune
to show her self in her right kind, for whereas the Carthaginians daily
hearkened and looked after the conquest of Rome with the whole Empire of Italy,
at this time they began to suspect to suspect their own estate and liberty.
Insomuch that the Senators of Carthage seeing the Carthaginian Empire in such
imminet peril and present danger, sent forthwith for Hannibal, commanding him
to leave warring in foreign regions and strange countries, and come home to
defend his own Empire, which stood in hazard to be loss: yet notwithstanding
the coming of Hannibal into Africa, did nothing discourage the noble Scipio,
but that he still gained on the Carthaginians to their great loffe and spnyle:
so that now the Carthaginians began utterly to despair of their own safety,
minding in this great extremity to venture and hazard their whole Empire,
City, liberty and lives in one Battle: for that they well knew they could
not long continue the wars, by reason that they had already spent such a
massy treasure in hope of getting of the Roman Empire, that at this time they
had not sufficient to defend their own Country, wherefore they were forced to
compremit the matter to Lady Fortune, whom although, for a time she had
sweetly smiled on, notwithstanding at the last she showed her self no equal
or indifferent Judge, but partially took part with the Romans, to the quite
overthrowing and subduing of the Carthaginians before the city of Carthage, in
the great and mighty battle which was at that time fought between them for
the Empire of the World. Thus Scipio defended both his own Country and
Empire, enlarging it with the Empire of the greedy Enemy, and also caused the
Senators of Carthage to sue both to him, and to the Senate of Rome, humbly on
their knees craving for their lives, and to have mercy at the hands of the
Romans, whom before they would take no peace withal: falling now prostrate
at the feet of Scipio, embracing and kissing the ground whereon he stood,
Submissio Paeni. Poli. 14.
crying continually; O thou victorious Scipio, use thy victory with mercy,
and thy conquest with clemency, spare our lives, suffer our City to stand,
destroy not our country: and we will henceforth become true friends and
aiders to you, O ye victorious Romans. Scipio considering the lamentable and
miserable estate of the distressed Romans, when Hannibal and the Carthaginians
lay before the walls of their City, and with what mournful cries, pitiful
waylings, lamentable howlings, and fearful scrichings, the pore afflicted
Romans were oppressed withal: wherefore now knowing by experience what
lamentation and pitiful outcries was in the City of Carthage, for fear of
him and the Romans, who lay at the very gates ready to spoil, take and
sack the Town; being moved with a manly pity, he not only refrained from
the destruction of their City, but also granted them peace upon such
conditions as he prescribed unto them; which they willingly agreed unto:
requiring also in the Articles their Navy of ships, which so often had vexed the
Romans, causing them all to be set on fire in their sight, to the lamentable
spectacle of the grieved Citizens, being above, 500. sail. Also it is to be
noted, that after the compositions, Scipio demanded a certain sum of money
to be gathered amongst them, and presently paid unto him: which money was so
grievous to the Carthaginians, because their stock and common substance was
before greatly wasted: wherefore at the leuying of the said sum of their
private substance, great lamentation and weeping was made in all parts of the
troubled City; which Hannibal beholding, could not forbear to laugh. Whereat
one Asdrubal Hedus took great indignation, rebuking him, for that he (being
the very original of all their sorrow) in the common mourning of the City
should so laugh. Whereunto Hannibal answered, If ye might behold the inward
thought of my mind, as ye may the outward apparent countenance of my face:
you should perceine this laughter not to come of any joy of the heart, but of
a mad and fransie mind. Nevertheless, this my laughter is not so inordinate,
nor comes so out of time, as your tears do: for first you should have wept,
when your armor was taken from you, and your ships burned before your eyes,
and when your liberty of making war with any stranger (but only by the
license of the Romans) was taken from you, wherein rested your chiefest fall
and undoing. But ye feel no hurt unless it touch your private wealth: and now
when you must pay the tribute of their private goods, every man weepeth, as he
would do at the burial of his friend. But they had further cause to wayle and
lament, than for their money and treasure or any other private goods, for they
before had lost in this war 400000. me^, which were slain in battle, Sic
scribit Poli.
besides a wonderful number of others, which died by hurts and in skirmishes,
and by the losses of Cities being no part of the aforesaid number which was
slain in set battle. Also they lost 300. of their ancient Senators and other
Estates, which had borne office in ye City of Carthage, to their great sorrow
and grief, but this (as Hannibal told them) grieved them but little, in
respect of the sorrow which they conceived by the touching of every man's
private substance, which thing came nearer to the quick, than that which they
ought far more to have lamented. Soon after these great victories won by
Scipio, he returned to Rome with great spoils, bringing also with him the
Empire of Carthage with a mighty mass of tresure, able to have rejoiced any
Nation in the world. Notwithstanding for all their victory, great spoils,
wonderful rich prays, and new Empire, he found them in a manner, as
sorrowful at his coming home, as when he departed from Rome in their great
extremity, for neither the news of his success, the mighty mass of
treasure which he brought with him, nor the stately empire of the world, which
he by his valor had obtained to the everlasting fame and renown of the
Romans, was sufficient to keep their minds from mourning, their hearts from
sorrowful sobbing, not their eyes from bitter tears, such was their losses in
that war, their Consulls slain, their Senators and chief rulers consumed,
and a mighty number of their people utterly perished. Hannibal had slain in
fight 5. of their kingly Consuls: to wit, Flaminius L. Aemilius Paulus,
Posthumus, Marcellus, and old P. Scipio that was slain in Spain. There was
also slain Cneius Scipio, brother to this P. Scipio, with Titus Gracchus,
Cneius Fuluius, Centenius Penula, with diverse other noble Romans of great fame
and authority. Ha^nibal had also slain of the Roman soldiers 300000. in
open fight and set field, besides the slaughters which were committed in the
winning of towns, odd meetings, skirmishes, and such other extraordinary
fights betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians; which by common judgment was
near comparable, to the former number. Thus was Italy stained with the blood
of her native Romans, and the cruel slaughters of the Carthaginians, so that
the Romans had no more cause to rejoice in their mighty conquest, than the
Carthaginians had at their lost Empire. In the last conflict between Hannibal
and Scipio, the Carthaginians lost the field before the walls of Carthage, with
the slaughter of 50000. men; the Romans having the victory, lost in the same
battle 54000. worthy soldiers. Therefore great was the mourning in Carthage
for their utter subversion, and as great, or rather greater was the lamentation
in Rome, after their victory, for their dear friends, chief states, and
other mighty losses, so that the Empire of the whole world, could not withhold
them from doleful moan and pitiful weepings, having good cause on both parts
to wish, that the wars had never begun, or that their proud minds had
digested the abuses of each other rather than on both sides so to bewail their
remediless losses: Qui struit insidias alijs, sibi damna dat ipse.

By what means ancient Troy was destroyed, and why the whole Empire of Phrigia
was lost, with the lamentable murders, as well of the Trojans, as the Grecians
being victors.
WHen Paris son to Priamus King of Troy was returned from Lacedemon with
fair Helena wife to Menelaus whom he had stolen from thence when her husband
was gone to dispose the goods of old Atreus his father, Vt Dictys Cret^nsis
affirmat.
lately being dead in Crete, the angry Greeks not well contented therewith, nor
digesting such a proud abuse and shameful rape at the Troyans hands having no
reformation of their wrongs, when as Palamedes, Ulysses, and Menelaus himself
went to Troy to demand Helena again by the way of entreaty, before they
would proclaim war) assembled a mighty Army, determining sharply to
revenge themselves on such a vile and intolerable act; wherefore they with
twelve hundred ships of war (being strongly furnished with men and munition)
sailed toward Troy with the aid and persons of three score and ten Kings, and
kingly Peers, which also in the behalf of the wronged Greeks had made a vow
against the Trojans. Priamus in like manner (after his son Paris had brought
home his long desired love) fortefied his town, made strong his walls and was
aided with the power and persons of three and thirty Kings, beside many
valiant princes which were his own sons, maintaining war against the fierce
Greeks the space of tenn years, two months and twelve days, to the
wonderful slaughter and mighty murder of them both. Notwithstanding, after
many cruel fights and bloody battles, Troy was taken, being sacked,
spoiled, beaten down and ruinously defaced with fire by the Greeks, who first
were mightily abused at the hands of the Phrigians. In reuengement whereof they
slew aged Priamus Father to Paris and King of Troy, with thousands of the
Phrigian Nobility, using al extremities, and finally subuerting that royal
City.

Thus when the angry Greeks had utterly wasted and destroyed Phrygia, burned
Troy, slain the valiant sons of King Priamus, slaughtered in battle of
the Trojans 656000. beside those that were slain at the subversion of the
City, which were a most wonderful and inestimable number, Sic Dares Phrigius
recordat. l. 1
to the great lamentation of the whole world, and fully had revenged the vile
villainy that Paris had offered, after the most cruel manner; then they whom
fortune had left alive, returned into Greece with the empire of Asia, and all
the kingdoms which lately were under the subjection of Priamus. Yet for all
this, ye Grecians had no great cause to triumph and rejoice in their victorious
conquest, but rather to lament their mighty losses, cruel slaughters and
manifold spoils, which they sustained by the Troyan War: for during the ten
years siege, they had slain of their people by the Troyans 860000. men,
besides all their chief Peers, which were slain during the time of the
siege, or else after by occasion of the Trojan war. The most valiant Hector
son to Priamus King of Troy, courageously chased the Greeks in many
battails by the space of 6. years: but then, after Achilles by misfortune had
slain the noble Hector, every thing fell out unhappily to the Troyans,
notwithstanding during his life, his name was terrible to the Greeks: for he
had slain 28. of their chief Kings and Princes with his own hand; namely,
Protesilaus the great King of Philaca with many thousand more when first the
Greeks landed on the Phrigian shore: he also slew Patroclus King of Pythia,
Hi Graij ca dunt ab Hectore.
who had put himself in the armor of Achilles, Lufor, Boetes, Archilogus,
Meron King of Crete, with Epistrophus, Leped^mon, Deipeynor, and proud
Prothenor king of Boetia, Dorius, Polixenus, Zantippus, Serpedon, with
Phidippus the mighty King of Chalcedo^, Polibetes, Alpinor, Philetes,
Letabonis, Isideus, and Leonteus the valiant King of Larissa, Menon, Humerus,
Maymentus, Palemon, Phillis, Octa^en, with Schedius the dreadful King of
Phocis: all which being mighty Kings, were manfully slain in battle by the
worthy Hector, beside many other noble and worthy Greeks of less account.
Agamemnon son of old Atreus King of Mycene, the chief ringleader of the
Greeks against the Troyans, was himself slain by the occasion of the Troyan
War. For returning home from the Phrigian Conquest with Cassandra the
daughter of unfortunate Priamus, his own wife Chtemnestra conspiring with
Aegisteus, Interitus Agamemnonis occasion bell. Troianoru^.
with whom she had lived in adultrie in the absence of Agamemnon her husband,
so that she caused her Lord to assay a garment on his body which had no issue
for his head, and whilst he was striving therewith Aegisteus thrust him
thorough, and so stewe him: thus was that noble Prince by occasion of his long
absence most cruelly murdered at his return; which happened by the Troyan
war. Also Achilles, after he had bathed his sword in the blood of the
Troyans, cruelly chasing the Phrigians in sundry fights, and also had slain
Hector and Troylus, Mors Achylli.
the valiant sons of Priam, at the length was himself slain by the subtle
invention of Hecuba, mother to these noble youths whom he had slain, with the
fained love of Polixena her daughter: for, causing doting Achilles to come to
Pallas Temple (after a subtle and treacherous sort) where he was traitorously
slain by Paris, her son also. Pirrhus occiditur per eadem causam, testis
Dyctis. li. 6.
In like case Neoptolemus otherwise called Pirrhus for his fierce and stearne
visage, the son of the most worthy Achilles; after he had slain aged
Priamus King of the Troyans, and murdered his son Polites at the Altar, in the
presence of Hecuba his tender mother, and sacrificed his Daughter Polixena on
the toomb of Achilles, sharply revenging his Fathers death, wrought by Hecuba
and her daughter. Thus, when he had both revenged Menelaus wrongs, and the
traitrous murder of his Father Achilles; was himself slain by Orestes, for
certain occasions about Hermione, which happened in his absence. Ajax, a most
renowned Greek being companion to Achilles, and always accounted of the
Grecians the next in force and strength to noble Achilles: therefore Ajax
claimed the armor of his slain companion, for that his strength far surpassed
all the Greeks, and also in consideration of his good service done at that uege:
notwithstanding Ulysses earnestly contended for the armor of slain Achilles,
encountering Ajax with eloquence, pleading also before the Greeks, that he had
conuayed the slain body of Achilles to Thetis his mother on his back; which
otherwise might have lost the honor of his funeral. Thus in the end, Ulysses
by his eloquent tongue, obtained the armor: for which cause Ajax fell mad
chasing after wild beasts threatening them (by reason of his frantic mood) to
be the person of Ulysses; and in this sort he died. Ulysses also, son to
Laertes, after he had done many notable exploits at the same siege, for that
(as the report goes) when he had conuated the sacred relic Palladium and
fatal destiny of the town away, was himself driven to sea by the displeasure
of Pallas from whose temple he had conuaied the relic, where he wandered the
space of ten years, losing in his perilous journey the armor of Achilles, for
which he had so mightily contended, leaving in that voyage his companion
Achemenides, in the dangerous den of the Ciclops, where he lost other of his
fellows and mates by Poliphemus the cruel giant, and at the last having lost
al, both that which he brought from Greece, and also that which he had gotten
at the subuertion of Troy, he chanced home again; where he remained for a time
unknown, suffering many spiteful displeasures by the suitors of Penelope his
chaste wife: whom after he had vanquished by the help of Telemacus his son,
Mors Vlissi. vt scribit Dares in reditu Grecorum.
was finally in the same quarrel slain himself, by his bastard son
Telogonus. In like manner, Palamedes was slain at the siege of Troy, by his
countrymen, which happened through the craft of Ulysses: for when first the
Gretians began to provide for the Troyan war, Ulysses being newly married to
fair Penelope, would willingly have staid at home in Greece with his dainty
love, insomuch that he feigned himself mad, cupling days together fondly and
plowing frantickly in yt field: but Palamedes loath to lose so fit a companion,
smelling also out the matter, laid Telemacus the young Son of Ulysses in the
furrow where his father came with the plough to prove his madness, Ulysses was
not so mad but perceived his son, and lifted his plough from the furrow to
miss his child, then cried Palamedes with a loud voice, saying, Thy craft
Ulysses is perceived, therefore lay aside thy plough and take in hand thy
weapons: so by the means of Palamedes the subtle craft of Ulysses was found
out: notwithstanding Palamedes escaped not unreue^ged, for as Dictis Cretensis,
(whose person was there present, Mors Palame. Dictis Cretensis.
and also whose works at this day remain extant) reports on this sort,
Igitur simulato quod thesaurum repertum, in puteo cum eo partiri vellent,
remotis procul omnibus persuadent, vt ipse potius descenderet. Eumque nihil
insidiose metuentem, adminiculo funis vsum deponunt: ac propere arreptis saxis
quae circum era^t, desuper orbuunt. Ulysses, with the help of Diomedes feigned
that they had found secretly hidden in a well, a certain mass of money, which
they would willingly part with Palamedes if it should so please him, persuading
him to go down into the well, which thing he unadvisedly did by the help of a
cord, suspecting no evil at al: but Ulysses and Diomedes, flinging down stones
violently which lay there about ready for the purpose, stoned Palamedes to
death, who mistrusted no such matter. In this sort (says Dictis) Ulysses
revenged himself on Palamedes, but other authors otherwise affirm, saying;
that when Ulysses lay before Troy, to work reuengment on him who was the cause
of his being there, he used this subtle policy, he counterfeited letters from
Priamus directed to Palamedes, wherein he made mention of certain money which
he before had sent him, giving him hearty thanks for diverse treasons which he
before had condescended unto also, (which money Ulysses had caused to be hid
in his tent by corrupting of his servants) now when these feigned letters were
found, and Palamedes called in question about the matter, Ulysses earnestly
took part with him, saying that he verily thought Palamedes had wrong, and
that these letters were feigned by the enemy; which thing (says he) may
easily be found; for if you can find any such money either about him or else
where secretly hid by his means, then no doubt, he is gilty of this treason;
but if not, as I am fully persuaded, then ye must think that the man has
mightily been injured by some dispitfull foe, then was search made in his tent
where the same money was found closely dug in the ground which ye
counterfeit letters made mention of, for which cause the whole host of the
Gretians cried out for speedy reuengement: wherefore he forthwith was
condemned by the peers of Greece to be stoned to death, Sic Dares Phrigeus
autumat.
which judgment presently was executed: so died Palamedes who always had been
true to his countrymen: Anticlus a noble peer of Greece, in like sort, at the
same siege died in untimely death, for being in the huge horse (which the
Gretians had framed before Troy, to be the fatal destruction of the Troyans)
with a number of other Gretian Lords secretly hidden in his hollow paunch or
woomb; the rest of the Army of Greece flying to Tenedos, as if they would have
returned home to Greece again, Anticlus now remaining behind in the holow
horse which stood before Troy, being accompanied with these worthy Princes,
Thoas, Ulysses, Menelaus and Neoptolemus Achilles brother, with many other
noble states. The Trojans hearing that the Grecians had consecrated that horse
to Pallas to appease her wrath, now in the absence of the Grecia^s thronged and
wonderfully clustred about the horse: some of them wishing to burn it, saying,
it was a false frame invented of Ulysses to betray their City, namely Lacon,
who cried out; Break down or burn this hollow horse, wherein the wilely
Greeks do lurk. Also fair Helena her self (who was the original cause of
that bloody war:) greatly suspected that a troop of Greeks were secretly
enclosed in that hollow frame insomuch that she her self came privily to the
horse, being before time acquainted with the right voices of the Ladies of
Greece, began most artificially to counterfaite their voices in the Gretian
tongue, meaning thereby, that if there were any Lords of Greece therein
enclosed, they would speak to her when she did rightly counterfeit their Ladies.
But the subtle Greeks were as mistrustfull as she was wyly, refusing to
answer to her voice; only Anticlus would have spoken, when (as he deemed) he
had heard the lively voice of Laodamia his wife, had not Ulysses let him, by
laying his hand on his mouth until Helena departed, whereby Anriclus was
strangled, and forthwith died. What cause then had the victorious Grecians to
rejoice at the ruin and destruction of Troy, when as their chief Peers were
slain at the same siege: some of them violently being chased at sea, so that
they returned not home to Greece in the space of 20. years: some of them also
being slain at their return to Greece by treason, which was known to happen
thorough the occasion of the Trojan war. So that there remained alive of 70.
Kings not fully 15. but either they were slain before Troy, at their return by
treason, or else through dissension for dividing the Trojan spoils. Insomuch
that all Greece had as great cause to bewail the loss of their noble peers
slain by the Trojan war; as the vanquished Trojans had to mourn at the
destruction and subuertion of their aged prince, worthy Peers, and stately
empire: wherefore neither the Gretians, Romans, Macedonians, nor any other
countriemen whatsoever, (who by their notable victories have brought many
Countries under subjection) that ever had just cause to joy over their
conquest, or triumph over their great and mighty victories, but rather had in
the end good cause to mourn, lament, sorrow, and heartily repent their
achiued victories, for that many calamities, miseries, lamentable losses and
pitiful slaughters, is as well incident to the victor, as inevitable to the
vanquished; therefore what gains the victor but loss, and although it
procures private joy to some: yet notwithstanding it purchases public sorrow
to many. Thus does despitefull war, both wast, destroy, ruinate, confound
and utterly subvert the Kingdoms, countries, stately provinces and worthy
Cities of the conquered: and also cruelly spoil, displeasantly voxe, and
miserably torment the conqueror: so that where the vanquished have cause to
bewail their subverted state, there (most commonly) the victor lamenteth his
loss, and has good cause to complain on fortunes cruelty.

That it is both a disgrace, and also a foul discredit, to Englishmen to
chaleng their genealogy of the Troyans or to derive their pedigree from such
an unfaithful stock, who were the chief causers of their own perdition.
IT has been, and is at this day amongst Christians a mere folly and
wonderful madness, to derive and fetch their genealogy and pedigree, from the
ancient Troyans, because (for sooth) that they would be known to descend and
spring from the Gods, as the old foolish saying is, that the Troyans did: for
it is said that old Anchises begot Aeneas on the gods Venus, and after the
fatal subuertion of Troy, Aeneas much increased that stock and kindred, as
hereafter shall more manifestly apeare. The proud Troyans and the stately
Gretians, falling into controuercie about their ancient generositie, seeking
out which of them descended from the most ancientest stock and line, the
Troyans affirming that Hector was far more worthy then Achilles, the Gretians
also stoutly mainetaine that Achilles was superior to Hector; which thing the
Troyans, not well digesting, unfold their fond pedigree as follows, Etsi
enim Peleifilius Achilles fuit, Aeaci vero Peleus, and Aeacus Iouis, sic quoque
Hector Priami, Priamus autem Laomedontis, and Dardani Laomedon silius,
Dardanus, quoque Jove prognatus est. Alijgenus Hectoris paulo aliter deriuant,
Jupiter inquiunt, ex Electra genuit Dardanum? Dardanus Assaracum and Ilium,
Ilius Laomedonte^, Vide Tertellum.
Laomedon Priamum, Priamus Hectorem, vide Tortellium, after this sort they
derive themselves from the gods, but if it be possible that a wicked and a
perverse generation should spring and descend from the gods themselves, then no
doubt but that the Troyans came linially from the gods, and if (as they say)
Dardanus was begotten of a God how soon then did his son Laomedon digres from
that sacred genelogie, for of him thus it was said; Vide Gel. lib 7.
Laomedon insignis perfidia fiut, qui pactam pro constructis Troiae maenibus
mercedu^ neganit Apolloni atque Neptuno, violauitque sacram iurisiurandi
religionem quae semper abalijs inuiolate santissimeque habita. Laomedon was the
vnfaithfullest Prince that lived, for having borrowed a great sum of money of
the priests of Apollo, and Neptune, to rear and build up again the decayed
walls of Troy, which being done, and the priests crave their money again, he
mightily forsweres the debt, protesting and vowing by the sacred gods, he ought
them no such sum, and therefore he would pay no such debt. Wherefore by the
just plague of the Gods their predicessors (as they themselves affirm) their
city was part over flown with the raging seat: by reason where of there arose
afterward in the city when the water was retired, a most miserable and deadly
plague whereof many thousands of the Troyans died, which plague to appease they
asked counsel and advice of the oracle at Delphos, how they should satisfy
the angry gods: answer was given the^ that no other ways they could apease
their wrath and displeasure, but only by this means, by giving monthly a
virgin to a sea monster, with should appear for the nonce at the shore or
banck before Troy, which custom being observed and dewly kept ye grievous
plague seized: it happened in time that the daughter of Laomedon the King (whose
name was Hesione) was chosen by lot and chance to be the virgin that should
satisfy the greedy monster: Vt dictum.
thus when the time drew on that the sea monster was ready waighting at his
wonted port craving his accustomed pray, and thus pensive Laomedon with diverse
of the lamenting Troyans came forth with the virgin bound, presently to be
given to the eager monster to be devoured, in the mean time pitifully be
wailing the destressed state of the guiltless virgin. Hercules by great chance
at that time coming from the voyage of Hespere, happened to be against Troy when
such a mighty throng of people stood on the shore, wherefore he forthwith
drew near and demanded the cause, and why they did so lament: then trembling
Laomedon told all that is before rehearsed confessing his own perjury, for
which all this misery chanced. The noble minded Hercules greatly pitying
their their distressed state, demanding of Laomedon what he would give the man
that should free their city from that monthly fee: whereunto he answered, that
he could never thoroughly recompense that man, but in token of his good will he
would give him two of his white steedes, which iuels of al earthly things he
had most pleasure in: now Hercules for that he always striued to do good,
coveting rather to deliver the distressed people, than after that gift of
Laomedon although he made countenance of acceptance, insomuch that he gave
battle to that monstrous beast where betwixt them was fought a cruel fight:
but in conclusion the monster was slain, and the Troyans freed from that
monthly fee: then was Hercules much made of in Troy, until such time that
unfaithful Laomedon forgeting the great pleasure and benefit that he had
received at his hands; privily repining and grudging at his being in the city,
chiefly for that the Citizens much honored and favored the man, which was
altogether displeasant to him, insomuch that Laomedon awaighted when Hercules
went to sport himself out of the City, and then presently shut up the gates
of Troy against him: also denying to give the horses which before he had
promised. Thus when Hercules did see himself so deluded, by the twice perjured
King; being mightily moved, vowed that he in time would take reuengement on
that disloyal wretch, and not long after he came with mighty force against the
city of Troy, and made war on the King, slaying many thousands of his
people, defasing the town of Troy which Laomedon by his vile perjury had
built and erected, taking prisoners Priamus and Hesione children of the
unfaithful king: but the wretch Laomedon their father was fled to keep
himself from the hands of Hercules, whom before he had so mightily abused;
thus for his perjury, disloyalty, and accustomed discourtesie, his stately
City was ouerthrown, his children led captive and himself forsed to flee. Yet
again Laomedon was suffered to erect up the walls of Troy, and replenish it
with people the second time: not long after also Hercules came again into the
Troyan road when he was going with Jason to Colchos, Cornelio Nepote
interpret. Fol. 149.
to fetch the golden fleece, and there required aid of Laomedon for his pay,
but the discurteous King denied his lawful suit, for which spightfull part,
Hercules when he returned from that voyag the second time came against Troy
with a great power, whom the king minding to encounter, was slain in the sight
of the Citizens, and Troy again taken. Yet the noble minded Hercules being
moved with pity, suffered Priamus, the son of Laomedon the slain king to be
redeemed from his captivity; who a new erected and built the walls of
unfortunate Troy. This perjury and unfaithful dealing of Laomedon, whether it
be true or false, it is recorded by the Troyans themselves, and especially
reiterated and made extant by the Romans; who of all other Nations do most
proudly brag and vaunt of the Troyans their predecessors and progenitors. This
I am sure, no Nation of the world can deny, but that Hercules was always a
freer to Countries from tyranny, a reformer of wrongs, a helper of the
afflicted, and never in his life did iniure or hurt any prince, people, or
Commonwealth, without just cause of shameful villainy. For it is well known,
that at ye very hour of his Nativity, the sacred Oracle of Apollo was heard
to pronounce these words; Heraclem te alio Phoebus cognomine dicit,
Gratificando etenim, Hercules was also called Heracles.
decus immortale tenebis.
Phoebus calls thee Hercules, thy name so terms he;
By doing good and gracious deeds, thy praise shall endless be.


Wherefore it is to be considered, that Hercules either did wrongfully
suppress the Troyans, Dares Phri. sic resert.
and subdue their City; or else that unfaithful Laomedon was justly punished
for his perjury and discurtesie. Priamus quoque filius Laomedontis seruitutem
perpetuam seruisset, si non precio fuisset redemptus: etenim puer ab Hercule
captus, cum Hesione sorore, pecunia solus redimi potuit, vnde Priamus dictus,
qui prius appellatus Podarces. Porro si qua fortasse fuerunt ineo virtutis
ornamenta, Paris tamen ab ijs deflexit, ad omnem libidinis turpitudinem. Also
Priamus the son of Laomedon should have lived in perpetual servitude, if he
had not been redeemed with money: for the boy being taken by Hercules, with his
sister Hesione, could be redeemed no otherwise save only by ransom, wherefore
he was ever after called Priamus, whose name was first Podarces. Furthermore,
if he had any ornaments of virtue, yet Paris his son did clean digress
from any such good quality, Libido Paridis.
to all filthiness of carnal pleasures. First it is to be remembered, that he
violated most shamefully his vow made to Oenone, who before had saved his life;
which otherwise by the consent of his own father had perished. After many
such unfaithful parts, by the provocation of his own lecherous motion,
whereunto he always was very apt and prone, and partly by the instigation of
Priamus his father, to the intent he might cry quittance with the Greeks, who
then held his sister Hesione captive, he sailed into Greece, where he was right
Princely entertained by Menelaus King of Lacedemon, who right honorably
banqueted and feasted both him and his companions. And for that the courteous
King had not convenient leisure in his own person to welcome sir Paris, being
at that time vrgently forced to go into Crete, to take order and dispose the
goods of old Atreus his father lately dead; he commanded Helena his beautiful
Queen so entertain her guest in his absence, that he might both have use of
his pallaice, country and subjects, with all other reverence to be done to him,
at his own will and commandment: for which friendly entertainment and gentle
courtesy, (he not digressing from the Trojans his unfaithful progenitors) to
requit the gentle King stole away from thence his wife Helena, Vxor Menelai
rapta.
whom he entirely loved. But Menelaus, and the other angry Greeks not
digesting such a proud and shameful rape, forthwith prepared a mighty and
huge Army against the Trojans, minding to be revenged on their City and
Country, for the abuse of that unfaithful lechour: insomuch that in the end,
by reason of his filthy folly, both the aged king his father was cruelly
slain, his Country ruinously wasted and spoiled, and the City of proud Troy
most miserably burnt and defaced with the slaughter of many thousands of his
Countrymen. Thus after Troy was thrice overthrown by the unfaithfulness of her
own native people, and especially utterly destroyed in the last subversion,
with the loss of the whole Empire by the unkind Citizens. Dares Phrigius.
lib. 1. Et Dictis Crentensis. lib. 5.
For Aeneas (as Dictys Cretensis says, who in the same war served against
Troy, under the conduct of Idomeneus King of Crete, whose works at this day
are extant) with the consent of old Anchises his father, and Antenor his
confederate companion, yielded up and betrayed Troy, with their aged king into
the hands of their enemies the Greeks, and by this faythlesse means, obtained
life both for themselves, their wives children, aliances and families, at the
hands of the Grecians, and suffered with bag and baggage freely to pass
from the burning town and slaughtered heaps of their betrayed Countrymen.
But now more rightly to decipher unfaithful Aeneas, whom Virgil oftentimes in
his profane verses does call Pius Aeneas: Virgilius. lib. 3. lib. 6. lib. 7.
as does appear in the 3. book of the Aeneidos, saving, Parce pias scelerare
manus non me tibs Troia, etc. And in the 6. book, Principue pius Aeneas tum
iussu Sibyllae. Also in the 7. book, At pius exequijs Aeneas rite solutis, etc.
First it is to be considered, that Aeneas was the only man that led doting
Paris to that unadvised enterprise accompanying him into Lacedemon. Then
afterward in the greatest extremity of his Countrymen (for sauegard of his
own life) he betrayed the town, and was the chiefest instrument to bring aged
Priamus to an untimely death, with all the whole Trojan State. For perceiving
the Greeks meant sharply to revenge themselves on the whole race of Priamus,
for the vile abuse of Paris his leawd son, Aeneas having married Crusa one of
the daughters of the said Priamus, then knowing the intent of the fierce
Greeks, presently with willing consent committed his loving wife to the
murdering enemy, that no let or impediment might be of his own escape.
Notwithstanding Virgil always favoring wretched Aeneas because the Romans
derive the pedigree from the fugitive Troyans, after a more cunninger sort
says, that he lost Crusa his wife in the burning town altogether against his
will when he with his father and the rest of his family made have to escape
from the persecuting foe. Virgilius. lib. 1.
Also other of the Romans going about to hide the unfaithfulness of their
predicessor, say thus of him, that at such time as Troy was taken by the
Gretians: sed ficta romanorum.
Agamemnon their chief captain greatly pitying the perplexities and miseries
of the Captives, made this general Proclamation in the Gretian tongue, that it
should be lawful for every Citizen which was free, to convey and carry away
with them some one thing or other, what they themselves would best like of, and
most tenderly loved, Aeneas therefore contemning all other things of great
value and estimation, carried out with him the gods of hospitality: which when
the Greeks beheld and considered the vertious and gracious inclination of the
gentleman (as they say) gave him leave in like manner to take and choose one
thing what be most made of among all his goods, riches, and possesions. Aeneas
using the benefit of this their merciful grant* took his father being old
and ancient upon his shoulders, and bore the burden of his body out of the
City: whereat the Grecians being wonderfully astonished, left unto him the
substance of all his wealth undiminished, adding these words importing a
testimony of their opinion conceived toward him; Pietatem in homines and deos
exercentibus, parentesque reuerenter colentibus, etc. Such as behave themselves
religiously toward the gods, and use themselves reverently to their parents,
must of necessity make blunt the sharp edge of the irefull enemy. But this
sauoureth nothing of the truth; for Dictys Cretensis serving the Grecians
against the Trojans during all the war, to the intent that he should note the
yearly adventures which fortuned; it is to be thought, that being a Grecian,
and in all places setting forth the worthy praise of his Countrymen to the
very uttermost, would never so stain ye valor of the Greeks, as to say they
could not take the Town by force, but were forced to use treacherous means to
obtain their purpose. Notwithstanding it might have been suspected (although he
had written that Troy was taken by the Greeks by manly force and stout courage
in despite of the Trojans) that then he had flattered the Greeks his
Countrymen, whose pen (most commonly) after the largest manner is given to set
out their Countries glory: wherefore it is certainly to be believed, that
Aeneas with his confederates was corrupted, and yielded up the town to the
enemy, or else Dictys Cretensis would never so much have abased his Country
men, Dictis and Dares, ita affirmunt.
as to affirm this. Tunc placitum est omnibus fidem dari, foedere firmari,
iureiurando stringi, eo pacto vt si oppidum proxima nocte tradidissent, Aencae,
Antenori, Vcaligoni, necnon liberis, coniugibus, propinquis, amicis, suisque
omnibus fides seruaretur. Then Aeneas (as Dictys reports) being at a point
with the Greeks concerning the yielding up of the Town, firmly gave faith on
all parts by solemn vow, being bound on this condition that if the next night
they yielded their City to the Grecians, that then both Aeneas, Antenor, and
Vcaligon, together with their Wives, Children, Families, Friends and Kindred,
with all their goods and riches whatsoever, should be faithfully spared, and
right carefully kept from hurt by any of the said Grecians, which plighted
promise was on either part firmly observed; for the next night Troy was
treacherously yielded up by Aeneas and his traitorous crew, Troia tradita Aenea.
and the Grecians (according to promise) spared the betrayers thereof.
Notwithstanding the unfaithfulness of Aeneas was greatly noted by the Greeks,
for when he had betrayed both his aged Prince, stately Empire and strong
town, he could not be found faithful to the Grecians, but sought to flowt and
mock them, at whose hands he had obtained life and liberty; insomuch, that
when Agamemnon and Pyrrhus the son of Achylles made diligent inquiry, and
earnest search after Polixena daughter to Hecuba, who so vilely had dealt with
noble Achylles, now minding sharply to revenge his fathers death on that
disloyal wretch, and therefore earnestly striued to find her out: Aeneas, who
could neither be faithful to his friends nor enemies, sought out means to
hide Polixena from the fury of Pyrrhus Achylles son; but fierce Pyrrhus not
ceasing until he had found her out, in reuengement of his fathers death he
cruelly sacrificed her on his toomb. For which unfaithful part of Aeneas (as
Dictis Cretensis reports) Tunc Agamemnon iratus Aenea, Dares lib. 1
quod Polixenam absconderat, cum omnibus suis a patria protinus discedere
iubet: that then Agamemnon king of the Greeks, being greatly angry with
Aeneas, for that he had hidden out of the way fair Polixena, by whose
unfaithful means his good companion noble Achylles was untimely slain,
Inconstantia Aeneae.
for which cause he presently commanded him to depart out of the Country, and
for that he before had promised him both lands, goods and all other things
whatsoever were known to be his own, he forthwith compelled him to take
whatsoever him best liked, and also to bestow his lands at his own pleasure,
for there he should no longer stay. Thus after Aeneas had betrayed his
Country, he himself with the other rabble rout of his treacherous companions
were forced to wander at sea, attending what destiny would bestow on them,
spoiling and robbing in diverse coasts and countries where he landed; in the
end, chancing on the country of Africa, he took land at new built Carthage,
Vt Romani ipsi confirmant.
where Dido (otherwise called Elisa) was Queen and gouernesse, there being by
her right friendly received, willing both him and his company to use her
Country as their own possessions, repairing his shaken ships, giving freely
al necessaries to the whole number of his wandering companions, commanding that
nothing should be wanting, that might pleasure the distressed Trojans, her
self oftentimes using to welcome her wearied guest, whereby she fell in love
with the comely parsonage of beautiful Aeneas, even so far as plighted vow
on both parts could assure them, Aeneas faithfully promising continual stay
and abode in her Country; but being a Trojan he could not digress from his
unfaithful progenitors, for through his disloyal heart and wandering mind, he
privily by night stole away from Carthage, leaving the pensive and sorrowful
Queen in the lurch, and to hold herself to her own harms, for which
unfriendly part, seeing herself so deluded and mocked by the unfaithful
Phrygian, presently slew herself for very grief, which she had conceived,
through his unsteadfast promise. Notwithstanding the Romans still favoring their
predecessor do affirm, to hide that unfaithful part, that Aeneas was warned
in his sleep to depart from thence, Ficta a Romany.
and seek out a land which the gods themselves had predestined to him and
his issue, meaning, by Italy, which he after won by force. Thus when he was
departed from Carthage, and had spoiled and robbed diverse other coasts and
Countries, at the last landed in Italy, where through corruption by gifts,
cruel threats, by menacing means, and also by fair promises and allurements,
he made such discord and dissension in the Country of Italy, whereby great
slaughters of people were horribly committed, insomuch, that in the end he
attained unto the Diadem and Crown of the whole Country, firmly
establishing himself in the kingdom, which he by force had taken from the
quiet Princes thereof, there reigning king until he died, whose death the
Romans seeming to hide, for that (as they say) he descended from the goddess
Venus, wherefore he was taken up into Heaven and there placed amongst the
Stars for ever to reign immortal. Vetus Pro^erbium. Malicorui, malum ouum.
Then after the death of this unfaithful fugitive, his son Ascanius reigned
also; after whose decease Siluius Posthumus, his son succeeded, who (as both
the Romans and Englishmen do affirm) begat Brutus, who slew Posthumus his
father, for which cause being vanished Italy, when he had troubled diverse
other quiet countries, at the last took land in the I Will, which then was
called Albion, of one of the thirty daughters of Dioclesian, which landed here
by chance, and named it Britanie, staying the huge and mighty Giants, whom the
devils themselves had begotten on Dioclesians daughters as the English
histories at this day reports; a foolish toy for the inhabitants of this
noble I Will, to derive themselves, and fetch their pedigree from devils, and
then after from the gods. First to confute this foolish error; It is most
certainly known, that there was no such king in Syria, who was called by the
name of Dioclesian, for that no ancient Author of the Syrians make mention of
any such name, neither of his daughters, which as the English Chronicles at
this day affirm, were put into a small vessel or boat by their father
Dioclesian, and committed to Sea without either pilote or guide, chauncing to
land in this I Will, naming it after one of their names, who was called Albion, as
the fond saying goes; and then forsooth, this I Will being inhabited with
devils, at their first arriving, the sisters were carnally known by the
devils themselves, and thereof did spring mighty and huge Giants which
afterward were slain by Brutus, who descended from the gods, as they also
affirm. Which vain opinion in like sort, is both ridiculous and foolish, for
that neither the Commentaries of Julius Caesar, the works of Cornelius Tacitus,
nor the Histories of Diodorus Siculus, who did write of this noble I Will, made
any mention at all of any such Brutus, being descended from the Troyans,
neither do the Romans themselves, nor the Greeks write of any one called
Brutus, before Julius Brutus, who did expel Tarquinius out of Rome, which was
long since the time of Siluius Posthumus. It is also to be considered, that if
Julius Caesar, who made a conquest of this I Will a thousand and five hundred
years since, had then known, that the people thereof had descended from the
Troyans, as both himself and all the other Romans did, no doubt, he would not
have made war against this land, but rather have sought to aid and succor
it. But the vanity of the English nation is such to derive their genealogy
from the Trojans, for that (as I have said before) they sprang and descended
from the gods, or else to fetch their original from Albion, who brought forth
huge giants by the help of devils, so that they must, there is no remedy,
either descend from the gods, or else from the devils themselves: this folly
first sprang up amongst the Romans, who challenged their pedigree from the
Trojans, which, as they say, descended from the gods; and in like sort the
Englishemen, to the intent they would spring from the gods as well as the
Romans, feign that Brutus son to Posthumus one of the Trojan stock arrived
in this I Will, and named it after his own name Brytannia: which truly, in mine
opinion, can not be true, for that his name was Brutus, which, if you mark
it, is altogether unlike unto Britannia: and to mend the matter also, they
affirm, that first they sprang of devils, a goodly commendation to this noble
I Will. But for that the proud Romans through their vaunting vanity, did derive
themselves from the gods, which they right well knew were but earthly kings,
for that the heathen kings in those days were called gods: notwithstanding,
since the corruption of the time, both the Romans and the Englishmen think
that they are linially descended from the gods themselves, for otherwise the
Romans would not be so proud and stately, as at this day they are wellknowne
to be, nor the Englishmen so vain to challenge their pedigree, or recount
their genealogy from the most wicked Trojans, unless they were fully
persuaded, that the Trojans came from the immortal gods; which foolish opinion
first sprang from the Romans by overmuch esteming their progenitors. Which fond
and vain errors to confute, diverse learned men are of this opinion, by
studious seeking out of the works of ancient historiographers, that the
Greeks when first their Cities became populous, waxing rich and puissant,
after they knew the cunning Art of Sailing, first of al other people found out
this I Will naming it Olbion, which in Greek is happy, for the abundance of all
things necessary that they found there, therefore no doubt but that in so
long a time as has been since Olbion, by the corruption of the continuance
might well he called Albion: or else they at that time finding this land by the
white rocks and cleeues, with which the I Will was environed withal, named it
Albion* ab albis rupibus, and also Britania of Britaniae, which are the Isles
that lie in the Ocean, and not Britania of Brutus, the supposed Troyan. And so
this noble I Will may be known to spring and descend from the valiant Greeks,
who suppressed the perjured Troyans, and beat down their proud town, which
they by unfaithfulness had builded; and not to come from that wicked race, who
always were the chief cause of their own destruction, and procurers of their
fatal destiny by their perjury, unfaithful dealing, churlish conditions,
and insatiable lechery, as the whole world at this day does witness against
them, to the everlasting reproach of their line and Successors.

Expressed by way of apparition, touching the manifold miseries, wonderful
calamities, and lamentable chances that happened to her unfortunate self,
sometime Queen of stately Troy.
WHen that Auroraes dewes were past, and Phoebus did decline,
And purple Titan ready pressed with fainting light to shine.
When Cynthia did prease in place to run her compass round,
And feeblely did show her face with duskish light on ground.
Then walked I to silent grove my fancy to delight,
Where willingly I meant to bide to pass the pensive night.
Sweet silence there her sound did yield, no noise did me molest:
All chirping notes were whisht at once, each breathing soul did rest.
Amidst the hollow grove I past to ease my musing mind,
But no redress of doleful dumpes I any where could find:
Until at last I viewde the skies where lucent lights abound:
And down again mine eyes direct upon the human ground.
Then did I shake from sobbing soul the griping grief and pain,
That long before had me oppressed, but now reuiude again.
Within the grove a pleasant stream with bubling note did flow,
Which I by chance had soon found out from hollow banks below.
There musing by the running tide and soundings of the deep:
The sliding floods that smoothly pass had hushed me soon asleep.
And as I slept on greenish shore, by help of warbling streams
Strange fearful fancies frighted me, by dreadful drowsy dreams.
In slumber sound me thought I spied a wight both fierce and fell:
A thing despisde, in viler sort no creature was in hell.
A woman vexed with eager looks in frantike fiery mood.
With clapping hands and rolling eyes uncertainly she stood.
She ran about with flaring hair, much like to horses stout,
When sudden fright had pierst their minds, with strouting tails did strout.
Even so or worse she roude about with head and shoulders bare:
And oftentimes from senseless pate her pendant locks she tare
With bloody nails and hands imbrued, her palms she often did smite:
And reaching for the heavens, as though she to the Gods had spite.
With irefull cries and fearful notes the hollow grove did sound:
In yelling sort from gulled banks the ditties did rebound.
Like mighty bulls that fiercely meets, and filles with noise the skies.
And for a token of their wrath the dustie gravel flies,
By tearing up of earth, so she in such like frantike fits
Does snatch up grass in griping hands, as one beside her wits.
Still stalking on, until at last she found me where I were:
Thus fancy fed my dreadful dream with grievous gripes of fear.
But when that she approached near, and stood me by, at length
Me thought my trembling joints did quake, to fly I had no strength.
With starting steps I sought to fly, to shun that fearful sight:
But all in vain I often assayed to save my self by flight.
My fainting feet did often fail by striving still to start:
No forced pace would ought prevail, or suffer to depart.
Thus still me thought amid my dream (as one that were in maze)
With quaking corpse and hair upright full still I stood at gaze.
For fear my faltring tongue did stay, I durst her not behold,
Until at last with friendly cheer she said, my friend be bold.
I wish to thee no harm at all, wherefore be not dismayde:
But call to mind thy frighted sense, and be thou not afraid.
Ne marvel why though I disguisde, have furiously been vexed:
In raging sort so strange to thee for that I am perplexed
In mind and soul, to think how far fell Fortune has abusde
Both me and mine in spiteful sort, when hautie Gods refusde
To succor us in greatest need, she turnde her face and fround,
Who long had smiled, but now gave help to croude us to the ground.
Wherefore good friend, quoth she, give ear and mark what I shall tell.
Lift up thy mind, be not dismayed, and note my speeches well:
For I must needs declare the cause to ease my pensive breast
Of hapless hap that Fate assignde, and then in hope to rest.
With that me thought I banished fear, and quaking limbs reuiude.
I courage took again afresh, of which I was depriude.
Then boldly thus I said at last, what madness does possess
Thy vexed soul? Be sure if that thy pain I may redress,
To find some ease of this thy grief or else I were unkind:
Therefore be short, to ease thy smart, and let me know thy mind.
It pities me to see the plight of thy distressed state,
And makes me shrink at all to guess on this thy heavy fate:
For that no fiend that comes from hell could any more lament
Their perverse lot for wickedness and sins already spent,
Than thou have here before my face with bounsing blows and cries,
Whereat the caves reuerberate, and Echo roles in skies.
But now dispatch, show me thy mind, if so to ease thy grief
Thou think it best: I am content that way to give relief.
Then she began to show her mind, and tell her grief forepast
With grievous groans in woeful wise, these words she spoke at last.
If ever any woeful wight had cause to rue her fate,
And plead with tears her heavy hap for change of her estate:
My self have just cause to bewail my state which I thought sure.
But woe is me unhappy wretch, what joy does aye endure?
On Fortune fell I do complain, the cause of my mishap,
That thus has dealt with me alas, when first within her lap
She lulld full sweet, and used right well* and then ere that I wist
Did tumble down from top of throne, thus Judas like she kissed.
She lifted me so high above my mates and fellows all,
For that more grievous when I fell she meant to make my fall.
But would from beggars brood at first my chance had been so good
To spring, and that I had been borne and bred of meanest blood,
Then would the world not so have musde to see my sudden chance
To fall so low, whom Fortune erst so highly did advance.
Yet give me leave to ease my mind although I wish in vain:
For now it is past by wishing I do ease my pining pain.
The truth is thus, I did descend from Cysseus that king
A mighty Prince of Thrace well known, whose praise each where did ring.
And from his house I higher stepped to highest place of state:
For Pryamus the king of Troy did take me for his mate.
Who was the stately Emperor of Asia, and there
Amongst the hautie Phrygians the diadem did wear.
Then Queen was I of flaunting Troy. The Troyans all rejoice
That Priamus their Lord and king had made of me his choice.
There many noble sons had I, the world does witness bear:
No Nation under heaven that day with me durst once compare
In valor with so many sons by one brought forth to sight:
Each people on the earth as yet will yield to them their right;
That for so many brethren, as I brought forth (poor Queen)
I say again that never since by any has been seen.
And that I mean to prophecy, wherefore I dare be bold
To say the like will never be while heaven and earth does hold.
But for because I would not wish thou should my name mistake:
Whom Greeks and Romans long ago in doleful verse did make
The world to know, and now my self shall verefie the same:
Who called me old Hecuba, so truly was my name,
A wretched wight too old indeed, for that I liude so long,
To escape the fire that burned Troy, to suffer further wrong:
O would to God I then had died, when Pryamus my mate
By Pyrrhus sword receiude the wound, but now I wish too late,
Fell destiny denide me that and sparde me for the nonce,
To plague me with a thousand woes, ten thousand all at once.
But first to tell my fatal hap, and orderly proceed
To show, how that the angry gods against me had decreede
And vowed, I think, by one consent to work me double woe,
Or else I never so had died to please my spiteful foe,
As after thou shall know: but first I wish to ease my mind,
In showing how that destiny and hapless fate assignde
To me poor wretch such mischief vile, as none did ever taste
Before nor since, though long ago my miseries were past:
For first within my body I, to my great pain, did bear
And nourish up the fruit which was the cause of all my care,
With child I was, but then unknown what fruit I forth should bring
To joy my self, or else to please old Pryam Troyan king
My loving mate, who used me well, wherefore I wished to please
His quiet mind, by my good will, that we might live at ease:
But see how froward fortune frownd, a dream did me molest,
And fearful fright did trouble me when I was laid to rest,
Me thought I was delivered of such a fearful sight,
For all was fire which I brought forth, and flamde as fire bright,
With fury great the fire waxt, with flames the air did stream:
Thus doubtful dumpe, by fright did pierse my breast in dreadful dream.
When that I wakde I told the king, how Morpheus had dealt
With me in sleep, and further how what agony I felt,
Who presently to oracle would have no nay, but sent
To know what by this fiery flame and dreadful dream was meant,
The dream resolude, the Oracle, for answer did return,
That I a son should bear, and he should cause strong Troy to burn
With fire bright, and for his cause old Pryamus his sire,
And I his mother should behold our town to burn with fire,
And all our people slain down right in fighting for his sake
A mighty foe for his abuse should sharp reuengement take.
Which to prevent the father sought, to slay his harmless boy,
For that he thought some mischief might by his means hap to Troy,
And for because the Oracle on him unborn, did give
Such sentence which did fright his sire, wherefore he might not live,
That when his son was borne, forthwith the father did betake
The child unto a trusty friend, that he away might make
The boy which well I loud, but yet such pity did remain
Within my breast, that I reserude my son which should be slain,
And closly spoke unto the man, that he my child should spare,
And tell the king, at his return, that cruel beasts did tear
The tender limbs of his young son: wherefore he now was free
From such suspect as erst before the Oracle did see.
The aged King was then content, and thought all things were well,
He feared not the prophecy which these things first did tell:
Thus did I breed and foster up even him that did destroy
Both parents, friends and country kind, and sought our great annoy,
The lad did live with heard in field, and shortly up was grown,
So that he for King Pryams son by secret signs was known,
Then was the youth callde home again, and Pryam was content
To take him for his son, and did his former act repent.
But when sir Paris came to Court, for so we callde his name,
The doting boy began to love and follow Venus game,
Enquiring often when fame would bring news of a peerless piece
And passing dame, which that ere long had tidings thus from Greece,
That there the flower of all the world six Menelaus held,
The like to her on all the earth no Nation then could yield:
For whom unknown my son did dote, in such exceeding sort,
That he to Greece by sea would pass, to see if that report
Had blazed a truth: but first before to Grecian soil he went,
He craude of me and Priamus, to yield him our consent:
Then ships were built on seas to sail, king Pryam willd it so,
And mates for him were picked out, and hence to Greece they go,
At Lacedemon he at length, a place of Greece so called
Ariude, and in their safest rodes, his weary ships in halld
By Menelaus his consent, who forthwith did inuit
The Troyans all unto his court, suspecting no such spite
As after did betide, for that sir Paris did convey
Fair Helen thence, his loving wife, and so without delay
Did hoase up sail, and speedy winds did send him soon to Troy,
Where many of his friends did wait to welcome his new joy.
But Helen thus conuaide from Greece, the angry Greeks wax mad,
To see how Paris played his prankes, when Menelaus had
Received his guest in frankest sort, and did him friendly use,
Whose courtesy to recompense, the letcher did abuse
His honest host by spiteful rape, in stealing of his wife,
Which hateful cause did soon procure sharp war and deadly strife:
Yet first the Greeks, I must confess, like honest minded men
Did send to Troy, to have again fair Helena which then
Was brought to Troy, and their demand, to end the bloody iaerre,
Which likely were to follow fast, and turn to deadly war.
But Priam he, with his fierce sons their lawful suit denide,
For which the Greeks, to take revenge to Pryams Kingdoms hied:
From Greece they sail to Phrygia land, which haughty Pryam held,
And there arriude in dreadful sort well armed with spear and sheld:
The war began great slaughter was, for mighty Mars did reign:
Full fierce they fought for ten years space, yet neither party gain,
Such loss there was on either side in lamentable sort,
That Phrygia soil did flow with blood, the world can give report.
When Phrygia thus was ouer-run by Grecians over stout,
Unto the Troyan walls they marchde and compast it about,
Where Pryam held his stately court, not passing of their spite,
Nor fearing future hap at all, but still maintained fight,
Where from the top of stately walls we daily might behold
Right near our sight the slaughters great of Troyan youth full bold,
And Greeks likewise on every side the Troyans fierce did daunt,
They lay on heaps wherefore as yet they justly could not vaunt
Nor brag, for that their mighty peers in bloody broile were slain,
Wherefore to end the war begun to sue did not disdain
To have fair Helen back again, for whom this war begun,
And eke to boot they offer made young Polidore my son,
Whom Polymnestor King of Thrace had to the Greeks betrayde,
When Pryam first had placed him there, in hope of better aid:
For when we knew the Greeks did mind to make sharp war with Troy,
To Polymnestor King of Thrace, we sent our youngest boy,
A mighty mass, and treasure great with this our son we sent,
In hope to keep him free from war, and from the Greeks intent:
But then the Thracian King betrayde (O vile disloyal wretch)
The harmless lad unto the Greeks, this was the traitors fetch,
To hold the coin which then he had, and so to yield the child
Unto the Greeks for lucres sake, lo thus we were beguilde,
Which boy the Grecians brought to Troy, and made request again,
That Helen Menelaus wife in Troy might not remain
But be restorde, then Polidore from their hands should be free,
And we our son might have again, and war should ended be:
But if in case that we denied, and Helen did detain,
Then Polidore for brothers fault should presently be slain.
Old Pryamus would not consent that Helen back should go,
But held perforce the wanton wench in spite of proudest foe,
And willd them for to do their worst, for Helen meant to bide,
Wherefore he would not yield her up what ever might be tide.
It well was known unto the Greeks, that Pryam bade her choose
To stay in Troy, or go to Greece, which she did flat refuse,
And forbecause she willing was with Paris to be still,
He would by no means send her back against her own good will.
Then sent he word to Grecian camp, if that they had decreed
His son should die, his other sons should make them rue the deed,
And that the fields of Troy should flow with gorie blood full fast,
Until the Grecians did repent their enterprised have.
But now alas began my woe, my sorrow did increase,
For never day from this time forth mine eyes from tears did cease,
O Polidore my youngest boy, sweet Polidore my son
From Troyan walls I did behold how fast the Grecians run
To do thee wrong, my harmless child, and mighty stones did bring
Thick thronging fast with fury great, at Polidore they sling,
Who sure was tied at fastened stake, which I from Troyan wall
Might well behold how bouncing blows did make my child to sprall,
Not ceasing till my son were slain, nor then, but still did smight
The bruised bones of my sweet boy within his mothers sight:
O hellish plague, O torture vile, me think I see it still,
How Grecians raging mad did strike, the harmless soul to kill,
With wringing hands I looked on, yet loath to see him die,
I turned my back, and strait again I could not choose but pry
For this my son, who bleeding lay so bobde with weighty stones,
The flesh with blows was mangled so, each man might see the bones,
Yet would mine eyes have passage still to this his carcass dead,
Till that my living sons from top of Troyan walls had lead
Their mother down, whose folding feet her body could not stay:
Which they perceived, so that from thence me wretch they did convey.
To Grecian camp a messenger we did command to trudge,
To crave the body of my son, which thing they did not grudge,
But sent the martyrde corpse to Troy, as custom did require,
They said not nay but granted straight when Priam did desire.
And also did a present send to breed me further woe:
The bloody stones that killed my son on me they did bestow.
Whose blood and brains in ugly sort about the stones was seen:
A homely present to be sent to me most wretched Queen.
Then shrinde we up with weeping tears, our son so vilely slain,
And put the stones in tomb with him, for ever to remain.
His brothers mad with this mischaunce, for battle strong provide:
And to revenge their brother slain to Grecian Camps they hide.
Where from the walls we had in view such cruel sturdy fight,
That mighty men to death were sent, thus battle raignd downright.
The Greeks by thousands fell to ground, their people go to wrack:
And that ere long the Troyans stout by Greeks are beaten back.
Thus Fortune plays in double sort, sometime with us to stand,
And then to fly to the other part, and give the upper hand.
But while that Hector lived in Troy, king Priams eldest son,
The proudest Peer that came from Greece his mighty hand would shun,
And fly the field before him fast, they feared so his name:
So fierce he fought amongst their men, each Greek does know the same.
At last my lot was so extreme to see him likewise die:
In turret top from lofty town his death I did epsy.
For when as he had slain that day in mighty battle strong,
Of kingly Peers the chief of all that often had done us wrong.
And there amongst the rest he had a noble Grecian slain,
Whose armor all was beaten gold, which pray he went to gain:
And drew him up upon his steed, and rode forth of the throng,
And for his better ease his shield upon his back he slong.
While he did spoil him of his weeds, careless of any wight,
His naked breast unarmed then Achilles had in sight
How he was busy, and therefore from covert where he lay
By stealing steps behind his back he took the ready way,
And suddenly with fatal spear ere that he could aduert,
He unawares with fury great thrust Hector to the heart.
Thus died he through avarice, whom thousands could not kill,
Until his wilful foolishness himself did fondly spill.
My self, I say, that time did see from top of lofty towers,
The Troyan fields besprinckled with dew of bloody showers,
That Hectors lance had letten out, but now his latest fate
I soon had spide, and did lament to see the woeful state
Of this king Priams eldest son, and eke my chiefest joy:
For well I wist that while he liude no harm could hap to Troy.
But now Achilles ouercrowed him whom he fearde before:
Wherefore he stabde him thoroughly that he might live no more.
I saw, I saw how Hector lay as dead as any stone:
And yet the tyrant would not leave but mighty blows laid on.
For if my son had been alive and armed for to fight:
Achilles durst not come in place, nor once be seen in sight.
But when by chance my naked son Achilles lance had paid,
The eager Greek to lay on lode was nothing then afraid.
When noble Hector thus was dead, yea dead, and dead again,
Achilles then to spoil my son began to take some pain.
I saw how that he handled him, I could not look beside:
And if I did, yet straight again my sight that way would glide.
The tyrant vile, the bedlam beast his carkas would not spare,
Who was a man, a valiant man, his noble mind was rare.
Another of king Priams sons that day was caught in fight,
Whose hands chopped off the Greeks sent home to work us further spite.
And wild him thus to say in Troy, and tell his aged sire
That Hector now by Grecian lance was paid his earned hire.
And that Achilles had no doubt but Paris so to slay,
Who was the cause of all that war, and bred that bloody day.
Thus came my son with loss of hands before his mothers face,
To tell how Greeks had dealt with him, a lamentable case.
And how that Hector now was dead, whom Troyans soon should miss:
Which was no news for that before mine eyes had seen all this.
And while my boy besmearde with blood his heavy hap did wail,
A servant came and shewde us how Achilles vile did hale
Dead Hector round about the walls in all the Troyans sight:
Which was because his friends should see, as easily they might
His naked corpse in mire drawn at horses tail fast tide:
And that the doer of the same before did vaunting ride.
Then came I to the wall to see slain Hector so misusde:
From whence I cride for that I knew the Greeks had him abusd
Who was king Priams eldest son wherefore against all law
In cruel sort to spite his friends, his carcass dead to draw.
With that I strainde my voice and said, Achilles, let me have
My son whom thou have slain, that I may send him to his grave.
But he for all my mournful cries, full fierce without remorce:
Did hale my naked son about the Troyan walls perforce.
Which when his aged sire be held, from top of lofty wall
For grief conceiude did yeald himself in desperate wise to fall
Down headlong from the turrets height, if friends had him not stayed:
And throngd about to succor him who then had need of aid.
But when at last he did perceive Achilles cruel heart,
With beckning hand he spoke aloud, Be sure for this hard part,
If that I live, thou shall repent, and Gods the same will grant
Thy wicked act: and that ere long, vile wretch, thou shall not vaunt
Of this despitefull fact, wherefore I wish thee to restore
My slaughtered son, as I have done thy slaughtered Greeks before.
Yet would not fierce Achilles cease from doing Hector wrong:
For round about the Troyan walls he halde our son along.
And thus did still for four days space even in his parents sight
To work our woe, for well he wist he could not Hector spite
Who then was dead, whose gaping jaws the dirt and gravel filled.
Whose whighish skin the muddy mire with filthy spots had hild.
His beard besmeard with stinking filth, to eyes and face did clung
Such loathsome stuff as filthy Greeks with durty fists had flung.
Was this a sight for parents eye to view their loving child
In such a case as he was then amongst his foes so wild?
O haples hap, O Fortune vile, what woman could abide
Such pangs of woe from sobbing soul as did to me beside?
We did not cease to sue for grace at proud Achilles feet
In yealding wise, to have our son, although it were not meet
A mighty king should stoup so low unto so mean as state,
For that unto the Troyan king Achilles was no mate.
But yet for all king Priams suit, when he did what he might,
The tyrant would not yeald as yet our son should have his right
Of funeral, nor that his bones should rest in silent grave:
When we had made such humble suit his mangled corpse to have.
Unburied thus he kept him still for twelve days space at least:
Whose flesh was torn, and then did will the dogs should have the rest.
Which when I heard, a hell of woes did plague me then alive.
O death (quoth I) my loathed life from miseries deprive,
Let not me live to call to mind this Fortunes froward spite,
Nor see the day wherein again such heavy hap may light.
Yet still in hope to have his corpse, Polixena I sent
My daughter fair to Grecian camp and to Achilles tent.
Who there on knees with wringing hands before Achilles face
With brinish tears made humble suite, to find as then such grace,
As that he would as then restore the corpse of this her brother slain.
And for which cause to pleasure him she ever would remain
His servant base, or bondslaue vile, to satisfy his mind.
For which, if that it pleased him well, she then would stay behind
To be a faithful servant true to him at all assayes:
And pray the Gods to prosper him, and send him happy days.
With that Achilles stepped forth, and gave to her his hand:
In courteous wise he greeted her, and wild her up to stand
Before his face, and wail no more, and then as she thought best
He was content it should be so, and granted her request.
This did my daughter bring to pass such was her peereles hew
That she a second Helen was within Achilles vewe.
When Priamus and Hectors wife before had tried in vain,
And I myself with weeping tears the like could not obtain.
Her beauty so did qualify the tyrants wrathful ire,
That Hectors corpse was brought by her home to her aged sire.
Then did I mourn afresh, to see there laid before my face
The ougly shape of my sweet son in such a woeful case
That Hectors face I could not know although I knew his name.
For Hecuba his mother I before had given the same,
Whose corpse once washed, full well I knew the favor of my child.
But pale aspect did alter much, that near I was begilde.
Twelve days at least my son had lain abroad in open air:
What time till now to have again we ever did despair.
The funerals and other rites in order allwell done:
We did provide the money, which redeemed this our son.
For first before my daughter had the thing she did desire,
Achilles he a certain sum of money did require.
Which thing before he had refusde, though massy sums were sent:
But for her sake and such a sum he seemed well content.
The money now without delay we sent away in have:
And willingly did pay the same for daughters promise past.
O wretch most vile, O tyrant bad, that thus with Hector dealt:
What stonied heart in brawned breast would this not make to melt?
The cause of this his fury great, and of such cruel hate
Was by Patroclus hapless death, who was his loving mate,
Whom Hector slew in open fight, with many a Greek that day,
And spoylde him of his armor bright, that naked there he lay,
Which armor was the chiefest canse that brought him to his end,
The angry gods displeasde with us such hapless hap did send.
All things thus done, my other sons revenge did vow to take,
On vile Achylles for this deed, and for slain Hectors sake,
That presently upon the Greeks with mighty force they went,
And thousands on each part that day to dreadful death were sent.
Thus daily they did still contend by force of cruel war,
And Princes fell on either side, that thither came from far:
The Greeks did wax, the Troyans grew as desperate men in field,
To daunt each others haughty mind, and make each other yield:
At last again as fortune would Achylles fierce did slay
My other son, sir Troylus, who was our chiefest stay.
A valiant youth the Greeks can tell, although he thus did die,
For that before the proudest Greeks he forced had to fly.
In turrets tall from top of town, my hap was still so bad,
To see my loving son to die, a woeful sight most sad
For mothers eye still to behold her loving children so
To end their days, and be abusde by such a spiteful so,
From lofty walls I then beheld sir Troylus my son,
To course the Greeks on every side, and made them fast to run,
Until that fierce Achylles came, who sure I think was borne
To breed my woe, and that the gods against me wretch had sworn
To plague with hellish torments vile, the plagues of furthest hell
Should hap to me, and greater pains than any tongue can tell,
For that what time soever I on walls did see the fight
Some child of mine was sure to die, within his mothers sight.
When now to turrets top I climde with many Ladies more,
Whereto I did not once ascend, since Hector did before:
But then too soon such was my chance, I think the gods decreede,
That while I did behold the fight no better they should speed.
Achylles brave, on horse did mount, whom Troylus had spide
To brag amongst the Greeks, his mates, well mande on every side:
But when my son had found his foe, and thought on Hectors foil,
Like mighty Mars he laid on lode, and made that day great spoil:
He thrust amongst the thicest throng Achylles out to find,
That he might know his brothers death, as yet he had in mind.
With couched lance and courage good, my son did run amain
In hope to have by manly force his cruel foe there slain,
He mist the mark, but yet he struck Achylles from his steed,
And if the Greeks had not given aid, he then had done the deed:
And yet for all the Greeks could do, he gave his foe a wound
Through plated thigh, he thrust his lance a handful in the ground.
Achylles horsde by help of Greeks, and mounted up anew,
And then with troop of armed Knights my son he did pursue:
The wounded Greek that followed fast, sir Troylus had spide,
Who turned his horse, and willd his mates his fury to abide,
With monstrous force, the Greeks did fight, the Troyans did not fly
On either side to lay it on, the people fiercely cry:
At last the Greeks had given the horse that then my son did bear
A mortal wound, that paind him so, the jade did fiercely fare,
In plunging sort, the horse did play with mighty gyrds, at last
From settled seat my hapless son the winsing jade had cast:
In falling down (ah heavy chance) his foot the stirrup held,
The wounded horse so scard before, ran raging in the field,
And dragd my child before my face upon the bloody ground,
For blood did flow that day full fresh from many a mortal wound.
Achylles having spide my son in such a woeful case,
With piercing spear to him half dead, he hied him then apace,
Through back and side his lance he sent, and cride, I now am quit
With this my wound receiude before, and therewithal did hit
The staggring horse that down he fell, and there together lay
Both man and horse: thus fortune vile her froward pranks did play.
Sir Troylus by chance thus slain, the Greeks from armor stripped,
Whose bowels hung about his feet, for they his body ripped,
And naked on a gibe they hang for Troyans there to see
Their champion stout whom erst before had made the Greeks to flee*
Old Pryamus and I beheld our loving son so kind
In ugly sort to hang on high stark naked in the wind,
Whose corpse did wave in swinging-sort which way each wind did blow:
And as he hung, the angry Greeks at him great stones did throw,
Their spears did pass through senseless corpse, before him slain they vaunt,
So fierce the fools his carcass dead with bitter words did taunt:
Hang here (quoth they) thou wicked wretch, and rue thy brothers deed,
If he by Grecian fist be caught, no better shall he speed,
For causing of this bloody war that many thousands rue
Their hapless chance, but he himself we trust shall have his due,
And that ere long, wherefore till then feel thou his earned smart:
We Greeks do hope that Paris proud shall rue his wilful part.
These words we heard, this sight we see, the Greeks like mad men rage,
They threaten still for Paris deed, sharp war with us to wage.
A sight full strange, yet not so rare for fortune did present
More harder haps to me than this, to plague me she was bent.
A messenger we sent to crave the carcass of our child,
Whose bones were broke and skin from flesh, with blows the Greeks had hilde
Achylles straight, did send my son which something pleased my mind,
I did not think such courtesy at his hands then to find.
But with my son to comfort me, these loving words did send
My friend (quoth he) tell Hecuba, that often I do intend,
Such gifts on her for to bestow to breed her further joy:
Til such time serve, wish her to take of me this mangled boy.
Thus Troylus was brought to Troy, a heavy sight God knows,
His body foul disfigured with many bloody blows:
They laid him down before my face that mothers eyes might see
Her son whom fierce Achylles used with such extremity,
His martyrde corpse I did intoombe, though part were left behind
Which Grecian iades did tread to dirt, yet all that I could find,
To grave was sent: the funerals and al things else well done,
The Troyans al in woeful wise do much lament my son,
That all the town with houlings sound each one did wail his fill:
Him dead, I know it was in vain, but that did show good will.
Now did the Greeks afresh begin the Troyans to suppress,
And they as fierce did fight it out, in hope to have redress
Of former wrongs, but al in vain, for Hector now was gone,
And Troylus my other son, wherefore there was not one
Alive in Troy, that durst presume Achylles once to meet,
Who thus had slain my noble sons, and crowded under feet,
The brauest peer of Troy that durst encounter with his force,
With Grecian lance he threw to ground, thus had he no remorce,
But still did strive by martial force to beat the Troyans down,
And egerly maintained fight in hope to sack our town,
My sons thus slain the war increast, and bloody sight did grow,
No Troyan durst within my sight encounter this my foe,
So that before our walls he marchde with glistring spear and shield
Like mighty Mars, he often did dare the Troyans to the field,
Which made me woe to see him reign that thus with me had dealt,
Whose cruel hand (to our great loss) the hapless Troyans felt:
A counsel then of matrons wise I presently did call,
How to revenge my slaughtred sons, to counsel straight we fall,
That fierce Achylles might not vaunt of this his cruel deed:
Together then we laid our heads, in such a time of need,
We thus conclude, that best it were, Achylles to ensnare
With some fine piece of Venus Court, whose beauty should be rare:
And forbecause the Greek well known, to love a dainty piece,
Which I had spide, for that before he sailed home to Greece
When Agamemnon took away sweet Briseis his delight,
No longer then, he would abide, nor for the Greeks did fight:
Till Briseis was again restorde, which thing I well did note,
And was right glad that beauty fair could make my foe to dote.
And forbecause Polixena his sight did well content,
When she to fetch her brothers corpse, to Grecian camp was sent,
So that at first he fraunted ber, when we before had nay,
And whatsoever she did crave was done without delay.
Which well I wist, wherefore forthwith my daughter I bedect
With gorgeous gear in hope to bring my purpose to effect,
And presently to Grecian camps a messenger I send
Unto Achylles tent to show what then I did intend:
Which messenger I did command his arrand thus to tell
That Hecuba the Queen of Troy, Achylles greeted well:
And further, that he should declare, Achylles should enjoy
My daughter fair Polixena the peerless flower of Troy,
No other wight I do desire, for that mine eyes beheld
The noble valor of the man so tried in Troyan field.
The Greek has often made me glad to see his courage bold,
For from the highest walls of Troy I gazing did behold,
To view Achylles that brave Greek, so lyon-like to vaunt
Before the town, and with his force the proudest foe to daunt:
And that although my sons were slain in war by lucklesse chance,
Yet were I glad their hap were such, as that upon his lance
To end their lives, that no reproach might happen to them dead,
And that Achylles right well knew they died before they fled,
And for their death I nothing grieve, for that my sons were slain
By such a noble Grecian peer, whose like does not remain
In all the world such worthy fame the peerless Greek has won:
Say thus, quoth she, I shall not rest till that he be my son.
My daughter for the courtesy that she with him did find
Cannot forget the benefit, but still does bear in mind
The friendly usage of the Greek, at whose hands she has found
Such sweet relief, that ever since to this day she is bound
To yeald to him her chiefest friend, and willing to fulfill
His mind in all respects, and be obedient to his will.
And that because Achilles shall not think my words as vain,
VVish him forthwith to prove my mind, and find if I do feign.
Appoint some place (wish him do so) and there my daughter she
And I my self his loving friend will then attendant be.
Achilles knows that often I do to Hectors tomb repare,
Apollos temple holds his bones, in which I have a care
To do him rights as custom is (and yet the church did stand
In greenish field without the town, not far from Grecian band)
In which if that Achilles will Polixena shall stay,
And I my self will come with her to celebrate that day.
Thus to the Grecian camps I sent my messenger in have:
Who soon unto Achilles tent in secret manner past,
And told him all that I had said: who presently with joy
Besturd his stumps, and was right glad my daughter was not coy.
For that when first he made his suite, and did my daughter crave,
The wench was coy, and thus replide: No Grecian she would have.
But now reuiude from former woe, the man with joy half mad
Did send me thanks, and ten times thanks, that thus had made him glad.
I will quoth he be there indeed, to offer with my friends
For Hector slain, whose death I rue, yet will I make amends
With some oblation to his ghost, right in his mothers view:
That she may say, Achilles is become a friend full true
To us and to the Troyans all, by soldiers faith I swear,
It shall be so while life does last, this mind I still will bear.
And then forthwith preparde himself to offer to my son:
Whom he before had slain, but now did vvish the deed undone.
Mean while when that I knevv his mind, and having place so fit
I did invent in secret sort to cry the Grecian quit.
For slaying of my sons, and for a thousand Troyans slain,
Which were my friends, for whose sake now such friendship I did feign.
The presently I called my son, whom Fortune yet had sparde:
And made him privy of my mind, how that I had preparde
To work my foe a spiteful part when least he did suspect:
And sure I was no living wight as yet could it detect.
And thus I said, my loving son, even as thou art my child,
And have a care to wish me well that am thy mother mild,
And as thou know I tendered thee when Priam sentence gave
Thou should be slain, yet I as then sought means thy life to save.
Wherefore good Paris have a care to ease thy mothers grief:
And that I pine in pain not long before I find relief.
Which soon may be by thy good help, wherefore lay to thy hand:
And shrink not now in time of need, but to thy mother stand.
Thou know my son (quoth I) how that thy brethren both are gone
Whom well I loud, and now in Troy alive there is not one
That dares so valiantly in field against our foe to fight.
But trembling we (thou know it well) do fear Achilles might.
Even now the time is come that we may banish fear away:
For that Achilles has set down a certain meeting day,
To meet thy sister and my self, with others of my train:
What time the wretch does make account my daughter for to gain.
Apollos temple is the place where Hectors bones do rest:
Which stands in field without our rovvne, a place mistrusted least.
In which Achilles minds to be, and vows if that he live
To keep the time, expecting then my daughter I should give:
So likewise I have promised, wherefore my son give aid:
Let not the terror of the Greek make Paris heart afraid.
But hie thee to the place, and there in secret sort go hide
Thy self before Achilles come so that thou be not spide.
With vveapon good provide thy self against so fierce a foe,
And when thou spiest convenient time then strike the fatal blovv,
That shall procure the Troyans ease, and pleasure to thy friends,
And pay the debt that Hector ovves to make the Greek amends.
My son as vvilling as my self to work Achilles spite:
Did soon consent to my request, and thither stole by night,
And closely by his brothers tomb himself he did convey:
And there until Achilles came in secret sort he lay.
Polixena my daughter fair in gorgious wise I clad:
For that I knew her pleasant hue would make Achilles glad.
According to appointed time we pass the Troyan gates
With certain of the Troyan dames, we had no other mates.
And to the temple straight we hide, where we Achilles met,
According to the place and time which he before had set.
Then did the Greek us Troyans greet, he faind a sober cheer,
And said he grieud at Hectors death that was so brave a Peer.
And further that he knew his death was to his mother pain,
And to his sister whom he loud, wherefore (quoth he) again,
I am content to make amends for that which I have done.
And that in stead of Hector slain I mind to be thy son.
And for assurance of the thing, by Jove he did protest,
That after this (by his good will) the town of Troy should rest
From further war, and therwithall his love he did embrace,
And fixed his eyes in doting sort upon my daughters face,
Not fearing any future hap, nor doubting any ill:
For that in all respects we did according to his will.
Which Paris spide, behind the tomb, when hand in hand we went.
His sword prepared with mighty force, through back and side he sent.
That down Achilles falls right soon all groueling on the ground:
From gored sides the blood did flow forth of his mortal wound.
There lay the wretch that erst we feared, now breathing out his last
Whom Paris wild to eager curres should presently be cast.
For using of his brethren so in such despitefull wise:
Their bodies dead he did abuse before their mothers eyes.
Whereto my son sir Helenus by no means then would yield
How that the body of the Greek should lie in open field,
Where beasts and fowls might feed their fill: but craude the Greeks might have
The body of their slaughtered friend to lay in resting grave.
Which thing was done, though vndeserud on vile Achilles part,
That ever sought by spiteful means to slay my woeful heart.
Then home we came with this revenge more merry than before:
For well we wist Achilles fierce should never hurt us more.
Now Fortune faund on me awhile, awhile it was indeed:
For that the angry Gods against me wretch had still decreed.
Achilles dead, the Greeks afresh fierce war did undertake:
And vowed revenge on all my friends for slain Achilles sake.
And on my daughter chief of all for working them such spite:
With one consent on either part they faithful promise plight.
If that in case our town they take, whereof before they boast
My daughter they will sacrifice to dead Achilles ghost.
But having slain so fierce a foe the Troyans all were glad.
And craved the field against the Greeks, who now remained sad
For losing of so brave a Peer, who was their chiefest aid,
Wherefore to fight with us we thought the Grecians were afraid.
Yet were we all deceiude for that more fiercer than before
The Grecians fought, that down there falls on either side great store.
Their rage was great for to revenge the death of this their Peer:
And fiercely fought in desperate sort, as men without all fear.
At last I climde to wonted place where often I had been:
Yet never there but some mishap by me poor wretch was seen,
From whence I viewd the bloody broyle which grieude me to behold
How that the Greeks and Troyans stout in blood together rolde,
At last I spied where Paris was (my son) who then did chase
A Grecian Peer, Sir Ajax stout, who fled before his face.
Not Ajax Telamon I mean, but Oelius Ajax he
Whom Paris chasdin open field that all the Greeks might see.
At last the Greek receiud a wound though he full swiftly flew:
For that my son the flying chase did eagerly pursue.
A grievous wound it was indeed, for Ajax feeling pain
By flight could not prevail, wherefore perforce he turnde again,
And did encounter with my son who first had made him smart:
And with his sword (O haples hap) struck Paris to the heart.
There died my son before my face, which Helen well does know
Who stood with me when that her mate receiude that fatal blow.
The Greek like bedlem beast laid on, for dolor of his wound,
And stabd my son through back and side, stark dead upon the ground.
Whose corpse when that the Greeks had spied, with mighty force they run
To have a part of Paris dead, for his offenses done.
For well they knew he was the man that stole their Prince his wife:
Which was the chiefest cause of all that bred that bloody strife.
Wherefore each Greek to have him dead did mightily contend:
And sure had got my son, but that the Troyans did defend
The mangled corpse of Paris dead, and kept from Grecian force
My son whom they would feign have caught to plague his senseless corse.
Whose life was gone they right well knew, but they like hellish hounds
Did hunt to have his carkas dead to plague with grievous wounds.
His senseless corpse they could not hurt, yet they as men stark mad:
Of worldly wealth would give great store so that they might have had
Alive or dead, or but a part, to satisfy their will:
For well they wist he was the man that did Achilles kill.
Wherefore they fiercely fought to have the body of my son,
Who slew Achylles traytrously, and first that war begun,
But by the aid of Troyans stout in maugre of their might,
The body of my son was brought forth of that bloody fight,
Whose corpse was laid before my face a grievous sight to see:
The arms and legs which Greeks hewde off, was likewise brought to me,
The pale aspect of this my son did mortify my mind,
That down upon the corpse I fell, in hope some ease to find,
For willingly I would have did, to finish up my care,
The gods denide it should be so, but still my life did spare;
For further woe and misery they meant I should abide,
Which would to God I had not seen, but that I then had did.
Fair Helena for this her mate in woeful sort did morn,
Who was the cause that all the Greeks against our state had sworn,
All Troy was sad for my hard hap they wail on every side,
Both old and young through every street, in mournful manner cride.
His funerals and other rites in order al well done,
And Troyans al had wailde their fill for loss of this my son:
Then Helen fair her sorrow slackt, by course of weeping tears*
Her beauty bright to Deiphoebe, in secret sort appeeres,
So that the man half mad for her does earnestly require
The Grecian Dame, and that he might forthwith have his desire:
He was my son, wherefore as then I seemed well content,
He had his choice, but then ere long the act he did repent:
The Greeks that knew how al things went came fierce again ere long.
When they had filld their ranks with men to maintain battle strong,
And gave sharp siege to Troyan walls which Troyans did defend;
From that time forth the angry Greeks no idle time did spend,
But day by day did still invent to work our great annoy,
And plots did lay how to betray the stately town of Troy:
For now they found no force preuailde against so strong a town,
Their hope was past, by open force to beat our turrets down,
Though diverse of our states were dead, and men of great account,
The Grecian peers which Troyans slew our number did surmount,
Our loss was great and over great, whereof the Grecians bost:
We also knew what mighty states the Grecian army lost,
Yet were we strong and strong enough for all the Grecian states,
And daily put their men to foil before the Troyan gates:
Which well they spide, wherefore at length, by secret means they sought
To take our town, and with our states full privily they wrought,
They promise that these traitors vile, should have their goods and lives,
And all their friends (whom they thought good) their children and their wives
Should freed be from sack or spoil, if that they would betray
Both Prince and town into their power, to be a Grecian pray.
Aeneas that disloyal man especially I blame,
And false Antenor, who at first consented to the same,
Both vile disloyal wretches they thus to betray their King,
And Grecian armies set in ranks within our town to bring,
But sure I think the gods decreede at first it should be so,
Wherefore I less do blame these men for bringing in our fo.
Fell destiny so frownd on me, wherefore this latest fate
Was first decreede for Paris fault, against King Pryams state,
To plague me often with woeful sights, to see my children torn,
Both planets sure, and fortune vile against me wretch had sworn.
Our town betrayde, not knowing as yet, til after, when too late,
For that the Greeks with mighty troops were entered in the gate
In silent night, by help of friends when Troyans were at rest:
They marched on, for well they knew the lowering night was best,
For this their subtle policy: when we to rest were laid,
The Greeks came in, our gates were open, lo thus we were betraide.
Now was my woe afresh renude, my miseries forepast
To this mishap a trifle was, but sorrow now full fast
In spiteful wise did show her force, to vex me more and more:
And fortune frownd in worser sort than she had done before:
For now my friends and dear alies in paued streets so wide
Besmerde with blood do gaping lie, as they to succor hide.
The conquerde town which then was lost in vain they sought to save,
With ranks of men not armde for haste, they lusty larums gave,
But al in vain was this their force for that the Grecians fell,
With murdring minds so laid about, a grievous thing to tell,
And so be hact and hewde our men unarmed as they stood,
That like to streams the Troyans streets did flow with gory blood:
There lay the States and Peers of Troy, whom angry Greeks had slain,
For that they thought to save the town which Grecians meant to gain.
Thus passing up our stately streets, such mighty spoil they made,
So that I think it grieude the Greeks in Troyan blood to wade,
Yet for because we had abusde the Grecians in such sort,
The slaughters vile of guiltless men was to the Greeks a sport:
At last when all the town was won, the states for succor flewe
To Pryams palace, hoping that the foe would not pursue,
Nor there to spoil the aged Prince for reverence of his years,
Who long had liude in Phrygia land, as at this day appears.
But they to reverence aged years, so little had regard,
That Prince and Peer, both old and young by Grecians was not sparde,
The palace fair of Pryamus, the greedy Greeks beset
With weapons bright, and fiercely fought, their hoped pray to get.
There now the battle great was up, as if no place else where
Had felt of war, and die did none in all the town but there,
So mightily the Greeks did run, to houses tops we see
The posts brake down, and gates brake open, beset that none might flee,
The walls with scaling ladders laid, and props for scaffolds hie,
That up by stairs they climb, and back they drive the darts that fly*
To battlements full fast they cling, on battred walls they hold
While Troyans down upon their heads the tops of towers rolde,
Full fierce a while the Troyans fought, but al their force was vain,
For that the gods had vowde, there should no part of Troy remain
Unconquered, and Pryamus the King of Troy should know,
How that he did not well when first he made the Greeks his foe.
At last the gates too weak to hold, by force were opened wide,
And fearful foes with armor bright passde in on every side.
The peers within right well perceiude the cruel foes intent,
Unable to withstand their force to dreadful death were sent:
Which I beheld from secret place where I my self did shrowde,
And other more that time with me, to save themselves did crowde.
My kinsmen dear and faithful friends before my face they made
To be as wood before the axe, and buckler to the blade,
Dismembring them in woeful sort, a lamentable thing,
And often inquired for Pryamus that they might kill the King,
Which well I wist wherefore from thence my self I did convey,
And word did send to Pryamus, that there he should not stay
But seek someway by privy doors to escape their bloody hand,
And not to bide amongst their force, nor to their mercy stand,
And then into the streets I passde by secret ways unknown,
Where chanells deep (ah grievous sight) with blood was ouer-flowne,
And martred men scarce dead did lie, there breathing out their last,
A worser hap then this I spide, as I by chance did cast
Mine eyes aside where I perceiude sir Menelaus he,
In armor bright, so lyon-like fast marching toward me,
And as he came, he soon had spide how Deiphoebe my son
Made haste to shun his cruel hand, and swiftly thence did run
For that he feared the desperate foe, and knowing just cause why,
Made greater haste to save himself, and fast away did fly:
The Greek despising that my son of all the rest should escape,
Because he held his lawful wife, he would revenge that rape:
For when that Paris late was slain, then this my son did take
Fair Helen Menelaus wife which did against him make,
And now before my face this Greek my loving son had cought,
Whom he before through all the town full egerly had sought
To make him rue his former deed: and Paris being slain,
He vowde my son that held his wife, should yield her up again.
Lo thus (I say) before my face the greedy Greek there held
My son, who to the bedlem beast in humble sort did yield:
But he in stead of clemency did show his cruel mind,
My son that yielded at his foot the tyrant vile did bind,
His nose he cut, his ears and lips, and plucked out his sight,
His other limbs in spiteful sort, he did dismember quite:
Take here (quoth he) the due reward of Paris fault forepast,
Thy brother dead, for if he liude, a worser plague should taste.
Wherefore commend me to his ghost, and truly to him tell,
That I for his offenses vile did send thy soul to hell.
And therewithal he stabde my son that willing was to die:
Which thing once done, yet further grief I chanced to epsy,
For presently right near my sight it was my hap to see
My daughter, whom full dear I loud, my sweet Cassandra she
Most vilely to be drawn along, whose hands and feet were bound
In spiteful sort by hair of head, they dragged on bloody ground,
They hallde her still along the streets, where gory blood did flow,
That when she past along by me, I scarce her face did know:
But soon she spide me where I stood, and lifting up her eyes,
To haughty heavens, and for redress in woeful sort she cries,
And calls aloude to have my aid, when I myself had need
Of aid, to succor my mishap, and that to have with speed:
Yet still she cries, O mother, help, lay to your helping hand,
Let not this Greek misuse me thus, while you on looking stand,
But rather seek to succor me from this vile tyrant wild,
And save me from this cruel Greek that minds to force your child:
Sweet mother help (quoth she again) get Troyans to defend
Me thus abusde But she in vayn her woeful voice did spend:
For I my self did quaking stand, expecting still the end;
Amongst my foes I there was placde, I could not spy a friend.
Yet following fast my daughter dear to see what might betide:
Who still for aid on me poor soul, continually cride.
To Pallas temple she was drawn, in Troy a sacred place,
And there my daughter was abusde before her mothers face.
That bad ungodly Greek did deal with her, and did abuse
The holy place with such a fact, her body to misuse.
Which when I saw I could not stay to give the looking on,
But cried aloud for Troyan aid although I could get none.
That holy temple was defilde with such a filthy deed:
For which offense that wretch ere long unhappily did speed.
Away I trudgd oppressed with grief, unable to give aid,
Or to revenge my self on him that this vile part had played.
And as I past from place to place, it was my chance to see
A hundred of my daughter-lawes which did enquire for me.
And quaking stood in open street with minds resolud to die:
For well they knew the ways were stopped, that none away could fly.
With woeful cries we wayld a good, down dropped the brinish tears
But all in vain, for dreadful death in ougly shape appears.
Yet lingering still in hope to line, we seek to find relief:
And rangde about in streets unknown, which bred us further grief.
For as I past I might behold an altar huge to stand
In open street, whereto we went to shun their cruel hand.
A sacred place, where all our Gods were painted on a row:
There throngd we thick about that place to shroud us from our foe.
Which place we thought the angry Greeks durst not once be so bold
Before the Gods our blood to shed, wherefore on them we hold,
And thought the Gods would us defend, and privilege the place:
And as a sanctuary safe to help in such a case.
Thus sitting there, at last I spide old Priamus my mate:
Who yet had escaped their murdring hand, but this his heavy state
Was death to me, yea death it self my husband dear to see
So chacte as hare before the hound who fast for life did flee.
The aged man whose quaking limbs could scant his body bear
Had weapons got, and armor bright upon his back did wear.
His bending hams did bear the weight unfit for Priams years:
With spear in hand as if no state of Grecian land he fears.
His manly mind was bent to fight, his feeble force to try:
And he amongst his loving friends most willingly would die.
The heavy harness over huge my husband would assay:
That being on, his spear in hand could scarce his body stay.
But staggering stood, not fit to fight infeebled so by age:
Yet he against his cruel foes in desperate wise did rage.
Which soon I spide, wherefore as then I humbly did desire
To rage no more, but seem content, and pacify his ire.
I wild him then without delay to sacred place repare:
Which thing to touch the greedy Greeks would have especial care.
For that the Gods there present were to keep us free from spoil:
Whose presence what bold Grecian dares pollute with bloody foil.
And therwithall in have I drew him to the altar side,
And set him down (old feeble man) but see what did betide:
By this time Pryams palace fair was yealded to the Greeks,
And Pyrrhus fierce Achilles son in every corner seeks
For Priamus that aged sire, and for his loving sons:
In hope to gain them with the spoil full eagerly he runs.
And having found Polytes out, in cruel sort did chase
The fearful youth, who for his life did trudge the streets apace.
And coming where his father sat, there hoping to have aid:
Yet scarcely come to wished place but that proud Pyrrhus stayed
Our son, and there within our sight with churlish fist fast held:
And presently in parents view Polites there he feld.
There panting lay our loving son by breathles course near spent:
While Pyrrhus stern his fatal spear through back and side had sent.
That dying straight his hands up held to take his last farewell:
It makes me shrink to call to mind, and greeues me now to tell
What after did ensue, for that King Priam could not rest:
With such a sight as commonly each father does detest.
For to revenge his son so slain he needs would take in hand:
When he (good man) unable was with feeble age to stand,
But he to show his noble mind bad Pyrrhus proud pack hence:
Forth of his sight, or else he would with speed drive him from thence.
What dare thou now thou wretch (quoth he) thus in my presence stay?
When that my son whom well I loud thou did before me slay.
And will thou stand to brave it out to breed me further pain?
No that I will not sure digest, though I my self be slain.
And therwithall in feeble fist his spear he trembling held,
Whose quaking lims by age oppressed could scant his weapon weld.
And at proud Pyrrhus he lets drive his hurtles spear (God knows)
Whereof strong Pyrrhus might have born for need a thousand blows.
Achilles bastard borne (quoth he) by this I know thou art:
That dares presume before my face to play so hard a part.
Thou wretch, thou misbegotten wretch, that thus have showed thy kind
For well I know thou art the man that bearst so bad a mind.
With that (quoth he) Neoptolemus my fathers son, the same
That was the bastard, and not I, for Pyrrhus is my name.
And for because in time to come thou shall not use me so
With these hard terms, a token I will give thee how to know
My brother and my self apart, wherefore thou shall enquire
Ere long of slain Achilles ghost to prove thy self a lier.
And therwithall the spiteful Greek from sacred place did draw
My noblemate by hair of head, contrary to all law.
And through the blood of his slain son the aged man he drew:
And right before our sacred Gods my husband dear he slew.
With fatal blade before my face he piercde his tender side:
That right against the Gods themselves my loving husband did.
The Gods no help at all would give the Grecian to prevent:
Nor that the Troyan Prince should live, but they with one consent
Did vow his death for former fault, and for his sins offense.
No earthly wight for this his sin could with their power dispense.
But die he must it was decreed, and dreadful death should end
This bloody war, that after none in like case should offend.
My husband dead, I did behold a grievous sight to see:
His daughters all bewayld his hap which then did stand with me.
The cellers deep and hollow caves with wayling all did sound:
And from the hauty houses tops the Echo did rebound.
Ah heavy chance to see him slain who was my chiefest joy:
The Emperor of Asia great, and stately King of Troy.
Who now lay slain before my face, but being then stark dead:
With loving zeal on Priam slain my greedy eyes I fed.
What has this princox boy (quoth I) my loving husband slain
Beside our Gods without revenge, what shall he still remain
Alive, to vaunt of this his deed, or brag of such a fact
Before the Greeks his cruel mates, who joys at this his act.
Ye Gods, ye sacred Gods (I cride) although your wrath be great
Against us Troyans now subdude, whose ruin ye did threat
For Paris sin yet have regard on Triam thus betrayed.
Who now is dead by your decree, wherefore his debt is paid.
But now (quoth I) grant my request, that this vile Greek may rue
This cruel deed in time to come, that ever he so slew
The aged King, for reverence of gray and aged hairs:
Whose youth was come by yearly course to old and aged years.
Let not the slaughter of a King make proud his hauty heart:
Nor that he long may make his vaunt of this so hard a part.
But as your justice now is seen, in so revenging wrong:
So Pyrrhus proud by your consent may rue this deed ere long.
When Priam thus by Pyrrhus sword had breathed out his last,
And that the town was quite subdude by Grecians fighting fast,
The Greeks demand Polixena, because she first procurde
Achilles death by fained love, through which he was allurde:
Whom when they found, this Pyrrhus craude to have my loving child
That so had causde his fathers death by working such a wild,
But when she knew the earnest suite of fierce Achilles son:
For succor to me helples wretch, with vain hope fast did run.
With clasping arms about my neck on me she cride for aid,
For Pyrrhus, dead Achilles son, had made her sore afraid.
Help mother now at need (quoth she) still weeping on my breast:
A place too weak, for greedy Greeks, for there she might not rest.
Grim Pyrrhus with an eager look did tear her from my lap:
With churlish fist he gript the girl, O hard and cruel hap?
That still mine eyes should witness bear of this my woeful case,
And that both mate and children dear should die before my face.
By hair of head Polixena was drawn along the street:
Where diverse of her woeful friends in sorrowing sort did meet
To wail with her, for well they wist to dreadful death she went.
Achilles death now to revenge they knew proud Pyrrhus meant.
And as they thought it came to pass, for Pyrrhus did devise,
Upon his fathers tomb as then my child to sacrifise
Unto the ghost of his slain Sire, his death to recompense:
And that Achilles ghost might know it was for her offense.
Polixena so halde along by such a cruel foe:
What should become of this my child as then I did not know.
Wherefore to see I followed fast what would to her betide:
Where round about Achilles tomb a troup of Greeks I spide,
Which ready were to give their aid if need should so require,
My daughters death with one consent each Gretian did desire:
And there before my face they bound both hand and foot full fast
Of this my child, that willing was of bitter death to taste.
But having spide me where I stood, her hands and feet fast bound,
In token of her last farewell, her head toward me she twound,
And fixed her eyes on me (poor wretch) with such a woeful look,
With nodding head for want of limbs, her last farewell she took.
Then Pyrrhus mad until revenge did draw his fatal blade,
And slew my child upon the tomb, which he before had made
In honor of his father dead, and there with gorie blood
Imbrewd the grave: which cruel act did all the Gretians good.
These words he spoke which well I heard (quoth he) take here thine end,
Thy soul unto my fathers ghost for thine offense I send,
And for the fault of Paris slain, King Priam late did rewe
His sons vile part; for with this hand the aged man I slew.
O fortune vile, that sparde my life to see this woeful day,
My friends stark dead whom Grecians slew, in every corner lay,
Not one was left to comfort me that could my woe redress.
But mourning matrons whose hard hap increasde my heaviness,
And last of all the angry Greeks to breed us further care:
The traitors of our common wealth, from sack or spoil they spare:
Aeneas, and Antenor he, those that betrayde our town,
In conquerde Troy had liberty as walkers up and down,
The spoil once had our stately town with fire fierce did flame:
The gods decreed my life should last that I might see the same,
Then did I see our lofty towers consumde with fire to fall,
In burning houses children cride, which number was not small:
A world of woe to call to mind the latter spoil of Troy,
When Greeks with fire our City great did utterly destroy,
Fierce was the flame on every side, down falls the buildings fair,
The temples of our sacred gods the fire did not spare,
Till all things flat upon the ground did lie like desert plain,
For memory of this our town the vvalls did not remain,
Down to the earth it smoking lay defaced so with fire.
To ruin now all things were come which was the Greeks desire,
The bodies of the Troyans slain in Zanthus flood did svvimme,
Each channel deep with crimson blood stood floting to the brimme:
The members of our martred men in barren fields they flung,
In fertile sort to fat the earth in stead of other dung,
That where the town of Troy did stand in little space was seen
Where houses stood there grass did grow in sprouting sort full green;
And where the Temples of our gods in stately manner stood,
The dockes and weeds were cherished by loss of Troyans blood,
No place of Troy untouched did stand, but all for waste was laid:
The Greeks cride quit with that vile part that Paris first had playde.
When that mine eyes had seen all this the sorrows which were past,
Each woeful hap once callde to mind, stark mad I fell at last,
And raging in the fields I ran where lately Troy did stand:
From thence when I had raylde my fill, I passde to Thracia land,
Where Polymnestor that vile wretch and traitor bad did reign,
Who had betrayde young Polidore my son for filthy gain.
Which cruel act (though then stark mad) in mind I still did bear
That for revenge on him I fell, and out his eyes did tear,
To work him woe for this his deed my frantike mind was fierce,
The cheeks of this disloyal wretch my nails did soundly pierce,
That he forthwith had lost his sight for this his former deed.
O would to God all traitors thus for treachery might speed:
This deed once done, my troubled mind somewhat I did appease,
For well I wist the wretch was blind which did my sorrow ease,
And also to my further joy proud Pyrrhus lost his life,
When he returned home to Greece by reason of the strife
That stout Orestes had with him for Hermion that wench,
That nothing else but present death could this their quarrel quench:
Achylles son at last was slain, Orestes had his joy.
And Pyrrhus might repent the time that first he came to Troy,
Where he imbrewde himself with blood, and slew the aged King,
Which was the cause of his mishap, and sure no other thing:
The gods that knew his cruel mind, and saw his wilful fact
Could not less do than make the Greek repent his bloody act.
Orestes slew Achylles son, thus Pyrrhus being dead,
Like herbs to pot his flesh was chopped, no otherwise he sped:
This news to me some comfort was in this my woeful state,
To hear what hard mishap befell to him that slew my mate.
And well I wist his father first for using me so ill
Was slain himself by my consent, for Paris did him kill:
And also how that Thracian King that Polymnestor hight,
For so betraying of my son, and doing me that spite,
Receiude a guerdon for his fact, his lumen lights he lost,
Wherefore the traitor of his gains, I think, could scarcely bost,
Of all the rest it did me good, for that my hands had done
Such due revenge on that vile wretch that so betrayde my son.
I ioyde a while at this my deed my sorrow well did flake,
For that I knew they did the death of whom before I spoke.
But when again I callde to mind my children that were gone,
And dear alies, of whom the Greeks alive had left not one:
And how old Pryamus my mate before my face did die
On Pyrrhus blade that Grecian grim, while I in vain did cry
For help, to free him from the hand of this his spiteful fo,
In vain I cride, for that the gods decreede it should be so.
And then when that I thought on Troy, on Troy our stately town.
Which was the eye of all the world, but now by Greeks thrown down,
And like a desert place did lie, no sign of Troy did stand:
The empire stout of Asia great, so wrested from our hand,
That I the greatest Queen on earth, so was my stately style
In time forepast, and now to be a helpless wretch most vile:
So base and humbly was I used far from my former state,
That harborlesse I rangde about, this was my hapless fate.
Despisde of all, receiude of none, refusde of those that faund
On me before, when I their Queen did every thing command.
But now, although I used them well in elder time before,
They to requite my courtesy did shut me forth of door:
And let me lie without relief, this kindness they did show;
In Princes place, to me they sude, but now they would not know
Their hapless Queen in misery, but let me raging run
In every corner where I would, each wight me wretch did shun:
Not Greeks I mean, but subjects mine, who sometime did profess
In Asia soil me for their Queen, and now in this distress
The Greeks had awde their minds so far, they durst not on me look:
But as a thing that venyme was each living wight forsook:
Which when I spide, and callde to mind my former stately place,
And now again did see my self to live in such disgrace:
In frantike sort my heart was vexed, the anguish of my mind,
Like bedlam beast did make me run the spiteful Greeks to find
That were the causers of my woe, that I revenge might take
On all the wrongs that they had done, and for my husbands sake,
Whom they had slain before my face, and for my children dear,
For whose sweet sakes, amongst the Greeks I went without al fear,
With eger fist I laid on load, with nails, and feet at length,
But slender hurt, a woman's hand could do to men of strength,
Yet notwithstanding my good will was seen by this my force
And theirs again (O wretched me) by using such remorce,
For when that I had done my worst, and showed my utter might,
And breathless stood for want of breath by this my feeble fight,
The Greeks with stones did compass me, whose force I still defide,
Till they with stones did strike me down, where presently I did.
Lo thus, when that all vile mishaps had chanced unto me,
Whom fortune followed to the death with such extremity:
And that mine eyes (to my great grief) such woeful things had seen,
But would to God before the war long time I dead had been.
When all such haps of hateful dome that fortune could assign
Did chance to me by hapless hap, such luckelesse lot was mine,
To end my days in great disgrace I did among my foes,
They stoned me to death (poor wretch) a heavy end God knows,
Had ever any such mishap since first the world begun,
Or any one did know such woe that lived under sun,
As I my self (poor wretched Queen) though bootelesse now I mourn,
For remedlesse the cause remains when Planets all had sworn,
And haughty gods to work me woe for Paris filthy sin,
Who would to God had did the death when life did first begin:
Or would to God (I wish too late) the waves had been his grave,
When he to Lacedemon went fair Helen for to have:
O Neptune fierce could thou not frown and Eolus out call,
With whirling winds to drench his ship, his company and all,
But safely so to suffer him to swim with gale at will.
The doting youth in prime of years, his fancy to fulfill,
In Simois and Zanthus flood, his ships did seem to sail:
So quiet was the seas as then because he should prevail.
What, did ye seaish Gods decree together with consent,
To plague the Trojan state so far, as angry Pallas meant?
Ye Gods that rule both land and sea, why did ye thus decree,
That Neptunes town, at first so called, to Greeks a pray should be?
If otherwise ye meant at all, his ship should not have past
So quietly through surging seas by help of Boreas blast:
For Triton mild did show his face so happily that day,
That Paris past with sprouting sails into the Gretian bay.
What was become of Palemon, did Glaucus hide his head?
Their swift recourse far from his ship in partial sort was fled.
The Strencoucht Antiphates, Parthenope was gone
That wonted were to keep their course, but now there was not one,
Not Circe nor Calipso would their wonted magike use:
Although they knevv the lecher meant Atrides to abuse.
So Zephirus and Eurus fell, with Aquilo did lurk:
And hid themselves while Boreas with friendly gale did work.
Nereides were past away, Latonas imps did shine.
Each thing did smoothly smile that day by help of Gods divine.
And all was for the Troyan wrack, to plague my sons offense.
For Paris needs to Greece would go, and soon returned from thence.
But would to God the brinish seas, with raging waves so wild
Had drowned that baud that Theseus first in filthy sort defilde:
And that my son had did with her before he came to shore:
Then Troy had stood and flourisht still, as long it did before.
But Helen Menelaus wife that was Sir Paris joy,
Was first occasion of our woe, and latest fate to Troy.
O would the tigers first had torn the lims of this my son,
When aged Priam sentence gave on that which was not done.
The cause whereof was mine own deed which act I now repent:
For that the Oracle did show before the boys intent.
But now I know I wish too late: the angry Gods had sworn
To plague our state for some offense. For Paris being born,
Whose desteny the Oracle did openly declare,
And yet to see, my hap was such that wicked babe to spare.
Who was the cause of this mischaunce, and breeder of our woe:
His death had been to us a life, and life to thousands mo.
Yet I for pity sake would not consent that this my boy
The tigers brood his tender lims should utterly destroy.
What power divine did hinder me, or what infernal fiend?
What did both heaven and earth to this their utter forces bend?
O what offense did we commit that all the Gods should frown:
And thus decree with one consent to pluck our Empire down?
Did they appoint that I should breed, and foster in my lap
A scourge to plague the parents sin, and cause of their mishap?
Was it king Priams fathers fault that Laomedon bad
That builded Troy with borovved coin? for he received had
Of Neptune and Apollos Priests a sum of money great,
And when the day appointed came, the wretch forsware the debt,
With mighty vows the periurde man at altar side did say
He borrowed none to buyld his walls, and therefore none would pay.
But whether twere for perjury, or for my sons offense
I cannot tell, but well I know it was a recompense
For double and for treble sin, so many thousand did:
From Nations far the world does know the people thither hide
In hope of pay to either side great troops of men did run:
But what was gaind save deadly fight? or what but death was won?
Did ever any feel such woe as I poor wretch did taste?
Did ever Fortune yield such looks as she on me did cast?
O hauty Gods what hap was mine to feel such bitter pain?
Did destiny assign me that, to make me thus complain?
I would that I had been unborn, or borne I dead had been:
For then these woeful miseries I wretch had never seen.
Why did the Gods cause me to live? why did they thus decree?
Was this their will that I should live with present eyes to see
My loving mate and children slain, and Troy to burn with fire?
If they did will it should be so, then they had their desire.
But fie on that vile destiny, O fie on that hard curse:
The Gods themselves could not devise how they should plague me worse.
And then with wringing hands she wept, with wayling voice she cride:
Which griende me sore, about I turned, where presently I spide
An aged man both grave and grim, for that he seemed sad:
Right father like for grayish hairs, with Princely robes be clad:
Unto the woeful Queen he marchd, and thus in modest sort
Began to quip her frantike mood as I shall give report.
What madness now has mooude thy mind (quoth he) O loving mate,
That thus thou fretst against the Gods, and frantikelie do prate?
Can this thy fuming mind redress, or cause the things undone
To be again? No, if we liude again we could not shun
The Gods decree, wherefore be still shake off such heaviness:
In vain it is to vex thy self where cause is remedles.
What shall thy ghost that now should rest, in worldly cares still dwell:
And think on things that carst were past, O plague far worse than hell.
Then suffer thou thy ghost to take her quiet ease at last.
And call thou not to mind again that which is gone and past.
Thou know our destiny was so, we could it not prevent:
For that the Gods to plague our sin for some abusesment.
What should we kick against the spur, or swim against the tide?
Or strive for that to have at will which angry Gods denide?
When I had sent my son to death, and that he should be killed,
His life thou sauedst, wherefore thou see that destenie it wild.
But I to shun Simphlegades on Hebrus lake did light:
And coasting from Charibdis gulf on Scilla rock did smite.
Thus seeking how all dangers great by counsel I might shun:
Did unawares ere that I wist to present perils run.
Was I the cause that Helen fair with Paris came to Troy:
No sure it was fell destenie, or fickle Fortune coy.
For when the Oracle had told what hap in time should fall:
I wild to take away the cause. For witness now I call
The sacred Gods who knew my mind, my son I would have slain.
I was content my flesh and blood the tigers chop should stain,
Because I feared the prophecy, therefore I did consent.
But what of that? the Gods themselves did hinder mine intent.
For if the Gods decree it once, I know it will fall out:
Let no man think the powers divine by any mean to stout.
Sir Satire son to Pariside, of Bosphore sometime king,
Was wild by Oracle to shun a mouse of any thing.
For that a mouse should be his death except he took great heed:
The Oracle did tell him flat his fate was so decreed.
But he to shun the warned harm did slay the silly mice
In field and town, that none might live his death to enterprice:
And in his land no man might dwell that mouse was called by name:
He sought each way to save himself, he feared so the same.
He stopped the holes of creeping mice in every place full sure:
For that the vermins by no means his death might once procure.
Yet see the end, when least he thought of this forewarned harm:
He wounded was upon the brawne or muscle of the arm:
For Musculus a little mouse in Latin we do call:
And Mus a mouse which Satire slew, as after did befall.
A dagger piercd Sir Satirs arm right where the muscle grew:
And muscle comes of Musculus, though then too late he knew.
And Philip King of Macedon was warned to beware
Of wagon or of wheeled coach: wherefore he had a care
To keep himself from any such: he never could abide
To come in coach for fear of that, but still on horse did ride.
For all his care it so fell out he could it not prevent:
He was deceiud, no running coach by this before was meant.
For being slain, the sword that slew the King was brought to sight
And viewed well, where on the hilts a coach was graven right.
To Pelius it was declarde when that he chauncd to see
One barefoot doing rights unto his fathers ghost, that he
Should then of death in danger stand, the prophecy was so:
Because he should take heed of him, and shun the warned foe.
When he was doing of his rights unto his fathers ghost:
His nephew Jason came by chance, whose right foot shoo was lost
And there unto his grandsire dead the youth his dewes did give.
The uncle then with ielous mind not long did think to live,
For that he feared his neuew now, who barefoot there did stand
Should be the cause of his dispatch, wherefore he out of hand
Did counsel Jason being young to Colchos I Will to sail.
To fetch the golden fleece from thence: wherein he did prevail*
His meaning was that Jason should be lost or drowned therein,
The conquest seemd impossible the golden fleece to win.
And for because he might not fear the prophecy forepast
He shipped his neuew speedely, and sent him thence in have.
But Jason soon returnde again, and brought away the fleece:
And brought Medea home with him to be old Pelias Niece.
To Thessalie Medea came, and hearing what was done;
Against the aged Pelias, she presently begun
To practice treason at the last, and causd the aged sire
By his own daughters to be slain, this was for Pelias hire.
For he that could not trust the man that was his kinsman near:
But purposely did seek his death to free himself from fear.
Had such a chance, ere that he wist Medea did the deed.
His ielous mind was chiefest cause that made him so to speed.
The Oracle long time before did know old Pelias mind:
Wherefore it told what destenie was to the man assignde.
Of fifty daughters Danaus to be the sire was known:
Aegiptus then his brother had so many sons his own.
Aegiptus would have all these his sons his brothers daughters wed:
But Danaus would not consent, wherefore away he fled
And took his daughters all with him, because he did suspect
A son in law would be his death, therefore he did reject
The offer that his brother made, but why he did refrain:
The cause was thus, the Oracle did say he should be slain
By him that was his son in law, wherefore he sought to shun
Such destiny as might befall through such a wicked son.
Aegyptus wroth with this his deed, did send his sons to stay
Their uncle that before was fled, and pact from thence away.
His sons according to his will old Danaus did take,
And causde him there against his will a marrige day to make:
His daughters all were wedded then against their fathers will,
Each man his cousin german had, Aegyptus did fulfill
His mind at last, and did rejoice in this so strange a march.
But Danaus not well content, did work a swift dispatch,
Because he fearde the prophecy, least that on him should light:
He did command his daughters all they should appoint a night,
Wherein each one with willing mind her slumbring mate should slay,
And disappoint the prophecy before the morrow day:
His jealous mind did vex him so, he still did doubt the worst,
Til it was done he could not rest, the man did so mistrust:
According to the fathers mind they did commit the act,
The nuptial bed was so defilde with such a filthy fact,
All saving one was slain that night, a hard and cruel part,
Whose life was saude, for that his wife did will him thence to start,
For very love she bare to him, though all her sisters had
Destroyde their mates, which deed she thought to be right vile and bad.
Thus being saude by such a mean, the son in law did wexe
Right fierce against his father law, and earnestly did vex,
He vowde revenge on Danaus, that thus unjustly dealt,
He swore that he should taste the same that they before had felt:
And in the end he slew the wretch, for doing of that deed:
The Oracle pronouncde before how Danaus should speed,
Thus seeking how to shun his fate his death he did procure,
Himself was cause of his dispatch, when he thought all things sure.
The Theban king that Laius hight by Oracle was told,
That Oedipus his only son would prove a man too bold,
And in the end should be the death of him that was his sier.
But Laius thought to frustrate that, and prove his god a lier,
Unto a shepherd of his own his son he gave to slay,
And chargde the man upon his life, there should be no delay,
But presently his son to kill and bring him home his heart:
He shall not live so long (quoth he) to make his father smart:
The shepherd took the lad a field, but loath he was to kill
His Masters son that he loud well, and yet he must fulfill
His masters mind, which grieude him sore, wherefore he did invent
How he might satisfy the King, and save the innocent.
That Oedipus were dead he wished, so that his hands were freed
From doing hurt unto the youth, and from so vile a deed,
Wherefore the hurtlesse lad he took, his legs with twigs he bound,
And by the heels upon a tree he hung him from the ground,
That no wild beasts might reach the child his tender limbs to tear,
He would by no means do the deed, but did the infant spare:
And yet he thought, how that ere long the boy must needs be dead,
But by that means he sought to free his hands from vile bloodshed:
He killde a pig, and took the heart, and brought it to the King,
And blooded certain linen clothes in token of the thing,
And told him that his child was dead, and there he might behold
The heart and heart blood of his son, wherefore he might be bold
To banish fear, for this his child should never him molest,
For he was dead and dead again, and therefore he might rest.
Now see the hap that to this man did afterward betide,
For Phorbas king of Corinth soil, by chance that way did ride,
Who spide the child as then alive, which woefully did cry:
With sprauling hands it reachd about, full near at point to die.
He causde his man to take it down, to save the infants life.
Right glad he was, wherefore forthwith he brought it to his wife
Who barren was, and had no child: then this as for her own
She did receive, from whence it came to them it was not known.
The child did grow, they loud it well, and then in course of years
Of noble lineage comes the boy (quoth Phorbas) it appears.
For that the lad was daily given to Martial exercise:
And did delight to take in hand some noble enterprise.
At last king Phorbas sends his son with mighty men of war,
To fight against the Thebane King, twixt whom there was a iar.
Sir Oedipus in battle strong did utterly confound
The Thebanes, and to their king he gave a mortal vvound,
VVherof he presently did die: thus Laius had his end:
The Gods that knew how all things went, such fate to him did send:
And Oedipus his mother takes, and mary's her in have.
No thing was known to him as yet that erst was done and past.
Thus Laius did by his own son, no botter could he speed:
It is no striving with the gods if once they have decreed:
Wherefore vex not (O Hecuba) let not thy ghost so fret
Against the gods for this their doom, and further do not three
Fell destiny or fortunes frown, for this that they have done,
Was for some mighty sin of ours, which fate we could not shun,
Or for the sin of perjury, a vile and hateful deed,
Which first my father did commit, and now upon his seed
The plague did fall deservedly for such his bad abuse,
The gods themselves will not accept for perjury excuse*
And I likewise a wilful man as al my deeds did show,
My woeful folly was the cause of this our overthrow,
For when the Greeks did send to have fair Helena again,
I would not hearken to their suit, but pufft with deep disdain,
Did flowt and mock at their request, and openly denide
Their just demand, which great abuse the sacred gods had spide,
When that my son had taken away, sir Menelaus wife,
A filthy part the letcher played, yet they to end all strife
Would willingly digest that wrong, so that I would restore
The Gretian dame that Paris stole from Greece not long before,
And that no war should once arise betwixt our Empires stout:
So gently they did entreat, but if I went about
To hold her still, they threaten war, and vowed by gods above,
That they would fight to have again, sir Menelaus love,
Whom I perforce unjustly held, and stoutly did maintain
So vile a part that would in time cause thousands to be slain,
But I did give them answer thus, I mind to hold her still,
Not Greece, nor all the Princes there, in this shall break my will.
Let Agamemnon do his worst, I pass it not a straw:
Let Menelaus fret his fill, my will shall be a law,
And let them both with all their force against my power fight,
I mind to hold dame Helen still, against all law and right:
I have her now, and here with me I mind she shall remain,
Let them not spare but fall to war, and see what they shall gain,
The walls of Troy are strong enough, my power is not small,
I ready am to sight the field when Grecian trumpets call.
This will of mine was chiefest cause that did procure my smart,
For I contrary to a law maintainde so hard a part,
No reason would persuade my mind, true justice was away,
And wilful folly held the sword, self-will did bear the sway:
The want of justice was the cause that this our ruin wrought.
What was the cause that Troy did fall, and so consume to naught,
So many thousand men to die, was not my wilful fact
The chiefest cause that Asia, by Grecian power was sacked?
What Empires great and kingdoms wide, has ruin over run
For want of justice and good laws? Or what has Princes won
By such default but present death? The world does witness well.
What mortal man that wilful was but so to him befell?
The mighty Caesar ruling Rome, true justice was debarde,
His will was taken for a law, and justice was refarde,
His government the Roman crew did privily disdain,
They hate him so, that he ere long by subjects hand was slain.
Could Nero live when he began to cleave unto his will,
When Rome mislikt his government, and found his deeds so ill?
With one consent the Roman state decreede that he should die:
Unworthy for to reign in Rome his subjects all did cry
And he that hated was, durst not unto their mercy stand,
But slew himself, because he would not fall into their hand.
And Philip, King Amyntas son, true justice did neglect,
And how to remed wrong with right the man had no respect,
He partial was for favors sake, not passing what was right:
For while he liud all Macedon gave place to vvilfull might.
The vvrongd might cry for remedy, whilst he did stop his ear:
For whom he loud who durst accuse, as plainly did appear.
Pausanias when he had sude unto the King for grace:
And found in vain he did complain, his suite could have no place,
He turnde his malice from the man that first had done him spite:
And causde revenge deservedly upon the King to light.
For with his svvord he stabd the King, his folly to repres:
Himself was cause of this his fall the dooer did confess.
What was the cause that Carthage fell and subject was at last
The Empire great of Africa of Roman force to taste.
Did not their vvilfull folly first their woeful state procure?
The want of justice made the war a long time to endure,
Until their Empire clean was lost, their chiefest forces spent:
That Carthage fell for such a fault the world did much lament.
Did Rome not fall for such offense? was she not overthrown
By Brennus Captain of the Gauls, whose force each where was known.
For Allia brook can witness yet where thousand Romans did:
The want of justice was the cause, it will not be denide.
If Empires thus and Princes fell, what makes thee thus to moan
O Hecuba, and vex thyselfe thus walking all alone?
Let them that live in latter time example by us take,
Fret thou no more: from sobbing breast all woeful wayling shake.
Thy troubled ghost does cry for ease, it is time, yea time to rest:
Of Lethe flood now take thy fill, all things forepast digest.
What furious fiend does vex thee now to double this thy pain?
In life thou knew all kind of woe. What, will the Gods again
Cause thee to see another world? a world I mean of woes,
When thou have felt such misery in elder time God knows.
It Is past with us and remedles, wherefore no longer mourn:
Shall we revenge the thing again that long time since was worn?
No, let it pass and grieve no more, thy grief does come too late:
Be now content with this mishap, since Gods assignde such fate.
And yet (quoth he) to angry Gods an humble suite I make.
That they upon the Troyan race will not reuengement take.
There lies an I Will enuironde within the Ocean sea:
Which Troyans won in time forepast, and holds it at this day.
For Brutus he of Troyan race made conquest of that land:
The Giants then that there did dwell, could not against him stand.
The people that inhabit there, and in the Island dwell:
Do fetch their pedigree from Troy* each Nation knows it well.
A homely brag for Englishmen, to them a foul disgrace:
To graft themselves on such a stock as was the Troyan race.
But yet if they descend from us, as they do witness still:
I pray the Gods to keep from them the desperate Troyans will.
And that they may not follow us, but far from that digress:
To purchase them eternal fame: and for their quietness*
Let this our death be life to them, that they may die with fame,
Let Troyan wrack example be, unless they taste the same,
As we have done in elder time: therefore let them take heed
Lest that if wilful folly reign, accordingly they speed.
And now (quoth he) O Hecuba, leave off and do not wail:
Can vexing here in woeful sort, for sorrow past prevail?
Let sorrow pass, and banish grief, the time is past and gone
When once a thing is remedles, then bootles it is to moan.
If that I liude on earth again, in time I would prevent,
But time did pass without regard, too late I do repent.
And therwithall the grave old man in bitter sort did weep:
He sighed sore from sobbing soul, his tears he could not keep.
Thus Morpheus my fancy fed, that from mine eyes a stream
Of tears did flow, which causde me soon to wake out of my dream.
And lying broad awake at last still musing in my mind:
Me thought I saw dame Hecuba that had such fate assignde:
And Priamus that aged sire me thought was still in view:
Their favor and their faces both, as if before I knew
What they had been: and now again to memory did call
Things done before in drowsy dream, as often does befall.
And therwithall I took my pen to note what fancy vewde:
And orderly did set it down. Lo thus I do conclude.
FINIS.

