A brief Conference betwixt man's Frailty and Faith, Wherein is declared the
true use, and comfort of those blessings pronounced by Christ in the fifth of
Matthew, that every Christian man and woman ought to make and take hold of in
their several tentations and conflicts: Laid down in this plain order of
Dialogue, to help, if it please God, the conceit and feeling of the simplest,
By Geruase Babington.

PSALM 119. O how svveete-are thy words unto my throat, yea sweeter than
honey unto my mouth.

AT LONDON Printed by Henry Midleton for Thomas Charde, 1584.

The Contents of this Book.
Strength and comfort out of the word of God against Poverty and want. page 4
Vncheerefulnesse. page 22 Heat of affections. page 34 Want of Justice. page 52
Unmercifulness. page 60 Dissimulation. pa. 79 Doscoragement to make peace.
page 97 The cross and persecution. page 113


To the Right Honorable, and virtuous Lady, the Lady Marie, Countess of
Penbrooke, his very singular good Lady and Mistrisse, G. B. wishes al mercy
and comfort in Christ Jesus both here now, and for ever.
IT is said of Solomon even in outward matters (Right Honorable, and my very
singular good Lady that if a man have riches treasure, and honor, wanting
nothing for his soul of all that it desires, and yet have not an heart both
to feel in comfort the goodness of his God therein toward him, and also to
use the said blessings liberally to his own good and others help, it is but
a vanity and an evil sickness, yea a price in the hand of a fool (as it is
said in an other place) that has no heart. That is, it is a mercy of God,
which he has no right and true use of. So necessary in very outward things
is both feeling and faith: the one to conceive, the other to apply, and both
of them to yield us the true profit, comfort, and good intended into us in the
same by the Lord. Much more, Madame, in spiritual matters respecting the life
of body and soul for ever. And by name much more in the word of God which we
now so freely, and so plentifully, under the gracious government of our most
gracious Prince enjoy. For if we read it over ten thousand times our selves,
hear it of others carefully and continually, and yet feel not the sweet
spirit of the Lord by it secret power, as it were with a dropping dew,
piercing and mollifying, shaking and comforting our souls by the same,
assuredly we want what we seem to have, and for all our reading or hearing of
it, nevertheless it remains a sealed book unto us. This proves Caine that
cursed caytise both here and ever, who though he knew the promise of certain
safety by the seed of the woman, hearing it no doubt often in words told,
and seeing it by sacrifices shadowed out unto him, yet wanting a heart to
feel, and faith to apply unto himself the benefit of the same, wanted also
to his woe, what he so inioyed. So did Esau, Saul, Achitophell, and others all
whatsoever they were, who together with the word received not a touch, a taste,
and a very rent as it were, in their hearts to feel, as also piercing eyes,
and a clasping faith, to see, and take hold of the hidden sweet comprised in
the same. Which weying often with my self (my very good Lady) together with
the place where I spend my time, and the burning desire which both his
honorable Lo. and your self have, that I should do good amongst them, I bow
the knee both of body and heart unto the Lord for them, and I often beg,
that in that bottomless heap of his mercy, wherein he even swalloweth up
himself, it might please him to see it good, to join unto the outward
ministry of his word, which he now voutsafeth them, that inward touch,
power and might of his spirit, that makes it both a mortifying sword, and a
comforting grace unto his children. For so shall my labors be life unto them,
and ever as I speak (delivering but the word) their consciences shall approve
and confess within them, that it is a truth. Yea further I have often secretly
in my self intended, to join unto prayer some further endeavor, and according
to that measure of mercy, which the Lord should voutsafe me, to make some
plain applications of such portions of scripture, as I should judge in use
and practice fittest for the^. That seeing in them by example the true use of
the word of God, and how to suck out strength in their several needs from
it, they might from one place to many, and from many even to all, without any
further guide, than the guide of guides, Gods merciful spirit, pass with
feeling, comfort, and true concept of the good therein contained, and intended
to us all. And falling by course of reading at last upon that notable Chapter
the 5. of Mathewe, and seeing by some further meditation upon those blessings
therein contained, such wisdom taught, such faults reproved, such comfort
ministered, and such matter handled, as for the^ and all the world is most
necessary, I resolved with my self even there to begin to put in practice
my named purpose, and to make a trial, if by such endeavor I might profit any.
Which Inowe have done, presenting the same unto the Lord with humble prayer for
his blessing, to mine own, and others, with hearty request of Christian
acceptance, and to your honorable L. as to a means that shall make it more
acceptable to all, and especially to them, that I chiefly intend it unto, so
greatly honoring with all duty and liking the manifoulde mercies of God in
you. I am not able (Madame) to do with content, what ten thousand times. I am
bound to do with all care: namely, to show my self mindful and thankful,
as I ought, for all your La. honorable dealings with me. But this I protest in
the eyes of the Lord, that I would, if I could, and in witness thereof I
deliver unto the world this affirmation, and to your self these fewepapers,
most humbly beseeching your Honor, that since my want is in ability, and not
in will, this small testimony of the same may according to your accustomed
clemency be accepted of, and find a supply therein of any want wherewith it
may be charged. So cease I to add any further thing, leaving your La. to the
Lord of heaven to strengthen you still in that happy course of the study of
his word, and all other good learning, of the practice of duty to your God, of
cheereful encouragement to your servants, and of honorable clemency to all
men, which is at this day a crown upon your head above many others, and a
glorious ornament about your neck in the eyes, ears, and tongues of all men,
that either see you, hear of you, or speak of you, and my self remain to
perform all duties, that ever I shall be enabled unto, even with all the
power both of body and mind, as I am most bound. The Lord open the windows
of heaven and power his mercies out upon your La. the Lord confirm you in all
good works, give you a true sight of this vain world, make your heart shake
at his judgments, melt with a fruitful feeling of grace assured to holy
life, and the Lord to profit make you think you ever hear that voice, ARISE
YOU DEAD AND COME UNTO IVDGEMENT, and yet in faith to say with cheerful
heart, COME LORD JESUS COME QVICKLIE. So be it.

London this first of December, 1583. Your Honors most humble bounden to death,
Geruase Babington.

A Conference betwixt man's Frailty and Faith.
Frailty. O Wicked world, and wretched state I stand in, O heavy heart and
sorowing soul, how should I comfort you? I have it not, I see it not, I feel
it not, what any way might joy me, and how then can I give it you? The
contrary I see in fullest weight and measure, and woe is me ten thousand times
that ever I saw this light: yea let the day even perish wherein I was borne,
Job. 3.
and the night when it was said there is a manchilde conceived. Let that day
be darkness, let not God regard it from above, neither let the light shine
upon it. But let darkness and the shadow of death stain it, let the cloud
remain upon it, and let them make it fearful as a bitter day, let darkness
possess that night, let it not be joined unto the days of the year, nor let
it come into the accounts of the months. Yea desolate be that night, and let
no joy be in it. Let the stars of that twilight be dim through darkness of
it: let it look for light, but have none: neither let it see ye dawning of the
day, because it shut not up the doors of my mothers womb, nor hid sorrow
from my eyes. Why died I not in the birth, or why died I not, when I came out
of the womb? Why did the knees prevent me, and why did I suck the breasts? For
so should I now have lien and been quiet, I should have slept then, and
been at rest. Or why again was I not hid, as an untimely birth, either as
infants, which have not seen the light? Woe is me I live, woe is me I do not
die, and woe I fear much more, when ended is my course.


Faith. Why Frailty, what in the name of God means this fearful impatiencie,
or what case can there be in the life of man and woman, so uncomfortable, as
that in regard thereof, they should thus cris out? Open your self, and
conceal not your grief, for the very speaking of it shall give some measure
of ease.


Frailty. Alas I know not almost how to do it. For my conceits do so
oppress me, and ever as I think of one misery, still the remembrance of an
other thrusts it self so into my mind, and at last the heap appears so
huge, as all amazed I faint under the beholding of them, and my cogitations are
so distracted, as it is not possible for me to make an orderly rehearsal of my
woe. Yet since I have met with you, I will perform it, as I can, committing my
self to that mercy, that has no measure, and to your self, as an instrument
to apply his comfortes to me, begging it even with tears ten thousand times
at your hands. I consider then, that I am created here in this world a
reasonable creature consisting of body and soul, both subject to dreadful
and endless woe, if I find not mercy with the Lord, which I confess unto
you I comfortablie cannot assure my self of as yet, because the hand of God me
think more heavily presses me diverse ways, than I imagine it would do if he
loved me.


Faith. And wherein I pray you, do you think you are pressed over heavily?


Poverty the first temptation.
Frailty. ALas in many things (and yet God lay not my pleading with him to
my charge.) To begin with some thing, I must needs confess unto you, that my
low estate in the world is a marvelous temptation to me many a time. For God
knows, I am poor, and even very poor, notwithstanding all my pains, carke
and care, which is not a little. My charge also is great for such an one as I
am, and their want, as good reason binds, is my continual woe. Yet if this
were all, me think I could wrestle with it, and by Gods help get the
victory, but these companions of poverty are they that sting me so sore, to
wit, disdain and contempt both of me and mine, of my doings, sayings, or any
thing that proceeds from me, and that reiection which is made of me out of
all meetings and companies, those whisperinges that I hear, reproaches that I
carry, even at their hands that I little thought would have done it, and that
scornful pitying of me, which often appears, with such like. For in deed
if ever any found it, I find it true, that by wise Syrac was said so long
ago. There is even as much peace Syrach. 13. 16.
betwixt the rich and the poor, as betwixt Hyena and the dog. But look
how the wild Ass is the Lions pray, so are the poor meat for the rich.
And look how the proud hate humility, so do the rich abhor the poor. If
a rich man fall, his friends set him up again: but when the poor falls,
his friends drive him away. If a rich man offend, he has many helpers, he
speaks proud words, and yet men justify him: but if a poor man fail,
they rebuke him, and though he speak wisely, yet can he have no place. When
the rich man speaks, every man holds his tongue, and look what he
says, they praise it to the clouds: but if the poor man speak, they say,
What fellow is this? And if he do amiss, they will destroy him. These, these
companions of my poverty are the things that even cut my heart a sunder, and
will I, nill I, it breaks even upon me by force as it were, to think that if
the lord love a man, he should never suffer him for want of worldly trash, so
despitefully to be entreated in this world, and so generally. This is but one
thing that troubles me, besides which I have many more, but help me if you
can ere I go any further.


Faith. Nay go on, utter your grief fully, and then your mind will be the
fitter to hear a great deal. For otherwise you will be musing of the rest,
when I shall he speaking to you for your ease in this.


Frailty An other very dangerous torment then I must needs confess is that
continual vncomfortablenesse, which is still in me by reason of diverse
things, as by a weighty and stinging sense of mine own sins, by sight of
other men's loose course, and grievous dishonouring of God in every place,
giving themselves to flattery, dissembling, and all manner of holowe dealing
with God and man, by meditation of the fierce wrath of God, and most dreadful
judgments, which assuredly hang over us for these things, etc.

Again both publikelie abroad, in such as I deal with all, and privately at
home in such as I trust, I find such naughty unfaithfulness, and such
unfaithful naughtiness, as that I am driven into greater choler and heat,
than can any way stand with my profession of the Gospel, and with the liking
of my heavenly father, whom I have ever found good unto me: and therefore
justly I stand in fear that he will punish me for such intemperancie, and yet
I cannot amend it. Now I pray you let me go no further without some comfort,
if you know any for so wretched and woeful a case.


Faith. Indeed Frailty, your terms are too sharp, and sower. For me
think, for any thing you have yet uttered, your estate is neither wretched,
nor woeful in truth, but Christianlike if you will lay a while away your earthly
eyes, and be judged by the word of God.


Frailty. Ah fie fie, is your feeling of my case no more? then have I uttered
enough, and too much. But see my heavy plight, I am every way wrapped in woe,
and yet I am not pitied.


Faith. Nay but stay your self for shame Frailty, and be not so rash. And if
I can not prove what I say, then be offended: but if I can, then as you fear
God be reformed, for this impaciencie in you is dangerous. I say therefore
again, me think your tentations be not strange, but such as usually happen
to Gods dear ones, and such, as (for any thing I see) Jesus Christ the
Savior of man did foretell, and deliver sure and soueraygne comfortes for,
while he was here on earth in diverse places, and by name in that notable
Chapter of Mathewe the fifth. But before I can apply the same unto you, I must
know of you one thing, concerning your first grief, namely how you feel your
heart within humbled by these things. For indeed if you be poor and bare,
and so forced to stoop in outward matters to the richer, and yet your heart
remain proud within you, arrogant, hawtie and conceited, your tongue bragging
the best, and your vanity ever as it can breaking out, and giving testimony
what you would do, if your hands were not tied, and your horns made short
of purpose by the Lord, then indeed I must plainly tell you, that your
poverty is a whippe of an angry God as yet with you, and it will not
certainly be removed from you in any favor: but even still God shall check
you, and every neighbor either openly, or secretly mislike you. For a
beggars hand, and a proud heart has ever offended the eye both of God and
man. But if God has given you this blessed grace, that by this cross of want,
disdain, contempt, scorn and such like in your calling, your soul is
schooled, your heart is humbled, your spirit broken, and all your unruly and
headie affections tamed within you very greatly in comparison of former times,
so that even truly your conscience does witness to you, it is not with you,
as it has been in many respects, and if now you find, that often you are
driven to God and his providence by this means casting up your eyes to heaven
for help, stay and succor, because you find but frosen hearts in men, and
falsehoode in the best fellowship less or more, truly then must I as
plainly tell you again, and with as bold a spirit, as such a truth requires,
your poverty is wealth, your contempt may be your comfort, and if ever man or
woman had God their friend, you may assure your soul in truth he is no foe
unto you.


Frailty. O Faith, say not this, but prove it.


Comfort against poverty.
Faith. With a very good will. I pray you therefore mark me. When Christ, as
I said before, was here upon earth to gather unto himself the souls of men
by life and death, knowing in his infinite wisdom the rain that would fall,
the floudes that would come, and the winds that would blow and beat upon
the houses of me^, that is their faith and religion, on a time his disciples
being come together, and much people beside out of many places, he sat him
down and took as it seems to me this matter in hand, of very purpose,
delivering out such comfortes and helps, such defenses and stays, as being
of men and women rightly applied, and used, shall ever hold up their course,
and keep their paths straight in the fear of the Lord and true religion.
And see, amongst the manifold temptations, that he saw in wisdom would arise
and be urged by Satan to shake men from ye truth, this of yours which now we
speak of is the first, namely poverty. Against which, his heavenly voice
delivers out this comfort, Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the kingdom
Luke 6, 20.
of God. Which golden sentence laid out in fuller terms, carries and
implies unto us this sense and meaning. Although earthly minds can frame out
no felicity, unless with worldly wealth their cup may ouerflowe, yet I
avouch unto you, contrary to the wit and wisdom of them all, that in my
fathers kingdom, blessed are the poor, the poor I say again, and such as
want what others wallowe in, not half so loved of the Lord as they. Now least
his meaning should be mistaken, he saying no more but so, and every spoiling
unthrift, whose unreformed heart does make an vnrepaired purse, or idle drones
that shun the Non magnum est sua, sed se relinquere.
course of men, and shut themselves up in cloisters as pore, that with more
ease they may live of other men's labors, or any proud heart yet wanting
wealth might think it spoken unto him, he more plainly has interpreted his
meaning, and showed what poor he thinks of, namely the poor in spirit:
That is, such as using godly means yet are of purpose by their God kept under,
and being under, do not swel with pride, arrogancy, and conceit, but even as
the beggar knowing his want, and no way having of his own to trust to,
confesses other men's help needful for him, humbles himself before them,
beggeth their aid, and gives them (as instruments) the praise of his living:
so they humbled, tamed, schooled and reformed by their want toward all men
carry a lowly heart, and only at the Lords hands look for both comfort in
this world, and salvation in the world to come. These poor men and women,
that is, these that are thus affected under their Cross says Christ, were
their want more than ever any abode, and the companions of their wantes
snubbes, checkes, taunts, and such like more, and more bitter than ever any
man's were, yet even in the most of them all, I pronounce them blessed, and I
assure them happy that ever they lived, for theirs is the kingdom of God. For
this cause therefore I asked you how you were affected under your poverty.
And now Frailty consider and weigh this sentence of the Lord. For enough it
is of it self, if our incredulity be not monstrous, to comfort the heart of
any man or woman in the world, even in the midst of al their worldly wantes be
they never so great. Yet has it annexed for our further joy the consent of
other places many, and experiences of the same in known examples not a few.
As, If thou lend to my people, that Exo. 22. 25. Deu 15. 10. Job 26 15.
is, to the poor, I will bless the, says the Lord. The Lord delivers the
poor in all his afflictions. The Lord will Psalm. 9. 9.
be a defense unto the poor, even a refuge in due time of trouble. He
remembers verse 12.
and forgets not the complaint of the poor when he makes inquisitio^ for
blood. The poor shall not always verse 18.
be forgotten, neither the hope of the afflicted perish for ever. Lord thou
have Psalm. 10. 17.
heard the desire of the poor, thou preparest their heart, and thine care
hearkeneth thereunto. He has not despised Psalm. 21. 24.
the low estate of ye poor, but they shall eat and be satisfied. I am poor
and in Psalm. 107. 22.
misery, but the Lord cares for me. Better is the poor that walks in his
Proverb. 28. 6. 22.
uprightness, than he that peruerteth his ways though he be rich. That which
is to be desired in a man, is his goodness, and better is such a poor man than
a lier. God regards the poor, and is Esaias 25. 4. 66. 2.
their strength. And unto whom again says the Lord shall I look and have
regard, but unto him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at
my words. The spirit of the Lord is Luke 4. 18.
upon me, and has anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor. And the
Matthew. 11.
poor do receive the glad tidings of the Gospel. Call the halt and lame and
poor Luke 4.
to the Supper. And has not God chosen James 2. 5.
the poor of this world says James, etc. with a number such like testimonies.
The comfort whereof if they be rightly considered, and the blessing of them
unto our heart by humble prayer begged at the Lords hands, no tongue of man is
able to express. For the Lord our God is not a man, that he should repent,
nor as the son of man, that he should change: but if he loved the poor when
these things were spoken, he loves them still, and to the end he will love
them: and if he regarded them, he forgets not us, and even amongst our
selves, if he see you, he beholds also me, and if he comfort me, he will
do no less for you, for there is no respect of persons in his eyes. Yet add
unto these the experience of examples, and they will be more sweet. Naomi Ruth.
and her daughter Ruth, how did the Lord regard, bless, comfort, and provide
for? The poor widow of Sareptha, 1. Kings 17.
whose meal and oil were at an end, and yet the dearth foretold much to
come, how regarded he and fed during all ye time? The other pore widow 2
Kings 4.
also helped by Elisha to pay her debts, and to live afterward with comfort of
the rest, how shows it the care of the Lord over the poor that are godly,
and how mightily should it increase our faith? What an example is old Tobiah
Tobias 4, 21.
and his family, and what a speech of faith was that to his son? Fear not
my Son, because we are made poor: for thou have many things, if thou fear
GOD and fly from sin, and do that thing which is acceptable unto him. How
loved the Lord the offering of the poor widow that cast in but two mites? How
chose he Disciples, and folowers of his truth ever of the poorer sort? How
chose he his parents of the very meanest certainly of a multitude, and how
himself has he honored the estate of godly poverty, for our eternal comfort,
having not so much in this world as the Foxes and Birds: borne in a stable,
wrapped in rags, laid in the manger, and yet the God and Lord of heaven and
earth, and the disposer of all the glory in them both. O my heart and hand,
how is the one too narrow to conceive this heavenly sweet, and the other
unable to lay down but even that little that I do feel? Shall any worldly
want make us think God loves us less, when we see the most loved that ever
was in the greatest want? shall any discountenaunce, dissauour, discredit
causeless, shall any snubbes, checkes, taunts, scorn, contempt, rumors, or
the very power of ye spite of hell drive us out of hope in our gracious father,
when we see examples in his dearest of them all? O Frailty, Frailty, open
thine eyes, look upon thy God, weigh his nature, mark his dealings with his
dearest, hear his promises, make him no liar, but gather strength, increase in
hope, and the Lord in mercy grant it to us ever. Let the changes and
chances of this world be what they will, or rather what it pleases God, let
our orderly walking in our places with true pains, heart, and meaning, with
due carfulness, with no unthriftiness, up early, down late, and whatsoever
means that good are to live and lay up by, for our selves and ours, yet want
their end of such reasonable store as we desire, let us nevertheless trust in
our God, and hang upon his hand, and never measure his favor toward us by
these things, for they are no judges of it being as we see often granted to the
wicked, and restrained greatly from the most beloved. Only let our poverty
make poor our spirits, and break the secret pride of our hearts, and then
fear not, we have a warrant of truth, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven, And a broken and contrite heart, O God thou
shall never despise.

The contrary now might as greatly be amplified to our comfort, if I thought
it needful. For as his merciful promises are many and sweet (as we have
heard) to the poor, so are his fearful threatenings to the rich not a few:
and as great is the good that is wrought in the child of God by this cross of
want, so fearful are the faults that are given unto the souls of many by
their store of wealth. Let it suffice to mark what this same our Savior
says, by the mouth of Luke and opposes over against the promise spoken of
now already: Woe be to you that are rich, for you have received your
consolation, says he, and after him his apostle James again: Go to now ye rich
men, weep and houle for your miseries which shall come upon you: your riches
are corrupt, and your garments motheaten: your gold and silver is cankred, and
the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as
if it were fire, etc. And Paul again, Gain 1. Tim. 4. 6.
is not godliness, but godliness is great gain, if a man be content with
that he has: for we brought nothing into the world, and it is certain that we
can carry nothing out. Therefore when we have food and raiment, let us be
therewith content: for they that will be rich fall into temptation and snares,
and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction. For the desire of money is the root of all evil, which while
some lusted after they pierced themselves through with many sorrows. But thou O
man of God fly these things and follow after righteousness, godliness,
faith, love, patience and meekness, fight the good fight of faith, lay hold
of eternal life, etc. By all which we do as evidently see again that Honor,
Fame, Port, Pomp, wealth and abundance in this world are no sure witnesses of
Gods favor, and therefore the want of them no sure argument of the contrary,
but the end and very truth is this, if we fear God and be poor, poverty
is great gain. And if further the Lord go with us and make riches also
increase, yet may we never set our hearts upon them, for there is no sure
comfort in them. And thus me think Frailty, for this first grief there
should grow comfort, and you should now be contented. For certainly,
certainly, as God is God, or truth truth, poverty is no token of Gods
displeasure to all, but a singular means of much goodness unto many: and thus
much only of it at this time. The Lord give us profit by his promises.


Comfort against vncheerefulnesse and sorrow, the second temptation.
YOur second temptation you say is this, the heavy weight you feel of your
sins, and the continual sorrow and grief, that is annexed and joined thereunto.
For comfort and stay whereof I seek no further, than to the place of Matthew
named before. For even there also in the very next verse is this assault bet
back, and breach made up, being in wisdom forseene of Christ, as a thing
that greatly should go about to shake his childrens faith. What therefore you
think your misery, he makes your happiness: and what you think your woe,
he makes your comfort sure and certain. Blessed (says he) are they that
mourn, for they shall be comforted. Which mourning can no ways be meant but
of such as now yours is, if it arise (as you affirm) by sight of sin
committed against your God, whom yet you love and hope in, though it be with
much weakness. For worldly sorrow (says the Apostle) causes death, but godly
sorrow causes repentance unto salvation not to be repented of. Worldly
sorrow arises upon outward griefs, or sight of outward punishment commonly,
and godly sorrow upon sight of sin committed against a merciful God, and a good
God, ten thousand times deserving better service of us; and who yet will be
merciful, if we repent and amend. Therefore the end of the one is nothing but
desperation and woe, if the Lord do not speedily help, and the end of the
other as you hear even Christ himself say, is happiness and comfort: which
that you may yet more firmly feel, and to greater joy with both hands
apprehend, let it not be tedious in a few examples to behold the truth of both.

Did not Caine sorrow and sadly cast down his countenance when he perceived a
regard given to his brother and not to himself? pinched it not his heart
within, when God gave sentence of him? We see it evidently, and yet
nevertheless we know withal that the Lord abhorred him.

Did not Esawe mourn, when he Genesis 4. 5. verse. 11. 12.
wept for woe, and dubling over his speech to his father so expressed the
passion of a pained heart within him? yet found he no place to repentance
says the Apostle, though he sought it with tears, but was rejected as a
profane person notwithstanding all his sorrow.

What grief griped the heart of Saul 1. Sam. last.
think you, when he saw his army spoiled, his three sons slain, himself sore
gauled and wounded with the archers shot, when he desired his armor bearer to
thrust him through with his sword, and for want of his assent was glad to do
it himself, and so become his own destroyer? Was this no sorrow and grief?
Yet not blessed, but accursed such mourning and such mourner.

What horrible hell of dispairefull grief battered the heart of Achitophel 2.
Sam. 17. 23
that famous Counselor, when he saw the distress he stood in, and for ease
and end of that heavy hap, was glad to conclude his own shameful
confusion, to put his own head himself in the halter, and to hang himself?
^ell ever this out think we, before even seas of sorrows had wrecked and worn
within him all kind of comfort away? No certainly, but such rufull ends have
ever heaps of rufull conflictes and conceits before them, and therefore we
see some sorrow far separated from this promise of Christ in this place.

To conclude, what woe or woorme Acts. 1.
think we, did guawe the heart of Judas, when the guilt of cruel deed did
press his soul so sad, that neither reward received, nor any kind of
conceit either of God or man could stay his hands from finishing his own
life? Yet a cursed woe, we know, and as far from the gain of this promise
here, as sin is severed from a virtue.

Now of the other part wey the sorrow that you are in, if you tell me true,
and mark the issew of it. Blessed first says the Lord Jesus is it, and
blessed are they that conceive and feel it, for they shall be comforted. And
then in his word he afordeth examples to show the truth by trial of this
promise. David mourned for the multitude of his iniquities, and remained
mourning as Psalm. 6. 6.
he says all the day long. Every night he washed his bed with weeping, and
watered his couch with tears. The sins of his youth stinged him, and the
sins of his age grieved him: his known offenses made him full woe, and yet his
secret sins remained terrible. Now the end of all was comfort according to
this promise, and blessed David that ever he felt with grief so much his
grievous transgressions: The like did Manasses, and was comforted: the like did
the Publican, and was comforted: the like did the Prodigal son, Marie,
Rahab, Lot, Noah, and all the rest of saved sinners since the world stood,
and were comforted. Now the promise is made and offered as heartily and
freely to you, to me, and to all that ever will take hold of it, as ever it
was to them. For Whatsoever things are Romans 15. 4.
written before time, are written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. And therefore Frailty awake, and
wipe thy dazeled eyes, behold the end of sense of sin and sorrow joined
thereunto: it is happiness, it is blessedness, and it is certain, sure, and
lasting comfort, if God be true. The like may be said of that sorrow also that
arises Luke 19. Romans 9. Psalm. 74. 9. Mich. 7. 2.
not upon our own, but other men's miseries, as for the want of the word, for
want of fruit when it is had, for heresies, divisions, and schisms Micheas.
7. 2.
in the Church, and such like: for this is a godly sorrow, and shall be
comforted. A doctrine so sweet as no pen can lay down. Sweet I say to al,
and yet even most sweet to the ministers, to whom it was chiefly spoken: for
he lift up his eyes upon his disciples says the text Luke. 6.
when he spoke these things, as knowing what store of storms should arise
unto them by reason of their calling. And therefore let them take it in the
name of God, as it is offered to them, and claspe it in their arms so hard to
their heart as all the woes in the world may not loose their houlde from it.
For the truth has said it, and experience tries it, they shall love and not
be loved, they shall labor and not be liked, they shall serve at the altar and
but poorly live of the altar. Their piety shall be hypocrisy, their zeal,
choler: their heat, youth: their prayers shall not profit, their watchings
wast, and their fastings do no good, but sin shall still reign, iniquity
abound, the greater part remain unreformed, and they for all their love,
labor, and true faithfulness be rejected, and contemned in the end.
Whereupon what woe does grow to the soul that sauored any truth of meaning,
love to God or goodwill to men, let them judge that have felt, or whose
wisdoms can weigh what the Lord has not given them trial of in themselves.
Surely such it is, as is able to make the meekest Moses plead with ye Numb.
11. 12.
Lord and ask why he so vexes his servant with an unthankful charge, and
commands to carry in his bosom, as a nurse the suckling child so perverse a
people, as though he had conceived the^ or begotten them all himself. Such as
is able to make Jeremy cry in the twitching torment of his mind, Woe is me
Ierem. 15. 10.
my mother that ever thou bare me a contentious man, and a man that strives
with the whole earth. I have neither lent upon usury, nor men have lent me
upon usury, and yet every one does curse me. O Lord thou have deceived me, and
I Ierem. 20. 7.
amdeceiued, thou art stronger than I, and have prevailed, I am in derision
daily, every one mocketh me. For since I spoke and cried out of wrong, the
word of the Lord was made a reproach unto me: and therefore I will make mention
no more of thee, nor speak any more in thy name. But here is a comfort to
stay all impaciencie, and to continue their course in serving of the Lord in
their callings still. Blessed are they that mourn, for the want of the fear of
God in men, for their sorrow shall have joy, and they shall be comforted at
the last. And in the mean time Elie his speech is meet for every one: It is
the 1. Sam. 3.
Lord, let him do what seems good unto him. And, Behold here am I, be it
Luke 1. 38.
unto me as my God will. Thus may the ministers apply this promise. And for
you, Frailty, or any one in your case, I pray you also consider how it
fitteth you. For what can you say now, groaning under this grief of yours,
traueling and heavy laden with your sins, what can you say, I say, if you
say your worst, but even cry out upon the fullness and foulness of your
iniquity, upon the ripeness and rottenness of your sin, saying your life
is loss unto you, and there is no joy under the sun, that you can conceive
of any thing by reason of your sin? For you have been an Jdolater, a
blasphemous swearer, a Sabbath breaker, a disobedient child to parents and
subject to Prince, a murderer malicious and spiteful, an adulterer wanton and
light, a thief deceitful and unjust, a false witness, an evil thinker, and
what not? And therefore though for many sins you could hope of mercy, yet
for so many you cannot, but a heap together beats you down, when many single
ones could not do it. This is the worst you can say, and this is ill enough if
God give not faith: Yet see how all this is nothing, where this promise is
marked. For eue^ this sorrow, this mourning, this discomfort and grief that
you have conceived by ruing of your life, is a sure token, that you are the
Lords, and that he has mercy for you, if you will not stand in defiance of
him, but be of good hope he sees you. And my proof is no worse than the Lords
own words, Blessed are they that mourn, (for their sins and transgressions,
for their wants and weakness, and for their loose course in the ways of so
good a God) for they shall be comforted. Shall he say blessed, and you say
cursed? shall he promise comfort, and you say you are cast a way? God forbid.
Remember what the spirit says in the 1. John 5. 10. He that believes not
God, has made him a lier. And therefore conclude with your self and be
cheered with it, were there no more promises (which yet are many besides) of
mercy unto sinners, yet were this sufficient to stay the weakness of any,
if the Lord be in them to give them faith in it, that the God of truth has
pronounced happiness to this woe, and intailed surely a certain comfort in
time to descend unto this sorrow. Many more I say are the promises of God,
and many more are the places of comfort in this your case, but my leisure
serves not now to make a treatise of a conference: and when enough is said,
why should you not be satisfied? God has spoken it, the power of Hell cannot
disprooue it, you should believe it, and I do end with it, happy are you, or
any man or woman in the world, if you feel your sin and sorrow for it, so
that you will believe. For you are not cast away, but you shall be comforted:
you weep now, but you shall laugh, and you shall feel the performance of the
words of David Psalm 126. 5. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy:
and they that go weeping and carry precious seed, shall return with joy, and
bring their sheaues with the^. Whereas yt same god says with a thundering sound,
woe be to them that laugh now, for they shall weep. Woe be to them, that in
this life stretch themselves upon beds of Juorie, sing to the sound of the
Uiole, and drink their wine in bowls of gold, without sense and sorrow for
their sins: for the day will come, when this sweet shall want, and what has
not erst been felt, shall smarte and sting, and burn no less than the fire
of hell, and strongest venom of destruction, that ever was or may be. God
therefore give us faith, and what feeling of sin it pleases him. For this
fleshly peace, and security within us, is no token of love, and the contrary
wakening, grief and woe, is nothing ever to dismay us.

Amen.
Strength against heat of affections, the third temptation.
YOur third assault arises of the diverse injuries and sundry wro^gs that you
sustain abroad without redress or revenge, together with the undutifulness
either known or imagined in your own household and family, whereby you are
driven to greater impaciencie often than may stand with the liking of your God
whom you serve, and whereby indeed, as you say, if you leave it not, you
know you do draw upon you the heavy and angry hand of him. For help
whereof no further, but even to the very next verse following in the same
Chapter of Matthew, and mark it well. For well knew the Lord that as they that
fear God, and have not a gaping conscience to swallow for gain horrible
things, are both more subject to poverty with the companions thereof, and also
more occasioned to mourn in respect of their own causes and other men's, as
also in respect of many checks, taunts, and unkindness, which they shall
endure more than others upon whom this flattering world fleereth and laugheth,
and in whom a lulled conscience offers sight of little evil in them, and
therefore needed to be armed against them, as I say this he knew, so likewise
as well did he foresee that these causes public and private of impaciencie and
distemperature in affections should arise unto his children, and therefore
provided for it also. For cast your eyes about the world a little, and view
the course of things, and are not the godly, harmless, and quiet men often in
this world rejected and wroong and pinched at for this thing and that, when
more contentious natures are let alone as shrowes to deal withal? Has not ye
true meaner often a shrewd turn done before others that are worse disposed?
Has not the voice of truth pronounced it of those that be his, that in the
world they shall be wronged and hated and persecuted, and so forth? Therefore,
if for this also he had not left us counsel, our hap had been harder, and
our fall should have been greater, by these occasions. But like a wise teacher,
and a good God he has done it as I say in the next verse there, and
comme^deth unto us the rule of our nature and the victory over our affections
be the prouocations never so many to the contrary, setting a crown of
happiness upon the head of that glorious virtue in these words, Blessed are
the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. Now the meek says a learned
man are they, which are not easily provoked with injuries, which are not short
and teastie upon every offense, but are ready rather to suffer any thing
than to do the things that the wicked do, men and women to conclude that
resist not evil, but overcome evil with good. Or yet more fully such (as an
other says) as are not of nature fearce, and desirous ever of revenge, but
mild, tractable, courteous, soft, and gentle, easily forgiving a wrong, if it
be done unto them, hating chidings, contentions and strife, ready to give
place to every body, and choosing rather with a quiet mind to commit all
to God, than with intemperate heat to pursue his own right. Blessed are these
men and women says the Lord, and happy shall they be, the earth is theirs,
and the commodities in it, and they shall inherit them. And why so may you
either say or think? Surely because this is not flesh and blood in them,
but an heavenly alteration of crooked nature by Gods renewing spirit. For
flesh and blood can not brook wrongs, but a man and woman wrought in an other
mould by the working grace of God, can and daily do. Now the Lord works
this in none but in such as shall never die (for this sanctifying spirit is the
pleadge of election) and therefore blessed are the meek. O Frailty then, what
a place is this to help your infirmity withal, if you will in deed consider
of it earnestly? You can not forgive, you can not forget, you can not be
stricken, but you must strike again, you can not be wronged by word or deed
either abroad of others, or privately of your own, but by and by you forget
your self, your place, your calling, your God you serve, and a number other
needful things to be regarded, and you are as hot as fire for a time. But
in deed you must do otherwise if you live for ever, as you see in this little
sentence. For the Lord has given it out and charged his ministers to the end
of the world with a bold spirit to proclaim it to his people, that blessed
are the meek. Now they that do, as you do, are not meek, and therefore you
see the conclusion how sharp it is, they shall never be blessed. And if not
blessed, then necessarily wretched, woeful, and cursed. Therefore I say again,
I pray you let it be regarded, and thought upon very earnestly. For truly me
think it moves my self very much. And though I see in the scripture many
other notable places sounding forth the same, and many reasons conuincing by
forcible conclusion the necessity of it, and many examples of the tried good
that has grown thereby, yet as to others God gives a greater concept of one
thing than an other, so this to me I find more pearcing than the other I must
needs confess. And yet because every man is not my self, and you
especially Frailty are not Faith, though my daily companion in the world,
least I should miss of helping you by ministering nothing but mine own
medicine to you, I pray you consider also of the course of other scripture
touching this matter. And first you shall see no calling amongst men whereunto
the Lord by name has not enjoined this temperance of affections and
sweetness of nature, which now I speak of. If they be ministres, then
instruct says he them that be contrary minded with 2. Timot. 2. 25.
meekness. If they he Magistrates, it is likewise enjoined them. And meekenes
beawtifieth especially them that are in authority says Chrysostom. If they
be neither, whatsoever they be, walk worthy of the vocation whereunto God has
called you (says the Apostle) with all humbleness of mind, and meekness,
and long suffering, supporting one another through love. And David gives a
reason of it: For them that are meek Psalm. 25. 9.
shall he guide in judgment, and teach the humble his way. And is this a
forcelesse reason? That which beautifieth every calling, and every person,
shall it not bewtifie you think you? And that which is forbidden to every one
in so express plainness, can you think the Lord will ever allow in your
self? Surely he will not, and therefore know it and think of it, if you
please the Lord you must be meek.

The reasons I spoke of be these and such others. First the Apostle in his
epistle to the Galathians reckoning up the Galat. 5.
fruits of the spirit which never appear in any truly, but in such as shall
be saved, reckons this as one amongst them, to be meek, and amongst the
fruits of the flesh, that shall lead us unto death, he reckons the
contrary, choler and heat, whereupon we our selves (as clear as yt sun) may
see, that if the Lord voutsafe us this change of nature from sour to sweet,
and from anger to meekness, there is no more comfortable cry can happen in
this earth unto our souls, that they are the Lords. And if he do not, then
as mightily ministers it an argument again of woe, alas, and endless woe
unto us.

Secondly to be meek is a true imitation of Christ, for Learn of me says
he, I am meek and lowly in hoart. But Math. 11. 29.
he that treads the steps of this Lord and God, shall never die: and
therefore blessed are the meek. Contrariwise to be hasty, furious, and
intemperate, is to follow Caine, Esau, and all reprobates, which whosoever
follows, shall never live, and therefore cursed is the contrary.

Thirdly, the Lord cares for us if we be meek, and watches over our
wrongs, seeing all the words and deeds and very thoughts conceived against
us, and the Lord will pay our debtes if we leave it to him and iustle him not
out of his throne, sitting down our selves therein as judges and reuengers of
our own causes. He knows our vprising, and down lying, he is about our bed,
and about our paths, and spieth out all our goinges, and sees he not when we
are wronged? He has taken a reckoning of the very heirs of our heads, he
puts our tears into his bottle, and are not our wrongs think we noted in
his book? O therefore how should we our selves learn to be meek, to forgive,
and to refer our selves ever to him, since we have such a judge? The wife
whilst her husband lives, quieteth her self from foreign toils, and leaves
all encumbrances to him, for he cares for them: but if he by death depart from
her, then she her self, because she has lost her aid. Now we, if we be
indeed as we think we are, the children of the Lord, we are the spouse of
an husband that never dies, but in life is permanent, in power sufficient, in
care still vigilant, and therefore how should this consideration kill our
affections, mortify our hasty hearts and hands, and altar us daily to an
heavenly temperance, patience and meekenes? The Lord is our advocate to put up
our suit, the Lord is also judge to give sentence of our wrong, and Frailty
then how can any escape that hurts us, if we would be meek, and leave it
unto him? Me think, me think I could even dwell continually in this
consideration, it is so comfortable. What madness should move us to harbor
our hurt, to hatch up our harm, and to keep matters boiling and festring
within us vnforgiuen and vnforgotten, when we have such a Judge? God
strengthen us and give us victory of our selves. But why Frailty, stand
thou yet so mute? Beleeuest thou not all this? If thou do yet hang in the
briars of thy unreformed passions, add hereunto some further proof of passed
practice, and experience, and let that as mighty to persuade, confirm and
comfort thee to this virtue, if it be the Lords will.

The Israelites in Egypt oppressed and harmed, could not with right
counternaile might, but as patiently and meekely as God made them able, abid
it, and cried unto the Lord, and what followed? The Lord heard them, Moses was
sent, they were delivered, and Pharaoh with all his host drowned in the sea.
See with your own eyes the reward of meekness.

David oppressed by Saul his father in law, whom at home and abroad he
truly served and honored, sought no revenge, but even refused it when it lay
before him, and with all meekness, mildness, and patience committed it to
the Lord, and Saul had his punishment, David the kingdom.

Jacob being threatened destruction by his brother, conceived not by and by the
like toward him again, but leaves his country and fathers house, puts
up the wrong, possesses his spirit in patience and meekness: and what insued?
The Lord was with him both day and night, the Angels of heaven are his
servants, the Lord gives him wives and wealth, comfort and strength every
where, and Esau lives to die for ever, as the fatted ox is prepared for the
slaughter.

Joseph horribly slaundered for his faithful service bare his grievous cross
meekely, and honor is his end, even great and rare honor. O hearts of ours
then, where are they? What a God serve we, whose mercy upon meekness has
thus showed it self beside in numbers more? Shall it not move us? Shall it not
pierce us? Nay shall it not change us? God forbid we should be senseless,
and therefore you see Frailty what must be done, and what sovereign help the
Lord lays down for your infirmity, be your occasion public or private, at
home, or abroad, with many or few, affections certainly must be brideled, and
even fought withal till they yield and become more That we hurt our selves
also in earth by heat of affections.
quiet: otherwise we run upon our ruin both in heaven and earth. For the one
thus as you see is proved, and truly the other is as true. For what government
are they worthy, that will not govern, as they possibly can themselves well?
What truth can they know, that can not abide to hear indifferently both
parties? No, every man shall frame him self to their humors till his turn be
served, and truth shall never dare to appear before them. What danger can be
prevented, or what guilefull guest ca^ be discovered, when heat does thunder
out threats, ere the time serve to take knowledge of the matter? The enemy is
armed, the friend is discouraged, and judge your self then how strength is
impaired. What servant, if God rule not in him mightily, will truly serve,
where comfortable countenance either gives not hope of convenient reward, or
at least presently accepts, what is done, in favor? What one that has any
gifts, friends, or ability, will ever abide with a loving and true heart, where
reproaches and discomforts, are his daily death? No, no, it will never be, nor
it cannot be. Well may a worldly mind in regard of passed time and charge
make men rub out and carry coals, till they can do better, or may get a
cheat, but the heart being alienated, and the true faithful kind affection
that is above gold, worn away with often rebukes, which being not digested
send up at times as tokens of their remaining a bitter taste, all is but
hollow, all is but in regard of themselves, and if time should serve to
need them. God knows how their snubbed hearts would call their snubbes to
remembrance, whereas meekness, gentleness, comfort and countenance makes
a servant true in his dealings, painful, willing, constant in his place, and
ready even to die in the service of them whose loving usage has pierced his
soul with a permane^t affection if he be of any good nature, and if he be not,
the same virtue of meekness watches, looks, hears and considers all
things wisely, not bewraying himself, till he have found indeed a hollow
servant, and then weedeth out justly so ill a member.

Therefore I say again whatsoever your occasions be of disorder in your
affections, be they at home or abroad, truly Frailty fight with your self,
and never suffer your infirmity to prevail. For God requires it, and even
worldly wisdom requires it: and the very hardest things are made easy by
some use. Now you have a God to help you beside use, who with his blessed
mouth has promised help, and with his mighty spirit shall assist you, if you
pray.

Frailty. Yea but the course of the world serves not for this counsel. For I
tell you now adays, who suffers a little shall suffer more, and who puts
up one wrong, shall put up 20. Men can not live now, and either get, or keep,
if they be so gentle as you would have them.


Faith. O Frailty how are you deceived? And how still savor all your
speeches of your nature? I pray you tell me, if God would say to you be
meek, and I would confirm thee in this world both with sufficient
maintenance and continuance in the same, be the practices never so peevish
against thee, would you not believe him?


Frailty. Yes, for I know he is able to do it, if he say he will do it, and
I am not yet so weak to doubt his power.


Faith. Uerie well, and I pray you what follows in this verse of Christ which
now we handle? Is it not a flat promise that the meek shall inherit the
earth? If you will then stand to your speech, and believe the Lord upon his
word, do it now then and ever hereafter, for here you see his promise. The
whole world may rage against us, and yet shall we inherit the earth in dispite
of them all if we will be meek. That is, we shall both get and keep that
portion, which the Lord thinks meet for us, will they, nill they, that do
trouble us: neither ever shall the force of foe further prevail against us,
than shall be good one way or other for us. Blessed father of heaven what a
promise is this, and how contrary to man's reason and sense: yet repeated over
and over in the scripture for further assurance as you may see, if you read
but that one psalm the 37. confirmed to us by Paul, who says he had nothing,
and yet possessed al things, and by the experience of all the godly that ever
was. Therefore even a thousand times mark it Frailty, and lay it up. The
world pitieth these meek ones, and calls them Gods fools: but the Lord
blesses them, and his blessing makes wise. The world judges meekness the
very high way to beggerie, and yet you hear the Lord even flatly say, they
shall inherit the land that have the same, were all the world against them.
Therefore to go no further, conclude now with your heart Frailty, to use this
remedy of the Lords laid down to bridle frail affections and trust his
word. Certain now you see it is (for the Lord has said it) Blessed are the
meek. And even by that hold that I for my part have taken of this promise, I
pronounce unto you again, that the very day and hour of your birth you may
bless, if the Lord give you victory over your affections and make you meek:
and so I leave you to his mercy.


The fourth temptation, arising of want of justice in our causes, etc.
Frailty. I Cannot deny, but your persuasions are upon true warrant, and they
ought greatly to move: yet me think you do not fully mark my case. For if
I sought any thing either at home in my house of my family, or abroad in the
world of others, which were not both meet for a Christian to demand, and
in truth mine own flat right, I could see mine anger to be faulty, and
patiently learn to put up the matter I trust in time. But I tell you Faith, I
do not so: I seek nothing, but, as I have said, mine own due, what I ought
to have, and what I truly pay for: and therefore I tell you in this case my
choler has more warrant than you well mark. For it would touch any body to
loose his right. And a man were better out of this world, than to be robbed
thus of justice and lawful favor as I am. It makes me weary of my life: and
I tell you I feel it stir within me, even to strike hands with the wicked,
and to do as men may like me, that I may be quiet.


Faith. Softly Frailty, softly, your tongue tumbleth too fast, and your
nature I tell you plain breaks out too much. Shall I loose my labor with
you, and prevail nothing with either speech or good will? Are you not ashamed
with this affirmation, that if you sought any thing unlawful, you could
bear in meekness the denial? Why, no thanks to you. Thus could a Turk or
Heathen do, and almost the Devil: common reason would make them. But I tell
you, except your meekness exceed this, you shall never be saved. For the
scripture is plain, there is no praise to be patient when a man deserves of
man his pain, but if when we do well, we suffer wrong, and yet be meek and
patient, this is acceptable to God says the Apostle. And even in your very
case of suits and demaundes, that are but right, if justice be not had, yet
must this virtue of meekness remain in us, as may evidently appear in the
very next verse of Matthewe. For there the Chap. 5.
Lord knowing the nature of frail flesh, how it would startle and storm at
this matter, and be tempted by it to forsake his truth, as it were of purpose
hitteth your objection on the mouth with his hand, and bids it stand
back, as not worthy to appear and be heard. For Blessed (says he) are they
that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. That
is, blessed are they that notwithstanding they so moderate their desires, as
never they seek or wish but what is just and right, and their own due debt;
yet as hungry and thirsty live in patience and cannot be satisfied with
recept of justice for their own. Blessed I say are these, and they shall be
satisfied. Where you see eue^ with both your eyes, except you will wink, ye
even in our own right we must want right sometimes in this world, and yet must
be meek and godly and faithful still. And in the end we shall be satisfied,
either of man, or God, or both, as surely as we live. Therefore Frailty, if
it be possible cease to be Frailty, and govern affections by these sweet
promises of eternal truth.

No want of justice, no wrongful oppression, no cross and unconscionable
dealing of men, must make us fall out with our God or strike hands with the
wicked. God forbid. Shall we serve God no longer than he will rule his
wisdom by our wisdom, and serve our desires fitly? But words be but
words, and yet I tell you these words are true reason. Notwithstanding
consider you for your confirmation what godly men in the scriptures have ever
done: and if God will have mercy upon you, reform your nature to their allowed
course. I pray you if a man serve at the altar, is it not reason that he live
of the altar, that is, if a man spend himself, his body, his mind, his
goods to instruct people in the way of salvation, and require of them again
meat, drink, and clothing for his pains, does he require a thing
unreasonable, or does he demand any more than is his due right? Yet did
Paul the dear servant of the Lord hunger and thirst after this
righteousness, and had it not. For unto this hour says he of himself, we
both 1. Cor. 4. 11. 2. Cor. 11.
hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain
dwelling place, etc. Yet was he meek, patient, and his affections orderly for
all this, and yet he had not his right as you see. What did David again desire
at Saul's hand, but that since he had voutsafed to make him his son in law,
he would likewise use him so, or at least as a true subject and servant, with
safety of life til he deserved worse? And was not this right and his very
due? Yet pleased it God David should hunger, and thirst for this righteousness,
and not have it. And yet you see I say again it was his right. What did
Joseph hunger and thirst for, but to be reputed honest, when he was honest,
and not stained with that crime which his soul abhorred? Yet did he want it.
What did all the Prophets and Martyrs desire, but Gods glory to be
increased, and their own lives saved when they deserved no death? Yet did they
want it. Nay what did even Christ himself hunger and thirst for, whilst he
here lived, but the rising up of Gods kingdom in the hearts of men, and the
salvation of their souls? Yet even this right and due to him, and this great
and endless good to men themselves, could he not obtain, but hungring and
thirsting after it, was despised and scorned, and in the end killed. Yet were
all these meek, and gentle, and quiet in their affections, notwithstanding all
this, and never fretted themselves at the crooked course of a cursed world,
but stayed themselves, and at the Lords hands they were all satisfied in the
end, according to this promise, Ye have heard that it has bin Mat. 13 38.
said an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, but I say unto you resist
not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on the right check, turn to him the
other also. Yea even yet further, they thus wronged in the world spoke of
meekness, and commended it both to themselves and others. For Learn of me,
(says our savior Christ) that I am meek, and lowelie in heart. And them
that be meek (says David) shall the Lord guide in judgment, and such as be
gentle, them shall he teach his way. Wherefore I conclude if it pleased the
Lord thus to deal ever with his children, and even with his own dear son
yet satisfying them in the end, and has in mercy made a faithful promise to
deal no worse with us in the end, if we will be content: truly then no want
of justice, ever in our most righteous suits and demaundes, should make us
intemperate, but rather drive us to this promise, and in it we to be content
with all meek mildness, both of heart, tongue, and countenance, till the
Lord see his time to satisfy us. And I pray you Frailty consider of it. You
see it with your eyes, your excuse is naught, be your right never so good, and
your wrong never so great. But we can not do what we should do ever, and
especiaily in these hard conflictes. Yet as near as we can, let us be ruled,
and draw to this heavenly virtue daily more and more of meekness and
patience. If we will not, surely as we live, when the Lord has tried us a
while with mercy seeking our good and cannot bow us, he will at last scourge
us in anger, and fiercely break us. If the judge should say it, or any mortal
man, be content and I will satisfy you, we would be quiet, and shall the God
of heaven and earth so saying not be heard, trusted, and regarded? The Lord
show his work upon us: for otherwise, if there be a hell, or he be a God, this
intolerable contempt of so sweet a promise, and so sure a blessing will have
a scortching reward at the last. I can say no more Frailty, but bid you look
upon his own words, he says you are blessed when you are oppressed for want
of right, if you will be content, and you shall of his own self be truly and
fully satisfied, if you will mildely tarry for it. Now if you will call him
lier to his face, and say you are miserable because you are so dealt withal,
or not happy, neither shall it be better with you unless you will leave his
laws, and join fellowship with the wicked, you may work your own woe, and
who can help it? But I hope better of you, and I wish better to you, which you
shall never miss if you will be meek. And so let the Lord work with you,
you see his word, and you know my mind.


The fifth temptation against mercifulness by reason of unthankfulness.
Frailty. SInce then you are so plain and comfortable, I will yet further
bewraie my secret assaults unto you, if I shall not be troublesome, and crave
your strength as in these, hoping when the remedy appointed of God is used, it
will prevail with me. I do then over and beside all these, find many other
infirmities and even in any thing that God has commanded, something or other
fast creeps upon me to slack me from that duty, which I know to be
enioined me. As first in dealing with such as have need of my help as a good
Christian should, truly you will not believe how the ingratitude of the
world quenches my heart, and stays my hand. For I see the course of men and
the naughtiness of natures in these evil days. Let a man lend his poor
neighbor something to help him withal, as God commands, or let him even
give clearly for ever to him, yet shall he never a whit be better loved of a
number for it: but if he lend, be driven to sue for his own: and if he give,
have rather unkindness, and a taunting scornful speech, than any other
commendable and thankful consideration for his goodwil. Whereby I am often (I
confess my corruption) driven even to the point of this worldly and wicked
conclusion with my self, Let them sink or swim for me, I will seek to live
my self out of al men's dangers, and I will neither borrow nor lend, give nor
take, make nor meddle. Let other men's wantes be other men's woes, and God help
them, there are many ways to make a man poor, though his hand be hard
enough. Now this I know is ungodly, and I was not borne to do thus, yet
Frailty I am, and by reason of the monstrous ingratitude that the world
abounds with, perforce I confess it, I am often driven toward this rock.
Again I see every man even from the head to the foot, so given to halting,
cogging, glosing, lying, soothing, smoothing, flattering, and dissembling, and
so thereby to win favor, to win wealth, to win friends and countenance
in their dealings, that me think I cannot stand any longer in the innocence
of a good conscience, but I must do as they do, that I may get what they get.
Yet know I this to be devilish, but I am Frailty by name, and I fear me by
nature I shall be no less. Thirdly, when any unquietness grows in town and
country, or any iarring unkindness, I see such hazard in dealing betwixt
them, such subtilties and fetches to make a man a party in that which his
soul hated, and so to trouble him, and let the best be supposed, I see usually
so small thank gotten of either party, but even the contrary, that I assure
you, I sit still and let them bate the fire that made the fire, and themselves
waste one an other, and a thousand more too for me, if they will.
Notwithstanding my conscience accuses me secretly, that this is not well done
of me. And thus endangered without, and accused within, me think my case is
hard and grievous. But I will not weary you with any more of my infirmities.
For I even shame to show you these, but that you are Faith, a friend where you
take strong and comfortable, and gave me liberty to be thus boulde with you
before.


Faith. In deed Frailty you are, when these things thus flow upon you, yet
Frailty may you cease to be, by the grace of God, if you will diligently wey
what strength in the scripture is ministered against them. For to begin with you
first, and letting store of other scriptures pass to keep me still in this fifth
of Matthew, evidently it may there appear, that the Lord knew it would
assault his children, and therefore uttered this sentence, no doubt of purpose
to confirm them still, that Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain
mercy. Verse 5.
Wherein if it were well marked, there is comfort hidden even sufficient
against this vile suggestion. For shall the Lord of heaven set a blessing upon
the head of a thing, and we not be moved with it? Nay shall it not more move
us, than all the speeches or conceits in the world to the contrary tending?
What though a dull heart say, let all men perish, so I may be safe, or what
though a thousand policies prick to a private regard above measure of private
welbeing, do we not hear with our ears, and see with our eyes, the speech of
truth which shall stand when heaven and earth shall fall, Blessed is the
merciful? Either then make God false, or this blessing assured to the virtue
ever. And if it be assured, then never regard the conceits of a witless
world, but consider the virtue in it self, and what it shall pull upon you.
Then to the imagination of want that may grow by this grace, and to the sting
that arises upon their ingratitude, whom we have been merciful unto, oppose
the promise that follows in the place, For they shall obtain mercy. Does a
man obtain mercy when he is in this world made worse, and in the world to
come no better? No; you know he does not, and therefore it must needs follow,
that this promised mercy implies a greater good than ever can come harm by a
liberal and merciful hand in order, either in this world, or in the other,
or in both And it has confirmation also of scriptures beside. For I have been
young (says the Prophet David) and now am old, yet saw I 37. 25.
never the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. But the
righteous is ever merciful and lends, and his seed is blessed. And again
in another Psalm, A good man is merciful, 112. 5.
and lends, and he shall never be moved, but had in everlasting remembrance.
Whereby it is plain and plain enough, that let the world and her chickens be
as churlish as they may be, yet mercy is gainefull by the promise of the Lord
unto the merciful. And more should we regard, what our God likes, loves,
and blesses, than what with worldly wretches gets reward. Yet even 31. 20.
Prou. 11. 26.
here also it has his praise, as you may see by proof in Job and others
many, though not peradventure ever in all that are most bound unto it.
Wherefore, even a thousand times we should contemn this rude nature of
unreformed worldlings, and let them be as unkind, as ungrateful, and as
perverse as their corruption can make the^, if the Lord soften our hearts, and
give us this virtue of mercy, our reward is certain, the bill of our
blessedness is signed, and we, as we could ever desire, assured to be gainers,
Sincke it then Frailty in your heart, if I may obtain any thing of you, and
hear not these things without any profit. Ponder the good promised in your
mind, and ponder the truth of him that promises it, God of heaven and earth.
If the good counteruaile your hurt, as a thousand times it does, your
temptation is strengthened, and if he never deceived, that has given his word
for payment of you, it is more strengthened, but both of these are true, and
therefore God give you use of them, the blessing of mercifulness to all that
truly need your help, is assured. This were enough then if you be not
utterly fallen out with me, and will credit nothing that Faith tells you,
to stay your steps in this godly duty of mercy, yet regarding your nature
rather than the need of the thing, add unto all this but some little view in
your mind of the virtue it self in it self, and it may be you shall find
strength increased by it. Is it not in his nature think you an assured virtue,
that God makes ever any promise of reward unto? Or can it make miserable
that Mich. 6. 6. Colos. 3. 12.
the Lord says, makes blessed? Or is it not cause enough to continue you ever
in the practice of it, that the Lord so often, so earnestly, and so generally
to all estates commands it? Surely it is, and therefore mercy in it nature
is a most notable virtue. Is it not to be honored that makes men in whom it
is so renowned, as that all ages speak and write of their names and natures
for it? But this virtue of mercy has been such to many, and therefore in all
truth, a notable virtue. For proof of my assertion, I let pass the multitude
of the faithful, whom either scriptures or stories, or present practice, as
yet amongst us honorably speak and think of. And I remember you only of his
name, whose nature in this action (being an heathen) has often well liked me
Alexander the great. Whom when Note.
one Petillus humbly besought to help him with some money toward the
bestowing of his daughter in marriage, by and by he commanded 50. talentes to
be given unto him: and when the man refused so great a gift, saying, that ten
talentes would suffice, being told of it he also answered, that it behooued
a good nature, not only to consider what an honest friend does ask, but
what his ability is well to spare and give. Thinking belike (which in truth
is often so indeed) that either modesty, or fear, or some one regard or
other, may make an honest nature, not ask so much as in deed he stands in
need of many a time, and therefore good reason a faithful friend should have
respect to such an one above his asking ever.

Was not this a sweet nature then, and a notable virtue in this man? Or can
any man read this of him, and not love and like him for it. Great therefore
is the praise of mercy and tender kindness ever. By mercy we resemble God,
and prove our selves his children: For our heavenly father is merciful. Luke
6.
By mercy we become instruments and as it were amners to the Lord to deliver
his gracious benefits to our brethren, and even very equity requires it at
our hands, that if we find mercy our selves in all our needs with God, we
should not deny it in their wantes unto our brethren. For so says Math. 18.
the Lord to that evil servant in the Gospel, that he should have forgiven,
because he was forgiven himself, and showed kindness to his fellow, since he
had found it with the Lord himself. Last of all that fearful threate of
mercy ever to be denied to us, if we deny it our selves to others should
strengthen and stay us in this virtue for evermore. Therefore look not I say
again upon men's acceptance of our doings, but look upon the virtue it self,
how it adorneth a man, how it commends a man, and how it makes his fame
to fly both far and near in every place. And look upon the sure reward,
that is promised to it by the Lord. If you be merciful you shall be blessed,
if you be merciful you shall have mercy, if you be merciful you shall be
renowned, you shall assure your soul that you are the Lords, because you
resemble his nature, and if you be not, both God and man shall curse you:
Therefore be merciful. This may encourage us, and this will encourage us
certainly Frailty, if the Lord be not quite departed from us. But as it is
needful that this virtue should be in us, so is it as needful that it be
rightly in us, for otherwise we deceive our selves, and we shall miss the
reward in the end. And therefore as I have endeavored to stir you up unto
it, so it shall not be unprofitable per adventure altogether if I also direct
you a little in it. Some then have thought this virtue to have been delivered
in the verse before which we have heard of under the name of meekness, but in
deed they differ much. For meekness then is showed, when we our selves are
wronged, and yet revenge not, but put it up and leave it to the Lord. And
mercy when we our selves being no way hurt, yet are touched and moved with
other men's wantes, and even suffering with them because they suffer, endeavor
ourselves to our ability to relieve and help them. So that this virtue of
mercy as you see, stands of two parts, to wit, of a tender feeling, and
compassion within us, and of an outward loving help with our ability
whatsoever it is without us. The misery of man is of two sorts, and therefore
also this merciful pity and help of as many. For either a man wants what
is needful for his soul, or what is convenient for his body. And both of
these does a merciful christian tender and pity, and help, as he can. Of the
former we have a proof in the example of our savior Christ, whose Mark 6.
bowels even yerned and heart aked to see the spiritual misery and want of
that great multitude that then he saw being destitute of knowledge and
altogether as wandering sheep without a sheapheard. Of the second we have a
proof also in the Samaritan, whose merciful nature shows it self toward
Luke 10.
bodily wantes, and outward griefs of him that thieves had so ill handled And
in both these you see the parts I spoke of, namely inward compassion and
outward help. Without which never can this virtue stand, nor we be liked
either of God or man. For if we pity and yet help not, that fearful speech
of John lights on us, How dwells the love of God in us, and we shall
assuredly hear it in the day of judgment, When I was naked ye clothed me
not, when I was hungry ye fed me not, and so forth. And if we help a man
in his need, and yet do it not upon any tender compassion toward him, but
upon a iolitie and pride in our selves, and upon an imagination of merit for
the work sake, or such like, it is loothsome: again, all that ever we do to
the Lord, and we loose our reward. If you doubt of this, you may see it
proved in the Pharisees, Matthew. 6. Matthew. 3.
whose alms abounded, and made a glorious show. But because they let the
weightier matters pass, as judgment and Mercy and fidelity, their outward
deeds had never reward Therefore even a thousand times mark it, how want of
right disposition in the heart, makes outward dealing of gifts, be it never
so magnificall, but pharisaicall and wicked: against that blockish assertion of
some, that the deed done must needs be rewarded. This tender feeling does
the Apostle both profess in himself, and require in others. In himself, when
he asks who is 1. Cor. 11. 29.
weak and he is not weak, who is offended and he burns not? In others,
when be says, weep with them that Romans 12.
weep, and rebukes the Corinthians for that they seeing so great a fall of
their brother, were puffed up and did not rather sorrow. So well thus you see
Cor. 15.
what manner of mercy must be in you, if it be allowed of the Lord. Now how
this good virtue is begotten in How mercifulness is wrought in men.
us, let us also consider, and beside diverse others that might be named, you
shall see the workers of it especially and above other means to be experience
and sight. For the first we see it in the wisdom of the Lord our God most
plainly, who therefore gave his Experience.
own son a sense of our woes, that experience might make him a more
merciful, ready and careful regarder of our suits. It behooves him (says
the Heb. 2. 17.
Apostle) in all things to be made like to his brethren, that he might be a
merciful and faithful high Priest. And again, We have not an high Priest that
cannot 4. 15.
be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but we have one that was in
all things tempted in like sort, yet without sin, concluding thereupon
presently, Let us therefore go boldly to the throne of grace, that we may
receive mercy and grace to help in time of need. Why so? Assuredly because
we can never feel that want which he knows not, and knowing, experience
works effectually a ready regard and help. Whereupon by the way, we may
ground a great comfort against any cross if we mark it. For thus may we
think, if mercifulnes make us blessed, and experience make us merciful, then
whenever the Lord gives us any taste of woe, he does but school us unto
happiness. But I pass it over, and now let us consider, what a very monster
and ugly beast in nature he is, who having himself drunk of the beggars
dish, and tasted the smart of needy want, yet never the more is moved in
tender kindness to others, when God has made him able to help them, but as
brass or iron turns both hand and heart away, when pitiful suits are made
unto him for some comfort. And Sight a worker of mercifulness.
then view we in like manner the force of sight in such examples as we have
commended to us in the scriptures. When Pharaohs daughter saw little Moses in
the basket, she pitied it: when Exodus 2. Matthew. 14.
Jesus saw the multitude, he had compassion on them, and healed all their
sick: when he saw their want of teachers, Mark 6. Luke 7. Luke 10. Luke 18.
he pitied them: when he saw the woman weep whose son was dead, he pitied
her: when the Samaritan saw the wounded man, he pitied him: when the Lord saw
his debtor fall down, he forgave him all: and he that sees his brother want,
and turns his face away, O how is the love of God in him? with a number
such. So that sight I say above either hearing or many other means, is a
vehement worker of this virtue in us, if we be the Lords: and of this virtue
not in part, but in whole, for if you mark the examples again, you shall
neither see pity without help, nor help without entire compassion in them,
but both together, the one following ever after and upon the other: which if it
be so; then should we take a view of our selves, occasioned by this doctrine,
and diligently weigh what either sight of other men's woes, or hearing, or any
other means works in us, and if we find a fiintie heart within us,
whatsoever we see or hear, judge then betimes what will be our case at one
time or other, when blessed shall be the merciful. Surely we shall find what
the Lord has spoken, that judgment without mercy shall be unto us, because
James 2. 13.
we have showed no mercy. And if we find the contrary, as greatly may it
joy us again on the other side. But I forget my self in following this
discourse too far, and therefore here will I cut it off: once again
desiring you neither in this virtue, nor others ever so much to regard what
the world does think, as what the God of heaven that made the world, does
judge. For if you do, you shall never whilst you live keep a straight course
in any good. The Lord says the merciful man shall be blessed, therefore
shame unto the face that once avouches it, that mercy makes miserable. The
Lord accepts it, let the world neglect it: the Lord rewards it, let a
senseless worldling be never so ungrateful, and what the Lord rewards, it
can never make a man worse if he use it, therefore be merciful. What should I
say? Certainly Frailty, till God become false, till his blessings become
cursings, his promises unprofitable, and his rewards not worth having, the
feeling heart and the helping hand, head, tongue, or any member gift or
ability in us can never impouerish us beyond our good, as you plainly see:
and therefore your temptation is answered, and your weakness strengthened, if
the Lord grant you feeling and use of his word: which I trust he will, and
beseech him that he may.


Strength against Dissimulation, the sixth temptation.
YOur next temptation arises by dissimulation, and a mighty motion you find
to do as the world does. But Frailty, would you leave to think gain to be
godliness, and begin to think only godliness to be gain, as the Apostle
teaches, and a little to weigh with your self, what in every age every
honest man and woman has thought of this beastly vice, were it never so
general, surely you would find strength against it in your self, and a
marvelous hatred kindled in your heart of it I believe verily. For there is
nothing that pulls any body into this Metamorphosis of nature, but a
careless contempt of al opinions of us, so we may flourish and get our desire
of this cursed world. Which I must say again is a beastly vice in man or
woman, because it so makes them that use it, this being ever the property of
a man, to prefer honesty before all utility. Now if Scripture against it.
you ask what has been thought, I am able to show you even under one sight,
both God and man against it, and man not only Christian, but heathen, such as
beside the light of nature had no direction by the Lord. For, Woe unto Esaias 2^.
them (says the Lord) that seek deep to hide their counsels from me. That
is, that carry more show than truth, as they do which are outwardely
religious, and inwardly most profane contemners of the same. Help Lord says
Psalm 12.
the Prophet David, for it is high time, there is not one godly man left, but
the faithful are minished from the children of men: they talk of vanity
every man with his neighbor, they do but flatter with their lips, and
dissemble with their double heart. And then in the detestation of so vile a
thing the spirit of the Prophet breaks out into a curse, and the Lord root
out says he, such deceitful lips. Which certainly is a speech that should
pierce us deep, when we consider and think of it. The Apostle Peter also
cries unto all that fear God Lay aside al maliciousness, and al guile, 1.
Pet. 2. 1.
and all dissimulation, envy, and all evil speaking, opposing these to the
sincers milk of the word of GOD, which al men ought to desire, that they may
grow thereby, as things that cannot agree and dwell together in any man. And
if we mark examples, was it not, I pray you, a horrible thing for Simeon and
Levy to pretend such friendship to the Sichemites, and to harbor secretly
so bloody conceits? Did not the soul of their godly father Jacob detest
both such men, and such dealings? Was it not vile and unseeming either for a
king, or an honest man to dissemble such liking of David, as that he would
give him his ^. Sam. 18. 21.
daughter to wife, and yet mean nothing thereby in truth but to snare him, and
to work his certain overthrow by it? Such love come to them that long for
it, and such fathers in law God keep us ever from may we think and say, if
we mark it. Was it not a detestable nature in Cain under a brothers face to
dissemble a murdering heart and mind? Can you abide but even to think of
that cursed Courtier Ioabs speech: Art thou in health my brother ^. Sam. 20. 16.
Amasa, and leaning forward to kiss him, secretly to stabbe him with his
dagger that he died presently? These are the effects of this cruel vice, and
these are the fruits of such unnatural men as have carried faces under an hood
more than they would show, which assuredly the Lord has caused to be written
to confirm our hearts in an unfeigned loathing of it, seem it never such
wisdom in a wicked world, and bring it never such gain to the users of it.
Now on the contrary side consider again what a lasting praise is given to the
contrary, namely, to sincere and faithful, true and plain honest dealing
with all men. So shall it still appear unto you cleerer, that detestable in
the eyes of god is a glosing tongue, with an holow halting and dissembling
heart. What man is he, says ye prophet David, that lists to Psalm 34.
live and would feign see good days, let him keep his tongue from evil, and
his lips that they speak no guile. As if he should say, halters will be halted
withal, one way or other, let them do what they can, and so evil a nature
shall find either with God or man, or with both at last a deserved recompense,
and therefore be simple. Again, in an other place, Blessed is the man in whose
spirit Psalm 32.
there is no guile. And again, Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, or who
shall rest upon thy holy hill? Even the man says the Lord that amongst
other virtues has this by name to speak the truth, when he speaks, from
his heart. And what a speech is that of the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians,
Our reioicing is this, the testimony Psalm 15.
of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness, and not in
fleshly wisdom, we have had our conversation in the world. His conscience
bore him witness of plain dealing ever, and it ioyed him. Ours cry within us,
our dissembling is monstrous, and shall it never think we bring sorrow to us?
Read at your leisure the first of Syrach from the 33. verse to the end. Never
forget also the commendation that Christ gives to Nathaniel. But what should I
heap up any more testimonies? May I not still refer you to the fifth of
Matthewe, and you there see even this temptation also as one that should
assault the godly provided for in these words, Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God. Consider then of it well, Frailty, and be assured
where there is a blessing set upon the head of the virtue, there is also a
curse set upon the head of the vice ever. If they be blessed of the Lord,
that reserve in themselves, notwithstanding all temptations to the contrary,
an honest, faithful, simple, true dealing, and meaning heart toward all men,
and in whose spirits there is no guile, then as you live, you may assure your
soul the contrary are cursed before the face of him that is truth it self
and never any thing but truth. And whatsoever they gain and get in the
world, they gain and get the Devil and all with it, unless the Lord turn
their hearts. But let this suffice a while touching God and his word, how
they do allow this vice whereunto you feel your self so greatly tempted.
And a little also weigh his childrens judgment of it, the ancient grave and
godly fathers of his Fathers against it.
Church. S. Chrysostom writing upon the 7. of Matthewe and considering this
sly nature of men and women, so faithful in show, and so faithless in
proof, breaks out into this detestation of it, Fie, fie, says he, what a
course is this? If it be a shame to seem to be false and naught, is it not
more shame to be so in deed? Therefore either be as thou seem, or seem as
thou art ever. Where you plainly see, the true loathing, that this godly
father lodged of this vice in his heart. S. Austine speaking upon the words
of Christ to Nathaniel, concludes this glorious gloss that many make, and
this deep dissembling that many use, to be a special of the general head
fraud and deceit, the very naming whereof we all abhor. And upon these
words again of the Psalm: Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that
they speak no guile. Then says he, is it treacherous Fraud, Cum aliud in
pectore clausum habetur, aliud promittitur aut verbo aut action. When one
thing is hidden in heart, and an other thing promised either by word or
action. Now of the contrary virtue openly and expresselie he affirms,
that the simple God heartily loves, and an other shows who they be, even
they whose dealings are without Simplices qua si sine plicatione. Anselm. in
Romans 9.
pleites and fouldes and wrinckles every way. Again that simplicity and
plain open honesty, that is contrary to fraud and subtlety ever is
commended says Lactantius. And simplicity Lib. 1.
is ever joined with true wisdom says Tertullian. No virtue so necessary
betwixt man and man, as humble simplicity and modest gravity, says an
other. And to conclude, if we regard the sentences and judgments of any,
but our selves, certainly me think it should never be forgotten, what S.
Hierome so heartily speaks: Have ever such a regard of truth in all thy
doings, as if once thou have spoken Ad Caelant.
it, all one thou take thy self pressed with it, as if thou had sworn it
a thousand times. Thus see you secondly then the judgment of true Christian
teachers touching the vice you are so strongly tempted to stain your self
withal. Thirdly now view the opinion of the heathen concerning the same,
and if nature taught them very heartily even to abhor it, what will be the
end Frailty, can you suppose, either of your self, or any other, in whom
neither nature, nor the renewed light, and strength thereof the blessed word of
God can keep upright in ye Christian course of plain, true, faithful, honest
meaning, speaking, thinking, and dealing with all men. What is horrible deceit
and fraud says one of them a famous Counselor, but when one thing is
Heathen against it. Cic.
done, and an other presented in outward show? Therefore like of the one and
like of the other, hate the former and abhor the latter, thought this man see
you plainly in this place: And in an other place, he has this reason against
it. Suspicion (says he) of others, was never good, but the more any Offic. 2.
man or woman use dissembling and halting themselves, the more ever they will
stand in a suspicious fear of others that they likewise use it, therefore
never was it, nor ever shall be any commendable course in any. Again how
sounds it still unto all posterities, the discredit and shame of those
cauilling, glosing Thracians, who having taken truce for 30. days, spoiled
their enemies in the night with this shameful shift, that they named no truce
to be kept on the night but only on the day? And how lives still and will
do long on the contrary side the praise of M. Regulus amongst these
heathens, because he rather chose to die a cruel death, than once to break
the faith he had truly plighted, and any way by fraud, subtlety, and
dissembling treachery to take the course that others did? But I stay my self
and assure you of this, that in all crations and speeches, in all pleas, and
actions, for and against any man amongst them, honest plainness was ever an
argument of favor and succor, and holowe smoothing glauerie a note of
reprooch and an argument to persuade the contrary. Now therefore let us
gather up all these again together, and if heathens hate it, Christians
loath it, and the God of life and death abhor it, what strength should any
cause in the earth have to tempt you unto it? Nay Frailty, how dare you for
any favor or gain under the sun oppose your practice to his alowance,
whose disliking kills and casts into hell for evermore? Therefore I pray
you, be warned, and wipe off that mist of earthly covetousness, and ambition,
that bleareth your eyes, look with an other sight upon these things, and be
assured if the truth of God be assured, that since honest hearts, and plain
dealing has a blessing promised, the gain of flattery, glosing and halting,
is not the best wealth, nor the best wisdom. But his little is more, whose
heart is pure, than mountains of goulde and all honored state, that is crept
unto by deep dissembling, and so will the end prove in them or theirs, if
God be God. For they are accursed, if the pure in heart be blessed, as I have
often now repeated. And judge if the curse of God will want his effect at one
time or other, at first or at last. But now if all this should not yet fully
strengthen you (which God forbid) then proceed with the sentence in Matthewe,
and ponder well the other part also of it. For they shall see God, (says it.)
What is this? But the Lord shall reueile unto them daily more and more as a
reward of their sincerity and honest walking, his will, his mercy, his
favor, his comfortes, his joys prepared, and all his goodness in Jesus
Christ toward them. Which in deed is to see God as man is able to see him in
this life, and therefore is called blessedness, because the end of such
knowledge and sight is blessedness, as woe and misery is of the contrary.
Where by the way we are notably taught what is necessary in either man or
woman that shall ever profit by reading or hearing the word of God, namely a
pure heart, that is even a sincere mind and upright purpose to learn of the
Lord and not to do what they do, either for one cause or other whatsoever
beside, that a subtle mind can lay down. Which words of Christ include a
strong comfort to honest simplicity, and as touching a terror against
smoothing hypocrisy. For the one shall see God, the other shall never behold
him to their comfort, but all their reading, all their hearing, all their
knowledge, if the Lord bestow any, shall be to death, and not to life: to woe,
and not to well: a savor sending them body and soul to everlasting misery,
as by necessary consequence follows of the place. Yet do I not mean in all
this, that a man should all be open to every one, and in every matter: for
that were as great an extremity the other way, and full of inconveniences. And
I remember well what good counsel wise experienced Syrach gives in this
point: Namely, Syrac. 8. 19.
that we should not open our hearts to every one, least they be unthankful
to us and put us to reproof. And in an other place, Be not too humble in thy
13. 9. De Sacerdotio lib. 1.
wisdom. And I remember Chrysostom confesses of himself without fear of
blame for it, that he used a little subtlety to make S. Basil accept his
Bishopric and charge, which otherwise he would not. Therefore I say again
under the praise of honest simplicity and purity of heart, I do not shrowde
or bolster any plain foolishnes, and indiscreet seelinesse, but my speech
tends to the pressing of that, even to hell, if I can, which you Frailty are
tempted to: namely, to lie, flatter, cogge, halt, gloss, sooth, smooth,
croutch, creep, sigh, sorrow, sawne, and fall down at ones feet, swear and
protest liking, love, faithful service and friendship, and what not, that
may allure for credit and favor, lucre, and gain: when there is no more
truth of good meaning in you, than is in the devil, but only for your turn.
This is that that I inueigh against, and this is that God and all good me^ have
ever hated as I have proved. To carry two faces under an hoode for commodity,
and mine own safety. To serve God with lips and outward show, because the
law so presses me, if I will live in account, and inwardly to be a deep
dissembling hypocrite and a secret scoffer at his truth. To salute with a kiss
the ministers of the word, as Judas did his Master, and yet in hidden soul
to abhor them and their counsel as I do a tode, and every way to remain a
beastly man, unreformed in word, deed, and thought utterly, and to care more
in the very truth of my heart for one secret hour amongst my mates, where my
thrice damnable desire and unregenerated humor may be satisfied, than I do for
a thousand days in any minister or man's company in the world, whose tongue
rebukes, countenance frowneth, or heart misliketh my sin. To say as Ioab
said with a fleering face, How do thou my brother Amasa, And to stabbe him
presently with his dagger, or as we say commonly many an one of us, God give
you good morrow sir, and so forth, when vitter gaul in a festred heart
bids the Devil fetch you sir, and worse too, if I could tell how. To
prate and speak as a faithful subject, and yet to be a longing foe to work a
ruin, to my will. And what should I say? to ride and run, to watch and wait,
and perform all duties, as if I were the truest servant that draws breath,
and yet is my heart only bent upon my masters preferments, and not one jot
at all of faithful duty and affection in me to his person. This this
abominable and even more than devilish nature if more may be, is that I mean,
and that the world too much likes of, that you are tempted to Frailty, and
that Jesus Christ in this verse now named armeth his children and chosen
against. Wherefore my companion Frailty, weigh my drift, and mark my
proofs, consider what you desire, and by what means you incline to get your
desire. You desire but the world (to speak in a word) and for the world to
loose your soul what again is it? But if you take this course, you shall as
certainly loose both body and soul, as you now live and hear me, for it is
cursed of the Lord, and they that use it shall never see God. His nature is
all truth, and simplicity, and therefore what feloweship can ever he have
with a false gloser? But if you set the Lord before your eyes, hang upon his
mercy, and trust to his providence, dealing with all the world sincerely,
honestly, plainly, and uprightly, bestowing not face, and form, but even all
the love, and duty of your heart where it is due, be it to God or man, you
hear the Lord, you hear the Lord I say that never lied, Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God: you hear his servant David again,
Blessed is that man in whose spirit there is no guile, no guile I say again,
and the Lord give us strength.

Against discouragement from peacemaking, the seventh temptation.
YOur next complaint is of slackenesse that creeps upon you daily more and
more in laboring to pacify disagreeing neighbors, against which your
conscience cries, and indeed with cause: for it is a great offense, hateful
to God, and hurtful to the common wealth in general, and to many a man in
several. But in the name of God, Frailty, strengthen your self by an earnest
consideration of the great excellency of that Christian virtue of peace and
unity, and fix not your eye so much upon the acceptaunce of men, that have
ever had their corruptions and ever will. The virtue you shall find in very
high degree commended unto men by the holy scriptures of God Scriptures teach
unity.
in many places, and by many arguments: but I will refer the noting and
naming of them to your own diligence, and content my self in a short speech
with a very few: Beginning first with that notable Psalm of the Prophet
David wholly spent in this Psalm 133.
matter. Where the first argument is this: That which is good ought ever 1.
greatly to be regarded and maintained amongst men, but much more if it both be
good and pleasant too, for these both do not ever concur together. But such a
thing is peace and love amongst men. For behold how good and pleasant a
thing it is brethren to dwell together in unity, behold I say and even mark
it earnestly. Therefore it ought to be regarded and maintened ever to the
uttermost of our powers amongst us. His second argument is this, that which 2.
casts a comfort from it like the precious ointment that was appointed for
the priests of the Lord Aaron and his successors, and even such a comfort as
that ointment has when it is not sparingly dropped, but even plentifully
powered, and so plentifully as that it runs down even from the top of the
head to the skirts of his clothing, that is a notable thing amongst men, and by
all means to be retained and sought: but this is peace and unity, love and
agreement amongst them. Therefore to be regarded and maintained greatly. His
third argument is this: That which 3.
being had is to men as the dew descending from the mountains to ye ground, and
being wanting, is as the want of moisture to the earth, that is thrice
needful, gainefull, and good to men: but such is unity, peace, and love,
even like the dew of Hermon that fell upon the hill of Sion. Therefore to be
regarded and maintained greatly. His last, and not his least argument wherewith
he ends both this matter and 4.
that Psalm withal, is this: That which pulls upon men even all the
temporal blessings of God, and life for evermore, that is a thousand times
profitable both to them and theirs: but such (says the prophet) is peace and
unity, love and agreement amongst men, therefore to be regarded and maintained
greatly. Thus you see one man's judgment, and that such a man's as had abundance
of Gods most blessed spirit to direct his heart to think, and pen to write,
and as in truth was every way then renowned, and now remains by the Lord
himself in high degree above others commended to us. Unto whom if you add
some other Scriptures, you shall more peradventure be confirmed with
diversity, though this indeed were sufficient. Consider therefore also those
often repetitions of Christ in the gospel, My peace I give John 34.
to you, my peace I leave with you, love one an other, for this is my
commandment, that you love one an other as I have loved you: and hereby shall
men know, that you are my disciples, if you love one an other, yea a new
commandment I give you, that you love one an other. Would ever the Lord
Jesus have thus gone over and over it again, and iterated charge upon charge
in this order, if it had not been a most excellent virtue in every country,
town, and house, love and agreement? Mark again that most earnest
exhortation of the Apostle Paul unto the same in his epistle to the Ephesians,
desiring them Ephesians. 4. 1.
in his bonds for the Lords cause that they would support one an other
through love, indeuoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace. And why? For there is one body and one spirit, one hope of calling,
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, etc. A most
vehement and urging reason if I should follow it and lay it plainer open. And
mark a multitude of other places to the same conclusion, which assuredly the
Lord would never have uttered, but that the price of peace, unity and love is
very precious in his eyes, and to all estates a most sovereign good in the
world. See also how sensibly Things in nature teach unity.
things in nature carry us to this consideration. For by experience we find
it, that if the heavens agree to moysten Hose. 2. 22.
the earth, and the earth being moystened to give her increase, we are all the
Deuter. 28. 32.
better for their unity, and if they should but even a little while either of
them deny his office, quickly and greatly should we feel the smart of it
also. Therefore judge by this the fruit of good agreement. Again if the
humors in men's bodies be at an agreement, not one above an other, but very
equally as is best proportioned and mixed, all the whole body is comfortable,
prospers, and does well: but if once any one abounds or wants, and their
sweet harmony is broken, then by and by the whole body feels it, and if a
reconciliation be not made with convenient speed, it perishes. Therefore
judge by this the fruit of good agreement. Again if the members of the body
well agree to do their several duties, all is well: but if either eye deny
to guide, foot to go, hand to reach, stomach to digest, or so forth,
straight the whole body falls to hurt. And therefore see by this the fruit
of good agreement. Last of all even in musical instruments mark how well we
like the noise so long as every string does keep his just proportion, and how
presently we stop our ears from hearing, if any one be out of tune, twitched
up too high, or let down too low, and all the music is marred. All which
and many more in nature sound unto us, and as they can deliver it out that
great is the fruit, comfort, and good of peace and love amongst men, and as
great the evil, as odious the sight, if any one member in his own vain
conceit be twitched over high or negligently slacked over much, whereby that
fit proportion is not kept, that ever sounds and seems sweet. For then will
follow assuredly ere the time be long the proof of Christ his speech, A
kingdom divided in it self can never stand. And that other also of the Poet.

By concord small to much is brought,

And discord great things brings to naught.

Upon al which then gather this conclusion, that if this great virtue of peace
and love be to the Lord himself so acceptable, and to all estates in the
world so profitable, must it not needs be in it self, howsoever the world
accepts it, a most singular thing, and a most deserved praise to a man to be
a peacemaker amongst men? Certainly it must. But we need not to gather it
by conclusion. For the Lord Christ himself has said it in the same 5. of
Matthewe, as preparing strength before hand for this very same temptation,
that now you feel, That blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called
the children of God. And never, as I have now often said, does he set a
blessing upon the head of any thing, but the same in it nature, and before
his majesty is a worthy thing. Wherefore this place should be to you even a
thousand arguments to confirm your obedience in so Christian a duty, as
peacemaking is, and a thousand spurs to prick you daily to it when
opportunity is offered, and occasion given to the same. For Frailty, what can
you resolve this speech of Christ into, if you mark it well, but into this
sense? As if he should have said to his disciples in this order: I know the
manifold discomfortes that shall be given to all men, and especially to you
ministers in that duty of peacemaking, which yet both belongs to al men,
and especially to your calling, notwithstanding ever to endeavor so far as
power shall serve. And therefore least hereafter, when it shall so fall out,
either you or any other should be tempted through men's unthankfulness, to
the giving over of that so thrice needeful a thing, I forewarne you here before
hand, and even give you in charge as I am your Lord and master, that you
never regard, cleave, and stick in the acceptaunce or thankfulness of men
for your pains, and travel, in this matter. For if you do, you shall be
discouraged. But ever look you up to heaven, what is there thought of it,
and to the better sort of the world also, whom the Lord has given eyes to
discern good things with all. And whatsoever you find at men's hands for so
godly a labor, you shall well know it, find it, and feel it, that with the
Lord in heaven blessed for ever shall be the peacemakers, and both of him and
his true children here in earth, that know what is what, they shall be
counted, taken, and acknowledged for the sons of almighty God, that shall
live with their Father for evermore. Which is enough Frailty, if there be
either touch or taste, or any feeling in the world in us, to stay us for ever
in this duty, be the perverseness of men never so much. For what can we
desire more than to have our doings accepted of the Lord, and our selves
assured of everlasting reward at his hands for men? Let men be mad and mad
again, let their crooked affections work and writhe them whither they can,
and even all unthankful speeches burst from them against us for our goodwill,
that may be imagined, my God is pleased, should a Christian heart think, with
my endeavor, and his acceptaunce is my satisfaction, his content is my rest,
and a sufficient requital of all my pains. Otherwise Frailty, I pray you
even earnestly consider it: What love of God is that in us, that the love of
man drives out of us, what care to please him is that, that men's displeasure
quenches? Fie, fie, it is too gross, and ten thousand wonders may it be, that
ever any of us can sleep with this imagination, that we love God above all,
and yet in such things as by name are commanded and by promises commended to
us, wholly guide our obedience according to men's acceptance or not acceptance,
liking, or misliking. Wherefore on still Frailty, with this duty and endeavor
to reconcile disagreeing minds in the name of God, and were the bitter gaul,
the spiteful peevishness and all the unthankfulness of the Devil and his
whole host in every man and woman you deal withal, yet have you comfort
enough if either the Lords acceptance can content you, or your own promised
reward and blessing please you, or good account to be one that God has
chosen for his child, with the better sort of the world comfort you. Now by
the way of a little digression, in hope I do not weary you, I would also wish
you a little to consider that if this peace and agreement amongst neighbors
in town or country be such, and so sweet in the sense of the Lord, as that
even the preseruers of it, and restorers, when it is broken are so heartily
blessed, and accounted for it the sons of God, must it not needs follow
that those things likewise are in high account before his majesty, which
being in men and women do most mightily maintain this blessed virtue in all
and every societis under heaven? Surely it must needs follow. And what are
they? Many and diverse are they if one should make a curious recital, but for
my part when I mark the course of things, and the causes of good agreement in
any place, I think but even especially of these three. First a patient and
meek nature in our selves able to bear and tolerate something, without
mounting into the house top immediately, and flashing out all on fire by and by
upon the sight or hearing of it. Secondly, a well judging heart of others, till
we be certain of the contrary. And lastly, a good tongue. Must not I say (if
peace be so pleasing to the Lord) these things also be precious in his eyes,
which all the world knows to be nourishing nurses of the same wheresoever
they are? If peacemaking pull a blessing upon us, as the Lord lives these so
great preseruers of peace shall have a happy reward. And if this be true, then
on the other side again the contrary vices for their contrary effect must
needs be as loathsome, hateful and accursed: Namely, an impatient, hasty,
fierce, froward, furious nature, ye is as short as moss, that has never
fought withal, and foiled any affection, but cleaving still in pure
naturalles, is unregenerated and ever casts out the savor of old Adam upon
every occasion be it but a trifle. Secondly, a suspicious misdeeming mind of
every body, that they say thus of us, work this against us, or at least
think thus of us, when in truth it is nothing so. O poison of peace in any
kingdom, country, town, house, or person living in the world, this
misdeeming mind. And to a man's self there is no more twitching torment under
the son. For it is even a worm that is ever gnawing and ever biting, and can
never be contented. Lastly, an evil tongue, a peaceles tongue, that can never
be quiet from prittle prattle, from scanning this neighbors wealth, that
neighbors wit, this man's doings, and that man's sayings, and from coursing even
the whole country over, til al men have been within the speech of our tongues,
drawn out of us by the power peradventure of a pot too much, or such a like
influence. Must not these things I say, and the owners of them be accursed, as
sure as they live, if peace and love and good agreement amongst men be of the
Lord blessed? They must, they must Frailty. For all the world knows the
venom of these things in any town, and their mighty working against unity,
and therefore I pray you, and I pray you heartily consider of it, and cast
even a long look upon them, such an one as we do when we would mark a thing
indeed, and bear it away. And I doubt not but God shall give you strength
against your temptation. There is no one thing so great a nurse of two of them,
namely, of a misdeeming mind, and a prattling tongue, as idleness is, when a man
has nothing to do, and to apply himself unto, but to sit on a bulk in
the street, or bench in a tavern, or an ale house, and to wet his tongue with
drink, and dry it with talking, or when a woman has no settled government of
her self in house, but is in the number of those that the Apostle Paul
speaks of, which 1. Tim. 5. 23.
being idle learn to go about from house to house. Yea, they are not only
idle, but also pratlers and busy bodies, speaking things which are not
comely. Therefore whosoever will be a preserver of peace, he must be an enemy
to these curses assuredly, and hear more with two ears, than he speaks with
one tongue. But I weary you with this digressio^, which is longer than I meant,
and therefore I cut it off, again and again requiring of you, that you never
hang upon the account of men in any thing, that ever you go about being
commanded by the express word of God, but fully suffice your self with the
acceptance of God. and that which you have here an assurance of, if you be a
peacemaker. Blessed shall you be, and ever accounted both with God and his true
children the son of God. And if this will not content you, quicken you,
strengthen and stay you in this virtue, but that worldly ingratitude shall
quench you, and draw you to such extremity as you spoke of, certainly
Frailty you deceive your self, there is no true godliness in you, but even
your name is too gentle for your nature, you are become plain infidelity. But
I hope the best, and perform you no less, if you regard your own comfort.
Sufficient is this yet once again, if you be the Lords, Blessed are the
peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.

The eight Temptation.
Frailty. ONce more would I trouble you Faith, if I might before we end, and
it is in this, I fear my nature if persecution should arise for religion. And
what should I do to obtain strength?


Faith. There are many treatises of this point, godly, and comfortable
whereunto for larger discourse I refer you and wish you to peruse them. For
mine own part whenever I think of this matter, these and such other
considerations seem most sweet unto me as yet: Further trial shall give further
assault, but God will be ever good to Israel. First it is ratified, decreede,
and established by the Lord our God that through many tribulations we must
enter into the kingdom of heaven. And therefore Acts 14.
since it must be so, so be it in the name of God, and be it unto us, as it
pleases him: necessary things are to be borne necessarily and with cheer.
For in vain do we grudge to do what we must needs do, or grieve to bear
what we must needs bear. Heathens and Pagans have made a comfort of
necessity, and should Christians in better cause bewray more weakness? No,
God forbid. But let it ever be our speech rather than theirs in such matters as
our God sends and lays upon us, Ferenda quaecunque sunt. They are welcome
what soever they be. Secondly, this decree and course that the Lord has laid
down for his children, thus to keep, proceeds not of anger and displeasure,
or of a mind delighting in our woe, and seeking to punish us, but of great
love and most fatherly affection toward us, and in deed wonderfully works
our better being, and therefore tenns thousand times welcome should this good
will of his be to us, and very far from shaking us from the true profession
of his name, and truth. For his affection, we hear his own mouth speak it,
that whom he loves, he rebukes and chasteneth, many a time repeating the
same that we might remember it. And Apoc. 4.
for the other we see it, and know it by the proof of every days experience.
For what makes us see the gaul of Satan's heart toward us, and even our
everlasting overthrow sworn of him by his diuelhood, if by any means he
can work it, to the end we may perfectly hate so perfect a foe, and yet so
^^^ring a friend? The cross. What rowseth us out of dull security, and cold
conceit of our own wantes or the necessity of Gods protection and succor,
and makes not only our tongues to speak, but the fire to kindle and burn
within us, and so our prayers to have spirit and power before the Lord? The
Cross. What kills this intemperancie of our affections, and this blustering
impaciencie of our natures, and makes us meek, mild, humble, gentle, and
like lambs, not lions, appointed to the slaughter? The cross. What works
the decaie even of the whole old Adam in us with all his lusts,
concupiscence, and venom, and daily raises up, as a means, the new man with all his sweet motions, heavenly and reformed actions? The Cross. What makes
us spitte in the face of this flattering world, whose love causes loss both
of body and soul in the world to come, and to be content to part with her
paps, and to bid al her pleasures adue? The cross. Lastly, what makes us
tear our bellies from the earth whereto they cleave so fast, and lift up our
heads to heaven, long for the life that lasts, and desire heartily to be
clothed with our house which is from above? The cross. Wherefore then since it
is decreed, and that in love to our so great good, that all which will live
godly in Jesus Christ must suffer persecution, what cause have we, would the
Lord voutsafe us eyes, with the cross to be discouraged and driven from the
Lord? Thirdly it never happens to us by fortune and chance, or by ignorance
in our God, or inabilitie to let it, if it pleased him, but by his knowledge,
by his will, and by his hand, and he is our father, bound unto us in league
and covenant of love, that of his part shall never be broken while we hang of
him. The mother may forget ye child that is her flesh before he can forget us,
and as well can a man suffer the apple of his eye to be pricked, as he us to be
hurt, if we cleave to him: then judge if his cross should ever dismaie us.
Fourthly it is no strange thing or unheard of, or unseen before, that
befalls to us when we are persecuted, but such as all our brethren have
tasted, found, and felt before us, and why then should we faint when we drink
but of the same cup that the dearest saints and souls now blessed with the
Lord, have begun to us in? Cast your eyes about, and see the course of times
although I know you know it well enough. Began not Abell unto us in this
cup and course, as soon as ever the Lord bewrayed his love unto him, before his
brother? Followed not the Patriarchs, and Prophets, men and women, elde and
young, in their times, and measures even till Christ came? Then was it not the
cup that his own self began to his children in, and the baptism
wherewith he was baptized? Followed not his disciples sent out into the world
as sheep amongst wolves, whipped and beaten, checked and snubbed, imprisoned
and cheyned, etc. Followed not again after them those thousands of his
children under the primitive persecution, some scalded, some burned, some
broyled, some hanged, some headed some thrown down from the rocks upon stakes,
some stabbed in with forkes, some racked and torn in pieces, their tongues cut
out, their eyes bored out, their flesh twitched off with pinsons, women's
breasts seared off with hot yrons, pricked under the nails with needles, and
a thousand ways tormented? Yea was it not ever true with the godly, In hoc
vocati estis: For this end were ye called? And good Lord then why should not
a common case be a common comfort? Why should any man or woman that loves God
seek or wish a privilege above all the children of God, that ever were and
even above the son of God himself Christ Jesus? Is it not honor enough,
mercy enough, and favor enough to be dealt withal, as they were? Therefore
the community of it to us with all our brethren and sisters, and even with our
eldest brother Christ Jesus, should stay our hearts whenever it pleases the
Lord to send it. Fifthly the cause being not ours, but the Lord our Gods, and
good, should also confirm us. The short time that it can endure, were it
(suppose) as long as we live should comfort us. For our life is but a flower,
as grass, as smoke, as a bubble of the water, and as the vainest fickle fading
thing that you can imagine. Again that passed promise from the Lord of life
and truth, sealed with the blood of his own son unto us, the sweetness
whereof all the tongues of men and Angels can never express, That he will
never lay more upon us than he will make us able to bear, should be like a
thousand stays round about us to houlde us up. The promises of peace,
comfort, and quiet, for evermore above measure and concept of man in heaven, if
we continue faithful to the end, should hold us up. That sentence passed in
the Lords court of bastardie and consequently of deprivation of all
inheritance, if we be without correction, should hold us up. And what should I
go any further? The examples of our brethren of al rallings, of all ages, men
and women, that have constantly carried their cross, and never delivered it up,
till they delivered soul and all to their God, should hold us up. Wherefore
Frailty, even as Judas the Machabee could encourage his men not to fear the
multitude of their enemies, neither to be afraid of their assault but to
remember how their fathers were delivered in the red sea when Pharaoh
pursued after them, so say I to you and to my self, let us never fear
affliction nor the evil day, for our momentanie cross causes an everlasting
weight of glory. But let us remember the firm faith of our fathers, of our
mothers, of our brethren, and friends, let us look upon their paciencie,
upon their constancy, their hope, and beseech the living God we may follow
their good steps, and stay in strength upon his mercy, whatsoever he
sends us, knowing it, as we know we live, that though our brains cleave to
the wales, though our bones be strowed in the streets, and our blood run
down every channel, yet shall we rise again, restored by the power of our
God, be gathered into his barn as his pure wheat, our blood revenged, we
crowned, and our tongues sound the praise of him that sits upon the throne
with majesty and honor above all concept of any earthly heart.


Frailty. O but Faith, the world will give such a spiteful censure of a man
or woman's life, religion, honesty, wisdom, and such like, as that it is even
a hell to hear them, when the Lord does exercise us. For it was ever, and I
think ever will be the concept of flesh and blood, that a good man and woman
truly religious, truly honest, and sufficiently wise, cannot be so plagued,
as they term it, of God at any time, and therefore the cross must needs
testify to the world a want in all these.


Faith. It is most certain and daily found what you say, yet is there nothing
under heaven more absurd than that opinion. For loved not God Abell, Abraham,
Isaak, and Jacob, loved he not his Prophets, loved he not his own son and
all that followed his steps to this day? Were none of them of a true
religion, of an honest life, and wise enough to take that course in the world
that God allowed? Yet all of them plagued he as they call it. And never any
further humbled in this world than Christ himself, and therefore prosperity
or adversity may not be taken for signs ever of favor or displeasure. But
the worst man most quiet often in this world, and most honored, loved,
promoted, and renowned, his deserved torment being deferred to an other day,
and the truest christian most troubled, tossed, rejected, and humbled, his
comfort and reward remaining for him in an other world. But beside all this
plain demonstration of a tried truth, use with your self Frailty to oppose
against that concept of the world, the sentence of the Lord our God next
following, in the fifth of Matthewe, after those that now have been
considered of, Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. And think with your self as I
have now often said, that if our God set a blessing upon it, what skilleth it
what the whole world, and ten thousand worlds more if they were extant, does
judge? Shall the voice of man be the guide of our course, and the line of our
life? Shall man's judgment or Gods judgment stand in the later day? O
Frailty, we may not hang upon so broken a reed as flesh and fleshly wit is.
We may not be lifted up with man's liking, unless it have further warrant: nor
cast down with his disliking, unless we know he so deemeth justly.

And therefore again I say consider of this comfort. Consider of this world,
and consider of the world to come, the one is transitory, the other permanent:
the one full of woe and secret sorrow in the very midst of pomp, the other
full of joy, comfort and solace, and that without all ending. Then, whether is
here good to be happy, and there unhappy, here judged miserable, and there
found most blessed, judge your self even with very reason. Certainly
therefore it is a comfort sufficient, so known to be by Christ that gave it,
and ever has and shall comfort the children of god against worldly conceit,
blessed are they that for a good cause suffer persecution, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. That is, all comfort possible to be thought of, and ten
thousand times more. This was Paul's comfort in the midst of all his misery,
and therefore he boldly and cheerfully says, he never counted the afflictions
of the world worthy the joy that should be revealed. This comforted David
also, that he perished not in his affliction, as himself witnesses, and Psalm
119.
as that speech by comparion may show, I should utterly have fainted, but that
I Psalm 27.
believe verily to see the Lord in the land of the living. And (what should I
name them) this ever has comforted first, or last, less, or more, yet ever
sufficiently any that were the Lords. But see further how not only thus in
generality against persecution it pleased Christ to strengthen our weakness,
but even in specialitie also against those kinds which most bitterly taste unto
us, and shake us sore, if we be not strong, to wit, reproach, and report. For,
Blessed are you (says he) when men revile you, and shall falsely say all
manner of evil saying by you, for my name sake, rejoice and be glad, for great
is your reward in heaven, a saying never to be forgotten of us whilst the
life is in us. For, the gaul of these Crosses is not little, and the power of
this assault has appeared not as feeble in great Prophets and members of the
Church. The very words also of Christ his comfort insinuate a secret force
above many others of this temptation. For he bids them rejoice, and
promises great reward in heaven, as forseeing a great downfall both of heart
and countenance in man, when he is once touched either with reuiling speeches,
to his face, or false reports behind his back. Wherefore to conclude and
leave you now to your other readings of this matter, I pray you Frailty open
your eyes, or rather desire the Lord to open them, that you may both now in
the day of peace, and whenever also it shall please the Lord further to try
you, see with your eye, hear with your ear, and believe with your heart your
offered comfort in the word, both against al other, and against this
temptation by name of persecution. The word teaches, and we know it is
decreede by the Lord to be the lotte of his dear ones ever in this world, and
therefore welcome be it. The word teaches it, and we know it, much good is
wrought in us by it, and therefore welcome be it. The word teaches it, and we
know it, no chance nor fortune, but the will of our heavenly father lays it
upon us, and therefore welcome be it. We know it is no new thing, or unseen
before, but the old portion of the godly that have ever been before us, and
therefore welcome be it. The cause is not ours when it is a truth, but his,
that made us, and therefore welcome be it. We have a promise we shall not be
oppressed with more than we may bear, and therefore welcome be it. We know
we are children, if as children we be corrected, and therefore welcome be it.
We are told we are bastards, if we be without it and therefore welcome be it.
And all our forefathers have patiently carried it, and now are rewarded,
therefore welcome be it. Welcome I say the cross in general, and persecution
for truth all or part, as it pleases God, and welcome in particular this kind
of cross, if so our God will, reuilings, reprochings, reportings false and
unjust. For we know our case, the plea is ended, and sentence is given never
to be revoked, blessed are we, good cause we have to rejoice and be glad, for
great is our reward in heaven. O the God of heaven and father of mercy
strengthen us, that these sweet promises may prevail with us, and that our
eyes may see the comfortes of his word. What should fear us Frailty, that
have such a God, and that stand in such a state? I pray you look up, and
clasp your God in your arms, embrace his mercy, believe his truth, and as you
live, though you be afflicted on every side, yet shall you not be in
distress: though you be in doubt, yet shall you not despair: though you be
persecuted, yet shall you not be forsaken: though you be cast down, yet shall
you not perish: and though every where you bear about in your body, the
dying of the Lord Jesus, yet shall the life of Jesus appear in your body, and
there is neither life nor death, Angels, Principalities, nor powers, things
present, or to come, height or depth, or any other creature, that ever shall
be able to separate you from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus.


Frailty. The Lord change me and I shall be changed, and greatly both ought
I, and do I thank you Faith for this conference, beseeching you still to
pray for me, as for one whose name and nature you know but too well. I can
promise nothing, but seeing what I would do I leave my self to his mercy
that is able to make me do both what I ought, and would do. And so the Lord
keep us both.


Faith. Amen Frailty, Amen. And the Lord give us eyes to see what it is to
have a true heart to God, and to embrace true religion. Is it not to stand in
possession of all these heavenly promises and whatsoever befalls to us in
this world, to be happy and blessed in it, and by it? Be it poverty, be it
sorrow, be it oppression or whatsoever? And contrariwise, what it also is to
be of a profane heart, and of an uncircumcised life. Surely even to stand as
deprived of all these comfortes, and if we be poor to be also accursed in our
poverty, in our sorrow, and whatsoever befalls unto us grievous in this
world. The Lord I say give us eyes to see it, and hearts to think of it. For,
full well we know that were every one of us a Monarch of a whole world by
himself, they being as this world is, the glory both of them and us must
pass away like a ship in the water, whose tract cannot be seen again, like
an arrow through the air, or a weauers shuttle through his work, like a fading
flower, soudenlie plucked up and withered, like grass, like smoke, and like
the bubble of the water. We shall be forgotten with all our pomp, as the
trauailer is that tarrieth but a night, our honor shall come to an end as the
players part upon the stage, our doings, sayings, looks, gestures, states,
and majesty's shall be rolled up as a screule, and cast into the office of
forgetfulness, where nothing can be found again. And then what remains? I
say what remains? any thing but woe and worms, if we have contemned religion
and lived disobediently against the Lord? any thing but vexation and torment
both of the body and soul in hell fire? Will then swearing be liked, or
drunkenness, or whoring, or tippling, and tauerning, sporting in vanity,
lascivious talking, writing, or looking, carding, and dising, roisting and
rouing, pride, and excess, or any kind of sin detested of the Lord? Will
then a dissembling time-seruer not be uncased? Will then an unjust servant not
be found out? Will then an unfaithful wife not be discovered? or a beastly
furious, frantic husband, not be rewarded? Will then any thing abide the
face that comes in the clouds with thousands of Angels, but only a
religious heart, and soul, that has labored to know, and endeavored to live,
trusting only to the mercy of God in Christ for all wantes to be pardoned?
Alas we know it, even as we know we live, it will not: but destruction and
death shall then be to the man or woman for ever that lewdly has lived in this
world, and comfort endless to the contrary. Therefore once again I say, the
Lord give us eyes to discrie betimes the reward and end of true religion,
and of a reformed mind and life in that day, even for his Christ's sake our
blessed Lord and Savior.


Amen.
FINIS.
A prayer for a family in the Morning.
O Most gracious God and loving Father, the very comfort that any sinful
soul can have, when we miserable sinners here met together, do consider of the
great mercy and goodness, that we have ever since we were borne, and before
found, and daily do find at thy Majesty's hands, together with our great
unkindness showed every way to thee again for ye same, we must needs confess,
and even do from the bottom of our hearts acknowledge, that marvelous is
thy mercy in sparing us still to live, and in not consuming us away from the
earth, and from before thee. For have not thou, O dear God, of thy free mercy
before ye foundations of the world were laid, chosen and elected us for thy
children, when others as good as we by nature shall burn in hell eternally,
being rejected of thee in that hidden counsel of thine? Have not thou to our
endless comfort certified and made known unto our spirits the same? Have thou
not created us neither beasts, todes, worms, or any such like ouglie
creatures, but in thine own image, according to thy likeness, to rule over the
fishes in the sea, over the fowls of heaven, and over every thing that
moves upon the earth? And when being thus created innocent, yet we persisted
not in the same, but fell into the curse that brings eternal death, did
thou not so pity us, as that for our redemption and safety, thou grudgest not
unto us, and for us to be powered out the heart blood of Jesus Christ thy
only son our savior, no other means being, whereby we could be saved? Have
thou not by thy holy spirit wrought faith in our hearts to believe by him,
and for him to be justified before thee? Have thou not in some measure begun
the death of sin in us, and wrought our sanctification? Enioie we not the
benefits of thy word, the freedom of conscience, great peace and plenty in
outward things, with many and infinite benefits more, waking and sleeping at
home and abroad, in our selves and our friends? For all which, O good Lord,
what do we? Are we thankful unto thee for them? Do we often think of
them, and labor to know thee and to serve thee with a perfect heart, and a
willing mind for them? No, no, dear God, we do not, we do not as we ought to
do. But with pleasure or profit, with vanity or self love, we are carried
away, spend our days in iniquity, careless and unfeeling of our sin, and
there is no goodness in us: yet is there mercy with thee, O Lord, and pardon
to repentance. Wherefore we all here met together at this time before thy
majesty, humbly confessing our wantes, most entirely beseech thee for Jesus
Christ his sake to have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us, most merciful
Father, and forgive us all that is past, strengthen us hereafter, that daily
both in body and soul, we may glorify thee more than we have done, yielding
thanks daily for daily benefits, and striving in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life. But because we cannot but offend and
fall diverse ways, good Lord, for thy mercy sake pearce our hearts with a
feeling of the same, and never suffer us to go on with dull and dead souls,
not seeing or sighing for our offenses. As a special means to keep us in
obedience before thee, O dear Father, work in us a continual, and an
effectual remembrance, that we shall not always live here in the show of
this wretched world, that does so please us now, but that a day will come,
when the trumpe shall sound, the dead shall arise, and all we shall appear
before thy tribunal seat of judgment, there to receive according to our
deeds without respect of persons. O good Lord give us a remembrance, and a
feeling of the unspeakable comfort, and eternal weight of glory, which in
that day shall be given unto us, if in this life we serve and please thee. And
contrariwise even terrify our consciences and let us as it were see before our
faces, the dreadful judgments, and the fearful torments, that both in
body and soul they shall be sure to have for ever more in the pit of hell,
which in this life do not serve and please thee, but follow their own
fancies and wicked delights. Give us an hatred of sin, and a true love of
righteousness. Bless thy word ever more with fruit unto our souls when we
do hear it, give us a desire to hear it often. Remove, O Lord in thy good
time, such hindrances of the fruit thereof, as are amongst us, give it full
course, and send forth laborers into thy harvest, which not for filthy
lucre and gain, but of love and zeal to thee and thy people may preach thy
word sincerely. Bless us O Lord from all hypocrisy, glosing and halting
before thee. And because we little know how soon thou shall send this
pampered flesh of ours to the worms, stop our breath and call away for our
souls to come unto thee, whether this day or no before the evening, blessed
Father, for Jesus Christ his sake, prepare and make us ready for thee, that
when the hour comes, we may neither fear, nor faint in faith, but joyfully,
without any skrikes and cries of desperation, and of a troubled and vexed
conscience, pass away in full hope and assurance, that all our sins are
wiped away in the blood of Jesus Christ, and we to thee in him so reconciled,
that life for evermore is certain unto us. Last of all good father with most
humble and hearty thanks for thy goodness to us this night let thy merciful
eye look upon us this day, and so keep us body and soul, that being
occupied in our several callinges we may be safe by thee from al our enemies
and live to thee, or die to thee, as it best shall please thy gracious goodness.
These things O Lord, and whatsoever else we have need of, grant us, for
Christ his sake, in whose name we ask them, saying, as he has taught us:

OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven, give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us,
and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, Amen.

Let thy mighty hand and out stretched arm O Lord be still our defense, thy
mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ our salvation, thy true and holy word
our instruction, thy grace and holy spirit our comfort and consolation unto
the end, and in the end. Amen.

The Lord bless us and save us, the Lord make his face to shine upon us and
be merciful unto us, the Lord turn his favorable countenance toward us,
and this day and evermore vouchsafe to send us his peace, Amen.

The blessing of God alminghtie, the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, be
amongst us and remain with us both now and for ever,

Amen.
An other for the same at night.
O Immortal God creator of heaven and earth, before whom all creatures fear
and tremble, were it not that thou have commanded us, never durst we appear
before thee, so corrupt is our nature, and so many are our sins. But good
Lord thou do bid, and therefore we obey: thou do call, and therefore we
come, give us spirits to pray aright. First then here met together dear
father, we yield thy majesty most humble and hearty thanks, for all the
mercies that ever thou have bestowed upon us, in body or mind, in our selves
or in ours, private or common, temporal or eternal. Many and marvelous have
they been, and still are upon us, yea even good Lord past finding out. This
day what thou have done for us, which of us knows or is able to express?
Father of heaven forgive us that we cannot acknowledge them or praise thee for
them as we ought, and quicken us in this duty more and more. Pardon and
forgive us whatsoever we have offended thee withal this day, or ever before,
either in thought, word, or deed, yea even our secret sins, such as we have
committed and know not of, remit them unto us for Christ's sake. Change us O
Lord, and we shall be changed. Create in us clean hearts, and renew a right
spirit within us. Break the strength of sin, that would subdue us, more and
more. And O merciful father, so frame these hearts of ours within us, that we
may more delight to live according to thy will, than to enjoy all the world,
and all the pleasures therein. Lay it often good Lord before our eyes by thy
remembering spirit, that thou have not breathed the breath of life into us,
that we should live as we list, but that in holiness and righteousness we
should walk before thee all our days. Lay it before us O Lord, that the
time will come when the trumpe shall sound, the dead shall rise, and we, even
we here met together at this time, all and every one of us shall most
assuredly stand before thy judgment seat with naked hearts, with open and
unfolded consciences, there to give an account how we have so done. In which
day, O the joy, O the endless joy that they shall have, who waining
themselves from the glistering show of this wretched world, in heart and
truth, have sought and served thee. Come, come, ye blessed of my father, to
their comfort shall they bear, and possess the kingdom prepared for you. But
woe, woe to all careless livers in that flerie day, they shall drink the
wine of the wrath of God, be tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy
Angels, and before the lamb, they shall have no rest day nor night, and the
smoke of their torment shall ascend for evermore. Father of haven have mercy
upon us, knit these hearts of ours fast unto thee, and now, whil we have time,
give us grace rightly to think of these things. O continue thy word of truth
amongst us ever to our comfort. Let the seed thereof now sown in our
hearts, take such deep root, that neither the burning heat of persecution
cause it to wither, nor the thornie cares of this world, riches, or voluptuous
living choke it, but as seed sown in good ground, it may bring forth fruit
according to thy pleasure. O father give grace that when we hear, or find by
thy word any sin that is in us touched, we may strive and study without
delay willingly to reform it. Keep us good God yt we never swerve for the
fear of man from our own true knowledge, beco^ming seruers of time, and
deniers of thee. Keep us from all hardness of heart, contempt of thy word, and
from all dissembling of sincerity, increase true love amongst us more and
more, stay our heady wrathful and wicked affections more and more. And every
way good Lord renew us to thy liking. Bless thy whole Church O God with
graces necessary, this parcel of it our native land and country, dear father
bless it still with continuance of thy truth. Lessen in it daily the number of
blind and wilful Papists, profane Atheists, and increase the number of thy
true children. O press us not dear God with the weight of our ingratitude,
whose lives and knowledge answer not the days that we have had: work with
us hence forward for thy mercies sake. Preserve unto us long alive good Lord
our gracious prince and governor, multiply thy spirit upon her, that still
more and more she may seek and set out, keep and maintain that which
pleases thee. Give to her honorable counsel graces necessary for so high a
calling. Bless all other Nobles, Magistrates, and the whole body of this
realm, with true hearts to thee, and this country. Increase in Israel the
number of true watchmen, whose hearts may seek thee and thy people, and not
their own glory or commodity. Bring to thy told by them such wandering
remnants as are thine, and O Lord be gracious to our kindred and friends in
the flesh, lighten their hearts with the sun of understanding, that they and
we acknowledging one truth, may glorify thee in the true and constant
profession of the same all the days of our life. Comfort O Christ thy
afflicted members wheresoever or howsoever troubled, and grant us peace, if it
be thy pleasure, in our days. Finally, because the night is now upon us, and
we ready to take our rest, let the bed O Lord strike into our hearts that the
grave is almost ready for us. Which of us can tell, whether these eyes of ours
once closed up shall ever open any more again, or no? Lord therefore receive
us into thy hands: we all here now commend our selves, body and soul we
bequeath unto thee, keep us this night and evermore ready for thee, when thou
shall call for us. Hear us O Lord, O God and father merciful in these our
petitions, for thy son Christ Jesus sake our Savior, in whose name we al
together beg these mercies, saying:

O Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven, give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil Amen.

Let thy mighty hand and outstretched arm be still our defense, thy mercy
and loving kindness in Jesus Christ our salvation, thy true and holy word our
instruction, thy grace and holy spirit our comfort and consolation, unto the
end, and in the end.

The Lord bless us and save us, the Lord make his face to shine upon us, and
be merciful unto us. The Lord turn his favorable countenance toward us,
and send us ever his peace. Amen.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the Father, the most
comfortable fellowship of the holy Ghost, be with us all, bless us, and
keep us this night and for evermore.

AMEN.

