THE COVNSELLER A Treatise of Counsels and Counselors of Princes, written in
Spanish by Bartholomew Phillip, Doctor of the Civil and Cannon law.

Englished by I. T. Graduate in Oxford.

LONDON Printed by John Wolse. 1589.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE M. JOHN FORtescue Esquier, Master of her Majesty's
great Garderobe, and one of her most honorable prinie Counsel, John Thorius
wishes health and honor, with accomplishment of all Heroical desires.
I Present unto your honor the very Idaea of a Counselor not shadowed (in
truth) with curious eloquence of words, but in his kind absolute and perfect.
Such an Orator Tullie, such a king Patritius, such a wise man Solomon
commends unto us: as, fit and needful to be propounded, like a masterpeece
for example, though hard to be expressed in full perfection. The book written
in the Castilian tongue by Barthol. Phillippus D. of the laws, was commended
by many my good friends, men of great judgment, and thought worthy for
desert, and profitable for use thereof, to be imparted to our Nation: and
diverse of them (whose will is sufficient commandment, and request persuasion
for me) earnestly entreated me to employ some time in translating thereof, for
the service of such Noblemen and Gentlemen (whereof they said there is no small
number) as not well seen in the Castilia^ language, are desirous to understand,
what this Spaniard does bring under so glorious a title for the direction or
furniture of their estate. Which, undertaken and ended, I was soon resolved to
whom I should and ought to address it. For the book entreating of Counsel
and Counselors (which, Plato worthily calls (...)) could not more properly
be submitted to any then your honor, whom her Majesty, a Prince of so
excellent judgment, has after her long experience of your rare perfections
called to her honorable privy Counsel, in this time which requires
extraordinary ability and wisdom. And to whom might I without just note of
great ingratitude, offer my labor in this kind, before him to whose honorable
favor both my parents and my self have bin and are infinitely beholding? For
although I am not ignorant that your honor understands the Author in his own
tongue, and need not to be endebted to any Spaniard for precepts or
directions in your estate, yet I trust you will not be displeased, that under
your favor and protection he may inform those young Gentlemen, whose
unexperienced years and want of knowledge in this language will be content to
confer with him, and serve themselves of me for an interpretour. To your
honor therefore I leave this book as yours (if you please to auow it) (...),
but (...) theirs to whom such helps be not superfluous. The Method which the
author uses, has received contrary censures of diverse judgments: but I
mean not here to defend him, who in truth has no need of so mean a Patron,
for that my end only is faithfully to deliver his meaning in such order as
himself had disgested it. Which my labor I shall think abundantly rewarded,
and besides my self much bound unto your honor, if you shall accept it as a
sign of my thankful mind, which honnourable courtesy, your former favors
make me hope for at your hands. Thus I leave your honor, to your affairs of
greater moment, with my prayers to God, to direct all your counselles and
aduices to the maintenance of the Church without scisme, and the commonwealth
without trouble.

A Catalogue of such authors as are alleged in this Treatise.
A
Abbas Panormitanus. Accursius. Aelius Spartianus. Aelius Lampridius, Aesopus.
Albericus Albertus Pighius Alexander d'Imola Alexander ab Alexandro S.
Ambrosius Ambrosius de Morais Ammianus Marcelinus Andreas Alciatus Angelus de
Perusio Angelus de Aretio Angelus Clauasio Antonius Sabellicus F. Antonius de
Gueuara. S. Antoninus Archiepiscopus Florentinus Antonius Gerardus.
Archidiaconus Aristeas Aristoteles Athenaeus Auerrois S. Augustinus Aulus
Gelius Ausonius.
B
Baldus Baltesar Cossa. Bartolus de Bartholinis Bartholomaeus Cassaneus
Bartholomaeus Socinus Bartholomaeus Caualcanti Bartholomaeus de Albornos S.
Basilius S. Bernardus Bernardus Mendes Boecius Brisonius Brunellus
C
Caelius Rodoginus Cassiodori Tripartita Chronica Petri Regis Castellae
Chronica Iohannis secundi, Regis Portugaliae Chronica Ducis Xlunnaluares
Pereira. Claudius Cotoreus Cornelius Tacitus Cujacius Contarenus
D
Demosthenes Didacus de Covas Rubias Diego Garejan. Diogenes Laertius Dion
Dionysius Areopagita.
E
Egesippus Emanuel Soars Erasmus Roterodamus Euripides Eustachius
F
Filinus Flauius Vopiscus Franciscus Fiontanus Franciscus Sansouinus Franciscus
Patritius Franciscus Poletus Franciscus de Villalobos Franciscus Conanus
Franciscus Balduinus Francus de Euzinas Francus Tamara Franciscus Aluares
Fredericus Furius
G
Gallenus Gaspar Contarenus Gaspar de Cruce Giofranciscus Lotinus Gaginus
Gregorius Aleander S. Gregorius Guido Papa Guillihelmus Postellus Guilihelmus
Mainerius Guilihelmus Budaeus
H
Hadrianus Iunius Hermolaus Barbarus Hernando Nunnez Hernando de Pulgar
Herodotus Hesiodus Homerus Honcalla Horatius S. Hyeronimus Hieronymus Francus
Hieronymus Angest Hieronymus Gigas Hieronymus Cagnolus Hieronymus Garimbertus
Hippocrates Hippolitus
I
Iacobus Faber Iacobus Papiensis Iacobus Ispiager Iacobus Philippus Bergomensis
Iacobatius Jason Iodocus Clichtoueus Johannes Gerson Johannes Bocatius Johannes
Andreas Johannes Franciscus de Ripa S. Johannes Chrysostomus Johannes
Montalonius Johannes Montagnus Johannes Broideus Johannes Bodinus Johannes
Igneus Johannes Monachus Johannes Montana Johannes Eckius Johannes de Mena
Johannes de Bairios Josephus S. Isidorus Isocrates Julius Clarus Julius
Capitolinus Justinius Iuvenalis.
L
Lactantius Firmianus Latinus Pacatus Laurentius Syluanus Laurentius Grimaldus
Libanus Sophista Lambertus 3. Hortensius Lucius Florus Ludovicus Gomesius
Ludouicus Granatensis Ludouicus Dulcis
M
Macrobius Mambrinus Roseus Marcus Mantua Marsilius Ficinus Mainerius Martialis
Martinus Laudensis Martinus ab Azpilcoeta Martinus Goringius Melchior Canus
Mimus Publianus
N
Nicolaus de Lira Nicolaus Bocrius Nicolaus Leonicus Nicolaus Machiauellus
O
Ouidius
P
Paleotus Paulus Emilius Paulus Castrensis Paulus Iovius Persius Petrus
Iustinianus Petrus Bembus Petrus Fontidonius Petrus Cremensis Petrus Rebufus
Petrus Galatinus Petrus Loriotus Petrus de Apono Petrus Calefactus Petrus de
Labrid Phillippus Probus Phillippus Decius Phillippus Deroaldus Phillippus de
la Torre Philostratus Philippus Bergomates Plato Plinius Senior Plinius Junior
Pierius Valerius Pius secundus P. M. Plutarchus Polidorus Virgilius Polienus
Postellus
Q
Quadraginta cantionum author Quinquaginta Cantionum author. Quintus Curtius
Quintinus Quintilianus
R
Raphael Fulgosius Restauras Castaldus Reginaldus Polus Robertus Brittannus
S
Salustius Sebastianus Herizo Seneca Speculator Speculum tristium Speculum
consolationis Stanislaus Osius Strabo Stephanus Gariuai Suetonius Tranquillus
T
Tabiana summa Terentius Theophrastus Thucidides S. Thomas Thomas de Vio Titus
Liuius Tullius
V
Valerius de historiis Ecclesiasticis Valerius Maximus Virgilius Wolphangus
Lazius Vlticus Zanzius
X
Xenophon
FINIS
In this treatise of Counselors of Princes, there be eighteen discourses, the
contents whereof here follows:
THe first discourse, from whence Counselors do proceed, and of the execution
of that which is determined in Counsels. Fol. 1.

The second discourse, what Counsel is, and upon what matters men ought to
consult. 9.

The third discourse, how needful and necessary it is, that Princes should
have in their service, such Counselors as freely would tell them what they
think to be profitable to the commonwealth. 11.

The fourth discourse, what Counsels are expedient for the government of a
commonwealth that is well instituted. 16.

The fifth discourse, how that in all Counsels the means and ends of those
things which are in counsel ought to be enquired and examined. 19.

The sixth discourse, what qualities Counselors ought to have. 22.

The seventh discourse, of privileges, prerogatives, and exemptions which the
law and right, does grant to the Counselors of Princes. 57.

The eight discourse, what punishment they deserve, that do not counsel their
Princes sincerely and faithfully without deceit. 68.

The ninth discourse, whether it be better for the commonwealth, that the
Counselors of the Prince should be learned or unlearned. 79

The 10. discourse, whether it be more profitable to the commonwealth, to have
a good Prince and ill Counselors, or an ill Prince and good Counselors. 85.

The 11. discourse, Of the Counselors, and of that which the Counselors ought
to do, before they begin to consult 90.

The 12. discourse, what Counselors of Princes ought to do, when they be
assembled to consult. 97.

The 13. discourse, Of the Counsel of estate, and of the ordinances and laws
that appertain to the same Counsel. 127.

The 14. discourse touching war. 147.

The 15. discourse, concerning peace. 156.

The 16. discourse, how, and wherewith commonweals be augmented, and
wherewith they do decay. 161.

The 17. discourse, how, and wherewith commonweals be encreassed. 166.

The 18. discourse, from whence it does proceed, that the commonweales are
changed out of one estate of government into an other. 171.

The printer to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, whereas some small faults remain (perhaps) uncorrected; if
thou light of any such, I beseech thee with thy pen to amend them, and
especially such as are contained in the Errata, which are general faults
through the impression. And if chance any of the authors names in this book
alleged have escaped correction, thou shall find them in the Catalogue, as
they be commonly written in other books.

Errata.
The first number signifies the page, the second, the line: this lettern.
betokens the marginall note, and this word, Item before a number betokens
the same page, and without a number, the same line.

4, 2. read* Vencejo. Item. 4. to pass. 6, 2. error. Item, 2. note Lotinus,
Item, the fifth note, Antonium. 10. 33. Clichtoueus. 12. 8. (...). Item, 12.
would. 14. n. 5. digestorum. Item,. Itaque. 19. ^. enquired. 25. 29. en
platica. Item, n. 5. (...) 27, 3. toss. Item, 6, quiereis. Item, Pide lo.
Item. 23. (...). Item, 32. then. 29. 11. blinds. item, 29. And then that
friend. 31. 1. ought to be. 34. n. 3. discursu. 5. Petrus: etc. 35. n. 1.
Petrus. 38. 12. and 14. Thucidides. 43, n. 1.. 6. 48. n. 1. Men^. 57. 36.
Counselor. 58. n. the last. locum in summi. 59. n. 9.. Plebei. 60. note the
last. pristinae. 63. 12. Conanus. Item, 23. Mittendarij. Item, note the first.
accidere. 64. 12. they ought to. item, n. 1.. hoc. 81. 7. serve. 85, ^0. and
moving of their bodies, maruail at their subtlety of wit and greatdesse of
judgment, and that, etc. 88. 9. so accustomed. 94, 30. no^ can deceive. 131.
34. oppose. 140. 10. share them* 151. n. 4. timere. 152. 33. y un dia. 155. 29.
axeltr^^* 167 4. Aquei. and Etholi.

A Treatise of counsel, and Counselors of Princes. (^)
The first discourse from whence Counsels do proceed, and of the execution of
that which is determined in counsels.
THE holy ghost, who is light unto them that follow him, mercy unto them that
fear him, joy unto them that love him, visits our souls, (as the Prophet
Esaias Esaias. 11. 2.
says) with seven divine gifts, which are: The spirit of wisdom: of
understanding: of counsel: of fortitude: of knowledge: of piety: and of the
fear of the Lord. These seven gifts of the holy Ghost, are the seven eyes,
which the Prophet Zachary saw Zachary. 3. 9.
set upon a stone. The stone whereon Zachary saw the seven eyes placed, is
our Redeemer, and Lord Jesus Christ, as the glorious Saint Jerome declares.
For in the holy Scripture, the stone signifies our Redeemer and Lord, as he
himself Matthew. 21. 42
taught, when he declared that which king David said: That Psalm. 118. 22.
the stone which the builders refused, is become the head stone of the corner:
which closes all the whole work, and gives perfection to the building. Saint
Paul following this interpretation, 1. Corin. 10. 4. Exodus. 17.
says: That the stone out of the which the Water did spring, of the which the
people of Israel did drink in the desert, signified our Redeemer and Lord.
The Prophet Zachary Zachary. 3.
says, that he saw seven eyes placed in a stone, for to show, that the blessed
soul of our Redeemer and Lord Jesus Christ, was most perfectly endued with
the seven gifts of the holy Ghost, as well in the morrall virtues as
intellectual, and in all the other graces, which through the union with the
divine Nic. de lira. supra. 3. Zacha.
essence, are communicated with the soul of our Redeemer and Lord, as I more
at large have showed in the Treatise which I wrote upon the Creed of the
Apostles.

2 Among those gifts with which the holy Ghost does lighten our souls, the
Prophet Esaias puts the spirit of Counsel and Fortitude. The spirit of
Counsel (as Saint Thomas declares it) is a certain light, wherewith the
holy ghost illuminateth our understanding, that so we may be able to choose
that which we ought to do in humane affairs. For the wisdom of man fails
in many things, which it cannot reach nor attain unto: especially if they be
particular things, which in sundry places, and at diverse times may fall out
diversely; and when we follow our own humane wisdom, we run into great danger of
our life. And therefore Solomon says: That the discourses of men are weak,
and their providence very uncertain, Wisdom. 9.
and that to assure our selves in this life wherein we live so full of danger
and darkness, we ought in no case to trust unto our own wisdom, but desire
God to lighten our understanding. For (as the Prophet Esaias says) GOD is a
marvelous Esaias, 3. Proverb. 3.
Counselor. This does king Solomon teach us when he says: Trust in the Lord
with all thy heart, and trust not to thine own wisdom: and set God before thee
in all thy ways, and he will direct thy steps, etc. And because the wisdom of
man is not sufficient, to attain to the truth of each thing in matters
concerning counsel, it is commonly said that God is he which shows that
which is to be done.

3 Well did king David understand this, when in the war which he waged against
his son Absolon, he prayed to God, that the counsel of Achitophel might not
be believed. Achitophel 2. Regum. 15.
was so wise in those counsels which he gave, (as well when he served David as
when he followed Absolon) that they rather seemed to be prophecies revealed by
GOD then humane counsels. And for this cause, king David much more feared the
counsels of Achitophel, then the battails and ambushes of Absolon. ^. Regum. 16.
And to the end he might make frustrate the counsel which Achitophel gave to
Absolon, he said unto Chusai the Archite (who came to serve him) that he should
follow Absolon, and say unto him: I will be thy servant O king, and I will serve
thee as in times past I have served thy father: that if Absolon did admit him
to his counsel, he should cross all that ever Achitophel counseled Absolon.
By the means of the Priests who were called Sadoch and Abiathar, Chusai did
the same which king David commanded him, and presented himself before
Absolon, who asking him why he followed not his friend David: he answered, Lord
I follow thee, and will serve thee, because GOD and the people have chosen thee
to be the King. Absolon believed that to be true which Chusai said. And whereas
Achitophel counseled that he might be suffered to choose out twelve thousand
men, and so set upon king David, and easily overcome him, and those who
followed him, because they were all of them very weary and full of fear:
Chusai crossed his counsel, and urged Absolon to the contrary. So that Absolon
and those that were with him, liked and approved Chusai his counsel. Then
Achitophel seeing that Absolon would not follow the counsel that he gave him,
hanged himself. Herein is it manifestly seen, that it is an ordinary rule
of Gods providence, always when through his secret judgments, he will punish
the faults and sins of men: that first they loose their understanding, to the
end that they may not understand nor judge of the truth: and besides (to make
those whom he will correct and punish, the more miserable and wretched) he
suffers (as Velleyus Paterculus says) the ill success of the matter, to be
attributed and imputed unto the fault and error of those whom he will punish:
and he blinds the understanding of men, to the end they should not oppose
themselves against him: and seeks all means that are necessarily required,
to bring that to pass which he will have. And as it is commonly said, to shun
that which fortune and chance will have, is the ready way to Gene. 41.
find it: as it is seen in that which hapened to Joseph and his brethren.

4 The Prophet Esaias did not without great cause join the spirit of Fortitude,
with the spirit of Counsel: for little profits counsel, if virtue and
strength be wanting, to execute that which by counsel is determined. And
because of those that neither can, nor know how to execute, Cornelius Tacitus
says: That when matters go to wrack, every man commands, but no man takes
in hand to bring that to effect which is commanded. Polienus s^ratage. 19.
Iphicrates being asked why he would not encounter with the enemy: he
answered, because he saw many command, but few obey. And because of these that
cannot tell how to bring such matters to effect, as is by counsel concluded:
the holy Scripture says: That the time of child-bedde draws near, and the*
mother has no strength to be brought to bed. And this is understood by the
Fable of the Rats, which were in counsel, which of them should hang the bell
on the Cat. And by our Spanish proverb. Qui en da el conseio, de el vencerio.
He that does counsel give to any thing,
Means let him show compass the same to bring.


Salust says, that first we ought to consult of matters, and afterward In
proaemio Catelin.
execute ye same, which is decreed with a sesonable and ripe haste. He would
have that those things which are counseled, should be executed after such an
order, that the execution be done in due time and place. And this is it that
Salust calls Mature facere, to wit: that it be neither green nor rotten. And
after this order, do Aulus Gellius and Macrobius declare that Lib. 10. cap.
11. Saturnal. lib. 6 Lib. 1. Aeneid.
of Virgil, Maturate fugam: as if Neptune had said to ye winds, that they
should so get them gone: that neither rushing away with too much haste, nor
with too much slownes, staying on the Seas too long, they should not hurt or
indomage the Troyan ships. The Emperor Charles the fifth used to say, that the
affairs of Princes, did consist in two things: in counsel and execution.
Sansouinus de dictis and fac. Imprat. Car. 5.
Whereof the first required good judgment, but the latter, great fidelity: and
that slownes was the soul of counsel, and haste the soul of execution: and
that both of the^ together, were the Quintessence of wise Princes. And that
counsel required a singular wit and rare judgment, and the putting of matters
in execution, demanded fit opportunity, with occasion proportionable, and much
fidelity.

5 It chances very seldom, that both wit to discourse of those things which
are in counsel, and judgment to put the same in execution which is decreed,
do both together concur in one person. Captain Picinino was of very weak
and small judgment Garim prob. 99.
in counselling, but very ready in executing of those things which in the
counsels were determined: and seemed rather to be carried with force and fury,
then moved by reason or judgment. He was also most fortunate in all things
which he took in hand. Frauncis the first of that name, king of France, in
counsailing went beyond all his Counselors, especially in matters touching
war: but in executing was nothing comparable unto them. Clement the seventh
Pope, exceeded every one in counsel, but in execution was inferior to al those
that were of his Counsel. The holy Scripture mentions, that king David ^.
Regum. ^^.
was wise in that he spoke, and strong in that which he did, and that he was
fair, and that God favored him. To be able to discourse well upon matters
which are in counsel, and not to know how to put the same in execution,
proceeds from a brave wit, but simple wisdom. And execution without counsel
Garim. prob. 99.
or judgment, comes of great wisdom and small wit: because he that puts
any thing in execution, ought to be endued with singular wisdom, to execute
the same well which is determined. There have been many Princes, who (as I
have written more at large in the Treatise which I entitled, Of the
institution of Princes.) were very apt and witty, in all Arts and Sciences,
but yet of small judgment in governing their kingdoms: and albeit they were
very ingenious and prompt, yet were they nothing wise. And many because they
cannot tell how to resolve themselves in such things as they consult upon:
they conclude not, but (as Cornelius Tacitus says) Lib. 5. con^ilium cui impar
est, ^ato permittere.
they leave such things as they cannot nor know not how to resolve themselves
in, unto Fortune, staying and expecting the success and event of them.

6 Because the holy Ghost is he that guides and helps us in our counsels,
God says by the Prophet Esaias, meaning to Cap. 3.
punish the people of Israel, that they should have no Counselors to counsel
them. When Judith went about to deliver the City of Bethulia from the
imminent danger in which it was when Olophernes besieged it, she said unto
those yt were Judith. 8.
besieged, that they should humbly with praying and fasting, desire of God that
it would please him to confirm the same which she had resolved and determined.
Tobias said unto his Son, Tob. 3.
that his counsel was not in the power of men, but of God. And the Captain
Nehemias says, that God destroys the counsel Esdras. 4.
of men: and the Prophet David, that God overthrows the P^^l^^. 32.
counsel of the Heathen, and reprooueth that which the people imagines, and
the counsels of Princes. After the same manner, as God deuideth the waters, so
enclineth he the hearts of Pro^^rb. 21.
kings to do the same which he will have, and brings to naught the counsels
of the wicked. And because counsels depend upon Esaias* 8. ^^b. 5* Tob. 4.
Psalm* 54.
the divine providence, it is necessarily required, that we should guide and
direct them unto the service of God, as Tobias counseled his Son: because God
maintains and vpholdeth them, that put all their trust in him. We ought also
not to trust to that little which we know and understand, that we commit not an
infinite number of faults, falling out of one rigor into another, and so at the
length into extreme misery: and (as the holy Scripture mentions) till the
measure of the Amorites Genesis. 15.
be filled.

7 They that consult upon any matter, must put that counsel Franciscus
Lotimus. Considerat. 319.
in execution, which seems to be less dangerous, and to have fewer
inconveniences: for it is well near a thing impossible, to be delivered from
all the inconveniences and dangers which hap to fall out in the execution of
matters, and especially in great enterprises. And therefore it is commonly
said, that Cornelius Tacit. Lib. 18. Publius Mimius: nunquam periculum sine
periculo vincitur.
he that ventureth not, neither loses nor wins. And one danger is saved by
the other, and after the danger comes the profit. If any man think that he
can put any thing which in counsel is concluded, in execution without
adventure, he shall never be able to bring that to pass which he wishes. For
it is the property of Fortune, to cross, not only great and heroical
enterprises, but also small and particular things. They ought not then to
linger, but straight-waies to put the same which in the counsel is concluded,
in practice, though there be danger in the execution of it: if so be that the
profit which is to follow the execution, be greater then the danger which is
incurred in not executing it.

8 It is the property of wise men, to consult upon all matters which they take
in hand, with great deliberation: and Salust in Catelin.
then (as Salust says) speedily with a proportioned diligence, to execute the
same which is concluded: and not imitate yt which is said of the Maquedana, who
spoke without consideration of the time and place, where and with whom she
spoke. Therefore it is convenient to consider well of every thing: for by how
much the more things be deeply pondered, by so much the more profitable are
the counsels unto the Common wealth, not only in matters of peace, but also of
war. And therefore in ancient Polidorus Virgilius in adagiis.
times past, it was wont to be said, that the Romans did overcome sitting:
and that counsel is taken on the pillow, and that many counsels amend all
matters.

9 It falls out very sildome, that they which have determined to do any
thing, leave and give over the doing of it, Proverb. 11.
though the execution thereof be difficult and dangerous: and many because
they would not be hindered, and kept from putting the same in execution which
they purpose to do, will ask no advise, nor admit any one to counsel them:
who (as they know) will not allow that which they will have. For it seems
Lotimus considerat. 330.
unto them, that their minds that should help them to execute the same which
they pretend, saint: and they fear, that if they should consult with them,
upon that which they have before already determined, it would be an occasion
to the^, not to execute the same which they wish. Such men are very hurtful
unto the Commonwealth. And if that before they had determined with themselves
to follow their pretenses, they had consulted upon that which they ought to do:
they might easily be brought from doing that, which they pretended: dashing
(as the royal Prophet says) the children of Babylon on the stones, not
suffering naughty and perverse pretenses to grow. These be the children of
Babylon, which the kingly Prophet says, that Psalm. 136.
they ought to be broken on the stone. The stone whereon they should be broken,
is our Redeemer and Lord Jesus Christ, by whose favor and grace, all naughty
and wicked imaginations are broken.

10 After that the same is begun to be executed, which in Lotimus considerat.
331.
the counsel was determined, the Counselors must not remember or think of
that counsel, which they forsook, that the execution of the same be not
hindered, which is already determined. For they must hold that firm and
stable, which in counsel is agreed upon, and think it to be most profitable
to the Commonwealth: for it is very hurtful to the execution, to think that
those counsels which they would not follow, were better then those which they
approved. And indeed it is the property of unfortunate persons, (as Cornelius
Tacitus says) Cornelius Tacitus. Lib. 1.
to think that, that counsel which they followed not, was better and safer
then that which they allowed and approved.

11 When the matters which are in counsel, are of such condition and quality,
that they may be redressed at all times, then may the Counselors spend much
time in deliberating what may be done: for that thing is not said to be done
out of time, which may be done in any time. But contrariwise, if the matters
require have, and a speedy conclusion, then ought the Counselors to make much
of the time, and with as great celeritie and speed as may be, conclude and
determine. For it is very hurtful to those things which the Counselors sit
upon, Lucan. Lib. 1. Cor. Tacitus. Liber. 17.
to wast time: and sit long in consultation, when the danger is at hand. For
whilst the Counselors are consulting what is to be done, the occasion passes
which was offered, to put the same in execution which was determined. Titus
Liuius says, Dec. 3. lib. 3.
that in mean space, while the Romans consulted what succor they should
send, to the Town Saguntia being besieged with Hanibals Army: it might have
been taken, destroyed, and rased to the ground. And in a certain City in
Spain, whilst they were long consulting, what super-scription they should
write on a Letter, which they sent unto those of who^ they asked aid: the
City was taken by the enemies, and spoiled. In ancient Frasmus in adag^s.
times past, the Image of opportunity was set up in many places, that men
might remember to let no occasion slip, which might be to their commodity when
opportunity was offered. And that all men might understand, of how great
importance it was, to let occasion pass, they painted her on a wheel, because
she never stands still, nor remains in one place, with wings on her feet,
because she passes away swiftly, her face covered with the hair of her
forehead, because she lets none know her, but such as be very attentine to
look on her: with a raser in her hand, because she cuts of their hope that
take no heed of her but let her pass: with the hinder part of her head balde,
because if she once be gone, no man can catth hold on her, and with a Maid that
waits upon her which is called Poenitentia, for repentance does accompany them
that cannot tell how to reap profit by occasion. This which we say of
execution holds, unless the matters are such as require no have, but may
rather be delaid without danger then done. For in the dispatch of them, they
may be done with deliberation, and though they be deferred, yet they may be
done to good purpose: and Hernam. de Pulga. Epist. 2.
therefore in such things much is done, though some thing be left undone. For
time it self heals many diseases without any medicines, whereas the
Physician with a medicine often times cannot. And many things in man's life are
mard, not for that they ought not to be done, but because they be not done in
Antonius de Gauara. 1. part. Epistol.
time and place. Therefore every thing should be thoroughly sifted, that in due
season it may be dispatched, as the Garden which is to be sowed.

12 They therefore that give not their resolutions in every thing at the first,
are not to be found fault with all, if the matrers which are in consultation be
hard and difficult and require long deliberation. But if they defer their
resolution, because they will not adventure a little, to obtain a great deal,
or because by the sharpnes of their wits, they can allege and bring reasons to
contrary every thing that is proposed: then may Franciscus Lotinus 336.
consideratione.
they well be blamed: for such fellows will never conclude, unless they be
forced unto it. Because they have no heart, to do according to the reasons
which they invent: and yet they never want reasons, to hide and cloak their
natural weakness, which at all times prevails more with them, then reason or
experience. Which nevertheless oftentimes she weth thr^, that they had no
cause to fear. Hereby may cleerelie he seene^ that subtlety and wit make not
a valiant man, neither is he to be thought so well of, that can see far into
a matter, but rather he that has a heart to execute the same, which the
subtitle of his wit shows unto him. Yet because men most commonly follow
their own inclmacion* it is convenient that he which is to give counsel unto
others, have wit to invent, and judgment to dispose, as well as heart, to
perform that which is counseled. And for because that these three things, are
very seldom found together in one person, there ought to be many Counselors,
and so some to supply the same which is wanting in others. This meant Homer,
when he said that Ulysses and Diomedes In illiad. Ovid. in Metamorph. Libro. 1.
A^ncid.
went together to do that which king A gamemnon commanded them. And Virgil
when he said, that Achates accompanied Aeneas, understanding by Achates
counsel, and by Aeneas execution.

The second discourse what counsel is and upon what matters men ought to
consult.
Counsel (as the private Laws of Spain say) is Lib. 1. and ^. tit. 2. p^^ti.
3.
good advise, which a man takes upon doubtful things, to the end he might not
fall into any error. Besides, this ought to be considered, what he is of whom
men ask counsel, whether he be a man sufficient to give counsel to the
purpose, and such as he needs who demands it: lastly, counsel ought so be
asked before the thing be done. ^^^^lerious Furius says; that the counsel In
tractatu de (...) princip^. Cap. 1.
of Princes, is a congregation, or an assembly of elected and chosen persons,
to consult upon all accidents both of peace and war. By which means, they
better and more easily remember the same which is pa^^, understand that which
is present, and provide for that which is to come: and so in all their
enterprises, obtain good success, and shun all inconveniences, or at least
wise if they cannot, yet they find means whereby the danger is made less. And
this assembly is of many called the counsel, taking the name of the end for
which it was invented. And the company or congregation of the Counselors, is
(...) the council. Where ^^^ent difference betwixt counsel and council as
Fran^ says for counsel is where Eth. 3. and m^gnorum morahum. Lib. 2. Lib. 5.
cap. 13. Histor. Romans
honorable men, and the cheese of the Realm meet together, to treat of
matters (...) and the council is, when men of mean condition make ^n
assembly. This difference betwixt council, and council; is not commonly
observed (as Bruides says. In annotationibus add. cap. 13.


2 Counsel is taken (says Aristotle) upon things which are not in man's power,
but may fall out (...). And not upon matters which are not doubted o^, whether
they ought to be done or no* for these have more need to be put in execution,
then to be had in counsel. Neither is counsel to be demanded for things
which are most certain, as whether the Sun will Plat^r. de virtut. mor.
rise to morrow, or no* nor for things that are impossible, nor for things
belonging to all the world, nor for things present, nor for things past, for
such things cannot be amended: because those things yt are present, or already
past, stand upon no advise, as I In tract^^ conditionum impossibilium, ^at
quasi.
declare more at large in another place. And if happily counsel be taken upon
some matter which is present or past, that is done, to seek some remedy,
least it should do harm hereafter in time to come. Iodocus Clichtoreus says,
that these be the properties In tract. Epit. mor. Jacob. Fabr. i^ (...) Arist.
lib. in cap. de pradentia.
of Counselors. First, they ought to have judgment and understanding:
Secondly, when they assemble and meet together to consult, they ought to
premeditate upon that, of which they are to consult: as they that travel cast
with themselves, which way thy will take to come to their iourneyes end. For
unless they do premeditate, their counsel shall be in vain. Thirdly, they
ought not to consult upon matters yt are present. Fourthly, Arist. bb. 1. Rhet.
and 3. Eth. lodoc. Cli. vbi sup. Arist vbis^p.
that they ought not to consult upon matters that are impossible. Sixthly, they
ought not to consult upon such things, which necessarily must happen, and
cannot be shunned or declined. Seventhly, they ought in their counsels, to
seek cut means, how to bring the same to pass which they pretend. Eighthly,
they ought to consult of things which are limited, and are not infinite.
Ninthly, upon things that both may be, and may not be. Tenthly, upon things
that be doubtful, and may fall out diversely. Those things which concern the
Commonwealth, Arist. Eth. 3. Author 40. cantronum ponit^o. regulas quas sequi
debet qui sit futurus prudens. P. 2. cant. 4.
are to be considered of with long deliberation: because there lies more upon
the venturing of them, then of private and particular matters, which every one
can more easily, and with less hurt judge of, and choose that which he best
likes.

The third discourse, how needful and necessary it is, that Princes should,
have in their service, such Counselors, as freely would tell them what they
think to be profitable to the Commonwealth.
OF how great importance it is unto all Common wealths that are, that Princes
should have such Counselors, who freely would let them understand what they
think to be most convenient: the Poets in their works sufficiently declare
unto us. Who (as Plato. says) write, that Princes are vnd^one, Plato. Epist. 1.
because they want faithful friends to counsel them. Cornelius Tacitus
agreeing with them, says: that a Prince Lib. 20. ^
can have no greater, better, nor fitter instrument, to keep and conserve his
estate, then good friends. The Emperor Augustus Seneca de beneficiis. lib. 6.
ca. 13
Caesar, said: into these troubles had I not fallen, if Moecenas and Agrippa
had lived, whose counsel I was went to enjoy. Augustus Caesar did much miss
them, and marked that he bad no friends to counsel him. For Princes have need
of nothing more, then of friends that may give them counsel. The greatest and
best guarde that a Prince can have (as Aristeus Lib. 10. interpre.
says) is to be accompanied with a great number of just and expart Counselle
who through (...), sefting their own commodity aside, regard the profit and
welfare of the Common wealth. For no Armies, no battles, no squadrons of
fighting men, and no treasures that a Prince has, can so well conserve and
defend the Prince his estate, as good and loyal Friends, who would freely show
him, what they take to be most profitable for the Common wealth. And as a
certain Poet says: Plutarchus in libro, quo pacto possis adulatorem ab amito
cognoseere.
(...)
O that some poor man Irus like there were,
That all my faults mislike waied without fear,
And true freend-like tell how my self I bear.


Merope in the Tragedy does admonish us, saying. (...)
Take those to friends, that from thy will in words do disagree,
But all such as with flattery, thy humor seek to feed,
That none such e^^tor (...) door, see that thou take good heed.


2 For Princes loose not their authority at all, in following that which their
Counselors advise them, but rather increase and augment it: for if Counselors
deminished it, then would no Princes have any Counselors, of whom they might
learn what were most profitable for ye Commonwealth. In the war which the
Grecians waged against the Troyans, the counsels of Nestor and Ulysses, were
far more profitable then the forces of Achilles and Ajax: as Agamemnon
showed, when he said, that if he had had ten Nestors to have given him
counsel, the siege of Troy should not have continued so long. Henry ye third
Gariuai. lib. 15. Capit. 4.
of that name, king of Castile, said: that the counsels of wise men, did the
Princes more good then the Arms of valiant soldiers, Because brauer and more
notable acts are wrought by men of counsel then by Arms. He was also wont to
allege yt which Tullie said, to this purpose: to wit, that the counsels of
Solon Lib. 1. Officio.
had been no less profitable unto the City of Athens, then the victory of
Themissocles. Salust assirmeth; that counsel is not Salust in principio
Catelin.
only profitable for the consernation and maintenance of peace, but also for
the atchiuing of victory: because good counsel always prevails much in war.

3 And Princes to the end they may be well counseled, should command their
Counselors to speak freely in their consultations, and show their minds what
they think ought to be determined to do the Commonwealth good. For (as
Artabanus said to king Xerxes) if there be not diverse minds and Herodorus. lib.
7.
opinions in their consultations, how can the Prince choose that which is best.
After the same order as we know which is the better gold, by laying of one
piece of gold to the other: even so, comparing one counsel with the other, the
Princes discern which of them is most profitable for the Commonwealth. And
(as Paulus de Castro says) even as persumes, the better they Consilio 13. lib.
1 Consilio.
be beaten, the sweeter they smell: so likewise, the sentences, minds, and
opinions of Counselors, the more they be debated and discussed, the surer and
better they be. True it is, that the rarest and greatest wits, being of
singular judgment, are able to enter deeper into matters, then they that are
not so witty, but of the simple sort. And they that are fully experienced,
can better discern what is necessaire in every matter, then they which have no
skill in it. Yet nevertheless, it is the duty of enerie wise man, to hear
the minds of many, for one man only, cannot see and know all things. And
oftentimes one of simple Saepe est olitor opportuna loquutus. Lib. 3. de
institut. princip.
learning and small knowledge, advises a wiser person, of such things which he
never did hear or see before. Dion says, that a Prince sees with as many
eyes, and hears with as many ears, as he has friends that counsel him
sincerely.

4 It is a thing very hurtful to the Commonwealth, that the Counselors
before hand should know their Princes inclination, for then they seek all
means possible how to find out reasons, which may justify and prove that
which their King or Prince desires. And for this cause, of all hurtful
Counselors, Franciscus Sansouinus. de dictis and fact. Car. v. looper.
learned men are most noyous to the Commonwealth, if they abuse their
learning. The Emperor Charles the fifth, was wont to say, that it became Princes
very well, to be accompanied with learned men: and that the society and use of
learned men, was very expedient and profitable unto virtuous Princes: and
contrarily, very dangerous and hurtful to wicked and lewd Princes. For to
euevy thing which the Prince will do, they find either n Law or an History to
allow and approve the same. And if so be that the Prince be of weak judgment,
he will not be able to determine and choose, what is most profitable to the
Commonwealth. It is manifest, that the Emperor said true, seeing that there
never wanted men of great learning, who contrary to all reason and justice,
justified and approved that which their Prince purposed and appointed to do.
As also the Emperors which persecuted our Christian Religion, wanted not
learned Counselors to allow and approve their wicked enterprises. Vlpian the
Lawyer, wrote the manner how Lactantius Tirmianus lib. 5. cap. 10.
they should torment and punish the Christians. Neither wanted the Emperor
Frederick, and the other Emperors which persecuted Baldouinus ad edicta
principium de Christianis.
the Catholic Church, learned men to justify their pretenses, though they
were unjust and erroneous. Moreover, many learned men did justify unto Don
Pedro king of Castile, that he might marry with Lady Marie of Castro, though
notwithstanding Marsilius Patauinus and alii quibus respondit Albertus Tigurius
lib. Hierar. Ecclesiast.
his lawful wife and Queen, Lady Blanch was yet living. Such Counselors are
not to be termed Iurisperiti, and Jurisconsulti, but rather Jureperditi, and
Iurestulti. Certes, they that glory, and vant that they be Christians, ought
to be ashamed to do that which Papinian being a Pagan would not Cagnolus in
procemio digastorum, 9, Itaque. in 131.
do, although he was commanded by the Emperor Caracalla, (whose Steward and
familiar he was) to do it: which was, to defend an unjust cause. Wherefore by
the Emperors command, he was slain and put to death. Rather would he die,
Aelius Spattianus in vita Antoni.
(though he was not a Christian) then defend an unjust cause. And he esteemed
more (as our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus Matthew. 10.
teaches us) not to offend God, then he did of those that kill the body, but
not the soul. Those learned men that justify false things unto their Princes,
discharge not their duties as they are bound to do: for they persuade them to
do many things that redound to the Commonwealths utter destruction.

5 A Prince then ought to select such Counselors, as do not approve all that
which be says: for that is the chief and principal trick of flattery, to
allow all that is said, and still to sing, Et cum spiritu tuo. Such men (as the
Italians say) journey still betwixt Lodi and Placentia: they never go to
Verona. They rehearse continually the Psalm of Placebo Domino, but they
Psalm. 114.
reach not (as Gerson says) to the verse In regione vi^orum! because their
sin is deadly, in deceiving their Princes with flattery: counterfeyting and
masking those counsails which they give, with a false show of Religion and
justice, regarding more their own particular profit, then the common welfare.
These counsels have no justice at all in them, but only the name of justice,
which they give them to color and mask the injustice and wickedness which in
them lurketh. And when such Counselors come with show of justice and Religion,
the harm which they do unto the Commonwealth, cannot be repaired: because in
their own defense they make a show of justice, with which otherwise they might
have been suppressed. Capi. 4. de inre in^ando.
These are rather (as Innocentius the third Pope says) cosenners then
Counselors of Princes.

6 That Counselors may freely speak their minds in their consultations,
Princes ought to imitate the Emperor Augustus Caesar, who (as Seneca says)
being desired by Tacitus Lib. 1. de Clementia. cap. 16.
to come to his house, to judge of the offense which one of his Sons had
committed, did as Tacitus requested him: and because he should not move them
that should hear the matter debated to follow that which he said, and say as
Princes Counselors commonly do, Et cum spiritu tuo: he commanded that every
one that was to determine of the matter, should set down his mind in writing,
and when as every man had said what he thought best to be done, the Emperor
told them his opinion and liking. The Emperor Caesar Augustus never asked his
Suetonius Tran. in vita Augusti.
Counselors after the order as they sat, but here one, and there another,
that they should all of them be attentive and ready to answer, and show their
minds what they thought was to be done, without addicting themselves unto that
which the others said. In ancient times past, when they proposed Laws unto the
people of Rome, concerning the Commonwealth: they began Dion. Lib. 3.
to propose the ordinances to them which bare no Offices, to the end that they
might boldly show their minds, what they thought to be most profitable to the
Commonwealth: and not keep back their opinions, for fear least they should
offend those that bare office in the Commonwealth, if they erst had said to
the contrary. Aulus Gellius says, that in ye Senate house sometimes Aulus
Gellius lib. 4. cap. 11. In titulo de controuersia ^e^^h apud par. cap. 1.
Eccle. cap. 3^.
they asked him that was chosen to be the head of the Senate, and sometimes
those yt were elected to be Consuls. And Baldus says, that the most ancient
men, ought to be asked first, conformable to ye which king Solomon says: speak
the elder first.

The fourth discourse, what counsels are expedient for the government of a
Commonwealth that is well instituted.
THE counsels are the foundation, whereon all Commonwealths be grounded. For
whatsoever is convenient to be done for the profit of the Commonwealth, is
decided in them. And according to Aristotle, there be five counsels which
every Rhet. lib. 1.
Commonwealth that is well governed ought to have. The first is of revenues:
in this counsel they consult upon rents, as well ordinary as extraordinary:
and upon superfluous expenses, how the rents are spent and consumed. This
counsel is very necessary in a Commonwealth, for substance is the
Quintessence as well in public as private affairs, without which, neither men
nor Commonwealths can fitly be maintained. For little profit the four
Elements, and al other mixtures whatsoever, if men have not wherwithal to buy
such things, as are necessary to their maintenance and sustentation: as I
wrote more at large, in the Treatise which I made, of the crafts and fetches
wherewith men attain to riches. The second counsel is of peace: and this
commonly is called the counsel of estate, on which the whole government of the
Commonwealth is grounded: as I write more at large beneath. The third counsel
is of war: unto this counsel it belongs to look to the fortifying of
places, and maintenance of men, and what Soldiers are necessary for wars,
and the defense of the Commonwealth, and many other matters concerning the
same. The fourth counsel is, of such provision and mayntenaunce as is
necessary to the Commonwealth. This has charge to provide and furnish the
Commonwealth, with maintenance and other things necessary to life, in time
of peace or war. The fifth counsel is for the Laws and justice. In this
counsel all things are handled that pertain and belong to the Prince, as well
in civil as in criminal matters: that ye same may be there determined, which
the Prince according to right In tractatu de consilio and consiliariis
principum.
and justice, (if he were present) should ordain by what order of justice
soever. Fredericus Furius calls this the counsel of punishments: unto this
is that referred which is determined in the Chaunceries: if the parties
pleading complain, that the Judges of the Chaunceries do not judge well and
conformable unto justice. To which also, it belongs to have a regard, what
Offices, charges, Magistrates and Governors are necessary for the government
of the Commonwealth: and what, and how much authority and power they ought to
have: this counsel shall add such Officers as are wanting, and put down such
as are superfluous. It pertains also unto this, to declare and expound such
Laws as have a doubtful sense, and take away such as are hurtful to the
Commonwealth, and make such new as are necessary.

2 Unto these five counsels which Aristotle sets down, Fredericus Furius adds
the sixth: of gifts and rewards. This counsel has charge to hear, and
learn, the merits and deserts generally of all: being informed of the life,
manners, and ability and deeds of those, that not asking any reward, deserve
to be rewarded for their virtues. And particularly of those that ask some
rewards. A reward is properly called that, which is given to do good unto him
to whom it is given. For that which is given, to get and obtain some thing of
him, unto whom it Seneca lib. 1. de benefici. cap. 6.
is given, is not properly a reward, but a contract or bargain: seeing it is
between two parties that have to do with debt and receipt. And such reward, is
rather to be set in reckoning books, which Merchants call books of account,
then in the book of rewards. The Commonwealth that is well governed, has
great need of this counsel of rewards: that each one may labor and do his
best, to conserve and augment it: for the reward inticeth, and stirs up men
to labor, whereas no man (as Salust says) would be good, if he hoped not for
some reward. Nemo gratis bonus est.
King Nabuchadnezzor had books, in which he commanded the service that was
done him to be written, to reward them that served him.

3 Although Aristotle and Fredericus Furius set down the counsels which are
necessary in a Commonwealth, after that order as we have said: yet it seems
that the principal counsel, and on which the Commonwealth does chiefly
depend, is the counsel of estate. For in that counsel, that, is appointed and
ordained, which is to be done in all the other counsels. This did the Senate
of Rome commend unto the Consuls, that they should have a regard that the
Commonwealth should take no harm. The power which the Dictator had, differed
from the power which was given to the Consuls: in this, that the Dictator, was
superior to all the Magistrates, and as long as Salust in Catelin Videant
Consules, nequid detrimenti respub. capiat: et potestas per Senatum more Romano
magistratui max ima permittitur.
his dictatorship continued, he was absolute King. But the Consuls could not
command any Citizen to be put to death, unless the Senate approved it.
Besides also these counsels, which Aristotle and Fredericus Furius set down,
two others are necessary to have the Commonwealth well governed. The one of
Censure or Manners, as the Romans had, that none might be suffered in the
Commonwealth to offend publicly, and so disquiet and slander her: and that
all such as do commit any offense openly, might not remain unpunished: as I
wrote more at large in the Treatise of decrees concerning manners. The other of
Religion, or Inquisition: for no Common-welth can be maintained or augmented,
if there be not a special regard of Religion and worshipping of God had in it,
to maintain and uphold it: as I show more at large in the small discourse of
this book.

4 All these Counsels are reduced (as Phillippus de la Torre says) unto flue:
viz. The first, unto the counsel of war. Cap. 9. de Institutione Christiani
principis.
The second, unto the counsel of justice. The third, unto the counsel of
estate. The fourth, unto the counsel of mechanical or handicrafts Officers:
and the fifth, to the counsel of Religion. This is gathered out of that, which
the Prophet Esaias says: That God might punish the people of Israel for the sins
which they committed, by taking away the valiant and hardy men, that are
experienced in matters concerning war: the Judges that minister justice: the
Prophets and Elders, that have authority to give counsel: the handicrafts
men, that are skillful in that which they profess: and the learned men that
can declare the mysteries of God. In this, God shows unto us, how necessary
these counsels are to every Commonwealth. For if they have not these counsels,
and be not governed as they ought, great confusion and discord must necessarily
follow after. It is therefore required, that the Counselors of Princes, use all
the diligence they possibly can, in looking to the public and common profit:
seeing that they be the very gates and doors, through which all good and ill
enters into the Commonwealth.

The fifth discourse, how that in all Counsels, the means and ends of those
things which are in counsel, ought to be required and examined.
IN all Counsels (as Aristotle says) ought not Rhet. Lib. 1.
only to be examined and enquired, whither that which is in consultation, be
necessary and profitable to the Commonwealth: but also the means and ends of
that which is in deliberation ought to be considered. The means are the ways,
by which yt which in the counsels is determined, may and ought to be put in
execution. The end is, that which cheeflie is inquired and sought: if the
means be naught, the counsel must be naught: if they be good, the counsel is
good also. The Greeks call good counsel Lib. 6. Moral. Lib. 6. capit. 31.
Antiq. lect.
(...) and naughty counsel (...) Aristotle does finely handle, and Celius
Rodiginus declare, wherein (...) does differ from science, opinion, and (...)
which is to divine and conjecture out of hand what may be done, without
spending much time in discoursing upon that which is consulted. But I mean not
hear to repeat it, seeing that such subtilties are fitter to be disputed of
in Schools, then to be treated of, in counsels of Princes.

2 Those counsels are naught, in which is consulted, how to bring wicked and
unlawful things to pass: and those are bad counsels also, in which unlawful
means are sought, to put that in practice which is lawful and honest.
Therefore it is meet and convenient, that they who deliberate and consult upon
matters, do enquire, not only whether the beginning and means, wherewith they
will accomplish that which in ye counsel is determined, but also, whether the
end of it be good and lawful. Following this rule: they that go about some
matter, which of it self is contentious and slanderous, ought not to regard
the present occasion which is offered to advance it, but to consider, whether
the end be like to be good or naught. Besides, they ought not to allow any
bad and dishonest thing, though of it come good and lawful things. According
to that, Non sunt procuranda mala, vt eueniant bona. King Solomon says:
Ecclesiast. 19.
That he that is hasty to give credit, is lightly minded, and shall never
prosper. For he that rashly takes a thing in hand, before he have thoroughly
considered it, is an enemy to good counsel. The glorious Apostle S. John,
does exhort us, that we should not believe every spirit, nor be moved with
every wind: but 1. John. 4.
try the spirit whether it be of God. This is known either by the end unto
which it tends, or by the means by which it is advanced, or by the
affections which move us to do it. If it be clear, that neither the glory of
God, nor the edifying of the Dempst. Epist. 1. Praeferri debet consilium quod
cum Dei voluntate congruit.
holy Catholic Church, nor the spiritual profit of our next Neighbor, but
some humane pretense be in it respected and regarded: then is it not the
counsel of God, seeing it is not directed unto the service of the Lord. For
(as Saint Jerome says) that voice that persuades any thing that offends
God, is the Super. Math. 4.
voice of the devil. As it is seen by the temptations wherewith he tempted our
Redeemer and Lord Jesus Christ in the Deserts, saying: that he should worship
him, and cast himself down from the Pinnacle. But the voice of God is that,
which encourages and persuades us to the same which he commands us.

3 Although sometimes those things, which with great prudence are deliberated
and consulted upon, and in which lawful means are used to put them in
practice, have not the same success and event which was hoped for, (for the
counsails of Fortune as Latinus Paccatus says, are very secret: or rather, to
say better, because the judgments of God as S. Paul says: are unsearchable,
and no man knows nor understands them.) Roma. 11. Psalm. 35.
Yet many things happen well which never were had in counsel: and though they
are practiced by naughty means, yet the event and end of them is good. As
Atheneus says of the Athenians: whose counsels and judgments, void of al
prudence and wisdom, fell out very prosperously unto them: and they overcame
their enemies, making election of Captains for the wars, which no man would
choose to make ready a banquet. Good counsel (as Artabanus said to King
Xerxes) is not to be He^odot. lib. 7.
less valued and esteemed, though it be overcome by Fortune: whereas
contrariwise, though ill counsel have good success, yet does the counsel
remain ill. When Phocion saw that the matter fell out contrary to that which
he had counseled, he said Erasmus in Apothek^^a.
that he was heartily glad, that it happened well, but that his counsel was
never thelesse very good. Giving thereby to understand, that for a matter to
fall out well, is but a chance, but to counsel well, comes by reason that he
who gives the counsel, is endued with judgment and wisdom.

4 Wise men ought not to trust to the prosperous success of things: for
Fortune often favors (as Valerius Maximus Ple^umque omnium temiretati. etc.
says) to hurt the^ the more that trust to fortunate events. The Carthagineans
commanded their Captains to be hanged, that got the victory without
consulting, but punished them not, that Titus Liui^s. Lib. 38. In o^a^. Ma.
having consulted were overcome. For they thought that to overcome without
counsel, was a good turn that God would do the^, (for as Amianus Marcellinus
says, the events of things are not in man's power:) and that not to consult,
was the negligence and fault of the Captains. Cleanges the Philosopher
compares them whose business fall out happily without consulting, Seneca de
beneficiis. lib. 6. Capitulo. 11.
unto a Gentleman that sent two Pages to find out one of his friends, one of
the Pages went to play, and by a chance, he, whom he went to look for,
happened to pass by the place where the boy was playing: the other Page went
about al day to seek, and at length returned home without finding of him. Now
he that did his endeavor to find out the man, whom his Master sent him to
call, deserved praise, and he that by chance as he played, met with the party,
ought to have been punished. Tullius in o^^t. pro Rabit. p^sth. and in Epistl.
ad Lentul. Boaetius quem citat. Accuitius, in L. sed an vl^ra in sine ^^.


5 Men commonly judge of every counsel by the event of it, and according as
it falls out, they account it good or bad. The divine providence (as Boaetius
says) to the greater punishment and misery of men, suffers counsels commonly
to be judged of, according as they speed, and that the counsels of the prudent
be not believed, as it chanced unto Achitophel with Absolon. These, say the
Greeks, are crossed with the destiny of Cassandra, in yt they be never
believed when they counsel. There be many examples of wise men, who if they
had been believed, many public and private harms and dangers, might have
been shunned: which because I have set down in my book of crafty and prudent
counsails, I mean not to repeat. GOD does oftentimes permit (as Boaetius
says) that their affairs that do account themselves very wise, happen quite
contrary to their imagination, to the end that they may understand and know,
that all things must fall out according to his pleasure. For except the Lord
keep the City (as the kingly Prophet says) the Keeper watches in vain.
And oftentimes humans Psalm. 126.
prudence serves them that think themselves to be wise, to no other use, than
to perceive the miseries and calamities, which they neither can nor know how to
remedy, neither when they chance, nor yet before or after they happen: that
the misfortunes may have, (as the proverb in Spain is used) Bysperas y
octauas.

The sixth discourse, what qualities Counselors ought to have.
THE qualities which king Solomon would have Counselors to have, are these: The
first, that Ecclesiast. 18.
they should be prudent, not rash and headdie, as following their own fancy,
for such men think nothing to be well, but that which they like: and for this
cause no man ought to have conference with an impatient or furious man about
any secrets, no nor yet trust him with any thing yt is secret, for such a one
in giving counsel, is obstmate, and in secrets, wide-mouthed. To be wise,
consists in consideration both of things past, and of things to come, and (as
Seneca says) he that is prudent, considers In libro. 4. Virtut.
that which may follow afterward, disposes that which is present, fore-seeth
that which is to come, and remembers that which is past: and if he forget that
which is past, he loses Aristo. lib. 1. cap. 8. magn. moral.
his life: and if he think not of that which is to come, he falls unawares
into many dangers. Therefore Prudence is called Discretio matter est omnium
virtutum. Aristo. Eth. Libro. 6.
the guide and mother of all other virtues: and as ( Aristotle says,
Rectarerum agibilium ratio: that is to say, the straight and ready rule of all
things that may be done. Without her, no man can counsel well, and she is the
most excellent and surest path to heaven. Prudence is divided into five parts:
which are, Seneca. lib. 9. Epistl. 68. Seneca. lib. 1. Epistol. 86.
Prudentia particularis, which concerns every particular man. Prudentia
Oeconomica, which belongs to housekeeping. Prudentia politica, which
pertains to the government of Cities and Commonweals. Prudentia quae in
ratione regendi est sita, which belongs to Kings, and to the government of
Realms. And Prudentia militaris, touching warlike policy, as Antoninus Anton.
in sum. part. 4. tit. cap. 14
the Bishop of Florence declares. All these kinds of prudence, as much as they
concern counselling, consist: First in fore-casting the end of that which is
consulted, after that order Iodoc. Clichtouc' in Introduc. tionc. Jacob. Fabii.
in Ethic. Arist.
as he that trauaileth, fore-casteth the place whether he is going. Secondly,
in seeking out means, how to attain to the end of that which is consulted: as
a trauailer enquireth the way to the place whether he trauaileth. Thirdly, in
choosing out the best, among all the means which he finds: and in picking
out that in which there is least danger. As for example, if some King consulted
to conclude upon peace with his enemy, whether it were best to do it, by
rendering of some place or City in his Realm, or by paying money, or by way
of marriage: even as he that trauaileth, when he comes to a place where be
many ways, takes the best. Fourthly, in considering how to execute the same
which is determined in the counsel, with less trouble and charges: as he that
takes a journey in hand, provides for that which he shall have need of by the
way.

2 The second quality which King Solomon would have Ecclesiast. 21.
Counselors for to have, is that they should be wise: for the counsel of the
wise remains for ever, and is like a pure Capitulo. 4.
Fountain of life. Tobias counsels his son, always to demand counsel
of the wisest: and that with great reason: for no doubt he that will do all
according to his own liking, and without taking counsel of them that know
more than himself, does go most astray. And for this cause said king Solomon:
My Ecclesiast. 33.
Son, do nothing of importance without aduisement, so shall it not repent
thee after the deed. That men might understand Claud. Cotor. Lib, 1. cap 2. de
discipline. milit.
how necessary it is unto a Prince to be counseled of wise men, the Poets
fained that Jupiter took counsel of Prometheus. For they that govern
Commonwealths, cannot rule them well, if they take not aduisement with persons,
that know and understand what is convenient to be done, for the welfare of
the Commonwealth. How much men ought to esteem of that which wise men say,
Aristotle sufficiently shows, affirming In 6. Ethic. al^isque in cocis.
that we ought not to ask account of the sayings of wise men: for the eyes of
their understanding are clean, pure, and clear, by reason of their knowledge
and learning, and they discern the truth in every matter which we cannot see:
for as Eustacius says, the Sciences take away the rust from the eyes of the
soul, the senses and the body: as Uineger scoureth the rust from the steel,
being rubbed til it be clean and shining. Claudius Cottereus makes mention of
certain Princes that governed Vbi supra.
their Commonwealths well by the counsel of wise men.

3 The third quality that a Counselor ought to have, is age: that he be of
ancient years, because old men have seen much. The Laws of Statuts say,
that in tract of time, prudence, Tit. 3. Lib. 2. in prolo. statut. Politic.
Lib. 5. Capitul. 8. In tractatu de constlio and consiliariis princip.
authority, and experience of all things that are to be done, is gotten.
Aristotle says, boys are not able and sufficient to give counsel, because
their wit and judgment begins to take force and vigor. Fredericus Furius
will have that the Counselors of Princes be not under thirty years of age,
nor above threescore, for from the thirtith year downwards, men's understanding
is not yet settled, their experience is small, their presumption much, their
heat great, their thoughts lostie, their natural weakness much, neither can
they keep due gravity: and besides all this, the people trusts them not,
but murmureth against them. Let them lie at Schools, let them travail to see
Countries, manners and governments, let them learn tongues, let them follow the
Camp and haunt the Court, let them take pains in learning: all such things
are convenient to be known unto the Counselor of a Prince. Though young men
commonly be not endewed with perfect judgment, and for this cause the Law
grants them the benefit Derestitutione Ff. de minorib. 25. annis.
in integrum: the Lacedaemonians would not admit them to sit in public
counsel: neither came they to common places where Courts were kept, and the
Senators assembled together: nor Plutarchus in vita Licurgi.
yet were they present in the Congregation of the Elders, till they were
thirty years old: and what ever they had to do in such assemblies, they
followed it by their* Friends and Kinsemen. Fredericus Furius denies not, that
many young men have better judgment and cleerer understanding then many old
men, and that the ability and wisdom ought more to be regarded then the age.
As may be seen by Papirius Praetextatus, unto whom (being but a youth) it was
granted, that he might were the garment, which men of full years did were, and
was called Aulus Gellius. Lib. 1. cap. 23
Praetexta or togapraetexta, the Robe which the chief Officers and Senators
wore. And this honor was done unto the youth, because coming with his Father
into the Senate, he would not discover and reveal those matters, that he
heard there discussed.

4 As touching old men, Fredericus Furius would have, Vbi supra.
that those which are above threescore years of age, should return home unto
their houses, live in rest and quietness, discharge their consciences, and
think how they may die well. He would also have, that the Princes should
according to the custom of Rome, give them honors, privileges, preferments,
preheminences, pensions, and rents, according to every ones deserts: as unto
them that are discharged from public affairs, not admitting them to their
counsels. For when they be once past the sixtith year, their memory fails,
their understanding wauereth, their experience turns into stubbornnes and
obstinacy, their natural heat is but little, and therefore they let
occasions slip being offered, their thoughts be wearied, they cannot travel,
and to conclude, such men are an impediment and charge to the Court. But to
return to the purpose, seeing that the virtue and gift of counselling well,
comes not from age, but from wit, judgment, and wisdom that every one has:
we ought not so much to respect the age of men, as their ability, which is
known by their words and deeds. For the words (as our Redeemer and Lord Jesus
Christ says) represent yt which Luke. 6.
is in the heart. Socrates being asked what he thought of a certain Erasmus in
Apothegma. 1. Co^nt. 13
man, answered, that after he had heard him speak, he would tell his mind of
him. S. Paul calls them that speak without judgment, tingling bells. When
John de Mena would praise Don Aluara de luna, high Constable of Castile, he
said: Tentalo, Tenta lo, ex platica alguna. Try him, try him, with some talk
or communication: and that with great reason. For words (says Aristotle) show
that which is in the mind. And In Libro. ^^ (...).
though old men be above threescore years of age, yet want they not
understanding, and they be more wise then young men. This Homer shows, where
he says: that King Agamemnon wished rather for ten ancient men as Nestor
was, to be his Counselors at the winning of Troy, then ten young men like to
Achilles. And that Agamemnon said true, it is seen by the most excellent Don
Hernando de Toledo, Duke Dalua, who in wisdom and experience of many
affairs, supplied the turns of ten Nestors, in counselling the great
Monarch of Spain* the Catholic king Phillip.

5 We may see how necessary old men are to give counsel, by this that ye
Laws of Greece ordained: that those should be admitted to be Counselors that
were past fifty years of age. Solon seeing that the flattery of Pisistratus,
wherewith he abused the people of Athens, was openly discovered and known, to
pretend no other thing then to usurp the Empire, and to Plutarch number seni
gerenda sit Respublica.
bring the government of the Commonwealth unto the rule of one man, only
himself: and that no man durst take upon him to resist and hinder him: he
himself fetching his weapons out, and laying them in the street before his
door, called all the Citizens to help him. And Pisistratus sending unto him
to know upon what assurance he durst be so bold to do such things, he
answered, upon old age: which always is most ready to give counsel in
matters of weight and importance. For it is free (as Plato says) from those
affections and passions, which trouble and molest youth. King Agis being in
Archadia with his Army, and readio to pitch the field with his enemies, there
was an ancient Lacedemonian that cried out a loud; that he should consider
that one sore, was not to be cured by another. Signifying by this, that he
might have gone away from the Argiues and saved himself, without putting
himself to the worst, by that his determined boldness out of time and season.
Agis hearing this, did according to the old man's words, and altering his
mind, went from the Argiues, and afterward ouerc^me them without danger. For
this old man, every day they did set a Chair at the door of the
Senate House (this was a custom among them) and many times, the cheifest
Senators arose and came unto him, to ask him, and consulte with him about hard
and difficult matters of importance.

6* That men might understand, that to counsel well, consists rather in the
vigor of the mind, then in the forces of the body: in ancient times past, they
painted the Image of Mercury in the disposition and form of an old man,
without hands and feet, his members being only stretched out. For force,
strength, and those parts that move the body, are nothing necessary, so that
their reason and understanding be fruitful and fertile. Plutarch by many other
examples, proves that it is Vbi supra.
convenient for an old man to govern, because it is proper unto Iacobus
Gracianus in prologo and declaratione omniu^ Plutarchi operum Moral. Cicero in
Catone Maiore.
old men to give good counsel. It is a common saying in Spain, Con mal esta,
^l corral a do boy vieio non corse: with the Oxehouse it goes ill enough,
where the old Ox does not cough. Again, Qua^do el perro vieio ladra, a
conseia. When the old dog barketh, he counsels. Again, Si quieris buen
conseio, prides^o al vicio:
If that thou will good counsel have,
Of the old man see thou it crave.


Job says, that wisdom is in old men. And Ecclesiasticus, that wisdom
becomes old men well, and their counsails ought to be had in account. Plato
counsels, that old men of approved experience, prudence, wisdom, and
love toward their Country* should be chosen to govern the Common-welth. In
Homer, ancient Nestors speech is praised as the most worthiest of all: and
Nestor speaking of himself, says: -- (...)
(...).
Midst the horsemen will I ride, with counsel them to aid, Iliad. 4.

For of old ancient men to be the duty this is said.


And the same Homer in his Odissea, praises Aegiptius the ancient, because he
always spoke first, saying this vearse of him. (...)
Because of age, whose weary lims did crooked grow, Odissi. 2*

And by experience who much did know.


Euripides in his Tragedies brings in Iocasta an ancient Matrone, speaking to
her Son after this manner. (...), Euripides. (...).

(...)
(...).
O son Eteocles, old age with evils is not freight,
But by experience the youth can speak of greater weight.


Seneca says, that it is the duty of young men to obey: and of old men to
counsel and command. Aristotle affirms, that In Menalipe vetus hoc dictum
est* opera quide^ juniorum consilia autem senio^u^ vim habert.
we ought not to commend the affairs of the Commonwealth to all manner of
men, but according to every ones age and prudence. For young men by the law of
Nature, have strength to execute, and old men wisdom to counsel. Euripides
says: That we ought to commit the execution of matters to young men, and the
consultation unto old men, because it is given unto Diuus Ambrosius officiorum.
Lib. 2. cap. 2. Seniores consilio praeualeu^, iuniores ministerio. Phillippus
de la Torre. in Libro. de institutione regis Christiani. 1. Regum. 18.
old men to counsel well: the houses in which they assemble to consult, are
in Latin called Senatus, but if young men commonly meet together in them,
then they ought not to be called Senatus, but Iuuenatus: as Boaetius says.

7 Every Prince ought to consider, that there happened much harm, and great
tumults arose among the Isralites, because Roboam their king, leaving the
counsel of old and expert men in the government of the Commonwealth, followed
the minds of young and unskillful Counselors. And straight after that
ouer-thwart counsel, followed the separation of the twelve Tribes, the
division of the people, the destruction of the Commonwealth of Israel, and
contempt of God. Then began Idolatry, and the condemnation of the ten
Tribes, for withdrawing themselves from the union and true worshipping of the
Lord. All these heavy and grievous harms befell unto Israel, because the King
knew not what counsels he should choose, and because he would not join with
the counsel of the wisest, and most experienced men, which in his days and
with his own eyes he saw. On the otherside may we see and consider, how
prosperously those kings governed, that were guided and led by the counsels
of wise men, and especially of such as feared God. We may behold how well king
Pharao governed, Genesis, 14,
when Joseph was with him: and king Saul when he followed the counsel of
Samuel. And the king of Syria when he had Naaman 1. Regum. 13. 4. Regum. 5. 4.
Regum, 12.
at his elbow: and Ioas when he did according to Ioyadas his mind: and
Nabuchadnezzor when he did as the Prophet Daniell counseled him: and Nehemias,
when he did according 2. Esdras, 8.
to the counsel of Esdras. Happy are those Commonweals, which God blesses
with such Priests as Esdras, to show and teach them, how they ought to serve
our Redeemer and Lord Jesus Christ: and upon which he bestows such Princes
as Nehemias, to bind those that are committed to his charge, to do 2 ^sdras, 5.
according to Gods commandments: and jointly of his own liberallitie, to
succor and relieve the people that is afflicted, destroyed, and impouerished,
through war, pestilence and famine, Luke. 10. Nicolaus de Lora in caput. 10.
Lucae.
joining mercy with justice, as our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ teaches in
the Parable of the Samaritane, that cured him that was hurt, with Oil and
Wine: signifying mercy by the Oil, and justice by the Wine.

8 The fourth quality which King Solomon would have a Ecclesiast. 30.
Counselor to have, is, that when he counsels he should not be sorrowful:
for a troubled and grieved mind, dries the bones (as king Solomon says) and
therefore much more the Proverb, 17.
flesh, and the blood. And a man's mind being vexed with grief, is obfuscated
and darkened with the passions which he suffers, so that he cannot understand
and judge well of that which is counseled. The people of Parthia, to shun
this inconvenience, did consult of that they had to do, in banquets. For
sorrow binds man's understanding, and for this cause this is used in Spain
for a common proverb: Mal se cura de suentura contristura: that is, sorrow
cannot lance away our mischance. For after that some misfortune is happened,
all the sorrow that a man can have will not remedy it.

9 The fifth quality is, that the counsel ought to be well Proverb, 11.
thought of, and as it is said, upon the pillow. For that counsel Seneca in
Libro de benefi. velox consilium sequitur paenitentia.
which is not well tossed and tumbled in our mind, brings repentance with
it: for the more matters are considered and wayed, the better they be
understood: and both haste and anger, are contrary to deliberation and
consultation. And therefore it is Secundae curae sapientiores. Nouerca consilij
praecipitatio. Lib. 22. Festinatio improuida est. and caeca.
said, that haste is a Mother in law unto counsel. Titus Liuius terms
hastines, blind and without providence. The natural Philosophers say, that
dogs be borne blind, because the damme makes haste to whelpe them. It
falls out sometimes that men ask counsel of their friends, concerning
matters which require such speed, that it lies upon their lives, credit,
Canis festinans caecos parit catulos Erasmus in Adagijs. Anton. de Gueuara. in
Episto.
and substance, yea and their conscience also, to have some counsel or other:
and that the friend of whom counsel is demanded, ought without any delay at
all, so readily show his mind what he thinks ought to be done in this case,
as if he found it ready in the holy Scripture. King Solomon counsaileth us,
to let our eyes behold the right, and let our eye lids direct our Prouer. 4, 25
way before us: and so shall we not go unadvisedly about that which we do,
before we have consulted and deliberated upon In lib. cui titul* Dux itinerant.
it. And unto this (as the reverend Father Ludouicus Granatensis says) five
things are necessarily required. First, to commit all matters unto our Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus. Secondly, to perpend them with great attention and
discretion, not only marking the substance of the matter, but also considering
all the circumstances that belong unto it. For if only one thing be wanting,
that one thing is sufficient to mar all: and though it be thoroughly pondered,
fully concluded, and altogether perfect: yet only the doing of it out of
time, is enough to make a foul blemish in it. Thirdly, to take counsel. For
those things that are done without counsel, very seld^me have good success:
also to talk and confer with others about it, but not with many, only with
such as be of sufficient wisdom and experience. For though it be profitable to
hear the opinion and minds of many, to know the matter thoroughly: yet it
ought to be committed but to sewe, and those very select and chosen men, to be
determined and concluded. For if there were too many, they might easily err
by reason of the diversity of opinions. Fourthly, to take time in deliberating
upon the matter, and let the counsel ripen a few days. For as by continuance
of time we are better acquainted with men's manners, so are we also with
counsels and determinations: and that which at the beginning liked us very
well, afterward being well considered, is altogether misliked. Fifthly and
lastly, to take heed of four Mothers in Law which the virtue Prudence has.
Which are, overmuch rashness, affection, obstinacy or stifnes in opinion, and
show of vanity: for overmuch rashness blinds: obstinacy, shuts the door
against good counsel: and show of vanity, does soil and spotte each thing
that comes near it. Franciscus de Vallalobos says, that into the Chamber In
problemat.
of man's understanding, four perturbations enter to counsel. First Pride,
which shows and presents matters of honor. Then Covetousness, which does
forecast what may be gotten by the victory, and what profit may be reap^d
thereby. Afterward Anger and hatred. And by reason of the opinions and thoughts
of these four perturbations, reason is not heard, and if it be heard, yet it
is not believed.

10 The sixth quality which king Solomon would have ^^ouerb. 12.
Counselors to have, is, that they ought not to be wicked and vicious: for the
counsels of the wicked are full of deceit. And seeing that the holy Ghost
does lighten the understanding of men in their counsels, it is a thing to be
believed, that he assisteth and helps virtuous and good men, showing them
what they ought to do. Counselors (says S. Ambrose) to be men Lib. 2. capit,
2. de officijs.
of such doctrine and life, that they might be an example to all them that take
counsel of them: for so, they may have authority and credit in the
Commonwealth, and their life and manners will agree with the counsels which
they give. For no man will take the water which he means to drink, out of an
unclean vessel. And hardly can he give good counsel to others, that takes
none for himself: and whereas he might be virtuous and honest, he is vicious
and wicked.

11 The seventh quality that a Counselor ought to have, Ecclesiast. 8.
Proverb. 27.
is, that he be no Stranger but a Friend, and one that is well known.
Alcibiades, willing to know who was his friend, that Polienus libro 1. stratage.
he might confer with him about his affairs, caused an Image to be made of
stone, or some other thing, and set it in his chamber: but it was made in such
order, that one would have thought it had been some dead body. And then he
called unto him those that professed themselves to be his Friends, and told
them each one a part in secrecy, that he had killed a man, and that he had him
at home in his house, and bringing them unto the Chamber where the Image was,
he showed it unto them, requesting them to favor him so much, as to take away
the dead body and to hide it in their houses: that if he had been suspected
for killing of the man, and the Officers had come to make search for the dead
body, it might not be found in his house: but they all excused themselves, and
refused to do that which Alcibiades requested of them* fearing least if the
dead body had been found in their houses, they should have been brought in
trouble, as accessaries in that offense unto Alcibiades. Only Callias said
unto him, that he would take the dead body, and keep it secretly in some part
of his house, and that for his sake, he would adventure what danger soever. And
from that time forward, Alcibiades took Callias for a right true Friend, and
said unto him, that the same which he thought to be a dead body, was but an
Image which he had commanded to be made to try his friends. In adversity, a
man may easily know who be his true and loyal friends. Julius Caesar said,
that a man's friends become Libro. ^.
enemies, if Fortune pursue him. And Iustine said, that where Fortune does
favor, there men do fancy.

12 The eight quality that a Counselor ought to have, is, to be faithful in
counselling, and not to counsel any thing which Ecclesiast. 27
is not good. Fredericus Furius says, that a Prince may learn Fredericus Furi*
vb^ supra. Erasm. in Panegir, ad Phil. Reg.
whether yt his Counselors be faithful or no, if he feign to ask counsel in
things that are quite contrary to the welfare of the Commonwealth, saying
that though they were such, yet for certain causes it concerned his person to
have them put in practice. As for example: if he would have them to break some
important Law, or to weaken and diminish the liberty of some Privilege: or
to ordain some excessive tributs or toles, or some such other like things. And
by their answer and determination, may he in some sort gather how they be
affected toward the Commonwealth. The Emperor Constantine, desirous to know
whether his Noble men and Counselors were faithful, Tripe^tit. libro 1. cap.
7.
he published, that all those that would leave the Christian faith, and turn
again to the worshipping of Idols, they might freely do it, and that he
would nevertheless maintain them in his Court, and make account of them, as of
his friends. Heerupon, some of them did forsake the faith of our Redeemer, and
Lord Jesus Christ, and of Christians became Idolators: which the Emperor
Constantine perceiving, would not any longer suffer them to remain in his
Court that turned from the Christian Tullius. lib. 2. de officijs. Paulus
^ouius Libro, 43.
faith, saying: That since they were not faithful unto God, much less they
would prove faithful unto him. Paul the third, Pope, used the same diligence,
to know the affection and inclination of men, and many times proposed matters
unto his Cardinals, (no necessity at all urging him unto it) which might offer
them occasion to strive and contend in opinions, and wylled them to tell him
their minds, and by their alteration, learned what answer he should give to
the Ambassadors that were sent unto him from other Countries.

13 There are many other policies, whereby a Prince Frederie* Furius vbi
supra. Erasm. in Panegir, ad Phil. Reg.
may know whether his Counselors respect their private commodity more, then
the welfare of the Commonwealth: for if there be any that be hypocrites and
covetous persons: if there be any that say all is the Kings, and that the King
may do his will and pleasure, or that the King may ordain as many toles and
tributes as he will, or that the King cannot do amiss, or that all which the
King will have is a Law, and ought to be kept as a Law, or that a King is not
bound to give account of that which he commands: all such Cou^sellers are
enemies to the welfare of the Commonwealth, for the King neither ought, nor
may do any thing, that may do the Common-welth any notable harm. No Prince
yet even until this present day, attained to great forces, and defended
himself there withal, but through means of men, that esteemed more the
public profit then their own private commodity. And contrariwise, when-soeuer
it shall happen that the Princes be counseled of those, that little regard the
welfare of the Commonwealth, so they loose nothing themselves: even at that
time shall ye Princes begin to decay, and nothing shall be brought to effect,
that may redound to the welfare and profit of the Common-welth. After that
Solon had determined to moderate the debts which Plutarch in vita Solon.
the City was owing, and to bring in an equality, which was a certain
diminution of the debts, and public acquittaunce which was given to the
City, that no man might come and ask that which was owing them there: he
communicated his intent with some of his near friends. They hearing of it,
presently took up great sums of money, and indebted th^selues before the Law
was proclaimed: and within a little while after that the Law was published,
they had bought them great houses, and purchased large possessions with that
money which they had borrowed.

14 The ninth quality, that King Solomon says a Counselor Proverb, 1.
ought to have, is, to keep close and secret that which is consulted, and not
to disclose or open it unto any man. Seneca says, that a Counselor ought to
talk much with himself, but very little with others: for in speaking much
with others, he incurreth danger to disclose that which is in secret. There
is nothing that destroieth and spoileth all public and private affairs more*
then to have that known, which is consulted and In 4. par. in sermon. ad r^gem.
Franciae, consideratione, 2.
determined in the Counsel. John Gerson says, that in his time all the Kings
affairs went to wrack, because some vile and base persons that served the
King, published all whatsoever was determined in his counsel. The very same
befell unto Henry King of Portugal, unto who^ (because he was somewhat deaf,
and could not hear very well) his Counselors were feign to speak very loud:
in so much that every one knew what was said unto him, this is very dangerous
and hurtful to the Common-welth. For to be delivered from dangers and
adversities, which many times happen to chance in public matters: Valerius
maxim de institut. antiq.
it is very necessary to keep the same close and secret, which is consulted,
as the Romans did.

15 The Signorie of Venice, in their counsel use great secricie, whereby they
have magnificently augmented and maintained their estate, and brought it to
that perfection and greatness as all men know. And chiefly, because they admit
not any Garimbertus problem. 117.
base men of the Comminaltie into their counsel. And the Noble men are so
bridled, that they cannot possible exercise any tyranny upon the
Commonwealth: and all men do their endeavor to procure the public
commodity. The great secrecy that is used among the Venecians, may clearly
be seen, in that they being informed, that Carmignola their general Captain
Bartol. discuss. S. Petrus Iustinia. in histor* venet.
discharged not his Office according to his duty, determined to send for
him, as if they would have communicated with him about certain affairs
touching the war at that time: that after he was come, they might have
executed due punishment on him, according to that he had deserved. This thing
being concluded amongst them, and determined in the Senate: was kept secret
eight months long, whereas notwithstanding, there were two hundred persons
present at the conclusion of the same matter. And though that Captain had many
friends in Venice that favored him: yet was not this counsel disclosed in
all that space. But Carmignola at yt length came to Venice, and was most
honorably received. But when he had been presented to the Senate, they led
him fainedlie to a certain place, as if he should have there rested, where
being come, he remained prisoner, and after thirty days (in which space they
consulted upon his cause) they commanded him to be beheaded with a gag in his
mouth. Paulus Iouius says, that they condemned him, to confiscate and seize,
as forfaite unto them, three hundredth thousand Ducats which he had: as I
wrote more at large, in my Book of the Office and duty of the Captain
General. But to turn back to our latter purpose. Because there be many (as I
said) that when they see the Counselors assembled together, begin to imagine
what it might be that they consult of, and many times they conjecture what the
Counselors go about to determine: in Venice it was ordained, that they which
were of the Counsel, should upon certain days every month, meet together
in the Chamber of Lect^us Bemb^s in histor, venet.
Counsel: but the day and hour of their assembly, should not be limited or
set down, and that though there were no matters to consult of, yet they should
spend the time (at which the Counselors are wont to be there) in matters
concerning the Commonwealth, and by this they procured, that the Common people
did not any more enquire, why they assembled together. The Venetians in this,
and many other policies concerning the Contarenus de repub* veneto^u^.
government of their Commonwealth, did imitate the Lacedaemonians, who when
they gathered themselves together, to consult upon matters which belonged to
the Commonwealth, if Plutarchus in vita Licurgj.
it happened so, that they had no public affairs to employ themselves in:
then they spent the time in praising the good sayings, and worthy deeds of
the Citizens, exhorting and encouraging them, still to continue in laudable
exercises, and in rebuking and blaming the vices of others. The Signorie of
Quomodo venet^ suffragia fe^ant in eligendis magistrat^bus prosequitur
post^llus.
Venice, ordained also, that those who gave their voices in election, should
cast them in a box that had a partition in the middle, which was so covered,
that no man could perceive in which place of the box the voices were cast,
because they would not have any one to know, to whom they gave their voices in
election of Officers.

16 Plutarch asks why Pythagoras did forbid, that any In opusculo de notis
Pythag.
man should keep Swallows in his house: and he answers, because they be
very unthankful birds, and will not become tame, how much soever a man
makes of them. But Pi^rius Libro 2. Hyerogliphic.
Valerius says, because they bring no profit at all unto those houses in which
they build their nests. And the Author Ad Herennium Dum fueris faelix multos
nube^abis amicos.
affirms, because after the same order as feigned and false Friends in time of
adversity, forsake them, whose friends they professed themselves to be in time
of prosperity: so the Swallows come in the beginning of the Summer, and as
soon as the Winter draws on, they leave us, and fly unto other Countries.
But I think that the same which Pythagoras said, may be understood as
Aristotle took it: because it is good for no man to have talkitiue persons in
his house. Many other examples could I show both of men and women, that
smothered in silence, such things as were committed to their secrecy: but
because they be known unto all men, and I have set them down in the Book
which I wrote of wise and crafty counsels, I will not hear stand upon them.

17 The tenth quality which king Solomon would have Ecclesiast. 37
a Counselor to have, is, that he be not envious, or owe any man ill will: for
how is it possible that he should give good counsel to a man, whom he hates
and cannot abide? Of the envious, this proverb in Spain is used: El cauallo
Argel ni en el ni cabe el:
The envious Horse called Argel, none
Will let on him to ride:
Nor any near him for to come
The same Horse can abide.


for the conversation of the envious is so contagious and infectious, that the
Spaniards used this old saying, Ni el embidioso medro, ni el que cabe el biuio:
An envious man could never prosper well,
Nor any one that near by him does dwell.


And to be brief, hatred is a vice that came forth of hell, and it was the
cause wherefore the devil deceived Adam and Eve, Genesis 3. de fructu ligni.
councelling them to eat of the fruit of that Tree, which God forbad them to
touch. King Solomon says, that we ought to choose one Counselor out of a
thousand: he would have only to Ecclesiast, 6.
take counsel but of one man, for that among a thousand we should choose
one. For that is far better understood, which is Gloss. in libro. 1. de
legate. 3.
enquired of by many, then by a few: and in deed it is thought, that four are
many.

It lies and depends upon every Prince his pleasure, to Elius Lampridius in
vita Alexan. Se^er. imper.
have more or fewer Counselors. The Emperor Alexander Seuerus, (as we have
said) before he published or proclaimed any Laws, which he had ordained to be
kept, he delivered them to twenty most learned Lawyers, and fifty most
excellent men, to consult of them. This cannot in any case be denied, that it
is safer to consult with a great many, then with a few: for (as Aristotle
says) when many gather together, (if they be not rude and gross fellows) the
one does confer with the other, and that Polit 3. and Eth. ^tiam saepe.
which one knows, is joined with that which the other knows. For GOD did
put a light in every man's understanding, whereby he might know the truth.
Psalm. 4.


The qualities which Plato would have a Counselor to have.
PLato says, that Counselors which will Dial. ^. de legib.
consult well, ought to be free from affections and passions. For delight and
grief, are two contrary and foolish Counselors. And (as Virgil says) love
and anger overthrow Aeneid. 2. In Catal. in Oratione Iulij Caesaris.
man's understanding. Salust affirms, that all men that deliberate upon
doubtful matters, ought not to be moved with freendship, anger or mercy: for
in those matters where they vary and contend, the mind can hardly perceive
the truth. Neither was there ever any one that did attend both his own
disordered will, and the public profit also, for whereunto a man's will is
most inclined, to that does his wit most apply it self: and if the will
overcome, it rules, and reason has no power: for the desire that a man has
to attain unto that which he pretends, blinds his understanding. And so
does fear also, (as Cornelius Tacitus affirms) Lib. 3. Pauidis consilia
incerta sunt.
so that fearful men cannot govern well, nor counsel that which is
profitable to the Commonwealth, for fear does not let them judge freely. And
as those that stand by and see others play, can better judge of the Game then
they that Lotinus consideratione, 326,
play themselves, for as the gain which they that play hope to get by their
game, blinds them not: even so they that judge and counsel, ought to be free
from passions, which trouble the understanding, and suffers it not to pick
and choose out that which is best. When the Areopagites in Athens, assembled
together Quintil. libro 6. cap. 1.
to judge, the Crier called unto them with a loud voice, that they should
judge without any respect of affection at all.

The Emperor Charles the fifth, wished that his Counselors Fran. Sansou. de
dict. and factis Imp. Car. v.
should lay aside all dissimulation, and respects which might move them, before
they entered to consult: that they might freely understand and judge, what were
most profitable for the Commonwealth. Plato writing unto the friends of Dion,
affirms, that In Episto. 7.
they which use themselves to eat much, cannot be wise, though they be never
so ingenious and witty. King Solomon says: A Ecclesiast. 10.
woeful kingdom is the same, where he that rules it is a child, and the
Princes that are with him, are belly-maisters: or as some interpret it.
Sorrowful is that Country, where he that rules it is a child, and they that
govern it are drunkardes. The reason is, because Gluttons and drunkards are
not wise: and that (as Plutarch says) they that accustom themselves to In
vita Lycurgi.
have their bodies filled with meat, corrupt and mar their judgment in such
manner: that they are profitable, neither to govern the affairs of the
Commonwealth, nor yet to do any other good thing, but (even as brute beasts)
to loose the use of reason, and abuse the gifts of GOD, which ought to be taken
with great devotion and reverence.

The qualities which Thucidites said that a Counselor ought to have.
THucidites ascribes four things unto Counselors, which they ought to have,
to be able to give Lotinus consideratione, 343.
good counsel in matters concerning the Commonwealth. The first is, that they
understand 1
that which is consulted. For hardly can blind Plato in Phaedr.
men (as Aristotle says) judge of coullours. Plato says, that this is the
most important thing that a Counselor ought to have. Socrates said, that every
man was eloquent in the A^te which he knew. And king Solomon affirms, that
every man is skillful Ecclesiast. 38.
in the Art which he understands. The second quality 2
which Thucidites says that a Cou^seller ought to have, is, that he be not
overcome, either with money which is given him, or promises which are made him.
The third is, that he be able to 3
propose the same, which he understands and knows to be profitable for the
Commonwealth. For if he understand what is convenient to be done, and knows
not how to utter it, it is as much as if he understood it not. Therefore all
Counselors of Princes, (as Fredericus Furius says) ought to be well seen Vbi
supra.
in the Art of Rhetoric, or Science of good utterance. For even as man
differs from all other living creatures, in understanding, and in the gift of
speech: so among men, they are accounted to be the most excellent and rarest,
that can reason and discourse with most grace and judgment.

The fourth quality is, that he be a greater freende to the 4
Commonwealth. then to his own particular profit and reputation. In so much,
that where he can do the Commonwealth any good, or stand her in any steed, he
ought to employ himself with all power and diligence therein: though he should
incur great danger both of his credit, life and goods. O the unhappy
Commonwealths, that have unto their Counselors such men as Midas and Glaucus:
for they in giving counsel, never regarded the welfare of the Commonwealth,
but only how they might themselves attain to great store of riches, and
augment their own substance with the damage and loss of the Commonwealth.
These men (as Petrus Cremensis says) counsel In rapsodia de recta reg^i
administratione.
and persuade their Princes to ordain new tributes, to seize upon their
Subjects goods, and confiscate the possessions and substance of their vassals:
that they themselves might enjoy the profit and commodities of other men's
goods. Therefore a good Fredericus Furius vbi supra.
Counselor, ought to rob and pill himself of all interest of freendship,
kindred, partiality, faction, and all other respects whatsoever: and to deck,
adorn, and apparel himself, with right and prudent verity, which neither
can nor will favor any thing but justice and truth. And this ought every good
Counselor to stick unto, as to his friend, Cousin, faction, and commodity:
and to respect this and no other thing whatsoever. In so much that a Counselor
ought to be affected toward all men alike, without any difference at all, but
in such order, that he regard them most, that incline most unto virtue. And to
conclude, all Princes Counselors, ought when they give counsel, not to procure
thereby any profit for their kinsemen and friends, with the loss and hurt of
the Commonwealth. But as Lucane says: Non sibi, sed toti genitum se credere
mundo.


He ought to think, that he was not borne to do for himself only, but also
to further and help all men: and always to have a regard of the welfare and
commodity of the whole Commonwealth.

The qualities which Aristotle says that all Counselors ought to have, that
consult upon matters concerning the Commonwealth.
ARistotle would have, that all Counselors should be exercised in all such
virtues and points of justice, Rhet. 1.
which are necessary to be known of those that consult upon matters, belonging
to ye whole estate of the Commonwealth. He would also have them to be well
practiced both in government of peace and Fredericus Furius vbi supra.
war, and all other things thereto pertaining. For seeing that the office and
duty of a Prince consists in these two things, Government and Defense,
both of them are referred unto peace and war.

The Romans admitted unto those counsels which the Senators Aulus Gelli* li.
3. cap. 18. noctium attic.
gave, upon things belonging to the Commonwealth, some men that had borne
honorable Offices in the City: not that they should show their minds
touching that which was consulted, but that they should follow those whom they
thought counseled best: and because they went toward those persons whose
sentence they allowed, they were called Pedarii, thus doing, they spent not
much time in counselling. The Commonwealth of Rome, admitted no men unto their
counsels, but such as had erst been present at many counsels. The Emperor
Charles the fifth said, that that counsel which was given by loyal Fran. San.
de dic. and fac. imp. Car. v.
and trusty men, and such as did understand the matters upon which they
consulted, was good: because faith and prudence, did profit much against
dis^oialtie and ignorance. And that they were good Counselors that had skill
and experience in those L. 1. C. de offi. vicarij. cap. stote. 1, quest, I.
Gloss. in cap. q. sit de elect. quae citat Aristotele.
matters which were in counsel, and that easily gave their resolutions
touching that which was convenient to be done: for practice and experience (as
Aristotle says) does quicken man's understanding, and make it more prompt and
ready to resolve in that which is consulted.

The second thing which Aristotle does require, in those taht consult upon
matters touching the Commonwealth, is wit to put the same in practice, which
in counsel is determined: for for as we have said, counsel is to no end, if
that be not put in Lotinus consideratio^e, 34^.
execution which is concluded. And in this Aristotle agrees with Thucidides.
For whereas Thucidides requires, that a Counselor should know how to propose
that which he in his mind conceiueth, it is to be noted, that he fitted
himself conformable to ye time in which he wrote. At which instant the
Athenians lingered much time, in proposing that in their counsels, which they
thought to be most profitable to ye Common-welth, without any resolution at all
for the performing of any thing. For it is proper (as we have said) unto the
Democratia, or populer estate, not to grow to any resolution in all their
counsels, unless necessity compel them to it. Therefore if they depart
Machiauellu^.
out of the counsel, having concluded, it is more by chance, then by skill or
wit. Demosthenes affirms, that ye Athenians were in their consultations as
Pylots, which consul^ed what they should do, and after they were arrived in
the Haven, they were discharged, and the ships were cast away. The reason why
in those weals which are governed by the Common People, they part without
conclusion unless they be forced unto it, is, because their weakness suffers
the^ not to determine in those things in which there is some doubt: and if
they do not (as it were) overthrow it with some violent onset, they always
perplexed, hang in suspense without determining.

18 Aristotle says, that the faculty of the mind, in which Politic. libro 1.
cap. 3.
counselling consists, is not perfect in bondmen, and also that it is but
weak and small in women. But this is to be taken generally and not
particularly: for though it be most true, that servitude does oppress the
faculties of the mind, and that they be perfect in the same man when he is
delivered from bondage, Dialog. 6. de Respubli.
(for as Plato and Homer say, servitude causes a man to loose his
understanding) yet nevertheless, there be many bondmen that are endued with
singular and perfect wit: as may be seen in many counsels which diverse
servants have given to their Lords: which I have set down in my Book of
crafty and prudent counsels. Quintus Curtius says, that it is safer and
better Libro, 7*
for servants to obey, then to counsel: for in counselling, if the matter fall
out contrary, they incur danger, and in obeying they be faultlesse howsoever
matters fall out, for it is their duty to obey and not to give counsel:
especially if their Lords suspect that servants counsel them in matters
concerning their own profit, little regarding that which is convenient for
their Persius Mill hominum species. etc.
Lords. No man can deny, but that seeing men's wits are very unlike and diverse,
some of them be purified in adversity, as gold in the fire, (for virtue as S.
Paul says, is made perfect by adversity,) and others contrarily, by
misaduenture and calamities 1. Corin. 12.
loose their wit and understanding. And not only men have more judgment and
understanding when they be favored, then they have being persecuted and
pursued: but also in brute beasts we may see the difference which they have
being much made of, and when they be misliked of by their Lords: yea and in
one self same man if he fall into captivity. For bondage and captivity do so
vex and disturb their wits that are crossed with misfortune, that he which
was free being brought into servitude, seems not to be the same man. The
civil * Laws determine, that fortune many times makes them L. quod attinet.
ff. de regulis iuris, quod attinet ad ius Civil seruj pro nullis habentur.
bondmen, whom nature made free, and makes them free who^ nature made slaves
and bondmen: but according to the law of nature, he that knows and
understands least, ought to serve and obey him that understands most.
Plato, Diogines and Joseph, though they were brought in captivity and made
bondmen, yet lost they not their understanding. But rather (as S. Jerome
says) Plato, though he was a Captive, yet was 1. Epistol. ad. Paulinum.
he greater then his Lord that bought him, for he that bought him was an
Idiot, and Plato was a Philosopher. Diogenes when he was led to the market
place for to be sold, said to the Crier that sold him, that he should cry
whether any man would buy a Lord to rule and govern him. As I wrote more at
large in the Treatise which I made of good education and bringing up of youth.
Though the Laws of nature command, that ignorant and unskillful men,
should obey and serve those that are learned and skillful, and they that can
do less unto them that can do more: yet we see commonly, that cowards rule
and command valiant men: ignorant and unskillful men, have the mastrie over
learned men: and virtuous and good men, are subject to lewd and wicked
persons: as Appollonius Thianeus answered, unto one that asked him what he had
seen in travailing through the world.

19 As concerning that which Aristotle says of women: that, that part of the
mind in which the virtue of counsel consists, L. 1. verse. viro^^. ff. de
legibus, doctores in lib. 1. 9 sex. ff. depostula. and in li. 1. ff. de regulis
juris.
is not perfect in them: it seems that Aristotle had a respect unto that
which the Romans and Lacedaemonians used, in not admitting Women to their
consultations. For they be commonly given to telling of news, and chatting
among their Gosseps, of that which is committed unto their secricle, although it
be never so dangerous unto those that trust them with their Erasm. in Apoth.
counsel. Cato the greater said, that he was heartily sorry, that he had ever
discovered any secret unto a woman. Lactantius Lib. 3. cap. 22.
Firmianus does reprehende Plato, because in that Commonwealth which he
instituteth and ordains, he would have women to be present at the counsels,
that are holden upon matters concerning the Commonwealth. But not to slide
from the matter, we may observe, that, that which Aristotle says of women, is
not so generally to be taken, that it may be said of all women without
acception: for there have been, and now are many famous and renowned Noble
women, whose counsels have done, and yet do, the Commonwealth much good.
Phil. Bargo. in lib. de illustrib. mulieribus. Cassan. in Cata. Gloriae mundi,
part. 2. consi. 10. Pet. Rebuf. in concordantijs.
As after John Bocace, Phillip Bargomate, and Cassaneus, I have written in the
Treatise of wise and subtle counsels. They that make such a general rule
touching woman's wit and understanding, seem not (as Peter Rebuffo says) to
address themselves unto the parable in the Gospel of the Math. 13.
ten Virgins, that five of them were wise, and five of them were fools,
neither was the number of the fools greater then the number of the wise. Out
of that which we have hitherto said, is gathered, that to affirm that
universally (as Aristotle does) which ought to be verified and proved
particularly, is rather to take occasion to dispute and seek reasons to argue,
then to show how a man may know whither they that are to give counsel, have
those qualities which in Counselors are required. For Counselors for the most
part, depend upon the occasions and circumstances, and are as remedies that are
applied unto diseases, which are not cured in the abstract, but in the subject
in which they be: (as Aristotle himself says) and the Counselors be Medicina
non curat hominem sed Socratem. August. Epist. 5. ad Mercellium.
Physicians, who in those matters upon which they do consult, seek remedies
to apply unto them: and in the applicatiue (as they term it) consists the
profit which the medicines do. And for this cause it is said, that the hands
of the Physician and Surgion, are ointments. And as the applicatiue does
depend upon the judgment and skill that every one has: so in matters touching
counsel, the ability which every one has, is to be considered. For (as
Eustachius says) the general and universal rules are not sufficient enough,
to have each particular thing governed by them: and much less Commonweals,
in which commonly concur many very diverse and contrary circumstances, which
cannot be comprehended under the universal rules.

20 Fredericus Furius says, that the Counselors of Princes Vbi supra.
ought to be skillful in many things, but especially in those languages that
are spoken in those Provinces that are under their Princes government, or be
their confederats or friends. For very seldom shall one meet with an
Interpreter, that declares and expounds the interpretation of a thing
perfectly, without wresting, turning, taking away, adding, changing and
altering the sense, after many and diverse manners. It falls out sometimes,
that there comes a Spy, upon whose relation, perchance the safety and honor
of the whole Realm depends, and which suffers no delay, and then it is a
great inconvenience at such a pinch to seek an Interpreter: for either none
can be found so soon, or though one be had, yet the Spy dares not to tell
it unto such a man, or the Interpreter may discover it, or some such other
inconvenience may happen. How much this importeh, may be learned by
Themistocles, who fleeing Plutarch in vita Themistoclis.
from Greece to the King of Persia, and being demanded of the King to tell
him what he would have, answered, that speech was like unto painted and wrought
Tapistrie: for as that being extended and spread abroad, does show the
painted Images that are in it, and when it is folded up it does cover and hide
them, even so is it with speech also. And therefore he desired of the King, to
grant him one years space, that he might in the mean time learn the Persian
tongue, which Themistocles did, because he would not show his mind unto the King
by any third person. Phillip, who interpreted that which Atabalipa King of
Cusco answered, unto yt which was asked of him when he was accused, did play
the Interpreter in such sort, that the king was condemned to die. The Judges of
Israel should have been skillful Lib^ 4. cap 6. de a^canis Catholicae fidej.
(as Petrus Galatinus says) in threescore and ten languages, if they spoke
not by Interpreters unto those that were at variance before them. The Emperor
Charles the fourth of that Anton. Ge^a^ ^^ bulla aurea.
name, commanded in the golden Bull which he ordained concerning the Electors
of the Emperie, that the Electors of the sacred Emperie, their Sons and
others that should be Electors, should employ all their years from seven
upward until the fourteenth year of their age, in the study of Grammar, and
learn the Latin and the Esclauonian tongues, because of the great necessity
and use which they have of them. To conclude, it is most expedient for
Counselors, to be acquainted with the tongues, which are spoken in those
Regions yt are under their Valerius Maxi. Libro 8. tit. de studio and industria.
Kings subjection: and so to imitate King Mithridates, which spoke unto twenty
Nations which he governed, without an Interpreter.

21 The Counselors of Princes, ought to have attentively read, both ancient
and new Histories, thoroughly sifting and examining Fredericus Furius vbi supra.
the^: but especially al such Histories, as have been written of their own
Commonwealth, and of their confederates, neighbors and enemies. Aristotle
counsels all those that govern Common-welths, to give themselves unto
continual reading of Histories, that occasion being offered, they may know
how to turn that to their profit, which in times past they have read.
Moreover, Cou^sellers of Princes, ought to know the end, matter and
circumstances, how, when, and how far each virtue is extended. For by reason
that this is not known, almost all men are miscalled. He that loves quietness
and shunneth quarrels and brawles, is termed a coward. He that is crafty, a
Traitor. He that is rude and rusticke, good. He that is dulheaded and blockish,
mild and gentle. He that studieth not witty and subtle Arts and Sciences,
either for want of capacity, or because he will not take pains: is taken to
be one that chooses the plain and right way. He that is wrathful, hasty, and
furious, valiant and strong. He that is prodigal, liberal. He that is
covetous, thriftie, provident, and circumspect. He that is superstitious,
holy. He that is learned, curious. And as Cato Vticensis said in an Oration
which he pronounced in the Salust in Ca^^lina.
Senate house: it is long since we lost the right names and titles of things,
and by reason of that, neither Commonweals nor yet men, can be well ruled and
governed. Furthermore, Vbi supra.
Counselors of Princes, (as Fredericus Furius says) ought to have seen and
viewed many strange Countries, but above all others, those that are belonging
to their Princes, enemies and neighbors. And this their being abroad in far
Countries and unknown Kingdoms, ought to be circumspect and prudent, not
careless and negligent, as the voyages of idle and wandering persons commonly
be: not unlike to men that walk through a Fair only to feed their eyes. It
is required in Counselors that travail in foreign Regions, to be well
informed both of the government of peace and war in every Country: of ordinary
things, and extraordinary things: of the love the King bears unto his
Subjects, and how his vassailes are affected among themselves: of the strong
Forts and Castles: and of the humors and qualities of the men. Many are of
opinion, that by great travailing from home, they can attain to wisdom and
humane prudence, but that is nothing so: for that is not gotten by running into
far Countries, or by living an exile far from home, but by communication
and conversation with wise men. For it is not enough to have been in strange
Countries, and seen many Regions, and manners of diverse Nations, if he that
trauaileth have not the wit to reap profit by his being abroad. Concerning
this matter, ye Castilians have an old saying: Quien Seuilla the chief Town in
Spain.
ruin es en su villa, ruin es tambien en Seuilla: he that is naught in his
Town and Village, will also be naught in Seuil, Meaning Horat. Caelum non
animum mutant qui trans mare current.
by this, that the change of place does not mende men's manners.

Homer and Virgil to form and make an heroical man, and one adorned with all
virtues, feigned that Ulysses and Aeneas had travailed through all the world:
and not contenting themselves with this, they feigned that they descended into
hell, and went into the Elisian fields, and knew those that were in them. Thus
ought Counselors of Princes to travail, imagining with themselves what
punishment they abide in hell for their wickedness, that counsel their Princes
and others naughtilie, and the glory which they deserve that counsel well.
This does the royal Prophet David give us to understand, when he says,
Psalm. 54. Descendant ad infernu^ viuentes. Anton. de Ge^^^a. In Episto.
that living men should go down to hell: as if he should more plainly have
said, that while men yet lived, they should ponder and weigh with themselves,
what torments they suffer that are in hell: that while they think upon ye
infernal punishment, they may endeavor how to keep and deliver themselves
from them.

22 Fredericus Furius would have, that Counselors of Princes should know,
what forces and power their Princes have, and their Confederats, Friends, and
Neighbors: for as the Physician, the first thing he considers in man's body,
is, what virtue and strength it has, and how much it is able to take, even so
a Prince his Counselor, ought to know what forces, and how great power his
Prince has, and those that are his Friends and Confederates, that he may be
able to cure the whole body of the Common-welth: and that in curing the one
part, he hurt not the other, as if a Physician to heal one member, should
harm the other. Fredericus Furius says, that the Counselor of a Prince,
ought to be a virtuous, upright, and just man: for such a man loves to give
every man according to his deserts. Which is, to punish those that offend, and
reward those that do well, and in all things he observes due moderation: for
in punishing he is not cruel or slack, or in rewarding scarce or excessive, or
vain and to no purpose. Neither does he punish men more then their faults
deserve, nor make all faults equal, as the Stoickes do, nor dissemble with
men's offenses, to turn the punishment with which the Laws punish the
offendourr, to their own profit by taking brybes, as Dionisius King of Sicil
did, and they now a days do, ye ordain Laws with which they may rob and
spoil the people. These men are like unto the herb Lumbricaria, which
kills the worms called Lumbrici, and if there come no worms near it, it
breeds worms of it self to kill the^ afterward. These men also, to show
themselves very diligent and zealous in executing justice, either punish them
that have not offended at al, or in punishing them that have done amiss, they
use more cruelty then the fault deserves. A Princes Counselor ought to be
francke and liberal, for the people is greatly pleased with francknes, and
loves liberality, yea and admireth it. But the covetous man, is always
detested, and abhorred: for he does all for money, and to fulfill his
greedines, sets all things to sale, nay, he does not so much as speak
without interest, and is ready to commit any treason whatsoever, so he be no
looser by it. Salust writes, that Iugurtha going out of Rome, said: O City,
thou would soon be sold, if thou had a Chapman. The Counselors of
Princes, ought to take a pleasure in doing well. This virtue consists not in
giving of money, or bestowing any of their substance or riches as liberality
does: but in helping the Commonwealth, and ayding each member of it, with good
counsel: admonishing, warning, aduertising, praising and dispraising, and
favoring by their authority and protection, not only those that crave favor,
aid, help, or succor of them, but those also that deserve it without asking.
Counselors ought also to be meek and gentle, gracious in words, courteous and
sweet in language, gentle in hearing of all men great and small, rich and
poor, and not to use slanderous speeches and ill words unto them that speak
unto them. For many men are sooner moved to cast away themselves, and lose
life and goods for a reproachful answer, then for some heavier and greater
injury offered in other sort. Moreover, a Counselor ought as it were to
set open his door, for all men to enter, of what condition or kind soever.
And he ought also to be of great sufferance and patience in hearing, and give
no man occasion to fall in desperation.

23 The Counselors of Princes ought to be valiant, this valiantnes is not
meant of strength and forces of the body, but of the inward fortitude, and of
the courage of the mind, by reason of which, men be called noble and heroical,
that is, more then men. As for the other corporal strength, that, is common
Johannes de Orrena.
to many, as to swash bucklers, Roysters, and other rascal fellows that care
not for their lives, and pass not if they sell it for a button. A ^aliant man
loves the truth, he is an eno^^e unto leasings, he cannot away with saucie
fellows and scurilitie: he is grave and constant: he is always of one
temperature: he hates the comiersation of babbling and talkatiue persons: he
speaks freely: he speaks graue^^: he shows his mind unto his Prince with
as great liberty, as he would do to any private person: he cannot* nor will
not dissemble. It is not enough that a Counselor be valiant, but it is also
necessary, that^ his valiantness be accompanied with prudence, for even as
fear hinders one from choosing that which is most honorable to his Prince
and profitable to his Country: so valiantnes or courage of the mind, if it be
not moderated with prudence and judgment, it does not permit a man to shun
and eschew any danger. And if Princes have any need or necessity of men of
good understanding and expert judgment, to give counsel in matters concerning
the profit of the Realm: it is a great deal Cornelius Ta citus. lib. 11.
more profitable, and far more expedient for the Commonwealth, that the
Prince have wary and circumspect Counselors, Vbi supra.
then such as be strong and valiant. Fredericus Furius says, that the
Counselor of a Prince, ought to be of a Chollericke or sanguine complexion,
and not of any other. For they that are of this mixture and temperature, are
witty, they have a notable memory, they can discourse bravely, they have an
excellent judgment, they are just and upright, they are loving, gentle in
talk, loyal, beneficial and liberal, honorable and sumptuous, valiant, and
of noble courage: their bodies be light and nimble, and of a good temperature.
They that are Melancholicke, as they are by nature sorrowful, and of the self
same complexion as the earth: so they be rusticall, base, and heavy, scarce
able to lift themselves one handful above the ground, vain, and delighting in
trifles, enemies to noble thoughts, malicious, superstitious: in so much that
men of this complexion, have wasted and utterly spoiled all the Regions of ye
world, with their dreams, foolish imaginations, and vain visions. They are
wonderful superstitious, and the more they grow in age, the less they know:
they are very hatred it self, and when they are angered, straight without any
occasion, either they fall to blows, or rattle out a thousand cursses, using
all the injurious and slanderous words that ever were heard among men.
Finally, it is a strange thing to see, how wonderfully all Philosophers, and
such as study the speculations of Astronomy, detest and fly from those that
be borne under the Planet of Saturn. In so much that it is thought to be most
certain, that the Philostratus (...) vita Apollo (...) Tya^*
great Appolonius Tyaneus, found a melancholicke person in the City of
Ephesus, who with his presence only, had corrupted the whole City, and
infected it with a great plague. To conclude, they that are of a melancholicke
complexion, be dull and drowsy, heavy, unskillful, unlearned, and they have
no one virtue in them that excels, and all their qualities are less then
mean.

24 Although the Mellancholicke complexion, be not so good as the Chollericke
and sanguine, yet it is by many called Lib. cui titulus examen ingeniorum.
the heroical complexion, because they that are of that complexion, refuse not
to tell the truth, making no account of any danger at all: and after the same
manner, as wine causes them that be drunk, to utter all what ever they
think, even so melancholy, makes them that are full of black choler, to
speak the truth, and oftentimes they divine and tell of things to come.
There have been many excellent men (as Aristotle says) that In problemat.
partic. 30. pro. 1.
were melancholicke. And though those inclinations be natural that cause the
complexions in men, yet be they not (as those that study Astrology say)
ordinances and decrees of Pretors. Inclinationes non sunt edicta praetorum: and
therefore it is commonly said, Vir sapiens dominabitur astris, Every wise man
may command the stars, and bear rule over them. For though the stars and
Planets incline to one thing or other, yet can they not force men to it that be
wise and circumspect, and of judgment how to govern themselves. No
inclination of star or Planet; can force such men to do that which they will
not, nor take away from them and deprive them of the free will that God has
given them, as I have in more ample manner declared in my Books. De Amore
diuino, humano, and Casto. Plutarch writes, In Apotheg.
that Socrates was showed to one, that affirmed he could judge of any man's
conditions and wit, by the phisiognomie of his face: who when he saw Socrates,
he said, that he was dulheaded, and that he had a very rude wit, and that he
was a great freende unto women, and that he did men great injury, and that he
was much given to wine, and that he was very incontinent. When Socrates his
friends heard this, they became very angry with the Phisiognomer, for they knew
the contrary by Socrates, that he was a very honest man, and well thought of
among all men: but Socrates said unto them, that the Phisiognomere said the
truth, and that he verily had been such a one, if Philosophy had not taught
him to be virtuous.

Fredericus Furius would have, that the Counselor of a Prince should be of
mean stature and thicknes, for extremity in the proportion or bigness of the
body, seems ill in a Counselor, and diminishes his authority. For of
overmuch greatness, all Philosophers and Astronomers conclude, that knowledge
and wisdom, be seldom seen in a man that is very hie, especially, if he be
very weak: and therefore it is said, that a long weak man, is lazy and
ignorant. As for them that be very short and low, there is not so much want of
government in them, as in ouer-tall men, but only this, that they be angry and
presumptious: and the people mocketh them, and makes no account of them.
Therefore a Counselor ought not to be, neither too long, nor too thick, for
there is no body but he will laugh, when he does see one man like a Barrel,
and another like a Conger. To conclude, talenes or shortness, so the mean
proportion that all men commonly are of, be not notably exceeded, hinder not
the judgment and prudence which is required in Counselors. Little men (as the
Author of the fifty Sonnets says) often times are endued with brauer gifts
then others, as touching ye mind. Virgil speaking of Tideus says, that he was
little of body, but yet very valiant. Mayor in exiguo regnabat corpore virtus.


Finally, it is well known, that men measure not their length by spannes, to
know by the measure of their bodies, what wit, judgment and ability they have.

25 The sufficiency of a Counselor, as concerning his body (as Fredericus
Furius writes) is the natural proportion, conformity, and perfection of his
members, that nothing be wanting or superfluous: for either of these two
faults, show very ill tokens of the mind, and also offends the sight of
those that look upon him. The proportion of all the parts of the body, is an
agreeing and equality of each member, the one with the other. The deformity
is quite contrary, when the members of a man's body are unequal, one arm
longer then the other, one hand small and the other thick, one shoulder hie
and the other low, and so other members some greater then the other. The
perfections of the parts in man's body, is, when he is borne wanting never a
part or member, and without any fault in any of them. As to grow crooked, to
have a crooked back, lame, or without some arm or foot, by reason of the
scarcity or super fluitie of the matter. For (according as all natural
Philosophers prove, and especially Gallen) they that be so borne, always have
ten thousand lacks and defects in their understanding, manners, and life. It
is said, that Aristotle commonly used this Poesy, God deliver me from a man
marked by nature. To have one foot, arm, or eye less, or one member bigger
then the other, does not (as we have said) hinder ye wit, judgment and wisdom
which is required in Counselors, for we observe not those qualities in a
Counselor, which we do in a bond-slaue when we buy one: but the ability
which he has to give counsel, and the discourse which he is able to make in
the counsels. Fredericus Furius would have also, that a Counselor should be
fair and well favored, for they that are endued with that grace, for that gift
only they are beloved and honored. Therefore it is necessary, that a
Counselors head be well fashioned, round, not sharp in the upper end, nor
very big, nor In problemat. particula, 10 problem. 3. Conciliator de prob. 3.
deff. 76.
very little. Aristotle says, that they which have little heads, are more
prudent then they that have great heads: if their heads be little in such sort,
that the inward parts of the head be not wanting or diminished. As for the
proportion of the face, that ought to be something flatter then round, not
great, nor round, nor laden with flesh, nor little: the forehead large or
meanly, not little, nor representing grief or sorrow: the eyes of mean
bigness, not too big, nor too little, clear, not rolling, steadfast, not heavy,
nor without rest: the nose large and thin, not short nor turned upwards: the
lips, something thick, not very small, falling something downwards. Finally,
Fredericus Furius would have, that a Counselor should be comely, well
favored, civil, and of good behavior. No man can deny, but that the beauty
of the face, is a rare and marvelous gift of nature, and in which she works
most artificially: as I wrote more at large in my books of Divine, humane,
and chaste love. Where I set down the qualities which a Gentlewoman ought to
have to be fair. And much less can any man deny, but that those counsels
that are accompanied with comeliness and beauty, are more acceptable then
those counsels, which are given by an uncomely man, and such an ill favored
fellow as has no grace. For if he that counsaileth be fair, his beauty does
procure, that his reasons persuade with more speed and seleritie, as Lucane
says: Vultus adest verbis, faciesque-incensa perorat.


And virtue is most acceptable when it proceeds from a fair person. Gratior
est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus.


But because counselling consists cheefely in the wit, judgment, and wisdom
which the Counselor has: we ought more to regard the Counselors prudence
then his beauty: for commonly the fayrer men be, the lesser wit and judgment
they be thought to have: therefore they be called fair beasts or fine
pictures, that be carried in show on solemn days. Experience teaches us, that
nature often times supplieth ye want of beauty, with an excellent judgment and
subtlety of wit. As the witty Saphos says: Ingenio formae damna rependo meae.


The Emperor Frederick riding forth a hunting, went to mass in a place,
where he found a Priest that was very ill favored, at whom he meruailed
greatly, looking upon him: but the Priest perceiving that the Emperor
meruailed to see him so ill favored, said unto him as the royal Prophet David
said: Psalm. 99.
Deus nos fecit, and non ipsi nos, God made us, and not we our selves. And the
Emperor talking with him, marked that he was a sage and discreet man, and
loved him so well, that he made him high Chauncellor of all his Empire.

26 Counselors, as Fredericus Furius says, ought to have an excellent and
rare wit: for a ready and brave wit, is the beginning, means, and end, of
hautie and heroical enterprises. Yet wit only (as we have said) is not enough
to judge which Plato dialogo. 6. de Repub.
of those things that are consulted ought to be done, and which to be omitted,
for this is belonging to wisdom, and we ought more to respect, that the
Counselors of Princes be wise, then witty, rich, or noble. For (as Plato
says) it is the point of In Alcibiad. 1.
wise men to give good counsel, and not of those that be welthie. And the
Angel being demanded by Tobias of what Tribe he Tobit. 5. 11.
was, answered unto him: Do thou seek a stock or family, or an hired man
to go with thy Son? Though the virtue of counselling well, consists more
in wisdom then in wealth, or nobility: yet it is supposed, that Gentlemen
and rich men, are commonly better brought up and instructed then others, and
that they do better understand and know, what is belonging to the government
of the Commonwealth, then men of base lineage and small substance. And to put
the counsel and government of the Commonwealth, in the power of the
Comminaltie, were to take the eyes out of the head, and place them in the
tail: as it is said that the Snak^ did, whereby he burst his head. For,
because the eyes look over the whole body, God Lactantius Firmianus de
opisicio Dej. cap. 8.
placed them in the head, and not in the other inferior members: seeing then
that the Rich men and Noble men, are the head of the Commonwealth, they ought
to have a regard over her, counselling what is most profitable for the
conservation of the whole Commonwealth, and government of the same, even as
the eyes look to the whole body. The Venetians admit not any of the common
sort of people into their counsels, nor yet to the government of their
Commonwealth, neither do they suffer any bastards to become Cou^sellers unto
the Duke, though they Fulgosius consil. 62.
be made legitimate, neither may they be created Cardinals, for these be the
Pope his Counselors. Yet Princes commonly Gometius in reg. t^ien. q. 2. n. 2.
admit them unto their counsels, and commit the administration of public
affairs unto the^r for in that they be bastards, that takes not from them the
judgment and understanding which God has given them: and there has been a
great company of bastards, that have been very excellent men, and very
profitable In fine tractatus de spurijs.
to their Commonweals, as Polietus larglie proves by many examples. No man
ought to take counsel of those that may command him, for then he is bound to
do that which they counsel him to do. Neither ought any man to take counsel
of Plin. Epist. li. 8.
such men as take it in displeasure, if men follow not their counsel, thinking
that he despises and contemns them, that will Cap. quisquis praecep 14. q.
1. and Cagnolus 11. L. Consilij. ff* de regulis juris. Cono^us libro 7.
Commentario.
not do as they counsel him. But these are rather to be termed Masters then
Counselors, for it is the property of counsel, that he who asks it, may
take it or leave it: and of dominion or signorie, to obey and do that which is
commanded.

27 Princes ought to make election of Counselors out of those nations which
they govern: for they that be naturally borne in those Provinces, are better
acquainted with ye estate of their Country, then Strangers be. And for this
cause S. In libro de consideratione ad Eugenium. L. 1. cod. si curiales relicta
ciui^ate libro. 10. In regula de Dioma^e, qu 1. n. 5. Politic. lib. 7. cap. 20.
Bernard says, that the Cardinals who be Counselors unto the Pope, ought to
be chosen out of all Nations. The Civil laws ordain, that they which are of
the Counsell-house, should not leave their own Countries: for they (as Gometius
says) know and understand the affairs of their Country better the^
strangers. Aristotle says, that some Commonweals ordained and decreed, that
none such as had their livings and possessions in the borders of their enemies
Countries, should be admitted to the Counsel. For such persons, fearing to
loose their goods, would not counsel that which were profitable for the
Commonwealth. Some will have that the Counselors of a Prince, should have all
their livings, within the territory and Lordship of the Prince who^ they
serve: for then, they fearing least they should loose them if they counsel
ill, or otherwise offend their Prince, and having no foreign place to flee
to, they are more careful of their charge and duty toward their Prince. It
concerns every Prince to have such persons in his service, as put all their
hope in him, and altogether depend upon him: that even as those which pass
over the Seas in some ship, look unto the same ship least they should loose
their own lives and substance, so they that counsel Princes, if their life
and all their livings consist in the Prince his welfare, they will give him
counsel with greater diligence and care. For the Commonwealths are like ships
and vessels of the Sea, in which they be carried that live in them. And by this
means will the Counselors take more heed of the public profit, and counsel
that which is most convenient for the Commonwealth, seeing that their life and
substance, depends upon that Prince his safety whose Counselors they be,
and that if the Prince decay, they must fall to decay also. If the Counselors
of Princes have any lands or livings in those Countries against which their
Lords will wage war, they ought to renounce them, imitating the great Captain
Goncalo Hernando de Cordoua, who before he Paulus louius in vita magn^ du^^
Goncali Herna^.
made war against the King of Naples, (being commanded by the Catholic king
Don Hernando to do it) resigned al ye lands, titles, and estates he had, in the
kingdom of Naples. Some brave and noble Captains gave their goods unto the
Common wealth, because the enemies commanded, that it should be cried through
all their Camp, that no one should do any hurt or damage to the possessions
of those Captains against whom they warred: by this means to make, that the
Co^mon-weales unto whom those Captains served, should not trust them, as I
wrote more at large, in the books whith I compiled of Military Discipline. L.
5 Tit. 9. part. 2. and tit. 3. lib. 2. statutorum.


28 The private Laws of the Kingdom of Spain ^aie, that the Counselors of
the Prince ought to be of good wit and judgment, and learned and ancient men.
For prudence, wisdom and authority, and experience of all matters, consist
in continuance of time. They ought to be such men as fear God, and are
alienated from all covetousness and greedines: and such as love to serve their
Prince, and seek* by all means possible, how to further their Country. Each
Prince that makes choice of Counselors to be counseled by them, ought to
consider, that nature brings forth three sorts of men, (as Hesiodus says)
Aristo. lib. 3. Eth, vbi adducit authoritatem Hesiodj.
Whereof the one sort is of them, that through their own natural inclination,
perceive and know what ought to be done, in the administration and government
of matters: and that which they judge, they put it in ure, without the
aduisement, teaching, or help of any other person at all. This state of men,
is the chief and principal among all others, and such men seem to be sent by
the providence of God, to the profit, welfare, and conservation of man's estate.
The other sort of men, is of such persons, as of their own natural
inclinations, cannot themselves judge what is convenient for them, to order and
dispose those affairs well, that are committed to their government: but they
be endued with such a natural kind of goodness, that they willingly learn of
others that are wiser then themselves, and obey them that give them good
counsel. The third sort is, of those persons, that neither know of themselves
what is best, nor yet will learn of others, nor submit themselves unto the
judgment of those that be more wise, refusing to follow good counsel when it
is given unto them. These fellows do more harm then good in the counsels of
Princes, for their intent is only to gainsay that which passes their
capacity.

The Emperor Charles the sift, said: that the first step Bartolus de
B^^^^linj discurs. 10.
unto wisdom, was the purpose and intent which a man does set before him,
that he will not err, or be deceived: and the second, willingly and patiently
to harken to the truth, especially when it redoundeth unto his profit that
hears it. For little does it profit that he is wise and faithful who
counsels, if he unto whom counsel is given, have not the wit to do
himself good with it. Although all these qualities which writers require in
Counselors, be not found in any one man, yet they serve to show an Idea or
pattern of a good Counselor. And for that all these qualities, never concur
in one person, Princes have many Counselors, that some may supply that which
is wanting in others. For it is thought that a great many shall Cap, in
Canonicis, distincti. 19. Cap de quibus. distint. 20. L. vlt. cod. de sidej
commissis, cap* prudentia de officio, Gloss. in cap. 2. q. 7. 3. decad libio*
1. Episto* 2.
sooner find out the truth of that which is enquired, and judge better and
surer of a matter, the^ but a few. Titus Liuius says, that for ye most part,
when many assemble to consult, the greater part overcomes the better. The
reason is (as Pliny affirms) because the judgment and wisdom of those that
counsel, being unequal, their opinions nevertheless and sentences are
equal, and their wisdom is not regarded, but the number of those that give
their voices; and though their prudence be unequal, yet the opinions of the
prudent and unskillful together are equal. Finally, one only quality
suffiseth for all Counselors to do that which they ought to do, viz. To be a
good and true Christian: for in this point, all whatsoever is written* touching
ye virtues with which each Counselor ought to be endued, is contained and
included. For the purity and sincerity of Christian Religion, allows no
vice, and suffers not any person to profess that Art and Science, which he
knows or understands not, and unto which he is nothing fit: to the hurt
of his next Neighbor, and damage of the Commonwealth Especially, seeing that
the Art which the Counselors of Princes do profess, is the noblest of all
Arts, which is, to rule and govern Nations. And for this cause is this Art
called of Plato and Aristotle, Architectonica: because she rules and governs
all other Arts and Sciences.

The seventh discourse, of the Privileges, prerogatives, and exemptions,
which the Law and right does grant to the Counselors of Princes.
SEeing that the counsels proceed (as we have said) from the holy Ghost, not
only the counsels, In Theage. dicitur, consultorum ^em esse sacrum.
but also the Counselors (as Plato says) are an holy thing. Plato terms
Counselors an holy thing, because if they counsel well, they be ministers of
God: who (as the Prophet Cap. 9. Plin* li, ^, cap, 7. Matthew. 5.
Esaias says) is a marvelous counsel, and in giving good counsel, they
imitate God, who does good unto all men. For good counsel profits the party
much unto whom it is given, and it hurts him naught at all that gives it.
Ignorant and unskillful persons say, Give us money, keep your counsel to
your self. But they that so say, perceive not (as S. Ambrose Lib. 2. cap. 2.
de Officijs.
affirms) that money is spent and consumed, whereas counsel lasts for ever:
and that money, the more it is given, and among the more persons it is
distributed, the less he has that gives it: but counsels, the more they be
given and communicated, the more good do they do, both unto him that
counsels, and unto them also that take advice: and lastly, that a little
wise and faithful counsel in matters of importance, ought to be bought (as
Demosthenes says) with a great sum of money. In Olynthiaca. 1,
If they that counsel well, be ministers of God, no doubt the Counselors of
Princes (who regard the welfare of ye Common Cicero in some. Scip.
wealth) do one of the most notable services unto GOD, that men in this life
can do, and therefore does God reward Cap. bon. 2. q. 2.
them that give good counsel, both in this life, and in the life to come.

1 The Counselors of Princes (whom the Laws call Silentiarij, 1. Priuilegium.
Titulus de silentiarijs and de curionibus. lib. 12. codicis. Cagnolus in L.
diom functo ff. de officio assessoris, n. 16.
either because the Princes communicate their secrets unto them, or because
they ought to conceal that which their Princes trust them withal) enjoy those
Privileges which the Law grants to the assistants of Magistrates who show
them what they ought to do for to judge well, and are called Assessores.

2 They do also enjoy those Privileges, which the Law grants to Rulers of
Towns and Cities, which in Latin 2. Priuilegium. Martinus Laude^. in
tractatu de co^silia^ijs principum. Martinus Gronin. in Epist. ad maximilianu^.
Quod si hoc^decurionibus, idest confiliari^s ciuitatu^ st^t^i^ur, quanto magi^
sibilo cu^ in so^ni principis consiliario vindi^abit.
are called Decuriones; who be the Counselors, Aldermen, and Senators that
rule and govern them: and that stands upon great reason. For it is a thing
more important to the Commonwealth, to give the Prince good counsel (who is the
head of the Commonwealth) then to rule and govern some City well: for they
that counsel the Prince, have a care of the profit of the whole Common-welth,
and of all those that live in the same, but they that bear rule over some
Town or City, regard no other thing than the commodity of the same place
which they govern. By reason of the necessity that Princes have of counsel in
all matters concerning the Commonwealth, the laws grant many Privileges and
exemptions to all Counselors of Princes: to the end the Commonwealth might be
well governed by their counsel, as well in time of peace as of war. Libr. 1.
officio.
For little (as Tullie says) profit Arms, if they unto whom the government of
the Commonwealth is committed, consult not what ought to be done.

3 The Counselors of Princes, are in great honor and dignity, 3. P^iuilegium.
Cagnolus, vbi supra. n. 17. 4. Priuilegium. L. Quisquis codic. ad lege^.
Julian, ^ecius tam^ L. 1. n. 15. ff. de officio eius, negat. Petrus vero
Cal^^actus, ind. L. 1. n. 35. dicit procedere dicta^ legem, quisquis and in
consilia^ijs supremi consilij. 5. Priuilegium. 6 Priuilegium. Filius Famil.
Institu. quotque modis ius patrae potestatis soluatur. and Johan. Monactus in
cap vnic. de scis. Li. 6. L. 3. ff. de adoptionibus. L. honor 9. Plebei, ff. de
inumeri. etc. L. 1. cod. de conl^li. et nouella constable. iust^^iani. 81. L. Ius
senatorum cod. de dignitatibus Libro. 11. et in. L. 1. cod. de prepas. laborum,
Lib, 1, 2,
though they have no jurisdiction which ministers any dignity unto them.

4 They be noble, and enjoy those Privileges which be granted unto Noble
personages: which are, to defend and plead for themselves in criminal
causes, by a Proctor or Solicitour: and also to command the sentences which
they do give, to be recited by others.

5 The Cou^sellers of Princes be Patritij, and Senators, and they be exemted a
patria potestate; but not because they be Patritij, or Senators, but by reason
of the Office which they bear.

6 And those Sons that be Counselors of Princes, Bishops, chief Officers,
Presidents of some Chauncerie, or Generals of some Army, though they be
exempte a patria potestate because of their Office, yet they enjoy those rights
and Privileges which appertain unto those that are as yet sub patria
potestate.

The Prince is placed in the number of his Counselors, and they be as members
of the Prince (who is the head of the Common-welth) and ( Gigas de crimine
lesae maiestatis, Libro, 1. Capit, 14, L. quisquis cod. ad L. Julian. L, 6. 1.
de institutione principis.
as Dion says) the Counselors be the eyes and ears with which the Prince
does see and hear. And for this cause ought every Prince to take good heed,
and to enquire and examine very diligently, what men he makes choice of to be
his Counselors: and they ought not to admit any one unto their counsel, that
has no wit or judgment: for this were also (as we have before said of base and
common persons) to take the eyes from the head, and place them in the feet, as
the snake, etc. Furthermore, a Prince ought not to admit any Idiots and
unlearned men, who know not how a Commonwealth ought to be governed, unto the
Counsel: for this were no less to take the eyes out of the head, and place
them in the feet then the other. And the Counselors of Princes, seeing they
be the eyes of the Commonwealth, ought to procure the public benefit of the
same, and love those that live in it, as their own natural sons and
brethren.

7 The Civil Laws ordain, that the Counselors of Princes 7 P^iuilegium L.
defens. cap. de defensorib. ciuit.
shall be guarded, and had in great account of every one, to the end that no
injury may be offered unto them: for otherwise, they dare not to show their
minds freely, and counsel that which they deem to be most profitable for the
Common-welth.

8 They that kill Counselors of Princes, yea they that but 8 Priuilegium
intend to slay them, though they kill them not, commit high treason against
the majesty of the Prince, and their goods are Gigas vbi supra lib, 1, cap, 4,
Boethius in addit. ad tractatum de authoritate mag ^^ consilij, n, 2. Grauit,
consi. 6. n, 79. Gigas vbi supra, n, 9. 9 Priuilegium L. seueram, cod, de
dignit. Martin, Laud. in tractat, de consi. principum. 10 Priuilegium. Martin
Laud. vbi supra, q. 24. 11 Priuilegium. L. 1. and ibidem Bald. ff. de colleg.
illicit, Martin. Laud. vbi su. q. 18 12 Priuilegium. Guido Papa. dis. 37 per,
L. can. cod, de excusat, muner, lib, 10.
confiscate. And this is to be understood if they kill them for some cause
pertaining to their O^^^ce, for if they kill them upon some other private
grudge, they commit no treason: but in the kingdom of Naples, they commit high
treason upon what occasion soever they kill them. And this Law was ordained by
the Lady Jane, Queen of Naples, because one of her Counsel called Andreas de
Isernia was slain.

9 The Counselors of Princes may not be put to any torment, but the
Councellers of Cities, are commonly racked, and otherwise tormented.

10 The Counselors of the Prince, may not procure any Office out of the Court,
without the Prince his leave.

11 If the College of y^ Prince his Counselors be dissolved, the goods which
the College has, are to be given to the Counselors: and this is understood,
of those goods that are given by them that founded y^ College, and not of
those which the College had of the Prince: for such goods, (the College
being broke up) return again to the Prince who gave them.

12 If the Counselors of the Prince give over their Office, either because the
Prince does license them to do it, or because he chooses other Counselors in
their steed, yet whilst they live, they do not loose their Privileges,
exemptions and prerogatives which the Law grants to Counselors of Princes.
This Privilege is granted unto them by reason of their dignity, and Office
which they have borne: for which cause many things are permitted in Law. But if
the Prince expel them out of his counsel, because they be vicious and wicked,
not content with such rewards and pensions which are allowed them, but
augmenting their stipend by bryberie and other unlawful means, and so (as
Johannes Andreas a famous Lawyer counsels) be put beside their Office, that
the Prince may make In cap, quanto jure jurando.
choice of virtuous, just, and upright men, which will regard the public
commodity more then they, then they that are so put out of their Office, enjoy
not any of the Privileges or oxemptions, which the Law grants unto the
Counselors of Princes.

13 The Counselors of Princes are not bound to bring that 13 Priuilegium.
Martin, Laud. vbi sup. q, 22.
money (wherewith their Fathers bought them that dignity) in account, at the
distribution of the Childrens portions: for that money which was given for their
Office, is of the same nature as goods gotten in war, termed Bonacastrentia,
which are not reckened (as the Lawyers say) In legitima, that is, as part of
the Childs portion.

14 If any Counselor die without an heir, his goods shall not 14 Priuilegium
Doctores in li. 1, cod, vnde vir and vxor. Martin, Laud, vbi supra, q, 5, 15
Priuilegium. Bartol. ind, L, 2, per seg. Si quis presbiter, cod, de Epis, and
cler. L, 1, cod, in col. li, 10, Martin Laud, vb, su. q, 28. L. Si quis decur.
cod, decurionibus Lib, 10. L, hac leg, verse, vt qui liberam, cod, de prox, li,
11, vt qui liberam proficiscendi licentia^, pronunciatione commeactus adopti
fuerint, sine qualibet stipeudiorum aut emolumentoru^ de ductione peregre
degerit. L, Reipub, ff, ex quibus ausis m^^^res, Reip. causa abesse cos
intelligimus, qui non sui commodi causa sed coacti ab sunt.
accrue fisco, that is, unto the Kings Treasury, but unto the College of the
Counselors: and not only the College, but also the Counselors wives exclude
the Kings Treasury.

15 Although Counselors ordinarily may not renownce the habitation of their
birth, yet the Counselors of Princes may, because they have their house and
abiding place in the Court, neither may they depart thence without they get
leave of the Prince. And if so be they do leave the Court, without license
from the Prince, then ought they to be rebuked, and the stipend to be paid unto
them, is to be kept back for the time that they be, or have been so absent.
For he cannot be said: to be from the Court in the behalf of the Common-welth,
who is not sent by the Prince, but departs without leave* This (as John
Igneus In lib. 3 9, de his. n, 24. ff. de Senatus consul, Silhan. 16,
Priuilegium.
says) belongs to the honistie of a Counselor, and seruire of the Prince,
not to depart. from the Court, or cease to counsel the Prince, according as in
duty he is bound to do.

16 If the Prince command any thing centrary to that which the Law ordains,
his Counselors are not bound to put the same in execution, and they ought to
let the Prince understand why they obey not his command. The Civil Laws
ordain L. vindicarj. cod, de penis, c. apud ^h^ssal. 11, q, 3,
that the Prince his servants and ministers; shall not execute any thing which
their Prince wills the^ to do, if it be contrary to Law and justice, and that
they shall let thirty days pass before they go in hand with the execution of
it: that in the mean time, the Prince his anger or passion may cease, which
moved him to enjoin that which was unjust. For all delaying, all lingering,
and all prolonging of time, which is done to save a man's life, cannot thoose
but be good, as Iuuenall says: Iu^enalis.


Nulla vnquam de morte hominis cunctatio sera est.

Athenodorus the Philosopher, counseled Augustus Caesar, Erasm, in Apoth,
that he should never say nor do any thing when he was angry, unless he had
first rehearsed the Greek Alphabet, a. b. g. etc. King Erasm. in panegyrico ad
regem Phil: et Gigas de crimine lesae may: in titulo qualiter in crimine
lesae mai^^statis, proceda^ur, q, 16, n. 16.
Antiochus wrote unto all the Cities of his kingdom, that they should not
execute any of his commands, which were against the right of the Laws, so
they did make him acquainted why they delaied the execution thereof. I his which
we say of Counselors of Princes, that they be not bound to put any of their
Prince his Commissions in practice, if they agree not with the sense of the
Law, takes place, except (as some Doctors write) this clause Motu proprio be
added thereunto: for that seems Gigas vbi supra q, 16, n, 16
to be as forcible, as if he should command it again. Nevertheless, because
these clauses, Motu proprio, de certa scientia, and plennitudine potestatis,
are so ordinarily, and that without the Princes command, specified and set
down in all rescripts and Letters of Princes: they prove not that it is the
Princes will and pleasure, that that thing should be executed, which is
repugnant to the Law, especially if it ^end to the hurt of some other. For
such clauses are to be understood, according to that which the Laws dispose
and ordeine. And though such ^ ^^^ses are of as great virtue, as if the Prince
should iterate his former command: yet are they not sufficient to prove, that
the Prince at ye writing of those his Letters was not (as it might have been)
angry, or troubled with some other affection, or L. digna vox, cod. de legibus.
moved with some passion, or ill informed. For it is supposed and thought,
that it is the Princes will and pleasure, that laws should be duly observed
and executed. And for this cause, if a Bald* in lege ad dictos, cod, de Episco.
audi. Cap, resist, 11, q, 2 da venia^ o imperator, tu carcerem ille Gehe^nam
minatur. Tulli^ib, Epistolarum vlt, Epist. T^bi persuade praeter culpam, et
peccatu^ homini nihil auidere posse, quod sit horribile aut pertimessendu^. 17.
Priuilegium L, final cod, de rescin, vendit. Mart. laud. vbi supra, q, 4. L,
principal ff, si certum petatur. In verrem acti, 6. L, 7. c. 7. co^menta: juris
cibilis. D. L. principali. L, non licet ff. de contrahe. Epist. and L, 1, cod,
de contract, Indi.
Prince command or will any thing to be done which is notoriously unjust, or
against Gods commandments, his Counselors ought not to obey him, nor
conceal that which he wills, answering him as the Christian Soldiers did
Julius Apostata, when he commanded them to do a thing that was contrary to
Gods commandments: Lord, your majesty may command us to prison, but our
Savior and Lord Jesus Christ, whom we serve, will send us to hell if in this
we fulfill your pleasure.

17 The Counselors of Princes, may not buy any clothes, gold, silver, or
bondmen that belong to the Prince his Subjects. This (as Baldus and the
Doctors say) holds in those Counselors of Princes that govern and rule
Cities. For it is supposed, that by reason of the Office which they bear,
they will not give as much as the things are worth: and (as Tullie says) they
had rather take them without paying for them, the^ to buy them. Franciscus
Conomus affirms, that the Law which forbids to buy gold, silver, clothes
or bondmen, touches not those Officers and Magistrates, whom the Civil Laws
forbid to buy any thing in the Provinces which they govern, for these have a
greater punishment appointed them, and the Law which we speak of, does only
require, that the price which was paid for things bought, should be given to the
kings Treasure: and because he for whose cause the Law was made and ordained,
had charge of certain particular things of ye Prince, (as we may gather by the
Title and superscription of the same Law,) and because it forbids to buy
clothes, gold, silver or bondmen, it speaks of things particular belonging
to the Ind. L. final. vbi. a priuatis nostrisea contige^it venundare.
Prince. So that understanding that which the Law ordains after this manner,
it holds not in those which govern any provinces, but in those that
accompany them: and it holds in all the Palatines or Courtiers, whither they
dwell within the Princes Palace, or whither they attend upon him only.
Alciatus In L. serinis cod. de palatin. sacr. largitionu^ li. 12.
says, that those which dwell within the Prince his Palace, be called
Comitatenses, and Palatinj: (for those be the Courtiers that accompany the
Prince) and they that go to rule or govern some place, are called
Mittendarijs. According to that which Alciat affirms: that which the Law
ordains, holds in those Courtiers that dwell in the Princes Palace, and
attend upon him. And being so that the Law was written of those that dwelled
within the Princes Palace, the Law is to be understood, of those Courtiers
which dwell within the Court, and not of al other Courtiers: for it is thought,
that those that dwell within the Kings Palace, will buy such things as belong to
the Prince, for a lesser price then they be worth. The Law may also be
understood, of those which buy things, which especially belong to the Prince
himself, and not of those which buy things that appertain to Fisco, that is,
to his Treasury. If it be so that the Prince have his wealth separated from
the goods of the Treasury, as the Emperors of Rome had in times past. The
substance of the Emperor was termed Aerarium, and L, 1. 9. hoc inter dictum
ib^res enim fiscales quasi propriae and priuatae principis sunt, ff, ncqaid in
loco publico. L, ibid, habitis, bostis cod, de fidej i^stru.
the Commonwealths substance was called Fiscus. But after that the Emperors
took the goods of the Commonwealth to themselves, the same which was disposed
of the Emperors goods does also hold in the goods that belong to the
Commonwealth, and that the goods of the. Treasury may be sold, if they be
brought to a public place where they may be bought. For being sold after
this manner, every one may without danger of the Law buy thereof.

18 The Counselors of Princes, may license any one, willing 18 Priuilegium
to build in public place, for to do it. And this is understood, of those
Counselors that are present in the counsel of rewards^ for this being one
of the special rewards that the Prince gives, it appertains unto no other
Counsel.

19 The whole years wages or stipende, is due unto the 19 Priuilegium Cagnolus
in L, diem functo. n. 17, ff, de officio assesso. Rebufus in concordam, in
titulo de electione egregj aduocat. 20 Priuilegium Martin, Laud. vbi sup. q, 3,
Cagno. and Mainerius in L. con. sil. n, 19, ff, de regulis juris. 21
Priuilegium. Martin, Laud. vbi sup. q, 23, 22 Priuilegium Martin, Laud, vbi
supra q, 25.
Counselors of Princes, if the Prince die before the years end. The same is to
be understood, of the Prince his Atturnies, if he die before they do serve out
their year. And it takes place, if the Prince which succeeds, retain the
same Counselors and Atturnies in his service.

20 Prelates and Ecclesiastical persons, that be Counselors of Princes, are
not irregular, if they counsel their Prince to make or constitute Laws which
may punish those that offend, with pain of death.

21 The Counselors of Princes, cannot neither in judgment, or out of
judgment, plead one for another.

22 The Counselors of Princes, may not sell any goods immooueable, without the
leave of the Judge: before whom they ought to justify, what necessity
compels or urges them to sell such goods: albeit that Counselors of
Princes, enjoy the very same Privileges, dignities and preheminences, which
the Law gives to those Governors of Towns and Cities, which in Latin are
called Decuriones. For the tenth man of those that were sent to inhabit some
place, was chosen to govern and rule it. These Decurions, are called
Counselors and Cap. statuimus 11, q, 1, and a cap. qui in. quo. 51, d.
defenders of those Countries which they rule. The other Decurions, are called
Decuriones Curiales: because they were bound to serve in that Court or Session,
where the Judges that governed the place which they inhabited did frequent and
assemble, and where the Priests or Curats did sacrifice to their Idols. These
are the Courts of which the Cannon-lawe makes Wolfangus Iazius, lib, 3, de
Repub. Roma.
often mention. And those that were called Decuriones Curiales, might not sell
or do away their goods immovable, neither might they leave those Countries
wherein they served. And because they were bound to gather and recover the
public revenues, it was their charge to provide maintenance for the Cities
and Towns, and to appoint Tutors and Overseers to all pupils, that should
guide and look unto them. And moreover, ordain such as should keep and
maintain their portions* and if those men, whom they had ordained to defend
and keep Orphans goods, dealt not well, they were bound themselves to pay
for them. They then being oftentimes much troubled, and very hardly dealt
withal, refuse their Office, and are unwilling to serve the Commonwealth any
longer: and these be the Decurions which may not sell their goods. So that it
is manifest, that this cannot be fitly concluded of the Counselors of
Princes, because the Decurions are bound unto it: for the Counselors of
Princes have no jurisdiction, in such manner as the Decurions have, and are not
bound to be resident in those Towns and places which they govern.

23 The Counselors of Princes which stand their Prince 23 Priuilegium
in great steed, may enjoy the fruits of their livings, though they Boethius
decisione, 17.
be not resident in the^, for then they be absent for the Commonwealths sake.
This holds not in Counselors that have nothing but the title and name of
Counselors, and serve not the Prince in giving him counsel.

24 The Governors of the City of Norimberge in Germany, 24 Priuilegium.
Antonius Gerar. in Repub. Norimb.
have this Privilege, that those wills and Testaments in which two of them be
witnesses, are of force. For it is supposed that those men which are chosen out
of the whole Commonwealth, and elected to be the Rulers of it, are persons of
such credit, reputation and authority, that the testimony of two of them is
sufficient in all such acts as the Laws ordain to be made in presence of a
great many witnesses. Xenocrates Cicero in oratione pro Lucio Cornelio Baldo.
et Diogenes Laertius, lib. 4. in vita Xenocratis. Cap, cum esses did. de
testam.
the Philosopher, was of such credit and reputation in Athens, that when he
was brought before the Judges to witness any thing, they would not let him
swear. And this seems to be the reason, why Pope Alexander the third,
commanded that those wills and Testaments of the Parishioners, in which the
Priest that had the cure over their parish was a witness, with two or thee more,
should be forcible in law. For it is to be thought, that he who has a cure
over the whole Parrish, and unto whose charge all the parishioners commit their
consciences, ought to be had in such account, and of such credit and
authority, that his testimony should be as forcible in any act, as Lib, 8,
cap, 4, co^me^t, iuris ciuilis,
the witness of a great many others. In so much, that Franciscus Conanus did
greatly err, when he said, that Pope Alexander ordained this, because he
thought the Priests by this means should easily obtain part of ye
parishioners substance, and it seems rather to be as I have said, then as the
interpretations Didacus de Couas Ruuias in d, cap. Cum esses. 25 Priuilegium.
Brumellus in tracta, de potestat, legate, conclu. 3. Vbi supra. q, 20
show which the Doctors make, upon that which Pope Alexander ordained
concerning this matter.

25 Princes may not do any thing of importance touching the Commonwealth,
unless they first consult about it with their Counselors. For as Martinus
Laudensis affirms, whatsoever the Prince commands, without taking advice
of his Counselors, is not accounted to be just and lawful. This which the
Doctors say, holds not in such Princes as acknowledge no superior or higher
power above them, but in such only as be not supreme Princes. As in ancient
times past, the Emperors of Rome acknowledged the Senate to be in authority
above them, and took counsel in the Senate about all such things as they were
to ordain and command: and if they did not rule and govern the
Commonwealth as they should do, then they In rubric, de co^stitut. n. 20. In
cap, super eo: n, 37, de haereti^^s, lib, 6.
were punished. Neither does it hold (as Ripa and Phillippus Probus say) in
those Princes which ordain and constitute any thing concerning that which
depends upon the Positive law. For the Prince himself only, without taking
any counsel of his Counselors, may ordain and command any thing, whatsoever
seems unto him to be profitable unto the Commonwealth. But if he command
any thing, which appertains unto the Law of God and nature, he may not do it
unless he do first take advice of those that be of his Counsel. But because
L, 1, ff, de constitu. princip. ibi populus ei and in eum omne imperium suum
co^tulit.
such a Prince as does not acknowledge any superior, has all that power which
the Senate in old times past was wont to have, whatsoever he commands, is
of force, and ought to be observed, whether it be pertaining unto the Positive
Law, or unto the Law of God and nature: which the Prince may expound. For it
is supposed to be commanded by him, seeing that he has all the power to
command, and ordains that the Commonwealth had. This does not hold, if that
which the Prince commands be notoriously wicked and unjust. For in such
Acts. 5.
matters, we ought rather to obey GOD, then men. Further, more, although
supreme Princes may enjoin any thing to be done, which they suppose to be
most profitable for the Common-welth, and yet not make their Counselors
acquainted with Iacobatius vbi supra.
it: nevertheless, to the end they may always be obeyed, and that which they
command, continually put in practice by their Counselors, they ought never to
do any thing of importance, except they take advice of their Counselors about
it. And it was an ancient custom in Spain, that the Counselors of the
Prince, should be witnesses in those contracts and wills which the Prince made.

26 The Counselors of Princes, in those contracts, testaments, 26 Priuilegium
L. Curialis. cod. de decuri. lib. 10.
and wills which they make, ought to have a respect unto that which the Laws
ordain, though they be exemted in those cases in which they be especially
privileged. According Mar. Lau. vb. sup. q, 9, per leg. fi ha bitatio.. 1. ff.
de vsu and habitat. ibi si vtilitas habitationis sit relicta. 27 Priuilegium L,
1, cod. de officio viccarij. D, L. 1. ibi indicationis nostrae soleat
representare reuerentia^. Wolfangus Jazius, lib, 1, cap, 12 Decad, 3, lib. 3.
to this: if a Prince grant any of his Counselors the profit of the habitation
in any of his houses, the use and fruit or property of the house is not due
unto him, but only leave is given him to dwell in it.

27 The Counselors of the counsel of the estate, are to be preferred before
Counselors of other counsels, when counsel is taken upon matters concerning
that counsel: for they have a care over the whole Commonwealth, and do more
particularly represent the person of the Prince. But if counsel be taken upon
matters touching war, then they that sit in the counsel of war, are to
be preferred above the others. For (as Titus Liuius says) one College or
Senate is preferred before the other, but not me^ some before others. And it
seems that by this which we have said, that Question is decided and
discussed, about which In tractatu de authoritate magni concilij.
Johannes Montagnus, In additionibus ad tractatum de authorita. magni concilij.
Nicolaus Bocrius, and In Catalogo gloriae mundi, p. 7. conside. 14
Bartholomeus de Cassameus strive and contend. To wit, that the Counselors of
Princes, ought to be some preferred before others: and in what places they
which more especially represent the person of the Prince, ought to be
preferred, as members more particular of the Prince. For eue^ as they that come
nearest to the fire, warm themselves most, because they feel most heat, so
the Counselors that be most familiar with the Prince, are most esteemed of in
all places. Esope the Historiographer, said unto Solon, that those which were
to be conversant with Kings, should either talk very little with them, or
very familiarly. Solon answered, yt it was a great deal more safer for them,
not to be in their company at all: and that if so be they were, it was
necessary for them to be very prudent and wary. For Princes are like to fire,
and they that be nearest unto them, incur most danger.

The eight discourse, what punishment they deserve, that do not couusell their
Princes sincerely and faithfully without deceit.
EVen as they that counsel well and give sincere advice, are Ministers of God,
and be rewarded by him, both in this life and in the next: so they Cap. bonae,
12, q. 2, bonae rej. Cap. nequitiae distin, 86.
that counsel maliciously and deceitfullie, are ministers of the devil, and
God does punish them, both in this life and in the life to come, and if they
do give maliciously their Prince naughty and wicked counsel, they cast
venim and poison (as Plutarch says) into the common Fountain, In opusculo,
cum princip^ maxim philosophum disputare debere.
which runs through all the City, and every man does use it: and by how
much the more harm the Commonwealth takes by their double counsel, by so
much the more deserve they to be punished. And that they be ministers and
servant to the devil, may easily be proved, seeing that the Office Johan.
8. Quia mendax est and pater eius. 1. Peter. 5.
of the devil, is to deceive, to lie, to cousin, and use a thousand setches and
crafts to do men harm: for this is his only intent, and his ginnes and
snares, which he uses to entangle men, are such and so many, that men can
very hardly escape Apoc cap. 12.
them, and with great difficulty be delivered out of them if they be once
snared in his nets. Furthermore, the devil (as the holy 3. Regum. 22. Ero
spiritus me^dax in ore omnium propheta^u^.
Scripture says) is even in their mouths that give counsel with malice and
deceit. And not only the devil, but also the world and flesh give those
persons ill counsel, that take advice of them. For the world (as the famous
Doctor Azpilcoeta says) In repetitj. cap. inter ver. 11. q. 3
does counsel those that serve Princes, to please their Lords and Kings,
though it redownde to the manifest danger of their souls, and utter ruin of
the whole Commonwealth. For so doing, they shall obtain honor, quietness and
profit: not to themselves only, but to their friends also: if they do the
contrary, they shall displease both their Prince and those Peers also which
be favored of the Prince, because they please him, and follow that counsel
which the world gives them. The glorious Cap, Nemo, peri. q, 3, cap, Nolite q,
3. Nolite timere eos qui occidunt corpus, ne forte propter timorem non dicatis
libere quod verum est. Matthew, 10, John, 8, Math, 16, 17.
S. Austen says, that it is better to suffer torment for speaking the truth,
then to receive rewards for flattery. And S. Chrysostom says. Fear not them
that kill the body, least for fear of them, thou speak not the truth
freely. The very same does our Savior Christ teach us, saying. And fear ye
not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul, but rather
fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. Furthermore,
against them that follow the counsel of the flesh, our Savior says: Ye judge
after the flesh, and praising S. Peter, he says: Blessed art thou Simon the
Son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my
Libro, 1, de legibus.
Father which is in heaven. Plato affirms, that every man carries two
Counselors about him, that be contrary one to another, and both of them void
of reason: to wit, Pleasure and Grief, for delight and passion give ill
counsel. And Julius Caesar, in a certain Oration which he made in the Senate,
said, Omnes homines. P. C. qui de rebus dubiis consultant, ab odio, amicitia,
ira atque misericordia vacuos esse decet, that is. It becomes all men that
consult upon matters which are uncertain and Cap. magnae de voto quid liceat
secundum aequitate^, quid deceat secundum honestatem, quid expediat secundum
vtilitatem.
doubtful, to have their minds free from hatred, freendshippe, anger, and
mercy. Therefore Counselors of Princes, to counsel well and sincerely,
without malice or deceit, they ought to consider (as Innocentius the third
Pope said) three things. First, whether that which is in consultation, be
lawful according to justice: then whether it be comely according to honesty:
and lastly, whether it be expedient, according to profit. And Innocent (as the
famous Doctor Azpilcoeta says) did first put down In cap, inter verba, ^, 64,
11, q, 3,
that which is lawful, honest, and comely, and afterward that which is
expedient for the profit of the Co^mon-welth, to show, that though that which
is consulted, be lawful according to the world, yet if it do comprehend any
sin in it, mortal or venial, it ought in no case to be put in execution:
nor also if it be not approved of wise and grave men, although it were never
so profitable: after the example of the Athenians, who because Plutarchus in
vita Themisto.
the counsel which Themistocles gave them, was unjust, would not follow it,
when as notwithstanding it was very profitable.

2 If the Counselors of Princes freely utter that, which they deem to be
most profitable for the Commonwealth, they are not to be blamed howsoever the
matter falls out: for the success (as we have said) and events of things,
consist not in the Discursu, 1,. 6,
power of man: and (as Vlpian the Lawyer says) he that counsels L,
Consilij, ff, de regulis juris con silij non fraudulenti nulla est obligatio,
cap. nullus de regulis juris. L. tua. final.
without malice or deceit, deserves no punishment, seeing that he unto whom
the counsel is given (as the Emperor Justinian affirms) may choose whether
he will put the counsel in practice or not.

They that give counsel without malice or falsehood, (according to the
Lawyers) differ from them that use guile and fraud in giving counsel, in
this: that they which counsel vprightlie and sincerely, are not bound to make
satis-faction for ye damage or loss which any man does get by following their
counsel, whither he that asks the counsel, be determined to follow the
counsel which they give, or be not: and, whether he unto who^ the counsel was
given, would not have done according unto it, unless it had been given him:
or would have done it, though Cagnolus, in d, l. consilij.
no such counsel had been given him: and, whether they give counsel to such
as ask advice of them, or to such as ask none: Hyeronimus Francus, in d, l.
consilij.
and lastly, whether they show any reason, why they think that counsel to be
good which they give, or show not any reason at all. Again, they that
counsel a man to do any thing, and do only show him a reason why they
counsel him to do so, differ from them that command and persuade a man to
do a thing, in this: that they which give a man counsel, and make him
acquainted with the reasons which move them to give such counsel, which the
Lawyers term Exhortari, do ^ot bind, or Arg, L, ad hae^ verba, lbi non ^nim
qui exhortantur ma^datoris opera fungitur, ff. de his qui notantur infami. L,
Cum, pater,, Mando siliae, 14 q. L. 1.. persuadere, ff, deseruo corrupto. In
dialogo de oratore. In Gorgia. Lib, 1, cap, 5,
by any necessity force him to whom the counsel is given, to follow their
counsel: but they that command, will have yt done which they command: and
they that persuade, urge the execution of that which they persuade. And
therefore Vlpian says, that it is more to persuade one to commit some offense,
then to compel or constrain him to do it: for men's minds are more moved by
persuasion, then by compulsion or commandment. And therefore Cornelius Tacitus
and Plato say, that the Art which teaches men to persuade, is the most
excellent and noble Art of al Arts: for that which by man's force could not be
atchiued, has oftentimes been obtained by eloquence: as I writ more at large
in my books of Military discipline.

3 Though they that give counsel without malice or fraud, be not bound to make
satis-faction for the damage or harm that comes by their counsel, yet they
that profess any Art, or take any Office upon them, are bound in the Court
of conscience, Cagnolus in d, L. consilij, n, 4.
to make satis-faction for the loss and harm that the parties take by
following the counsel which they give: for they are bound to open the truth
unto those that ask aduisement of them, in such things as appertain unto
their Art: as also Assessors, Aduocats, interpreters of Laws, Proctors,
Solicitors, Physicians, and all others are, ye being ignorant of the Art which
In L, quida^ existimauerunt, ff. si cert petatur, a. In titulo de requirendis
consilijs. 1. versiculo consilia^ij. L. in peritia, ff, de regulis juris In L,
ex malesicijs., si index ff. de actiombus and obligationibus L. in te
stipulantem,. 1. ff. de verbo obligat. D. L. imperitia culpae enumeratur,.
Imperitia instituta, de lege Aquilia.
they profess, use it to the great hurt and damage of their neighbors, and of
those yt take their counsel: and (as Socinus says) Advocates and Counselors
in Law, are bound in the Court of conscience, to make satis-faction for all the
loss and damage that ensues by their counsel, in those causes which they
defend. Speculator will have, that Advocates or Patrons that defend the
poor, or them that be falselie accused, shall not be bound to make
satis-faction of the damage that comes by their counsel, so they use no
couine or deceit therein: albeit that ignorance is counted a fault. For this
does hold, as Bartholus says, in Judges, w^ose duty is of necessity, and not
in Counselors, whose duty is voluntary.

Against this opinion of Bartholus, do they make, which affirm, that the
ignorance or want of skill in the Physician, is counted a fault, and that they
which profess that Art whereof they have no skill, are fault-worthy: for they
deceive the^ that ask counsel of them, as of men that be learned and skillful
in I., si quis domu^. Celsus ff. locatim culpa^. etc In L. quod nerua ff,
deposi. in intellectibus.
their profession: and this opinion follow Zasius, Alciatus, Alexander de
Imola, Johannes Montalonius, and Baldouinus.

4 The Emperor L, rem no^ nouam,, patroni.
Justinian ordained, that every Advocate should swear, he will not defend any
unjust cause, which can not be defended, but with false allegatiens, and with a
bad conscience: and which no Advocate will defend: for it were not good, that
they should be more esteemed of, which defend unjust causes, then they which
will not defend them. This (if I Johan. Eckius in tractatu de materia
Iuramenti ad finem. Probus in cap, vt commissi. n 2. de haereticis, li. 6. per
le. 3,. magis ff, de testibus. L. debetur.
be not deceived) does hold in those causes, which are manifestly known to be
unjust: for in those causes which depend upon proofs and witnesses, (which
only conclude to the Judge) and in those causes which depend upon expositions
of Texts, upon opinions of Doctors, and upon the will and arbitrament of the
Judges: (which is as free, that though the causes be just, yet it is very
uncertain what sentence the Judges will give,) Patrons and Advocates are not
forbidden to defend such causes, (seeing they be not manifestly known to be
unjust) but yet they be bound to open the truth unto their Clyants, and procure
that the strifes and suits in Law, be not immortal, and everlasting, using
malicious and crafty fetches to deceive the Cliants or parties pleading. That
which we have said of Patrons and Advocates, L. ^i calu^niatur ff, de verborum
significatione. Ouid^us. No^ est in med^o semper releuetur vt ^ger, interdum
docta plus valet art malum.
does also hold in Physicians, for they are not in fault, if they minister to
the sick according to the rules of physic: for it is not in the power of the
Physician to give life unto them that be sick: albeit that they are faulty, if
they be ignorant in their profession, and understand not the Art which they
profess. For this holds in those Physicians that be ignorant of those
things, which they commonly ought to know, which profess the Art of curing:
and this is the ignorance that is counted a L, labeo, ff, de verbor,
significatione.
fault, for they use deceit and crast in professing that wherein they have no
skill. And if the Patient die, through the ignorance of the Physician that
undertook his cure, he is bound to make satis-faction for the cost and
charges of the Patient. And Mainerius in L. imperitia. ff. de regulis iuris.
Albericus in d.. sicut^.
as concerning corporal punishment, it lies in the Judge his pleasure, either
to appoint him a moderate and extraordinary punishment, or to punish him
according to the offense committed. That which we have said of Patrons and
Advocates holds, whether they take money for their counsel or no: albeit
this holds not in those that say without consultation, what in such a matter
ought to be done. For those that answer questions Angelus in d.. praeterea si
medicus per leg, ide^ juris ff, ad lege^ Aquilia^, quem sequitur Mainetius in
d, L. Imperitia.
demanded of them, are not bound without rewards to resolve doubts which they
ask of them in the Art which they profess. And many loath to spend money,
propose their doubts to some learned men: who, though they answer conformable
to the rules of the Law, which they remember at the time yt their counsel is
asked: and albeit they answer according to their conscience, yet be they not
bound to call to remembrance al which both divine and humane law disposes and
entreats, in matters that may fall out: for this (as the Emperor Justinian
says) is a thing more divine then humane: and the fault lies in the L. 2.. si
quid.
Clyents, who because they should not pay fee unto the learned, are contented
with the answer which their Counsel give, without study upon the case. For
such answers and counsails, are by the Lawyers termed, Consilia et responsa
volatilia; such as are lightly passed, and are not considered and examined, but
lightly given, and are like feathers carried away with the wind, having nothing
in them like to counsel, but the name only: for it is given without
meditation or study, only to satisfy their importunity that ask.
Furthermore, if he that gives a man counsel, persuade the party to follow
his advice, because of the profit which he himself may get thereby, and not
for that he unto whom he gives advice, should be the better by it: then is he
bound to make satis-faction for the loss which the party takes by following
his counsel. As for example. One knowing Hieronimus Francus, in d, ^,
Consilij.
that a certain Merchant which owed him a sum of money, was altogether
behind hand, and ready (as they say) to make a banck-route; to recover his
money, affirmed to another Merchaunt (to whom the banck-route made suit to lend
him some money,) and assured him, that the banck-route who would borow money of
him, was a welthie man, well monied, and sufficient to be trusted with any
sums of money that were lent him. This man is bound to pay for him, whose
sufficiency he assured to the Merchaunt that lent the money; for unless he
had warranted the banck-routs ability, the Merchant had not trusted him with
his goods. Again. One burst not take a Servant, because he doubted of his
truth; another told, him that he might trust him with all that ever he
committed to his charge Franciscus Conanus, lib. 7. ca. 14. Commenta. Iuris
Ciuilis, and Hieroni Francus in d, l. consilij.
or custody. This man is bound to answer for all what soever the servant
stole: because his Master would not have taken him into his service, unless
he had assured him of his truth.

5 The providence of God, (in whose power the counsels of men be) does often
permit, that those counsels which are given fraudulently and maliciously,
become hurtful unto those that give them: according to that of Solomon. Who so
diggeth Ecclus. 27. 26,
a pit, shall fall therein, and he that lays a stone in his neighbors way,
shall stumble thereon: and he that lays a snare for another, shall be taken in
it himself. And for this cause says Hesiodus the Greek Poet, (...)
(...).
That man himself does harm, who seeks another to entrap,
Ill counsails to themselves, which men to others give, worst hap. Erasmus in
^^agio consilij. Fran. Conanus vbi sup. l, 7, ca. 14



As it happened to the Woolfe, that when he counseled the Lion to kill the Fox,
he himself was killed by the Lion: and many others are so served, and hurt
with their own counsels, as I writ more at large in my books De consilijs
astutis et prudentibus. Besides, the divine majesty of God, does not only
permit, that counsels given through malice and deceit, turn to the
Counselors hurt, but they be also bound in the Court of Angelus de Clauaso in
summa in verbo consiliu^ D, l, Consilij, si dolus and fraus intercesserit, de
dolo actio competit.
conscience, to make satis-faction for all the damage men receive by following
their counsails: notwithstanding that the success of that which is consulted
be not in the power of men: and humane laws also punish and chastise all such
as counsel with malice and deceit. Euripides says. (...).
Then counsel ill there is no-thing
On earth, that danger more does bring.


6 The Counselors of Princes, are bound to conceal that which is consulted
with them: for all that which is said to one in secret, and committed unto him
as a thing to be concealed, ought both by the laws of God and man, to be kept
secret by him. Therefore, if Counselors of Princes discover those counsels
which by the Prince are committed to their secrecy, they be perjured: for they
do contrary to their oathe, which is, to In titulo de forma fidelj.
keep secret all what soever their Princes communicate unto them. Yet
notwithstanding, this oath does not bind them to conceal any thing that is
contrary to the commandment Archidiac^in cap. de forma 22. q Filin. in cap.
2. de n^a. et obedi.
of God: or notoriously hurtful to the Commonwealth: for it is a more
grievous thing to perform such oaths as be unlawful, then to break them.
Therefore they that swear, are not bound to conceal any thing which is said
unto them if it be unlawful, and hurtful to the Common wealth. As for
example. If any man tell his servant, that he will kill some body, the
servant ought to diswade him from so doing: and if he cannot alter his mind,
or remedy his purpose any other way, he ought to discover it: but so, that the
discovering of the enterprise, be profitable to the one, and not hurtful to
the other; and he ought Martin, ab A^pilcoeta, vbi supra, number. 805.
not to let his Masters purpose be further known, then may suffice to remedy
it. Nay, nor to open his intent at all, if his Master be like to take more
hurt and loss by the discovering of it, the^ the other party, if the
enterprise were not made known at all.

Furthermore, those Counselors of Princes, that discover their Prince his
counsel, be not only forsworn, but they Diuus Thomas in 4, destinct, 1, q.
2, art. 3.
be also falsifiers, and they deserve punishment according to the offense which
they commit, and the hurt which the Prince and the Commonwealth take, by the
discovering of that counsel Gigas lib, 1, q. 21 n, 8, de crimi ^e laesae
may. Boecius vbi supra. L. aliud in princ. ff, de paenis ibi. Bart. et
Boecius vbi supra, 155. Gigas vbi sup. n, 10, per leg, 1,, 15 qui deposita ff,
ad leg. Cornel. de fa sis.
which they disclosed. Again. If the Counselors discover their Prince his
secrets not to hurt the Prince, but to harm some other person: and if the
Prince do take any loss by the disclosing of his secrets, the Counselors
loose their fees which they receive of the Prince; for they do not perform
that which they swore, to wit, that they would help and aid the Prince both in
word and deed. They aid and assist the Prince in words, in giving of him
faithful and sincere counsel, without malice or deceit: and they assist
him, in deed, by executing that which he commands.

Moreover, if they that discover their Prince his secrets, be neither
Counselors nor Secretaries unto the Prince, they ought to be put to death, if
any hurt befall unto the Prince by the discovery of his secrets: but if they
discover it, not intending to hurt the Prince, but commending him for some
thing, Hippolitus de Marsiliis co^sil, 1.
wherewith they do him harm: then they ought to be extraordinarily and
moderatlie punished: for they intended not to L. cuius dolo ff, ad l, Iuli,
may, and leg, si quis aliquid,. transfugae. ff, de paenis, ibi, transfugae
ad hosts vel nostrorum consiliorum renunciatore, aut viui exurantur aut furca
suspendantur.
hurt the Prince, and that offense which is committed without malice or deceit,
ought not to be punished. But if they wittingly discover any of the Prince his
secrets, the disclosing of which, may do the enemy good, they ought either to
be burned quick, or to be hanged.

7 The ancient Poets, because men should know how necessary it is for Princes,
to have such Counselors, as conceal those secrets which are committed unto
them, fained that Tantalus was in hell, and had both water and pleasant
fruits by him, but though he greatly desired to drink of the water, and taste
of the Apples, yet he could not: for when he stooped to Lotinus
consideratione. 460.
drink, or reached to the fruit, both the water and the tree did move from
him; and this torment was appointed him, because he did disclose that which the
Gods had in their counsel determined.

They fained also, that Sisiphus was tormented in hell, Bocacius de genialogia
Deoru^. lib, 13. cap. 56. Erasmus in ada. Saxum voluere.
for discovering the counsel of the Gods: and that this punishment was
allotted him, that he should turn a stone up to the top of an huge and
mighty Hill, on his shoulders, but when it was at the top, it should fall
down again and renew his labor. These punishments were fit rewards for
their offenses: for as the counsels of the Gods took no effect, because they
were disclosed by Tantalus and Sisyphus, so it was very well appointed, that
Tantalus should never eat nor drink when he greedily desired: and that
Sisyphus should continually labor carrying the stone on his shoulders, without
bringing that to pass which he so earnestly endeavored. The Kings of Persia,
Quintus Curtius, lib. 4, lingua apud Persas gra^^^s castigatur, qu^^^ vllu^
prob^^m.
did punish them with pain of death, that disclosed any thing, which in their
counsel was concluded. For they thought that he, which would not bridle so
small a member as the tongue, could much less refrain the other greater
members. And in deed, greater secrecy ought to be used in the counsels of
Princes, then in any other thing, and great care ought to be taken, that no man
understand what is consulted, or know what is at the Counsell-table determined.

King Lysimachus demanded of the Poet Philipides, of Plutarchus in tractatu de
curiositate,
which of his matters he should make him partaker: he answered, that of
which he pleased, upon condition it were not of his secrets: because of the
danger which they incur, that discover the secrets of Princes.

John the second of that name, King of Portugal, was very Chronica regis
Iohannis.
wary in concealing such things as were told him: whereby he delivered
himself out of many great dangers, which because they be known unto all men,
I will not make mention of them.

8 The Doctors ask what punishment they deserve, which counsel one to commit
some offense: and some affirm, In d, l. consilij and in cap, 1. de officio de
legate. Filin, and Mant. in d, cap, 1.
that if the offense be grievous and outrageous, as Treason against GOD or
their Prince, then they that give the counsel, and they that commit the
offense, are to be punished with the like punishment. This holds not, when he
that gives counsel to have any offense committed, does nothing else but
counsel, and show the reasons which move him thereunto: for then he that
gives the counsel, and he that commits the offense, are not to be
punished a like: for he that Iuxta cap, Solitae In versiculo. No^ causam sed
occasione^ de maioritate and obedientia. L. 5.. Persuadereff, deserui.
Persuadere plus est quam compelli and cogi. D.. Pesuadere, N^ enim op^rtet
laudamdo augeri malitiam. Lotiotus et Hieron. Francus in d, l, consilij. Maine.
in d l co^silij, (...) in summa in verbo consilij, Emanuel Xuarez in thesauro
communium opinioru^ in thesauro co^muniu^ opinionu^ in verbo. consi. Et Julius
Clarus in commun. opin. In verb. consil. Et promptuarium iuris in verb. consil
^t Glos, in cap, Nullus, de regulis iuris. n 6. Laurentius* Sil^^nus. in
tractatu de recognitione feudi, ca. 109 Loriotus in d, l. consilij. Et Decius
in d, ca, 1, n, 9 de officio legate* Erancisc, Conanus, li, 7, cap, 14.
Commentarioru^ Iuris Ciuilis. Maineri. in d, l. consilij. n, 7.
gives the counsel, is not the cause of the offense, though he gave
counsel to commit it: but he that persuades to offend, deserves the
like punishment as is due to the offender. For it is a greater matter (as
Vlpian the Lawyer says) to persuade one to commit some offense, then to
force or compel him to do it. For it is not tolerable, (as the same Vlpian
affirms) that an ill deed should be either praised or approved.

Others distinguish, that each offense either is of such quality, that it is
not punished, unless it be committed, or it is pnnished after the same manner,
as if it had been committed, though he that does intend to offend, do not
commit the offense: and in such kind of faults, that holds not, which we
have before said, of him that does only give the counsel. For in such
causes, the attempt is punished as much, as if it had been committed. Others
distinguish, that either those counsels which be given with malice and
deceit, are about contracts, and near contracts, or about offenses. Others
distinguish of them that give counsel unto those, which unless they had
been counseled, would not have committed it: and of the^ that give counsel
unto those, that would have committed it though they had not been counseled.
Others distinguish, of those counsails that be given, to do him good unto whom
they be given, or to profit others. Others distinguish, of those that give
counsel before the offense is committed, and those that give counsel after
it is committed: counsayling and exhorting the offendour, to persevere and go
forward in the execution of the offense. According to that which we in Spain
do commonly use to say. Las baraias,
O no comencarlas,
O acabarlas.
that is, Broils either not at all begin,
Or through to go with them not linne.


Others distinguish between those that counsel maliciously, for love of the
profit and gain which they hope to get by their fraudulent counsel, and
those which never look for any profit or commodity by they counsel which
the give. Others distinguish those offenses that are committed concerning
substance, and those that are committed concerning persons.

But leaving aside the distinctions of Doctors, and their ampliacions,
faliacies, and additions, which Decius Filinus, Cagnolus, Hieronimus Francus,
Loriotus, and other Interpretours of the Law assign, conformable to the
distinctions which they set down: all which I have largely written in my
Book, entitled Rapsodia etc. two rules only (which Vlpian gives) suffice.
In verbo consiliorum.


The first is, that he which counsaileth without malice, deserves no
punishment. For it is supposed, that he who so gives D* l, consil. consilij
non fraudulenti nulla est obligatio.
counsel, is a good man: and by reason of this supposition, he that charge
him that he counseled fraudulently, is to prove it: and to reduce his intent
ad actum. L. merito, ff, pro socio cap, final. de praesumptionibus. Et Alciatus
in tractatu de praesump. regula 3, Jason in rubric. cod. qui admit. Et Filin.
in cap* In presentia de probat.
Which act, to be an offense or crime, requires that it should have been
done with malice, and according to the rule of Law, he that intends to
charge a man with any quality or circumstance, is to prove Bart. in l. Non
solum sed vt probari, ^^, non aper. nunc^. lason vbi supra. Bernardus Diaz. in
tractatu doctrinatu^ doctrina, 208. Incipient. probati. quando. Cap, 1, de
praesumptiombus. Matthew, 4, Vox diabolj, quae semper homines cadere deoisum
desiderat, sic Christu^ his verbis. Mittete inquit deorsum. Persuadere potest
at precipitate non potest. In l. que^admodu^ cod, de Agricolis, et censit. l.
11. L. Quisquis and ibi Bart. ff. de furtis. Lauren. Sylu. vbi supra. L. qua
action. Celsus ff, ad l. Aquiliam, L, qui occidit,. Penult. ff, ad L.
Corneliam de sicarijs.
it. And this which we have said, holds, when counsel is given concerning
acts that are indifferent or good. But if counsel be given to commit any
offense, or to execute any unlawful act, or to put any thing in practice
which is contrary to the Laws of GOD or man: then is he supposed and thought
to be faulty, that in such a case gives counsel. For it is the voice of the
devil (as Saint Jerome writes) which does persuade men to do such things, as
be cleene contrary to the divine and humane Laws, and which offend God.

Unto this rule, Lucas de Pena reduces two hundredth and twenty three cases.

The other rule which Vlpian gives, is; That if he unto whom counsel is
given to commit any offense, may not be punished, by reason of some
privilege, by which he is exempted: then he which gives the counsel, ought
to be punished in such sort, as he that puts a weapon into the hand of a mad
man to kill some body with it.

The ninth discourse, whether it be better for the Commonwealth, that the
Counselors of the Prince should be learned, or unlearned.
THey that affirm, that it is more profitable for the Commonwealth, that the
Counselors of the Prince, should be learned then unlearned, allege that
which Agesilaus King of the Lacedaemonians said: that it did not become the
Lotinus consideratione, 74
estate and royal dignity of a Prince, to have unlearned men to his
Counselors: for though rude and ignorant men are subtle and watchful, and
look to the public commodity: yet much greater is the harm which the
Prince takes, for want of learned men's company, then the profit which comes
by the craftiness and subtlety of the unlearned: for no man makes account of
that profit, which is not accompanied with honesty and virtue. For, this is
it, for which all Princes be esteemed, honored, and reverenced.

Elius Lampridius says, that the Emperor Alexander Seuerus, In vita Alexan.
Seueri.
had many excellent Lawyers in his Counsel, with whom he consulted upon all
matters concerning the Commonwealth. And because he ruled himself, by the
counsel of wise and learned men, which did not only regard the Emperors
service, but also the public commodity of the whole Empire: he commanded
nothing, but that which was most just and lawful.

Hernando the third of that name, King of Castile, imitating Gariuai, lib, ^^.
cap. 4, de compendio Histori.
the example of the Emperor Alexander, did choose twelve men singularly well
learned, to govern his Country. These men began in their time, to establish
the Laws, called Lasleyes de siete partidas; which were so termed, because
they were divided into seven parts: and afterward they were abolished in the
time of King Alonso. The private Laws of L, 5, Tit, 9, partit. 2.
Spain say, that Kings ought to make choice of such Counselsels, as were
friends, learned, etc.

2 They that affirm it to be better, that the Counselors of a Prince should
be unlearned, subtle, crafty, witty, and watchful then learned: say, that
subtlety and watchfulness, are very necessary for them that govern
Commonweals: for all they that deal with Princes, go about to deceive and
cousin them. The Emperor Dioclesian, said, that Princes could very hardly
hitte the mark in that which they do, and Flauius Vopiscus in vita Aurelij.
imperatoris.
command; because all they that be conversant with them, do their best to
deceive them, who being always occupied, know no more of matters then they
are informed, by them with whom they speak. Apelles, in the portraiture of
Princes, Lucianus de Calumnia.
which he presented to King Prolomie, painted a Prince sitting in a Chair of
estate, with great hands and large ears, and by him were two Damsels, the one
called Ignorance, the other Suspicion: and Calumnia accempanied with her
Sister Lady Flattery. As I have written more at large, in my Treatise of the
institution of a Christian Prince.

3 Seeing that Princes must necessarililie use the conversation of many men,
and very diverse persons, it is no less necessary for them, to reap profit
by the subtlety and craftines of the unlearned; then by the skill and learning
of those that be highly learned. For as they say, half the year men live by
art and deceit, and the other part of the year* by deceit and art. The
learned strive for matters concerning conscience and justice: and the crafty
unlearned, to recover Rents, and to dispatch such business as pertain to the
substance of the Commonwealth: neither (as Plato says) do subtle unskillful
men suffice Dialogo, 7* de repub.
to govern the Commonwealth well, nor they that spend their life time in
study. And experience teaches, that Princes further their estate no less
with the subtlety of the unlearned, then with the learning of Scholars: for
they that apply themselves to learning, are but little skilled in action and
practice, and know not how to contriue the affairs of the Commonwealth. And
(as Quintilian and Pliny say) more profits practice Lib. 12 cap. 6.
without science, the^ science without practice. Learned men be very
doubtful, and perplexed in giving their resolutions of those matters upon which
they co^sult: for they find many difficulties and ambiguities, and many
inconveniences, which make them to stand in great perplexity, full of
imaginations, and respects which do not profit at all. Homer going about to
describe a wise, prudent, expert, and an absolute Prince, (such an one as he
fained Ulysses to be) says not that he delivered himself out of so many
troubles and dangers, in which he often found himself: because he was learned,
or brought up in good literature at schools, or because he had spent much
time in haunting those Universities that flourished in his time: but for that he
was very witty, watchful and subtle, and could quickly and readily
perceive and foresee how things would fall out.

4 The Governors of the City of Norimberge, admit no Antoni. Gerard. in
gubernatione ci^^tatis Norimberg.
learned men to enter in the counsel, to consult upon matters concerning the
Commonwealth: but they have some excellent men, that be very well learned, and
great Scholars, of whom they take advise, upon such matters as are moved in
the counsel. And the Vrsins in Italy, do not permit that any learned men
should govern the Commonwealth. This statute (as Papa Pius in descriptione
As^ minoris, cap* ^^
Pope Pius says) is like to that statute in the City Ephesus, which did not
consent, that any virtuous man brought up in learning should live there, and
for this cause they banished Hermodorus Strabo. libro. 14.
the Philosopher, who being sent into exile, left Ephesus and came to Rome,
and caused the Romans to establish the Laws of the twelve Tables. And Pope
Pius says, that those L, 2,. Exactis. ff. de Origin iuris.
Princes that expel learned men from their counsels, resemble the Governors
of Ephesus. To be short, no man can deny, but that Princes have great
necessity to use the service of learned men and Scholars, to help and assist
them in the government of the people which is committed to their charge, as
Iethro counseled Moses to do: for by reason of the great and manifold Exodus.
18.
business which they have, they are not able to minister justice themselves unto
their Subjects, without the help and service of wise and learned men, that
understand and know what is profitable and necessary for the Commonwealth,
conformable to the Laws and ordinances by which it is governed. And that the
Counselors of Princes may perform their duty accordingly, it is convenient
they should give themselves to the reading of many Histories and Chronicles,
that when they consult, they may turn that to their profit, which has in like
matters succeeded and fallen out at diverse times, and in sundry places. For
they that have seen little, and know no more the^ they Cicero in Oratore ad
Brutum. Cap. 8.
have seen, are but children in respect of them that have read much, and (as
Job says) they that have only experience of themselves, and are not confirmed
by the example of others that went before them, are but of yesterdaie. Plato
reports, that a certain In Timaeo.
Egiptian Philosopher said unto Solon, that the Philosophers of Greece, were
as children in comparison to the^ of Egypt, because the Egiptian Philosophers
were very ancient, and had long time before, given themselves to the
contemplation and consideration of divine and natural things.

The difference between them that have seen, and also read and heard many
things, and those that know no more then they have seen (which for the most
part is but little) is this: that they which have seen, read, and heard many
things, may freely speak in all places, concerning all matters. And for this
cause it is commonly said, that three sorts of men may discourse freely; Old
men at home: young me^ abroad: and men of great reading every where.

5 My intent is not to prove, that it is not necessary for Princes to have
learned men to give them counsel, seeing that they have such great need of
men, that can examine and weigh, whether that which is consulted be conformable
to justice and reason, but that which I say, tends to this end, that men may
well enough be learned, without haunting many Uniuersities, or continuing long
in Schools to take degrees, and become Masters, Licentiats, Bachelors and
Doctors: for there have been many men in the world, that have been excellent
fine Scholars, and wonderful well learned, that were not either Bachelors,
Licentiats, Masters, or Doctors, created in the Universities of their time:
for the degrees which now a days are given in Universities, unto them that
study in them, took beginning but seven hundred years ago: and in deed,
many labor more to be Doctors and Graduats, then learned: as I writ more at
large in my treatise of Schools and Readers.

Therefore men may very well become learned, and be good Scholars, without
being Bachelors, Masters, Licentiates, or Doctors* if in steed of spending
the time in such exercises and passetemps, as be but little profitable to the
Common-welth, they did read Histories and Treatises concerning Princes and
Commonweals: but especially such Books and discourses that treat of things
touching the Princes of their own Country, and those Princes whom they serve:
seeing they ought to counsel them according to that which they find and read in
such discourses, Histories, and Chronicles: for neither Acurtius nor Bernard
teach them any such thing. Men may also be learned, (as Euripides and Plato
say) by being conversant with men of In fine Dialogi. 8. de Republica.
understanding and literature: for thereby of rude and unlearned men, they
become skillful and prudent, and by this means they come to be acquainted with
the Laws, by which ye Commonwealth is ruled, and to give counsel according as
the Laws ordain and command, in so much, that though men be subtle crafty,
and watchful, yet be they no whit the better for that to rule Countries: for
government does not proceed from wilines and subtlety, but from virtue and
justice.

6 Isocrates counsels Princes to enquire, whether the In parenesi.
Counselors of whom they take advice, were good Husbands, and had the wit and
wisdom how to use their thrift, and how to bestow their own substance: for he
that cannot rule and govern matters pertaining to his own substance, will
never be able well to rule other men's things. There was once a certain
Gentleman, which being very unthrifty, yet thinking his deserts great,
requested the Emperor Charles the fifth, to pleasure him with an Office in his
Treasury, that he might have the oversight and government of such matters as
did belong unto the rents, revenues and substance of his Majesty. The
Emperor answered, that he knew he well deserved to have him do him a
pleasure, but yet nevertheless, if he should grant him that request, he should
give all the world occasion to talk: for seeing he knew not how to use his own
substance, he should much less know how to rule and govern the store of the
whole Commonwealth. But to return to the purpose: that the Counselors of
Princes may according to their duty, serve their Princes well and faithfully:
it is convenient, that as well those* that be learned and lettered, as they that
be crafty and subtle, should have a good, a pure, a sound, and a sincere
conscience, and that they should be (as our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
teaches) Math, 10.
wise as Serpents, and innocent as Dooues: for it is not profitable for the
Commonwealth, that Princes should have such men to their Counselors, as be
subtle and malicious. And if this be manifest, that all Commonweals be
conserved by Religion and true worshipping of God, no doubt but they will be
better conserved (as Laurentius Grimaldus says) if Princes admit Lib. 1. de
optimo senatore.
learned and virtuous Prelates to their counsels, unto who^ our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ committed the charge of Christian souls, the administration of
his holy Sacraments, and the delivering and preaching of his word, that they
might with their zealous prayers, and supplications, continually request and
beseech the Lord, to augment and conserve the Commonweal public. And if the
Romans, Grecians, Egiptians, and all other Nations, which served the devil and
worshipped Idols, did admit their Priests unto their counsels, and government
of their* Commonweals: by what great reason then, ought Christian Princes in
the government of the Commonwealth, to take counsel and advise of the Priests
of God, and the Ministers Sansouinus de dict^s and ^actis, Caroli. v.
of his holy word. The Emperor Charles the fifth said, that learned and
virtuous Prelates seemed very well in the counsels of Princes, because they did
represent the Ecclesiastical estate, which was the foundation of all
Commonweals: and because that (the Prelates being in the counsels of Princes)
all matters which in them were handled, might be dispatched to the service and
glory of God.

The tenth discourse, whether it be more profitable to the Commonwealth, to
have a good Prince, and ill Counselors, or an ill Prince, and good Counselors.
ELius Lampridius affirms, that it is better for the Commonwealth, that the
Prince should be naught, and the Counselors good, then the Prince good, and
the Counselors naught. For a great deal sooner is one changed by the example
and counsel of a great many, then a great many by the example and counsel of
one. And for this cause the Counselors of Princes ought to be virtuous, of
good behavior, honest in life, and estranged from all covetousness, and
humane pretenses: loving the Commonwealth and their King, whose authority and
estimation they ought to make account of, above all other worldly things. This
which Elius Lampridius says, holds in those Princes, that follow that, which
their Counselors advise them to do: and not in those, who will have that
their Counselors shall approve and allow all whatsoever they say, o^ like,
though the same be manifestly hurtful, and prejudicial to the Commonwealth.
These (as King Antiochus said) are so nice, wanton, arrogant, and proud, that
they will never hear any true tale, nor take any counsel: but will have, that
all men shall like with their actions, and allow all their sayings^ and by
gestures, demeanures, and moving of their bodies, their subtlety of wit, and
greatness of judgment, were meruallous, and that every one should say, Et cum
spiritu tuo.

Demetrius Phalerius to shun this inconueniente, counsels Erasmus in
Apothegmatis.
Ptolemey the King of Egypt, that he should read Books which treated of Kings
and Commonweals. For in reading of such books, he should find many things,
which his Counselors and familiars durst not tell him. Isocrates exhorts and
De regno.
counsels Kings to choose virtuous and faithful Cou^sellers, and that they
should many times request them, not to favor or praise that which they said,
but to tell them the truth, and freely show them what they ought to do,
concerning that about which they consult. And by this means, every Prince
should have Counselors, that would have a regard of his estate, and public
profit of the Commonwealth. John the second, King of Portugal, would not
bestow a certain dignity, unto some Garcia de resende in Chronica regis Johan.
that requested it of him, saying: that he would give it unto one of his
Subjects, that never spoke any thing unto him in all his life which pleased his
humor, but that which he knew to be profitable, both unto him, and to the
Commonwealth. Don Gariuai lib, 14 cap. 15. de compendio Historia.
Alonso the twelfth of that name, King of Castile, entering into the house of
counsel, sat in his Chair of estate, holding in his right hand the sword
wherewith he was dubbed Knight, and in his left hand the royal crown: and
being thus set, he requested those of his Counsel, that they should freely
tell him what they thought, and in such order counsel him, that the majesty
and honor of his crown, might ever remain inviolable: and the power of his
sword, might daily rather increase then diminish.

2 Don Francisco de Almeida, Viceroy of the Eastern Indies, Johan. de Bayros
decad, 2, lib. 3. cap. 5.
(being informed that some of his Captains which he admitted to his counsel,
had given forth speeches, how that they did not freely open their minds unto
him, because they feared, least if they should have uttered any thing contrary
to his humor, he would have been offended with them) took occasion to talk
with those of his Counsel, and among many other things which he mentioned unto
them, told them that one of the greatest sins which men might commit against
God, and their Prince, was* not to make him acquainted with their opinions, and
not freely to show him what they think concerning that, about which they
consult. For so, they offend the Lord, in that they deny the judgment and
understanding, wherewith it pleased his divine majesty, to endue and enrich
them: and against their Prince undoubtedly they commit a kind of treason. And
because men err more often through malice then ignorance: those clean,
unspotted, and free counsails, which God inspireth, are better, safer, and
surer, then those that are given unto hope of gain, or some other ungodly
pretense, and respect of fear, love, or anger. For men commonly, by reason of
some perturbation, or indignation and wrath, wherewith they be moved against
others, know not what they do, and like men distracted and ravished of all
their senses, do all things ouer-thwartlie, and otherwise then they ought.
Isocrates counsels those that will In (...).
take advise about some thing, to break the matter unto those of whom they
take counsel, as if it were concerning some other body, and not pertaining unto
them themselves. For so by this means, they shall understand, what is best and
safest for them to do, and that secret which they would not have to be
discovered, shall be concealed. This which Isocrates counsels ought to be
done by those that are noted and reprehended in some thing, if the quality of
the matter so permit: proposing it unto them that find fault with them, as if
they asked counsel of the^ about Johan, de Bayros decad. 2. lib. 2. cap. 7.
it. This counsel was used by Don Francisco de Almeida, knowing that his
Gentlemen* found fault with him, because he would not assault the City of
Aden, after that he had overcome the Armies of Camori, of Calecut, and Melique
ayas.

3 Of this which we have breefelie noted, follows necessarily, that it is
far better and more profitable for the Commonwealth, that the Prince should
be good, and the Counselors naught, then that the Counselors should be good,
and the Prince wicked. For all men endeavor to imitate the Prince. Plato with
great judgment and prudence (as Tullie says) writes, Dialog, 4. de legibus.
Lib. 1. Epist. fam.
that as the Princes be, so the Subjects prove. If ye Prince be virtuous, every
man does his best to become virtuous, and if the Prince be vicious, they be all
vicious. If the Prince be an hypocrite and superstitious, they ^e all
hypocrites, and superstitious. Cap, finali. de consilio and consiliarijs
principum.
Fredericus Furius says, that when the Prince is given to Poetry, all his
Courtiers fall to versifying: and when the Prince takes pleasure in Music,
they be all busy with des^anting, and tuning their Instruments: when he is a
warrior, they all exercise themselves in feats of Chivalry: when he is
delighted with jests, then every one plays the Jester. And when he is a
friend unto Astronomers, and those that study the speculations of Astrology,
then every one disputes of S^heres. If, because the Music alters (as Plato
says) the Dialogo, 4. de Republica.
customs of the City be changed: much more easily will they be changed by
imitating the Princes, who hurt all them that follow their example, with which
they d^^ a great deal more harm, then they do with the sin which they
commit, for no man dares to tell them the truth. For which thing, we are much
beholding to Dame Flattery, who prevails so greatly with Princes, that the
same which out of all question is good, is misliked, and the same which is
notoriously known to be naught and wicked, is allowed and approved.

Princes are now of long time accustomed to hear false tales, and to be
flattered, and to have all, whatsoever they say and do, allowed and praised:
that the greatest Monster which can be showed to a Prince, is to tell him some
true thing which offends him, as if he had never seen or heard any such
thing. And this is the cause wherefore Monsters offend, for if they had been
seen, they had never offended.

4 Princes then, seeing how necessary it is, that they should have virtuous
and learned men in their service, which might counsel and show them, how they
ought to rule and govern the people which is committed to their charge: ought
to consider, that both the credit and discredit of their own person, and of
all their Subjects also, depends upon the election of their Counselors. We
see commonly that men judge of the Prince and his ability, according to the
reputation of his Counsel. For if his Counselors be wise, and in all points
sufficient men, then is he always accounted wise. For it is no small argument
of wisdom in a Prince, to be able to know and discern wise and sufficient
men from others, and to choose them that are faithful and loyal, to be his
Counselors, leaving those that be unskillful and rude. But when the
Counselors are not learned, prudent, and rare men, it is impossible that ye
Prince have a good reputation. For he erreth in the principal point, if he
choose insufficient and bad men to be his Counselors. And it is in a manner
necessary, that he who erreth in a matter of most great importance, must also
err in all other things whatsoever. For if the Fountain be infected, all the
water must necessarily be also infected: even so, if the counsel be corrupted,
all the government of the Commonwealth goes to wrack. If a Prince have good
Counselors, though he do amiss, yet will no man believe it: but if his
Counsel be not good, though we see the Prince do well, yet can we not believe
it, or we think that it was done by chance. By this may we perceive, that a
Prince who has trusty and loyal Counselors, does thereby not only obtain
good success in his enterprises, but also great credit and reputation, both
among his own Subjects, and also among strangers. His own Subjects love and
obey him, strangers fear him, and all men jointly with one voice singularly
commend him.

5 Every Prince ought to think, that a learned Counsel is more necessary for
him, then the bread which he eats: to the end he may hear the truth. For
Princes cannot abide to hear the simple and naked truth, by reason of the
multitude of flatterers, which compass and enuiron them on every side.
Neither is it good that every man should be so bold as to tell the Prince the
truth: for so they might incur danger, to loose their kingdoms and
authority, and be had in no account.

The royal Prophet David, to show that all men honored Psalm. 17.
and reverenced him, said, that they all lied unto him. For they that are of
power and authority, no man dares to tell them the truth: but to poor men
that are of small power, every one speaks freely and boldly.

If a Prince have many Provinces under his government, he ought (as we have
said) to choose Counselors out of every one of the places that are under his
subjection, and not out of one or two only: for the people takes it very
impatiently, to see that they be, as it were excluded, and cast off from the
administration and government of the Commonwealth, seeing not one of their
Countrymen to be of the Counsel: and they think (and that with great reason)
that the Prince makes but small account of them: or that he takes them to be
slaves and bondmen, or that he thinks them not worthy to be trusted. The
first ingendreth hatred. The second seeks liberty, and therefore they
conspire against the Prince, and confederate with strange Kings. The third
emboldeneth them to admit any kind of treason against their natural Prince.

When a Prince chooses a Counselor, he ought not to be contented with those
only that dwell in his Palace or Court, nor of those that are his own
Countrymen, nor of those which he knows by sight or by hearesaie, although
they be never so wise and prudent: but he ought to be well informed of all such
as live in any of those Provinces which he rules, and among them all, to make
election of him that is well known, and sufficiently proved to be the best of
the^ all. Neither ought a Prince to make too much haste in choosing of his
Counselors, but to take leisure and time enough, in considering and learning
the sufficiency of all such as shall be named unto him. Willingly hearing,
and attentively waying all informations given unto him: some favoring those
that are named, some making against the^. To conclude, he ought not to elect or
choose any one Counselor, before he have thoroughly examined his ability and
sufficiency: making choice of singular Lawyers to govern the Cuj at obseruat.
lib, 7. cap. 12.
Commonwealth, as the Emperors of Rome were accustomed to do.

The eleventh discourse, of the Counsel house, and of that which the
Counselors ought to do, before they begin to consult.
WHen the Romans served and worshipped Idols, and Images of Heathen Gods, they
built the Temple which they consecrated to the God of counsel: in such order,
that they which went to worship him, should go down a certain pair of
stairs, to desire him that it would please him to vouchsafe and set them in
their way, and guide them in that they would do. And this was done after
this manner, to let men know, how necessary it is for him that asks
counsel, to submit himself unto the judgment and opinion of those, of whom he
demands counsel. The Church was not very clear, to show that counsel
ought to be kept very secret: and yt no man ought to know what is handled or
treated of in it. For oftentimes men conjecture what is determined in the
Counsel, if they know about what the Counselors consulted. So that men
commonly use to say: tell me what Counselors there were, and upon what
matters they sat, and I will tell thee what was concluded.

2 Lycurgus would not have, that the houses wherein they Plutarchus in vita
Lycurgj.
of the Counsel entered to consult within Lacedaemonia, should be
magnificentlie and sumptuously builded. For he thought, that these exterior
and outward shows of magnificence and bravery, were nothing necessary unto
Counselors for to use prudence and judgment: but that they did rather hurt and
endomage the most excellent gifts of the mind, making men either abiecte and
effeminate, debasing their courage, or else proud and arrogant, and moved with
such vain and superfluous buildings. For continual experience teaches us,
that when men meet or assemble together in some gorgious place or stately
Hall, most sumptuously and costly built and set forth: then they spend the
time in looking upon the comely building, or in beholding the Images engraven
and carved in the walls, the cunning pictures artificially painted on the
entries and doors, the stately Pillars erected up a marvelous height, and of
wonderful thicknes, and in viewing the curious workmanship of the Roof. And
so, as well they that come into such stately places to give counsel, as they
that come to take counsel, busy their brains, and employ all their senses in
those frivolous things, loosing that which is worth a great deal, for that
which is worth little or nothing.

This which Lycurgus ordained in Lacedamonia, (which Plato in Alcybiade, 1.
Common-welth was not adorned and decked with many magnificent ornaments, and
gorgeous furniture, though it was very welthie and puissant,) takes no place
in those famous and Xenophon de Cyri minoris expendi, lib, 6.
rich Common-welths, in which such magnificence is used. For it beseems such
Commonwealths, that the houses in which the Senators and chief Governors
enter, to consult upon matters concerning the estate of the Realm, be
answerable to the magnificence and greatness of the same Commonwealths.

They that cause Schools to be builded for those that learn, ought to follow
Lycurgus his saying: erecting them in places that be not delightful or
pleasant, so that there be nothing in them, to allure and withdraw the eyes of
the Scholars from their Books, which makes them nothing attentive to hear
that which their Masters read unto them.

Plato (as S. Jerome and S. Basil affirms) did choose out Maisilius Fiscinus
in vita Platonis.
a place in Athens to teach, which was neither delectable nor wholesome:
because he being hard, and of a strong temperature, the place should not
hinder his imaginations and thoughts, which necessarily ought to be free, and
not occupied in such recreations, delights and pastimes, which would have
hindered him from contemplation and study. The great Turk has a window
covered with a green veil, or Curtain of silk, forth of which window, he
sees and hears all that the Bassaes say and do, when they assemble
together in the house of Counsel. And thus being neither seen nor heard of
the Bassaes, he harkeneth to all what they speak, and hears the mones of
those that complain. And the Bassaes and Turkish Counselors, not knowing
whether the Turk be harkning behind the window, or no, dare not but deal
justly with those that come thither for justice, or spend the time in vain
talk, which tends not to the service of their Lord. Some Counselors were
wont to command, that the door of the Counsell-chamber should be left open,
because no man should stand behind the door and harken what they said.

3 In old times past, no man might in France speak anything Tamara. lib, 1.
cap, 7. de moribus gentium.
which concerned the Commonwealth, unless he pronounced it publicly, and
he that came last into the place of counsel, was put to death. So did the
Cranes (as Pliny says) in Asia, when they assembled together in the night
time in the Lib. 1, cap. 23.
place from which they should depart, out of that Country into another,
killing the Crane that came last of all. In France also Idem Tamara vbi supra.
in ancient times past, if any man made any stur in the place of counsel, there
came incontinently a Sergeant unto him, with a naked sword in his hand ready
drawn, who menaced him to strike if he held not his peace. And if he left not
talking at the third threatening, the Sergeant cut his cloak in such order,
that the rest that was left did him but little service.

4 As often as the Emperor Frederick called his Counselors, Papa Pius lib. 3
de dictis et factis Alfonsi regis.
to confer with them about matters concerning the Commonwealth, he used to
say. I would to God that it would please him to do me so good a turn, that
when my Counselors enter into the Counsel house, they should cast of
counterfaiting and dissimulation, and all fained pretenses at the very gates
and doors of the Chamber, in which they enter to counsel. And if I am not
deceived, it is sufficient if they leave but only one thing, to wit, their
own private commodity: for this is it which overthrows and destroys all
counsels: and for love of this, men feign and dissemble: which deceitful
practices, undoubtedly L, 30. Tantu^ nimiru^ ex publicis malis sentimus quantum
ad privatas res pertinet, nec. in eis quicquam acrius qua^ pecuniae damnu^
stimulat.
they would not so much use, if they more regarded the public commodity and
welfare of the Commonwealth, then their own particular profit. But (as Titus
Liuius says) the loss of the Commonwealth never greeueth us, but so far as
it touches the hurt and damage of our own goods and substance.

5 When the men of Galacia would consult upon matters of great weight and
importance, they used a most abominable cruel, and deuillish sacrifice. They
ripped up some one man's Idem Tamara, vbi supra.
breast with a sharp sword, and by the spilling of the blood, or the tearing
and unlacing of his members, they gessed and diuined of that which should
happen, concerning those things about which they consulted. In a certain part
of the kingdom of Persia, they use this. When they that dwell in that Country
go to ask counsel of the Priests, upon that which they determine to do:
the Priests hold in their hands the book, which is commonly called the book
of Lots or Fortune, and according to that which they find written in that
book, they answer them that come to consult with them. It seems that the
Book of Lots or Fortune, wherewith they deceive the ignorant Comminaltie, was
brought out of Persia: wherefore the Inquisitors did with great reason forbid
the same Book of Fortunes to be read, that they which are of little
understanding, might not be deceived by it.

6 Seeing that counsels, and the success of those things which are consulted,
proceed, (as we have said) from the holy Ghost: it is convenient, that all
Counselors before they begin to consult, should humbly request and beseech
the holy Ghost, with great devotion and humility, to direct them in their
way, and lead them in their consultations, saying that service which is
properly belonging unto the holy Ghost. And if the shortness of the time
permit it not, they ought to sing the Himne of the holy Ghost, as it is
rehearsed in the Church, Come holy? Ghost etc. And unitating King David, Veni
Creator spiritus. etc. Psalm, 24. Psalm. 123.
say, Lord mine eyes look up and trust in thee, thou shall deliver me out of
the snares etc. King David says not, that he looked to his feet, to deliver
them from the snares, but that he lifted his eyes up to the Lord, that he
should deliver him, and found himself not deceived, as he afterward
mentions. O Lord, my soul has escaped as the byrd out of the snares of the
Hunters, and the snares were broken in pieces. Plato does Marsilius Fiscinus
in argum. Dialog. Plato. qui inscribitur Theag.
counsel us, that we should continually beseech God, that it would please him
to direct that which we shall do, unto his holy service. For it is he, that
by the means of the Angels, shows unto us what we ought to do. For this is
an everlasting truth, confirmed with perpetual experience, that in the most
hard and difficult things of all man's life, where the wit of man is most
blind, and does most want counsel and forces: there does the divine wisdom
of the Lord, show it self most clearly and wonderfully. That great Judith,
with a noble and excellent mind, said unto those that were besieged in the
City of Bethulia. And now who are you that have tempted GOD this day, and
will Capitulo, 8.
bind the counsels of the Lord our God? And so she rebuked the faintnes of the
Gouerners of Bethulia. For it is a token and sign of great weakness and
ignorance in a man, to do all matters according to his own wisdom and humane
counsels. It were better and safer, to desire the Lord that he would be our
guide in all our actions and counsels: for he will direct us in the ready
path, and show us which way is best, seeing that he never fails to aid
those yt power forth their prayers unto him. Those Angels, that by the
commandment of God, aid and help men in their ways, and rule the actions
of virtuous Princes, are comprehended under those companies, which are called
Dominions Marsil. Fiscinus vbi supra.
and Principalities, as Dionysius Arcopagita says.

7 And the better to bring this to pass which we say, we ought to do
according to the commandments of our Savior and Lord Jesus Christ, who
neither deceives himself nor can not deceive them unto whom he gives
counsel. For from him flows the spring of understanding and knowledge, and
he is the author and cause of all goodness. From him does it proceed that
Counselors be good, and he is the cause why Kings govern their kingdoms well,
and minister justice. And this did King Proverb, 8.
Solomon, ask of the Lord, saying: Lord send me thy wisdom down out of thy
holy heavens, and send her from the throne of thy Majesty, that she may be
with me, and labor, that I may know what is acceptable in thy sight. If those
that in old times past worshipped Idols, asked counsel of them, and the devil
to deceive them used many kinds of Oracles and prophecies, (as I wrote more at
large in my Books of policies and Commonwealths) it is more the^ reason,
that we, which serve and worship Christ the redeemer of the world, should
humbly offer our prayers to his holiness, and request him, that it would please
him of his goodness, to favor and help us in all our counsels. And no doubt,
seeing the holy Ghost is he that beadeth us in all our actions: he will choose
that for us, which shall best please his holiness. And that counsel which we
choose through his inspiration, is the best, and which most appertains unto
us.

8 The night time is very fit to consult. And for this cause did the Grecians
call it (...). that is to be wise. For Plutar. in lib. de curiositate.
when the Counselors assemble together, to confer about matters in the night
time, those things in which men be commonly occupied by day, do not hinder or
trouble them: and with the stilnes of the night (as Virgil says) all things
are quiet. Homere, Aeneid, lib, 4. Cum tacet omnis ager pecudes, pictaeque
volucres. Iliad. Lib. 2.
to she we that the silent night time was most commodious to consult, said,
that it did not become Princes to sleep all the night, who ought to consult
upon matters concerning the Commonwealth. And for because yt when a man is not
withdrawn from his book, neither by his business, nor by any other means, it
greatly confirms his memory, and profits him much for the invention and
contemplation of that which he searches and learneth: no doubt, but the quiet
and still night, which cutteth of all occasions that may hinder a man, is the
fittest, and best time to study in: especially, because the mind at that tune
is more free, and readier to muse and consider of every thing.

9 First of all before the Counselors begin to consult, they ought to see
that no man be in place, that may hear that which is spoken off in their
consultations. After that the Ambassadors of King Tarquinius, had conspired
with the Sons Plutarchus in ^^ta Romulj.
of Brutus and other young Gentlemen, to restore Tarquinius to his kingdom,
they solemnized their conspiration with the death of a man, whose blood they
drank, and touched his enentrailes: that they might by that ceremony, bind
themselves to keep counsel, and help one another. And to do this, they
assembled together in a desert house, where no body did dwell. But as it fell
out by chance, a certain. Servant called Vindicius, was in the same house,
who seeing them enter in on the sudden in great haste, could not get ^ut:
but spying a large Larget in one of the corners of the Chamber, presently fell
to the ground, and covered himself with its and so he lay very secretly, and
saw all what passed between them? and heard how they determined to slay both
the Consuls, and cast down the City gates for the Tarquinians to enter; and
take possession of the kingdom, which he presently revealed unto Publicola
being one of the Consuls.

Don Alfonso King of Castile, being in the Court of Almenon Gariuai, lib, 11.
cap, 12, de compend. histo.
King of Tolido, Went into the Kings Orchard, and espying the King coming
thither to walk and enjoy the pleasure of the Garden, being accompanied with
his Noble men and Counselors, he hid himself behind the Arbor where the king
was wont to walk in, that he might hear what talk there should be had
between the King and his Counselors. The king being come, and having his
Counselors by him, he asked them whether they thought, that the same City of
Toledo being so great, and so strongly built, might be taken of the
Christians, or no. All of them answered, that it was impossible, that such a
strong City should be overcome by Christians: except one, that was of opinion
that it might be taken, if the Christians should burn their Corn, and bar
them from receiving any fruit of the lands about them, for the space of seven
years: and so they should be compelled to render up their City into the
hands of the Christians, unless they would sustain hunger and famine. And
after the King of Tole do had ended his talk, he chanced to look on the
other side of the Arbor, where he espied Don Alfonso the King of Castile,
lying* on the grass, as if he had been a sleep. Which thing he took very
grievously, fearing leaft he had heard all their talk: and to try whether he
slept, they cast melted lead in his hand, which pierced quite through: and for
this cause he was called, El de lamano horadada, that is, he of the hand-bored
through. He was also called so, because he was very francke and liberal.

Many other examples might I allege, of counsels that were discovered by such
as were secretly in place, where the matter was handled, and heard all what was
said: but because they be all well night known unto all men, I mean not to
stand upon them. This may suffice, that it is a common proverb with us in
Castile. Tras parred o soto, no digas tu secreto a otro: Behind a hedge, a
mounde or wall,
No secret see thou say at all.


The twelfth discourse, what Counselors of Princes ought to do, when they be
assembled to consult.
PAulus Iurisconsultus says: that those contracts L. Naturalis ff. de
praesc^ip. ver.
which are called Contractus immominati, depend upon giving and doing. After
the same manner may we say, that all humane affairs, depend upon saying and
doing. These are the two balances of deed and word, which S. Isidorus says
that all C. omnis, 45. d.
men carry about them. This, (as Homer writes) did Phaenix Master to
Achilles, teach his Scholar. Our Savior and Act. cap, r. caepit Jesus sacere
et do^^re.
Lord Jesus Christ, (as S. Luke says) began to do and teach his most holy
doctrine. Therefore if those matters which are in consultation, depend upon
doing and saying: it is necessaire that all Counselors before they determine,
consider that some things ought to be said and done, and some ought neither to
be said nor done: other some ought to be said, but not done: and some ought
to be done, but not said.

Metrodorus said unto Sextus Pompeius, that if he would be Plutarchus in vita
Mar. Anto.
Lord, not only over all Sicil, but over the whole world also: he should let
him cut the gables of the Ankers of that ship, in which he himself was, and
Mar. Anthonius. Pompey answered, thou might have done this without I had
known of it. But now since I know it, I am content with yt which I have, and I
will not break my oath and promise made unto Anthony, that he should come safe
to my ship without any danger.

2 Those Counselors whom Princes take to give them counsel, ought to do as
Aristotle counseled Valerius Max. li. 7. de sapienter dict. and fact. monuit
vt cum co, aut qua^ ^a^^ssime loqueretur quo scilicet apud regias au^es vel
siletio tutior vel sermoue esset acceptior.
Calisthenes his Cousin to do, viz. that when he spoke to great Alexander, he
should be short, and speak to the Kings contentment. But Calisthenes not
regarding his counsel, openly rebuked Alexander for his folly, in embracing
the pride of the Persians, and Plutarch in vita Alexan. Mag. and Justinius. lib,
15.
commanding the Macedons to worship and honor him, and to call him the son
of Jupiter. Wherefore Alexander being incensed with anger against Calisthenes,
because he reprehended him in the face of all the world, and thereby incited
and styrred up others to despise him, and set nothing by him: and because he
provoked many to kill him, he commanded his hands and feet to be cut off, and
his ears, nose, and lips also, and to be thrown into a Dungion, where every
one might look upon him: whose grievous pains and deform^tie, one Lysimachus
a valiant Gentleman pitying, sent a cup of poison unto him, that he might
drink of it and die. Which thing being told unto Alexander, he commanded that
Lysimachus should be cast without a weapon, to be devoured of a fierce Lion.
But he like a noble and courageous Knight, wrapped his cloak about his arm,
and without any fear at all stepped to the Lion, and thrusting his hand into
his mouth, caught hold of his tongue, and pulling it out of the roaring Lions
head, killed him. For which act, Alexander esteemed much of him, and did not
only pardon him, but also largely rewarded him, aduauncing him to great honor.

3 Out of that which happened to Calisthenes, may clearly be seen, that the
same is true which Euripides the Greek Poet says. I set little by that wise
man, that has no wit for himself. These be they that take upon them to give
counsel to every one, and can give themselves none: not much unlike Horatius
Fungar vice cotis acutum redere quae ferru^ valet, expers ipsa secandj. Hernan.
Nunes.
the Signs of Innes, which show the way into the house unto all men, but they
never enter themselves: and Whetstones which sharpen knives, but remain blunt
themselves and cannot cut: and the Hearneshawe that can give counsel to every
one, and for himself he can give none.

This is said of the Hearneshaw, because the Pigion having built her nest upon
a tree, and being threatened by the subtle Fox that he would eat her, if
she would not consent to give him part of her young ones, the Hearneshawe
took pity on her, and counseled her to give the Fox none, saying: that she
should not discourage herself, nor fear the Fox, for he could not clime up
to the tree where she was. So that the Pygeon after that time, would give the
Fox nothing: who asking why? she answered, because ye Hearnshaw had told her,
that he could not clime up to the Tree, and therefore counseled her to give
him no more. The Fox understanding this, went to yt Hearnshawe, and began to
praise his wisdom, saying, that of all byrds, none could govern their lives,
and live so wisely as he: and among other matters, he asked him how he was
wont to do when he would sleep? The Hearneshaw answered, that he laid his
head close to his body, and covered it with his wing, and saying so, showed
him the manner how, and put his head under his wing: then the Fox stepped
near, and on the sudden took him, and did eat him. And so the Fox did
verily according to Euripides the Greek Poet, his saying: (...)
that is, Such wise men I despise,
That for themselves be nothing wise.


4 That which Aristotle taught his Cousin and Scholar Calisthenes, ought to be
observed of al such as be conversant with kings, speaking unto them and giving
them counsel: which was, that they should be very wary, in all their speeches
and actions: imitating and following the example of the Prophet Nathan, who
though he was sent from GOD, to rebuke king 2. Regum, 12.
David for his sin committed with Bethsaba, commanding her husband to be
slain: yet would he not tell it him plainly, but used a figurative kind of
speech, and proposed the matter so unto him, that he could not choose but
confess his fault, and repent himself of his offense committed against the
Lord. Ioab 2, Regum, 14.
used the same slynes and subtlety, sending a subtle Woman, which feigned
herself to mourn, and putting on mourning apparel, went to King David, and
falling down to the ground on her face, said, that she was a widow, and her
husband was dead, and that she had two Sons, and that they two strove in
the field, and none being there to part them, the one smote the other and
slew him. And that the whole family was risen against her, and would have her
deliver him that smote his brother, to destroy the heir also: and so they
should quench her sparkle that was left, and should not leave to her husband
neither name, nor posterity upon the earth. And the King knowing that the
hand of Ioab was with the widow in all this, he pardoned his son Absolon, and
commanded him to be brought again. Erisistratus, Physician to King Antiochus,
used the same Lucianus in Dea ^yria.
policy: and because the King should not be offended, he said unto him, Lord
your son is sick for love, and she whom he loves, is my wife: then the King
requested him, to let his wife do according to his sons desire: affirming,
that if he had been in love with his own wife, he would suffer her to deliver
him out of the danger of his disease. Then Erisistratus answered. Lord, it is
thine own wife whom thy son loves. The Catholic King, Don Hernando the
fifth, King of Castile, in like manner, because he would not have the Lady
Blanch his Ga^iuai. lib, 19 capit. 6. de compend. Histor.
Queen grieved, for the death of the young Prince, Don Iuan her son,
commanded his Gentlemen to tell her, that he was dead himself, and that the
young Prince lived: and anon after he entered in unto her, and comforted her
with his presence.

5 Many subtilties and crafty policies must be used by them that will say
the truth, unto one that is not willing to hear it. And as the Physicians
prepare their purgations with sirrops, and gild their pills, least the Patient
should be moved and offended with the bitterness of them, even so it is
necessary, that his mind should be prepared unto whom we mean to tell the
truth. For the truth does no less move and offend where it is told, if he
unto whom it is told be not prepared, the^ any medicine whatsoever, if it be
given out of time and season. And therefore the truth may not be told unto all
men, nor at all times, nor in every place. And when the truth is told, we
Hypocrat, Aphorism.
ought to consider, who, where, when, how, and unto whom he tells it: (as the
Physicians regard and perpende all the circumstaunces of the disease, to cure
their Patients,) and if it be not so done, in steed of doing them good unto
whom it is told, it makes them worse, and causes them to abhor and detest
those that tell it.

The truth ought to be told unto Princes, with due honor and reverence, as
the Prophet Nathan did unto King David: and the Prophet Daniel, when he
declared the Dream of the Cap. 4.
Tree unto King Nabuchadnezzar, saying unto him: My Lord, the Dream be to them
that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof unto thine enemies. Johannes
Franciscus Lotinus (who^ Considera. 319.
we follow in this discourse) says: that when Counselors doubt upon any
thing, and their opinions be diverse, they ought not to cross or gainsay them
that are of a contrary mind, least they should seem more curious in defending
their own opinion, then careful for the common profit. It is therefore
convenient for Counselors to accustom themselves, patiently to hear all that
which in the Consell is said or spoken: and not to spend the time in
declaring and expounding their own opinions, and contrarying that which other
Counselors allege. For many men in consultations, are more like to Masters,
that read and dispute in Schools, then Counselors that consult what ought to
be done.

6 If the counsel which is given, be manifestly known to be good, no man
ought to care whether he that gives it be virtuous or vicious: for that
counsel which without doubt is proved to be good, ought always to be
preferred. But this ought in all counsels to be considered, whether he that
gives the counsel, regard more his own particular profit, then the
commodity of the Common-welth: for by how much the more counsels are free from
all respects of private commodity, by so much the more are they profitable
unto the Commonwealth.

Niceas, to make the Athenians to assent unto him, when he persuaded them that
they should not wage war against Si^il, told them that he should reap no
profit by it, if they did as he counseled. For he well knew, that if they
enjoyed peace and lived in quietness, there were a great many that would take
upon them to govern the Commonwealth: but if they warred, there was not one
Citizen, that might either be his superior or equal.

7 If it happen that in counsels, some Counselors gainesaie that which others
say, and allege the contrary, then they whose opinions are crossed, ought not
to think yt they do it because they hate them, or make no account of them:
but because L. Item ^inus. principaliter ibi preter naturalem hominu^ ad
dissentiendum facilitatem, ff, de receptis arbitr.
they think their own opinions to be the best. For (as Vlpian the Lawyer
says) men be naturally inclined to be contrary in opinions, and not to agree
one with another. And (as the Emperor Justinian says) there is nothing in all
humane affairs so just, nothing so clear, and nothing so manifest, which is
not called in question, and of which there be not sundry and diverse opinions:
and, (as it is commonly said) men differ far more in understanding and
judgment, then they do in favor. Horat, lib, 2, sermon, Saty. 1.
Quot capita, tot sententiae, so many heads, so many minds.

8 Many Counselors regard not what is spoken in the counsel, concerning that
upon which they consult, but rather what he is that speaks, and if he be
their freende, they allow all what he says: and if he be their for, they
disalow it, though it be never so profitable for the Commonwealth* and though
they know not or understand not, what he says, nor what they gaine-saie. As
one did who chanced to sleep in the Counsailehouse, Bal^az^^ Cossa in Aulico.
when the Counselors should give their voices: and being awaked by the other
Counselors, and asked what he thought of that upon which they consulted: rose
up being half a sleep, and not knowing what he said, uttered these words. My
Lords, I say the contrary unto all what soever Alimani has said, (for he was
his adversary.) But Alimani answered, I have said nothing. Why then replied
the other, I gainsay al what ever thou shall say. Such men are very hurtful
to the Commonwealth.

9 Though in witnesses, the person that bears witness, is more regarded then
the testimony which he gives, yet in L. 3*. Eiusdem ibi de testibus no^
testimonijs creditorum ff, de testibus.
counsel, we ought not so much to regard the Counselor, as his counsel:
for the persons be in authority by reason of the counsails, and not the
counsails by reason of the persons. And though it be true, that they which are
more experienced, know better what is necessary in every thing, then they
which have no skill at all: yet ought every prudent and wise man to hear the
opinion and liking of many. For no one man (as we have said) can know all that
is required: and oftentimes a simple fellow his advice, is as good as ever any
was heard. As I writ more at large, in my book of crafty and prudent
counsails. And for this cause it is said of old among us in Spain: So
elsayal, ay al.
that is, Often a ragged cloak,
Does hyde a silken coat.


And Athenaeus says: (...)
And often simple men we see,
Speak things that to the purpose be.


There was a certain Prince, that devised how he might enter into Italy to
make war, and a Fool said unto him, Lord I beseech your majesty, to look how
you shall get out again, if need force you to come back out of the Country;
for there be many ways to get into it. If Charles king of France, had
considered this, he had not been so troubled in fleeing out of Italy, when his
Army was ouerthrown in the River of Tarro. The counsel which the Fool gave,
was like unto that of the Fox, who would not enter into the Lions Den,
because he saw the steps of many that went in, but of none that came forth
again: Horace -- Quia me vestigia terrent, Epist, libro, 1. Epistola prima.

Omnia te aduorsum spectantia* nulla retrorsum.
Because I fear these foote-steps what they mean,
All tending toward thee, none back do turn again.


10 The Lacedaemonians consulting upon a matter of great Plutarchus in Politiis.
importance, a certain Citizen called Demosthenes, being a wicked and
vicious man, gave an advice which was very convenient and much to the purpose:
but they rejected it, and elected one of the Elders to pronounce the same
opinion in the very same words, (as if one should power out the liquour that
was in a foul vessel, into a pure and clean vessel) because it Aulus
Gelliu^, 18, cap. 3.
should be the better liked of the people. And that they which were to give
their voices after him, should allow and approve that counsel, seeing it was
given by a sage and virtuous man.

11 Counselors ought to show their minds freely, concerning that which is
consulted, though they know that the other Counselors will not approve ye
counsel which they give, for (as Tullie says) counsails ought not to be
rebuked for the Phillippica, 2.
success, but for the reasons which are alleged to have them followed. And
they ought not to excuse themselves, saying: that they shall loose their
credit, if they counsel any thing which will not be approved: so that it is
more profitable, and better for the Commonwealth, to have them accounted
prudent and wise, then mighty and puissant: and they that will have their
counsels followed, seem not so much to counsel as to command.

12 Many things, though they do no harm at the beginning, nevertheless at
the end they become very hurtful and dangerous to the Commonwealth, if they
be suffered to take root, (as Ca^o Censorius said) in one of his Orations
Tit, Liu. Lib. 34
which he made in the Senate, against the superfluous expenses of the women of
Rome. For there is no estate of men, who if they be suffered to assemble and
consult together secretly, but they will shr^wdlie endomage the Commonwealth.
And (as the same Ca^o said in an Oration, which he pronounced against those
that were assembled together in Rome, to celebrate the Feasts which they
called Bac^hanalia,) those secret meetings Nullas ad huc vires coniuratio,
cae^e^^m incrementum ingens virium habe^, quod ind^es plu^^s ^iunt.
and congregations, which when they begin have no forces, and are very weak,
if they be dissembled and not looked to in time, increase and grow in strength
more and more, and in such order augment daily, that it is a very difficult
and hard matter ^^ repair the harm which they do, especially in matters
concerning Religion. This is manifestly seen in those which bring in new
sects: which if they be not ex^inguished and quenched at the first beginning,
as the fire when it begins to burn: in time will gather so great forces,
that they quite disturb and disquiet the whole Commonwealth. Therefore it is
necessary, that before they take root, great care and diligence be taken to
ra^^ them out quite, and not suffer them to take root. For they be easily
remedied when they begin, but with much ado when they grow daily, and
increase. As Ovid affirms, saying. Principiis obsta, sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas conual^ere moras.
At first resist, or else in vain, thy medcin comes too late,
When mischiefs gotten have, by long delays a perfect state,


13 Young men, because their natural complexion is hot, and have had but
small experience of Fortunes gutles (as Hanniball said to Scipio) in
consultation ^asilie incline to that which is more magnificent then sure, not
regarding what may succeed and follow. But old men, because their natural
complexion is cold, and have oftentimes been crossed with events Tit. Liu.
lib. 2. decad, 3. caeteris omnibus in consilio salutaria magis quam specio^a
suadentibus.
contrary to their expectation, follow surer counsels then magnificent or
honorable. We ought therefore to temperate the vehemency of youth, with the
wisdom of old men, and consider and examine what is said both of old and
young, choosing that counsel which is safest, and most profitable for the
Comwealth: and when there is any doubt, which counsel ought to be allowed,
then ought the old men's advice be approved and put in practice. Roboam King
of Jerusalem, lost the kingdom 3. Regum. 12.
and dominion which he had over the twelve Tribes of Israel, and only two of
them obeyed him, the Tribe of Judah, and the Tribe of Benjamin, and that,
because he had refused ye counsel of the ancient. Francis the King of
France, because he followed the counsel of his Admiral, (who was a young man)
refusing Ma^bri^us ^oseus part, 3, cap. 2, historiae mu^.
the advice which his aged Counselors gave him, was overthrown and taken
prisoner, in the battle of Pauia, by the soldiers of the Emperor Charles
the fifth his Army.

14 They which consult about any matter, ought to follow that counsel which is
least hurtful to the Common-welth. for it is impossible in great enterprises to
be delivered from all dangers that are like to fall. And for this cause it is
commonly said: Periculum periculo vincitur.


One danger is won by the other. As we have in the beginning of this
Treatise in more ample manner declared. And he that never does adventure, can
never loose nor gain. For after the danger comes the profit: and cowards
because they greatly fear the events of matters, never atchiue haughty
enterprises. If a man think that he may execute a thing without aduenturing,
he shall never bring any thing to pass. For many times the success fails,
not only of those things which we confidently, and not without good reason
hope for: but also of those things which we think to have well provided for, as
well in great and honorable enterprises, as in small and particular actions.
They therefore that co^sult, ought not to delay the execution of the same which
is concluded, because there is danger in it: if the profit be greater then the
danger which is like to follow after the execution thereof.

15 The Persians used to consult upon all matters in their Tamara de moribus
gentium.
banquets, when they did ca^e and drink: and after they had ended their
banquet, they determined what they would have put in execution. And this they
did because the Counselors should freely show their minds, concerning that
whereon they consulted. For wine causes men to speak the truth, according to
that, In Vino veritas. Alexander the great, commanded Plin. lib, 14, cap, 22.
that those Ambassadors which came unto him, should be welcomed with great
banquets, and made drunk, because he might learn or sift out the right cause
of their coming, and about what matters they were sent unto him.

The Germans assemble together to consult being all Armed, Cornel. Tacitus de
moribus Germanoru^, de pace atque de bello plaerumque in conuiuijs, consultant.
and if they approve that which was determined, they shaked their Pykes and
Lances: (for this was a token of agreement and consent,) and contrariwise, if
that which was consulted liked them not, then they murmured and made a noise,
and a confused cry. Besides, they consulted in banquets upon matters concerning
peace and war: because they thought that at such times they were not troubled
with other cares, and they thought that at such times, they were hotter and
readier to take any enterprise in hand. The people were not crafty nor
malicious, and the next day after they turned again to consult upon their
affairs, that they might conclude and determine what they should do, when as
they could not feign or invent.

They that live in the Country of Phrigia, eat and drink together Tamara vbi
supr. Bernardus mende de Sale, libro. 3., 17.
upon the cost and charges of the Commonwealth, before they begin to consult:
for they are of opinion, that eating and drinking in public assemblies, does
reconcile them together, that are at discord one with another, and that it does
take away severity, pride, arrogancy, and melancholy, as things Caelius
Rodoginus li, 15, ca. 18
estranged from the end for which banquets and feasts were ordained. The
County Ribadeo answered a certain Captain, Herna^do de pulga in lib. de viris
illustribus.
(which came unto him from his enemies, to entreat him that they might eat
and drink together, before the day which was appointed for the field) that if
he did eat and drink with him, the desire which he had to buckle with him,
would he taken from him.

16 They that think that men ought in consultation, to deliberate upon on
only matter, are greatly deceived. For oftentimes, matters be of this
quality, that the one depends upon the other: and it is necessary to
consider, the inconveniences which may follow that which is determined in the
counsel: and if they that consult know what is past, and understand what is
present, they may the better conjecture and divine what may fail out* Demades
said, that the Athenians resembled those that make no account of their health
before they be sick. Demades said this, because the Athenians in their
deliberations, always varied about that which was past, not endeavoring to
prove what was necessary to be done. It is said that they of Genoa in their
counsels, dispute upon that which is past: and the Florentines upon that which
is past, and that which is present: and the Venetians both upon that which is
past, present, and to come.

17 It chances many times when men consult, that that thing which seems to
be profitable for the Commonwealth, does happen to be very hurtful and
prejudicial. As for example: The Emperors of Greece called the Turks to aid,
who afterward destroyed them, and took the Empire from them. In the year of
our Lord GOD 1513. four Monarchs entered Petrus Bembus Lib, 8, Historiae
Venetae.
league against the Venetians, viz. Julius Secundus Pope, the Emperor
Maximilian, the Catholic King Don Hernando, and Jews King of France. And
the Venecians, though they were driven to great necessity, yet would they
never accept of the help and aid, which Selim the King of the Turks offered
them: who had sent them word, that he would defend them with all the power
that he had. But they feared least if he had once entered into Venice, he would
have done, as his predecessors dealt with the Emperors of Constantinople.
Francis King of France, in those wars which he made against the Emperor
Charles the fifth, (who, as he often protested, pretended no other thing, then
to conserve those estates and patrimonies which by right and justice were his
own) took a great company of Germains to help him, and paid wages to all
such as would come to help him against the Emperor, which Soldiers
afterward did him wonderful much harm. The same King of France, brought the
Army of Soliman King of the Turks to help him in those wars, which he made
against the Emperor Charles the fifth, and thereby did Christendom far more
harm, then he did good to the kingdom of France.

Don Alonso King of Naples said, that men were so hot to be revenged on their
enemies, that they were like to the birds, which for fighting one with another,
saw not them that came to take them.

18 The Counselors of Princes, ought in such manner to say their minds, that
they seem not to contend in words, but ought to seek and pick out ways and
means, which they suppose to be more fit, and better to persuade that, which
they think to be profitable for the Commonwealth. Some upon subtlety,
though they know what ought to be done, and what is best and most profitable:
yet they propose it after such a manner, as if they doubted of it, to the end
that they which hear them, should not cease to enquire and examine what were
convenient to be done, and that if they happily say any thing, they might
contrary them, and cross that which they allege.

Pliny counsels them that would willingly persuade any Lib. 1. Episto.
thing, to imitate the Physicians, who with fine speeches, sweet words, and
pleasant reasons, persuade their Patients to take those medicines which they
give them. Quintilian admonishes them that consult, to be courteous, friendly,
and tractable, and not to speak too hastily. For those counsels are well
given, that are uttered with leisure and judgment.

Theophrastus says, that they which give counsel, ought not to use garnished
and adorned reasons, but such as be to the purpose, and applied unto that which
they go about to persuade, alleging some examples of matters, that are like
unto those things upon which they consult. For it is commonly said. Will thou
know what shall be? then consider what has been. And for this cause men say,
that experience is a certain kind of proof.

19 Many when they give counsel, utter it after such an intricate and
obscure manner, that no man can plainly understand what they say: and this
they do to make that which they say, to agree with that which afterward
does happen and fall out. This guile and subtlety the devil used in old
times past, when he answered them by Oracles, that came to ask counsel of
him, answering them after such a manner, that howsoever the matter fell out,
yet his Oracle might have been applied unto the event: and with such aunswers
did he deceive men, and does yet daily more and more. Those Counselors Cap,
16, Consolatores onero^^omnes vos estis.
which show not their minds cleerelie (as Job says) are troublesome and
miserable: and after they see the success and event of the matter, if it be
not good, then they cast the fault upon them that would not follow their
counsel, saying: I told you well enough what would come of it: but you would
give no ear to my words: whereas indeed, their words were such, as could not
be understood, and might rather have been termed Oracles the^ counsails: and
so they heap one misfortune upon another, not without their great harm whom
they counseled: Lucanus. Erroribus addere culpam.
blaming them, and laying the fault in them, when they see that they have had
ill success in their affairs: this is to heap on^ misfortune on another; to
blame men after they have erred. For they find fault with them whereas they be
blameles: and counsails (as we have said) ought to be judged whither they be
good or bad, by the reasons which are in them alleged, and not by the success
and events, which many times are out of all judgment and humane understanding:
neither is any man bound to divine of that which shall come to pass.

20 If the Counselors of Princes cannot persuade their Lords, to do that
which is profitable for the Commonwealth, yet shall they not cease to do what
they can, that the Commonwealth sustain no loss, always having more regard
of honesty Lib, 1. cod. de caducis tolle^dis. De prohibita feudi alienatione.
etc.
and virtue, and the profit of the Commonwealth, then of their Princes. And
they ought (as the two Emperors Justinian and Lotharius say) to esteem and
set more by the public commodity, then by the private profit of their
Princes. And this becomes Princes best: for the office and duty of a good
Prince is, to procure that his Subjects live in peace, and be well governed.
And therefore Counselors shall do better and safer, to present their Princes
with that sentence of the two Emperors, L. princeps, ff. de legibus. Princeps
legibus solutus est.
Justinian and Lotharius: then to tell them that Princes are not subject to the
Laws, and that they may use their authority, and do what they will,
according to those clauses, De plenitudine potestatis, ex certa scientia and
motu proprio. They which use these speeches to their Princes, are deadly
enemies, not Restaulus Castaldus in tractatu de Imperatore. q. 111.
only to the people, who^ they hurt with their detestable counsails, but also
to the Princes whom they serve. For they being here on earth, as Images or
portratures of God, (whom they ought to imitate in godliness, authority and
wisdom,) these Counselors, not regarding the welfare of the Commonweal
Aristoteles. Polit. 5. cap. 10.
so much as their private commodity: counsel them to imitate the devil, and
to be his Ministers, exercising tyranny and all kind of cruelty, upon those
Nations which GOD has committed to their government. Whereas notwithstanding,
L. digna vox est maiestate regnantis legibus alligitu^ ^e principem profiteij.
Quintinus in ca^ Nouit de indici^, Fin. Institut. de iustitia et iure Iuris
praecepta sunt haec, honest viuere, altru^ non laedere: ius suum cuique
tribuere. Math. 7.
that which most belongs to the majesty of a Prince (as the Emperor
Theodosius says) is to be subject unto that which the Laws ordain. The King
Antigonus said, that no dishonest and unlawful thing, might be lawful and
honest to a Prince: for though he be a Prince, yet is he not dispensed withal,
but ^^^ht to behave himself according to yt laws of nature, which show how
men ought to live honestly one with another, without hurting their neighbors,
contenting themselves with their own, and not offering any injury unto
another, which they would not have others to offer unto them. And within this
divine precept (as our Savior and Lord Jesus Christ teaches us) be the Laws
and Prophets included. This rule and doctrine which our Lord and Redeemer gave
us, is so plain and clear, that it needs not any gloss or exposition at
all.

21 They that consult upon any matters, judge better of that which others
counsel, then they do of that which they counsel themselves. For every man
is led by nature, to like well of his own opinion and sentence: because his
judgment is not so free to judge of his own matters, as of a strangers
affairs. And for this cause, ought every one that writes books and
pamphlets, to show them to their friends before they commit them to the press:
that they may freely show their minds, what they think ought to be changed,
and what to be corrected: for no man can judge aright of those works which he
makes himself, because the love which he bears to himself, and all what he
does, does blind him, and suffers him not to mislike with any thing that is
of his own doing. And therefore it is commonly said, that the first thing
which a Child does after it is borne, is that it makes the father fond: for
it does in such manner blind his eyes and judgment, that he thinks his child
to be a great deal fairer then all other children. As the Ape being asked of
the Fore, how he might know her young ones if he should chance to meet them,
that he might spare them, answered: that they were the fairest that he could
find. Who going into the field, found them, and did eat them, for they seemed
not so fair unto him, because he looked not on the^ with the same affection
which their mother did bear unto them.

22 When one gives counsel to men of simple understanding, upon a matter
concerning the Commonwealth: he ought not to allege many reasons, which may
bring them into some confusion, and stay them from giving their resolutions.
For when they be (as it were) dulled, with the confusion and multitude of
reasons: they be hindered from executing that, unto which their natural
inclination does prick and entice them.

The Emperor Charles the fifth, said, that the Counselors of Princes, were
spectacles to that Prince that lacked wit and understanding, to judge of such
reasons as were alleged unto him: he said furthermore, that those Princes
which could not see without those spectacles were not very well: but they were
worse, that could not see neither without them nor with them. And the
Counselors of Princes, are not only the spectacles through which they see,
but also ye looking glasses in which Princes behold what is done in their
absence. Every Prince therefore, ought to know and understand, whether they
represent the right and true Image of that which they show: for there be
certain hollow looking glasses, which show a thing quite contrary, and
otherwise then it is in deed: for some glasses make a little thing seem
big, and some make a great thing seem little: and again, some glasses make
one thing to show as if there were a great many. All these differences and
many more, which the perspectiue Art teaches us concerning looking glasses,
are found in Counselors of Princes, who inform not their Princes truly of
all that is done. And therefore it is most necessary for a Prince, to enquire
and learn, whether his Counselors of who^ he takes counsel upon matters
concerning the Commonwealth, be pure and clear looking glasses, or whether
they be false glasses representing a thing otherwise then it is, and whether
they seek colors, to make that which is black seem white, and white to
show as if it were black. For thus Painters do, and those Counselors that
imitate them.

23 There be some Counselors, that are so proud and arrogant, and that take
such delight in their own sayings, and in hearing themselves speak, that they
know not how they shall conclude, or with what periode they will shut up
their speech: often repeating that which they have said: not because they might
be the better understood, but to feed their humor with the pleasure which
they conceive in their own words, and as S. Gregory says, to be accounted
men of singular eloquence. Lib. 26, cap. 18 In Job.
But Ecclesiasticus teaches the contrary, saying, make not many words, when
thou art among the Elders, neither repeat a thing often. And King Solomon
counsels us, to comprehend Eccle. cap. 10.
many matters in few words, and not to spend a great company of words in
uttering a few things.

Phocion one of the chief Governors of Athens, said, that that was the best
kind of speech, which in few words contained much matter: for words are like
money, which is accounted so much more precious, as in small quantity it
contains greater price and value. And some men are so enamoured with their
own words, that wen they think they have spoken bravely, they ask, whether
they have not spoken out of the purpose, not because they doubt whether they
have or no, but because they would be praised. The best and surest thing that
one may do Sanct. Grego. lib. 10. cap. 1. Iu Job.
in consultations, is to come with all speed to the very point of the matter
it self, and straight ways to resolve what ought to be done, without
spending much time, in alleging reasons, which serve to no other purpose, then
to show that they be eloquent. It is an easy matter (says Titus Liuius) for
one to find Libro. 8.
out words and reasons, after he knows what ought to be done.

24 They that in consultations consider and forecast but few things* shall
easily be resolved: and they that reuolue many things, shall never be able to
determine. We have of old had this proverb in Castile. Quien todo lo miro,
Nunca con boys aro.
which is to say, He that forecasteth all the storms of the air,
With Ox and plough the land will never care.


So that they which consider all doubts, forecast all events, and think upon
all the inconveniences that may happen, are never like to conclude and
determine: and though they do determine, yet do they very seldom put the
same in execution which they have agreed upon. But they that are nothing
scrupulous, and pass every thing over lightly, having no regard what
inconveniences may fall out, they do easily conclude many matters, but put few
in practice. And to shun these two inconveniences, Counselors ought to
choose that, which they think to be most profitable for the Commonwealth: and
not, as it is commonly said, of two inconveniences, to choose the least; for
there is no choice of good, in ill things: and oftentimes, Hieronimus de an*
in moralib*
when a man shunneth the greater inconvenience, he auoideth both.

25 The time ought not to be spent in counsailing, upon that matter which is
already dispatched; unless some thing happen concerning the same, which does
require, that ye Counselors should consult upon it again. Cato Vticensis (as
Plutarch In politicis.
says) when he knew, that that thing which was handled in the Counsel, would
be hurtful to the Commonwealth, he did drive out the time in declaiming: and
once prolonged his Oration so long, till that Julius Caesar, (who was Consul
at that time) asked him when he would make an end, and show what he thought,
concerning that about which they consulted. But he spent the time without
concluding any thing, touching that which Julius Caesar demanded of him. Then
Julius Caesar commanded him to be put in prison, because he would not make an
end, and let him understand his mind and opinion, concerning that which he
asked of him; and all the Senators arose out of their places, and accompanied
Cato, till he came to the prison. Which thing Julius Caesar seeing, caused him
to be set at liberty. Many allege all the inconveniences that may happen,
concerning that matter which is consulted: to the end, that while they
deliberate upon it, the opportunity may pass, which was offered to have it put
in execution. The Emperor Charles the fifth, said, that the Parliaments in
which the Germans Ludouicus dulcis de dictis et factis imperat. Caron. ^.
consulted, upon matters concerning the Empire, were like Vipers: for as the
young Vipers kill their mothers, so that which was concluded in one Parliament,
was recalled and made frustrate in the next.

26 Prosperous events, cause men oftentimes to judge ill of a thing: for when
it has succeeded prosperously once, or twice, they think that it will
always fall out after the same manner. The same happens unto them, that to
revenge some Liuius, lib. 30.
little injury, or to shun some small danger which they fear, they are so
blinded, that without considering the perrils which may follow, by doing that
which they determine to do, although they be told what were better, yet they
will not hear those which counsel the^: and one little affection can
prevail more with them, then all the reasons that may be offered, be they
never so forcible. So that we commonly use this Castilian proverb. Hombre
determinado,
Nunca bien aconseiado.
that is, A man determined,
Never well counseled.


They therefore that consult, ought to be free from affections, that they might
freely without any passion, see and conjecture what may fall out, as if they
had it present before them: and if they do this, they shall see whether they
have any reason in that which they pretend. Cato Vticensis said, that those men
were to be accounted valiant, who seeing the dangers before their eyes, were
not any thing molested at all, with any perturbation, or passion of fear.
Lucan. -- fortissimus ille
Est quisquis metuenda pati si cominus instent
Et differ potest. --.
Things to be feared who can endure, and wisely them defer,
(Though hard at hand) for valor him of others I prefer.


And Martial. Eortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest.
That man alone does valiantly,
That well can live in misery.


27 When they that are of a contrary faction or partiality, give any
counsel worthy of reprehension, their adversaries ought not to rebuke them,
least they which hear them, think they do it more for ill will which they
bear them, then for love or affection toward the Commonweal. Moreover,
Counselors, if a matter fall not out according to their expectation, they
ought not to reprehend the Princes who^ they serve, because they followed the
worst counsel; for so doing, they should grieve them worse: and in deed the
Princes are blameless; for they do but follow the counsel which their
Counselors Plutarch. in trac-tatu quo pacto. possis adulatore^ ab amico
dignoscere.
give them. Anctus and Eulus (being two of the King Perseus his very familiar
freenos) as long as he lived in prosperity, used no cross speeches against
him, but such words as

28 They that give counsel, (as the reverend Father In Lib. cui titulus Dux
peccatorum.
Jews de Grauado says) ought to be constant in mind: for as gravity and
waightines in matters accompany prudence, so facility and lightness betoken
folly: and therefore every one ought to take great heed, he be not too easy
and light in these six things: to wit, in believing, in granting, in
promising, in determining or concluding, in being easily and lightly
conversant among men, and in being angry. For in all these consist manifest
danger, if men be over light and easy in them: for he that believes easily,
is light of heart: he that promises easily, loses his liberty: he that does
grant easily, does often repent: he that does lightly determine and conclude,
puts himself in danger to err and do amiss: (as King David did in
Mephibosheth, 2. Regu^^. 4.
his cause) but he that is light in conversation, is little accounted of: and
he that is soon angry, shows a manifest token of foolishnes: for he that is
patient, knows how to behave himself, and how to lead his life: but he that
cannot bridle his anger, cannot choose but commit much folly.

29 Plato exhorts them that go about to persuade any In Politicis.
thing, which is necessary or profitable for the Common-welth, to imitate the
Musitions, who when they finger the strings of their Lutes, to make some
harmony or music, they do it softly and smoothly, without any force or
violence: he exhorts them also, not to use cunning and artificious speeches,
nor speak sharply or craftily, but sincerely and truly, and that their
words be agreeable to honesty and justice, using grave sentences fit to
persuade.

30 Such men as have always had prosperous luck, and good success in their
affairs, can very seldom give good counsel, as Hanniball told Scipio, in
the parlie which they had, Tit. Liu. lib. 30.
concerning ye peace which the Carthagineans were about to make with the
Romans: and to persuade him to it, Hanniball alleged, that Scipio was a young
man, and had always had good luck, and that they which had never been crossed
with ill fortune, did very seldom consider, and forecast all unfortunate
events which might fall out. For the virtue of counsailing well, proceeds
from experience: and they that have tried adversity as well as prosperity, are
better able to judge of both, then they which never have been unfortunate: and
they which have no experience, cannot give counsel so well, as they that have
delivered themselves out of trouble and adversity.

31 Many though they be old in age, yet in manners, behavior, and prudente,
they be but young: and such men are Esaias, 65. Puerj ^e^tum annoru^.
called in the Scriptures, boys of an hundred years old. Who though their age
be sufficient, yet they be not fit to give counsel in matters which require
wit and judgment: and we ought more to regard how they live, and what they do,
then of what age they be. They that be young in government of life, lightly
I^uenis moribus
change their minds, and easily pass from one opinion to another: for this
trick is proper unto them that want judgment and understanding to examine that
which ought to be determined in the Counsel.

32 They that counsel Princes, ought not to use words and reasons, which
bear a greater show then they be of force: for he that goes about to persuade
a Prince, must think that he takes another matter in hand, then if he should
persuade the people: for they that persuade the people, seek all means,
arguments, and reasons, (though they be never so false) to prove that which
they go about, and they use all the figures that Rethorick teaches. But to
persuade one man (as Quintilian Lib, 1, cap. 3.
says) eloquence little avails. Antigonus king of Macedon, said unto one ye
went about to persuade a certain thing Erasmus in Apo. libro. 4.
unto him, with painted words and sophistical reasons: think thou to talk
unto me, as if thou spakest with the people? Leonides Psutarch in vita Lycurgj.
King of Lacedaemonia, said unto another that spoke too much of a weighty
matter: friend, thou speak of a good purpose, but to no purpose.

33 Counselors ought to do like the Physicians, and give no counsel, before
they know upon what thing counsel is demanded, and what ought to be done
concerning the same. For as it is not enough for the Physician to know the
disease, unless he also know what medicine ought to be given: so the
Counselor, though he know what is consulted, that suffices not, unless he
also understand what ought to be done therein. So that it is a thing most
necessary for a Counselor, to have notice of that which is handled in the
counsel. For no man can give counsel in any matter, concerning man's life,
unless he have both science and experience, touching that which is consulted.
But when Counselors are acquainted with ye substance of the matter, and
understand it thoroughly, then may they easily Facile erit explicatis
co^silijs accommodare rebus verb a. Matthew. cap. 1. Aphorismo, 1. Quintil. li.
2. c. 14
give their resolutions: and (as Ti^^s Liu^us says) find fit words to deliver
their minds: contrariwise, if they understand not the matter which is
consulted, they are (as our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ says) like blind
men that lead the blind. Neither is it sufficient (as Hippocrates says) for
the Physicians to be acquainted with the infirmities, and know what remedies
ought to be applied, but also the time, and other more circumstances ought to
be considered. And no less ought Counselors to regard and consider, that all
circumstaunces of time, place, etc. be accomodated and fitted, to execute the
same which shall be determined. Moreover, seeing that all things upon which
counsel is taken, are uncertain, and void of all firmnes and stablenes:
counsails ought to be baried and changed, conformable to the time and place,
not only every day, but every hour also, and every minute, when necessity
shall require it. And for this cause it is said, Sapientis est mutare
consilium: it is the point of a wise man to change his counsel. Seneca
faith, that counsel ought to be taken whilst the matter is handled. And Ovid
says: -- Consilium resque locusque dabunt.
The place and thing,
Will counsel bring.


34 Some Counselors are so ambitious, that they will not consent to any
counsel but their own: and will not suffer any other man's counsel to be put
in practice, though it be never so profitable for the Commonwealth, staying
and delaying the execution thereof by all means possible. And whereas they
might atchiue both honor and glory, by bringing the same to pass which is
concluded, they will not: only because it was not done according to their own
counsel and liking. But such men know not, that the true glory of heroycall
enterprises, does not only consist in knowing what ought to be done, but
also in executing that which is determined.

35 They that consult upon matters concerning the Commonwealth, ought not to
forgo any profit that may be gotten: no not so much as that commodity which
may be gotten by such men, as have greatly endomaged the Commonwealth.
Chabrias a Citizen of Messala, said unto one Euridanus, (a man chief and
principal in the government of the Common-welth, but very sullen and rigorous
in nature. O Euridanus, thou art a necessary evil in the Commonwealth: for
they that live in it cannot choose but be conversant with thee, and yet because
of thy frowning and lowering countenance, they cannot abide to continue with
thee.

36 Plutarch counsels them that go about to persuade the people to any
thing, that they should not all of the at once, sing one note, but that there
should be diversity of judgments at the first, but afterward (as if they were
overcome by them that showed better reasons) they should agree all in one
opinion, and all iumpe, as it were, into one mind. For so the people, thinking
that they were forced unto that unity of consent, will soon be persuaded,
that that which they say, is most profitable for the Commonwealth. But in small
matters, and such as cannot greatly endomage the Commonwealth, it were good
that the Counselors should in earnest differ in their censures, one from the
other, every one using his own reasons and arguments, that they might
afterward in greater matters of more weight and importance, seem to agree,
and be all of one mind. This policy did many Heretics use, suborning some of
their friends that should gainesaie that which they said, and afterward when
they did dispute with them, they should confess that they had erred in
misliking their doctrine, seeing they had with such forcible arguments and
necessary conclusions proved and confirmed it unto them.

37 There is much difference betwixt those that in counsels enquire what
ought to be done, and those that contrary and cross other men, to show that
they only understand all themselves, and that no man else is so fine headed as
they be. For they that enquire of all circumstances, concerning that thing
about which they consult, consider and sift the matter thoroughly without
affection, and their judgment is not encumbered with any thing that may hinder
them from divining and coniecturing such accidents, as may happen in those
matters upon which they deliberate: and these men are very good and necessary
in a Commonwealth; for they oftentimes show unto them that govern it, some
things, which before that time have lain hidden and secret from them. But
contrarily, they that contrary those that propose any thing in counsel, love
not the Commonwealth, but hinder and overthrow all affairs both public and
private: for whilst they alterate and contend, Nimis altercando veritas
amittitur, and Plato, Dialogo, 1. de legibus. Oportet autem non contentiose sed
quiet rem inquirere.
they cannot find out the truth of any matter, but rather (as Boaecius says)
they go farther from the truth: for it is the property of those that
gaine-saie every thing which others allege, to defend and maintain their own
opinion and conceit, thought it be never so false and heretical. Otherwise if
men disputed, minding to sift out the truth, and not to overthwart other men
in their reasons, they might easily perceive and understand the verity of
each matter. And to this end were the Sanctorum Patrum disputationes non erant
contentiones sed collationes.
disputations of the holy Fathers called, not contentions or differencies, but
collations and conferencies. For their intent was not to show which of them
was wisest, and knew most, but to search out the truth of that which was in
question.

39 The Counselors of Don John Prince of Auis, (who Chronica Duci^ Nunaluares
Pereira, cap, 20.
afterward was crowned king of Portugal) perceiving that their Lord always
followed the counsel of Don Nunaluares de Pereira, determined all of them
jointly together, to stand stiflie against Don Nunaluares, and gaine-saie all
whatsoever he should say. And on a time, as the Prince consulted with his
Counselors upon a matter of great weight, all they that were of his Counsel,
misliked that which Don Nunaluares alleged, concerning that which was
proposed, which thing, when Don Nunaluares perceived, and marked to what intent
they did it, be laughed: and the cause of his laughter being asked of ye
Prince, he answered: because they have all of them agreed, to disagree from me,
and to withstand and contrary what soever I say. But the Prince liking that
counsel which Don Nunaluares gave, followed it, nothing respecting yt all his
other Counselors were of a contray judgment. This thing ought to be shunned*
which is so hurtful and prejudicial to the Commonwealth, as nothing can be
more: for what can be worse, then to set more by his own opinion, then the
welfare of the Common-welth* Those that assemble together to co^sult, ought to
imitate Aristides, who being wont to contend with Themistocles, when they were
both of them sent by the Athenians in Embassage, said: Plutarch, in Apothegma.
how now Themistocles, shall we leave our emnities here? and when we return
to Athens, we may do as we did before.

39 Some men easily vary and change, when they sit in counsel: others be
very obstinate and stiff, and will not vary at all. Certes it were good that
a Counselor should be grounded and settled in his opinion, and follow that
which seems unto him, to be most profitable for the Commonwealth. But he
that will not change his mind, when as his counsel, if it were followed, would
do the Commonwealth much harm, is obstinate, selfe-willed, and stubborn:
and is not to be admitted to give advice upon matters concerning the estate of
any Commonweal. For wisdom consists not in being selfconceited and
selfe-willed, but in knowing how to make choice of that which is best and most
profitable: for it is the property of the devil, to persevere still in doing
ill: and therefore we use to say. Palabr^ de Satanas,
No buelue atras.
that is, From wicked will we never find,
That Satan changes once his mind.


Tullie says, that he does not change nor alter his counsel, Episto. famil.
li. 1. Episto. no.
that changes it to choose a better: and as the Pilot that guides the ship,
moves the sails from one side to the other side of the ship, to sail the
better, and will rather obey the Wind the^ loose the Ship; so they that
consult, ought to vary and change their minds, rather then to endemage or
hurt the Commonwealth. And indeed, the end for which counsel was invented,
is to have both a great many to show their advice, and each one of them to be
of diverse opinions, that the best of them all, may be picked out amongst them.

40 Tullie affirms also, that they which separate, that which is Lib. 3.
officior. Atticae leges Cyrsillu^ quendam vtilia hone stati preferentem
lapidibus cu^ vniuersa familia obrui volebant.
honest, from that which is profitable, ( honestum ab vtili) do the world
great harm: for every one now respects commodity, nothing regarding
virtue. And the same Tullie In lib, partit. Consideratio. 355.
says, that in all counsels, that ought to be chosen, which is most
profitable for the Commonwealth. This opinion does Iohannis Franciscus Lotini
follow, because he thinks yt Tullie followed it, when he was old, after he
had seen the event of many public affairs: and because Aristotle concluded
the end of counsel, to be the vitilitie and profit of the Commonwealth. This
opinion of Tullie, is confirmed with that which the Laws of the twelve Tables
ordain, to wit, yt the chief end of all Law, tends to the conservation of
the Commonwealth. The uttermost end and issue of the Law is, the preservation
of the Commonwealth. When men deliberate upon the safety of the
Commonwealth, they ought not to regard honesty, but setting aside all
respects, they ought to follow that which is profitable. They which defend the
majesty of their Kings and Lords, will not suffer any one to say, that any
thing which the King has granted or allowed, is ignominious, infamous, or
dishonest. For they say, that no insamie, reproach, or dishonor, can fall into
any determination which the King approoueth. But I take that opinion, to be of
more weight and moment, which holds, that we ought to make more account of
honesty, then of utility: but if that which is honest, depend upon the Civil
and positive Laws, and not upon the natural and divine Laws, let all the
Civil laws cease, when as the necessity of the Commonwealth is so great,
that it can not be remedied unless they be broken. This holds in those
Commonweals, which acknowledge no superior: and in those also which do
acknowledge one, if they only violate those Laws which they may break,
without the hurt or hinderance of their Superior: for all the humane and
positive Laws, which are instituted and ordained for the conservation of the
Commonwealth, cease, if they be hurtful and domageable to the Common-welth.
Titus Liuius terms the^ mortal Laws, for wars change those that were made
for peace, and peace breaks those that were made for war.

41 Themistocles, in a certain consultation, said, that he Plutarchus in vita
Th^m^stoclis.
had thought upon a thing, which would be very profitable for the
Commonwealth, but it was such as might not be pronounced openly, nor known
unto all men. They that were of the Counsel, answered, that he should make
Aristides acquainted with it, and if he approved it, they would every one like
of it: upon this, he showed unto Aristides, how that he had determined to fire
their enemies Ships, that they being consumed with unlooked for flames, the
Athenians might be absolute Lords over all Greece. Aristides hearing this,
told the other Counselors, that Themistocles his counsel, was very
profitable, but very unjust; whereupon they would have no more mention made
about it, and that with great reason. For whenever any question is moved
concerning the soul and substance, or riches and authority: it is most
manifest, that the soul is better then the whole compass of all the world:
and it ought not in any case to be permitted, that learned flatterers should
Franciscus Villalobos in prob.
be admitted to such counsels. For these men are they that use to justify both
parts, and by reason of these, each side thinks that he does according to
justice. Frauncis King of France, did owe unto the Emperor Charles the sift,
two Millions of crowns, and the learned men of his Counsel told him that he
ought not to pay them: which counsel the King no doubt had followed, if the
Emperor had not had his two sons as pledges for his assurance. On the
otherside, the learned men of the Emperors Counsel, said, that the King of
France ought to pay those two Millions of crowns, because he had waged war
against him unjustly, and was taken prisoner in the same conflict: and all
those crowns were in comparison nothing, to the loss and damage which the
Emperor had received by those wars. But the King of France could not be
persuaded, but that he had right according to his Counselors minds, and
forthwith, sent a strong and mighty Army toward Naples, where he lost out of
his own treasure, above sire millions of crowns, and all the treasure of
France, with all the youth of his Nobility, and all their Captains: and at
the end nevertheless, he was constrained to pay the two millions of crowns.

42 Silence at all times, and in all places (as Plutarch ^n libro de offi^^^
auditoris.
says) is a great Ornament unto a Counselor: especially when he hears
another speak, he ought not to interrupt his speech, and at every word which he
faith, to cut him off and hinder his discourse, but patiently to suffer him
that speaks, to say his mind, and make an end of his speech, though it do
ouerflowe with many words which be not very acceptable unto him. And when he
has made an end, then ought not the other too hastily begin, to gainsay or
cross that which he has said: but stay a while (as Eschines says) and see
whether he will recall that which he has said, or correct it, or add any
thing more unto it, or detract some thing from it. They which incontinently
interrupt and break another man's discourse, and do so loose their patience,
that they cannot stay ye hearing of four or five reasons alleged by another,
but begin to speak before the other has done, they do both trouble
others, and yet cannot be heard themselves. But they that be accustomed to
hear an other give his verdict, patiently with sufferaunce, and a quiet
moderation of mind, admit and allow those words and reasons, that are good,
profitable, necessary, and expedient, and keep the^ in remembrance: but those
that are vain, foolish, and false, they sever and discern the^ from the
other: and so they show themselves to be more desirous to search out the
truth, then to contend and strive, whereby they be known not to be men without
consideration, or ouer-rashe and headlong hasty, not contentious, or
wranglers. Therefore he that will atchiue honor and credit, ought to hear
him that speaks, attentively, meekely, willingly, pleasantly, and with
great tolleration, as if he were at some religious and sacred banquet.

43 Xenophon said, that even as they that be thriftie and Plutarchua ^^i supra.
good husbandmen, use to buy as well of their enemies as of their friends: so
they that hear others, ought with great vigilancie and watchfulnes, always to
be attentive to reap profitte by that which they hear, whether it be good or
bad: and consider whether they that speak, say any thing which tends to the
matter, or whether they be deceived, and are wide from that which they aim at,
whether they allege forcible reasons, or clatter out a heap of vain
arguments; and whether they use any good figure or laudable form of speech,
ending their periods with some gracious clause, or commit some great
absurdity, whereby they thought to get some credit or vainglory: or some
such other like thing. And this ought to be noted by the hearers, to the end
that they may consider with themselves, and examine their own defects: for
they cannot so well mark faults in themselves, as they can easily correct in
others: which when they find in others, they ought to consider whether they
jar not in that string themselves, before they find it a fault with others.
For certes it is an easy matter to rebuke, but a very vain thing, and
ignominious unto us, if we be faulty our selves, and take not heed from
falling into the same errors: wherefore when we rebuke any one, we ought to
think continually upon that saying of Plato, have not I perhaps committed any
such thing? and even as in the eyes of other men, was see the representation of
our own Image: so ought we to imagine our own words in the words of other
men, to the end we should not ouer-rashlie despise others, and that we should
take more heed and diligence when we speak our selves. Moreover, it were very
profitable and expedient, that Counselors should compare that which they hear
others say, unto yt which they say themselves: and attentively consider,
whether they hear any thing that is not well solowed by him that reasons. And
if he declare and expound it not, as well and sufficiently as the matter
requires, then they should themselves endeavor to expound, and explane the same
more clearly and exactly, or declare it after some other order or manner, or
take the same argument, and quite change it from the beginning to the end,
uttering and pronouncing it in better words and fitter phrases.

44 They that assemble together to consult, ought not to be proud, and puffed
up with vain glory, nor lean upon any thing, bending their bodies on
neither side, nor hang their heads, but sit bolt upright, having there bodies
erected in comlie order, and giving ear unto him that speaks, in so much
that he may perceive them which hear him to be attentive: They ought moreover
to be constant, sincere, pure, uncorrupted, simple, without dissimulation, not
puffed up with pride, hatred, or any other thing: in so much that they ought
always to be in a readiness, and not to seek what they should say concerning
those things whereof they consult. For as many things are required to make a
man perfectly virtuous, like as in Music to make a consorte, many notes are
requisite which concur altogether in one time within their limited compass:
so contrarily, if any one thing be wanting, the whole is blemished: as also in
Music one jar brings all out of tune. And therefore Counselors ought to
take great heed, how they behave themselves in consultations, especially
when they hear any other to discourse: for then ought they not only, not to
knit or hang the brows, nor to cast their countenance downwards, giving show
of sorrow, nor to gaze about, nor to turn their bodies, nor to hold their
feet vndecentlie: but also, not to make signs, not to whisper with another,
not to laugh, not to yaune, not to nodde as they that be drowsy, and not to be
rude in behavior: for all such like things are worthy of correction, and
require great care and diligence. And note this; that all that which we have
said of those that hear, ought also to be observed by those that speak.
Furthermore, as in Tennice play, he that receives the ball, ought to move
and bend his body, cunningly to bandie it back again to him that sent it,
so in reasoning and discoursing, as well he that speaks, as he that hears,
must do his part and duty, and dilligentlie observe what he ought to do. So
that Counselors ought, whether they hear or speak, to behave themselves
orderly in all respects; and take heed when they begin to speak or discourse
of any thing, that they be not too tedious; for many, when they once begin to
talk, they never make an end.

45 The Counselors of Princes are subject unto two great inconveniences, The
first is, that if they counsel not their Princes to do that which they
think to be most profitable for the Commonwealth, without having any respect
unto their own profit, or any other thing; then they discharge not their
duty. The second is, that if they do counsel their Princes, to do that
which they will not do, then they incur danger of their lives. And to
shun these inconveniences, the best and safest way for them is, to beware of
both extremes, and follow a mean in every thing: showing their minds unto their
Prince with great modesty, concerning every matter, (as that which touches
nothing their own persons) in such order, that if the Prince follow their
advice, he may do it willingly of his own accord, that it seem not that he
is drawn or forced to do it, by the importunity of him that gives the
counsel. And if the Counselor do thus, there is no reason why the Prince
should bear him ill will, or be highly offended with him: and so the
Counselor may avoid that danger, which else he should incur, if in any thing
he withstoode the Prince his pleasure: or the selfe-liking and opinion of the
other Counselors. For if the success be unfortunate, every one endeavors to
dispatch him which gave the counsel. So that in this case, when Counselors
counsel their Princes modestly (after the manner which we have showed) though
they get not that glory which they obtain when the counsel falls out
prosperously: yet they have two commodities, the one, that they be not subject
to any danger, the other, that though their counsel have no prosperous
event, yet they get no discredit by it, but be rather in more account. And
contrarily, they that will be chief and principal in the Counsel, and will
suffer no counsel to be preferred before their own, if their counsel fall
out unhappily, and have but had success, then they are rebuked, and bear all
the blame: and though it fall out well, yet the discredit and infamy which
they procure when the matter does fall out infortunatelie, is greater then the
credit or glory which they get when al things succeed prosperously.

46 As they that are invited to some banquet, must be content Plutarch. de
officio auditoris.
with that whith is set on the Table before them, without asking any thing
else: even so in counsels, they that hear another man speak, ought to hear
him with great attention: and not to move any doubts, or interrupt his speech
with vain questions: for all the profit that comes thereof, is only to
trouble him that speaks, and cause him to err, and digress from the
purpose. And therefore they ought not to be troublesome unto them that are in
the Counsel, asking them often about one and the self same thing: for such
(as Plutarch says) Vbi supra.
are like those little birds, that cannot yet fly, and yet be always gaping
at other birds bills, to receive their food already champed and chewed by
them. To conclude, it is the point of foolish and simple fellows, and such as
have no wit, to be asking of questions at every word, and to be still
informed upon every point.

47 They that consult upon matters of great importance, ought to consider, (as
Cornelius Tacitus says) whether that Lib, 18,
which they determine upon, be profitable unto their Princes, and whether it
may be put in execution, without harming or endomaging the Commonwealth. They
ought also to consider; whether they that give the counsel, are like to come
into into trouble if it fall not out prosperously: and who shall gain the
credit and honor if all things succeed happily. And above all, they ought to
have a regard, what the people talk, if the Prince do as they counsel him;
for though all other men use to follow those counsels, which are most
profitable for them, though they be not altogether just: yet Princes ought to
do nothing (as the Emperor Tiberius says) that passes the bounds of
justice: greatly regarding their fame and reputation: and what would be said
of them, if they should follow counsels that were hurtful to the
Commonwealth.

The thirteenth discourse. Of the Counsel of estate, and of the ordinances
and laws that appertain to the same Counsel.
THe Counsel of estate (as Plato says) is the anchor Dialogo, 12;
whereon depends the safety or loss of all the Commonwealth. For this
Counsel looks to the whole Common-welth: and (as Isocrates says) it is the
soul thereof: and it is In Areopagitico.
like to prudence in man, which has a care of the estate of the whole body.
All other counsels depend upon this one Counsel: and it is called the
Counsel of peace, because the chief and principal intent of this Counsel is,
to procure that every one may live in peace and quietness: for this is the end
for which the Counsel of estate was ordained. For (as Plato says) wars are
not made for any other cause, then to Dialog. 1. de legibus.
procure peace. This Counsel of estate, does oftentimes change the governments
into tyrannies, and quite destroy the Commonweals: and, (as Hesiodus says)
one ill counsel given by some wicked man, causes the decay and ruin of many
Cities: and therefore it is commonly said, that all the welfare of the
Commonwealth, lies all in all in the counsel of estate. And because in my
Books of Commonweals, I writ of all the other Counsels in their proper
places; I mean in this place to entreat of the Counsel of estate, which is
(as the Emperor Adrianus Iunius animad verse. lib. 3, cap, 9.
Charles the fifth said) the knowledge, power, and understanding, yea, the
very eyes, hands and feet of every Prince.

2 Fredecicus Furius says, that the charge of the Counsel of estate, is
Civil (as the Laws term it) and whether the In libro de consilio and
confiliarijs principum.
kingdoms be gotten by force of Arms, or by inheritance, it is pertaining to
the Counsel of estate, to see what Viceroyes, Governors, and Generals be
created, as well for peace as for war: what marriages be contracted, and what
Ambassadors be sent into strange Countries, and whither all other Officers
discharge their duty or no: and what provision ought to be made and not made.
The Counsel of estate ought also to take heed, that no provisions, voyages,
and expeditions be made by stealth, to the damage of the Commonwealth, and
commodity of the enemy. It appertains also to the Counsel of estate, to
see that all ordinary expenses and charges, be discharged in due time, as well
in peace as in war, and to give bills for the receite of the money out of the
Counsel of substance and Revenues: which Counsel ought to be as a Cosfer to
keep the money, which is to be distributed and delivered out, by ye Commission
and authority of those that are belonging to the Counsel of estate. It is
also belonging unto this Counsel, to see with what Nations they ought to make
peace, and against what Nations to wage war: with what people they cught to
be confederated, and with whom to use fair words and large promises, but
accomplish nothing, and such other like things, public or private. This
holds in that which generally pertains to the other counsels: for if this
Counsel of estate, should meddle with every particular thing that belongs to
the other Counsels, it should usurp the Office of them all.

3 The Counsel of estate, has all jurisdiction both Civil and Criminal. And
what ever is determined in it, ought to be put in execution, as if the Prince
himself had commanded it. For this counsel above all others, does cheefely
represent the person of the Prince: and for this cause the Prince ought to be
Lib. 1. cod. de officio Vicarij.
personally in those consultations which are made in the Counsel of estate, to
the end, that nothing be ordained, which may harm the Commonwealth. So that
every Prince ought to consult with his Counselors, and with the learned men of
his Realm, whether such ordinances as he means to publishe be good and
profitable for the Commen-wealth. For there is nothing that is more contrary
to a good Prince; and proper to a Tyrant, than to say, Sic volo sic i^beo;
stat proratione voluntas. Thus I command, thus shall it be,
For reason, will, shall stand with me.


4 Seeing that in the Counsel of estate, it is chiefly consulted what ought to
be done, for the preserving and maintayning of the Commonwealth it is
necessary that the Counselors of that Counsel, be well practiced and
experienced in Military discipline, and very skillful and prudent in ruling
Commonwealths: so that they ought to know how to enquire, examine, and judge
all things concerning policy and government, both in peace and war. Further
more, they that consult upon peace, whither it he profitable, it should be
established or no: ought to know what is belonging to war, seeing peace and
war he two contraries: and the nature of contraries is such, that the one is
known by the other. In ancient times past, many Senators entered into the
Senate of Rome to consult, and they that had triumphed for victory over their
enemies, sat with the Crowns on their heads (which they wore when they
triumphed) as tokens and shows of their virtue and excellency. And this did
Cyneas the Ambassador of Pyrrhus declare, when he being asked of Pyrrhus what
he thought of the Senate Plutarchus in vita Pyrrhj.
of Rome, he answered, that it seemed unto him to be a counsel of many Kings,
that were assembled together to consult. Liuie reports, that Cyneas in this
answer, showed the greatness and excellency of the Senate of Rome, for in it
were not only many noble and famous Captains, with those Crowns on their
heads, with which they triumphed, because they had valiantly overcome their
enemies, and subdued many Princes to the Empire of Rome: but also many ancient
persons of great authority and estimation, wonderfully exercised in the
government of the Commonwealth.

5 Those ordinances and Laws, that were made at the Macchiauellus in
discursibus.
first beginning of the Common-wealthy, when men were good, afterward whe^anen
became wicked, served to no purpose: for the Laws vary according to the
accidents that happen in the Cities, but the ordinances are very seldom
altered. And this is the cause that good Laws suffice not, because the
ordinances remaining stable and inviolable, do disanull them. There was in
Rome, the ordinance of government, or rather of estate; and after wards the
Laws and Offices with which they bridled the Citizens. The ordinance of the
ostate, was the authority of the people of the Senate of the Tribunes (for so
the Protectors of the Commons were called in Rome) and of the Consuls: and it
was the manner and order how the Laws should be ordained. Which ordinance is
not change or al^^eb by reason of any accidents that may chance, but she Laws
which keep the Citizens in obedience, they be altered: as the Laws which
were made for the constraint of adultery, of excessive expenses, and ambition,
and many other Laws aceording as the people daily grew to be more and more
wiched and vicious. But because the ordinances of the estate, which the people
being corrupted) were not good, did remain inviolable: those Laws which were
renewed, did not suffice to keep the people from wickedness: but they might have
doone-much good, if the ordinances had been renewed with the Laws.

6 We may easily perceive, that it is not good, to have the ordinances
remain stable and inviolable, when as the Citizens ware wicked, by two
principal things: the one touching the election of Officers, and ordeining of
Magistrates: the other touching the establishing of Laws. There was an
ordinance in Rome, that none might be Consuls, or bear any other great Office
in the City, saving those Citizens that did stand for the Office, and made
suit for it. This ordinance at the beginning was very good, for then no
Citizens sued or sought to bear Office, but such as thought that they did
deserve to be in authority, and they took it for a great diseredit to have
the repulse, and therefore every one, because they would be judged and
accounted worthy of that dignity, endeavored to be virtuous. But after ward,
this ordinance became very harmfull and pernicious: for they that were most
mighty, not most virtuous, sued for the dignity, and they that were not
mighty, though virtuous, for fear durst not stand for the Offices. To this
inconvenience came it, though not in a moment, yet in continuance and tract of
time, as all other inconveniences use to happen. For the Romans having subdued
all Afric and Asia, and brought almost all Greece under their subjection,
assured themselves of liberty, and thought not that they had any enemies whom
they needed to fear. Whith security of theirs, and weakness of their
enemies, caused the people of Rome in the election of their Consuls, not to
respect virtue, but favor: so that those were placed in that dignity, that
wist better how to entertain their friends, then to encounter with their
enemies. And after that, they which were most gracious had a pretty while
borne the Offices, then they which were mightiest, and could prevail most,
were elected to be head Officers, so that honest and virtuous men, by the
defect of such an ordinance, were altogether excluded from the dignities, and
prebeminences which cheefely appertained unto them.

7 Therefore to the end that a Commonwealth may be maintained in her wonted
liberty, it is necessary that new ordinances be made, to remedy that which
the malice of me^ bath corrupted: for little profit the Laws, when the whole
subject and body (as it were) of the Commonweal is so much disordered, that
they cannot possibly set it in order again. Some say it is well nigh
impossible, that all ordinances should be changed: for if they would disanull
them by little and little, it is necessary that it should be done by some
wise man that foreseeth and perceives, what inconveniences might happen by
reason of such like ordinances, and those men that are accustomed to live
after one manner and order will not alter that ordinance, especially, because
they perceive not the discommoditie thereof, unless it be showed unto them by
apparent conjectures. Moreover, if they would go about to repair the
ordinances all in a moment, yet albeit every one esteemed the^ to be naught
that yet would it be very hardly brought to pass. For to use ordinary
means, (seeing they be naught) is not enough: but it is necessaire, that he
should come at last to extraordinary means, to wit, violence and Arms: and
before any other thing, to make himself chief of that City, that he may
change all things at his will and pleasure: and to establish his Laws and
ordinances, it is necessary he should have authority to suppress them, that
through envy propose themselves to gainesaie and contrary them: for no man
can hope that tract of time may confirm them, and his virtue and honesty that
brings them in, suffices not: and as for the favor of the people, that is
variable: and wickedness and mischief will not be appeased by any gifts or good
turns, according to that. Improbitas nullo flectitur officio.
A knauish minded man
Reform, no duty can.


Moses slew many men, which for envy and hatred rose up Number. cap. 25.
against him, and would not have that the Laws and ordinances which he
published should go Forwards. To conclude, because it is necessarily
required in the mutation, or rather reformation of a Commonwealth, that it
should be done by a good man, and because it is presupposed, that he which
makes himself Prince by force and violence, is a wicked man, it chances
very seldom, that a good man will make himself Prince by ill means, though
his intent be good, or that a naughty and Cornel. Tacit. lib. 27. Nemo enim
vnqua^ imperium stagitio quesitum bonis attibus exercuit.
wicked man, after he is made Prince, will use that authority well, which he
has obtained by ill uteanes: and therefore it is necessary that the
Commonweal be reduced to the estate of a kingdom.

8 All this discourse (which is taken out of Machiauell) is grounded upon this,
that in those Commonweals that be ruled and governed by many, they that rule
and govern them, do very hardly agree one with another, in keeping and
altering the old and ancient custonies: and it seems that this holds in
those Commonweals, that are weak and governed by the counsel of many:
who, though the inconveniences be most manifest and notorious: yet through
their natural imbecillitie, they know not, nor cannot tell how to repair
them: But those Commonweals that can renew the old rites and customs, can
as well annihilate and disanull those Galen in lib. artis medicae, ca. 89
that be both bad and hurtful, and as Physicians when they be acquainted with
the causes of the diseases, they take them away first, and afterward very
easily cure their Patients, so it is convenient, that they which gonerne
Commonweals, should as a necessary remedy, execute punishment on offenders,
when men live so corruptly and wickedlie, that those ordinances which at the
first were good and holy, cannot be innouated without bloodshed and fire:
which are the remedies with which God does cure the vices of men^ as
Physicians, when purging and letting of blood suffice not, use searing to cure
the diseases. They therefore that govern Commonweals, ought dilligentlie to
search out, whether the dissolutnes of men's manners springs hereof, that the
accustomed Laws are not good and profitable for the Commonwealth. And it is a
great deal better to repair them, by adding, changing, or diminishing, then
by altogether destroying the^. But if humane malice have so corrupted them,
that they cannot be bettered, but by banishment, confiscations of goods,
killing or burning, then must the verte Hyppocrates. lib, 1. aphor. 6.
uttermost and last remedies take place. As the Physicians do in those
diseases that cannot be otherwise cured. As I hane declared more at large, in
my Books of policies or Commonweales.

9. A Uenotian Gentleman nanted Bernardus Campellus, Francis. Lotious
Considerat. 45.
would have had a Law published and proclaimed, that none should have been
chosen to bear Office in the Commonweal, which had been in Office the year
immediately before, but that some years should have been interiected before
he should be elected again: he was moved no doubt to think upon such a Law,
because he saw that the same persons, remaining so many years together in their
Office, many other Gentlemen that might as well have been serviceable for the
Common-welth, were excluded from the government: and he imagined it not
expedient for the safety and commodity thereof, that the Offices belonging
thereunto, should be bestowed but upon a few Citizens, which might stand her
in steed. But these reasons whith Bernard Campellus alleged to persuade the
Lords of Uenice, to bring in the Law which permitted none to continue in
Office, seened not to be so requisite, as that the former ordinances should
be cancelled by reason of them: and they that were of the Counsel of ten,
would not consent, that such a Law should be proposed in ye Senate: for they
thought it would be hurtful for the Common-welth, to alter and abrogate those
Laws, whereby their predecessors, being men of great prudence and singular
wisdom, had long time before governed and maintained it: and that it was not
expedient to innouate those ordinances which are belonging to the estate:
because men being naturally given to innouations, and oftentimes do choose
the warst: if that they should once permit the ancient ordinances, to be altered
and innouated: the Commonwealth should never be free from factions and
dissentions: and because albeit it be dangerous to have the Offices continue
still with the selfsame persons: yet it is not so when there be many men in
the Commonwealth, that are in as great power and authority as those few that
bear Office: and for this cause, though they would hurt and endomage the
Commonwealth, they can not: and though they that* be chosen be but few, yet
they be chosen out of many, and the greater company, may more easily withstand
the less.

10 Though the Counsel of ten in Venice, permitted not this Law to be
proposed in the Senate, which Bernarde Campello would feign have brought in,
yet can no man deny, but that it is more profitable for the Commonwealth, to
have Aristot. lib. 4. Politicoru^. ca. 15.
many to bear such Offices, and enjoy such dignities as are in the
Commonwealth, then but a few: for when a few have all the authority, and they
only are in power and dignity, those few if they continue in Office, may
easily tyrannise over the Commonwealth: and there remain many men which do
the Commonwealth no service, whereas they might stand her in great steed: so
that it were a great deal more expedient, that the Commonwealth should be
governed by many, and that every one upon hope to be admitted to the
government, should endeavor to be virtuous, and live honestly and decently*
notwithstanding the danger that may ensue by beginning to in^ouate and
abroagate the Laws of the estate: for when as the profit which is to follow,
is manifestly and surely known to be greater then the hurt which is feared
that will en^ue: then the Governors of the Commonweal, ought to ^brogate
them; and place others in their steed, for the end for which al Laws are made
(as we have said) is the public commodity and profit of the Commonwealth:
according to the Law of the twelve Tables: Salus publica suprema lex est.


And they that do not so, are like unto the Governors in a 1. in rebus ff. de
constitut. principum in rebus nouis constituendis euidens esse vtilitas debet
vt recedatur ab eo iure. quod diu aequum visum est.
certain place in Spain, who consulting whether they should wall a certain
Well about, in which many children had been drowned, the Elders of the Counsel
would not consent unto it: because their predecessors had many years used to
fetch water out of that Well, though it was not walled about. Therefore the
Counselors of Princes, ought to consider whether it be better for them to
change the ordinances, or to let the^ remain as they be, or altogether to
disanull the^. And if they do change Seneca. laboramus magis opinione quam ^^.
Et Plato. Plu^^nos tenent ^u^ pre^^^t.
and alter them, they shall* do well to attribute the name of the old unto
the new, for the people oftentimes, is more moved with the names of things,
then with the things themselves. And therefore they that alter, and reform
ancient ordinances, ought to keep still the names, shadow and similitude of
the old ordinances, that ye people perceive not that they be changed, though
the new be altogether different from the old. For men are deceived with the
show of things, and think it to be s^ in deed. And many times they be more
moved with that which only seems to be, then with the thing it self.
Finally, as the Physicians when they cure any disease, they vary and change
the diet and physic which they minister unto the sick, according as it does
them good or harm: so they unto who^ the government of Commonweals is
committed, ought to leave o^ change the ordinances and laws, according as they
be profitable or hurtful to the Commonwealth. And as the Physicians apply
their medicines and remedies to the diseases: so they that govern
Co^mon-weales, ought* to punish and chastise the offenders and transgressors of
the Laws, both with money and corporal pains.

And for to remedy the inconveniences and harms that are in a Commonwealth,
it is not enough to change the Governors of it, and choose others, if the
fault proceed not from them: and as the Ague is not driven away by changing of
the Physicians only: unless others be found that are more skillful, and know
better how to cure it then the first: so the vices and harms of the
Commonwealth, are not taken away by changing the Officers and Magistrates,
unless such persons succeed in the Offices, that know how a Commonwealth
ought to be governed.

11 If any man obtain the principallitie in a City or estate, and become
chief of the place, when his foundation is weak, and he thinks that he
shall not be able to keep the Commonwealth long in the same estate into which
he has brought it: the^ that it may not return into the former estate, his
best remedy were to change and alter all things: to make new governments, new
ordinances, and new Laws, and call them all by new terms and new names:
and to take the authority from the^ that were in dignity, and give it to
others: to make new Officers, new Magistrates, and new men, and to make them
that were poor, rich: and them that were rich poor: and in a word, to alter
and turno all things t^psie turuie: by killing ye greatest heads, and those
that have most power, Arist. Polit. lib. 5. cap. 10. Periand^^ ad Thrasibulum.
Lu^ius Florus, lib. 1. Gestorum Romano. cap. 7.
as Periander cou^selled Thrasibulus; and Tarqu^^^us the pr^ud^ counseled his
son, when he took the City of the Gabians. Besides this, he ought to build
up new Cities, and pull down some old Cities: and remove the inhabitants of
one City into another, and finally, not to leave any thing in that province
which is not changed and altered: and that in it there be no degree, no order,
no estate, or dignity, which he that has it do not acknowledge, that he does
enjoy it by the grant or gift of him that made himself Prince. And thus did
Phillip King of Macedon, Father to Alexander the great, make him self Lord
over all Greece, placing the men of one Province into another, as Sheepheards
drive* a flock of Sheep out of one f^^lde into another. But this policy and
manner of conservation of arrestate, is properly used by them that tyrannise
over the Commonwealth. For having not wherewithal to satis^fie them that
follow them, and to keep them to their friends that favor them: they rob,
spoil, burn, kill; murder, destroy, ransacke, and pull down all things,
using most cruel remedies, altogether contrary to the purity and sincerity
of Christian Religion: which permits not that any man should make himself,
by endomaging his neighbor, and so commit mortal sin: wherefore every one
ought rather to be contented with a private life, then desire a kingdom, by
destroying and undoing so many men.

12 If the government of any Commonweal be altered out of one estate into
another: as for example out of a Democracie into an Oligarchie, or out of an
Oligarchie into a Monarchy, it is expedient, that the Laws and ordinances of
the estate be altered also. As Brutus did, when he cast the kings out of Rome,
and brought in the government of the Consuls, changing the kingdom into a
Consulshippe: and so the Commonwealth was governed by two Consuls, and the
choice and election of the Magistrates was given to the people. So like wise
the Roman Emperors, after they became Lords over ye whole Empire, by little
and little altered and changed all the Laws and ordinances by which the
Commonwealth was governed, during the Consulshippe: accomodating and fitting
the Laws conformable to the estate which they would bring in: and use the
Laws as Physicians use medicines; for it properly concerns Cap^ rex
pacificus in proaemio decietalium.
Laws to cure the vices, naughty customs; and dissolute manners, which
disquiet and molest the Commonwealth. And as the Physicians use not to cure al
diseases with one medicine, and apply not the same medicine at all times: but
according to the strength or feeblenes of the sick, and other circumstaunces
considered, vary and alter their remedies and physic which they minister,
and in many sicknesses they defer the cure till some other time, rather then
they would remedy them with manifest danger of life: so it is a great deal
better, and more convenient in government, to dissemble some things, then to
go about to mende them with the loss and damage of the whole Commonwealth.

This counsel did Pompey the great think to use, in the war which Julius
Caesar waged against the Common-welth, and to maintain that war as Fabius
Maximus maintained, the war which Hanniball made against Italy. For in such
enterprises, and many other affairs, the time does dissolve and overthrow
them: and to go about to dispatch and destroy them in haste, were to spoil
the Commonwealth.

13 They err greatly, that think that the mixed bodies Machiauell' lib. 3. in
prohemio discursuum.
of Commonweals be cured, by reducing them into their first original: for
seeing that the mixed bodies, are like to men's bodies, (which because they
increase and decrease, Children and babes ought to be cured one way, young
folks another way, and old men after another manner, conformable to their
age and compl^rion: for as the Physicians say, every day some Quotidie
aggregatur aliquid in nobis quod indiget curatione.
humor is ingendered in man's body, which must be cured no less with
preservative medicines then curatiue;) that which ought to be considered in the
rule and government of a Co^monweale, is, that great care be had of the
public commodity, and welfare of the whole body of the Commonwealth: as
the Physicians have of the soundnes and wholesomnes of man's whole body, when
they cure and heal the sick. It is therefore expedient, that they which
govern Commonweals, change and alter the Laws and ordinances, by which the
Co^mon-weales were ruled when they began, and square them to the times in which
the Commonweals increase, and become greater and larger. For a great
Commonwealth cannot be conveniently maintained; with the self same Laws and
ordinances, with which it was maintained and governed, when it was but little,
though notwithstanding that it be said, that Princes go about to spoil and
mar the estate, when they begin to break the old laws and rites, and
ancient customs, under which men* lived many years: for this holds not, when
necessity requires that the government should be changed, and squared to the
present estate of the Commonwealth. And as the Physicians cut or burn off
one member of the body, to save the sick man's life: and as the skillful
Pilot, casts the wares and Merchandise ouer-boorde, to help the ship out
of the imminent danger: and as the Sheepeheard has the charge over ye whole
flock to cure it: even so it is convenient, that they which govern the
Commonwealth; should consider what vices and disorders, disquiet and trouble
it. And even as the dilligent and careful Labourer, takes great pains in
weeding his Gardens, and rooting out those herbs which are rather hurtful
then wholesome unto his grounds: so they that rule and govern Commonweals,
ought to labor, clensing them from all pernicious weeds of wickedness and
naughtines, which hurt the^: for there is nothing more hurtful, and less
profitable to the Commonwealth, then to suffer dissolutnes of manners, and
pernicious customs to increase and augment daily; which afterward, molest and
vex the Commonwealth. And, to bind every man to live politically, and
according to reason, as well by rewards as by punishment, in every
Commonwealth. Parliaments be holden: in which the Estates being assembled
together, consult upon all things that necessarily ought to be done, for the
commodity, profit, and conservation of the whole Commonwealth.

14 Aristotle is of this mind, that such Laws and ordinances Politicor. lib.
2. cap. 6.
as are profitable to the Commonwealth, should not be altered, and that those
that are not very harmfull, should not be abrogated: for if they should still
be changed, altered, and renewed, and have no stablenes or firmitie in them,
they be but little accounted and esteemed of by the people: for they think,
that as some of them be changed, so they will al be altered. And therefore they
obey not the Laws with such reverence and duty as they ought to do. This
which Aristotle says, ought to be observed* in the election of Officers and
Magistrates, and all other things pertaining to the Commonwealth: not changing
or renewing any Law or ordinance, which endomageth not the D. L. in rebus ff.
de constitut. princip.
Commonwealth: for the less they be changed or reformed, the less they be
transgressed. As I writ more at large in my Books of policies and
Commonweals, in the Treatise of Laws and Lawmakers. But if the Governors
of the Commonweals, change and alter one manner of government into another,
they ought to forecast and consider with themselves, whether that people, whose
government they go about to abolish, are wonted and accustomed to live in
liberty, and whether they be privileged, and have gotten the government by
succession, or by law of Arms: for those Princes find the people more loving
and willing to obey, that continue in succession of some estate, then they that
newly begin the inheritance. Cornelius Tacitus says, that it is expedient,
that they which Libro, 20.
newly obtain some estate, should use great liberality and mercy,
especially, if the people be accustomed to be mercifully and courteously dealt
withal. So that if Princes follow that counsel which the Elders gave unto
Roboam, despising the advice 3. Reg. 12.
which the young men gave him, then they shall govern their people (as Phillip
de la Torre says) with love of brotherhood In tractatu d^ Institut. principis
Christian^.
and Christian charity, to the end that the people, with the same love and
charity may obey them. For there is no better way for a Prince to be beloved,
honored, reverenced, and ob^ied of his Subjects, then to love the^ first:
which, Princes would soon do, if they did enter into themselves, and consider
yt they are Sheepheards, Pastors, and fathers of the multitude, which God has
committed and commended unto them to maintain and defend them, and to aid,
relieve, and succor them, when they be wearied with labors, consumed with
pestilence, and wasted with wars. But those subjects that be welthy and well
able, ought to aid their Prince in the defense of the Commonwealth, and
relief of the poor and needy people, that have been oppressed with the
grievous tyranny of war. For, seeing that, part of the commodity that is
gotten by defending the Commonwealth; falls to their share, it is great
reason they should assist their Prince to aid the Commonwealth, and deliver
it from out the hands of the enemy, putting him to flight and driving him from
their borders: and they ought not to excuse themselves, either because they be
exempted or privileged: for no such excuses are to be admitted in time of
necessity. But the Prince on the otherside, must so moderately, and after such
order use them, that he do not (as the Emperor Tiberius Suetonius in Tyberio.
says) flea them, but shave the^: and seeing that the causes wherefore we be
chastised, ill dealt withal, destroyed, and vexed with wars, famine,
dissentions and plagues, are common: (for we are all sinners, and in many
things we greatly offend against the Lord: and perchance they that think
themselves blameless, are most faulty) it is great reason that every one
should join with the King, and bear a part of all the troubles and charges
with him: seeing that not so much as our Kedeemer and Lord Jesus Christ, nor
all the Apostles, denied to pay their Matthew. 17.
part unto the Magistrates: if not for right, and because it is due, yet both
because the Commonwealth should not be disquieted, and also with their
example, to encourage and stir up others that be better able to do the same.

15 Very small faults, and such as are not seen at the first, are more
dangerous then great faults: for that danger which Lotinus in
considerationibus.
is known, causes men to seek means to avoid it: but that which is not
known, grows so much by little and little, that when it is known, it cannot
be remedied: and it is like unto the disease called Febris ethica, which when
it begins, a man feels or perceives not any harm: but when it is come so
far that he knows it, no medicine can cure it. And this does proceed, by
reason that men commonly consider, only that which they see: and that which at
the beginning seems to be but a small thing, and altogether unlike to become
any thing hurtful: growing by little and little, at length waxes very
domagable to the Commonwealth: which may be easily seen in those assemblies
and congregations where many meet together in secret, which at the beginning
seem not to threaten any great harm: and yet at the length, when they are
fully grown and augmented, they wonderfully disquiet the Commonweals, and
cause many hurlie-burlies. The Romans Ff. de collegijs et corporibus
illicitis late per Brisonium lib. 1. selecta^u^. ca. 14.
would not permit any great assemblies or companies, to gather together,
without they had license of the Prince, and they ordained, that every company
or congregation, should have a President, whom (because of the authority that
was given him by the Prince) all they that were of those congregations or
assemblies, should obey. And those Presidents should enquire and examine, what
men gathered into those companies. For the people being like to the Sea, which
by any wind is soon moved, they that assemble together when opportunity
serves, they disquiet the Commonwealth. And as it does a man much harm to
have any one of all his members, to grow bigger then the Aristo. Polit. 5.
cap. 3.
rest, and to exceed the proportion of all his other members: so great care
ought to be had, that no assembly or congregation be suffered to grow so
long, that it may bring harm unto the Commonwealth.

The Emperor Traianus, wrote unto Pliny, when he governed Plin. in Episto. ad
Traianum.
the province of Bethynia, that he should not let the company of those that
made the Armor and Instruments for war, to increase so much, that they might
hurt or endomage the Commonwealth.

16 When the government begins to be deminished, because there be more that
govern naughtilie, then well: the^ a small thing suffices to hinder the
execution of that which is determined in the Counsel, and though some
counsel well, yet it is to no end, seeing that the greater part bears it
away: and their being in the Counsel, is to no other purpose, then to be
partakers of the fault which they commit that counsel ill: these men are very
unfortunate: for if they contrary and gainsay that which the other say, they
incur manifest danger, that the other ill Counselors will spoil them and
undo them. And if they consent and agree with them, then they lay all the
fault of ill government in them: so that their lives, honor, credit and
estimation, is subject to the will and pleasure of those, that rule naughtilie.
And they that govern, being men of small wisdom, and knowing not what is
belonging to the Commonwealth, marvel greatly how the matter should fall
out infortunatlie, whereas they might with greater reason marvel; how it
should fall out prosperously.

The people of Rome was so great and mighty, that the Batani, (a fierce and
hardy people) though they were greatly burdened and ouercharged by the
Romans, yet they durst not rebel. But they that were in authority, and did
bear rule over, them: seeing that the Roman Captains offered the^ great
injury, in ouercharging them with too much tole and tribute (in the time that
the forces of the Roman Empire were divided, by reason that the Emperors of
Rome waged wars against diverse Nations) and whereas they ought to have been
contented with the unreasonable tributes, which according to their own
pleasure were paid unto them: they were so unwise, and dealt so unadvisedly,
that they did not only more and more continually ouercharge them, but also
gave them occasion to assemble together, and seek means to revenge the
injuries which they offered unto them, by choosing old and feeble men to be
Soldiers, that they might pay money to be dismissed, and pressing fair boys
to satis-fie their execrable beastlines by abusing them: whereupon the Bataui
determined to rebel against the Romans, and deliver themselves from the
injuries and mischieues that the Roman Captains did them: and choosing a
famous Captain to be their General, they fought against the Romans and did
them much harm: and so they did cast off that troublesome yoke of subjection,
and recovered their former liberty. The Jews had not forces enough to
withstand the Lotinus vbi sup. Joseph. lib. 1. de bello Iudaico, and Egesippus
de excidio Hyerosolymitano. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Romans, as king Agrippa showed in his Oration which he made unto them, to
persuade them that they should not rebel. But they, not able to suffer the
tyranny and greedines of the Roman Captains, rebelled, and so Jerusalem was
destroyed: wherein God showed his just judgment upon the Jews, that they
should receive the punishment deserved by crucifying the Redeemer of the wolrd.

17 Many think that the estate of the government, consists in having many
Towns, Places, and Cities, and therefore to reserve and keep some place of
their kingdom, when their enemies set upon them, they agree to most
unreasonable conditions, which are very harmefull and prejudicial unto them:
which they would not do, if they knew that the preservation of their estate,
consisted in the government, authority, and reputation that they have: and
that, though they loose some Fortress, Town, or Castle, they may easily
recover them again from their enemies, if they can tell how to defend
themselves: as the Romans did, when they did drive Hanniball out of Italy,
notwithstanding that he had possessed the Country, and had been Lord over
it sixteen years long. And they did not only drive him out of Italy, but
also waged war against Carthage, and sent fresh Soldiers to their Arm which
they had in Spain, and denounced new wars against King Antiochus. And they
bought and sold those grounds, lands, and possessions which Hanniball had
taken, for the selfsame price that they were rated at before. So Charles King
of France, recovered Gaginus et Paulus Emilius de rebus Franco^u^ in vita
Caroli septimj Gallorum regis. Petrus Bembus hist. Venaetae, lib. 8. Caelius
Rhodoginus in prohemio. lib, 3. antiquar. lectio.
his Country from the Englishmen, who had almost taken his whole Kingdom from
him. The Venetians defended themselves against Julius Secundus Pope, Maximilian
the Emperor, Jews King of France, and Hernando King of Castile. They
therefore that govern estates, ought to imitate the^ that playing at Chesse,
loose some one man or other, thereby to win the Game, and take the check to
give the mate. This is to be understood, if the estate have sufficient forces
to defend it self; for if it have not, it is better to make some honest
agreement, (as our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ teaches us) then to be quite
destroyed, and loose all: as it happened to the renowned City Jerusalem, and
other famous Cities, which by reason that their Governors did not know their
weakness, were overthrown, and levied with the ground.

18 If they that govern any Commonwealth, think that to defend themselves
from their enemies, least they should be subdued by them, consists more in
the forces that the Commonwealth has, then in the particular and private goods
of those that live in it, they are far deceived. For the goods have their
foundation in the Commonwealth, and if they do not help it, both the goods
and Commonwealth also goes to wrack: even as that body, in which each member
only procures the conservation of it self. Therefore it is convenient, that
as each member does put it self into danger to save the head: so those that
live in a Commonwealth, should adventure both life and goods to defend her,
seeing she is the head of all them that live in her. They ought moreover to
consider, that many times Co^mon-weales be overthrown and subdued by the
enemy, because the Citizens being rich, and the Commonwealth poor, they
will not succor and aid her with their substance: and (as Titus Liuius
says) nothing greeueth them, but as far as it touches their own particular
interest: for that is it that all Iuuenalis ploratur lachrimis amissa pecunia
veris.
men most regard, and we find by experience, that men commo^lie set more by
their substance, then by their credit and reputation: as may be seen in ye
Noble men of Rome, who always (without any extraordinary displeasure)
suffered the profit of the Commonwealth to be preferred before their own
honor and credit; but concerning their wealth; they did with great vehemency
and stiffnes, resist against the Law Agraria, (for the distribution of the
Lands among the people) and would not by any means permit, that it should be
established: whereby they wrought the ruin and destruction of Rome: which
began from the sons of Gracchus, and continued three hundred years, till Julius
Caesar tyrannised.

Some hold opinion, that Commonweals, to the end they might be well
governed, ought to be rich and welthy, but Salu, in Catili. in oratione Catonis
public opulentia^ et priuatim aegesta^em, et Diuus Aug, lib, 5, ca, 12 de
ciuitate Dej. Vt aerarium eseet opulentum, tenues res priuatae.
the Citizens and people that live in them, poor. The Marquis of Pescara,
going about to persuade the Emperor Charles the fifth, to take upon him to be
Lord over all Italy, told him that he had the King of France in his power,
and because the Commonweals of Italy, were but poor, he might easily
subdue it, because they that lived in it, would not spend their substance to
defend their Country. But the Emperor would not do that which the Marquis
requested of him, because he always did more respect the peace of all
Christendom, then his own profit: whereof he showed a most lively example in
that he rendered the Dukedom of Milan unto Frauncis Sforcia. To the end that
Commonweals may be maintained and defended: they that live in them, must
consider, that they cannot be saved, if the Commonwealth perrish: and that it
were better for them to spend their wealth, to maintain the Commonwealth, then
to be overcome, and brought into captivity by the enemy. If they that lived
in Constantinople when Mahomet the king of Turks took the City, had aided
the City with paying money for things necessary for the defense of it: that
famous City had not been taken of the Infidels, to such great loss of
Christendom. Also many other excellent Cities have been overthrown, through
the execrable covetousness of such miserable Citizens, which deserve to be
abhorred and detested of all men, and to be spoiled themselves only, without ye
harm of others: seeing they care for no man but themselves, and are In vita
Pauli Acmilij.
(as Plutarch says) their enemies Treasurers.

19 When some youth of noble blood, in a Co^mon-weale begins to be had in
account, that is, endued with some extraordinary virtues: all the Citizens
honor him, and have him in great estimation: in so much, that if he be never
so little stirred with ambition, among those gifts which nature bestows upon
him, in short space he does so clime, that when the Citizens perceive that
they have erred in aduauncing of him: though they would set him down again,
yet they cannot hinder him: and to go about any such matter, were only to
hasten their own ruin and destruction. Cosme de Medicis, (by whom the House
of the Medicis came to that excellency and In discursibus, and in histor^is
re^si Florent. lib. 14.
greatness), attained to such credit and reputation by his own prudence, and by
the ignorance of the other Citizens: that he began to put the whole estate
in such fear of him, that many Citizens thought it dangerous to offend him,
and a great deal more dangerous to suffer him longer. But Nicolas de Cussano,
(who being a man singularly well seen in Civil affairs, lived at that time)
seeing that the first fault was committed, in not foreseeing the dangers that
might follow, by honoring and esteeming of Cosme de Medicis, he would not
suffer (whilst he lived) the second also to be committed; to wit, that the
Citizens should intend, to take away the honor from Cosme unto which they had
advanced him: judging that such an intent, would be the cause of the
destruction and overthrow of the whole estate, as it afterward fell out: for
the Citizens that remained after he was dead, would not follow the counsel
which he had before given them, but gathered forces against Cosme de Medicis,
and expelled him out of the City, but what followed? A while after, those of
the City that were of his side, sent for him, and made him Prince over the
whole Common-welth: unto which state he had never reached, if the Citizens had
not publicly opposed themselves against him. The same happened in Rome with
Julius Caesar, who being favored of Pompey, and the other Romans for his
virtue: afterward became the destruction of the Roman Commonwealth: of
which thing Tullie bears witness, saying, that Pompey began to fear
Caesar too late: which fear urged him to procure a remedy, and the remedy
hastened the destruction of the Commonwealth.

20 The Athenians, Argiues, Milesians and Megarens, used Adrianus Iunius
animaduersion. Lib. 5. cap. 18. Aristo. Polit. 5. cap. 11. Ostracismus ide^
valet ac efficit quodammodo, quod p^ohibere superio^e^ atque in exilium mittere.
the Ostracisine; which was a kind of banishment of the excellentest man of all
the City, for ten years space: that by his authority he should not hurt
the Commonwealth. They of Sicilie used the same remedy, to the self same
effect, and called it Petalismus. This banishment continued ten years: and
their goods were not confiscate, nor the fruits of their possessions were not
gathered by any of the other Citizens, whilst they were absent. And this kind
of banishment was used, because such men as were most rare and excellent among
them, should not tyrannise over the Commonwealth, and translate the government
unto themselves. We read in the Histories of Venice, that the Galleys which
had been abroad, being returned to Venice, and certain contention arysing
between the people, and the men of the Galleys, the contention did continue so
long, till they fell to blows: which hurlie-burlie, neither the force of the
Officers, nor the reverence of the Citizens, nor the fear of those that
ministered justice, could appease, until a certain noble Citizen, that had
the year before been Captain over those Mariners came in presence: whom as
soon as they had espied, they all of the^ gave over fighting, and Machiauellus
in discursibus.
so parted themselves: which obedience of the Gallie-men, bred such suspicion
in the Senate concerning the Gentleman, that in short time they made themselves
sure from all evil yt might ensue by reason of his authority.

21 They that govern Commonweals, ought to have one special care, that no
news be published, which may do harm to the Commonwealth: for such things
disquiet the people which (as Cornelius Tacitus says) loves still to hear
Libro, 17. Petrus Iustinia. in histo. Vene. Tamara de moribus gentiu^. li. 1.
cap. 7.
novelties. The Venecians caused a certain man to be put to death, because he
had spread false rumors and new lies through the City, which greatly
perturbed and disquieted the Citizens of Venice. It was an ancient custom in
France, (in times past) that every one that had heard any thing, which was
either profitable or hurtful to the Commonwealth, was bound incentinently to
make the Magistrates acquainted therewith, who did publish it, if they thought
it would be profitable for the Commonwealth. To be brief, it belongs to the
Counselors of the Counsel of estate, to see that no seditions, contentions,
and hurli-burlies arise in the Commonwealth: as the Counselors of Cayphas
admonished, when they did consult how they Matthew. 26.
might take our Savior and Lord Jesus Christ.

The fourteenth discourse, touching war.
BEcause the duty, whereby a Prince is bound to rule and maintain the
people, which God has committed to his government, consists cheeflie in two
things; to wit, in governing his subjects, according to the Laws and
ordinances of the Realm: and in defending them from their enemies, that they
may live in peace: and seeing that I have in ye former discourse entreated of
the Laws and ordinances of the estate: I mean in this to say some thing
concerning the Counsel of war.

1 They that follow wars (as all men know) are always in great danger and
troubles, and at no less charges. And for this cause, no Prince ought to make
war, unless he cannot otherwise choose: and unless he cannot enjoy peace
without the harm of the Commonwealth, the loss of his estate, and impayring
of his reputation. Otherwise, if a Prince can obtain an honest peace of his
enemy, upon reasonable and just conditions, he ought not to wage war, but
conclude that peace, to shun bloody battles, slaughters, spoils, pillings,
sacrileges, and all such other wicked actions, which are practiced in time of
war. And if those Princes that consult, whether they shall wage war or no,
considered all the domages and harms that may succeed by waging war, they
would never be resolved to make war: whereby they should increase their
enemies forces, and weaken their own. Therefore incontinently after that they
that are of the counsel of estate, have concluded, that it is expedient for the
profit of the Commonwealth, and safety of the Prince, that war should be
made against the enemy. Every one ought to determine fully, either to
overcome, or to die in the enterprise: as a Woman of Lacedaemonia said to her
Son, when she gave him a Target to go to wars: return my son either with
this Target, or else within it.

2 Every Prince that goes about to make war, ought first to consider whether
he be able, and if he be: then whether the profit that is like to ensue, be
greater the^ the harm which may succeed: for if the loss should be greater
then the commodity, that would be (as Augustus Caesar said) as if one should
fish Suetonius Tranquillus in vita August. Caesaris cap. 25. Imperatorem de
bello consultaturum, non ignorare opertet quam magnae sint exercitus facultates
etc.
with a golden hook. He ought furthermore, dilligentlie and earnestly to
enquire, what forces his enemy has, and whether his own power and strength be
sufficient to vanquish the Army of his enemy, and overthrow it. And if he
stand in doubt, and can not certainly be informed, whether his enemies forces
or his own be the greater: he ought to think, that his adversaries are
better provided, and more strongly guarded: that he may be the more dilligent,
and the more careful in persecuting his enemies, and infirming their forces
and powers: for many Captains, because they respected not their enemies, and
made no account of them, were overcome and put to flight. Furthermore, to
examine, both his enemies forces, and his own: he ought to know whether of
them both, has the greater store of money, he or his enemy: and how long
the wars are like to continue, and how much money is necessary to maintain
them.

In this, great care and diligence must be taken: for money Claudius Cotoreus
de iure militum in prohemio, libro, 2.
(as it is commonly said) is the sinnewe of war: which begins and ends
it: and for this cause, the Counselors of Princes ought to enquire, whence
provision of money may be had: and how they may bring to pass, that their
enemies should want. And how needful and necessary this is, we may
manifestly perceive by this, that many enterprises have been given over for
lack of money to supply the charges of war, as happened to Cleomenes, King
of Lacedaemonia, with Antigonus King of Macedon.

3 Princes ought to consider what Captains they choose for the wars: for if
the Captain, who is the guide to lead and conduct the Soldiers, be not
valiant and prudent, then must all needs go to wrack. Tullie in his Oration,
pro lege Manilia, sets down the perfect pattern of a good and In oratione
pro lege Manilia.
valiant Captain, showing what quallities a good Captain ought to be endued
withal, to become famous; of which matter, I have written very largely, in
my Book of the Office of Captains and Generals.

That the war may in all points have prosperous and good success, all men
know how important and necessary it is, that the Captains should be hardy,
valiant, courageous, and faithful: for nothing can be more hurtful in wars,
then fearful, cowardly, faithles, and unskillful Captains. There ought also
great care to be had in the pressing of Soldiers, what men be chosen to serve
their Prince in war. For the Soldiers be they that must fight, and get
the victory: and therefore, though the Captains, Generals, and all other
Officers, be never so perfectly adorned, and endued with all heroical
virtues: if the Soldiers be base and cowardlike fellows, the wars cannot
be fortunately finished.

When Julius Caesar went to fight with Perreyus in Spain, he said that he
went to seek an Army without a General: and when he went to meet with
Pompey, he said: that he Suetonius Tranquillus, in vita Iulij Caesaris. cap.
34.
sought a General without an Army. And therefore in the mustering and training
up of Soldiers, great diligence ought to be taken in examining and
enquiring, whether those Soldiers that be pressed for the Prince his service,
be faithful, or Traitors to their Country and Prince, whether they be
constant, or inconstant and variable: whether they be new and fresh water
Soldiers, or old and experienced Soldiers, that have long time been
practiced and trained up in wars: whether they come of their own accord
with a willing mind to serve their Prince, or be forced thereunto by
compulsion: and whether they come for the love they bear their Country, and
obedience they own unto the Prince, or being base and rascal fellows,
fetched out of Innes, Tiplinghouses, and other such like places, they come to
serve the Prince only for pay: besides these, there are many other things
which ought to be carefully considered in the pressing of Soldiers: as I
have written more at large in my Books of Military discipline.

Furthermore, Princes that determine to set upon their enemies, ought to
enquire, what Harnes those Soldiers have, that are gathered for service in
wars. For Soldiers that be well weaponed, fight with a more valiant mind,
then they that are unweaponed and lack their harness. And when soldiers are
thoroughly well fenced with Armor of proof, they be the more emboldened to set
upon their enemies, to assault Fortresses, and to undertake any kind of
service. And many times some kind of weapons, are not so good and so apt to
obtain the victory, as others: as may be seen by the difference of weapons,
which the Lacedaemonians, Romans, and Parthians used. The Romans often
vanquished their enemies: not because they were more valiant, and more strong
or courageous then their enemies. but by reason of the odds in fighting with
better weapons. Therefore Princes ought also to enquire what weapons their
enemies use in war, and with what weapons they ought to Arm their own
Soldiers, to defend themselves, and endomage their enemies. And also, what
places are most fit and convenient to assault their enemies, and surest for
their own safety.

4 They that mean to wage war with any Country, ought to know what friends
they have to help and assist them, especially, if they have no Countries,
Towns, or Provinces, in that Land which they mean to invade. And it is very
good in such enterprises, to have some one natural borne man in that Country
to their freende, to be helped by him, and informed of the humors, interest,
pretenses, conditions and customs of the enemies: and whether ye places which
they inhabit, be plain, or hilly, and full of Mountains: and of what
things the Inhabitants of that Country stand in need of, and what things
would be most acceptable unto them, to entice them to come to aid and help
them: and so they shall diminish their enemies forces, and augment and increase
their own. It were very good also to learn, whether the people of that
Country which they mean to assault, make much of their King, or else hate him,
for it chances oftentimes, that the people rebel against their King, and
take part with the enemies, because they hate their King, and would willingly
be revenged of him, or because they love the other, and desire greatly to have
him to be their King. Certain Cities in Asia did rebel, by reason of ye
hatred which they bore against Laodice and his son Seleucus, and because of
the affection with which they loved Bernice and his Son. This policy
Fernandus Cortes used in the Conquest of the Kingdom of Mexico, making war
against King Motesuma, with his own Subjects that could not abide him.

5 Many Princes have atchiued many famous and excellent victories, through the
estimation, credit, and reputation of their own persons. Alexander the great,
published that he was Titus Liuius decad. 3. lib, 6.
Son unto Jupiter, (though he knew it was not so) that those Nations upon
who^ he made war, should yield and give over their Countries unto him. If the
Captains and Generals of Armies be valiant and renowned, they procure and
obtain friends and alliance, and easily atchiue victory: but if they be not
famous, they can hardly attain good success in their enterprises, and they
are always crossed with unfortunate events. Some counsel Princes to see,
whether those Captains which they choose for their wars, be fortunate in
those Martial enterprises which they undertake, for it is thought that Fortune
(as Salust says) prevails much in warfare. But seeing that In Catilina.
Fortuna in omni redominatur.
the people commonly call that fortune, which by chance happens well or ill,
for which no reason can be given, and this is uncertain and variable: no man
can persuade himself that he shall always have prosperous luck: and for this
cause was Fortune painted upon a wheel which is ever turning. Many times.
Captains have excellent good luck in one thing, and very Tit. Liui. No^ temere
incerta casuum reputat, quem Fortuna nunquam decepit.
badde fortune in another, as Hanniball told Scipio, and as Hanniball himself
had tried by experience.

Seeing that the events of wars are so uncertain and variable, wise and
valiant Captains, ought to increase the fame which is bruted abroad of their
good luck and prosperity, in their Martial endeavors, that they may
encourage their soldiers to fight, and they that are not fortunate, ought to
show unto their Soldiers, how inconstant and variable Fortune is, and to
persuade them that thence-forwarde, all matters will 2, Reg. 11.
succeed more happily, for the adventure of war is uncertain.

6 The first thing that all Princes which make war ought to do, is to justify
that war which they take in hand, that all men may know, that they are
bound to fight, by the necessity which compels them to defend themselves:
and although their cause be good, and grownded upon reason and justice, yet
they ought to accept any honest and lawful condition of peace, which their
enemies do offer them. Again, Princes ought to consider, that wars are
commonly made, either to recover that which has been taken from them, or to
revenge some injury that has been offered unto them, or because they desire
to atchiue glory and renown, or for ambition: the first and second causes
are just, the third is unjust, and the fourth is tyranny.

The Romans were always very careful, in justifying the wars which they
made, with all diligence possible. which may be seen by this, that the
Ambassador of the I Will of Rhodes, when he went about to praise the people of
Rome, said in a certain Oration which he made to the Senate, that the Romans
did not so much esteem the conquest, as the equity of their cause: and
because in my book of Military discipline, I have largely written how Princes
ought to justify their wars, I mean not here to stand upon it.

7 They that consult upon Martial affairs, ought to enquire, when they be
overcome with their enemies, whether the fault was in the Captains, or in the
common Soldiers, or because it pleased God, that though every man did his
duty, yet they should be put to the worse: and after the cause is known,
they ought to think upon the remedy, and to do all things that are expedient
to atchiue victory of their enemies. And if they understand yt their enemies
are stronger, and that they must continue their wars, it is better for them,
to defer the field (as Fabius Maximus did) then to enter battle to the
manifest danger of their whole Army. For, with delaying the time, they may
overcome, and with giving a rash onsette, they shall be put to flight, and as
we of old say in Castile: Diez aunos de guerra, y no un dia de pelea, that is;
Wars for ten years assay,
And battle but one day.


And because no Captain how wise soever he be, can imagine and forecast all
inconveniences which may fall out in war, it is convenient, that every Captain
take counsel with faithful, prudent, and wise men, and well experienced in
warfare, which may tell him the truth without any deceit. The Carthagenians
Liuius. Apud Carthaginense^ in crucem tolli imperato^es dicuntur, si prospero
euentu p^auo cum consilio ^em ge^serint.
did esteem so much of counsel in Military actions, that they hanged those
Captains and Generals, which over; came their enemies without taking advise.
The Venetians did not permit their. Generals to pitch a field with their
enemies, unless the Prouisors which were sent to the wars with them, did
consent unto it.

8 Captains and Generals shall obtain the favor and good will of the people,
if they minister justice unto them, and permit not any one to offer them any
injury, or to take away their substance unjustly, or to dishonor and
discredit the^ wrongfullie. And as for the good will of the Soldiers, the
Captains may obtain that, by being valiant and liberal, for these two
virtues make a Captain to be beloved. And though it seem a thing impossible,
that a Captain should be favored, both of the people and his Soldiers
also: because the people wish to keep their goods and substance, and the
Soldiers desire to pill and rob, yet notwithstanding this hinders not, for
they may well enough deal vprightlie with the people, that are their own
friends and alliance; and the Soldiers may rob pill, slay, and spoil those
that dwell in their enemies Countries. Furthermore, if by chance the Captain
be compelled by necessity, to ask some new tribute, to pay the charges of
the war, he ought with moeke words and good reasons, first to show (as
Tullie says) the necessity which at that instant urges him to demand it,
and then he ought to let them understand, that it concerns the whole
Commonwealth: and when opportunity served, he would repay that which they do
lend him. Generals and Captains of Armies, ought to see that no idle persons,
and such as are unapt for war, do loyter in the Camp, and that each
soldier employ himself in all such things, as are thought to be necessary
for the atchiuing of victory.

9 The Counselors of Princes, ought to examine, whether it be more profitable
for the Commonwealth, to stay till Lotinus con^ideratione, 500.
the enemy come to make war upon them at home, or whether it be better to
assail them in their Country. This being disputed upon in the Senate of
Rome, Fabius Maximus affirmed, that it was better for them to desend themselves
at home, then to invade their enemies Country. But Scipio said, that it was
more convenient for the Commonwealth, to war in Carthage then in Italy.
Furthermore, they that consult ere they determine to maintain war, either at
home or abroad, ought to consider, whether it be profitable for the estate of
the Country to make war at all. For though it lie in the power of men to
begin war, yet cannot they obtain victory at their pleasure: and yt
commonly many things fall out in warfare, which men can neither see nor
imagine: and yet the war it self, the enemies and the success, show and
teach what ought to be done: and for this cause it is said, that counsel is
taken in the field. And though the matters that concern war, may be
communicated and talked of among many, yet they ought to be deliberated upon
but by a few: for else they would be discovered, before they were determined.
Also, they that consult upon matters touching war, ought to consider, whether
it be profitable for the Commonwealth, that their Generals and Soldiers
should be strangers, or natural borne Subjects. The Carthagineans did not
only take strange Soldiers into their service, Strabo magnopere pe^^are putat
populos qui externis du^bus vtuntur in bello. etc. Petrus victorius, variarum
lect. lib, 8, cap. 17. Lotinus consideratione, 485.
but did also elect strange Captains, as they did in the wars which they
waged against the Romans, choosing Xantippus a Lacedaemonian to be the General
of their Army. Many Commonweals, after that their Captains were overcome,
they vanquished their enemies by the service of strange Captains: as the
Chalcedonians did with Brasidas, the Sicilians with Gylippus, the Asians with
Lysander, Callicratides, and Agathocles, Captains of Lacedaemonia. And if it
chance yt any strange Captains do tyrannise over the Commonweals which they
aid (as they of the house of Othoman did) that happens heerof, that they
which requested them to help them, are not able to withstand their forces, and
to defend themselves against the^. The Romans to shun this inconvenience,
would not consent, that they which came to succor or help them, should be
mightier then themselves.

10 Princes ought not to commit the administration of the war unto any
person whom they have offended: for such a one, to revenge the inturie offered
unto him, would cast away the Army. Marius had after such order compassed
Hasdruball Titus Liu. decad, 3. lib. 6.
a noble Captain of Carthage, that he was driven either to fight with
disadvantage, or die for hunger: but Hasdruball did hold him so cunningly,
with certain parleyes of agreement, that he got out of his reach, and so
Marius was frustrated of the occasion which was offered him to overthrow his
enemy: which thing when it was known in Rome, did redownd to his great
discredit, both with the Senate and the people, and every one through all the
City, spoke very much evil of him. Within a while after, Marius being made
Consul, and going to make war upon the enemy, Fabius Maximus said unto
him, that Titus. Liu. decad, 3, lib. 7.
before he came to the day appointed for the field, he should see what forces
the enemies had, and that he should not rashly hazard the Army, and adventure
the liberty of Rome. Unto who^ Marius answered, that as soon as he came by
the enemy, he had fully determined to encounter with him, and being asked
Liuius vbi sup.
why? he said, because he knew, that if he overcame the enemy, he should
recover the glory which he had lost in Spain, and if that his own Army were
overthrown, dispersed and put to flight, he should be revenged of the injury
which was offered him by that City and those Citizens which so unthankfully
had offended him.

Princes ought also to consider the necesitie which they have to make war,
and to understand what provision they ought to make, against occasion be
offered them to make war, that if any strangers go about to molest them,
they may defend themselves by force of Arms, and not be vanquished: for there
is no Prince so great, mighty and strong, but some or other may set upon him.
And as our old Castilian proverb goes, Muchas vezes chicas piedras aballam
grandes carreras. Little stones often times we see:
Way down the greatest Apple tree.


And if a Prince be of so little understanding, that he must be ruled by that
which the Captains say, he is their servant, and puts himself into
danger, either that the Captains know not what they do, or that they do not
so faithfully and dilligently as they ought.

11 Those Princes that determine to make war, ought to imitate the Catholic
King Don Hernando, the first of that name, King of Castile, who as it were
standing on hie in his Tower a far of, espied and watched the success and
event of the wars which the Christian Princes made among themselves, to succor
and aid them that were weakest, and not to suffer their power to increase in
Italy, that pretended to make themselves Lords over it: neither did he enter
league with those Princes that were confederated together, if he could reap no
profit thereby: and for this cause he would not wage war with Jews King of
France, when Pope Julius, the Emperor, and the Zwitcers warred against him:
for he thought that he should receive no profit by weakening the Kingdom of
France, with the augmentation of those that did persecute it. But when he
saw, that the King of France would increase his estate, and enlarge his
kingdom by making war against the kingdom of Mambrinus Roseus, lib. 1.
Historiae mundi.
Naples, he entered league with the Emperor and the King of England, against
the King of France. Finally, such Princes as enter league with other Kings,
ought to consider whether it be better for them, to maintain that peace which
they enjoy, or to wage wars: (as King Mithridates wrote to King Arsaces) and
whether the wars be just, and such as thereby they may have profit, and
atchiue honor, glory, and renown. The In Epistola addita operibus Salustij.
Romans (as Appian reports) would not accept many Subjects that offered
themselves unto the^: because they were pore, and if could not any way redounde
unto their profit to have the^ under their subjection. Many other examples,
precepts, rules, considerations and instructions could I give and aleage, but
because I writ of them in my books of Military discipline, I willingly
here omit them.

The fifteenth discourse, concerning peace.
WE have said that the Counsel of estate is called the Counsel of peace,
because their principal intent that assemble in that Counsel, is to procure
that ye people may live in peace, and if they make war, if is to defend
themselves from the injury of those that trouble and molest them. And to
signify this, the Romans accustomed to were the Millitarie ring on the left
Plin. li. 33. cap. 1.
hand, in which they did bear their shield: and not on ye right hand in which
they held their sword: for they thought it more necessary for a well
instituted Commonwealth, to defend themselves then to offend others. The
Spartans demanded of those that returned from wars, whether they had lost
their shield: for they thought it more, not to loose their shield, then to
save all their other weapons. Epaminondas a noble Captain of Thebes, being
grievously wounded and ready to die, Valeri. li. 3, c^. 2. Traiectus h^sta
sanguine et spiritu deficien^ recreare se con^^tes primum a^ clipeus suus sal
vus esset, dein^e an fusi hosts paenitus fo^ent interrogauit.
commanded his shield to be brought unto him, which when he had ombraced,
gave up the Ghost: thereby to signify, that if ever he had warred against
his enemy, he did it rather to defend his Country, then to offend them.

That it is the duty of every Prince, to defend his subjects from the
enemy, and govern them in peace and quietness, may be seen in this, that
when he takes his oath at his Corronation, he holds his Scepter, with which
he is to rule his people in time of peace, in his right hand, and his sword is
borne before him, with which he is to defend his Country, if need be he
should make war for the conservation of peace. Seeing therefore that the
chief Office of a Prince is, to maintain his Subjects in peace, I mean to
treat in this discourse of such things as be belonging to the Counsel of
peace.

1 Counselors of Princes that consult upon the establishing of peace, ought
humbly to request God, that it will please him, that the peace may be concluded
to his honor and* ^^ie, Sempiterne Deus, Da propitus pa^e^ in Diebus nostris.
for he only can give peace, and through him cease all wars, with which God
chastises the stanes of men. And when they do agree upon any peace, they
ought to consider what causes hindered, that the peace which before was
established, did not firmly remain unbroken: and they shall clearly see, ye
Princes make peace, either because they be wasted and destroyed with wars, or
because one Prince is subdued by ye other, and cannot any longer defend
themselves, or because they desire to be friends, and to overcome one another
in courtesy: and this last cause is the best to establish a firm and
continual peace, if it be done with true amity and perfect love. For if the
Princes wills be different that make the peace, then is their peace (as the
Prophet Ezekiell Capit. 13.
says) like unto the wall that was built up and daubed with untempered Mortar,
which peace may with small violence be overthrown: for because the love and
conformity is wanting, it cannot last long or continue. The Senate of Rome
asked the men of Pri^ernum, how long the peace which they demanded should
endure: and they answered, that it should be continual, if they would grant it
upon good and honest conditions, otherwise, it should be but very short. They
that will establishe a firm and stable peace, that may continue for ever,
ought to procure that God be not angry or displeased, but favorable, propice
and merciful unto them: that, he being the right author of al peace and true
concord, may prosper the peace which they make. And they may easily please and
reconcile God, with supplication and earnest prayers, if they humbly with all
their heart beseech his holiness to give them judgment and understanding to
execute justice: for the work of justice shall be peace: even the work of
justice shall be quietness and assurance for ever, Esaias, 32, 17.
as Esaias the Prophet says.

2 If they that consult upon the making and establishing of peace, cannot
conclude, they ought to make a truce for a certain time, that they may have
some space to deliberate upon it, and to examine the conditions upon which the
peace is to be concluded, and to see and consider, whether it be better for
them to prosecute the war, or to give it over, and many times a truce being
made for a time, the peace is established, whereas there had none been
concluded, if no league had been made for some days. They ought also to
perpend and weigh, whether it be better for the^ to procure peace, by re^dering
some Castle, town, or City, or by paying a sum of money, or by allowing
some tribute, or by concluding some marriage, or by making of alliance or
affinity, as we have before showed. They ought also to consider, whether they
that demand peace, are persons that use to accomplish that which they promise
(as Hanniball told Scipio, when he demanded of him, that he would stablishe
a Liuius decad, 3. Libro. 30.
peace with the Carthagineans) and whether it be better for the^ to make the
peace, when their enemies be victorious, and may set the conditions according
to their pleasure, (as Hannon Liuius. decad. 3, lib, 23.
couns^^led the Carthagineans) or to stay till necessity compel, the^ to come
and entreat a peace.

3 Seeing that the augmentation of the Commonwealth, depends upon peace, and
the end for which men take Arms in a Commonwealth well instituted, is to
conserve the good estate thereof in peace, it is convenient, that the
Counselors of Princes should persuade their Prince, that it is better to
accept an honest peace, then to make a dangerous war. The Lacedaemonians and
Athenians made so great account of peace, and desired so earnestly, that no
occasion might be offered them to make war, that they continually said in
their banquets, would to God our weapons were hanged over with copwebs. In that
peace which the Romans concluded with King Porsenna, they allowed it with this
condition, that they should not use any iron saving in tilling of the ground.
And because oftentimes, the estate of the whole Commonwealth, depends upon
the conditions upon which the peace is established, and men cannot in any other
thing err so greatly to the hurt and damage of the Commonwealth, it is
convenient that they which conclude Valerius Maximus. lib. 7. tit. 3.
the peace, should be both wise and wary. Titus Labeo, being urged to make a
peace with King Antiochus, at the same Kings demand, said that he was
contented upon condition, that half of King Antiochus shyps should be for the
behalf of the people of Rome, which being granted by the King, Titus Labeo
commanded half the part of every ship to be cut away: because all the
shyps should remain for the Romans. Again, the Consuls of Rome agreed to make
peace with ye Carthagineans, so they would yield and render all the ships
which they had; over unto them: which as soon as the Carthagineans had done:
the Romans commanded all the shyps to be set on Lucius Florus de gestis
Roma. lib, 2, cap. 5. Et Paulus Horosius, lib. 4. ca. 22.
fire, and told the Carthagineans that the Senate of Rome commanded that they
should come forth of Carthage, and build a new City in some other place
where they would, so it were ten Italian miles distant from the sea.

Many other examples very pregnant for this our purpose might I here allege.
But seeing I have set them down in my Treatise De Iuriiurando and promissis,
I will not here repeat them.

4 Though all Commonweals labor to maintain peace, and avoid occasions of
war: yet the ambition and malice of men is so great, that no man ought to
trust to the peace that is established betwixt him and his enemies. For under
the color of peace, they oftentimes practice many subtle devices, whereby
they obtain that, which unless some peace had been concluded, they could
never have attained unto. Those Princes that are not molested with wars, but
rule their Subjects in peace, ought not to suffer their people so to give
themselves to ease, that they never be exercised, or trained up in Arms, for
an unarmed peace is very weak. Gelon King of Sicilie, being Robertus
Brittaunus in Encomio Agriculturae.
persuaded that those Commonweals in which the people were not exercised in
Military practices could not long continue (for peace, vacation from labors,
and idleness, spoil and consume them) he commanded that it should be
published through all his Country, that great necessity urged him to make
war, and there withal commanded, that the people should presently be
mustered, and taught how to use their weapons: and after they had been trained
and some thing exercised in handling them, he commanded, that they should all
of them be placed in order, that they might go with him to seek the enemy,
but when they were all gone, and asked where the enemies were with whem they
should fight: the King showed the fields, hills, and valleys unto the^, saying
that if they would atchiue victory over their enemies, they should labor in
those grounds, felling down the Trees, and digging out the stones that were
in them: for so doing, they should vanquishe those deadly enemies, Sloth and
Idleness, which would overthrow and destroy the whole Commonwealth, if they
were not in time expelled: and no Nation durst make war upon them seeing that
they were practiced in exercises of war, and accustomed to labor. For (as
Titus Liuius says) the enemies themselves Decad, 3. lib. 30.
do not the Commonwealth so much harm, as delight and wantonness.

Anncient old men in their time, painted the Goddess Pallas Bocatius de
genealogia Deorum, lib, 5. ca. 48 Cicero pro Murena. Arts ilico nostrae
conticescunt In proaemio institutionum.
in Complete harness, because they would have men to understand, that the
Arts and Sciences which flourish in peace, little profit unless they be
defended by Arms.

The Emperor Justinian says, that Princes ought to be adorned with Arms, and
armed with Laws, that they may well govern the people that is committed unto
them.

The sixteenth discourse. How and wherewith Commonweals be augmented, and
wherewith they do decay.
Counselors of Princes, especially they of the Counsel of the estate, ought
to understand and know, wherewith Commonweals be augmented, and by what means
they decaie again. The famous S. Augustine says, that as the Physicians Lib.
1. de ciuitate Dej. cap. 3.
cure sick bodies, by purging, letting of blood, and searing: so God cures
the sins and vices of men, with famine as dyets: with plagues as purgations:
and with wars as letting of blood and searing. The Prophet Esaias says, God will
chastise Cap. 3.
the people of Jerusalem, with taking away the stay of bread, and the stay of
water. The strong man, and the man of war, the Judge, and the Prophet: the
prudent and the aged, the Captains of fifty, and the honorable, and the
Counselor, and the cunning Artificer and the eloquent man: and he will
appoint children to be their Princes, and babes shall rule over them, and the
people shall be oppressed one by an other, and every one by his neighbor: the
children shall presume against the ancient, and those that are contemptible,
against those that are honorable. God does also chastise Co^mon-weales, and
brings them to decay, by suffering Pharaoes, Nabuchadnezers, Ose. cap. ^.
Dabo regem in furore meo.
Caligulaes, Neroes, Dyoclesians, to govern, because of the sins of the
people, and they stand him in steed of Tormentors. Attila was called the rod
of God, and Tamberlaine the wrath of God. Those Princes which God will have to
serve him in steed of Tormentors, to punish the people, who with their heinous
sins offend him, are (as Cardinal Reginald Poole says, in the Oration which
he made unto Charles the fifth, concerning peace) those that persecute the
Church of God. For GOD places not Christian Princes in authority, to the end
they should serve him in steed of Tormentors, but that they should minister
justice equally unto al men, and be (as S. Paul says) Ministers 2. Cor. ^.
of God, imitating him, and following him, in using clemency, and being
merciful, to the consolation and comfort of all the people: but because the
people repent not themselves of their Gene. 1^.
sins, and leave not their wickedness, and because (as the holy Scriptures
say) the measure of the Amorites is filled: GOD sends them Princes that
stand the^ in steed of Tormentors: but if they amended their lives, and
inclined their hearts to repentance, as Niniuie did, he would pardon them. For
it is the Ionae. cap. 3.
property of his divine Majesty, to pardon and show mercy unto those, that
from the bottom of their heart do call unto him, and repent themselves of their
sins. And unto those people which are just and virtuous, God gives good
Kings, and such as do the Commonwealth much good, and are as Angels sent from
heaven, to conserve and defend her. Therefore those Princes that do not this,
accomplish not their duty, and cannot be properly called Princes, but
equiuocally as a painted man is called a man. The holy Scriptures call those
Princes that do Job. 34.
not minister justice, unto every man according to the commandment of God,
hypocrites: for they have no princely thing in them, but only the name of
Princes, and being most cruel Wolves, they be masked and disguised with
tokens only, and shows of most merciful Princes.

2 God does oftentimes permit, that Princes should suffer many troubles and
adversities, to turn them from their wicked lives, and to show them that God
does punish and chastise Princes, Kings, Monarchs, and Emperors, when they
govern not their people as they ought, according to the will and pleasure of
the highest Monarch of the world. After this manner, Cap. 4.
says the Prophet Daniel, that God did show unto Nabuchadnezzar King of
Babylon; how that God is Lord of all kingdoms, and gives them unto whom he
will: and even as Schoolmaisters correct their Scholars, to make them to
apply their books, and duly come to school: so GOD does chastise the
Princes of the earth, that they may perform their duty, and understand that
the true beginning to govern well, as well in time of peace as war, consists
in knowing that God Almightic is the Lord of all kingdoms, and that the
beginning of all Prouer. 1.
knowledge and wisdom (as King Solomon says) is the fear of the Lord: and
this is ye first lesson which they ought to learn that will follow him, and the
first show and token which they make in the school of his doctrine. The fear
of the Lord is glory and gladness, and rejoicing, and a ioyfall crown. And
the fear of the Lord makes a merry heart, and gives gladness and joy, and
long life, and who so fears the Lord, it shall go well with him at the last,
and he shall find favor in the day of his death. The Prophet David being
taught by the holy Psalm. 2.
Ghost, says. Be wise now therefore ye Kings: be learned ye Judges of the
earth, serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling. Kiss the Son least
he be angry, and ye perrish in the way, when his wrath shall suddenly burn,
blessed are al they that put their trust in him. And those that follow not this
doctrine, God visits with calamities and adversities, which he sends unto
them to cause them to turn from their wickedness, and to obey his
commandments. That which we say of Christian Princes, is also to be
understood of those just and virtuous Princes, whom God does cross with
misfortunes and troubles, that they may be suffering them patiently, deserve
that glory which God gives unto the^ that serve him. To be pressed with
misery, plague, famine, fire and war, is common both to good and wicked men:
but only good and virtuous men die in the service of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, bearing his cross on their shoulders: for (as the kingly Prophet
Psalm, 115.
says) precious in ye sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

3 God also destroieth Co^mon-weales by appointing children to rule over them
as the Prophet Esaias says, and I will appoint children to be their Princes, and
babes shall rule ouerthem. Cap. 3.
For sorrowful (as King Solomon says) is that Kingdom, Ecclesi. 10.
in which the Prince that rules it is a Child, and they that give him
counsel and govern him, are given to their lusts and pleasures* and also
the Prophet Hoseas says, that when God is angry, and will punish the people
for their sins Cap, 2.
which they commit, he appoints children to be their Princes. The Romans in
their processions, beseeched God continually, that it would please him to be
so favorable unto them, as not Auertant superi a nobis reges pueros quorum
manus tutor regat. Ecclesi. cap. 4. Esaias. 5. Esaias. 5. 2. Reg 3.
to appoint Children that should be governed by Tutors and Protectors, to rule
over them. But yet (as King Solomon says) better is a poor and wise Child,
then an old and foolish King which will be no more admonished: for old fools
are in the Scriptures called children of an hundred years of age. GOD does
also chastise the Commonweals, giving them base and vile persons, that shall
put their hands to the wherue, (as the Scriptures say) and handle the spyndle.
Which thing is properly belonging unto women as Homer does give us to
understand, when be brings Telemachus speaking thus to his Mother. (...)
(...)
(...)
But home to do your business may you hie,
Your spynning and your distaffe to apply,
And eake your Maids, unto their taskes to tie.


And therefore in wars, they were wont to put spyndles and distaues in those
Soldiers hands, that were cowards and dastards, for such men are rather to be
termed women then men. Vt dicitur. lib. 19. de disciplina militarj.
GOD does also chastise Commonweals, giving them rash Prelates, learned men
without hearts, and without courage, unskillful Physicians, unconscionable and
unlearned Judges, and unprofitable people that stand the Common-welth in no
steed, but to eat and to drink the food and the sustenance which the earth
brings forth, as the idle and wandering persons do, which waste and spoil
the Common-welth more then the Fly called Locusta, which burns Corn with
touching, and denoureth the residue, and they do the Commonwealth no good at
all, and be less profitable then the laboring beasts, that with drawing and
bearing, help to maintain the Commonwealth, and for this cause does Plato
safe, that no City can be Lib. 8. de Repub.
termed happy, in which many poor, idle, and loytering persons live, who
being able to work, will rather beg, and so commit all kind of wickedness
to maintain themselves. Furthermore, God chastises Commonweals, if those
that live in them use to deceive one another, and for love of money commit
Ecclesiast, 10.
iniquity, by reason whereof, God translateth the kingdom from one people to
another. Again, God does chastise Commonweals, if they that govern and
bear rule over them, permit men to sin publicly, for that were to bring
the people Deuteronomy. 17. Nec reducet populum in Egiptum.
again to Egypt, and for this cause does God punish Commonweals, with all
those cursses and plagues, which the Scripture says shall come on them that
will not obey the voice of the Lord, and keep his commandments and
ordinances. Besides, Commonweals perrish and decay, if any factions and
divisions reign in them: for factious and dissentions persons, disquiet the
Commonwealth: and taking advantage by the malice of a few, and the ignorance
of many, disturb and endomage the Commonwealth, to increase and augment
their own commodity, for as our Spanish proverb says: Rio buelto gananciaes
de pescadores.
The laded River, gains
Yields for the fishers pains.


Factions and divisions were cause of the destruction of the Empire of Rome, as
may be seen in the dissentions which grew in Tulli. officior^. Libro. 1.
Rome, because of the Laws Agraria, which caused great alterations at every
time that the people of Rome did intend to establish it in that City: this
Law Agraria had two especial clauses; the one ordained, that no Citizen
might possess more then a certain number of Akers of land: the other, that
all what soever was gotten from the enemies, should be equally divided among
the people of Rome: and this Law was very hurtful to the Noble men, for it
deprived them of their goods, and hindered them from increasing their wealth and
riches. But the Noble men opposing themselves, sought one remedy or other to
put down this Law: and either they brought an Army of man out of the City,
or they caused that when one Tribune did propose the Law, another should
contrary him: or they granted part of the Law: or they sent people to
inhabit that place which should have been distributed among the people of
Rome: to be short, how hurtful it is to favor and maintain scismes and
partialities in a Commonwealth, may be seen, in that many Commonweals have
been thereby destroyed and overthrown: and therefore Plato calls dissentions
and factions, In dialogo, 1, and 5. de legibus.
poison, that spoyleth and destroys Commonweals. To make an end, those
Commonweals that are governed by the people, perrish and decay, if one man
continue long in the government, and this was the cause of the destruction of
Rome, as may be noted in Julius Caesar who tyrannised, though notwithstanding
Cato Vticensis (wisely divining and coniecturing the event of the matter)
contraried the people of Rome, in that they did appoint Julius Caesar to
continue in the generallship, longger then his day before prefixed: saying,
that they gave the Arms and weapons unto him, that with them should destroy
them, Unto which, Pompey (who at that time favored Julius Caesar) answered,
that Cato by saying so, did nothingels, but give the^ occasion to suspect, that
he owed Julius Caesar a grudg: and that which he said himself, did proceed of
freendshippe. Again, the people of Rome having appointed the Trybunes or
Protectors of the Commons, to continue in their Office the second year,
because they thought that they were very sufficient to withstand the ambition
of the Noble men: and to maintain the liberty and benefit of the Common
people, against their power: the Senate, because they would not serme to have
less power and authority then the people, would have had Lucius Quintius (who
at that time was to give over his Consulship to some other) to continue in his
Office, and be Consul an other yeeere: but Lucius Quintius contraried the
Senate in that, saying, that naughty examples ought to be shunned, and not
multiplied and increased with another far worse example: and Lybanus in
argumento ad Olynthiacam primam Demosthenis.
would have them to choose new Consuls. Lastly, Commonweales perrish and
decay, if they that bear rule over them, be young men, little experienced in
government: and the people that live in them is very rich, for it is natural
unto them to be careless, negligent, and vicious if they be welthie: and
unless necessity urge them to labor, they will never take pains. Finally,
Counselors of Princes ought to consider, that commonly Chronica Petri.
Lussitani regis Lib, 18. cap. 23.
six things cause Commonweals to decay. The first and chief cause of the
destruction of a Common-welth, is contempt, when men are little accounted or
esteemed of. The second is covetousness, or inordinate desire of other men's
goods. The third is, inordinate delectation in worldly things, when men will
fulfill their pleasure, and do all things according to their own will. The
fourth is disobedience, when men transgress the Laws wilfully. The fifth is
cruelty, when they Plato Epist. 1. Salust in Iugurtham.
that bear rule, exercise tyranny. And the sixth and last, is want of friends,
when men have not friends to give them counsel.

The seventeenth discourse. How and wherewith Commonweals be increased.
Commonweals are made bigger and greater, three manner Machiauellus, Lib, 1.
cap. 4. discurs.
of ways. The first is, by manner of league, or alliance, to be in league with
diverse other Co^mon-weales, which all of them be one as rich, as mighty, and
as great as an other, and in all points equal, so that none of them have any
advantage of the other: and when any of them conquer any place, they make the
rest partakers of the conquest, as the Suicers do in Heluecia, and as the Aguei
and Ethoti did in Greece. The second manner to augment Commonweals, is, also
by way of alliance: but in such sort, that they have the chief authority,
rule, and government, and the title of all the enterprises: this manner is the
best, and was used of the Romans: for they keeping the emperial seat, and
title of command to them selves, their alliants deprived of all power and
authority, of themselves by their own sweat and blood, became subject unto
them, seeing they were compassed about, and oppressed on the sudden by such a
mighty City as Rome was: and of alliants and companions, became subjects and
bondmen, not being able to defend themselves, by reason that they had
increased, augmented, and advanced the Roman Empire with their own forces.
The third and last manner, for Commonweals to be augmented and enlarged, is,
to make them whom they overcome, not fellows, but subjects, as the Spartans
did: but of all three, this is least profitable, if they be not able to keep
and govern those Cities which they conquer. For it is commonly said, that he
that conquereth an Empire and forces withal, becomes mighty: but he that
atchiueth an Empire without forces, must needs decay. The Romans to augment
their Commonwealth, did imitate them that prune Trees, who to make a Tree grow
and bring forth fruit in time, do cut off the first boughs, that the virtue
of that plant may remain in the stem, and by reason thereof, greener and
more fruitful boughs may spring out of it. And that this manner to enlarge an
Empire or dominion is good and necessaire, may be proved by the example of
Sparta and Athens, which being two Commonweals very strong, mighty, well
Armed, and established with most excellent and perfect Laws, could never
reach or attain to that greatness, unto which the Empire of Rome was
advanced. And yet did Rome seem to be more full of disordered and seditsous
troubles and contentions: yea and nothing settled in such good order and
fashion, as those two other Commonweales, Sparta and Athens: whereof no other
reason can be alleged, then that which is already given: for Rome, (because
it had augmented the body of the City by those two ways which we have showed)
could gather together eight and twenty thousand men for their defense, and
Sparta and Athens, never could go beyond the number of twenty thousand each
of them. And this came not because Rome was situated in a better place then
Sparta or Athens, but by reason that a different kind of proceeding was used,
in the erecting and establishing of those Commonweals: for Lycurgus the first
founder of the Spartane Commonwealth, thinking that nothing could so easily
innouate or abrogate his Laws, as the mixture and confusion of new
Inhabitants, he bethought himself all means possible, how he might bring to
pass, that no Strangers should come to dwell in Sparta, or be conversant in
it: and therefore he ordained, that in his Commonweal, no money should be
used but of Copper, because no man should have any mind to come and dwell in
that City, or to bring any Merchandise or wares thither from fortaine
Countries. And for this cause the company of the Citizens could never be
increased. And because al our actions imitate nature, and it is impossible that
a little thin stock should support or hold up a great thick branche,
therefore a small and weak Common-welth, cannot overcome and vanquish great
and mighty Cities and kingdoms, that are more puissaunt and stronger then it
is: and if it do conquer any, then it fares with it, as it does with thin and
small siemms, that have gross boughs and branches, so that the smallest wind
that is, does blow them down and ouerturne them, as it happened with Sparta,
which having taken all the Cities of Grecce by force, Thebes no sooner
rebelled, but all the other Cities did rise with them against her: and so the
stock remained without branches, which thing could not befall on Rome,
because the stock was so gross, that it was able to bear up and to support
the weight of any branch.

5 Commonweals be also augmented, by favoring the Inhabitans: for when they
that dwell in them, may live freely out of bondage, and be Masters and Lords
of their own substance, and such goods as they get by their labor and
travail, they multiply and increase their riches, as well in husbandry and
tillage, as in Arts, handicrafts, trades, and Merchandise, for every one does
with a good will, increase and heap up those goods which he hops that he
may enjoy after he has got them. And by this it comes to pass, that men so
earnestly strive and contend one with an other who may best regard, both his
own commodity and the public profit also. But contrarily, in those
Countries and Provinces, that are oppressed with over many tributes, and
ouercharged with excessive tols: the people think upon nothing but how they
may live idle, and Franciscus Alu^res in historia 1. Ethiopiae. fol. 205.
make good cheer upon the Kings cost. The Ethiopians have much fruitful
land, which might bring forth a wonderful deal of excellent fruit: but by
reason of the excessive tols, and unreasonable tribute which they pay, they
will not take pains to labor and husband more ground, then may suffice for
their sustenaunce. And because the King of China, in the Province of Gaspar de
Crus.
Chapan, takes away the substance of the Crafts men if they be rich: and if
they will not give it, he does command them to be imprisoned; none of those
Provinces will labor, nor take pains to get more then they need for their
maintenance. And on the otherside, because they that live in China, pay but
small tribute, they be very industrious, and take wonderful pains to heap
up riches, and loose nothing whereby they may reap any profit: in so much,
that of the bones of dogs and other beasts, they make little trifles for
Children to play with, and pay money for the ordure of the necessaries, to dung
and fatten their grounds.

Furthermore, Commonweals be augmented and increased, by ministering justice
equally unto all men, not suffering any notorious offenses to escape
unpunished: and by having an especial regard of Religion. For justice and
Religion, are the two principal pillars yt support al weals public, without
which, no Commonwealth can dure long, or continue: and with which, little
Commonweals be enlarged and made bigger, and great ones continue in their
bigness, as I writ more at large in my books De Politijs et rebus publicis.
Lastly, Commonweals be increased and amplified, by not suffering any one of
the^ that provide them of maintenance and Merchandise, to engrosse things,
that no man may sell or gain but they: for these men cause the Commonwealth
never to be without famine and dearth. Dionisius King of Sicilie, banished a
certain Merchant, Aristo. Pol. lib, 2. cap. 7.
because he had bought up all the iron that was brought to Sicilie, that he
might sell it only, and have all the gains to him self. Finally,
Commonweals he augmented and amplified, by the carefulnes of Princes, if they
provide all things necessary for their Subjects: even as Sheepheards procure
pasturing Xenophon lib. 8 Cyropaediae.
and folds for their sheep, shearing them (as the Emperor Tiberius said) and
not fleaing them. For (as Socrates said) he is not a good Shepherd that
diminishes his sheep, and does Eras. in Apoth. Xenophon. lib. 1 de dictis
and factis Socratis. L. cum ratio.. si pluribus. ff. de bonis dam.
not let them wax fat. Neither is he a good King, who does not procure that
his subjects and vassals live in peace, and become rich and wealthy: and this
is the amplification and augmentation, which the Emperor Adrian says, that
Princes ought to procure in those Commonweals which they govern.

6 Even as nature works in humane bodies, and when it has gathered much
superfluous matter, yet notwithstanding by purging restores them to their
health again: so in mixed Machiauellus lib. 2. cap. 8. discurs.
bodies, when all Provinces are full of Inhabitants, in such manner that they
cannot commodiously live so many together, nor go to any other place, because
they be all inhabited and possessed: although the Cities and Countries be
purged and cleansed, by plagues, famine, dearth, and wars etc. yet always
there remain people enough to inhabit them again.

The Britans report of their Country, that it is so fruitful, and their soil
so fertile, that unless the plague did visit them sometimes, they would eat
one another. To be short, least Commonweals should consume and decay, by
reason of the multitude of people that live in them, all the Nations of the
world accustoined to scour as it were, and make them clean, sending forth
some men to inhabit void places, and such Countries as they had taken from
their enemies by war. And so they that did remain in the Commonwealth,
might live very commodiduflie, and the idle poor people and straying
vagabunds had wherein to employ themselves, and where with to be sufficiently
maintained, as I writ more copiouslie in my Books De Policijs sieve
Rebuspublicis, in tractatibus de Conlonijs and de pauperibus otiosis ae
vagabundis.

The eighteenth discourse. From whence it does proceed that the Commonweals
are changed, out of one estate of government into an other.
THe alteration of government in a Co^mon-welth (as Plato says) proceeds
from those yt govern Lib. 8. de Repub. Aristo Polit. 5. Sebastian Frizzo in
discursu de administratione civilly. Bartholomens Caualcante 4. discursu. de
Republica.
it. For seeing that these inferior things, are in perpetual alteration,
they cannot be everlasting, but are changed out of one government into another,
after men have had experience of those inconveniences, which were in the
government which they had at first, To wit, if the Commonwealth were governed
by the people, (which estate of government is called Democracia) after they
have made trial of those inconveniences which are in the Democratie, or
popular estate, they bring in Aristocratia, (which is, when the Commonwealth
is governed by the Noble men or chief persons) and after that they have tried
the Aristocracie, they choose some principal person, that may defend, govern
and protect them: who oftentimes exercises tyranny upon them. And because
the end of every Commonwealth Plato. Vbi sup. Arist. Polit. 5. cap. 5. Na^
maxima sete ex part veteres tyranni extribunis plebis ex^iterunt.
is to be well governed, the government thereof would be perpetual, if they
that govern it were just and virtuous, and if all men wished to be ruled
according to reason and instice. But because they who have all the authority
of the Commen-wealth, exercise tyranny upon the people, the Noble men and
chief of the Realm rise against them, and either kill them, or cast them
down from their sovereignty, translating ye whole government of the
Commonwealth unto themselves, and usurping all the authority which the
Monarch had, who ruled alone without peer. And if chance these chief Noble
men govern tyrannouslie, then the people, they arise against them, and
dispossess them of the government, and will rather be ruled by one King, then
by many Peers. And this is the alteration which Commonweals commonly
sustain, returning to the beginning from whence they first began. For
Democracie, changes into Oligarchie, (which is, when a few persons have all
the authority) and Oligarchie changes into Monarchy or kingdom, and the
government of the Kingdom or Monarchy decaying, it turns again to the
Oligarchie or Democracie: and because the Democracie or popular estate, has
assayed the inconveniences of the Oligarchie, it runs oftentimes into the
uttermost of the Monarchy, to be delivered from the Oligarchie or government
of a few persons that have all the authority. Plato says, that the
Commonwealths are very 4. Delegibus.
hardly brought out of tyranny unto a Kingdom, and out of a Kingdom into the
Democracie: and out of the Democracie into the Oligarchie, but to change the
government out of the Oligarchie into some other estate, is most hard and
difficult, for they which hinder and let it, are many and prevail much.

2 The most difficult reformation of all, is to restore a Commonwealth which
is in subjection, into a free estate: for the estate Machiauellus li. 1. cap.
16. de discurs.
of the Commonwealth is soon altered, but very hardly reformed, and restored
to the former government: because people upon small cause arise, but are not so
soon appeased, especially if they once be given to live dissoloutlie, as it
was seen in Antonius de Gauara in Epistolis.
Rome, when Brutus and Cassius went about to restore the City unto freedom:
and though they were favored by many, both of the noblest and cheifest of the
City, yet they could not bring it to pass, for the City was quite already
marred and spilt, by reason of the dissentions and wars of Sylla and Marius,
and of Caesar and Pompey, and the Romans were now as it were accustomed to live
in bondage. Besides this, they that labor or endeavor to set any Commonwealth
at liberty, find partial enemies, but no partial friends; for all they
become to be their partial enemies, that were the better by ye Prince his
estate, and reaped great profit by him and his substance. For they will be
loath to have the Prince deprived of his kingdom, least they should fare the
worse by it: or if by hap the Prince be deposed of his government, they
seeing the Kings authority to be decayed, by reason whereof they are deprived
of the commodity which they were wont to have, cannot live contentedlie, but
continually seek means to attain to the authority and favor which they
enjoyed before. And on the otherside, they that endeavor to set any
Commonwealth at liberty, find no partial friends: because to live at
liberty, seems to be nothing else, then to aspire to honor and rewards, by
means of some honest and lawful causes, for otherwise no man is either
honored and rewarded. And when any person receives those preheminences,
profits, and commodities, which he thinks that he deserves, then he
confesses not that he is bound to him that honors and rewards him.
Moreover, the common profit which is gotten by living in a free Common wealth,
is not known by any one, as long as he does not enjoy it: which is, to enjoy
the use and commodity of his own substance, and to dispose of it at his
pleasure. And they that will go about to remedy and redress these
inconveniences, and dysorders, ought to do as Brutus did, killing all those
that oppose themselves against that new government which they will bring in to
the Commonwealth. Which, Brutus well might do, for when he expelled the
Kings, the people of Rome were not so vicious, nor so full of dissolute
manners, nor so wickedlie given, as when Brutus and Cassius slew Julius Caesar.
And when Lib. 1. Quotus quisquis reliquus erat, qui rempub. vidisset.
Augustus Caesar usurped the Monarchy of the Roman Empire, there was not one
in Rome, (as Cornelius Tacitus says) that knew what it was to live in a free
Commonwealth.

3 Those Princes unto whom the Commonweals are committed, as unto Protectors
which should defend them, and yet exercise cruelty upon them, destroying,
killing, and seysing upon their goods, that hinder them from being absolut
Lords, have much ado, and incur great danger to maintain the tyranny or
kingdom which they usurp. For they must destroy all those which may resist
them: which they may easily do, Arming themselves with the laws to justify
their intention, as all those have done, which have tyrannized over those
Commonweals Ari. li. 4. Pol. ca. 3, Sed duae esse maxim vide^tu^: vtenim
ventus dicituralius Aquilonaris, a ius Australis, ab^eorum mutat^nes: sic
Respub. secundae, sunt eaquae est i ^populi et eaquae est ^^ pancoi^ pocestate.
which were committed unto them.

The popular Regiment is reformed unto the government of a few, and that
government in which a few have all the authority, is changed into the
Monarchy: and the Monarchy into the tyranny: or out of one extreme into the
other, without passing by the mean governments. Even as betwixt the North and
the South there be many winds, which take part with the chief and uttermost
winds, and as betwirt black and white there be many diversities of colors: so
betwixt the Democracie and the Tyranny, (which is a cruel or violent rule or
government for a private commodity, and not a public weal) there be many
diversities of gouernme^ts, which are mixed with both ye two extremes: and to
pass out of ye one extreme into the other, they need not pass through those
gouernme^ts which have the place in a mean between them. Albeit in natural
things, no transinutation can be made out of the one extreme into the other;
without passing through ye means which are betwixt both the extremes. Yet this
does not hold in those things which depend upon man's will, which easily pass
out of Auerrois, in paraph. ad li. Platonis de Repub. Et Melchior canus in
tractatu de Sacramentis.
one extreme into the other, without passing through ye means which are
betwixt both the extremes.

4 It were needles to dispute of all the alterations of governments in the
Commonwealth, and how easily they be changed out of one form into another.
They that are desirous to understand this matter more exactly, let them read
Bartholomew In tractatu de Politijs discursu. 4.
Caualeante, who handleto it very largely, examining and sifting the opinions
of Plato, Aristotle, and Polibius, concerning the trans-formations of
Commonweals, which sometimes alter and quite change that kind of government
which they had before, sometimes enlarge it, and sometimes diminish it. These
alterations are made as Aristotle says, either out of Pol. lib. 5.
ill governments into good, or out of good governments into better, or out of
ill governments into worse. This is verified in the Democracie, Oligarchie,
Aristocracie, and Monarchy, which (being in themselves good governments if
they be ruled according to reason and justice) may be changed thus. The
Democracie into the Oligarchie, and the Oligarchie into the Aristocracie, and
ye Aristocracie into the Monarchy: and so, one good government, into another
government, as good or better. Also a good government is changed into an ill,
and that ill government, either into one of the same kind, or into one of an
other kind. As for example, into the same kind, as the kingdom into the
tyranny: the Democracie and Aristocracie, into a good or bad administration:
and out of one kind into another, as the Aristocracie and Democracie, into any
one of the other contrary kinds of governments. Notwithstanding that which some
say, Bartholom. Caualcante vbi sup.
that the badde and good governments are contraries, which is proved, because
those things are contrary, which being of the self same kind, do much
differ the one from the other, and yet are apt and disposed to be produced out
of the self same subject according to the doctrine of Plato and Aristotle: but
that the Plat. In Phaedone. Ari. In post predicame^tis. and 1. physicorom.
contrary governments are under the self same kind, considering them
according as they be good and badde, and are in dysposition to be produced in
the same subject, may manifestly be seen in the Monarchy or tyranny, and in
all other governments, whose subject is the people in which they be produced,
and therefore if such governments be co^traries, it seems that no
trans-formation or alteration can be made, out of a good government into an ill
government, without passing through the mean governments that are
indifferently betwixt both the extremes.

5 Unto this objection some answer, that contraries are not very distant one
from the other, and do not much differ, for they be very near joined, both in
the kind under which they be, and in ye subject in which they be produced. And
those things which any way whatsoever are differing (which are called opposita,
diuersa, and differentia) are far more distant one from the other, then those
things which are contrary: and seeing contraries are joined very near
together, the one contrary may easily be changed into the other: hence it
follows that ye Monarchy is more easily altered into the tirannie, then into
the Democracie or Oligarchie, though Aristotle notwithstanding say, that Lib.
3. Politicorum cap. vlt. Cu^presertim saepius in co^trarias mutentur respub.
omnes, quam in finitimas atque vicinas. Aristo. lib. 2. de generat. and corrup.
facilis est transitus in symbolizantibus.
the government passes more easily out of the Aristocracie into the
Democracie, then forth of the Monarchy into the Tyranny: his reason is,
because the Tyranny is contrary to the Monarchy, but the Aristocracie is
joined near unto the Democracie. And those things which are like one to
another, and do (as the Philosophers say) symbolizare, be easily trans-formed
and changed out of one into another. But this hinders not: for it holds in
necessary and natural, but not in morrall agents, which depend upon the free
will, as I have written more at large in my books De amore Diuino, humano et
casto. Thence it follows that the people trans-form and change the
governments one into the other, as they think will be better and more profitable
for them, without following the Vbi supra.
order of the natural trans-formations and alterations. Bartholomewe
Caualcante gives other solutions for this objection, which are rather to be
disputed of in Schools, the^ to be handled of those which entreat of the
government of Commonweals. Polibius affirms, that the Monarchies be
commonly reformed Libro. 6.
with the Aristocracies, and the Aristocracies with the Oligarchies, and the
Oligarchies with the Democracies. Aristotle 5. Politicorum.
examineth and sifteth this matter better the^ Polibius, who could not read
Aristotle's books, for his heirs hid them, and they were found and brought to
Rome in the time of Sylla the Dictator, who was long after Polibius: for
Polibius was in the Strabo. lib. 13.
time of Scipio the Affricane. This which Aristotle and Polibius dispute of,
concerning the reformation of Co^mon-weales, which are more easily reformed
into the contraries, then into those which are next unto them: is to be
understood according In lib. 5. Polit. cap. vlt.
to that which S. Thomas says: to wit, that Plato will not have, that the
government of Commonweals shall be only changed unto that which is next
unto each of them, but yt they be trans-formed and changed, after that manner
as we have said, that those things were to be trans-formed, which do symbolize
one with another. And seeing that Plato understands it after this manner,
there is no reason why Aristotle should reprehend him: for Aristotle himself
says, that those things are easily trans-formed that do (as ye Natural
Philosophers term it) symbolize one with the other.

6 Plato affirms, that Commonweals are altered out of Dialogo. 8. de Repub.
one kind of government into another, because they that govern them, regard
their own particular profit, more then the public commodity of the
Commonwealth. For because of their own private commodity, they marry Noble
men with some of the Comminaltie, and will have that some children in the
Commonwealth, should not follow the estimation and nobility of their fathers.
Plato proves this, saying, that Nature when she brings forth men, she
communicates the properties of Metals unto them: and gives the property of
Gold unto those which are apt to govern Nations: and to those that are
valiant and hardy, she communicates the property of silver, that they may
defend the Commonwealth: because she gives the noblest place in the
Commonwealth unto them that govern it. And for this cause, even as Gold is
the most excellent of all Metals, so the Art of governing a Commonwealth, is
the most excellent and worthiest Art of all. And as silver is esteemed Aristo.
lib. 1. cap. 2. Ethico.
most worthy of all Metals next unto gold: so they which defend the
Commonweal are chief, and pessesse the second place next to them that
govern it. But I do not believe that they which follow war, will consent
unto that which Plato says. But seeing that Arms little profit or avail
without the counsel of those which govern the Commonwealth, and though
Arms be necessarily required for the defense of the same: yet
notwithstanding, the science or art of governing and ruling Nations and
Countries, is very necessary in a well instituted Commonweal, as I writ
more at large in my Books of Military discipline. But to return to Plato, he
attributes the property of Iron and Copper, unto ye Mechanical Artificers
and handicrafts men: and he says furthermore, that they which mingle their
progenies and linages, marrying those that are of noble blood, with those that
are of the Comminaltie, are like unto those which mingle Gold with Silver,
Iron, or Copper: and that hence it proceeds, that the Nobility of th^se
which govern the Commonwealth diminish: and that the Nobility diminishing,
one government is changed into another. And because they which govern the
Commonwealth, should not mingle the property of Gold, with the property of
Silver or Iron, Plato would have, that every one should marry with one of his
own estate and quality: they that are of Noble blood, with Noble women, and
the Common People with the Comminaltie, laboring men with laborers, etc.

The Romans did not suffer any of the nobility to marie with any of the
Comminaltie. And certain of the people of the East Indies, observe this order,
that every one marieth an other that is of the same trade.

Plato affirms also, that the Commonweals change their Dialo. 8 de repub.
^. 1. Constat ergo in ciuitate vbi mendicos vides* mess fures latrones
sacrilegos, omniumque scelerum authors.
government, when they be full of poor creatures. For those Commonweals in
which many poor people live, are full of thieves and wicked persons, masters
and authors of all myschiefe and ribaldrie. That we might shun this
inconvenience so hurtful and prejudicial to the Commonwealth, Plato
cou^saileth us, that as the Bees suffer not the Drones which help not to make
honey, to eat of it: so ought they which govern the Commonwealth, not to
permit idle and vagabund poor folk to corrupt and spoil the Commonwealth,
maintayning their idle beggerie with the painful Citizens thrift. For such
people love new reformations, because they have hope through them, to find some
remedy for their poverty and misery. They Liuius decad. 3. lib. 3. Plebs
nouarum, vt solet, rerum auida.
desire to have seditious laws published of distribution of lands, from the
Citizens, portion meal, among all them that are in the City: as Tiberius
and Caius sons unto Gracchus would do in Rome, to win the hearts of the
Common People. Indeed Plato, to the end that the government of the
Commonweals might not be altered by reason of poverty, would have (that
according to the laws of Nature) all goods immoouable should be common: and
that those which govern the Co^mon-weales should divide and part those goods,
conformable to every one his necessity. This Commonwealth which Plato
instituteth, is as it were an Idaea of all other Commonweals, as I writ more
at large, in my book of civil and politic governments of Common*weales, in
the Treatise of lawful and honest assemblies.

8 Aristotle affirms, that rich men do alter and destroy Li. 4. Poli. ca. 13
Na^ seditiosi non sole^t esse pauperes, ijque omnes qui ad honores no^
conscendunt, nisi quis cos violet aut aliquam partem facultatu^ detrahat.
Commonweals more then poor men, because they that are wealthy and
ambitious, can prevail much, and they will not, nor know not how to obey the
Laws, whereas poor men are constrained-to do otherwise. And herein
Aristotle is not against that which Plato says: for Plato speaks not of
those poor men that can maintain themselves, with that which they get by
their own labor, and have wherewithal to succor and help themselves: for
these men are not able to change the estate of the Commonweal in which they
live, and being accustomed to maintain themselves with a little, and always
be occupied and employed in their business, they have no time nor leisure to
take so great a matter in hand. But if the people be oppressed, and
ouercharged with too many tributs, or cannot maintain themselves with that
which they get: then they find that which they cannot of themselves do, for
want of forces to execute it, in those which are able to disquiet the
Commonwealth, and change the government, and so with the help of the welthy
and ambitious people, seeing that they have more forces then their enemies,
they hope that they shall easily overcome them, and be delivered from those
troubles wherewith they be oppressed. So that the rich and ambitious men
disquiet the Commonwealth, because they are able, and the poor men are
compelled to alter the government, through the ignorance and small policy of
those that govern them. Who because they keep them not still employed, or
because they provide not such things for them as be needful to their
sustenaunce, or charge them with over many toles, give them occasion to
assemble together, and seek means by which they may change the gogernment
and disquiet the Commonwealth. This needs not to be declared by examples,
seeing it is known unto all men. Moreover, the government is soon changed in
that Commonwealth, in whith many idle and careless fellows live, though they be
not poor. For such fellows disquiet the Common wealth, and suffer none to live
quietly that dwell in it. And seeing they be never occupied in lawful
practices, and honest exercises, they are always ready to favor and assist
all factions and part-takings, that arise in the Commonwealth: they go up
and down the streets in all corners of the Town, persuading and alluring
men's children and servants, not to obey their fathers and masters, and
disquieting married folks, and those that live with that which they gain with
the sweat of their brows: lastly, they are instruments of all vices,
wickedness, and mischiefs that are committed in the Common-welth. And for this
cause is this Spanish proverb used. No estes ocioso, no biuiras deseoso.
that is, Otiosus semper viuit in deside^
From idleness betake thee,
So wishes will forsake thee.


Not much unlike unto the English proverb. Wishers and woulders, In Epist. ad
propinquos and amicos Dyonisij. Nulla legu^ vllarum potentia quieseere potest,
si cuncta in superfluos sumptus eroganda ciues existiment etc. E. Tulli. li. 3.
de legibus vita vic^uque mu^a^o mores mutari ciuitatum puto.

Are nere good householders.


Plato says also, that those Commonweals cannot continue long without
alteration of government, in which many live, that spend overmuch in banquets,
bravery, and other kind of pleasures and pastimes: for such people suffer not
those which govern, to minister justice equally to all men, and make any
mention concerning the reformation of dissolute manners Hence it does proceed,
that Civil governments are changed into Tirannies, and the Tyrannies into
Aristocracies or Democracies, according as the state is disposed, to be brought
into that government into which it does change: unto which the people does
easily agree. For as sick bodies take no rest in any place, because they have
the disease and sickness which troubles and disquieteth them, within
themselves; so those people which live spending more then they gain, in
riotousnes and supers^uities* without regarding what is belonging to honesty
and virtue, and what is most agreeable to their estate and calling, cannot
continue without altering and changing the government.

9 Plato following the opinion of Pythagoras, attributes the mutation of the
governments unto numbers, and he says: Lib, 8. de Repu.
that the consonancie and proportion which is in Music, does cause the
government of the Commonwealth, to change out of one estate into another.
Aristotle, because he will not leave his old custom in reprehending his
Master Plato, says, that the Pol. 5. cap. 12. In Platonis autem Politia
disseritur quidem de mutation* bus Reru^pub. a Socrate. Sed no^ recte
disputatur ^u^ presertim optimae reipub. (quae eadem prima est) non tradit quae
sit proptie mutatio. Marsilius Fiscinus in argum. D^alogi. 4.
alteration of government, does not depend upon harmony: for the government at
diverse times and for diverse causes, is altered without respecting ye
proportions of Music: unto this argument some answer, that Plato did not
intend to attribute the change of Regiments, to accords and consorts in
Music, but, even as in Music, if the consent of the Diatessaron, and the
consent of the Diapente, be joined together, they make the Diapason; so in
Commonweals and Empires, after that the principles, beginnings and means, be
joined together with the end, (which are the Diatessaron, and Diapente, with
the Diapason) they are losed and dissolved. And although Plato following the
opinion of Pythagoras, say, that one may know and divine of things to come by
numbers, which (the Greeks call (...), for as they that study the speculations
of Astrology, divine and foretell by the aspects of the Planets and signs of
the Zodiac: so the Pythagorians attributing unto every Planet and Sign, his
proper number, do guess and judge of things to come. And this Pythagoricall
doctrine, does Plato follow in his Timaeus, and in his Dialogues De republica,
as In somnio scipionis.
Macrobius, In somnio scipionis.
Ludouicus Viues, In libro de co^^^ribenda histo.
Johannes Bodimus, and In libro. de Diuinatione.
Gasper Pencerus declare) yet nevertheless, Plato his intention is not, to apply
the alteration of the government unto numbers, but to the fertility or
sterilite of the bodies: and for this cause, he will have, that they which
govern the Commonwealth, shall ordain and declare of what age men ought to
be when they marry, respecting the proportion which is between the beginning,
middle, and end, for by respecting or not respecting this, does the want and
superfluity of wits and bodies proceed. Plato. Dia. 4. de Repub. In Argument.
4. Dialo. Platonis de Republica.


Marsilius Fiscinus says, that Plato following Pythagoras, applies the number
of two and the number of eight unto justice: for as the number of two being
reduced in it self, to wit, two times twice two, does make the number of
eight, which on every side is equal: so justice ought to be equal unto all
men. The alteration of governments, comes not by reason of numbers, but of
the causes interior and exterior, and which be near and far of: for the
numbers neither essentiallie nor accidentiallie, have any power or property
at all, whereby men may know or divine what shall come to pass. But
Pythagoras imitating the Astrologians, would persuade those yt followed him,
that he told of things to come by numbers. The same may be said of
Arithmantia, and Geomantia, which in dividing are helped by Astrology. To
conclude, no man can August. de ciuitate Dei. lib. 11. cap. 30.
deny, but that numbers are very fit and apt, by them not only to signify
humane, but also divine things.

10 Moreover, the government of the Commonwealth, is also altered out of one
estate into auother, if the people be not exercised in warlike exploits: for ye
estate of Commonweal* in which the subjects be not brought up in Military
discipline, is subject to be overcome by every enemy who will take it, and
Plato. Dialo. 1. de legibus. Omnia bona eorum qui victi sunt* ad victores ilico
transeunt.
it must stand at the will and pleasure of him who overcomes it. A certain
Philosopher respecting this, said, that he should wish that our enemies were
rich, healthful and fair, and that they had no forces to defend themselves:
for if they be not able to withstand our forces, then their substance and
riches should serve us, and may be turned to our own uses.

After that King Xerxes had taken the great City of Babylon, he brought it
not into captivity, nor commanded them Arist. lib. 3. cap. 2. Politic. Quae
cum capta esset, fama est, tertio die, quanda^ partem v^^ is non sensisse.
that lived in it to be slain: but to be revenged of them he ordained and
commanded, that they should not exercise themselves in feats of Arms, or
practice any Martial affairs, but that they should employ themselves in
playing upon Instruments, singing and dancing: and that they should be
Jesters, Tauerners, vitlers and pot-companions: and that they should give
themselves to all kind of sportes and pleasant pastimes, that they could
devise: and by this means he made the people of that City, which had been
so famous and renowned through out all the world, in short time to become
weak, and of no account.

11 Plato affirms, that the Laws and ordinances of the Quem eitat Caelius
Rhodoginus ^^, ^, cap, ^^. antiqua^^ lectionu^. Tibiae in disciplin^
recipiendae no^ sunt, nec aliud artificiosum instrumentu^, vt est cithara,
verum quae auditores effici^ot bones. Pla. Dialo. 2. de legibus. In Egipto
iuuenes bonis figuris and bonis cantibus assuescunt, quae vero and qualiasint
huiusmodi, in sacris ab eis est institutu^. 1. Reg. 10. Habebis giege^
prophetar^ descende^^ium de excelso, and ante eos Psalterium and timpanum et
^biam et citaram ipsosque prophetantes. Psalm, 7. 4. Reg. 3. Quin. lib. 1. cap.
17. vt iidem musici and vates and sapientes iudicare^tur. Vbi supra. Musicam
Natura ipsa videtur ad tolerandos facilius labores velut mune^i nobis dedisse.
Caelius Rhodoginus lib. 5. cap. 22. antiqu. lectionum. Bartholomeus de Albornos
in proaemio lib. de contractibus.
Commonwealth change and alter, if that the music which is used in them be
changed: and that, to shun so dangerous a loss and detriment, they that
govern Commonwealths, ought not to suffer any new kind of Music to be
brought into them: for the manners and customs of the people change when
Music alters. Aristotle counsels those that are desirous to be virtuous,
not to use any kind of Music or Instruments, which may allure and entice them
to wickedness. The Laws of Egypt suffered not, as Plato says, any thing to be
sung within Egypt, unless they which governed the Commonwealth, had first
examined the thing to be sung, and with what Music they should sing it. It is
likely that it would be very profitable for every Commonwealth, not to
allow songs and ballads or Music to be sung in the City, which may entice
men to dishonestie, and it were very good that, that diligence which
Magistrates take in suffering no books to be printed, or pictures to be
drawn, that may endomage or hurt the state of the Realm, were also had, in
examining those kinds of Music and ditties, which are used in the
Commonwealth: for Music being a divine gift, which easily moves mortal
hearts, if men were accustomed to sing holy Psalms and honest Sonets, it
would no doubt, draw men from following of vanity and wickedness, to embrace
virtue and honesty. In ancient times past, the Priests and Prophets, to
apply themselves the better to divine things, used Music, as King David did,
and the Prophet Elizeus, and among the Gentiles, Prophets and Philosophers were
Musitions. How forcible Music is to move the hearts of men, may be seen in
children, who when they cry, are appeased and quieted with Music: and in men
also upon whom God bestowed (as Quintilian says) the benefit of Music, with
it the more easily to forget their labors, and by it to be persuaded to do
that which is sung unto them. And for this cause diverse kinds of Music
applied to that which is sung, is used in feasts, plays, banquets, wars,
solemnities and funerals. The Poets feigned that Amphion and Orpheus, two great
Musitions of Thracia, with the sweet harmony of their Music, builded the
walls of their Country, drawing after them stones, trees, and beasts. These
fained fables (which ordinarily betoken some thing misticallie contained in
them) give us to understand, that the Philosophers which first established the
liberal Sciences, policies and precepts for civil behavior, and learning in
their Countries, did with their sweet voice and learned tongues, persuade the
rude and rusticall people, (which did not much dyffer from stones, plants, and
beasts) to leave their savage kind of life, and reform their wild and
brutish customs: and so brought them under Laws and pollitique government. But
not to wade too far from the purpose, let us return unto Plato, who though he
affirm that it is a thing very dangerous for the government of each estate,
that Music should be altered in the Commonwealth, (for by it the customs be
altered, which being altered, the government is soon changed.) Nevertheless,
Lib. 2. de legibus. Ego autem nec tam valde id timendum, nec plane conte^nendum
puto. and lib. 3. Plato ait Musicorum cantib^ mutatis, mutati ciuitatum status.
Dialogo. 2. Delegibus. Vt in ciuitate iuuenes bonis figuris and bonis cantibus
assueseant. Plato. Dialo. 8. de Repub. Arist. Poli. 5. Plutarch. In vita
Romulj. Dialogo. 5. de legibus. Lucanus. In sua victrices conuertunt visce^a
dextias. Politic. 3.
Tullie affirms, that this needs not to be so much feared, (but yet not
contemned.) But we must understand, that which Plato says, after the same
order as Aristotle does, to wit, of that Music which enticeth men to
dishonest and vicious actions: as may be gathered out of that which Plato
says, that the Governors and Priests of Egypt, did examine those pictures
and Poemes, which in Egypt were painted and sung, to the end that honesty and
virtue should be greatly regarded in them.

12 The government of a Commonwealth is also changed by factions, divisions
of people in sundry opinions, scismes, and partialities: and even as
terrestrial bodies grow and perish: and when there is no outward thing that
corrupts the^, they consume of themselves by reason of some inward
corruption: even so Commonweals, when they have no foreign enemies, they
Arm and prepare enemies among themselves at home, to destroy one another. The
Emperor Charles the fifth, said, that as the rust does eat up the iron, and
the worms the fruit of the earth, so divisions do disquiet and destroy the
whole Commonwealth, and alter the government. And this manner of alteration of
governments, is the most dangerous of all: for as Plato says, it is a most
grievous sickness, which destroieth and makes many fameus Cities desolate,
which with their own weapons wage war against themselves. factions and
deuisions grew, as Aristotle says, either because there are but few, that be
partakers of the government and honors Aristo. vbi supra. Cum multitudo animos
sustulit quod pari virtute sit praedita. Non nulli magni viti neque inferiores
virtute etc. A^j nimium tenues sant, a^j locupletes. Si quis magnus sit,
possitque crescere, aut cum aliquis vi^i nomine digous, non adipiscitar honores.
in the Commonwealth, whereas there be many that deserve to be admitted to the
government, or because they that are honest and virtuous, and deserve to be
esteemed, be nothing set by, nor admitted to bear any Office: or because seem
be over rich, and other very poor: or because there is seem man in the
Commonwealth who is greatly favored of the people, and has great
authority, whereby he pretends to rule and govern all. This manner of
changing the government, is commonly seen in those Co^mon-weales, in which
there are mighty persons, that take occasion to profit themselves by the
weakness of those Princes which be cowards and faint hearted, or but children
under protection and custody of Tutors and Gouerners: for such men procure
that place which is nearest to the Princes to usurp their power, and command
all.

The same manner of alteration is also seen in Commonweales, wherein be many
ambitions persons, who against all reason and justice disquiet them, either
because they will not pay that which they owe, as Julius Caesar did, when he
tyrannized over the Monarchy of Rome, or because they intend to rob the
Commonwealth, whilst the tirannie of those which disquiet it does continue,
as they of Roane did in the time of Guaginus in vita caroli sexti Fra^corem
regis.
Charles the sixth of that name, King of France, choosing a Citizen to be a
King, that under ye color and pretense they might freely rob and spotle: or
because the desire of rule (as Cornelius Tacitus says) is the greatest desire
of all. And it makes Lib, 15. Cupido Domina^di cunctis affectibus flagrantior
est.
them that pretend to be Kings (as Euripides says) not to regard any thing
that either the divine or humane Laws command: affirming that to obtain a
Kingdom, they may violate any Law, according to the Castilian proverb. Por
ser rey se quiebra toda ley.
To win a crown,
All Laws go down.


Not much unlike unto that which Euripides says, Si violandum est ius, imperii
causa violandu^ est. If the Law may he transgressed, it may be trans-gressed
for a kingdom. Which sentence of Euripides liked Julius Caesar so well, that
he repeated it oftentimes, and in tirannizing the Commonweal did follow it.

13 The ambitious which pretend to govern against reason and justice, do
commonly imitate Absolon, when he conspired Phillippus. de la Torre, in
institutione principis Christiant. 2 Regum, 1. 2. Regum, 15.
against his father David. Which Absolon, to bring that to pass which he
desired, found no better means nor readyer way then to hear the complaints
of the people, and to provide for their necessities. He received and
entertained them very curteoustie that came to speak with him and salute him:
and he asked them whence they were, yea he embraced and kissed the^. And to
reconcile them unto him, and alienate them from his Father, he said unto them,
your cause is just, but my Father is so negligent and careless in governing
his people, that he has not yet appointed any man to hear you: he said also,
if it pleased God that I should reign in Israel, I would hear al your
causes, and decide your controversies, and I would do justice unto every man.
Such men take advantage by the ignorance and small skill of the rude people,
who are always ready and prompt (as Cornelius Tacitus says) to follow the
worst, and Lib, 15. Vulgus ad dete^^ora promptum. Matthew, 27. Que^ vultis vobis
de duob' dimitti, illi dixetrunt, Barrabam.
wish that he should live, who goes about to kill them; and that he should die,
that means to save their lives, as the Jews did, when they cried to Pilat
that he should crucify our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and deliver
Barabas unto them.

These and such like policies are used by the ambitious, when they
tirannouslie usurp any kingdom, with which wicked slight they win the
favor and hearts of the Common people, that with their help, they may execute
that which they wickedlie pretend and greedily wish for: for the malice of a
few and the ignorance of many, have always disquieted the Commonweals.

14 There is no reason, why Aristotle should reprehend his Master Plato,
because in writing how governments are changed, he set not down the
especial and particular cause, for the best government of all, is changed into
another, and the reason which Plato uses, (to wit, that all created things
do alter in time) does not prove the especial and proper cause of the
alteration of the best government into an other. That Aristotle has no reason
in this, may be manifestly seen, in yt it was not Plato his intent, in his
books De repub. to entreat of ye particular and especial causes why
governments alter: but of the universal and common causes: for as strong and
healthful bodies fall sick for common causes: so Commonweals (which are
mixed bodies) are trans-formed and changed by common causes. The reuolutions of
the heavens, suffer nothing to continue still without corruption that are under
the Orde of the Moon, but all are subject to alteration and corruption:
especially because those that rule and govern Commonweals are free agents,
though notwithstanding some say, that seeing that those which govern the
Commonwealth, are not necessary but free Agents, the natural Agents ought not
to be respected: for this does not hinder that some governments are more easily
transformed and changed into others, because they be more ready and more
disposed to be trans-formed into some, then into others, whether the causes for
which they be trans-formed and changed be universal or particular. And that
Plato in his Books De Repub did not set down the particular causes why
Commonweals were changed: it was, because he imagining and sayning a
certain Commonwealth (the Idea whereof is that, which he writ in his books
De Repub.) he needed not to set down the particular causes why Commonweals
do alter, seeing that the universal cause suffiseth. So that as in healthful
and sound bodies, the general causes suffice to alter their health and
soundnes: so in a perfect Common-welth, the reuolutions of the heavens do
suffice to alter and change them: and Plato, seeing he entreated not
particularly of one especial kind of government, but generally of the Idaea
or example of all Commonweals: he needed not to set down the especial and
particular causes, why the governments change and alter: for seeing, as we have
said, that those which change them are free Agents, it suffised to set down
the general and common causes for to show how they are changed, because the
particular and special causes of the alteration of governments, though they
proceed from free Agents, yet they be reduced unto common and universal
causes. By this is concluded, that though the Kingdom and Tyranny be
contraries, and (as Aristotle says) differ greatly, yet nevertheless, a
kingdom is sooner Lib. 8. Ethicor.
trans-formed and changed into a Tyranny, then into an Aristocracie, or
Democracie, for they are more distant and separated from the kingdom, then the
Tyranny which is under the same kind, in which the kingdom is. Hereby may we
cleerlie perceive, that Aristotle would rather find sault with his Master Arist
ad Plato. accestit annos natus quindecim mansitque in eius schola annos
viginti, hoc est vsque ad Platonis mortem: test Ludouico V^ue in Commentar. ad
August. de ciuitate Dei lib. 8. cap. 12.
Plato, (as he does in many other things) then to solow and declare that which
he learned of him in the space of twenty years, in which time he was his
Scholar.

15 And that all men may understand, that there was no cause why Aristotle
should reprehende his Master Plato, touching the kinds and diversities of
Commonweals; they ought to presuppose, that Plato in his Books De republica,
sets down the Idaea and form of a well instituted Commonwealth, and in his
Dialogue De regno, he sets down an Idaea or example of a good and just King:
and conformable unto yt which he treats, he does distinguish the kinds or
diversities of the Commonweals: respecting both the subject and the intent of
those that govern them. The subject is, that those which govern be one, a
few, or many: the end is, that the Commonwealth should be well governed: and
the intent is, that thing which they which rule them do principally pretend.
And the more these kinds of Commonweals do imitate the Idaea which Plato
sets down, the better they be, and the less Bartholo. Caualcante discursu
4. In tractatu de Republica.
they imitate them, the worse they be. Plato says, that they be the worse,
because he speaks not of corrupt Commonweals, and naughty governments, but
of good Commonweals, and those which imitate the Idaea which he sets down:
and respecting those Commonweals which are well governed, of which be spoke,
he erred not, in saying, that those Commonweals which were most like to his
Idaea, were the best: and that those which did less resemble it were not so
good, though Aristotle 4. Polite. 2. Nec populare genus aliud alio melius esse
recte dicitur, sed minus malum dicendu^ est.
reprehending him, says, that the corrupted Commonweals are not better, some
then other, but that they are less naught some then others. But Plato says
well, for he makes no comparison of corrupted Commonweals (for he
accounts not that a Commonweal, which is corrupted) but of good
Commonweals of which he speaks: and because the kingdom Plato. in Dialo.
civilly vel de reg.
or Monarchy is most like unto his Idaea of good government, he says, that it
is the best polity of all, and that the Democracie because it is most
separated from his Idaea of good government, then all the other, it is the
worst polity of all: and that of all Plato. vbisupra.
Commonweals that are well governed, the Democracie is the worst: and of all
Commonweals that are naughtilie governed it is the best. Plato says this,
because seeing that all Commonweals are ill governed, they which live in that
Commonwealth which is governed by the people, are more free, Aristo. Polit
lib, 5. cap. 9. Lib. 3, 4, and 5, Politicorum. Plat. In dialo. de Republica, de
legibus et in civilly vel de regno, et Arist, Polit. lib 3 cap. 5. Mutatur
potestas in tyra^nidem, ea quae est in optimatu^ potestate in eam cui p^uci
praesunt, et ea quae a populo g^ritur, in eam quam communi omnium nomine
R^mpublica^ appell^ri diximus. Ide^ asserit Plutarchus, in lib. detribus
generibus Reipublicae. Pro Planctio. Plutar. in vita Demosthenis. Lib. 8. de
Republica. Polit. lib, 5. cap. 6, vt supra, huius eiusde^ discursus. 12. Ex quo
Aristote. loco Seb^sti^nes E^zzo hae^ded^cit, in tractatu de discurs. ciuilibus.
and less oppressed by those that rule and govern them. And understanding
that which Plato says after this manner, all Aristotle's arguments and
objections which he brings against him, concerning the governments, and
trans-formations of Commonweals, are vain: and in effect, Plato said the
same which Aristotle, to wit, that the most principal and cheifest kinds or
diversities of government are three, the Monarchy, Oligarchie, and Democracie:
and that the Monarchy is the best government, and the Democracie the worst, by
reason of the inconstancy and small skill of the people. Tullie affirms, that
the Sea has not so many tempests, dangers and troubles, as the peoples
election has, in which they choose, ordain and establish Officers and
Magistrates to rule and govern them. Demosthenes said, that if he had known
the malicious defractions, forged crimes, and crafty inventions, unto which
they that bear Office in the Commonweals, which are ruled by the people, are
subject: and that two ways had been showed him, the one, to be an Officer and
Partaker of the government, and ye other, to incur present death: that he
would rather have chosen that way in which there was danger of death, then to be
in Office, in a Democracie or Commonwealth governed by the people.

16 The regiments are trans-formed and changed, some into others according to
the opinion of Plato, the Monarchy and Kingdom, into the Aristocracie, (which
he calls the ambitious government, because they that govern, desire and
covet honors:) the Aristocracie, is translated into the Oligarchie, which is
when a few govern, whose principal intent is, to be rich: this estate is not
so good as the ambitious government, for honor and glory is preferred before
riches: and the Oligarchie is changed into the Democracie. Aristotle says,
that governments are altered, either because they which prevail most, and are
of greatest power, oppress the people, or because they which are rich and of
greatest authority, will not suffer others, though they be rich and honored,
to govern the Commonwealth: or because there are factions and partialities
among those that govern, which of them shall be the cheifest: or because they
that govern, will expel others that do govern, from the government: or
because some of those that govern, take advantage by the favor of the people,
for to tyrannize over the Commonwealth. Polibius is of that opinion, that me^
after they assembled together, lived polliticklie in civil government, and
choose some that had most credit and authority Plat. vbi supra. EX quo patet
tyrannum ex radice tutoris nasci, and Arist. Polit. 5. cap. 5. maxima fere ex
part veteres tyranni etc. vt supra.
among them, to rule and defend them. And these afterward of Tutors and
defenders, became Traitors and Tyrants, and the cheifest of the^ not being able
to suffer the tyranny of those their naughty Governors, dispossessed the^ of
the government, and translated it unto themselves, making it an Aristocracie,
which kind of government was after the same order in time trans-formed into an
Oligarchie. This discourse of Polibius, concerning the alteration and
transmutation of Commonweals, is like to that which some men say of riches
and poverty, affirming that poverty makes men laborious, industrius, and
glad to travail and take pains, by which diligence and industry, they
attain to riches, by them they become vicious and wicked, and so by reason of
their wickedness, at length they fall into poverty again: which constrains
them to take pains and be industrius as they were before. The change of ye
government, Polit. 5. cap. 6.
(as Aristotle says) comes by reason that they which govern are very
absolute in commanding, nothing regarding Iuuenalis, Sic volo, sic ^ubeo, stat
pro ratione voluntas.
reason or justice: but altogether tendering their own particular and private
commodity, and herein differ Kings from Tyrants, and a good regiment from a
bad.

17 And to conclude, the government in Commonweals Cor. Tacit. lib. 21, honor
sacerdotij firmamentum potentiae assumebatur.
are also changed and altered, by sects and new Religions: for nothing does
more maintain the estate of the Common-welth then Religion, and for this cause
they that will usurp any Kingdom or Monarchy, take advantage by Religion,
for with it they draw the people to obey them, wherewith they disquiet the
Commonweals, and all customs are broken, and factions, seismes, partialities,
and dissentions are brought in: as may be seen in those that have brought in
new sects, and altered good customs into badde, under pretense of Religion. As
Mahomet, Sabel. Aenead. 8. lib. 6. Idem Aennead. 11. lib. 6.
who with his wicked sect infected all the Arabians, the Xequi Ismael, with
interpreting the Alcoran after a new manner, brought in the Empire, which the
Kings of Persia now hold.

In the time of the Emperor Alonso King of Castile, a certain Valerius
Historiarum scholast. lib. 3. tit. 4.
man in Afric called Aldemon, son unto a Gentleman, did rebel, because an
other Moore, that was one of his companions, and a great Astrologian, very
well skilled in his Art, had told him that he should once become a mighty
man, so that this same Astrologian began throughout all Afric, to preach and
declare the Alcoran, praising his fellow and companion Aldemon, and making all
the people to believe, that he should be a great Lord, and thereby he gathered
such a company together which followed Aldemon, that it was a wonderful matter
to behold them: and at length the matter was brought to that pass, that
Aldemon with all them that followed him, fought a battle with Alboachi King
of Arabia, (who at that time was Lord over Affricke,) and ouerthrewe him, and
slew him in the conflict: and so Aldemon was made King of Arabia, and Lord of
Affricke. The Anabaptists and such other pestilentiall Lambertus 3. Hort^
nsius in li. tumultuum Anabaptistarum.
Heretics, by misconstruing the holy Scripture, and sophisticallie expounding
Gods word, have infected many places with their pernicious sect, and caused
many alterations and hurlie-burlies in diverse Countries, not without the great
hurt and loss of many Christians. King Jeroboam builded a Temple, and in it
set up a golden Calfe, making himself high Priest of Idolatry: which he
did, because by his own example 3. Regum. 12.
he should draw the people to commit Idolatry, that committing Idolatry, the
ten Tribes which had rebelled against Roboam King of Jerusalem, should not
return again unto their Lord to serve him. That new sects and herisies might
not disquiet Dion. lib. 54. Religionis nouae praetextu multi res nouas
moliuntur. 10. De legibus.
the Common-welth, Mecenas counseled Augustus Caesar, that he should not
permit any new Religion to be brought into the Commonwealth: and Plato said,
that they which go about to alter any thing concerning Religion, and think
not well of it, ought to be put in prison and severely punished, and no man
ought to be suffered to communicate with them.

18 Lastly King Solomon says, that Commonweals are translated from one
people to another, because of unrighteous Ecclesiast. 10.
dealing and wrongs, and riches gotten by deceit. He says also, Proverb. 29.
that when the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice, but when the
wicked bears rule, the people sigh, and when Proverb. 28.
the wicked rise up, men hide themselves, but when they perish the righteous
increase. And in the prosperity of the righteous, Proverb. 11.
the City rejoices, and when the wicked perrish, there is joy. If therefore
many Princes succeed in the Kingdom either because of the sins of the people,
or because they that bear rule, are slow and negligent in ministering
justice: that Prince which does justice equally unto all men, without
exception of Deuteronomy. 1. Nulla erit distinctio personarum, and actuum. cap. 10.
Deus non est acceptor personarum.
persons, shall make his inheritance perpetual: for justice is the foundation
of every Kings throne and royal seat. Finally, GOD does often permit,
that kingdoms be translated out of one government into another by lawful
succession, both for his own glory, and augmentation of his holy service,
and also for the reparation and amplification of Christian Religion.

FINIS.

