A SERMON PREACHED TO THE NOBELY-DESERVING GENTLEMAN, SIR THOMAS WARNER: And
the rest of his Company: Bound to the West Indies. For their FAREVVELL:

At St. Buttolphs, Aldersgate, London. September. 6. 1629.

BY JOHN FEATLY, Preacher of the Word of GOD.

LONDON: Printed for Nicholas Bourne, at the South entrance of the Royal
Exchange. 1629.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JAMES Earl of Carlisle, etc. Count Palatine of the
Province of CARLISLE, etc.
Right Honorable:
DVtie becomes disguised, where it wants the substance of Integrity: and this
loses it self, when ignorant of expression. Great Personages are often cloyed
(as with the verbal expressions, so) with the hypocrisy of those that tender
them. But my self am become the exception against that common rule; and I dare
with as bold a Confidence convict, as slight the Opposer. My bowing-heart has
bin always steeped in desire to present the Pledge of an humble observance to
your Lordship: But remaining guilty of my weakness, here I sue for assistance
by a Noble Protection.

The Sermon it self is the Defenders of the faith; and though brief, yet
orthodoxall. If any carpe at it, peradventure it may prove a Mansenile-apple,
(whereof I have seen diverse in the Indies) that blisters the Tongues of them
that taste.

The Noble worth of my deserving Commander, Sir Thomas Warner, made me a
Traveler into the Indies, being thereby the first Preacher upon Saint
Christophers Islands. And your Lordships unvalued Goodness and Patronage of
those Parts, has now commanded this Sermon to travel into the Censure of each
Peruser: If it suffer by a Martyrdom, yet the Author shall ever appear

Your Lordships humbly and faithfully-deuoted, IO. FEATLY.

A SERMON PREACHED TO THE West-Jndia Company.
JOSH. 1.9. Have not I commanded thee? Only be strong, and of a good courage:
Be not afraid, neither be dismayed: for I will be with thee whithersoeuer thou
go.


MY Text speaks in Thunder; and like the rowsing Drum beats an Alarm: Joshua
is the Commander, the Israelites his Soldiers, and the Inhabitants of the Land
of Promise are the Enemies whose destruction is threatened by the God of War.
Here are Judgments to be executed, and furious Anger to be fed with the Blood
of a Nation, and the desolation of a Country. The dismal day of a grim
destruction, that must speak in the fiercest language of horror and amazement,
is now hard at hand. And that the Time it self may (as it were) stand still
till the gasping groans of dying men have mystied the Air, and their foamy
blood disfigured the Earth, the Sun shall seem unjust to the conquered
wretches, when each minute of unexpected Misery shall appear more tedious then
an Age of common Sorrows.

The Israelites, after a tyring and long continued Journey, grow so weary, that
their faint limbs are now as desirous of Rest, as before their scorching
Thirst desired Water: Yet, lest they should enjoy their Pleasures, before their
Miseries had prepared a sufficient relish for them, they must not yet enter
into their earthly Bliss: For behold their Commander is dead; and what greater
Affliction could strike them dumb with ouer-cloyed Sorrow, then the loss of
him, who should lead them to their Rest? yet to the end that they might know
that he that commanded their Ruler, commands them to behold his Providence and
Care over them; Moses is dead, (says he, ver. 2. of this Chap.) But what
follows? Now therefore arise Joshua, go over this Jordan, thou and all this
People, unto the Land which I do give unto them.

And lest the People should suspect their Generals Commission, it is given him
by the King of Kings, in the 5, 6, 7, and 8. verses, but especially in the
former and later words of my Text: Have not I commanded thee? and I will be
with thee whithersoeuer thou go. Yea, and to the intent that Joshua should
not be ignorant of his duty required, the Almighty (as it were) puts in the
Conditions, Only be strong, and of a good courage; Be not afraid, neither be
dismayed.

Thus is my Text the complete Commission: Have not I, etc. The words imply a
Voyage to make war upon a rejected Nation: I may therefore peradventure
incur the rigid Censures of diverse here present, whose homebred Security
desires to nuzle it self in the sweet repose of a happy Peace. And may the God
of Peace preserve our Kingdom in the Bond of Peace and Quietness till our
Saviors second Coming. Yet I am sure of Others that hear me this day, which
cannot dislike the Subject of my ensuing Sermon. My Text was chosen for some of
us most particularly, whose occasions command us to take leave of our Native
Soil, that we may possess the Land of the Hittites and Amorites, the
Habitations of Saluage-Heathens, whose understandings were never yet
illuminated with the knowledge of their Maker. Yet will we not ingrosse the
whole hours discourse: For I presume (by Gods assistance) that my Meditations
shall be acceptable to All, and the use profitable: for every one ought to
desire and endeavor that his Actions might be seconded with divine Blessings,
if he desire what he ought: Which he alone can do, whose approbation we must
implore, that so we may hear him speaking unto us, as to Joshua in my Text.

The words (you see) are full of authority, and contain in them thus much
Variety: 1. The great Commander: I: God. wherein, 1. The Commission and
Authority he gives to Joshua: Have not I commanded, etc. Wherein observe 1.
His Power, included in the Majesty of his speech. 2. His providence and care
over his People, to give them Joshua.
2. A Promise. wherein 1. The Promise it self; to Joshua, upon his trusty
Service: I will be with thee. 2. The large extension of it: Whithersoeuer thou
go. Be strong, and of a good courage. Be not afraid, neither be dismayed.

2. The Person commanded, Joshua: in whom is required a Duty. 1. Affirmative.
2. Negative.




First of the first General, the Commander: and therein of the Commission: in
which Gods great Power, included in the Majesty of his Speech. Have not I
commanded thee?
EArthly Authority deriues it self from the Omnipotency, and ceases to be
imperial when it forgets the Author thereof. Non est Potestas nisi a Deo; and
quae sunt Potestates, sunt a Deo ordinatae (says Saint Paul, Romans 13.1.) There
is no Power, but of God; and the Powers that are made, are ordained of God.
Here then Joshua stands justified, whose Command knew no other donor then the
great Commander of Heaven and Earth. And again, here God himself confutes the
Epicures, by his own language, making use of his Potencie in the words of my
Text. Could any man here question his All-sufficient Power in doing whatsoever
he pleases, the majesty of his words would control the petulancy of such
blind folly: Have not I commanded thee? I that sit in the high and holy place,
to judge those Miscreants, that dare question mine Authority. I, that have
created all things out of nothing, that nothing might hinder them from knowing
their Creator. I, that threaten in Thunder, when unjust Mortals, following
their own wickedness, provoke my fury to throw vengeance upon their
disobedience. I, that control the whole Fabric of Nature, and can blow it
away with the breath of my displeasure. Have not I commanded thee? The Majesty
of his Style is a strong argument of the Sufficiency of his Power, against all
that deny it. To read his Judgments upon the Israelites in their Journey, for
their stubborn Murmurings, would command the Peruser to a confident belief of
his Justice. To behold the Plagues he sent upon K. Pharaoh and all Egypt, would
make the heathens themselves determine of his Prerogatiue-royall. Yea, and to
observe his infinite store of several Punishments for perverse Sinners, would
make the stubbornest offender acknowledge it sufficient when he shall say Have
not I commanded thee? Let Joshua then stand undaunted, and the glory of the
Creator dispell the Clouds of Fear that might possess his Heart, for it is
the great Jehovah that commands him. It will not (I suppose) be impertinent
here to instruct the ignorant in this Attribute of God, which is defined to be
the essential property of God, whereby he can and may work whatsoever is
agreeable to his nature; Yet that the Power of God has several acceptions.

First it is taken for the Eternal Son of God, Jesus Christ our Savior, (as
in 1 Cor. 1.24.) We preach Christ the Power of God. Secondly, for the Gospel
of Christ, (so Romans 1.16.) I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is
the Power of God unto salvation. Thirdly Catachrestically, The Samaritanes
called Simon Magus the Power of GOD, (Acts 8.10.) To whom they all gave heed,
from the least unto the greatest, saying, This man is the great Power of God.
Fourthly, and truly, It is taken for the essential Property of God, which
belongs to the Trinity.
Yet, to avoid all erroneous mistaking herein, we must have a care to
distinguish between the Essentiall-Power of God, (now spoken of) and the
Personall-Power: As the Power of Begetting, in the Father; the Power of being
Begoten, in the Son; and the Power of Proceeding, in the Holy Ghost.

And again, we must distinguish between the absolute and the actual
Omnipotency of God; yet both remaining active. The former is such whereby God
can perfectly do whatsoever may be done, as well praeter and super naturam,
besides and above nature, as with it: exemplified in making Elizabeth conceive
in her old age, and the like: for with God all things are possible, Luke 1.37.
The latter is that whereby he not only can do whatsoever he determines; but
can do it with a word, without any difficulty, and nothing may or can resist
him. From the former of these arises a question, Whether God can bring to
pass things against Nature, styled Impossibilities? To which we must
distinguish between Impossibilia naturae, and Impossibilia natura, Things
impossible of Nature to be done, which fly beyond the common pitch thereof, as
to make the Sun stand still; or cause the fire not to burn, which we read
of in the Scriptures; And things impossible in Nature, which are against the
definition of a thing, as it is Ens: as to make a thing simply and really to
be, and not to be at the same instant, which is utterly and absolutely
impossible. By this latter the Papists are convicted, which maintain the
Transubstantiation of Bread, into the very fleshly Body of Christ, and make the
very individual Body in several places at once. Thus much then for the
Positive knowledge; Give me leave only to clear 2 or 3 objections, and so I
shall conclude it.

First then in Genesis 18.17. the Lord said, Can I hide from Abraham the thing
which I do? (as some Translations read it) which may seem to deny his
Omnipotency: This is easily answered by the word, which is in the future tense,
and our last Translation justly renders it, Shall I hide? Or if the former were
true, yet it would be per (...), not that God could not hide from Abraham the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha, but in the ardencie of his affection, that
he was so good that he would not.

Secondly, Genesis 19.22. When God commanded Lot to fly to Zoar, he spoke in these
words, Haste thee, escape thither, for I cannot do any thing till thou escape
thither: therefore the Omnipotency may seem to be questioned: But to this it
is answered, that God said he could not, because his Council was
unchangeable, and he had before determined the escape of just Lot.

Thirdly and lastly, Because God cannot lie, nor sin, nor be deceived, nor
dye, therefore some would question his all-sufficient Power: But to this S.
Austine answers, Ita haec non potest, vt potius si posset, minoris esset
potestatis. Could he admit of these things, it would instead of improuing,
lessen his Power. He is called Omnipotent, because he can do what he will, and
not suffer what he will not; for that would prove a passiue-Power in God, which
we absolutely deny to be in him, and acknowledge only that which is active.

Thus have I, as briefly as I might, waded through the first particular,
considered in Joshua's Commission, viZ. the Power of God, included in the
Majesty of his Speech: Now follows.

The Providence of GOD, pointed out in his Care which he had over his People,
in giving them Joshua, Thee: Have not I commanded thee.
Corruption vnius est generatio alterius, say the Philosophers. The Corruption
of one thing, is the Generation of an other. The Seed in the ground quickens
by death. The Ashes of the Phoenix produces another Bird. And as in them, so
likewise in Authority: Moses being dead, Joshua succeeds. Thus will the Word of
God ever have the Truth to support it. He promised the Land of Canaan to the
Israelites, whose Commander being dead, (lest they should rowte themselves with
a Mutiny, to dash their hopes,) Joshua, is placed over them by Divine
Authority. Thus was the Providence of God as well manifested in this, as in
former passages touching the Israelites. His Providence (I say) which that I
may briefly handle, I shall consider therein,

First, What it is in the largest extent, viz. The Administration of the
All-mighty, whereby he did create, and does, and will govern, and preserve by
his Word, all his Creatures in general, but more especially Those that believe
in his Word, to whom he gives the Holy Ghost for their Protector. Other
definitions I need not oppress you with, lest I should become tedious.

Secondly, we must consider How we may know that there is such a Providence.

Which is manifested 1. By the order of things visible. 2. By the consideration
of God in himself. 3. By his Governing of all things, manifestly appearing. 4.
By his Word, wherein in diverse places he has made it evidently apparent.


Thirdly, The Causes are to be weighed; which are Three, viZ.

1. The Mercy of GOD. 2. The Promise of GOD. 3. The Goodness and Love of GOD.
Fourthly. The Sorts of it, which are two, viz.

1. General, whereby GOD preserues all things in general. 2. Special,
whereby he does more particularly tender the Faithful.
Fifthly and lastly, The Effects of it, which are twofold, viz.

1. General, to Create, Govern, Preserve, Cherish, and Defend us. 2.
Special, to his own Elect, in giving them his holy Spirit as a Preserver, and
in caring both for their Souls and Bodies.
Thus you see here Gods especial Providence over the Children of Israel, his
chosen People, who for his Mercie-sake, his Promise-sake, and through his Love,
would not suffer them to wander up and down without a Guide; but upon the
death of Moses, he puts Joshua in his stead, and gives him his Charge, with an
Encouragement, Have not I commanded thee?

Wheresoever GOD lays an Iniunction, he cannot, nay, he will not endure any
Contradiction. His Authority will not be questioned, therefore his will must
be obeyed. Have not I commanded thee? True, yet this Command is loving too, and
out of that affection which he had both to the People and to Joshua, whom he
first instructed, and then preferred.

I could here remember the forwardness of our Times, wherein some, not knowing
the burden of Authority, think themselves happy to wear the favor of a
Title, yet remaining ignorant in the duty attending it. Honor was never more
then a blast, which whistleth up and down, and rather studieth Fashions then
Goodness: it is indeed a mere Ignis fatuus, leading men out of the right way,
and yet shining as bright as if it meant no deceit. This Age is as well read
in Titles, as any ever was in former times; but whether they have all had their
Authority from the Almighty, (as Joshua in my Text) with their Commission from
Heaven, running in the Style of my Theme, Have not I commanded thee? I
question whether I may question. Great Persons in Honor, I am sure, are
sometimes but like to the Line of an Anglerod: the Cork is the Honor, floting
on the top of the Water, yet giving notice where the Bait is, which must catch
that Fish, which we commonly in our language call Vice. There are several
kinds thereof: Sometimes Adultery nibbles at the Bait; oftentimes
Covetousness; but for the most part Pride: But where Desert challenges the
preferment of Honor, the Lead so peizes the Cork, that it is just between
floating and sinking, yet not enclining to one more then the other. He that
thus considers with himself of the Honor he has gotten; not purchased, but
merited, shall not only have his Commission with Joshua, Have not I commanded
thee? but shall likewise have the Promise with Joshua too, I will be with thee
whithersoeuer thou go. Which is

The second part of the first general: and therein first of the Promise it
self, I will be with thee.
THe power of Vbiquity belongs to the Deity only; and determines that Person
to be most irreligiously ignorant that dares a contradiction. That Spirit
which in the beginning moved upon the waters, will wash the Perverse into the
extremity of Judgment, unless the preue^tion of repentant tears pleads his
reconciliation. Sparrows cannot take a flight, nor a hair fall from the head,
till God has granted a consent. The Scripture takes notice of these two
Instances, as things vnder-valued in our opinion; yet the former may teach us
by his flight, to soar aloft, and shun that nakedness wherewith we are clothed;
as well as the latter may prove the Power and Providence of God, who can blow
away that which we cannot so much as discolor; Gods Immensitie is without
circumscription; his vbiquity without contradictio^; his Omni-presence without
limitation: His Attributes have all a relation each to other, and remain
indissoluble. Were he not Omni-present, we might deny his Omnipotency, because
he would not have power then, to be euery-where: we might deny his
Omni-science, because he could not know the actions of men, where he could not
be. And thus should we so mangle the Divinity, that by such Consequences we
should in our opinions even utterly dissolve it. How miserable the^ we might
become, being left to our selves, denying a future happiness of Immortality, and
expecting no more Bliss hereafter, judge ye. I could amplify this point far
more largely, but that I hope your true belief would judge it impertinent. Let
our Position then be that of S. Austin, (Lib. 22. De Ciuit. Dei) Deus totus in
Coelo est, and totus in Terra, non alternis temporibus, sed vtrumque simul. Or
as the same Father, in his 57. Epistle: Deus est totus vbique, et totus in
vnoquoque, and totus in Seipso. God is all and wholly, every where, and the
same in every person and place, and that in himself. The Heavens contain him,
or else we cannot begin the Lords-Prayer, Our Father which art in Heaven. And
yet he is not limited and bounded within that place; for so we should deny him
to be here upon Earth, and how miserable Mortals would then appear, let every
man censure. GOD is in Heaven, in respect of his more ample Glory and Majesty,
because he does there most excellently make manifest his Power, Wisdom,
Goodness, and Communication of his Gifts and Graces in the presence of the
blessed Angels. We must understand of him, as the Philosophers do of the
Soul, who say it it Tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part: It is all
completely in the whole Body, yea, and the same in every part: In the Hands,
Arms, Legs, Feet, and the like; but the chief Seat of it is the Head, as
the Galenists; but according to Philosophers and Divines, the Heart.

Thus (Beloved) GOD is upon Earth, seeing and observing what we do, ordering
and disposing of us according to his pleasure; yea, and he is in Hell,
executing and viewing there the effects of his unspeakable Justice: But his
Chair of Estate (if I may so speak) is above in the Heavens; Nusquam est,
quatenus a nullo continetur: et vbique est, quatenus Omnia continet. He is no
where as contained, and he is every where as he contains all things. He is
every where entire in himself, and absent from none, yet he is not contained
by those with whom he is present, as if he could not be without them. He is
every where by his presence, so as all things ever have, do, and shall stand
naked to his view. And lastly, he is every where by his Virtue, working and
effecting his good pleasure. Thus then have we determined of the Omni-presence
of God, and the same essential.

Here we renounce the Errors of the Vbiquitarians, who have earnestly contended
to prove the vbiquity of Christ's humanity; but how vain their Tenent is, let
S. Austin speak, who in his 57 Epistle thus concludes of it, Vna persona Deus
and homo est, and vterque est vnus Christus Jesus, vbique per id quod Deus est,
in Coelo autem per id quod homo. God and Man make up but one person, both of
them united being the one Christ Jesus, who is every where as he is God, but in
Heaven only as he is Man. I dare not spend any time in the Arguments Pro and
Contra concerning this point.

Our Use may be that of the Psalmist, (Psalm. 139.7) Quo irem a Spiritu tuo? aut
quo a facie tua fugerem? Whither shall we go then from thy Spirit? or whither
shall we fly from thy presence? He that is Omni-scient, knows what we are: He
that is Omni-potent has caused that we are: and he that is Omni-present, is,
and will be with us whithersoeuer we go, (according to the words of my Text,)
I, the great Jehovah, who have Heaven for my Throne, and Earth for my
Footstool; who know all things, govern and dispose of every thing according
to my pleasure; from whom no place is hid, and without whom no place can be; I
(I say) will be with thee Joshua, in this thy progress to the Land of Canaan;
I will be with thee directiuely, to teach thee what thou shall do: I will be
with thee powerfully, to give thee ability of performance, and to cheer thee
up in thy Voyage. Yea, I will be with thee correctiuely, to punish those which
disobey my Command, sent unto them by thee. I will be with thee without
intermission of time; when thou sleep, and when thou awakest, when thou
walk on the way, when thou go before the People which I have committed
unto thee, and when thou entrest with them into the Land of Promise.

Happy Israelites! whose Protector was God, and whose indulgent Father was the
Lord of Hosts. Thrice happy Joshua too! whose Commission and Authority was from
the Lord, strong and mighty, even from the Lord, mighty in Battle, who first
gave him ability to perform, and then the order of performance. So just is God
unto his Creatures, that he never takes advantage of their weakness, where he
beholds a desire of performance.

I may here then direct my speech in general to all that are here present, who
shall at any time undertake the Commission of Joshua: Let them be assured, that
if God has given them their Authority with a Have not I commanded thee? the
same God will also give them the Promise, I will be with thee. There is none
here but my speech must address it self unto. Those that only walk in the
Streets, unless God has given them his Promise, to be with them, may feel
his Judgments by several chances. Those that ride abroad without this
Promise, may daily hear of the several afflictions, which they, as well as
others, have been, or may be bitten with. But more particularly We, whose
intent it is (with Gods assistance) to plough up the foamie Billows of the
vast Ocean; whose Resolutions have commanded to visit another World, (as
Geographers have termed it) We (I say) must first be sure that our Commission
runs in the words of my Text, Have not I commanded thee? and then doubt not but
the Promise will ensue upon it, I will be with thee. I will be with thee,
Joshua, not at this time only, but for ever; and not in this place only, but
whithersoeuer thou go. Which is

The large Extension of the Promise: and comes next in order to be handled.
ALl the Promises of God in him are Yea, and in him Amen, (says S. Paul, 2
Cor. 1.20.) So certain is the performance, so sure the execution of them, that
it transcends all humane Capacity, to express the truth of them. He that can
do whatsoever he pleases, cannot promise but what he will perform. Whether
it be in his fury, as the Plagues he sent upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and all
his household: Or whether it be in mercy, as the delivering of Lot: Or merely
in his indulgent and fatherly Love, as to Joshua and the Israelites, in my
Text. But it may seem strange that God should first command Joshua to go with
the Israelites into the Land of Canaan, and yet promise him to be with him
whithersoeuer he went. Observe we then that the Promises of God concerning this
Life, are always conditional. If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the good
things of the Land: But if ye refuse and be rebellious, ye shall be devoured
with the Sword. And (as it is in my Text) Only be strong, and of a good
courage, etc. Again, God promised to be with him whithersoeuer he went,
provided always that he went no whither, but to the Places where God should
send him. For Jonas steering his Course another way, when he was sent to
Nineueh, felt the Power of God working upon the waters: yea, and his Protection
also to bring him safely ashore, that he might learn a better obedience. And
if Joshua here, in passing over Jordan, shape not his Course for the Land of
Canaan, he may likewise find that God will be with him whithersoeuer he goes,
either as a Judge to punish, or as an Omnipotent God, to bring him back,
peradventure to the Land of Promise.

Thus will God be with Us too, whithersoeuer we go. If we repair to his
Temple with honest hearts, and truly-religious intentions, he will be with us
in our Prayers, and add zeal and devotion unto them. He will be with us at
Sermons, and add Attention and Memory unto us. He will be with us at the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Redeemer, and fit us for it with Faith
and Repentance, yea and with all other necessary duties: that so when we
return home to our houses, he may be then also with us, in our Practice of the
former pious Duties; yea all our life time, by his Protection; at our deaths by
Comfort; and after that in Glory.

The thickness of the Hills cannot withstand the Immensitie of the Godhead;
insomuch that they which shall repair to the^ for shelter, shall find the
words of the Psalmist verified; All the Mountains are his, and the strength of
the Hills is his also. If they say that the Darkness of the night shall cover
them, they shall find that The Darkness is no Darkness with God, but the
Night is as clear as the Day: The Darkness and the Light to him are both
alike. Hell feels the Severity of his Justice: Earth knows the Power of his
Greatness: and Heaven is filled with the bounteous Goodness of his Mercy.
Thus is he with us here, to ouersee us: in Heaven, to Crown us: and in Hell,
to torment the Reprobates. What manner of persons then ought we to be in all
holiness and uprightness of life? He that runs on in his Sins (just like a
Moath about the Candle in the night) plays with hellfire, till at last it
consumes him. He that makes a profession of holiness, and seems to endeavor to
be as he appears, yet harboring still some bosome-sinne, imitates a Fly shut
up in a Chamber at noone day, which beholding the daylight through the glass,
beats it self to death against that which discouers the light: But he whose
heart is upright, and conversation just, flies up in his Meditations to the
highest Heavens, to prepare a place for what is yet imprisoned upon Earth.
Whenever he stays at home, he finds God there, and for the time makes it
a Bethel: when he goes abroad, (with Jacob) he finds God there too, and sets
up a Pillar of Prayers, to make it the Gate of Heaven. When he sleeps, he is
clambering upon Jacobs Ladder up to Heaven: And when he wakes, he finds God
with him then too, ready to accept of his Sacrifice, and protect him under the
shadow of his wings. The whole Universe can as easily teach us the
Omni-presence, as the Omni-potencie of God, and confound the Assertions of
heathenish Infidelity. Joshua therefore here durst neither question the Power of
God, whether he could be with him, nor his Truth, whether he would be with
him whithersoeuer he went.

Thus must we then with Joshua resolve to obey, that we may secure our
happiness. God will be with us, if he promise it. GOD will promise it, if we
desire it; but without that, no Promise, nor favorable Presence. GOD will be
with us in Peace, to preserve us in unity: in the Wars, to give us the
Victory: in our Native Soil, to bless us with Plenty; and in
forraigne-parts, to enrich us with Prosperity; provided always that (with
Joshua) we receive our Command from the GOD of Heaven. But if being commanded,
we run into disobedience; our Peace shall be corrupted with perpetual
Alarums; our Wars shall devour us; our own Country shall lie waste; and
when we seek abroad, we shall perish where none shall have compassion on us.

Let us the^ more especially, which must look undaunted upon Death it self,
by the protection of our Maker, and see his works of wonder in the Deepes;
that must fly from hence upon the wings of the Wind to the wast places of the
Earth, to plant the knowledge of his goodness who commands us to go; Let us (I
say) more especially assure our selves that we are dispatched with Ioshuas
Commission, that the Sea may be but a Jordan unto us, and the Land we go to
inhabit, a Canaan. Our examples must as much teach the Saluages what we obey,
as our Precepts, whom we obey. Our Religion must be as well clad in Sincerity,
as our Strength in Courage; that so those ignorant Infidels observing our
religious Conversation, may join with us in a happy Resolution. Our equal
Steps, and upright behauior thus inflaming the hearts of the Ignorant, it may
peradventure prove in a short space, a greater taste to dissuade them from
believing us to be Gods, then to persuade them to believe that there is a God.
Thus may those which are yet without, be comforted, and may perceive that God
is with us whithersoeuer we go. It was his Promise to Joshua, and doubtless
it is the same to us; the Conditions as well as the Commission still running
alike, Only be strong and of a good courage: Be not afraid, neither be
dismayed. Which is

The second General: The Person commanded, Joshua. Wherein first of the
Affirmative part: Be strong, and of a good courage.
Man's Integrity was the perfection of Amity; but his Fall the ruin thereof.
When GOD imposed this Tax upon the Creatures for Adams disobedience, all
things tumultuously stole into a Mutiny. The Earth suddenly hatched an
abortiue Contention, insomuch that the Thorns and Thistles witnessed their
strife, by a greedy scratching of each other. The Elements not contented with
Peace, fell at variance too, so that the Fire wanting ability to overcome the
Water hissed at the conqueror: and that part of Air which was detained in the
bowels of the Earth, shook the foundation when it triumphed in a Victory.

Ovid Meta^. Frigida pugnabunt calidis, humentia siccis,
Ovid Meta^. Mollia cum duris, sine po^dere habe^tia pondus.
Yea, and to show the corruption that we our selves fell into, the whole World
seeming (as it were) too little to contain two Brothers, Abels blood must be
the price of Caines revenge. Hence have our Wars drawn their succession, and
the gaining of Kingdoms has become the large rate of innocent Blood: yet all
to prove the Justice of our Maker, who seeing us neglect his Commandments,
gives us over to be punished one of another. But as in other things, so in
this, is his Goodness manifested too, in that he punishes Rebellion with
extirpation; and makes Religion inherit, where spotted Vice seeks its
subversion. It is apparent by those whom the Israelites are sent to supplant.
The Canaanites, which lived in the height of sensuality, must be humbled now in
the depth of Misery. The great Lawgiver observes such a legal course in his
Justice, that whom Plenty has swelled up to the disease of wickedness,
Poverty shall be Physic to bring them to humility. And again, Those that
have suffered the Slavery of Bondage, to be free for his Service, shall
inherit a Canaan, to encourage them in their Integrity. The Israelites which
were exposed to the tyranny of injustice under the Egyptian Pharaoh, must be
comforted again with Milk and Honey. But lest a sudden Liberty should
procure their forgetfulness of him that relieved them in misery, a tedious
Journey must usher them to Repose. They are come near Jordan, and their
Commander (poor wretches) surrenders up his Soul to the Giver thereof. Yet no
sooner is he deceased, then Joshua is raised. And lest he should plead excuse
through a diffident Infidelity, Moses before his death ( Deuteronomy. 31.6.)
encourages him, saying, Be strong, and of a good courage: Be not afraid,
neither be dismayed, for thy Lord thy God it is he that does go with thee, he
will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. The Injunction from Heaven still
remains the same, Be strong, and of a good courage. Yea, and to the intent
that Joshua should neither forget nor slight his Charge, it is oftentimes
repeated; as you may read in the 6. and 7. verses of the 31. Chap. of Deuteronomy.
and in the 6, 7, 9, and 18. verses of this Chapter. Where God is urgent in
pressing Man to his duty, his Punishments for neglect become the greater.
Joshua certainly cannot forget what he is so often charged; he cannot deny it,
because the Command is from Heaven: and he must not disobey it, for now his
Credit, his Observance, and his Reward lie at the stake. Durst any to question
what need the All-mighty had to press Joshua so hard to it, whom he could with
a word make speedily valiant: the answer is ready, That he is not always
pleased to do what he can, because he will try (as it were) whether men are
willing to do what they may.

But shall he command Joshua to be strong, who has said himself, that he
delights not in any man's Strength? Alas (Beloved) What have we which we
have not received from him? If I speak of strength; Lo he is strong (says
holy Job, chap. 9.19.) wherefore whomsoever he commands to be strong, his
very Word strengthens both the command and the commanded. But because ye should
not run blindfold in an error, and be muffled with the common opinion of the
World, intituling every rash and immoderate heat with the name of valor, the
sequel Discourse shall rectify your judgments.

If ye please to attend to Arist: ye shall hear him call it the rushing upon
things terrible, where Death stands ready to snatch us, yet we undergo the
ieopardy for some common-good. Peter Martyr determines it to be A habit of the
mind, whereby according to a right reason, and for some just and lawful end,
we hold a mean between Fear and Audaciousnesse. Others affirm it to be the
Defender of Justice, whereby we either banish Adversity, or moderate our
Grief in affliction, or curb our joy in Prosperity, lest excess of Joy or
Sorrow should breed the performance of that which is base and wicked. Take
which definition you please, or join them together, and I suppose it enough in
brief for a present knowledge. Should I but attempt to divide it, the time
would fail me before I should find the way out again. The of it howsoever is
something which is honest and good, otherwise it is styled madness and cruelty.
That which is thus good and honest, is either for God, our Country, or our
King. The Subject of Valor is that part of the Mind wherein (in the absence
of it) Fear or Audacity keep their quarter. The Object that it looks upon is
Danger. The Form of it is a Mean between the two Contraries: and the true
end, in brief, is that which is well-pleasing to God. It is wrought in us, and
becomes ours in this manner.

First, God opens our understandings, and teaches us that he is most happy,
who suffers most for his sake.

Secondly, He is with us by his Strength and Power.

Thirdly and lastly, He sends his holy Spirit to cheer us up, that we may
boldly suffer whatsoever befalls us.

St. Bernard would have every valiant man's Action be thus tempered; Sit
Iustitia (says he) in affectu, Prudentia in intellectu, Fortitudo in effectu,
and Temperantia in vsu. There must be Justice in our affection; Wisdom in our
understanding; Courage in the eff cting of it; and Temperance or Moderation in
the use of it. See then how boldly he may fall-on, whom GOD commands to be
strong, and of a good courage.

But let me not forget the rashness of our Age, which writes him Valiant, that
dares thrust himself into a Challenge for a slight offense, and hazard his
Soul for the steame of a word. Reason cannot plead excuse for him who
mortgages that Jewel for the vanity of a word, which cost our Savior the
price of Blood. He came to lose his Life for our sakes, and shall we quit our
selves of our selves for a blast shorter then our Breath? In the reuengefull
person, if common sense may speak, verba verbis expianda, words should expiate
words: But in the regenerate man, neither words nor actions can prevail for
Revenge, because Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it, (says the Lord.) Yet
mistake me not (Beloved) For as we ought to be cowardly in the performance of
things prohibited, so should we strive for valor in the execution of that
which is just. When I condemn every common Duel, I approve of our lawful
Wars; and where the Soldier fights upon just authority, that man is either
ignorantly fillie, or miserably detestable that honors not the Calling. The
slight reward which the noble Soldier receives from the mouths of many in this
age, may strike us into a fear lest we shall hereafter cry for those whom we
now despise, and bewail the want of whom our Grief cannot recall. But God of
his mercy prevent it by his Power, and preserve us safe from the fury of our
Enemies. O it is (me thinks) a poor, and shameful requital for the ineffable
miseries and hazards which a Soldier suffers abroad, when at home he shall
be bitten with the aspine Tongues of some venomous Cowards whose property it
is to undervalue what they dare not undergo. These are strong indeed, but
only in their poisonous Breath, and their good courage proves Pedancie
expressing it self in a speedy flight, not standing the shocke of opposition.
I could be far more copious in the just prosecution hereof, but that the time
would prevent me: Howsoever, give me leave to admonish the Soldier too, that
he may know that swelling Oaths, profane and execrable Curses, and surfeiting
upon all unclean and ignominious filthiness, disgraces the Person, and
reflects in part upon the Profession, not without a stain of Reproach. They
surely cannot be strong, and of a good courage, who^ vice, not order instructs
in undigested rashness. It is Joshua only that is strong, and of a good courage,
because his Cause is just, his conscience upright, his Religion Zealous, and
God his Protector; for vice and valor never yet agreed in one. O let us then,
who (as I hope) are all Ioshuas, holy and religious, be strong and of a good
courage, that we may neither fear the Arrow that flies by day, nor the
Instruments of War that speak in fury: for David may kill Goliath; Saul may
slay his thousand, and David his ten thousand, when God gives the word, to be
strong, etc. He that enioines us to it, can and will expect our performance;
and requires that whom he cherishes, should not be afraid, neither be dismayed.
Which is

The Negative part required in Joshua, my last point, and craves your patience
for a little while. Fear not, neither be dismayed.
COntraria iuxta se posita, magis elucescunt. Contraries then appear most
manifest when they are nearly joined each to other, as in black and white;
heat and cold, and the like. Right so is it here: for fear and dismaying are
but the privation of valor and courage, (handled in the first point.) I shall
not need to dwell long upon it. Only take the definition of it from Arist: out
of the second of his Rhet. where he determines it to be A certain Grief and
trembling of the Mind, arising from the serious thought of some ensuing Evil,
which may bring upon us either Trouble or Destruction. Should then a Joshua
fear, he might suffer the censure of men, and the displeasure of God, for
want of confidence in him that imployes him. Dangers he must needs undergo,
that runs the hazard of Travels and War: But where GOD commands us not to be
afraid, the Perils are prevented by the word of authority. Should Joshua fear
the wounds he might perhaps receive from his Enemies; yet God is that good
Samaritane that can power Oil into them. Should the fear of a Dearth possess
him; alas, the Lions do lack, and suffer hunger; but they that trust in the
Lord shall want no manner of thing that is good. Should he fear the pangs of a
dry and scorching Thirst; He that before opened the Rock, and the waters
gushed out, is as powerful now as he was at that time. Nay, should he fear
Death it self, it might be an argument to prove the badnesse of his life; or
at least it might give a suspicion of their unbelief concerning that happiest
life of Glory. To suspect a danger before it comes, is to rush into Misery
before our times: and so instead of prevention to hasten the destruction. Quid
prodest (says Sen.) mala arcessere and praesens tempus futuri metu perdere?
Stultum est, quasi ante futurus miser, esse iam miserum: He that strives to
prevent a Mischief, and yet loses the present time in the fear of that which
is to come, falls wretched before it was appointed for him. Why should Joshua
then fear, or be dismayed, whom God almighty promises to preserve? Ignorant
gratiam libertatis, quem ligat seruitus timoris, (says S. Greg.) He knows not
the blessing of Liberty, which lies imprisoned in the bondage of Fear. Let
them be dismayed, whose sick Souls, deep in a Consumption, forget to hope for
a future remedy. Integer vitae scelerisque purus, non eget Mauri iaculis, nec
arcu. A pure and undefiled conscience needs no Shield to guard it from the fury
of an Adversary. Joshua may well fear if once he disobey, but till then let
him be afraid to fear, lest thereby he be dismayed. Should we attribute the
event of War to Fortune, the Heathen Poet would encourage the dullest spirit.
Fortuna fortes metuit, Ignauos premit, (says Senec.) Fortune stands afraid of
those that are valiant, but plays upon the Cowards. Yet we that acknowledge
the vanity of that heathenish Idol, must confess with Solomon, that The Horse
is prepared for Battle, but God gives the Victory. (Pro. 22.31.) Yet it may
appear strange, that God should command Joshua not to fear, when as his
Statutes run perpetually, Fear ye the Lord. There is indeed a twofold fear,
Filial, and Servile: the former arising from a true affection we bear to our
Creator, and fear to offend because we love him. The latter is only a fear
of the evil of Punishment, arising from a guilty conscience. The former is
commanded, the latter forbidden in my Text. But this is a base fear of our
Enemies, not to be suffered. The Heathen were as ignorant of the Punishments
which came from God, as sent by him, as they were of God himself; and
therefore one of their Poets, out of a daring resolution, cries out, Moriamur,
and in media arma ruamus, vna salus victis nullam sperare salute^. Let us die,
(says he) and rush into the midst of our Enemies; the only safety the
conquered know, is to have no safety. Shall then the Heathen out-doe us, in
that which Religion teaches us to be perfect? No, (Beloved) let us go on
valiantly and courageously when we have occasion, for the Lord our God will be
with us whithersoeuer we go.

You that live at home under your own Vines, and eat the fruits of your own
Trees; that feel not the terror of want, nor the heat of Miseries, to you it
belongs to be valiant in suffering (if occasion shall happen) any persecution
or cross which God may justly inflict upon you, either as a Punishment or
Trial. Besides ye must be valiant in the Conflict against the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil, lest if they overcome, destruction suddenly come upon you, as
sorrow upon a Woman in travel.

And again, for us that go abroad, it belongs in a special manner not to be
afraid, neither be dismayed. If the surging waves of a swelling Sea smoke out
threats and anger, yet he that walked upon the water and breathed a calm, can
do the like for us too; but we must not be afraid, neither be dismayed. When
the tempestuous Winds buzze in our ears, and seem to speak the language of
death, he that once charmed them with Peace; be still; can do the like for us
too; but we must not fear then, neither be dismayed. If the blustering noise of
Guns shall roar in our ears, to threaten our mangling subversion, yet he
that taught our Enemies to war, and their fingers to fight, can as well vnteach
them again, and strike them with astonishment for our sakes; but he still
requires that we should not be afraid, neither be dismayed. Lastly, if the
Company of Indian-Archers rank themselves against us, yea and promise to
themselves our utter confusion; yet must we know that the Lord, which is a Man
of War, (as he has styled himself) which breaks the Bow in pieces, and
knappeth the Arrows in sunder, can prevent their fury; but his Charge still
will remain the same; the same Condition, that we be not afraid, neither be
dismayed.

Let me add then S. Austins words of Consolation, Deus tibi totum est; si
sitias, Aqua tibi est; si in Tenebris sis, Lumen tibi est; ac si nudus,
Immortalitatis tibi Vestis est. God will be all in all unto thee; If thou art
hungry, he will be Bread unto thee; if thirsty, Water; if thou sit in
darkness, he will shine upon thee; and if thou art naked, he will cloathe thee
with Immortality. O let us then, who intend (by the divine Providence) to sing
the Lords Song, in a strange Land, here make our promise unto the Almighty,
That he shall be the Lord our God, and him alone will we serve. And then the
Lord will speak unto us, as he did to Joshua, in the words of my Text, Have
not I commanded thee, etc.

But before we depart, it remains that the Testimony of our Faith,
Repentance, Love, Zeal, and all other divine Graces be sealed here in the face
of the Congregation. See how for our Farewell Christ has invited us all unto a
Feast; O let us draw near, and receive our sweet Jesus into the bosoms of our
Souls, that he may receive us into the Arms of his Mercy: Our loving Savior
did eat of the Bread of Affliction, that we might eat of the Bread of Life:
Our Jesus drunk of the Waters of Marah, that we might drink of the sweet
Springs of Liuing-Water. Come, let us feast then both with him, and on him,
that fasted for us; Let us embrace him with reverence; hold him by faith; keep
him with charity; and preserve him in our souls, with repentance for our
wrongs past, and Prayers and striving against it for time to come; that his
victorious Death may be to us a triumphant Life. Thus when we have all eaten
and drank together the assurance of our Adoption and Salvation, let us depart
in Peace, with Joy in the holy Ghost.

But first, to those that remain in this flourishing Kingdom, We will cry,
Peace be within your Walls, and Plenteousnesse within your Palaces; For our
Brethren and Companions sakes, we will wish you Prosperity. For us, that must
arise, and seek out a farther habitation, we will beg of the Almighty with a
unanimous consent, that he will be graciously pleased to speak unto us, in the
words of my Text: Have not I commanded you? Only be strong, and of a good
courage: Be not afraid, neither be dismayed, for I will be with you
whithersoeuer ye go.

And to all of us may the God of Grace so plenteously give and bestow his
Blessings, that we may not want his loving Protection in this Life, nor the
fruition of Glory together in the Life to come.

Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, etc. Amen.

FINIS.

