Transubstantiation exploded: OR AN ENCOVNTER WITH RICHARD the Titularie Bishop
of Chalcedon concerning Christ his presence at his holy Table. Faithfully
related in a Letter sent to D. Smith the Sorbonist, styled by the Pope
Ordinary of England and Scotland. By DANIEL FEATLEY D. D.

Whereunto is annexed a public and solemn disputation held at Paris with
Christopher Bagshaw D. in Theology, and Rector of Ave Marie College.

JOB 31. 35. Mine adversary has written a book against me, surely I will
take it upon my shoulders and bind it as a crown to me. Facundus Hermianensis
pro def. trium capt. p. 404. Potest Sacramentum adoptionis adoptio nuncupari,
sicut Sacramentum corporis and sanguinis eius quod est in pane and poculo
consecrato corpus eius and sanguinem dicimus, non quod proprie corpus eius sit
panis and poculum sanguis sed quod in se mysterium corporis eius sanguinisque
contineant. LONDON. Printed by G M. for Nicolas Bourne, at the South entrance
of the Royal Exchange. 1638.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS Lord Coventree, Baron of Alesborough, Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privi^ Council, etc.
Right Honorable,
YOur Lordships courteous acceptance of the greater The Grand Sacrilege of the
Church of Rome.
Work, emboldeneth me to present this Appendix thereof to your Honor: the
lesser it is, the lesser trespass it will make upon the public service of
the State and your Lordships most precious hours: and I hope it will prove
like Diomedes in Homer, ^ly.
(...),


Perpusillas quidem pugnax tamen, for I labored therein what I could (...)
express the Character which Lipsius Lip. pref. in Sen.
gives of Seneca's writings, copiam in brevitate, and vehementiam in
facilitate. The Subject I handle is mos^ noble and divine, The holy Sacrament
of the blessed body and blood of our dearest Redeemer, and it is to be lamented
even with tears o^ blood, that what he ordained for the surest tie of unity,
and strongest bond of amity, is through the malice of Satan, and heretical
pravitie turned into a bill of divorce, or rather fire-ball of contention among
Christians at this day. For my Antagonist D. Smith, he is a man of greatest
note among all our English Romanists, as famous with them, as ever was the
Nymph, of whom Ovid. Ep.
the Poet writes, Tu quoque si de te totus contenderit orbis,


Nomen ab aeterna posteritate feres. For it is he about whom the Sorbonists and
Secular Priests on the one side, and the Iacobines, Jesuits, Benedictines on
the other, have of late published so many virulent Pamphlets Tincta Lycambeo
spicula fell madent.


It is he for whose apprehension two Proclamations were not many years since
(...) forth. It is he upon whom for his extraordinary parts, and well
deserving of the Sea of Rome, Pope Urbane the ^ght has conferred the high, but
empty title of Ordinary of all England and Scotland. It is he whose a^rie
Bishopric of Chalcedon has so much troubled this and our neighbor Land. With
whom I could have wished that some of higher rank and place had entered into
the lists. But being challenged by him into this field, lying by the Waters of
strife, I could not decline the combat. Which I now undertake with more
confidence, by how much he shows many ways apparent diffidence of his cause,
for in his frontispice he makes mention of my book entitled The Grand
Sacrilege o^ Printed by Felix Kingston, An 1630.
the Church of Rome, in taking a^ way the sacred cup from the Laity detected
and convinced by the ev^ dence of holy Scripture, and test^ money of all ages,
as if he meant to refute the whole work: yet from the first page to the last,
he questioneth not a sy^ lable, nor disableth any one testimo^ therein,
Egregiam vero laudem and spol^ ampla


A doutie piece of service, never (...) approach any thing near to the mai^
Fort and citadell, but sit down before a small out-work (a relation of^
Conference 25. years ago, consisting (...) a few pages) in the battery
whereof, (...) shows himself not only (...)


For he carefully shunneth the point (...) question, and falls upon a more
plausible tenet. Whereas to gain or confirm a Romish Proselyte, which was the
occasion of his Conference with me, h^ should (...) have propugned ^e Trent
doctrine of Transubslantiati^n, he carefully declineth that rock, and puts
in at the fair harbor of the real presence, which in a Catholic sense all
Protestants admit, and the Lutherans in as flat a manner as he. In ^e
despairing to make good his tenet by argument, he turns argumento^m tela into
maledictorum aculeos: he leaves the Schools, and flies to the theater, and
there sets a namelesse and shameless Poet to play upon my name with
Anagrames, and my Treatise with Sarcasmes. Whereunto I Epig. gr^. l. (...). c.
3.
think fit to return no other answer then the words of Mars in the Greek
Epigram, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)


But because I speak to him in every paragraph in the ensuing letter I will
say no more of him here; but now I apply my self to your good Lordship to whom
I owe the dedication of a fa^ greater and better work then this, (...) this
alone I have now ready for (...) press, and I held my self bound take the
advantage of the first opportunity to testify in public my thankfulness to
your Lordship for your Honors many undeserved favors. An^ if the argument be
well scanned, will not seem improper to Dedica^ the Work to the Lord Keeper
of the great Seal, for the Scriptures are the instruments and deeds of our
sa^vation, and the Sacraments are t^ seals annexed thereunto: the great
whereof our Romis^ adversaries have audaciously and impiously violated b^
breaking off half of it, and putting false and counterfeit stamp upon (...)
With these misdemeanors (as I conceive) of a high nature I charge them and if
I fail in my proofs, I refus^ not to suffer, pro falso clamore The Lord make
your Honor and (...) that shall vouchsafe to peruse and ^amine this work,
like Angels of ^ht, to discern between good and ^vill, truth and falsehood,
and more^ver crown your Lordship with his ^ncipall blessings here, and bless
(...) with an everlasting crown ^eafter.

Your Lordships most humbly and affectionatly devoted, DA: FEATLEY.

A Table of the special Contents.
PARAG 1. Of the empty and aye^e title of Bishop of Chalced on, (...) PARAG. 2.
Of the cold entertainment which English and (...) Priests find beyond the Sea,
how well soever deservi^ the Sea of Rome, p. 8. PARAG. 3. What a kind of
Religion Popery is, page 11. PARAG 4. The issue of diverse disputations in
France, and how Romanists have had always the worst in confere^ with
Protestants, page 16. PARAG. 5. Of the absurd title in the frontispice of
Edward Stratfor^ pamphlet, and how lamely and imperfectly both he his Lord and
Fisher and Weston have answered for treatises set out by the Author, page, 25.
PARAG. 6. Of the novelty of Popery, and the true occasion o^ Author his
conference with D. Smith at Paris. page 30 PARAG 7. Of the Conditions of this
Conference, and how they (...) kept on both sides p. 34. PARAG 8. The state of
the question is truly set down, five p^ wherein we differ touching the Real
presence are (...) (...), p. 41. PARAG. 9. Twelve passages out of Tertullian
against Transubstant on vindicated, and all objections out of him for the ca^
p. esence answered, p. 57. PAR. 10. Thirty three allegations out of S. Au^
against Tra^ st^tion vindicated, and all objections made by the ver^ie out of
him answered, p 78. PAR. 11. Twelve testimonies out of Origin against
Transubstant on vindicated, and all objections out of him answered, p. (...)
PAR. 12. ^hteene places out of Gratian (the Father of the Cano^ists) against
Transubstant^n vindicated, and objecti^ns out of him answered, p. ^38. PAR. 13.
^at the words of the Institution This is my Body, are to be taken in a
tropicall and figurative sense, is prooved, 1. By testimony of Scripture. 2.
By authority of Fathers, namely. Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, Athanasius, Cyrillus Hierosolomitanus, Am^rosius,
Epiphanius, Hieronymus, ^yrillus Alexandrinus, Au^stinus, Chrysostomus,
Theodoretus, Gaudentius, Issidorus, Oecumenius, and Arnoldus Carmotensis. 3. By
the confe^ on of our Adversaries, Gerson, Gardener, Bellarmine. 4. By force of
reason, p. ^54. PAR. 14. ^at in the words of the institution of the cup, this
cup is the New Testament in my blood, there are diverse figures is prooved by
unavoidable consequences, and the confess^ on of our Learned Adversaries,
Salmeron, Baradius and Iansenius, p. 190. PARAG. 15. That the words of our
Savior, Matthew. 26. 29. I will drink no more of this fruit of the vine, are
meant of the Evangelicall cup, or Sacrament, is prooved against D. Smith and S.
E. by the testimony of Origin, Clemens Alexandrinus, Cyprian, Austin
Chrysostom, Druthmarus, the Author of the book de Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus,
Iansenius, Maldonat, the counsel of Worms and Pope Innocentius: and D. Smith
and his Chaplains evasions refuted, page 198. PARAG. 16. Of the Bishops
Chaplain and Champion S. E his cowardly Tergiversation, base Adulation,
shameless Calumnia tion, and senseless Scurrility. page 209. PAR. 17. A
serious exhortation to D. Smith otherwise Bishop of Cha^ cedon to return home
to his dearest mother the Church of England, and famous Nurse the University of
Oxford, p. 229.
Perlegi hunc librum, Cui Titu^ est [An encounter with Richa^ the Titularie B.
of Chalcedo^ etc.] in quo nihil reperio sanae (...) ctrinae, aut bonis moribus
contrariu^ quo minus cum utilitate publica i^ primatur, ita tamen, ut si non
in^ 5. menses proxime sequentes ty^ mandetur, haec licentia sit omn^ irrita.

Ex Aedibus Lambethan. October. 28. 1637. Reverendissimo in Christo Pa^ and Dom.
D. Arch. Cant^ Sacellanus Domestic^ GVLIEL. BRA

Errata.
Page 11. in marg. read Binium p. 41 line 14^ Cha^ p. 42. l. 20. r. implicita.
p. 47. in marg r. exhiberi. p. 57. l 10. (...) fidell r. reprobate. p. 60. in
marg. r. sic. p. 63. in marg. r. ad^ and l 25. r. you conster. p. 65. in marg
r. Cordis loco. p 66. marg. (...). and l 13. r (...). p. 77. in marg. r
prophet. 94: l. 25. r. consecrat. p. 117. l. 22. dele that. p. 118. in mar^
p^nitus quantitas auferat^r. p 123 l. 13. r. invisible. p. 189. l.
Sacramental. p 194. l. 26 r is without. p. 283. in marg. r. (...) p. ^0 in
marg. r (...).

TO RICHARD SMITH Dr. of the Sorbone entitled by the Pope B. of Chalcedon and
Ordinary of England and Scotland, D. F. wishes a better 1. Title. 2. Cause.
3. Advocate.

PAR. 1.
Of the empty and ayerie title of Bishop of Chalcedon.

NO men Omen. The style wherewith the Pope graceth you, seems to me ominous and
to bode you a mere titulary ^gnity and a blind Diocese. For I read in Strabo
geograph l. 7. p 221. (...), etc.
Strabo and Plin. not. l. 6. cap. 32. Chalcedon Procerastis antea dicta dein
Comp^sa postea ^corum opp^dum quod locum eligere nescissent.
Pliny that the inhab^ tants of Chalcedon were by the Orac^ of Apollo
anciently termed blind me^ because they could not see to build the^ City upon
the more commodious si^ of the shore. And I Council. Chalced. act. 7 and Binius
nota in council. Tom. 2. (...). 409. Cum Imperator instaret (...) Chalcedon
nomine ^enus Metropolis (...) consequ^retur citra pr^iudicium N comed^e (...)
c^ilij act. 7 communi consensu admiserunt.
find that at the instance of the Emperor Marcian^ the Fathers in the fourth
general cou^ cell advanced this City to the title of Metropolitan See: yet
without the privileges belonging thereunto, ju^ as his Holiness sent to you
from Ro^ the shadow of a Mitre without the su^ stance, and conferred on you the
title (...) Ordinary of all England and Scotla^ without any revenue to mantaine
and support your Port and State. When at notwithstanding the Pr^es: gener^ and
(...) regiminis congregat. (...), Benedictinorum.
Benedictine^ H^ man (...) spongia Nicolao Richardij ordinis Sancti dominici d^
(...). ^aropoli 1631. Eccles. angli^an: querimon: apologet: (...) (...) (...).
Jacobines and A modest discussion by Nicolas Smith, approved John Floyd
Iesui^, printed at Roven, Anno. 1630. apolog. Danielis a Ie^
Jesuits so bark a^ bawle in print, that not only Engla^ and Ireland, but
also France and Ro^ her self rings of them. And althoug^ the most celebri^us
University of Pa^ has let fly two fierce (...) (...) de (...). (...) (...).
(...) Paris 1^. P^us A^relius (...) (...). Sorb. (...). Paris (...).
(...) to ^ake these curres, and the Epist. (...) (...) (...). Paris 1631.
Arch-Bi^ops and Bishops of France have laid (...) them amain with their
crozure ^ves, and the faculty of (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) the ^log. Paris (...). 1631.
Sorbon with ^r battone, yet they will not be quiet. (...) strange thing to
hear those who ^ast so much of Catholic unity to ^ndie the terms of
Schismatike and ^eretike so familiarly one to the other, (...) Sorbonists to
the Jesuits, and the ^suites by back-racket again to the ^orbonists: and yet
a stranger to see ^erius revived in Ignatius Loyolae, and puritan buds to
sprout out of a Jesuits stock. Geneva was wont to be branded for denying the
necessity of confirmation by a Bishop, or of a Bishop at all in the Church, but
now S. Censur^. Sorb de (...): (...). p. 42. and de Hierar. and ^p, p 48 49
(...) chris^te (...) in (...) (...) ab Episcopo (...) (...) per^ s^t christiani
and legi divinae satisfit licet nulli sint Episcopi in (...) (...) (...) Anglia.
Omers has justified Geneva. Thus Schism (...) card (...) (...) (...) ^mentis
ingenij postquam in unum extremum (...) (...) (...) ner^ (...) rationem sese a
praeterito cri^e (...) op^ (...) putarunt si se aed (...) extremum conferrent
and (...) papa^ (...).
errors run in a ring, and though diametrally opposite at first, yet meet at
the last in the Center. In the mean while, what does Monsieur Le-Pape?
eitherlike Sw^t. in vita Neron.
Nero he sings a Poem of his o^ making to his Thearbo, when he see^ dangerous
fire kindled within the wa^ of Rome, or like Gallio Deputy in (...) Acts,
Chap. 18. Ver. 15. he account^ these controversies (which yet to^ not only all
Bishops Miters, but (...) Triple-crowne also) to be questions words and names
and will be no judge such matters, and lets the Monk take The Archbishop of
Paris. See qu^rimonia Eccles. angl. v. 17.
Sosthenes and other chief R^ lers of the Romish Synagogues and be^ them
before his judgment seat and (...) reth for none of these things. N^ certes
his Holiness is doubly to bla^ First, to reward your eminent pa^ both natural
and morrall, improved (...) learning and travel, and emplo^ wholly to the
advancement of the Pa^ cie, with no better a guerdon then (...) empty title of
a hungry Praeses Benedictin: F. Clemens p. 175. Ep scopu^ titularis (...) Gr^a
non nisi improprie and valde pr^ter na^ram potest (...) caput corporis nostri
in Anglia. Horat. Graeculus ^suriens in coelum (...), ibit.
Greek (...) shoprick. Next when he saw his Exemplar (...) Vrbani octavi per
quod Episcop^lis authori^, Richardo Chal^edone^si demandatur. D^ Rom^ sub
annulo (...), 4 Februarij ^25.
Br^ come short of his intendment, and yo^ hopes: not to enlarge it out of the
p^ nitude of his papal power, and tak^ short course with your mutinous Mo^ who
not only resist but openly i^ pugneit, and your jurisdiction found^ thereon.

First upon the matter he grants you nothing and afterward he makes not ^ood
that his nothing. Perdis and infaeli^ ipsum nihil -- Iuvenal Satyr: (...)
infaeli^ ips^m nihil.

Not to question his Holiness interest ^n the Bishopric of Chalcedon
subor^inate to the Greek Patriarch, and at ^is day in captivity with her
native ^ishop under the grand Signior: I would feign know what this title of
Bishop of Chalcedon imports you? What are the revenewes of this new ^rected
See, transported out of Bithynia into England by miracle, as our Ladies picture
and Chapel were out of Palestine Hi^re. de (...) (...) d^ L^tto
to Lauretto? what is the circuit of your Dioces? what commendams hold you with
it? what benifices have you in your gift to prefer your Chaplain and
Champion S. E. unto? where is your Episcopal Palace situated? where stands
the Mother Church? on which side of it is your Consistory built? where keep
you your Count? surely no where, except in Nido See (...) (...) (...) of S E.
his pamphlet (...) (...) the sig^e (...) the (...). And ^ill n^ (...) ^ou.
(...) ^phlet ^e (...), (...) the (...) (...) (...) (...) her bones.
(...), the nest of the Phaenix at the sign whereof your book was printed. I
received it from a good band, that all your receipts from Chalcedon will not buy
you a true Chalcedo^ A precious stone mentioned in the Apoc. 2^ 19 the third a
Cal^edonie, the f^rth an Emerald.
Wherefore as the Cardinal of Sa^ Susanne when diverse Romish Prie^ repaired
unto him the 19. of Octob^ 1624. desiring his Grace in the na^ of their Chapter
to further what (...) could a motion they then made to hi^ admonished them to
mend their peti^ on, and instead of nomine capituli s^ in the name of their
Chapter to wri^ nomine cleri Anglicani, in the name^ the English Clergy: for
your Chap^ says he is a ^ra. Clemens de ma^d^to re^m: (...). p^es, gen^ muit
(...) nomine c^ert Anglicani: nam c^pitulum inquit vestrum chimaericum ^st.
Chimaera: so I wou^ advise you to stick to your title Archpriest over the
seculars in E^ land, nam Episcopatus vester Chalce^ nensi^ chimaericus est, for
your (...) shoprick of Chalcedon is a chimaera^ ^re ^ion. As for your other t^
of Ordinary of England and Scotlan^ I cannot skill of it: the Engl^ Pr^pos.
Benedicit. Chalced^ e^s^ (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) ^abet (...) ^m n^c (...)
nec de^ (...) Angli^ and (...) regna, etc p. 31. and p 83. iam (...) Sco^s cum
risu ^anc Ordinarij praetensam authoritat^m reiecisse.
Monks seriously dispute you out^ it, and the Scottish Priests saw^ jeare at
you for it. As for us, who y^ know have abjured the Popes pow^ both
Ecclesiastical and Temporal whether Urbane the eight intend to r^ duce the
Kingdoms of England a^ Scotland into one Diocese, and make y^ Bishop of it,
or into one Parish, and make you Pastor of it, we account his Vid. Poem V^b 8.
(...).
design therein none other then the work of his poetical fancy, and have no
more faith in his Brief then in Ovids Metamorphosis: In nova fert animus
mutatas dicere formas Regna.



Our Archbishops, Bishops, Ordinaries, and Pastors in both these Kingdoms
possessing all the Sees, and enjoying peaceably under our most Gracious
Sovereign, the entire rights thereof, will ease your seven (...) Loemelij
(...) (...) (...) apostolic^.
Vicars and Bithynian Collectour of his pains. As for the Recusants charity,
it goes another way, they are no less Recusants to your authority, then to
our laws: for albeit your great Pan at Rome has committed the greatest (...)
(...) (...) (...).
part, if not all his spotted sheep to your Pastoral charge: yet they yield
you little or no profit, because they are sheared to your hands: especially by
the Jesuits whom Reverardentius ap^ly (...) (...) (...). (...).
terms in this respect equi^es aurei velleris, Knights of the golden fl^ece.

PAR. 2.
Of the cold entertainment which Engli^ and Irish Priests find beyond the
Sea, how well soever deserving of the Sea of Rome.

WHen Hanniball saw the hea^ of his brother Asdrubal hel^ upon a spear at the
command of Cla^ dius Nero, he said, video fatum Carth^ ginis, I see the
destiny of Carthage, (...) me thinks I see in you fatum Angloru^ and
Hibernorum, the fate of our Engli^ and Irish Papists, which is at this pre
sent, and has ever been to yield mo^ to the Roman See, and to receive lea^
from her. Pope Urbane the third, for Ca^bden hist. ef^. Elizab. ad annum 40.
all the gold which by one trick or other he got out of Ireland, sent in old
time^ Coronet of Peacocks feathers to John the son of Henry the second, wh^
was designed Lord of Ireland: an^ in our memory, Clement the eight mo^
bountifully rewarded the Earl of Tyrone, for exhausting his patrimony upon
the Irish rebels, with store of indulgences and a Phoenix plume. Wh^ ever
deserved better of the Romis^ faith and See, then Johannes Roffensis, Allin,
Stapleton, Sanders, W. Reynolds, Harding, and your self? yet what has been
done to any of you for all that you have done and suffered in the Popes
quarrel? To one of you a Cardinals hat was sent indeed, but never came on the
party his head, which was cut off by Henry the eight, to an other a Cardinals
hat was given, but with so thin lining, (I mean, means to support his
estate) that he was commonly called the starveling Cardinal. The third was made
professor of a petty University, scarce so good as one of our free Schools
in England. The fourth, whose tongue was so full of adders poison against his
Sovereign and Country, before he died felt his tongue cleaving to the roof
of his mouth, being starved to death in Ireland. The fifth was nominated to a
poor Vicaridge under vallew: on a sixth his Holiness bestowed a prebend of
Gaunt, or to speak more properly a gaunt prebend. And you for weighing so
stedily both religions (the Reformed and the Romish) in a A (...) printed by D.
Smith, (...) the prudentia^l balance.
prudentiall balance, he has placed in a pendulous Bishopric adjoining to
Martial epig. l. 1. aere pende^tia Mausolea.
Mausolus his Sepulcher in the air. For your so accuratly and learnedly
maintaining all the Romish tenets, he has at last made you So the Italians
call in de^ision a titular Bishop.
nullatenensem a hold. naught. When Saint Mat. 17. 4.
Peter spoke of making Tabernacles in the air, the Luke 9. 33
Evangelist says, he knew not what he said: and now when his pretended
successor, Pope Urbane the eight foundeth Episcopal Sees, and Cathedral
Churches, and Ecclesiastical Courts in the air, may we not be bold to say
that he does he knows not what, and deserves the title of sapientum octanus.

It is not for nothing that he assumeth to himself the name of Urbane, or the
facetious who requiteth his best servants and chiefest favorites with jests
and riddles- For read my riddle what is this? the Supervisour of a See unseene a
Bishopric of Chalcedon in Brittanie, an extraordinary Ordinary, a Diocesan of
particulars universals, Romish Catholics, English Romanists, and Superior t^
all the irregular regulars in Engla^ and Scotland.

PAR 3.
What a kind of Religion Popery is.

HOw be it were the cause you maintain good, the fortune you sustain could in
no sort prejudice you, either in your conscience, or your credit. For to follow
Christ naked is an honor and an ornament to a Christian: and Solomon has left
this for one of his divine essays, that the (...) 9* (...).
race is not to the swiftest, nor the battle to the strongest, nor yet bread
to the wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor favor to men of skill,
nor the greatest preferment to the (...). (...). (...).
worthiest. The golden bishopric of Carthage fell to the lot of leaden Council
a^. rica^ in subscript sub Bo^ace (...) Celesti^ (...) (...) p^ ^55.
Aurelius, and little Hippo to great St. Austine, of whom we may truly say
concerning Hippo, as it was said of (...). m^ (...) ^x Euripid^s q^am E^pides
ex. (...) (...) (...).
Euripides concerning his familiarity with Archelaus, that Hippo was better
known by S. Austine then St. Austine by Hippo. Let it not seem strange that
men of meaner worth set the best leg forward, and outstrip their betters now
adays: when in the ancient and better times of the Church Damasus the scholar
was advanced to the first See, and Hieren ad Damasum papam epist. 143, 144, 145
146, etc.
Ieromie his Master (to whom even after he was Pope he expounded many difficult
places of Scripture) ended his days in his Cell at Bethlem. And Gregory
Nazianzen the learnedest of all the Greek fathers and surnamed the divine in
the sharing of preferments in Capadocia could get but the poorest and most
incommodious Bishopric in all that province: about which he expostulates with
Saint Basil. A rich stone is of no less worth when it is locked up in a Epist.
31.
wicker kasket, then when it is set in a Bishops mytre. The wise Historian
observed that the statues of Tacit: annal: eo praefulgebant quod non visebantur.
Brutus and Cassius were the more glorious and illustrious, because they were
not brought out with other Images in a solemn procession at the funeral of
Germanicus. And in like manner men of excellent endowments when they are
neglected in states, are by so much the more inwardly reverenced by how much
they receive the less outward honor, and advancement. Cato was in the right
who said he had rather men should question why he had no statue or monument
erected unto him, then why he had. For certainly men honor them more who ask
why such and such men are not preferred, then they who enquire why such men are
preferred, or what worth is in them correspondent to the titles they bear. But
what is this to your either advancement or disesteeme in the Sea of Rome; Saint
Cyprian teaches us that if a man suffer death in an erroneous belief, being
fallen away from the truth, his suffering is not corona fidei but
paenaperfidiae, not a crown of faith, but a punishment of his perfidiousnesse.
It is just that they who wrong their native soil should be disrespected in
foreign countries. Had you continued in the universitie of Oxford, you might
have been not only according to your name, faber a Smith, but even Aurifaber a
goldsmiths to form many precious vessels for Gods Sanctuary, whereas now
since your revolt from your Religion, and departure out of this kingdom you
have turned silver-smith, like those in the Acts that Acts. 19. 14.
made shrines for Diana, they for Diana of Ephesus, you of Rome, or rather,
like Alexander, (...) a Copper-smith. Aeneas when he left Troy, carried his
Father, and his gods out with him: (...) you when you forsook your countr^
left your mother and your religion a^ behind you, and you have ever sin^ spent
all your time in maintaining a^ propagating by your tongue and pen^ a Religion,
which is where it diff^ from us, nothing else but a cento (...) See the book
of the 3. confirmities Whitaker. Cont 2. de not. eccle. q. 5. C. 7. Rivet
summa. cont. q. 1.
hotch-potch of diverse heresies and superstitions. A religion which loosene^
and dissolveth all bonds of vows, a^ religious obligations by papal dispe^
sation, or Jesuitical aequivocation: (...) religion which sacrilegiously
robbe^ God of his honor, Christ of his praerogatives, and Princes of their
sovereignty. A religion which blasphemous^ derogateth from the sufficiency o^
Scripture, impiously mutilateth both the ten Commandments, (cutting ou^ the
second) and the Sacrament (taking the cup from the laity:) praesumptuously
adds to the Apostles creed as many more new Articles, Idolatrously worshipeth
Images, pictures, shrines, relics, the Cross, and the consecrated wafer,
superstitiously halloweth cream, spittle, medals, and beads, etc. A religion
whose last resolution of faith is into the Pope, who has been oftentimes an
heretic and sometimes a necromancer. A religion which warranteth subjects to
take arms against their Bellar. l. (...) de Rom po^. c. 7. Sipri^ cipos
conentur ^vertere pop^lum a sule possunt (...) (...) privari suo daminio, et
non licet christianis solerare regem infidelem (...) hereticum. vid. Bulla^
Pauli cons. Hon. 8. (...) Pij. 5. cont. Eliza, et l Card. Alani cuitit An
admonition to the nobility of England and Ieland concerning the present warr^
made for the execution of his holiness sentence against and Elizabeth.
Clement. 8. his Bull and letters to Tyron Set down at large in my L. Carew his
book tit. pacata: Hiber. l 3. c. 18.
Sovereign, canonizeth (...) the Jesuits chatechisme Apolog. Garneti
Amphitheatrum honoris et lit. Card. Commensis ad Parreum perduellionis reum et
ca^al. mar^y. Jesuit. c^messig. et nom. excus. lutes.
parri^des, and crowns traitors with the garlands of martyrs. A religion
which dispenses with incestuous marriages and sins against nature, sets a rate
upon all Taxa Camere Apostol wess. cont indulg.
crimes and draws a revenew from the sinkes of all impuritie (stews and
brothels) a tribute far worse then that of Vespasian ex lotio. Had I
contested with you in our meeting at Paris about any of these no less
unexcusable then unsufferable impieties of your Romish pseudocatholike faith,
into what an agony should I have put you; when conferring rather then
disputing with you according to the laws praescribed by the company calmely
and peaceably about one of the most plausible tenets of your Trent Creed, in
which you make most show of Fathers and brag of Scriptures, you were foiled in
every argument: and driven t^ much perplexity and miserable esc^ patories, as
I will presently make it appear after I have acquainted the reader with the
issue of other former conferences in France, which occasioned this with you.

PAR. 4.
The issue of diverse disputations in France, and how the Romanists have had
always the worst in conferences with Protestants.

Upon the sad news of the death of Henry the fourth, whom Ravaliach ran into
the side with a stiletto in Paris, near the Church of Saint Innocents, right
over against the house, whose sign was the flever de lies his own arms: Sir
Thomas Edmonds being sent with all speed into France to be liedger Ambassador
for his Majesty of Great Britain, left order with D. King then Vicechancellor
of Oxford (afterward Lord Bishop of London) to provide him a Chaplain; who
with much importunity drew me green from the Universiry, after my first
solemn The rehearsal Sermon, Anno 16^0.
exercise in Saint Mary's, to this employment in France. Where I was no sooner
arrived, but I heard of diverse English Priests resident there, who not only
set upon our English Gentlemen that traveled into those parts, and fixed some
of them in the wrong, who before were unsettled in the right: but put the
Ambassadors Chaplains also oftentimes to some trouble. These were D.
Stanhurst, D. Wright, D. Bagshau, D. Stevens, D. Smith the elder, D. Champney,
M. Reyner, M. Meridith, and others, with whom I declined all manner of
contestation in point of Religion for a great while, not upon any distrust of
the cause, neither any fear lest they should gain upon the truth, or unsettle
me or any other in any ground of our most Orthodoxe belief. For blessed be
God, as in former times, so in our age we see the promise of our Savior daily
fulfilled in diverse of the reformed Religion, who have been See Acts and
Monuments of the Church. Cri^pin in Mar^rolog. Histoire Des Vaud.
convented before your Inquisitours, Luke (...) 15.
I will give you a mouth and wisdom which all your adversaries shall not be
able to gainsay nor resist. And as o^ of the mouth of women and Mat. 21. 16.
Psalm. 8. 2.
children he has perfected praise, so in publi^ disputations between the
learned Doctors on both sides, he has ev^ Mat. 12. 20.
brought forth judgment on our si^ unto victory. Witness the solem^
disputation in the Synod of Basil between the Orthwinus Gratius in fascic rer.
expetend. and sug.
Huzzites and your Prelates and Doctors, in the year of o^ Lord, 1438. Wherein
Johannes Rok^ zanus the Taborite, and Petrus P^ mus our Country man, so worth^
acquitted themselves in the defer^ of the Bohemian Articles, that they r^
gained from that Synod the free use^ the holy cup in the Sacrament for t^
Laity. Witness the disputation between Martin Luther, and Eckius (...) at
Lipsia by the Appointment of Du^ George of Saxony, Anno 15^9. (...) which I
may say as the Orator speaks of Cic: orat^r Marcelli pugna ad Nolam populus
Romanus primo se erexit postea multae res prosperae cosecutae sunt.
Marcellus his battle wit^ Hanniball at Nola, it gave the first li^ to the
reformed party in Germany, an^ after it the affairs of religion went (...)
most prosperously. Witness the disputation at Zurick, appointed by the Bishop
of Constance, between Faber S^apulensis, and Zuinglius, Anno 1523. at which
the Champion for the Romish party was so daunted, that after a flourish, he
said in that great assembly, that the cognition and determination of
differences in religion pertained to a general council which was near at
hand, and that he would confute the doctrine of his adversary by writing,
dispute he would no longer: the issue was the Senate of Zuricke presently
proclaimed reformation. Witness the disputation a^ Baden, Anno 1525. between
Oecolampadius and Eckius, where Eckius sat down by the loss, and the Church
gained all the reformed Pagi of Helvetia. Witness the disputation at Berne in
Anno 1527. between Conradus Treyerus an Augustine Friar, and Martin Bucer. This
disputation held 19. days, the issue whereof was a pillar erected by the
Senate at Berne: in which they wrote in golden letters the day and year of
their reformation. To come nearer home; Witness the disputation begun a^
Westminster by the commandment of Queen Humfred in vit^ Jewel. ^ox Acts and
Momuments. Tom. 3. p. (...)
Elizabeth, Anno 1559. between D. Story Bishop of Chichester, D. Cocks, M.
Whitehead, M. Grindol, M. Horn, D. Sands, M. Gest, M. Elmer, M. Jewel on the
one side for the Protestants, and the Bishops of Winchester, Litchfield,
Chester, Carlisle, Lincoln, D. Cole, D. Harpsfield, D. Langdale, D. Chedsey on
the other side, in which after the Protestants had given the charge, the Popish
party presently sounded a retreat, and upon frivolous pretenses brake up the
conference, witness the Epistle of Gerson Archiepisc. Prag: neque rursus in
disputa^do apud tales, etc. ullus unqua^ (...) fini^; sca^dalizabitur populus
denique talis protervitas incidit in illud poetae aegrescitque medendo l. de
punit: haere^. non est public disputandum cum ^aeretico praese^tim pertinaci.
Sunt enim haeretici in disputando disertissimi and sciunt optime disput ationum
retia tendere. Huiu^ rei exemplum nobis praeluit publica disputati^ cum Luthero
Litsia habita.
Gerson to the Archbishop of Prague, in which he disswadeth him from putting
the matter of Religion to a Trial in disputation, because by such a course
taken with the Huzzites, the noble forerunners of our protestant faith, the
people would be scandalized, and the wound given already to the Church, would
be made worse by the cure. And lastly, witness the determination of k Alfonsus
a Castro, we ought not says he publicly to dispute with an heretic,
especially if he be pertinacious, for heretics are most nimble in disputation,
and very skillful to spread nets of arguments, as we have an example in the
public disputation with Luther at Lipsia.

I had no reason therefore to doubt our arguments or cause which like P^rtas
Caesare^ and fortunam (...). Eras. Apoth.
Caesar has ever been victorious. Yet partly because I had not as then spent
so much time in the study of controversies, as I thought requisite for him who
was to encounter with veterani milites, old soldiers of the Popes train band:
partly because I knew whatsoever my performance might be, the major part of the
spectators addicted to the Romish party, would do me no right in the
relation; I carefully avoided all conflicts with them, till by a wile I was
drawn into the lists with Christopher Bagshan D. D. sometimes fellow of Baily
College in Oxford, and afterward Principal of Gloster-Hall. This D. I met at
M. Alexanders a Scottish Papist his house at a dinner, to which my Lord
Ambassadors Secretary, M. Woodford and my self were invited. At the last
service, M. Alexander blew the coal, and D. Bagshan presently took fire: and
immediately after dinner we fell (...) it with great vehemence for man^ hours.
What this conference wroug^ with others there present, I cannot say but sure I
am, it left many scruples (...) M. Alexanders mind. From that ho^ he began to
question the Romish Religion in which he was borne and bre^ and diverse times
after he repaired to m^ to instruct him more fully in the doctrine of the
reformed Churches, a^ when he lay upon his death bed, he ea^ nestly desired
those about him to se^ for me with all speed: but they bei^ zealous in the
Romish Religion, a^ conceiving that my conference wi^ him would set him further
of from t^ same, fulfilled not his last desire, but in stead of me, brought to
him a Popis^ Priest, who finding him drawing on (...) his end, offered to
administer to hi^ their Sacrament of extreme unction which he refused to
receive from him This a servant of his with weeping eyes after his burial
related at my Lord Ambassadors house. My nex^ conflict was with D. Stevens,
occasioned by an English Gentlewoman, wh^ falling into want, and being relieve^
(...) his means, was easily drawn by ^m to hear their Lent Sermons; and at
Easter, the Papists who had contributed to her necessities, made full account
that then she would communicate with them, and renounce our Church. But that
she might not be thought to be drawn to them for temporal respects, and that
D. Stevens might have the honor to win her from us by disputation, he and she
both by themselves and their friends, importuned me to give them a meeting at
M. Porie his Chamber in the Fauxburg of Saint Germans. I fought at the first
what I could to put it off, because I had an inckling that this conference was
sought for, only to give some color to her intended revolt from us: yet being
deeply adjured by her, as I tendered the good of a soul bought with Christ's
blood, and being directly challenged in the end by D. Stevens, I met at the
time and place appointed. Where the Doctor made an eloquent speech, imbroidered
with all variety of learning, wherewith many there present were much taken, but
when he came to dispute, and was tied to propound his arguments in a
syllogisticall form, and so propounding the^ received some unexpected answers,
(...) quite lost himself, being derided (...) some, and pitied by others in
reg^ of his great age. At the next meeti^ which was far more solemn, (...)
Lord Clifford and diverse other person of great quality being present, D. S^vens
gave way to D. Bagshau to disp^ for him; who first answered, and af^ opposed in
the question by the audit^ proposed, and by us stated; the sum^ of which
disputation was taken (...) M. Arscot and M. Ashley there prese^ and by M. M.
P. sent over to his Gr^ See the relation thereof in the end of this Treatise.
of Canterbury. The Gentlewo^ after these conferences gave less ho^ to the
Papists then before, whereup^ their charity waxing cold toward h^ the next
news I heard of her was t^ she was cast in prison for debt, wh^ I visiting
her, found her constant in (...) truth, and firmly resolved by Go^ grace never
to enthrall her soul to R^mish Idolatry and superstition, to (...) deem her
body from that miserab^ captivity, being committed to a clo^ and nastie prison
in a strange Count^ among those that hated her with a pe^ f^ct hatred for the
constant love she^ ^re to the truth.

PAR. 5.
Of the absurd title in the frontispice of Edward Stratford his pamphlet, and
how lamely and imperfectly both he and his Lord and Fisher and Weston have
answered former treatises set out by the Author.

ABout this time you came to Paris and understanding what had past between me
and your pue-fellowes for reasons best known to your self, you dealt with M.
John Fourd by M. Knevet his half brother to draw us together to a friendly
conference, which soon after your arivall he also effected as your Chaplain
S. E. relates, in his introduction to your conference, to which he has
prefixed an absurd title viz The conference mentioned by D. F. in the end of
his Sacrilege, frontispicium sine front. Is the sacrilege which I detect and
convict your church of by the joint testimony of all ages, my sacrilege? can
he make this goo^ by his Doway logic? suum cuique, giv^ every man his own,
the book is min^ the sacrilege is yours. He that de^ fendeth or excuses any
heresy (...) crime in an other, I grant makes it (...) own, and what the great
Lawyer Ulpi^ spoke of parricide, may be said as tru^ of sacrilege, the
justification of so fow^ an act, intitleth the patron thereof^ the crime it
self, and taints him (...) deep or deeper then if he had committed the very
act. In which consid^ration if M. Everard or your Chaplai^ S. E. or any other
drunk with (...) Whores Apoc. 17. 4
cup shall be so hardy as i^ reply to that book of mine to mai^ taine or
excuse your sacrilege in tak^ away the cup from the laity, his rep^ may be
justly termed his sacriledg^ But contrariwise to term a boo^ written ex
professo against sacriledg^ the authors sacrilege, has neith^ color of
truth nor relish of wit, (...) what can be more absurd then to tear^
Mithridates his confection against po^ son, Methridates his poison? or Por^
Latro his invective against conspira^ Portius his conspiracy? or (...)
Emperors Law against adultery, the Lex Iu^ de Adulter^ vid. Bullarium To.
Pontif. L^th. 10. 1. contra Execrabil^ bullam. Anti christi.
Emperors adultery? or the Popes bull against simony, the Popes simony? or
Luther his declamation against Pope Leo his execrable bull, Luther his bull?
^piphanius has written a special book against all heresies, Acontius against
^athans stratagems, The Bishop of ^uresme against the grand imposture of ^e
Roman church, Reynold against the ^dolatrie thereof, Stapleton against the 7.
deadly sins, will he call the first, ^piphanius his heresies, the 2. Acontius
^is stratagems, the 3. The Bishop of Du^sme his grand imposture, the 4. Doctor
Reynolds his Idolatry, the last Stapleton ^is 7. deadly sins. Let his
frontispice ^hen blush for shame, and by his own ^eason take sacrilege to
himself, and ^all it his sacrilege, because it is his ^tle: and let him cite
the title of my book true as it is, The grand sacrilege ^f the Church of
Rome, that he may have at least one true quotation in all his book.

In my book (which he so nicknameth) a great beam is discovered in the eye of
the Roman church: in the ^elation of the conference appendant thereunto a mote
in your eye. Why does he so earnestly endeavor to take out the mote out of
your eye, and leave the beam in his mothers eye the church of Rome, is your
credit dearer to him then his catholic belief? or thought he^ himself
sufficiently provided to encounter the small skiffe attending on the great
vessel, not the great vessel it self? If he and the rest of you so much
slighten my endeavors against your Trent Faith, that you think them not
worthy the taking notice off, why do you put forth answers to part of them?
if you esteem them fit to be looked after, and put to the test of
examination, why do you not answer them entirely? but to halfes, or not so
much as to halfes, scarce to the tenth part, some of you like birds pecke at
the blossoms of my words, other at the bark of my praefaces, or praeambles,
none of you yet has pierced into the heart or pith of any polemical treatise
written by me. Your stout champion In a pamphlet entitled the repair of
honor. Imprinted at ^uges, An: 1^4.
D. Weston bravely charge my Epistle to the A reply to D Featlies answer to
M. ^rs (...). (...) An. (...)
reader and presently repaires to his fort for fear of gunshot. M. John Fisher
the Jesuit advances a little further, he shapeth some kind of answer to a
piece of my preamble to the Romish Fisher caught and held in his ^owne net, and
there sits down panting for breath, now this 9 years: and your Chaplain
after two years, since the book of the grand sacrilege was printed, falls
most valiantly upon the appendix consisting of a few leaves, leaving the maine
treatise untouched; wherein a Jury is impanaled of all ages, condemning your
Romish Synagoguo of a crime of a high nature, a crimson sin the robbing Gods
people of their Redeemers blood contained as we say mystically, as you believe
literally and properly in the chalice. Every argument in it against you is
confirmed by the prime writers of your own ^de: every objection of yours
against ^s is solved out of your own C^assick divines, who are brought upon
the theater like Roman fencers playing their p. (...) and seq.
prizes, and dangerously wounding one the other. Out of compassion to whom, if
not for the love of the cause, he should have drawn his weapon if he durst. I
have heard from the mouths of two Roman Priests that that treatise is as a
thorn in your eyes: yet your Chaplain dares not pluck at it for fear of
pricking his fingers: but under your relation, tanquam sub Ajacis clypio, under
Ajax buckler hides himself presently after he has flung a dart of Calumny at
a Conference of mine signed and subscribed by two witnesses, both named by him,
and acknowledged to be present at that disputation in Paris, Anno 1612.

PAR. 6.
Of the novelty of Popery, and the true occasion of the Author his conference
with D. Smith at Paris.

AFter I have repelled his darts, I will encounter your relation, in both which
the Greek proverb is verified, (...), never a barrel better herring. In his
Eras. Adag.
introduction, from p. 3. to the 11. he relates the occasion of this
conference, partly defectively, partly injuriously and falsely.

1. His narration is defective, in that he relates, pa 8. That M. Knevet was
put in mind that he was mistaken in the matter of Religion, and that before
Luther, all known Churches did believe that which he saw there in France
openly professed, but he omitteth what was replied thereunto, that this was a
stale allegation confuted a 1000. times by Protestants, he omitteth also what
was retorted (viz.) that no known Church in the world before the late Council
at Trent, which began in the year of our Lord, 1545. and ended in the year
1563. believed those 12. now articles added to the Apostles Creed, ^lla Pij 4
Pontif. anno, 5. A. D. 1564. Haee est catholica fides extra qua^ nemo saluua
essa potest quam in prasenti pr^or, etc p. 441.
by Pius 4. to be de fide and to be assented unto by all men under pain of
damnation. That the Primitive Church worshipped no Images, knew no private
masses, or half communions, or prayers in an unknown tongue nor Church
treasury of superabundant satisfactions, nor Popes indulgences for the release
of souls out of Purgatory, nor any of that dross which he saw in your Church
mingled with the gold of the Sanctuary: that a man would have been laughed out
of his skin, who would in those days have given any credit to that which he
and I both saw in Paris openly professed, and painted too, viz. Saint Denis
holding his head in his hand, and our Lady saying over the Rosarie with a
great pair of beads about her neck, Saint Genoviefue Patroness of Paris,
carried in solemn procession about the streets, and public supplications
made to her for rain, or the host carried in state in the street under a
Canopie, and the people kneeling before it in the dirt, or Christ eating the
Paschall Lamb larded after the French fashion, or an Ass kneeling down to
the Sacrament, or Bees building a Chapel and the like legendarie fopperies.

2. It is false and injurious in that he says, p. 8. that I thought my self
alone hard enough for the whole Church of Rome, and p. 10. that I presuming of
victory made the matter known both to the English and to the French. Me
thinks you should have taught your Chaplain better then to put his dreams in
print for my thoughts, and to presume what were my presumptions, neither had I
any such thought, neither presumed upon any such thing; for although I know my
self to be ignorant of many things which I ought to know: yet I dare boldly
profess with Origin, Ignorantiam meam non ignoro, I am not ignorant of my
ignorance, neither have I been shie to make so much known to all men, in most
of my disputations, using this premonition, that if the auditory should not be
satisfied in my arguments or answers, that they ought to impute it to the
weakness of the advocate, not of the cause, and this or the like conclusion,
that if they heard any thing that gave them contentment, they were to ascribe
it to the goodness of the cause which I maintained, which will be able to
defend it self not only against the Popes chair but also against hell gates.

But I need not wipe off the aspersion of self confidence cast upon me, p. 10.
he himself does it, p. 12. saying that I called M. Moulines a famous French
Preacher to the Conference, whereas it was appointed, that the Conference
should be betwixt us two only. If I thought my self hard enough for the
whole Church of Rome, what need I call in Peter Moulines to assist me, against
one Doctor only of the Church of Rome? Here certainly your Lordships
Chaplain was forgetful of special precept in his art, oportet mendacem esse
memorem, he that will v^ lies, and desires not to be taken in them ought to
have a good memory, least (...) contradict himself, for lies are contrary,
not only to the truth, but oftentimes to themselves also.

PAR. 7.
Of the Conditions of this Conference, and how they were kept on both sides.

HAving done with your servant for the present, and given him his arrant, I
come now to confer with your self, or rather to hear your reference and
rehearsal of our Conference, two and twenty years ago, September 4. Whereof
I may truly say, as Scaliger does of Baronius his Annals, (facit annals non
scribit) he makes Annals or Chronicles, he writes them not: so verily you
rather make a new Conference betwixt me and you, then relate the old. For you
devise conditions, cast my arguments into a new mould, piece out your own
answers, invert the order, and fairly dissemble those replies that touched you
to the quick, wherefore I entreat the Reader to take notice that the
Protestant relation of the Conference printed 1630. was taken out of the
authentical notes of both parties, and confirmed and subscribed by two that
were present at the disputation, and confessed to have been so by your self,
p. 9. but this narration of yours is penned by your self, and published 2^.
years after, and has no attestation at all unto it. Yet because you shall
know that I am ready to answer, not only to all that you did then say, but to
all that you can say in the propounded question, I will trace you, (...) and
where you stumble help you up.

First, you charge me with the breach of I know not what condition, by making
the Conference more public then it should have been. The two noters make
mention but of three conditions or laws made by the company, and assented unto
by us before we exchanged any word, which were these. 1. That we should
dispute calmely and peaceably. 2. That all impertinent discourses should be
avoided. 3. That M. Featly at this time should only oppose, and D. Smith only
answer. The fourth law which you mention concerning the private carriage of
this Conference was so privately enacted, that I never heard of it till now,
the other three I kept punctually through the whole Conference, but you
violated, at the first entrance you had scarce spoken three words before you
transgressed the third law, whereat I took exception and offense, not because
I was affrighted at the very sight of your tenets, as your Chaplain S. E.
would scare his simple Reader, though your Transubstantiation be an ougly
Monster, nor for that I was netled at the proposal of your objections against
our tenet: for they were but blind nettles, as we term them, that sting not
at all; but partly because I could little hope for any fair proceedings from
him, who stumbled at the threshold, and brake his own promise before he
infringed any argument of mine, partly and especially, because you brandished
your sword furiously against me, when you knew I was engaged by promise, and
bound by the law at that time not to use my Buckler. I saw my condition like
his in Floresta Hispan: l. fac^.
Floresta, who seeing a dog run at him, and stooping down to take up a stone
to fling at him, and finding it so fast in the ground that he could not moove
it, cried out, A vengeance on this country where dogs are let loose and
stones are tied. Your tiphenie wherewith you cover this skarre in your
reputation from the custom of Oxford (for the respondent to confirm his
Thesis) is too transparent and netlike. For what was the custom of Oxford in
this kind to us in Paris, who had by joint consent set down an other order to
be held in this disputation? Neither did you (si meminisse jnvat) at that time
insist upon any such Oxford custom, nor intimated so much, that you took any
degrees of Schools there: for then I should in the first place have charged
you with the Articles of Religion you subscribed unto, and the oaths you took
at your presentation: to all which you bid adieu when you w^ first bound for
Rome. -- Vent is and verba, and vela dedisti
Vola queror reditu verba carere fide.
As for the short warning (where you complain) to prepare for the meeting, you
allege it but for fashion For who knows not that you were professor many
years in Spain, a^ in your written Works had befo^ this elabourately handled
this question Besides, for ought I know you we^ acquainted with the day of our
disputa tion as soon as it was set: this I am sure of, that excepting only
the goodness of the cause, you had all advantages of me. First of years, for
I was but Tyro, you veteranus miles, I the^ but a pusney in these studies, you
a Doctor in your faculty, of so loud (...) fame that your name rung before
this in England, France and Spain, insomuch, that as you your self reported
M. Knevet said of me that I was to young to deal with you. Secondly of books,
for I brought but a few with me to Paris, nor had access (being known an
opposite to your Religion) to any of your Libraries. Whereas you besides your
own, had the command of the Library of Sorbone, and others in the City and
University. Thirdly of assistance, for I was alone and had none to advise
withal: you conversed daily with the Sorbone Doctors of your society, the
acutest disputants of this age. Yet whatsoever garland now your Chaplain
platteth for you, at that time you were far from triumphing. For you doubted
your own answers, and like bears whelps often licked them to bring them to
some form, and when at the end of the Conference I had read them all unto you
written from your own mouth; a friend of yours snatched the paper away, and
never would (...) ver it, but in liew thereof you tendered me a paper of
answers written with your own hand, with such additions and limitations, as
your after thoughts suggested: in which notwithstanding fairly you yielded the
cause, saying, ego agnosco quod in his verbis, hoc est corpus meum, est figura:
that is, I acknowledge that there is a figure in these words, or that these
words are to be taken figuratively. If so, then they make no more for the
Transubstantiation of Bread into Christ's Body, then the like figurative words,
I am the door, I am the vine, I am the way, make for the Transubstantiation of
Christ's Body or person into a vine door or way. Wherefore I cannot but commend
your ingenuity in choosing that sentence of Saint Austine for your posie in the
frontispice of your relation, facile est ut quisque Augustinum vincat, quanto
magis ut vicisse videatur, aut si non videatur, vicisse dicatur, it is an easy
thing to get the better of Austin, how much more to seem to get the better, or
if not to seem yet to be so reported, if you neither had the worse, nor seemed
to have, nor were reported to have the worst in this Conference, how does this
posie fit your relation, but if either, indeed you were foiled, or in
appearance, or at least in report, discordant ultima primis, the first words
agree not with the last, that you got the field, and bare away the prize.

PAR. 8.
The state of the question is truly set down, five points wherein we differ
touching the Real presence are touched.

THe praeludium is past concerning the occasion and conditions: I come now to
the encounter it self concerning your Real presence by Transubstantiation.
For which those of your Church contend, tanquam pro aris and focis, and well
may you so do, for it furnishes your ara and your focus too. Iustitut. l. 4.
c. 17. quia Satan have exposit^ veritatem per turbulentos spiratus hodi^ quoque
molilius quibuscunque potest calumnijs and probris foedare nec in ullam al^am
rem maiori conatu incumbit accuratius eam tueri and asserere opere pretium est.
Calvin truly observes that Satan by his instruments labors nothing more
then to suppress the truth in this point of controversy: and in regard of the
infinite Volumes written on both sides. Chamierus de Euch. l 10. c. 1. quaestio
de reali praesentia est animosissima, prolixissima, intricatissima sed and
nobilissima.
Chamerus rightly terms it the most intricate and perplexed, as also the
most noble question of all other between the Roman and the reformed Churches.
It much imports therefore both parties, that (...) be rightly stated and
solidly handled that which you say in the explication of the state of the
question is very brief, much like lightning in t^ night, that rather skareth a
man the^ shows him the way in the dark^ That which your Chaplain added is
large and clear enough, but like false fire held out by Pirates in t^ night to
draw Mariners into dange^ You say p. 17. that the Conference (...) to be not
of Transubstantiation, but of (...) Real presence only, which by order (...)
disputation ought to be first. Yet b^ your favor these questions are not (...)
distinct and severed as you imply, (...) rather like the wheels in Ezekiel 1. 16
And their work was as it were a wheel in the midst of a wheel.
Ezekie^ vision, rota in rota implicit, one in the other. You believe no Real
prese^ otherways then by Transubstantiation your Council. Trid. Sess. 13. c. 1.
Doce^ Sancta Synodus in almo Sanctae Eucharistiae Sacramento post panis and
vini consecrationem Christum verum Deum atque hominem vere realiter and
substantialiter subspecie illarum re^ sensibilium contineri.
Council of Trent in that Ca non wherein it defines your Real presence
involveth Transubstantiation, the Synod teaches that in the Sacrament^ the
holy Eucharist, Christ God and M^ is truly really and substantially contained
under the form or accidents (...) the sensible creatures of Bread and ^ine. If
the substance of Christ's flesh ^e there under the resemblances or ^cidents of
Bread and Wine, the substance then of Bread and Wine must be gone, and Christ
his Body and Blood ^cceed in the room of them, and ^hat's this but a
paraphrase of Transubstantiation? take that away, and we shall soon join
Andre^ Episcopu^ VVint. Resp. ad apolog. Bellar. c. 1. p. 11. Nobis autem
vobiscum do obiecto convenit, de modo l^ omnis est, pr^sentiam credim^ nec
minus quam vos ver^m, de modo praesentiae nil temere de^imus, addo nec anxie
inquirimu^.
issue with you, for (...) agree with you in the object, we differ ^out the
manner, we believe as true a ^esence as you, touching the manner of ^is
presence we define nothing rashly, nor ^quire curiously no more then in Bap^sme
after what manner Christ his blood ^asheth us, no more then in the mystery ^f
the Incarnation how and after what ^anner the humane nature is united to the
divine in one person.

Your Chaplain S. E. (that I may repay him back some of his own coin) p.
23. being conscious of the weakness of his cause thought the very sight of
our tenet as it appears in the Protestants relation, p. 288, 289. would
overthrow his utterly, and therefore conceales my distinctions of presence and
real, which are the keys with several wards, without whi^ this question
cannot be opened: (...) as f Weston writes that his head ak^ in reading D:
Reynolds his books o^ the Idolatry of the Church of Rom^. So your crazie
Chaplain, Conference by S. E being to tell the state of the question he puts
down a discourse to make the simple Reader giddie,
p. 2^ complains that my discourse upon the state of the question made his
he^ giddie. For a while he stands amaze like the Goat, after he has tasted
t^ herb Eringium, and after when he comes to himself, either ignorantly o^
wilfully mistaketh his way. The S^ cramentarians, says he, for whom D. Featly
disputed against our tenet, (...) that the Body and Blood of our Savior be not
in the Eucharist truly accordi^ to the verity and substance of the thing
signified by those names, but that the Eucharist is a sign and figure of them
(...) For proof whereof he (...) (...) (...) shreds and snips of (...) (...)
(...), Peter Martyr, (...) (...) ^ght, Perkins, Zuinglius, (...) (...) Calvin,
taken from your Conference of Catholic and Protestant doctrine, c. 10.
shop-boord. If it be no disparagement for him, yet certainly it cannot but
be a great blemish in you to understand no better the Doctrine of the
Protestants, we impug^e the Sacramentarians as well as you. ^our Chaplain
might have learned as ^uch out of the Ancilla Piet^. p. 83.
Handmaid to Devotion. Let no heretical Harpie pluck from thee thy heavenly
dish or meat, as Celeno did Aeneas' s. Beware of two sorts of heretics
especially, which seek to ^guile thee in the Sacrament, or rather of it, viz.
Sacramentaries. Papists.
The one denying the sign, the other the thing signified. The one offers
thee a shadow without the body, the other the ^ody without the shadow, and
consequently neither of them gives thee the true Sacrament, to whose nature
and essence both ^re requisite. The Sacramentaries (...) rob thee of the
jewel, the Papists of the casket. As Christ at his Passion was crucified
between two thieves: so the Sacrament of his Passion is fallen among two
thieves likewise, the Sacramentaries who take away the substance of Christ
body, and you Transubstantiators, who take away the substance of the elements.
We take part with neither of you, but endite you both of felonious Sacrilege.
But because you are a Bishop in title at least, I refer you to be instructed
in the point by a Reverend Lancelot Winton: answer to the 18. C. of the first
book of Cardinal Peron.
Bishop of o^ Church. It is well known says h^ whither he (naming there the
pri^ patron of the Sacramentarians) leane^ that to make this point straight he
bo^ it too far the other way, to avoid est i^ the Church of Romes sense, he
fell to b^ all for significat and nothing for est (...) all, and whatsoever
went further the significat he took to savor of the ca^ nall presence, for
which if the Cardin^ mistike him, so do we. And so, he d^ not well^ against
his own knowledge (...) charge his opinion upon us. Neither do you, who if you
have read your sel^ the Conference of Catholic and Protestant doctrine. C. 10.
passages which you cote out o^ Jewel, Cartwright, Martyr, Muscul^ Perkins,
Beza, Calvin, etc. and took^ them not up upon trust; cannot be know that they
are meant of the outward element, which is not ind^ Christ's Body as Jewel, not
properly (...) Body as Martyr, not the very Body, a^ Musculus, but only a
sign, as Cartwright, a figure as Beza, or at the most a seal as Perkins is
alleged b^ you to call it. None of them affirm that in the Eucharist or holy
Sacrame^ ^selfe an empty figure or a bare sign ^exhibited. Let Jewel* apolog.
c. 138 d x. Pa^ and vinum dicimus esse sacra and (...) mysteria corporis and
sanguinis Christi and illis Christum ipsum verum panem eternae vitae sic nobis
praesentem exhiberi ut eius corpus sanguinemque per sidem vere sumamus etc. 4.
d. x.
Jewel, Calvin I^ stitut. l 4. c. 17. Sect. 19. His absurditatibus sublatis
quicquid ad exprimendam veram sub^antialemque corporis and sanguinis Domini
communicationem quae sub sacr^ c^ne symbolis sidelibus exhibetur, libenter
recipio atque ita ut no^ imaginatione du^xat ac mentis intelligentia percipere,
sed ut re ipsa fr^ in alimentum vitae eternae i^telligatur. Sec. 11. dico
duabus rebus constare s^crum caenae mysterium corporeis signis and spirituali
veritate quae per symbol^ ipsa figuratur, simul and exhibetur, and Sec. 10.
Spiritus vere unit qu^ loci^ dis^cta sunt, a symboli exhibitione rem ipsam
exhibere rite colligim^s and ^ccepto corporis symbolo non minus corpus etiam
ipsum nobis dari certo con^imus.
Calvin ^d Perkins speak for the rest. We ^firme that the Bread and Wine are
the holy and heavenly mysteries of the Body and Blood of Christ, and that by
them Christ himself being the true Bread of ^ternall life, is so presently
given unto us as that by faith we verily receive his Body and Blood. And a
little after we abase not the Lords Supper, or teach that it is but a cold
ceremony only, as ^any falsely slander us, (you and S. E. for ^ample) For we
affirm that Christ ^oth truly and presently give himself wholly in his
Sacraments, in Baptism, that we may put him on, and in his Supper, that we may
eat him by faith, and spirit, and may have everlasting life by his Cross and
Blood: and we say not that this is done slightly or coldly, but effectually
and truly. Calvin, Taking away these absurdities (he speaks of
Consubstantiation and Transubstantiation* whatsoever may be said to express t^
communication of the true and substantial Body and Blood of the Lord whi^ are
exhibited to the faithful under t^ holy Symbols of the Supper, I willingly
admit, and that in such sort, that the participation may be understood not
(...) imagination only, and apprehension (...) the mind, but a real fruition
to neur^ the body and soul to eternal life, and again, I say that the holy
mystery of the Supper consists of two things, bodily signs and the spiritual
truth, which is both figured and exhibited by the signs. For the Spirit truly
uniteth those things which are severed in place. From the exhibition of the
sign we rightly, infer the thing signified by it to be exhibited to us, and
when we receive the sign we are confident that we receive the Body it self,
Reformed Catholic 10. point. p. 590.
Perkins is as full: we hold and believe a presence of Christ's Body and Blood
in the Sacrament and that no feigned but a true and real presence.

1. In respect of the sign by Sacramental relation. 2. In respect of the
Communicants to whose believing heart he is also really present.
Thus you hear we stand all for a real presence, and that so universally,
that Riv^ summa co^. q. ^8. p. 34. Nemo nostrum cred^ eum intelle^isse tantum
sig^ vel solam gratiam, eumque nihil nobis voluisse largi^ aliud, qu^ qua^ vere
hic p^nis qu^t s^um corporis Christ^ dona^ corporibus nostris, tam ver^ etiam
d^tur animabus nosiris corpus Christi
Andrew Rivet says peremptorily, none of us believes that Christ gives unto
us only a sign of his Body, or only grace, because as truly as the Bread
which is the sign of Christ's body is given to our bodies so truly is the Body
of Christ given unto our souls.

The difference between us is about

1. The means. 2. The meaning of eating Christ.
The means We say is by faith Artic. 28. Only after a heavenly and spiritual
manner the body of Christ is received, and the means whereby it is taken in
the Supper, is faith.
mystically, You by the mouth and properly.
The meaning You say is a carnal. We say is a spiritual manducation.

Desire you a greater light, because it seems your eyes are dim: thus then
conceive of the doctrine of the reformed Churches

1. Christ is said to be present in holy Scriptures four manner of ways.

1. Divinely. 2. Spiritually. 3. Sacramentally. 4. Carnally or corporally.
According to the first kind or manner, he is present in all Ier. 23. 24. Psalm.
139. 7. Whether shall I sly from thy presence? and Amos 9. 2, 3.
places, Can any man hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him,
says the Lord, do not I fill heaven and earth.

According to the second, he is present in the hearts of true Ephesians 3. 17.
believers, I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that Christ
may dwell in your hearts by faith.

According to the third, he is present in the Sacrament both mystically or
relatively, and 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17.
effectually also. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion
of the blood of Christ? the bread that we break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ? For we being many are one bread and one body: for we are
all partakers of that one bread.

According to the fourth, he was present John 1 (...)
in Judea and the confines, in the days of his flesh, And the Word was ^ade
flesh and dwelt amongst us, but is Acts (...). (...).
now in heaven.

2. As the word presence, so also the word really is diversely taken, sometimes

1. As it is opposed to that which is feigned and imaginary, and imports as
much as truly. 2. As it is opposed to that which is merely figurative and
barely representative, and imports as much as effectually. 3. As it is
opposed to that which is spiritual, and imports as much as corporally or
materially.
Conclusion the first.

1. We believe Christ to be present divinely, and that after a special manner
at his table, spiritually in the hearts of the Communicants, Sacramentally in
the elements: but not corporally, either with them by Consubstantiation, or in
the Ame^as Bell. Enervat. Tom. 3. l. 4. c. x p. 95. Corpus Christi
substantialiter non continetur in eodem spati^ quo panis and vinum conti^bantur.
place of them by Transubstantiation.

Conclusion the second.

The presence of Christ in the Sacrament is real in the two former acceptions
of real but not in the last, (...) he is Calvin l. 4. Institut. c. 17. Sec.
11. Per symbola panis and vini Christus vere nobis exhibetur adeoque corpus and
sang^s eius.
truly there present, and Jewel Apolog p. 2. c. 14. d. 1. We say not that this
is done slightly or coldly, but effectually and truly. For though we do not
touch the Body of Christ with teeth and mouth, yet we hold him fast and eat
him by faith, by understanding, and by spirit
eff^ctually though not carnally or loc^ And that this is the general doctrine
the reformed Churches, and co sequently that all your discourse p. 25 26, 28,
47, 51. and through your who^ book generally against empty types bare signs,
void figures, excluding the verity, is u^terly void and of none effect and a
mere (...) and fighti^ with your own shadow: I proo^ by undeniable and
impeachable evidences extant in the book inti^uled, Harmony of confessions:
and I will compass you in both with such a cloud (...) witnesses that you
shall see no way to get out.

The Articles of Religion reprinted by ^s Majesty, special command, (...).
Artic. 2^.
English as it well deserves shall have the first place. The Supper of the
Lord is not only a sign of the lov^ that Christians ought to have among
themselves one to the other, but rather (...) is a Sacrament of our Redemption
by Christ's death, in so much that to such a rightly, worthily, and with faith
receive the same, the Bread which we break is a partaking of the Body of
Christ, and likewise the Cup of blessing is a partaking of the Blood of Christ.

The rest shall follow as they are martialled by the compiler of that work.

The Harmoni^ confess ad Sect. ^4. p. 190. Intus fid^les oper^ Christ's per
Spirit^ Sanctura percipiune etiam car^ and san^nem Domini and pas^untur his in
(...) aternam, (...) p. 110, qui ^oris (...) side Sacra mentum percipit, idem
ille non signum dun taxat percip^ sed (...) ipsa qu^s s^itur.
Helvetian. The faithful receive that which is given them by the Minister of
the Lord, and they eat of the Lords Bread, and drink of the Lords Cup, and at
the same time inwardly through the help of Christ by the Spirit, they receive
the flesh and blood of the Lord; he that outwardly (being a true believer)
receives the Sacrament, he receives not the sign only, but enjoys also the
thing signified.

The confession of Confess. Basilart^. (...). In and Domini cum pane and (...)
Domini verum corpus and verus sanguis Christi per ^inistrum (...) pr^figuratur
and offertur.
Basil. Bread and Wine remain in the Lords Supper, in which together with the
Bread and the Wine, the true Body and Blood of Christ is prefigured and
exhibited.

The Art. 37 qui ad Sacram mensam (...) puram fidem tanquam vas quoddam
afferunt, credimus vere recipere (...) ibi signa tes^ficantur, nempe corpus and
sanguinem Jesus Christi nominus esse cibum and potum animae quam panis and vinum
sunt co^ris cibus.
French. We believe that those who bring to the Lords Table pure faith as it
were a vessel, do truly receive that which there the signs testify, for the
Boand Blood of Jesus Christ are no less (...) meat and drink of the soul,
then br^ and wine are the food of the body.

The Art. 35. Quam vere accipimus and tenemus manibus nostris hoc sacrame^tum
illudque ore comedimus, tam vere etiam nos fide recipere verum corpus and verum
sanguinem Christi.
Belgicke confession. Chr^ instituted Bread and Wine, earthly a^ visible
creatures, for a Sacrament of (...) Body and Blood: whereby he testifet^ that
as truly as we receive and hold (...) our hands this Sacrament, and eat (...)
with our mouths, whereby this our life (...) maintained; so truly by faith,
which (...) as the hand and mouth of the soul, we receive the true Body and
Blood of Christ our only Savior, in our souls, to holy and nourish
spiritual life in them.

The Confess. Aug. Art. 10 In caena Domini corpus and sanguis Christi vere
adsunt and distribu^tur (...) s^ cum (...) and vino v^ exhiben^r.
Augustan. In the Lords Supper the Body and Blood of Christ are truly present
and distributed to the Communicants, or as we read in a later edition they are
truly exhibited with the brea^ and wine.

The S^. Confess c. 18. Art. 14. Falso ab adversarijs iactatur non nisi merum
pane merumque vinum in nosiris caenis administrari.
Suevick. The most holy Supper of our Lord is by us most devoutly, and with
singular reverence ministered and taken, whereby your sacred Majesty may
understand, how falsely our adversaries charge us, that we change Christ's words
and corrupt them with man's glosses, and that nothing is ministered in our
Supper^ but bare bread and mere wine.

By all which it appears, as how falsely your Lordship and S. E. relate our
tenet: so how no less blasphemously then slanderously (...) cont. (...).
Noris compares the Protestants Supper to Heliogabalus his feasts: he should
rather have compared your private Masses to them. For as that Emperor invited
his servants to a banquet, where he ate all himself, and they only looked on:
so you invite the people to your Mass and bid them eat and drink, rehearsing
the words of our Savior (Take eat, this is my body, and drink you all of
this, etc.) yet you eat all and drink all your selves. As the Priests under
the Law among the Jews had their panes propositionis, their show-bread, which
the people ^ever touched: so you, though under the Gospel, have panem
propositionis, shewbread, and always vinum propositionis, shew-wine, for the
people very seldom eat of the bread, but never drink drop of the consecrated
cup.

Me thinks I hear you say, if we both acknowledge Christ's Body and Blood to
be thus really present in the Sacrament, as has been showed, how fell we out?
why may we not be good friends? wherein stand we yet at od^ about this
Sacrament and Christ's presence there?

In five points:

First, You teach there remains n^ the substance of Bread and Wine after
consecration: we teach that they remain.

Secondly, You believe that Christ's body is contained under the superficies or
accidents of bread: and takes up the room of the substance of the element,
this is no part of our belief.

Thirdly, You hold that the host or Sacrament is to be adored cultu latri^, the
worship proper unto God: we believe that though honor and reverence (which
Saint Cyrill and Saint Chrysostom call for) is due to the Sacrament, and that
with all due Lancelot Winton: answer to Cardinal Peron. Sect. 4. The Sacrament
is with all due respect to be handled and received, but no divine adoration may
be used to the symbols.
respect and a most humble gesture it ought to be handled and received, yet no
divine adoration may be used to it. To yield that to any creature is Idolatry.

Fourthly, You aver that Christ's very body is eaten with the mouth: we cannot
brook such a gross and caper^aiticall conceit.

Fifthly, You profess (and I know not whether you believe it) that infidels,
yea some of you also, that rats and mice may eat Christ's very body: we abhor
that blasphemy. For though it might fall out through some negligence that a rat
or a mouse, or who is worse then either, an Insidell may sometimes seize on the
Sacramental bread: yet we say Christ's Body and Blood are out of their reach,
their unhallowed hands or mouths cannot come near it.

PAR. 9.
Twelve passages out of Tertullian against Transubstantiation vindicated, and
all objections out of him for the carnal presence answered.

THis was or should have been the S E (...) (...)
Rodus, our stand, now let us measure the leap, of which you have made seven
jumpes. Thus I took my rise. That doctrine which h^ no foundation in the Word
of God is repugnant to the doctrine of the true ancient Church, and overthro^
eth the principles of right reason, i^ plying palpable absurdities and apparent
contradictions is to be rejected a erroneous and heretical: but the doctrine
of the Church of Rome concerning Christ's bodily presence in the Sacrament is
such, Ergo it is to be disclaimed as erroneous and heretical.

The Major or first proposition had his pass from you, nor can it be impeache^
by any who rightly understands the terms, and seriously weighs the
consequence. For divine faith must be built upon a divine and unmooveable
foundation, which can be no other then Gods Word. And since we on both sides
acknowledge that the Church in which the Primitive Fathers lived and died, was
the true Church, they who gainsay the faith thereof, are to be ranged with
heretics. Lastly, that metaphysicall principle is of undoubted verity, verum
vero non opponitur, truth never opposes truth. That doctrine therefore which
destroys the principles of reason, and quenches the sparkles of divine light
kindled in our souls by God, cannot but be from the Prince of darkness.

The Minor or assumption has three branches as you see on the first: whereof I
insisted in that conference. My prosyllogismes which you and S. E. both omit
were these. First, if there be any ground in Scripture for your carnal
presence in the Sacrament, it is either in the words of Mat. (...). 26. This is
my Body.
institution, or on those John the 6. 53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son
of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. For upon these both the
Bishops in that Lateran, and Trent Council, and all the learned on your side
build their faith especially in this point. But neither the one nor the other
Text are any sure ground for it, Ergo you have none. The Major in this
prosyllogisme being assented unto by you, I proceeded to the confirmation of
the Minor in this wise. If the words of institution, Mat. 26. and the other
alleged out of John the 6. are to be taken figuratively, and not in the proper
sense nothing can be concluded from them for the bodily presence or carnal
eating Christ with the mouth. But the words above alleged in both places are
to be construed figuratively, and not in the proper sense, Ergo nothing can be
concluded from them for the bodily p^esence of Christ in the Sacrament, or
carnal eating of him with the mouth. The Major in this second Syllogism being
likewise evident to all men of learning, who know that to argue from a
figurative sense to the proper is a fallacy in Logic, and a dangerous error
in Divinity: against which Saint Aust. l. 31 de doct. christ c. 5. In principio
cavendum est ne figuratam locutionem ad literam accipias, cum enim figurate
dictum sit accipitur ta^ quam proprie dictum sit, carnaliter sapitur.
Austin gives us a special caution, I undertook the proof of the Minor both
by unavoidable testimonies of ancient Fathers, and pregnant argumen^s drawn
from the circumstances of those Texts. And first because with the ancient is
wisdom, Job 12. 12. let the ancient speak, Tertullian, Origin, Austin,
Prosper, etc. Acceptum panem and distributum Discipulis, corpus suum illum
fecit, bcc est corpus meum dicendo, id est figura corpo^is mei, figura autem
non fuisset nisi veritatu esset corpus.
Tertullian in his fourth book against Martion, the 40. Chapter, the bread
taken and distributed to his Disciples he made his body saying, this is my
body, that is a figure of my body. Now a figure it had not or should not have
been, unless his body had been a body of truth or a true body, for avoid or
empty thing, such as a phantasme is, is not capable of a real figure.
Tertullian his argument in this 40. Chap. against Marcion, who taught that
Christ had no true body but an imaginary or fantastical stands thus.

That body whereof bread is a figure must needs be a true body.

But the Body of Christ is such a Body whereof bread is a figure, Christ
himself saying, when he took bread in his hand, This is my Body, that is a
figure of my Body. Therefore Christ's Body is a true Body.

If Christ made not bread a figure of his Body, but turned it into his own
Body, as you teach, how could Tertullian out of those words of our Savior,
prove against Marcion that bread was a figure of Christ's Body? Again, if the
meaning of the words of institution (This is my Body) be, this bread is a
figure of my Body as Tertullians id est inforceth, then are the words of the
institution metonymically or figuratively to be taken. A fair evidence for the
truth is this testimony of Tertullian which so puzzels our adversaries, the
they turn them every way, yet cann^ avoid or impeach it.

Fisher falls foul upon this ancie^ Rossens. cont. Oecolamp.
and most learned Father, disabling h^ testimony in regard of his taint o^
Montanisme.

But neither was Tertullian slipped in^ that heresy when he wrote these books,
neither did the heresy of Montanisme concern the Sacrament, neither was ever
this passage Bellar. de Sacra bucha l. 2. c. 7. Quam^ i^ fuerit Mon tanista in
extrema aetate sua, tamen a nullo veteru^ Pa^rum reprehenditur hoc nomine quod
^rraverit circa Sacramentu^ Dominici corporis.
excepted against by any of the Ancients, nor the Father himself branded for
any error about the Lords Supper.

Steven Gardener gives a more respective answer, that Tertullian spoke these
words, (...), not (...) in heat of opposition to his adversary, not
deliberately and doctrinally.

But he that reads these books against Marcion, which the author so esteemed
that he translated them into verse; will find in them strength of reason, not
violence of passion. These words sparkle not with anger, but give a clear
light to the words of the insti^tion: and the like are found in him ^ls where
and in other of the Fathers, when they wrote in coolest temper in their
Epistles, Commentaries on Scriptures, Homilies, and Treatises of piety, the
places are quoted particularly by Desentia ad Gardinerum de Euchar^ part 1. Ob.
161.
Peter Martyr. Verius ergo
Et magis ingenue Peribomius.
Well fare honest Rhenanus in tract. de Monogam. (...) hic ^ertulliani error
verba sacra^ caenae figurate exponentis in Berengarij persona re^tatus est.
Rhenanus who ingeniously confesses, that Tertullian favored our figurative
interpretation, for which your Church condemned Berengarius.

But you like not so well of this plain dealing, you have been better
instructed by the Belgic Index ex purg. Belgic anno 1571. Cum in catholicis
vateribus alijs plurimos seramus errores and extenuemus excogitato commento per
saepe negemus and commod^s ijs sensi^ affi^gamus cum opponuntur in
disputationibus aut in conflictionibus cum adversari^.
inquisitors to devise some shift and feign a commodious sense to the
testimonies of the Fathers, and blanch their words with ingenious glosses when
they are obj^cted against you in disputation or conflicts with us. Therefore
after i A^tat in Tertul l. cou^. Marcionem 4. c. 40. ^otae 662.
Pammelius, Bel^ de sacrament Eucha l. 2. c. 7.
Bellarmine, and Perone resp. ad Plesseum. p. 9 0.
Perone conster, Tertullian thus: This, which was once an old figure of my body
is now my body; for he does not refer those words, id est figura corporis mei
to corpus meum: but to hoc.

For this your strange forced and incongruous interpretation, you produce first
a parallel place to this out of the book adversus Prax. c. 29 Dicendo Christus
mortuus, id est unctus.
Praxean, Christ is dead that is anointed, where the words id est are referred
to the subject (Christus) not to the attribute (Mortuus.) Secondly out of the
words he made bread his own body, since say you Tertullian says, that our
Savior taking bread made it his body, he was not so forgetful as immediately
to add that the Eucharist is a mere figure of his body: this reason you backed
with a third, that Tertullian presently after the foresaid words says, figura
autem non fuisset, it had not been a figure, etc. by which words he shows
that he speaks of the figure which was before our Savior said, This is my
Body. Lastly, you much insisted upon the words veterem figuram, an old figure,
and those that follow in the same place, but why calls he bread his body?
and not a Pepon or Melone rather? which Marcion had in place of a heart, not
understanding Or inst^d of his heart, Cor Christi loco.
that it was an old figure of the body of Christ.

Though the water be never so clear, it is an easy matter by stirring the
bottom with a stick to trouble it, and make it all muddy, stay but a while
till it settle, and you shall see the stream run clearly, and the silver w^
seek for in the bottom bearing the Image of Christ's Body. Tertullian here
prooves the reality of Christ's Body by the reality of the figure thereof bread.
Bread he prooves to be the figure of his body, both out of the Gospel of Saint
Matthew in the first place, and afterward out of the Prophecy of Jeremy, where
the Jews conspiring against the Prophet, said, Come let us cast wood on his
bread, that is, the cross on his body. The illightner therefore of antiquities
declared sufficiently what he would have bread then to signify, calling his
body bread. Mark I beseech you, Tertullian sets the Texts of Matthew and
Jeremy like glasses, to cast a mutual light one upon the other. In Jeremy
Christ's Body is called bread, in Saint Matthew, bread is called his Body, both
by a like figure: but I subsume Christ's body is not called bread in Jeremy,
because it was transsubstantiated into bread as you must needs confess,
therefore neither in Saint Matthew is bread called Christ's body, because bread
was transubstantiated into it. In Dialogo 1. (...).
Theodoret harpes upon the like strings tuned together, Our Savior, says he,
changed names and attributed to his body the name of the symbol, or sign
thereof, and to the symbol or sign the name of his body, he that called bread
his body, calle^ himself bread: in both which speeches there is according to
both these Fathers, a (...) no (...), a trope or turning of speech, no Theod.
16. (...).
change of nature.

The sparks fly up in the smoke before the fire breaks into a flame,
afterward they vanish away: such your objections appear to be after the
blazing (if I may so speak) of Tertullians meaning, by the precedent
elucidations of this place.

The first taken out of his book Object. 1
against Praxeas, thus vanishes to nothing, (...), one swallow makes not a
summer, nor one heteroclyt overthrowes a general rule in grammar. You and your
Chaplain talk of (...). 3^. Neither did he say any thing to the places
wherein Tertullian had in like^ sort inverted the order.
places in the plural number, as if such a Transposition were usual in
Tertullian, name you but one other passage in all Tertullian where the like
hyperbaton or dislocation is used, Et Phillida solus habeto
There is in this passage I grant a Metathesis or transposition of the words,
id est unctus, which should have been placed before mortuus not after: but yet
that place of Tertullian is not like Sol 1.
this as you interpret it: for there id est must of necessity be referred to
the subject Christus, and cannot be referred to the predicate mortuus: because
the word mortuus does not signify anointed, as Christus does: but in this
place id est may well be referred to the predicatum corpus, as Art 13. Cited by
S. (...).
Ruardus Tapperus, and Gardinerus, and Renanus, and all other Papists referred
them, before this new crochet was found out by Pammelius, or Peron. Again, in
those words Christ Sol 2.
is dead that is anointed, the sense is made good by a mere inversion thus,
Christ that is the anointed is dead, whereas besides an inversion you add the
words quod erat vetus: (non nunc est) which words if you should add to the
other place, saying Christus mortuus est, id est is qui erat unctus est
mortuus, you would make the speech blasphemous, insinuating that Christ was the
Lords anointed but is not, as you make Tertullian say bread which was a legal
figure, but now is not, is Christ's body.

But to put this passage of Tertullian Sol. 3.
out of all peradventure, the words (id est) that is to say, must needs be
referred to that term in the proposition which was obscure, and needed some
explication. But that was not the subject (hoc) for Christ by taking the bread
in his hand and pointing to it sufficiently, showed what he meant by (hoc) all
the doubt that could be made was of the predicate body, what that term
signified, or in what sort it agreed to the subject (hoc) the id est therefore
of necessity is to be applied to the obscure predicate (corpus) not to the
subject (hoc) which was then when Christ uttered those words evident ad oculum.

Your second objection melts of it self, since Tertullian (say you) affirms
Object. 2
that our Savior made bread his body, he was not so forgetful as immediately
to add, that the Eucharist is a mere figure of his body: neither do we Sol.
1.
say so, as I have proved at large in the former Paragraph. It was not
forgetfullnesse in Tertullian to add this gloss, Sol. 2.
id est figura corporis mei, but mindfullnesse and cautelous wisdom maturely
to remove a block, at which his Reader was like to stumble. When he had said
before corpus suum ipsum fecit, he made bread his body, a man might have
thought that he did it so by Consubstantiation, or by Transubstantiation: to
prevent which mistakes, he adds that Christ did it by Sacramental
consecration, saying, This is my Body, that is, a figure of my body.

Your third objection is an idle criticisme, Object. 3
as if there were great difference between esset and fuisset, for your Candor,
look but upon Lilly his grammar, Sol. 1.
and you shall find that eram and fueram, and ero and fuero, and essem and
fuissem are indifferently used as Synonima. Yet if you will have (fuisset) in
Sol. 2.
these words (figura autem non fuisset) not to be rational, but temporal, nor
to construed it should not be, but it had not been, you must howsoever refer
it to that which goes before, acceptum panem and distributum, not to that
which follows six lines after, veterem figuram corporis Christi dicentis per
Ieremiam, the apparent sense then is, Christ by saying This is my body, made
the bread then a figure, or Sacrament of his body, which it had not been if he
had not then, when he spoke so, a true body, but only an imagnarie, as the
fantastical heretic Marcion surmised.

Your fourth and fifth reasons are answered Resp. ad 4. and 5. Object.
already. Tertullian as it is evidently deduced from the passage you cote, and
another parallel unto it, l. 3. cont. Marcion. c. 19. (So God has revealed in
the Gospel, calling bread his body, that hence now thou may understand, that
he has given the figure of bread to his body, whose body the Prophet long
before figured in bread) taught that bread had been a legal figure, and was
also an evangelicall sign or Sacrament of Christ's Body. But why Christ made
choice rather of bread then of a Melone, as Tertullian speaks, or any other
solid thing to be the Symbol or Sacrament of his body, as also why he rather
chose wine then any other licour to be the emblem and memorial of his blood,
we can assign certainly no other reason then his mere will. Tertullian his
guess is but probable, that Christ in the institution of the Sacrament in the
forms of bread and wine had an eye to the Prophecy of Jeremy, or Jacob. But
I^r. 11. 1^. Genesis 49. (...).
be it probable or necessary, it matters not, seeing it is confessed on all
hands, that bread is a figure of Christ's body, though not now a Legal Type,
yet an Evangelicall. Being both, it makes the stronger for this gloss of
Tertullian, this bread is my body, that is, a figure of P. 44. Object. 6
my body.

But here S. E. helps you at a dead lift, alleging a testimony out of De
resurrect. carnis. c. 8. Caro abluitur ut anima emac^letur, caro ^gitur ut
anima consecret^r, caro corpore and sanguine Christi ves^itur ut and anima do
Deo saginetur. Eras. glori^ tur Adag. ut Pelei^s in Machar^.
Tertullians book de resurrectione carnis, for the carnal presence of Christ
in the Sacrament. The words of Tertullian are these, The flesh is washed that
the soul may be cleansed, the flesh feeds upon the body and blood of Christ,
that the soul may be fatted by God. Of this place of Tertullian he is as proud
as P^lius in the proverb was of his sword, not observing that the point of it
lies against himself: for if he expound these words according to the rule of
the Fathers, the signs have usually the names of the thing signified, by them
then he confirms our figurative interpretation, understanding by the body of
Christ the Symbol or sign thereof, upon which our flesh seeds, when we
receive the Sacrament: but if he understand the words of Tertullian properly as
if our very flesh or stomach turned Christ's Body into corporal nourishment, and
so really fed upon it to fatten or cheer our souls, he makes Tertullian
blaspheme, and he gives the lie to his Lord your self who page 65. in
express terms affirm, that in the Fucharist there is no violence offered to
Christ his flesh in it self, nor is it eaten to the end our bodies may thereby
be nourished. To affirm that the substance of our mortal body is nourished,
or increased by the flesh of Christ taken in the Sacrament, is to make the
Eucharist cibum ventris non mentis, the food of the belly, not of the soul,
then which gross conceit nothing can be more absurd in the judgment of your
own Cardinal Bellar l. 2. de Sacra Eucharist. c. 4. Non intelligunt patres
cum hoc dicunt Eucharistia nutriri vel augeri mortalem substantiam corporis
nostri, sic enim facerent Eucharistiam cibum ventru non mentis, quo nihil
absurdius fingi potest.
Bellarmine. Tertullian disclaimes this carnal fancy in the very words
alleged by your Chaplain, ut anima saginetur, the flesh says the Father
feeds on the Body and Blood of Christ, that the soul may be fatted, the soul
not the body. If he demand how can the soul be satisfied or fatted by the
bread in the Sacrament, if it be not turned into Christ's Body? I answer out of
the former words of Tertullian, even as the soul is cleansed in Baptism by
washing the body with water, though that water be not turned into Christ's blood.

You have heard that Ter. de resurrett. carnis. c. 37. ex materia dicti
dirigendus est sensu^ nam quia durum and intolerabile existimaverum sermonem
eius, quasi vere carnem suam illis edendam determinasset, premisit spiritus est
qui vivificat. Arg. 1 ex Tertul. pro Protest. doctr Ioh. 6. 53.
Tertullian does not so much as lispe in your language, hear now how loud he
speaks in ours. The sense of the word (says he) is to be taken from the
matter, for because they thought his speech hard and intolerable (unless ye
cate the flesh of the Son of man, etc.) as if he had appointed his flesh
truly and in very deed to be eaten of them, he premised it is the Spirit which
quickneth, and a little after, appointing his Word to be the quickner, because
his Word is spirit and life, he called the same his flesh, for the Word was
made flesh, therefore to be desired with an appetite, to give and maintain
life in us, to be eaten by Ter. ib. Devorandus auditu ruminandus intellectu,
side digerendus.
hearing, to be chewed by understanding, to be digested by believing. These
words are so plain, that you cannot mistake the meaning of them, and if you
should go about to draw them to any carnal sense or eating Christ with the
mouth, he will check you in the words following, where he says, that Christ
used an Ter ib. Carnem suam panem c^elestem pronunciarat arguens usque quaque
per allegoriam necessarioru^ pabulorum. Arg. 2 ex Tertul.
allegory in this place: now an allegory is a figure in which an other thing
is to be understood, diverse from that which the words import taken in the
usual and proper sense.

Doubtless he who held the bread at the Lords Table to be a representation of
Christ's body, and the wine a memorial of his blood, believed not that the
bread was turned into his body, or the wine into his blood: for no picture is
the life it self, no memorial is of a thing present but absent.

But Ter. advers Marcionem l. 1. c. 14. Nec reprobavit panem Creatoris quo
ips^m corpus suum representat.
Tertullian called bread that whereby Christ represented his own body, taking
the word represent in the same sense which Saint Ber. Ser. 6. in vigilia not.
Dom. Videtur quotidie nascidu^ fideliter representamus cius nativitatem.
Bernar does. As Christ after a sort is sacrificed every day when we show forth
his death, so he seems to be borne whilst we faithfully represent his birth.
As the figure, sign, or that whereby any thing is represented or set before
the eye, is not the thing it self: so neither a monument or a memorial of our
friend is our friend: the wine therefore which Ter. l. de anima cap. 17.
saporem vini quod (...) sanguinis sui memoriam consecravit.
Tertullian says Christ consecrated for a memorial of his blood, cannot be
his very blood.

The same Father in his book of the Arg. 3. ex Tertul.
flesh of Christ smiled at the heretics, who imagined Christ to have flesh
hard without ^b. de carne Christi. c. 5. Sine ossibu^duram, sine muscul^s
solidam, sine sanguine cruemam.
bones, solid without muscles, bloody without blood, etc. They says he that
fancy such a Christ as this, that deceives and deludeth all men's eyes, and
senses, and touchings, should not bring him from heaven, but fetch him rather
from some jugglers Ib^ Ecce fallit and decipi^ omm^ oculos, omn^ sensus, omnium
accessus and contactus, ergo iam Christum non de coelo defer de bueras, sed
(...) aliquo circula^orio ca^. Arg. 4. ex Tertul.
box. I trow he meant not your Popish Pix, yet sure such a flesh it encloseth,
hard (if it be so) without bones, solid without muscles, and bloody without
blood, for you say Christ's blood is there, and sh^d too, and yet tear me your
Mass an unbloody sacrifice. I take you to be so ingenuous that you would not
belie your senses, I am sure you will confess that you see nothing in the pyx
but the whiteness of bread, in the Chalice but the redness of wine, no flesh
or blood color in either. You taste nothing but bread in the one, and the
sapour of wine in the other, you touch no soft flesh with your hand, nor
quarrie blood with your lips, or tongue. But I infer out of Ter. l de amma c.
17. Non licet nobis in dubium sensus istos revocare, ne and in Christo de fide
eorum deliberetur, ne fort^ dicatur quod falso Satana^ prospectarit de coelo
praecipitatum, etc.
Tertullian, You must not question the truth of your senses, lest thereby you
weaken the sinews of our faith, lest peradventure the heretics take
advantage thereupon, to say that it was not true that Christ saw Satan fall
like lightning from heaven, that it is not true that he heard a voice from
heaven, but the sense was deceived. Were not the senses competent judges of
their proper objects, even in the case we are now putting, viz. the discerning
Christ's true body; Christ would never have Luke 24. 39.
appealed to them as he does. Behold my hands and my feet, that is, I my
self, handle me and see, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me
have.

I have given a touch hitherto, but Arg. (...) ex Tertul.
upon sing^e testimonies as it were single strings: now in the close, listen to
a chord. So Christ has revealed unto us, calling Ter. ad. Iud^s c. (...). Sic
Christus revelavit panem corpus suum ^ppellans, cuius retro corpus in pane
Prophetis siguravit.
bread his body, whose body the Prophet prefigured in bread. Christ is our
bread, because Christ is our life, and life is our bread, I am, says he, the
bread of life: as also because his body is Tum quod corpus (...) in pane
c^setur, hoc est corpus me^m, it aque petendo pa^ quotidimum (...) (...) in
Christ^ (...) a corpo^ eius.
accounted for bread, taking the bread (he said) this is my body, when
therefore we pray for our daily bread, we desire to continue in Christ and
never to be severed from his body. And against Ter. l. 3. c. 19 Pa^m carpus
suum appellans ut hinc eum intelligas corpor^ sui siguram pani dedisse. Et s^q.
l. 4. c 4^. cont. Marcionem. Cur autem panem corpus suum appellat and non magis
peponem, qu^m Marcion cordis loco habuit, non intelligens veterem fuisse illam
siguram corporis Christi.
Marcion, So God revealed in your Gospel, calling bread his body. And again,
why does he call bread his body, etc. But I assume bread cannot be Christ's
body in the proper sense; because disperate substances cannot properly be
predicated one of the other, therefore when Christ spoke these words, This is
my Body, which Tertullian constantly and perpetually silleth up thus, this
bread is my body, he used a Metonymie, called signatum pro signo, or figuratum
pro figura, which quite overthrows your carnal presence, and beats you out
of your strongest fort, the words of Christ's holy institution which you would
have to be taken according to the letter. Thus you see Tertullian is clearly
against you, and you are foiled in the first argument.

PAR. 10.
Thirty three allegations out of S. Austin against Transubstantiation
vindicated, and all objections made by the adversary out of him answered.

SO are you also in the second which you propound amiss. Saint Austin in his
third book, de doctrina Christiana says that speech of our Savior, unless
you eat the flesh of the Son of man, John the 6. etc. is figurative,
therefore the other, this is my body, is so too, Quem recitas meus est o
Fidentine libellus Sed male dum recitas incipit esse tuus. The argument was
mine, but by your mis-reporting it and mis-applying the consequent to the
antecedent, you make it yours. Thus I connected this argument to the former:
there are two Texts in the Gospel, upon which you rely, either principally,
or only for your carnal presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament under the
forms of bread and wine. The former, Mat. 26. 26. I have proved out of
Tertullian, yields your doctrine no support, and you are driven in effect to
confess as much, subscribing with your own hand, Ego agnosco quod in his
verbis (hoc est corpus meum) est figura, I acknowledge the words of Institution
to be figurative. Now I will prove that in like manner the words of our
Savior, John 6. 53. are to be taken in a figurative and improper sense, and
consequently that the proper eating Christ's flesh with the mouth, cannot be
inferred from them.

For proof of the antecedent, I produced in the first place a passage out of
Saint Si autem flagitium (...) (...) facinus videtur (...) bear, aut utilitatem
aut beneficentiam v^tare figurata est. Nisi manducaveritis carnem filij
hominis, and sanguinem biberitis non habelitis vitam (...) vobu, facinus vel
flaginum videtur i^bere; Figura est ergo pracipien^ Passioni Domini esse
communicandum, and suaviter atque utiliter recondendum in memoria quod pro
nobis caro cius crucifixa, and vulnerata sit.
Austins third book, de doctrina Christiana, cap. 16. But if that Scripture
seem to command a sin, or an horrible wickedness, or to forbid any thing
that is good and profitable, the speech is figurative: for example, (when he
says) unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you, he seems to command a sin or horrible wickedness;
there is a figure therefore (in the words) commanding us to communicate with
the Lord his Passion, and sweetly and profitably to lay it up in our memory,
That his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. Here said I three things are
very remarkable to the point now in question.

1. That Saint Austin makes choice of these words of our Savior, as of a most
known instance of a figurative speech.

2. That he not only affirms it to be a figurative speech, but confirms it
also by a strong argument, figura est, Ergo it is therefore a figure.

3. That he shows what figure it is, end expounds the meaning of our
Savior in this figurative speech, conformably to the doctrine of the
Protestants, and contrary to all Romish glosses upon it.

To this allegation you answered, partly by glancing at Saint Austins argument,
partly by glossing upon his conlusion. First said you, it is not a horrible
thing to eat man's flesh, unless it be eaten in the proper shape, for it
appears in Mumme that man's flesh may be eaten without horror, when it is not
eaten in the proper shape. Secondly, you distinguished of a figurative speech
according to the thing eaten, and according to the manner of eating it, and
said that the speech of Christ, John 6. according to Saint Austin was
figurative, according to the manner of eating, to wit in the proper form, but
that it was proper according to the matter (viz.) the substance of Christ's
flesh.

1. Against your first answer to Saint Austins antecedent, I reply. 1. That
whereas you pretend Saint Austin to be for you, you should not have disabled
his argument, but have defended it rather. Now you evidently overthrow it. For
if it be not a horrible thing to eat man's flesh, though under an other shape,
Saint Austins Ergo therefore, our Saviors speech concerning eating his flesh
must needs be figurative, is a plain non sequitur.

2. Saint Cyril ad object. Theod. in expos. a^ath 11. Number hominis comeftionem
hoc Sacramentum pronuncias?
Cyril makes good this argument of Saint Austins, choking his adversary with
this interrogatorie. Do thou pronounce the Sacrament to be a man eating, and
do thou irreligiously urge the minds of the faithful to gross and carnal
imaginations? You would have instructed Saint Cyril to have interrogated more
warily, do thou pronounce the Sacrament to be the eating of a man in his
proper shape? Otherwise to eat a man under an other shape (you would have
whispered him in the ear) is a school delicacie, no carnal and gross
imagination.

3. I affirm that it is an horrible thing to eat man's flesh, and drink his
blood though in an other shape; for it is not the disregard of the countenance
of man, or the disfiguring his shape, which makes Anthropophagie or man eating
so horrible a sin: but the making the flesh of one man the food of another,
and the belly a sepulcher. This I make appear by four instances.

1. Suppose at Rome or Venice on the day of your carnivals, when many murders
are committed by men in disguised habits, that one of the masquers or mummers
slain, should be boiled or roasted, and served in at table, in the habit of a
whiffler, or masquer, were it not a horrible wickedness think you to eat of
this man's flesh, his head for example though with a vizard upon it, and so I
return you a mummer for your mumme.

2. If according to Iustins story, or Ovids fiction, the members of a son
were baked in a pie, in the likeness of venison, with the proportion of a
Dear printed on the crust, were it not a horrible wickedness for a Father to
eat wittingly of his sons flesh, though under another shape.

3. What though a man's body in some fight were so mangled, and battered, that
it had lost all humane shape, would you warrant an Indian to eat this man's
flesh, or excuse him from an horrible crime if he should eat it, because it
was not in propria specie?

4. Did you live among the Lycanthropie, men in the shape of wolves, or meet
with witches who delude the senses, and take upon them the shape of a pig, or
cunny, or goat, would you preach it for good doctrine, that a man might eat
wittingly the flesh of any of these while it remained sub aliena specie. As,

For the argument you take not from any topic place, but from the Apothecaries
shop, I mean your instance in Mumme, I wish you some better drug of theirs, I
mean some strong confection of Helleborum to purge your brain. For our
question is not of the medicinal use of man's flesh, altered by art, but
whether it be not a finne, and that a horrible one, to eat with the mouth and
teeth the flesh of a known man, nay of the Son of God.



2. Against your second answer to Saint Austins conclusion, I replied 1. That
Saint Austin by figura, meant such a figure as excludes the native and proper
sense of the words. His words are immediately going before those I cited, si
autem hoc jam proprie sonat nulla putetur figurata locutio, if it be taken in
the proper sense let it be accounted no figure.

2. Saint Austin speaks of such a speech which can in no wise be taken
properly, such a speech, to wit, where a virtue is forbidden, or a vice
commanded, and in this very Chapter he instanceth in Romans the 12. 20. Thou
shall heap coals of fire upon thine enemies head. In which words, because the
Apostle seemed to command an evil act, Saint Austin inferres, ne igitur
dubitaveris figurate dictum, Doubt not therefore but that it is spoken by a
figure. If a speech commanding a sin, or forbidding a virtue, might be taken in
the proper sense, hence it would follow, that it should be lawful to sin,
because expressly commanded by God, and sinful to exercise some act of
piety, or charity because forbidden by him. And here your Lordship touched the
second time at Hercules Columna Non plus.

3. Whereas you say that Saint Austin by sigura meant a figure mixed of a
sigurative and proper speech, dato and non concesso, supposing for a while that
there might be such a figure; I desire you to observe that Saint Austin speaks
here of no such figure, but of a speech merely figurative. For he declares
that the meaning of the figure is, that we ought to partake of Christ's
sufferings, and remember his Figura praecipiens Passioni Domini esse
co^municandu^ and suaviter ae utiliter recondendu^ in memoria quod pro nobis
caro cius crucifixa and vulnerata sit.
death. Now to compassionate Christ, or to partake with him in his sufferings,
or remember his death, is not to eat his flesh in any proper sense at all.

4. Of one simple categoricall proposition, there can be but one true sense.
And this sense cannot be figurative and proper, but either the one, or the
other for proper and figurative are proper and improper, borrowed and not
borrowed, which cannot be affirmed de eodem.



I conclude with Saint Austin l. 3 do doc. Christ. c. 5. In principio cavendum
est ne figuratam locutionem ad literam accipias, ad hoc enim pertiue^ quod ait
Apostolus, litera occidit spiritus aute^ vivificat. Cum enim figurate dictum
sit accipitur tanquam proprie dictum sit, carnaliter sapitur, neque ulla mors
animae congruemius appellatur.
Austin his own words. The first thing that you must beware is this, that you
take not a figurative speech according to the letter, to that belongs the
Apostles admonition, the letter kills, the spirit quickneth. For when we take
that which is flguratively spoken as if it were proporly spoken, it is a
carnal sense, neither is any thing more rightly termed the death of the soul
then it.

Here S. E. puts a great deal of varnish upon a rotten post, he tells us of a
mingled color, and a garment of motley, and distinguishes of a mere figure,
and of a figure which has the truth joined with it; in fine he alleges what
Tapper, and Allen, Suarez, Gordon, and Pittigarus have confessed upon the rack
of our arguments concerning a figure in the words of the institution.

But one sad shower of rain will wash away all this his varnish.

1. To his demand, Why not a mixed figure, as well as a mixed color. I answer,
because the opposition betwixt colors is inter contrarios terminos, contrary
terms which admit a medium, but the opposition between figurative and
proper, is between contradictorie terms which admit of no medium. Wherefore
although there may be a mixed color of white and black, and a mixed temper of
hot and cold, and a mixed sauce of sweet and sower, and a twilight between day
and night, because these are mediate contraries: yet there cannot be a mixed
element, or a mixed truth, or a mixed figure; because simple and compound, true
and false, proper and figurative (that is improper) stand upon flat terms of
contradiction.

2. His distinction of a figure which is a mere figure, and of a figure which
is not a mere figure but has the verity joined with it, wherewith he goes
about to soder the bracks and flawes in your leaden discourse, is altogether
impertinent. For the question between me and you, was of tropes, not of types,
of verbal figures, not real: of rhetorical, such as Metaphors and Metonymies
and the like are, not of physical or natural figures, if speech be of the
latter kind of figures, I deny not but that such a difference among them may
be observed. Some of them are mere figures and representations, as Philips
picture or image, some are more, as Alexander, Philip his son. Sacraments are
according to this acception of figures, not mere figures, nor bare signs, as
is showed at large in the former Paragraph, for they do not only signify,
but also really exhibit, and are effectual means to conveigh unto us those
spiritual blessings and graces whereof they are signs and symbols. But if the
speech be of figures in words or sentences, such as all grammatical and
rhetorical figures are, I say that all such figures are mere figures, every
Metaphor is a mere Metaphor, every Metonomie a mere Metonomie, every
Allegory a mere Allegory, every Ironie a mere Ironie, every Solaecisme a
mere Solaecisme, neither can any instance be given to the contrary.

But because S. E. has felt M. Waferer his feriler for his error in
Rhetoric, I leave him to con better his Susenbrotus, and I return to your
Lordship, who persuade your self that Saint Austin favors your carnal
presence, because he says, We receive with faithful heart l. (...). con.
adv^rs. leg. c. 9.
and mouth, the Mediator of God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus giving us In Psalm
33.
his body to be eaten and his blood to be drunk; and again, he bare himself
in l. 9. conf. c. 13
his own hands, when commending his body, he said, This is my Body; and
again, she only desired to be remembered at thine Altar, whence she knew the
holy host was dispensed, whereby the hand writing against us is cancelled; and
yet Tract. 59. in Johan.
again, The Disciples and Judas ate both: they bread the Lord, he the bread of
the Lord against the Lord; and yet again, Christ suffered Judas that devil
Epsti. 162.
and thief, to receive amongst the innocent Sermon. ad Neophy. hic accipite in
pane quod pependit in cruce, hic accipite in calice quod manavit de Christi
la^re.
Disciples the price of our redemption; and lastly, here receive you that in
the bread which hung upon the Cross, here receive you that in the cup which
flowed out of Christ's side.

To all which allegations, though I might shape one answer out of Saint Epist.
ad. Bonifacium. Si Sacrame^ta quandam similitudine^ earum rerum quarum
Sacramenta sum non habere^t, omnino Sacramenta non essent, ex hac autem
similitudino plerumque etia^ ipsarum rerum nomina accipium. Et quest. S^p.
Levit. 57. Solet res quae significat cius rei nomine quam significat nuncupari,
hinc quod dictum est, Petra era; Christus, etc.
I Austins own words, That in regard of the similitude between the sign: and
the things signified, it is usual in Sacramental speeches, to attribute the
name of the thing signified to the sign: So the Lamb is called the Passover,
Circumcision the Covenant, the Rock Christ, the Bread his Body, and the Wine
his Blood and price of our Redemption. With this one brush reached unto me by
Saint Austin, I might whiten all the walls you point unto: yet partly out of
respect to your self, but especially to S. Austin, I will take special notice
of every place and passage above mentioned.

Your first allegation is like a leaden Rep. ad 1.
sword, it boweth either way; for as you bow it toward you by urging that
Saint Austin must needs speak of corporal and proper eating, because he
adds the words with the mouth: so I may as easily bow it the contrary way by
arguing that he must needs speak of spiritual eating, because he adds with
a faithful heart. As the mouth cannot receive Christ spiritually, so neither
can the heart receive Christ corporally. Saint Austin therefore as he speaks
there of a double organ, the heart and the mouth'; so he speaks also of a
double eating, Spiritually and Sacramentally, and the meaning of the whole
sentence is this, we receive with a faithful heart spiritually, and with the
mouth Sacramentally, the Body and Blood of the Mediator betwixt God and Man,
the Man Christ Jesus.

Your second allegation is like Sir Rep. ad (...)
Philip Sidneys emblem which was the word hope, written in large golden
characters, but dashed through with a pen. When Saint Austin uttered these
words, a man may be carried in another man's hands, but no man is carried in his
S. Aug. Ser. 33. de v^rb Dom. Panem que^ Dominus gestavit in manibus. It was
not then his very body, but the Sacrament thereof which he carried in his hands.
own hands: we find not how it can be understood of David, but we find how it
may be understood of Christ, for he carried his Body in his own hands, when
he said, This is my body: he gave you great hope that he was strong for your
carnal presence, but when Convio. 2. in Psalm. 33. Accepit in manus suas quod
norunt fideles, and ipse se portabat quodammodo. cum diceret hoc est corpus
meum.
afterward resuming his former words, he thus glosseth upon them, when he
commended his Body and Blood he took into his hands that which the faithful
know, and he carried himself after a sort when he said, This is my Body. He
dasheth all your hope, for he expounds quodammodo as Gratian teaches you
out of his 23. Ep. ad Bonifac. non rei veritate, sed significante mysterio, not
in the truth of the thing, but in a signifying mystery, de 3. consect. did. 2.

Your third allegation hurts us not Rep. ad 3.
at all, for we acknowledge both as Altar and an Host in the Fathers sense^ to
wit, mystical or representative, in memory of that one most proper Host and
sacrifice offered once for all upon the Cross for the crossing of the hand
writing against us, though we cannot allow of your Mass, Altar and Host,
wherein Christ existing on earth, and covered with the forms of Bread and
Wine, is said in his very substance by you, not Saint Austin to be offered up
to God his Father.

Your fourth allegation out of the 59. tract upon John, is like Dido her Rep.
ad 4.
sword, wherewith she ran her self Rep. ad 4.
through, Non hos quaesitum munus in usus
For if the other Apostles who brought Faith and Repentance with them, received
bread, the Lord, but Judas who brought neither, received panem Domini only,
not panem Dominum, not bread which was the Lord, two things hereupon
necessarily ensue. First, that none can receive Christ the Lord, or panem
Dominum without faith. Secondly, that bread is not turned into Christ's body,
for then Judas could not receive panem Domini, but he must needs have riceived
panem Dominum.

Your fifth allegation out of the 162. Epist. of Saint Austin is already
answered, Rep, ad 5.
that Saint Austin called the wine which Judas received, Christ's blood and the
price of our redemption; because it was the Sacrament thereof, so he expounds
himself in the words following, Sacrame^tum corporis and sanguinis sui ipso
non exclus^ comr^uniter omnibus dedit. Rep. ad 6.
He gave the Sacrament of his Body and Blood in common to all his Disciples,
not excluding Judas.

Your sixth and last allegation is like a piece of coin, full weight, but of
counterfeit metal: the Sermon ad Neophytos is not Saint Austins as your
Parisians note, neither are there in it any such words as you quote.

By this time you perceive that your few allegations out of Saint Austin are
partly forged, partly forced, and yet come not home to your carnal presence by
Transubstantiation, whereas on the contrary, the testimonies we produce out of
Saint Austine are very many, and those most undoubted, free, clear, and
pregnant, for the doctrine of our Artic. of Religion. 28.
Church concerning the body of Christ given taken and eaten in the Supper only
after an heavenly and spiritual manner, by faith, I reduce them all to six
heads.

1. The conveniencie between the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament. 2.
The difference between the sign and the thing signified. 3. The figurative
sense of Christ's words. 4. The true Communicants at Christ's Table. 5. The
necessary dependence of accidents on their subjects. 6. The limitation of
Christ's humane body to one place at once.
Touching the first. If the Fathers under the (viz.) ^he co^veniencie between
the Sacraments of the Old and New Testaments.
Law, and we under the Gospel in the Sacrament, receive the same thing in
truth, and substance; it follows that we receive not Christ's flesh with the
mouth after a carnal manner, but only by faith after a spiritual: for before
Christ's Incarnation, the Fathers could no otherwise receive it.

But the Fathers under the Law in their Sacraments, and we under the Gospel
in ours receive the same thing in truth and substance, as Saint De utilitate
penit, Eundem cibum spiritualem manducaverunt, quid est eundem nisi quod eum
quem etiam nos.
Austin teaches, they did eat the same spiritual meat. What is the same?
the self same with us. And in his 26 In signi^ diversa sunt sed in requae
significatur paria sunt: audi Apostolum, omnes eandem escam spiritalem
manducaverunt, spiritalem uti^ eandem, nam corporalem alter an^.
Treatise upon the 6. of Saint John, Manna signified this bread, their
Sacraments and ours were diverse in the signs; but equal in the thing
signified: hear the Apostle, I would not (says he) have you ignorant how that
all our Fathers were under the cloud, and al^ passed through the Sea, an^ did
all eat the same spiritual meat; Mark the sa^ spiritual meat. For the^
ate not the same corpor^ meat, they ate Mann^ we eat another thing; b^ they
ate the same spiritu^ meat which we eat, and they all drank the same
spiritual drink, they Aliud illi, aliud no^sed specie visibili, quod tamen
hoc idem significare^ virtu^ spiritals.
drank one thing, and we another, according to outward appearance or in
visible form, which yet signified the self same thing in spiritual virtue.
How did they drink the same spiritual drink? He tells, they drank of the
spiritual Rock which followed them, which Rock was Christ.

Ergo according to Saint Austin we eat not Christ's flesh in the Sacrament
with the mouth, after a carnal manner, but only by faith after a spiritual.



Touching the second. No sign, Sacrament, figure, or memorial of Christ's
(viz.) The difference between the sign and the thing signified.
body and blood is his very body and blood: for signum and signatum, the sign,
and the thing signified, the type and the truth are relatively opposed; and
therefore no more can the one be the other, then the Father be the Son, or
the Master the Servant, or the Prince the Subject, or the Husband the Wife; in
so much that Saint Chrysostom. Homil. genesis (...)
Chrysostom concludes, that Melchizedeck could not be a Type of Christ if all
things incident to the truth, that is, Christ himself, were found in him. And
Saint Austin de consecrat. did. 2. cap. Hoc. est.
Austin apparently distinguishes between Sacramentum and rem Sacramenti, and
affirms that every sign signifies something else then it self. And that it
is a miserable De doct. Chris. l. 3. c. 5. Miserabilis animae servitus est
signa pro rebus accipere
servitude of the soul to tak^ c Con. Maximin. l. 2. c. 22 Sacramenta quoniam
signa sunt rer^m aliud ex^stant, a^iud significant.
the signs for the thing themselves. For the sign of truths are one thing
(...) themselves, and signify another. They are visib^ August. de Catech^.
rudibus. Si^nacula visi bili^ sed re^ invisibiles in ijs honorantur.
Seals but things invisible are honored in them.

But that which we take at the Lords Table is a Aug^n Psalm 98. Sacramentum
aliquod ^obis comm^ davi spiritualiter intellectum vt visicab^ vos.
Mystery, a Detrin l. 3. c 4 Pos^t tamen significando praedicare D^minum Iesum
Christum aliter per (...) guam suam aliter per Epistolam, aliter per
Sacramentum corpor^ (...) sanguinis eius.
Sacrament, a Contra Adimantum c. 12. Non dubitavit dicere Hoc est corpus m^
vid. in fr. cum daret signum corporis sui.
Sign, a Aug in Psalm. 3. Eum (Iudam) adhibuit ad convivi^m in quo cor poris
and sanguinis sui figuram Discipulis commendavit and tradid^.
Figure, a Contra Faust. l. 20. c. 21. Garo Domini promissa fuit nobis in (...)
Testamento in similitudine victimarum, in cr^cere ipsa suit exhibit^, ^s
Sacramento autem celebratur per memoriam.
Memorial of Christ's Body and Blood.

Ergo that which we receive in the Lords Supper, is not the very Body and
Blood of Christ after your sense.



Touching the third. If the words which our (viz.) The sig^e sense of Christ's
w^.
Savior spoke concerning the eating of his flesh, and drinking his blood,
recorded by the four Evangelists, and Saint Paul, are to be taken
Sacramentally, Spiritually and Figuratively, and not in the proper sense which
the letter carries, nothing can be from them concluded for the eating the very
flesh of Christ with the mouth, for so to eat the flesh of Christ, is to eat
it corporally, not Sacramentally, carnally, not spiritually; properly, not
figuratively* whereas to believe in Christ's Incarnation, to be partaker of the
benefits of his Passion, to abide in him, and to be preserved in body and soul
to eternal life (which are the interpretations Saint Austin gives) is not to
eat Christ flesh properly, but only in an allegorical sense.

But the words which our Savior spoke concerning the eating of his flesh, in
the judgment of Sai^ Austin, are to be taken Sacramentally, Spiritually* and
figuratively. For the words which our Savior spoke of this argument, are
either the words of the institution related by the three Evangelists, and Saint
Paul; or they are set down by Saint John, Chap. 6. The former Saint Austin
affirms to b^ (...) figuratively, sp^lly ^d Sacramentally, (...) (...) book
against (...) (...). 12 and in his Commentary upon the 98. Psalm, and in his
23. Epist. to Boniface, and in his 33. Sermon upon the words of ou^ Lord: the
latter he expounds in like sort figurative^y, in his 3. book de doct.
Christi, c. 16. in his 2. Sermon of the words of the Apostle, and in his 33.
Sermon de verbis Dom. And in his 25. and 26. Tractats upon Saint John. All
these passages are well known to the Learned, and although you cast a mist
before some of them, yet it will easily be dispelled, and the beams of truth
in this holy Fathers Writings discover themselves so clearly, that they will
dazzle all your eyes. What words can be more conspicuous then those of this
Austin c^nt. Adim^ c. 12. Dominus non dubita^ it dicere, Hoc est corpus meum
cum daret signum corporis sui.
Father. I could interpret that precept of not eating blood figuratively,
understanding by blood that which it figureth, for our Lord doubted not to say,
This is my Body, when he gave the sign of his body. Here the antecedents
possem dicere I might say the precept is figurative He made no scruple to say,
This is my body, when he gave the sign thereof.
hoc praeceptum in figura positum esse, and the words non dubitavit, clearly
demonstrate Saint Austins meaning to be: that though it might seem harsh to
call the bread which is a sign of Christ's body, his body, as the blood of a
beast slain the soul, yet by a figure Christ made no scruple so to term it.
Doubtless the blood of any beast slain is neither properly the soul of that
beast, nor a sign of a soul present in it: no more by Saint Austins comparing
(these Texts together) is bread Christ's body, nor a sign of his body present
in it, but only a Sacrament and memorial thereof. The next passage is as In
Psalm. 98. Spiritaliter intelligite quod loc^us sum: non hoc cor* pus quod
videtis man du^aturi est is, and bibit^ri illum s^guinem quem s^suri sunt q^ me
crucisige^t, Sacramenti^ (...) quod ^obis commen^ (...) spirit^ter int^ctum
(...) (...).
clear. You are not to eat that body which you see, nor to drink that blood
which they will shed who crucify me, I have commended unto you a certain
Sacrament (or mystery) which being spiritually understood will quicken you. And
although it ought to be celebrated visibly, yet it oug^t to be understood
invisib^. Put the parts of the sentence together, and the meaning of the whole
will be evidently this, that which you are to eat, and drink, is not my very
body which you now see, and the Jews shall pierce, and crucify but a visible
Sacrament thereof. Which yet received with faith in my bloody death, through
the power of the Spirit shall quicken you. If there could be any obscurity in
this passage it is cleared in the Epist. 23. ad Bonif. Sicut ergo secundum
quendam modum Sacramentum corporis Christi, corp^s Christi est, Sacrament^
sanguinis Christi, sanguis Christi est, ita Sacramentum fidei ^des est, si enim
Sacramenta quan^am similitudinem earum rerum quarum Sacramenta sunt non
haberent, omnino Sacramenta non essent.
next. When Easter is near (says he) we say tomorrow or the day following
Christ suffered, whereas he suffered but once, and that many years ago: so
we say on the Lords day, this day the Lord rose, whereas many yeare^ are past
since he rose, why is no man so foolish as (...) charge us with a lie in s^
speaking, but because we^ call these days according (...) the similitude of
those days in which these things were done, and say th^s is such a day, which
is not that day, but in the revolution of time is like unto it, and that is
said to be done that day, by reason of the celebration or mystery of the
Sacrament, which was not done that day but long before. Was not Christ once
offered in himself? and yet in the Sacrament he is not only offered at
Easter, but every day, neither does he lie who being asked shall answer that he
is offered. For if Sacraments had not a resemblance of those things whereof
they are Sacraments, they should not be Sacraments at all. Now in regard of
this resemblance, for the most part they take the name of the things
themselves. As therefore the Sacrament of Christ's body after a sort is Christ's
body, the Sacrament of his blood is his blood: so the Sacrament of faith (he
means there Baptsime) is faith. But I assume Good Friday last past was not the
very day of Christ's Passion, nor the last Lords day, the day of his
Resurrection, nor the celebration of the Sacrament the very offering of Christ
on the Cross, nor Baptism the very habit or doctrine of faith, but so termed
only by a figure, to wit, a Metonymie, therefore neither is that of which
Christ said, This is my Body, his body in propriety of speech; but only so
termed by a figure, because it is the Sacrament, and resemblance of his body.
For all these speeches Saint Austin in this Epistle makes to be like. I know
not what can be more plain, except the words of the same Sermon. 33. de verbis
Dom. caenam manibus suis ^onsecratam Discipulis dedit, sed nos (...) illo
convivio non discubiamus, and tamen ip^m caenam (...) quotidie ^anducamus
Father, Christ gave the Supper, consecrated with his own hands to his
Disciples, we sat not together with him in that banquet, and yet we eat
daily the self same Supper by faith. Eating by faith is not eating by the
mouth, for faith is of things Heb. 11. 1.
not seen, what we eat with the mouth, is seen. You have heard what Saint
Austin conceived of the words of the institution, and that his judgment was
the same of the words of Christ, John the 6. It appears by these passages
Tract. 250 in Chap. 6. John. Us quid paras deutum and ventrem (...) creed and
manducasti.
ensuing. Why do thou prepare thy teeth and thy belly, believe and thou have
eaten. To Tract 26. in John. Qu^ manducat carnem meam, and bibit ^cum sang^mem
in me manet: hoc est ergo manducare illam escam. and illum bibere potum, in
Christo man^e, and illuns man^tem in se habere. ibid. Qui manducat intus non
soris, qui maducat in cord, non qui premit dentibus.
eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood, is to abide in Christ, and to
have Christ abiding in himself; and again, Christ speaks of him who eats
inwardly, not outwardly, he that feeds on him in the heart, not he which
presses him with his teeth. Prepare not therefore (says he) thy Ser^. 33. de
ver. D^m. Noli parare fauces sed cor, inde co^mendata est ista cana, ecce
credimus in Christum quem side ^ccipimus.
chops but thy heart. I omit the testimony out of the third book de doct.
Christ. c. 16. figura est ergo, etc. because it has been before fully
discussed and I conclude out of all these joint allegations, like many stars
i^ the same constellation.

Ergo the words which our Savior spoke concerning the eating of his fles^ in
the words of the institution, and in the 6. of John conclude nothing for the
eating the very flesh o^ Christ corporally with the mouth.



Touching the fourth. If none are true Communicants (viz) The true Communicants
at Christ's Table.
at the Lord Table but true beleeve^ certainly the Bread and Wine are not
turned into the very body and blood of Christ. Were they so* wicked men,
hypocrites, and reprobates, who are sometimes present at the Lords Table, and
receive the sacred Symboles with their mouth, must needs also eat Christ's very
body; unless our Adversaries will feign a second Transubstantiation of
Christ's body back again into bread, as soon as ever a wicked hand, lip, or
tooth touches it: which as yet no Papist has been so hardy as once to
opine. For then they know we will come upon them with a new demand, by what
operatorie words of Christ is this second Transubstantiation wrought?

But none are true Communicants at the Lords Table, or eat his very body but
believers, who are also members of his body, in Saint Aug. (...) Civis. Dei. l.
21. c, 25. Non dicendum est e^ manducare corpus Christi qui non est in corpore
Christi, and soli Catholici qui non solum Sacramento sed (...) ipsa manducaver^
corpus Christi, in ipso scilicet ^ius corpore constit^i.
Austins judgment, They are only Catholics and such who are set, or
incorporated into Christ's body: who eat his body, not Sacramentally only, but
in truth. For we must not say that he eats Christ's body who is not in his
body. The wicked are in no sort to be said to eat Christ's body, because they
are not members of his body, Christ himself when he says, he that eats my
flesh and drinks my blood, abides in me and I in him, thereby shows, what
is truly and not Ostendit quid sit non Sacramento tenus sed re vera corpus
Christi manducare.
Sacramentally only to eat Christ's body and drink his blood, and that no man
eats his body or drinks his blood that abides not in Christ, and Christ in
him. And again he says, he that In Sent* 139. Qui discordat a Christo nec
carnem ejus manducat nec sanguinem bibit, etiamsi tantae rei Sacrame^tum ad
iudicium suae praesumptionis quotidie indifferentur accipiat.
disagreeth from Christ, neither eats his flesh nor drinks his blood,
though to his own condemnation, for his presumption he daily receive ind^tly
the Sacrament of so great a thing. He beats again upon the De verb. Aposb
Ser. (...). Illud bibere quid est nisi viv^ manduca v^am, bibe ^isam, habebis
^itam: (...) autem ho^ eri^ id est vita ^nicuique er^ corpus and sanguis
Christi, si quod i^ Sacrament^ visibilitar (...), in ipsa verita^ spiritalite^
manduc^ spiritaliter bibatur.
same point, To eat Christ's body is to be refreshed, and so to be refreshed,
that it never fails whence thou art refreshed, to drink that (Christ's blood)
what is it but to live? eat life, drink life, and thou shall have life: but
then, or upon this condition the Body and Blood of Christ shall be life to
every one, if that which is eaten visibly in the Sacrament, be spiritually
eaten and drunk in the truth it self. And the Tract. 26. in Ioh. Hui^ rei
Sacramentum id est unitatis corporis and sang^inis Christi de mens^ dominica
sismitur quibusdam ad vitam quibusdam ad exitium, res vero ipsa cujus
Sacramentum est omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium qui cunque erit ejus
particeps fuerit. ibid. Per hoc qui non manet in Christo, and in quo non manet
Christus procul dubio non manducat spiritaliter carnem eius, nec bibit eius
sanguinem, licet carnaliter, and visi^ liter premat dentibus Sacramentum
corporis and sanguinis Christi.
Sacrament hereof that is of the unity of Christ's Body and Blood is taken at
the Lords Table, by some to life, by others to destruction, but the thing it
self whereof it is a Sacrament, (that (...) Christ's body) is received by every
one to life, and by none to destruction, whosoever is partaker thereof. For
after Christ had said, he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has
eternal life, he presently adds, and I will raise him up at the last day.
And a little after he expounds what it is to eat his body and drink his
blood, Saying, he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, abides (...) (...)
and I in him; this is therefore to eat that fle^ and drink that drink for a
man to abide in Christ, and to have Christ abiding (...) him: and consequently,
(...) that abides not in Christ nor Christ in him, withot doubt does not eat
his flesh, nor drink his blood spiritually, though carnally and visibly with
his teeth he crusheth the Sacrament of Christ's body. I forbear to press here
our allegation out of the 59. Tract upon John, concerning Judas eating panem
Domini, and not panem Dominum, (the bread of the Lord, not bread the Lord)
because I have retorted it before upon S. E. and out of all these places I
conclude.

Ergo the Bread and Wine according to Saint Austin, after consecration are not
the very body and blood of Christ. The Syllogism which has been proposed at
large, with frequent testimonies out of Saint Austin to confirm the
Assumption, may be thus contracted.

No wicked men, or reprobates eat Christ's body. Some wicked men and reprobates
eat the bread after the consecration, Ergo the bread after the consecration is
not Christ's body.


Touching the fist. (viz.) The necessary dependence of accidents in their
subjects
Whosoever holds the doctrine of Transubstantiation believes that accidents
may subsist without their subjects. For Transubstantiation as your Church
defines, is a mutation or turning of the whole substance of bread into the
whole substance of Christ's body, and the whole substance of the wine into the
substance of Christ's blood, the accidents of bread and wine still remaining
(viz.) The whiteness, thickness, roundnesse, and taste of the bread, the
thinness, moisture, color, and relish of the wine with the quantity of both.
Their own subject being gone, where stick or inhere these accidents? in the
air? or Christ's body? you cannot say either. For every accidental form
denominateth the subject in which it is inherent, according to that axiom of
Logic, quicquid in est in dicitur de. But neither Christ his body, nor the
air is denominated by these accidents; neither the air nor Christ's body has
the color, quantity, figure, or taste of bread or wine. Neither the air, nor
Christ's body is white or round like a wafer, etc. It remains therefore that
according to your tenet that these accidents remain in no subject.

But Saint Aug^. de d^m catig. (...) est in sub^ie in quod in a^ro est, non
(...) pars quedum, neque sine eo in quo in^ potest unq^m esse and post, (...)
est in subiec^ quod sine subjecto esse non potest.
Austin believed not that accidents can subfist without their subjects. For he
defines an accident to be that which is in a subject, not as a part thereof
neither can it ever be without the subject: he Epist. 57. Si moles ipsa
corporis qua^tacunque vel qua^tulacunque sit penitus auf^ratur, qualitates esus
(...) erit, ubi (...)
expressly affirms, if the quantity or bulk of a body, be it bigger or
lesser, be taken away, the qualities cannot have any subsistence. And in his l.
(...). (...). (...) 13. (...) in subiecto est (...) sub^ iect^ epsum non manet,
manner non potest, and cui posse fieri videatur, ut id quod in subjecto est
maneat ipso intereunte subjecto* monstrosum enim and a veritase alienissimum
est ut id quod non esset nisi in ipso esset, etiam cum ip sum non fueris poss^
esse.
Soliloquies he hooteth at the contrary assertion as most absurd and
monstrous. Who would deem it possible (says he) that that which is in a
subject should remain when the subject is taken away? it is a monstrous thing,
and most repugnant to reason, that that which has no being but in a subject,
should yet be when the subject is not. That which you adore as a miracle, Saint
Austin blesses himself from as from a monster, and indeed it is a monstrous
thing, and prodigious to hear of quantity and nothing big, or little: of
whiteness in the Sacrament, and nothing white, thickness, and nothing thick;
redness and nothing red; moisture, and nothing moist: it goes beyond all the
fictions in Ovid his Metamorphosis, to turn accidents into substance, and
substance into accidents: to talk of mere accidents broken, eaten, digested
and voided: to tell us of accidents putrified, and growing finwood, and mouldie
and breeding vermin: of accidents frozen and congealed: nay of accidents not
only subsisting by themselves, but also supporting substance, as when dirt
sticks to the Sacrament through negligence, it having fallen to the ground; or
when poison has been put into it, wherewith (...). (...) ^ip. (...). (...)
Ignat us (...) compe^. hist.
Uictor the third, and Henry the fourth of Luxenburg took their baine. It will
not serve your turn here to fly to a miracle as Eras adag. Homer. nube.
Homer when he is at a stand does to a cloud. For S. De Trinit. l. 3. c. 10.
Honorem tanquam religiosa possunt habere, stuporem tanquam mira non possunt. As
holy things the Sacraments are to be reverenced, not to be wondered at as
things miraculous.
Austin ex professo denies the Sacraments to be miraculous. The Sacraments
which are known of men, and administered by men, may have reverence as holy
things, not admiration: we cannot be astonished at them, as at miracles. But
your doctrine of Transubstantiation cannot be maintained without more miracles,
then there are letters in the words of consecration, from whence I conclude,

Ergo Saint Austin believed not the doctrine of Transubstantiation.



Touching the sixth. Whosoever teaches (viz.) The limitation of Christ's humane
body to one place at once.
that Christ's body is confined to a certain place, and there is after the
manner of other bodies with distinction of parts, overthrows the doctrine of
Transubstantiation. For your doctrine of Transubstantiation puts Christ's
body upon a Million of Altars at once, and teaches that it is whole in the
whole, and whole in every part of the host being there as invisible, so also
indivisible.

But Saint Austin teaches that Christ's body is confined to one place at once;
and is there after the manner of other bodies, with distinction of parts, or as
the Logitians speak, part extra partem. First in general he lays down
this l. de praedic, quant, lacus circundat quodcunque corpus.
rule; place compasses every body, and Epist. ad Volusia. Quantumcunque sit
corpus sive qua^ tulumcunque corpuscul^ loci occupas spatiis cundemque locum
sic implet (...) nulla ejus part ^t (...) (...)
how great or small soever a body be, it takes up some space of place: and so
fills that place that it is whole in no one part of it. And take away says he
the spaces of places from bodies, and they will be no where, and because they
will be no where, they will not be at all: and in the same Ibid. loca suis
molibus tenent ut distantibus spat ijs simul esse non possunt.
Epistle, bodies so possess places with their bulk, that they cannot be^
together in distant spaces And Nam ita distantibus partibus, quae simul esse
non possunt quoniam suae quaeque spatia locorum tenent mineres minora, and
maiora maiores, no^ potest esse in singulis quibusque partibus tota vel tanta:
sed amplior est qua^titas in amplioribus partibus, brevior in brevioribus, and
in nulla part tanta quanta per torum
because the severa parts of them hold severa spaces of places, the less parts
lesser, and the great greater, it cannot be who^ in each part: but there is
larger quantity in large parts, and a shorter in t^ shorter, and in no part is
the quantity so great as it through the whole. An in particular concerning
Christ's body he affirms that the condition of a tr^ body requires, that sin^
his Ascension it be placed is some Ibid. Vbique torum praesentem esse non
dubites tanquam Deum, and in loco aliquo coeli propter very corporis modum.
certain place of the heaven, and that one one^ at once. Till the end of the
world, the Lord is above and yet his truth is here wi^ us, for our Lords body
in which he rose from the dead must be in one Aug. citat, a Great de co secrat.
did. (...) c. 1 quidem Corpus eni^ Domini in quo resurrexit in (...) loco esse
oportet, ^ritas autem eius ubique diffusa est.
place, his truth is every where. The Aust. in Evangel. John. Tract. 50.
Patoperes semper habebitis cobiscum, me autem non semper habebitis, accipiunt
and hoc boni, sed non sint solliciti, loquebatu^ enim de praesentia corporis
siti. N^ secundu^ maiostatem, si^, secundu^ providentiam, secundum ineffabilem
and invisibilem gratiaus impletur quod ab eo dictum est, ecce ego vobiscum sum
usque in consummationem seculi. Christus etiam absens praesens est: abi^ and
hic est: and redijt and no^ non deseruit, corpus enim suum intulit c^,
maiestatem non abstulit mundo.
poor you have always with you, but me you shall not have always: Let good
men receive this saying without fear. For he spoke this of the presence of his
body. For according to his providence, according to his unspeakeable and
visible grace, that is fulfilled which was spoken by him, Behold I am with you
to the end of the world. Christ being absent yet is present, he is gone, and
yet he is here, he is returned, and yet has not forsaken us, for his body he
has brought into heaven, his Majesty he has not taken from the world.

Neither will your common answer hold water, that Christ's body naturally is
but in one place, yet by miracle it may be, and is in so many thousand places
at once, as the Sacrament is celebrated: for 1. We Excep. 1.
ought not to argue from the power of God to his will, but on the contrary,
from his will to his power, whatsoever he will do he can do: but he can do
many things which he never will. Prove that he will put his body in a 1000
places at once, and we will never contest with you about his power. 2. I before
2.
showed you out of Saint Austin, that the Sacraments are to be reverenced as
holy things, not to be admired as strange and mavelous: signs they are of
grace, which are properly called mysteries; not signa potentiae, which are
properly called miracles. The effect indeed of this Sacrament in the souls of
the faithful, as also of the other is supernatural: yet as the Water in
Baptism is not by miracle turned into Christ's blood: 3.
so neither is the bread in the Lords Supper by miracle turned into his body.
3. Saint Austin in this 50. Tract upon John, uses an argument like to that of
the Angel, Mat. 286. He is not here for he is risen, Christ Idem secundum
carnem quam verbum assumpsit, etc. non semper habebitis vobiscum, quare, quia
secundu^ corporis praesentiam quadraginta doebas conversatua est cum Discipulis
suis and ijs deducentibus ascendit in coelum and non est hic.
according to his flesh is not now with us, because he is ascended into
heaven, which reason, if it has any force at all, must imply and presuppose
that Christ's body at the same time could not be in heaven, and upon earth. 4.
This Father in his 20 book against l. 20. c. 11. secundum praesentia^
corporalem simul and in sole and l^a and cruce esse non possit.
Faustus the Maniches, concludes not only that Christ's body was not in more
places at once, but that it could not be. The Dilemma there he uses against
them is this. When you Manichees believe that Christ was at once in the Sun,
the Moon and the Cross, whether mean you according to his spiritual
presence as God, or according to his corporal presence as man: if you speak
of his spiritual presence, according to that he could not suffer those
things; if of his corporal presence, according to it he could not be at once
in the Sun, in the Moon and in the Cross. Certainly if in Saint Austins
judgment Christ's Body could not be in three places at once, it can much less
be in three millions of places where Masses are said at the same hour, I
conclude therefore this argument and this Chapter.

Ergo Saint Austin overthrows your carnal presence of Christ in the
Sacrament by Transubstautiation.



PAR. II.
Twelve testimonies out of Origin against Transubstantiation vindicated, and
all objections out of him answered.

THe next ancient Doctor I claimed at the Conference for the doctrine of the
reformed Churches, concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, was Orig in
Lev. Hom. (...). p. 141. S^ secundum literam sequaris he iy^m quod dictum est
nisi manducaveritis carnem meam and bibe^itis sanguinem (...) occidit he
litera.
Origin, who in his seventh Homily upon Leviticus, repeating those words of
our Savior, unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you, says of them, if ye follow the letter, that
letter kills. To this allegation you answer; That Origin speaks according to
the capernaiticall letter, that is, according to the literal sense wherein the
Capernaits did understand those words, who as Saint In Psalm. 4. and 98. etc. 6.
John.
Austin and De caena Dom.
Cyprian say, thought our Savior would have cut off some pieces from his body
and given them to eat, or that they were to eat it boiled or roasted.

But 1. You should have observed that Origin says not, if you follow the Rep.
1.
conceits of the Capernaits, but if you follow the letter of Christ, that is
the sense, which the letter of his words carry. Now there is never a word,
letter, or syllable in Christ's speech, which signifies, or imports boiling
or rosting, cutting or mangling. These are but accidents to the eating of
flesh, flesh may be eaten, and that in the most proper acception of the
phrase, though it be neither boiled, or roasted, nor mangled. Whosoever takes
flesh raw, or roasted, whole or cut, into his mouth, cheweth it with his teeth,
and after conveigheth it into his stomach: truly and properly eats that
flesh. Thus you do in the Sacrament, if Pope Nicolas prescribe not a wrong
form of recantation to Berengarius, yet extant in your Canon Law: I Great. de
consecrat. did. 3. Ego Berengarius credo corpus Domini sonsual^ter (...) in
veritate manibus sacerdotis tractars, frangi and fidelium dentibus atteri.
Berengarius do believe the body of our Lord Jesus Christ to be sensually or
sensibly and in truth handled by the hands of the Priest, broken and champt or
torn in pieces by the teeth of the faithful.

2. You should have cast back your eye to the precedent words of Origin, which
make it evidently appear, that he listened not to your Jews harp, nor took
the tune from the Cap^naits strain: but that his meaning was, that we ought to
take the words of our Savior in a spiritual and figurative sense, and not in
the carnal and proper. For having related the words of those Jews in Saint
John, how shall this man give us his flesh to eat? he turns to his
Christian auditors, saying, But you if you are Children of the Church, if you
are instructed in the mysteries of the Gospel, if the Word which was made
flesh dwell among you, acknowledge these things to be true which we say,
because they are the words of the Lord. Acknowledge that there are Ib.
agnoscite, quia figurae sunt quae in divinis voluminibus scriptae sunt, and
ideo tanqua^ spirituales and non tanquam carnales, examinate and intelligito
quae dicuntur, si enim quasi carnales ista suscipitis laedant vos and non
alunt, est enim and in Evangelio littera quae occidit.
figures in the Scriptures, and examine and understand those things that are
spoken as spiritual men not as carnal, for if you take these things as
carnal, they will hurt you and not nourish you: for there is a letter that
kills in the Gospel as well as in the Law, there is a letter in the Gospel
which kills him that understands it not spiritually, and then follow the
words above alleged. For if thou follow the letter in these words, unless ye
eat my flesh and drink my blood, the letter kills.

Thus having freed this passage, I might proceed to the examination of your
next Section, yet (...), as before I have done in Tertullian and Saint Austin,
so I will now clear other places in this Fathers Works, and prove him to be
a thorough man for us every where. I will follow the order of his books in the
edition at Basil, that you may speedily with a wet finger turn to every
cotation.

First, cast I pray you a look to his ninth Hom. 9. in Lev. Non haereas in
sanguine carnis, sed disce potius sanguinem verbi, and audi ipsum tibi
dicentem, hic sanguis men's est qui pro vobu effunditur in remissionem
peccatorum.
Homily; Thou who art come to Christ the true Priest, who by his blood has
reconciled thee to his Father, stick not in the blood of the flesh, but learn
rather the blood of the Word, and hear him saying to thee, This is my blood
which is shed for you for the remission of sins. He who is instructed in the
mystery of the Sacraments, knows both the flesh and blood of the Word of God.
You who press the letter and urge the carnal eating of the flesh of Christ
with the mouth, stick in the blood of the flesh, but we who feed on Christ by
faith, receive the blood of the Word, and eat the flesh and blood of the Word
of God in our heart according to Origens wholesome advise.

Secondly, in his 16 Homily upon Bibere dicimur sanguinem Christi nonsolum
Sacra^ ^ritu, sed and cum sermones eius (...) pi^us in quibus vita consistit.
Numbers, there is a passage parallel to this, Who can eat flesh and drink
blood? he answers, the Christian people, the faithful hear these words, and
embrace them, unless ye eat my flesh and drink my blood ye have no life in
you, because my flesh is meat indeed, He that spoke this was wounded for our
sins, and we are said to drink his blood, not only in the rite of the
Sacrament, (when we drink of the consecrated cup) but also when we receive his
sayings, in which life consists, as himself says, I. b. quis est iste
populus qui in usu habet sanguinem bibe^e, populus fidelis, populus Christianus
audit has, complectit eum qui dicit nisi manducaveritis carnem filij hominis.
the words which I have spoken unto you are spirit and life, and a little after
he concludes, thou therefore art the true people of Israel, which know how
to eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Word of God. In this passage,
with one blow he cuts off both your carnal manducation, and your half
communion, the people as you hear drink of the blood of Christ both in the
Sacrament and out of it, but how? with the mouth? nay but by faith, therefore
he says, not that all Christian people drink it, but populus fidelis, the
people that has faith in his words, and by receiving his sayings drink his
blood, both at the communion and at other times in hearing and reading the Word.

Thirdly, he is constant in this his figurative and spiritual interpretation
of the words of our Savior in the 6. of John, for in his 23 Homily upon the
book of Hom. in Number. c. 28. Hom. 23. Iudaei carnali sensu comedunt carnis
Agni, nos autem comedamus carnem verbi Dei, ipse en^m dixit nisi comederitis
carnes meas non hab^bitis vitam in vobis, hoc quod modo loqu mur carne^ sunt
(...) Dei.
Numbers, he harpeth upon the same string, Christ our Passeoveris offered for
us, let the Jews in a carnal sense eat the flesh of a Lamb, but let us eat
the flesh of the Word of God, for he says unless ye eat my flesh ye have no
life in you, this that (...) now speak is the flesh of the Word of God. If you
can eat words with your mouth, and chew them with your teeth, you may in
Origens judgment eat the flesh of Christ with your mouth: but if you cannot do
that, then according to our English proverbiall speech, eat your own words,
and retract your gross and carnal assertion.

Fourthly, I press you with a most material and considerable passage in In
Mat. c. 15. Ille cibu^ q^ sanctificatur per verbism Dei perque obsecrationem,
juxta id quod habet materiale in ventre^ abit, and in secessum eijcitur,
caeterum iuxta precationem quae ills accessit Prop^ne fidei fit utilis,
efficiens ut perspicax siat animus spect^ ad id (...) ^ile est: nec mat^a
panis, sed super illum dictus (...) est (...) prode^ non indigne Domino
comedenti illum. E^ h^c qui^ (...) (...) symbolicoque corpo^e Multa porro and
de ipso verb^ (...) q^d factum est c^ro verusque cibu^ qu^m qui cum ede^it
(...) (...) in aeternum quem nullus malus potest edere.
Origin concerning the matter of bread, which he calls the typical and
symbolicall body of Christ, and says, it goes into the belly and is cast out
in the draught; but for Christ himself, and his flesh, he says, that it is
the true meat, which whosoever eats shall live for ever, which no wicked man
can eat. I am sure wicked men can and do eat of the bread after
consecration: it is not then in Origens judgment Christ's flesh. I pray also
resolve me what is that S. Origin calls the matter of bread which he terms
Christ's typical and symbolicall body, and says it goes into the belly, etc.
you dare not say Christ's body. For it is blasphemy in the highest degree, to
say that his glorified body passes through the guts and is cast out into the
draught: Substance of bread you say there is none, and to call accidents a body
and the matter or material part of bread, is as absurd in speech as it is in
sense, that a man can void tastes, and colors, and figures without substance.

Fifthly, I allege against you in the same Commentary upon Saint Matthew, his
interpretation of the words of the In Mat. Tract. 35. Edite, ^oc est corpus
meum, panis iste quem Deus verbum corpus suum esse fatetur, verbum est
nutritorium animarum, and potus iste quem Deus verbu^ sanguinem suu^ fatetur
verbum est ^tans and ^nebrians ^orda biben^um.
institution, which can no way stand with your doctrine of Transubstantiation,
Take eat says he, This is my body, the bread which God the Word says to be
his body, is the Word which nourishes the soul, the Word which proceeds from
Gods mouth by which man lives, bread, the heavenly bread which is set upon
that Table, of which it is written. Thou have prepared a table before me. And
the drink which God the Word calls his blood, is the Word making glad the
hearts of the drinkers. Mark I beseech you, he says that Christ calls
bread his body, which he could not but by a trope or figure, since bread and his
body are substantiae disparatae, substances of diverse kinds, which cannot in
truth and propriety of speech one be called the other. Secondly, he says that
this bread is the food of souls, and this drink refreshes and makes glad
the hearts of them that drink: it is the food of souls, not bodies, and the
drink of the heart, not of the mouth, if we believe this Father.

Sixthly, I retort your own allegation against you, out of the fifth In diverse,
loc. Evangal. Hom 5* Intrat and nunc Domi^ sub ^ectum credemium dupl^ci figur^
ve^more, etc.
Homily. The Lord (says he) even now comes under the roof of Believers two
manner of ways: The one when thou entertainest into thy house the Governors
or Pastors of the Church, for by them the Lord enters into thy house, and by
them thou becommest his Host. The other manner is, when thou take that holy
and uncorrupted banquet, when thou do enjoy the bread and cup of life, eatest
and drinkest the body and blood of our Lord, then our Lord does enter under thy
roof, wherefore humbling thy self imitate the Centurion, and say, Lord I am
not worthy that thou come under my roof. Observe I pray you as before, that
the faithful enjoy the cup of life as well as the bread, whereof you utterly
deprive them, and that by roof he means the heart which entertaines Christ,
not the mouth. That which S. E. adds (suppose the soul be wicked, this
Author says Christ goes In) he adds of his own, Origin says no such thing,
that Christ e^ters into the soul or heart of a wicked man, but all that he
says is this, where he enters in unworthily, he enters in to the condemnation
of him that receives, that is, where the party unworthily eats of that bread,
and drinks of that cup: for in that bread Christ enters in his typical and
symbolicall body, as he calls it before, not in his true and natural, which
he proved unto us there, no wicked man can eat.

Seventhly, I conclude this Section with a testimony out of the last book of
De Christ. Hom dial. 3. Si ut obloquuntur isti carne destitutus erat and
exanguis, cuiusmodi carnis, cujus corporis and qualis tandem sanguinis signa
and magines ^anem and ^oculum mi^istravit? ^ussitque per ^a (...) (...) (...)
re^ovate.
Origin, If as these men cavil or upbraid us Christ was destitute of flesh,
and without blood, of what flesh, of what body, and of what blood did be
administer the bread and the cup as signs and images, commanding his Disciples
by them to renew the memory of himself. Hear you how brief he speaks, how
fully in the language of the reformed Churches, bread and the cup are not the
very body and blood of Christ by Transubstantiation, but signs, images, and
memorialls thereof by representation. And if now you are cast as your
conscience will tell you, you are by several verdicts of Origin, thank your
self who would needs refer the matter to him among others, and be tried by
the bench of antiquity, whereby you are clearly overthrown as you will be in
your own Court by your own feed judge Gratian, your great Canonist, of whom
in the next Paragraph.

PAR. 12.
Eighteen places out of Gratian (the Father of the Canonists) against
Transubstantiation vindicated, and objections out of him answered.

GRatian de consecratione distinctione, 2. capite, hoc est quod dicimus, says,
as the Sicut ergo coelestis panis qui Christi caro est, suo modo vocatur corpus
Christi, cum revera sit Sacramentum corporis Christi, illius viz. quod
visibile, quod palpabile, mortale in cruc^ positum est, vocaturque ipsa
immolatio carnis quae sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi Passio, mors, crucifixio
non r^i veritate sed significante mysterio: sic Sacramentum fidei (quod
Boptismus intellignur) fides est.
heavenly bread which is Christ's flesh, is after a sort called the body of
Christ, when as in truth it is the Sacrament of the body of Christ, I mean of
that which being visible, palpable, mortal, was put upon the Cross, and that
immolation of the flesh which is done by the hands of the Priest, is called the
Passion, death and crucifixion, not in the verity of the thing, but in a
signifying mystery: so the Sacrament of faith (Baptism) is faith. The Coeleste
Sacramentum quod vere representat Christi carnem dicitur corpus Christi, sed
improprie, unde dicitur suo modo sed non rei veritate, sed significante
mysterio, ut sit sensus vocatur Christi corpus, idest significatur.
gloss adds the heavenly Sacrament which truly does represent the flesh of
Christ, is called the body of Christ but improperly; wherefore it is said in a
sort but not in the truth of the thing, but in a signifying mystery. This
testimony of Gratian is like a great torch thoroughly lightened, which a strong
blast of wind blows not out, but makes it blaze the brighter. Three puffes
you and your Chaplain have at it. First, you say Gratian is no authentical
Author with you, much less the gloss. Secondly, you say his words are meant
of the accidents which are a Sacrament only of Christ's body. Thirdly, your
Chaplain adds, that the flesh of Christ on the Altar is a Sacrament of
Christ's visible and palpable body upon the Cross, you say the less to the
purpose by saying so much, and your answers interfere on the other. For if
Gratian be no authentical Author with you, why doc you strain your wits to
make his words reach home to the truth? why do you contradict one the other to
make Gratian agree to himself? the truth is, you have a Woulfe by the ears,
you can neither safely hold him, nor let him go. For if you reject Gratians
authority, all the Canonists like so many Hornets will be about your ears:
if you admit him, you loose your cause, for then you must confess, that after
consecration, that which remains on the Altar is not indeed Christ's body, but
a Sacrament thereof, whcih is no otherwise called Christ's body, then your
oblation in the Mass is called the crucifying of Christ, and that I am sure
you will say and swear too is not in the truth of the thing, but in a
signifying mystery. To examine your answers severally.

First, you impeach Gratians credit, telling us, that with you he is no
authentical Author: What you mean by authentical I know not, a classical
Author sure he is with you, who prefer him before Dionisius, Exiguus,
Isidorus, Cresconius, Burchardus, Ivo, and all other compilers of ancient
decrees, and read him publicly in your Bellar. de Scriptor. Ecelesiast ad
annum 1140 Ipse solus obtinuit u^ public in Gymnasijs praelegeretur and
multorum doctissimoru^ virorum Commentarijs illustrareu^.
Schools. What esteem Aristotle is in with Philosophers, Hypocrates with
Physicians, Euclides with Geometricians, Johannes de sacro Bosco with
Astronomers, Ptolomey with Cosmographers, Peter Lumbard with School Divines,
Justinian with civil Lawyers, the same in Gratian with Canonists. And if
before he were not an authentical Author with you, yet since the year 1580.
in which by the authority of Gregory the fourteenth, he was revised and
purged, he must needs be authentical with you. Howsoever it stands with
Gratian (because it may be your Dioces of Chalcedon is not governed by the
Canon Law) this testimony out of him is as a threefold cable, which though you
and your Chaplain tugg never so hard at, you will never be able to break,
for Gratian quoteth this out of the Sentences of Saint Austin, gathered by his
Scholar Saint Prosper. Gratian is but the relater and approver, S. Prosper or
rather Vid. titulum decret. Aug. in lib. Sentet. Prosper.
Saint Austin is the Author thereof, and is not Saint Austin with you an
authentical Author?

Secondly, upon better advise you admit of the authority of this testimony, and
shape a kind of answer unto it, that when Gratian out of Saint Austin denies
the bread to be Christ's body, he means the accidents of bread, which are
Sacramentum tantum, the Sacrament only, and not in truth the body of Christ.
This answer cannot stand: for the accidents of bread are not panis, much less
coelestis panis, heavenly bread, or coeleste Sacramentum, a heavenly Sacrament,
and lest of all Christ's flesh, therefore the former words cannot be meant of
the accidents, but of the consecrated host. What S. E. adds to piece out your
answer, that the accidents may be so called in regard of their reference to our
Saviors body which they cover; which reference is founded upon an heavenly
action, to wit, consecration, is unworthy the refutation, for he beg^ that
which he ought to prove, that the accidents of bread cover our Saviors body:
this we deny, and I have disproved it in the former Section. Besides, he
seems to be ignorant of your Church tenet, which is, that the words of
consecration work upon the substance of bread, and turn it into Christ's body
not upon the accidents.

Thirdly, the last answer which you or your Chaplain give, is worst of all,
(viz.) that the body of Christ on the Altar is a Sacrament of Christ's visible
and palpable body which hung on the Cross for this is not only an absurd and
senseless, but also an heretical and blasphemous solution. It Is absurd to
make the same body num^ro to be a Sacrament of it self, it is all one as to say
that the disease is the symptom of it self, or the Ivy bush is a sign of it
self, or the face is the picture of it self, or the substance is the shadow
of it self. A Sacrament as your Schools out of Saint Austin define, is a
visible sign of an invisible grace, how then I pray you can the flesh of
Christ in the Sacrament (which you teach to be covered under the form of
bread and so to be invisible) be a Sacrament of the visible flesh of Christ
on the Cross, visible things may be signs and Sacraments of invisible, but
it is a thing impossible, that an invisible thing should be the Sacramental
sign of a visible. I would forgive your Chaplain the absurdity and
senselessness of his answer, if there were not implied heresy in it against
the fundamental Article of our Creed.

It Is flat heresy to affirm that Christ had more then one individual humane
body: but if the body of Christ really and substantially and carnally present
on the Altar, is a Sacrament of his own body, then on the Cross, or now at
the right hand of his Father, then he must have two bodies, one visible and
palpable on the Cross, when he suffered, and now in heaven, and an other at
this very instant invisible, insensible, and impalpable on the Altar.

Thus having made good our fort in Gratian, I might pass to the next Section:
yet because your Armourbearer S. E. will not yield us this fort, but having
produced some passages out of Gratian, and the Gloss against us leaves it to
the Reader to judge with P. 119, 120.
what conscience I cited them for our opinion. I will out of this one
distinction in Gratian, produce so many pregnant testimonies for us, that any
indifferent Reader will marvel with what face you can deny him to be ours.
For the Gloss which you reject with such scorn, all that I will say shall be
this, that although he lived in times of thickest darkness, even in the
midnight of Popery: yet he saw a glimmering of the truth in this point, as
appears by his note upon cap. ego Berengarius, unless says he thou do
understand the words of Berengarius in a good and sound or wholesome sense, (in
which according to a form prescribed him by Pope Nicolas, he confesses
Christ's body to be eaten in the Sacrament with the mouth and torn with the
Nisi sa^ intellig^ verb^ Berengarij in maiore^ i^cidis heraes^ quam ips^ habuit.
teeth) thou will fall into a worse heresy then his. And upon cap. Coeleste
Sacr^ qu^d est in Altari improprie dicitur corpus Christi, sicu^ Baptismus
impropri^ dicitur side^.
hoc est, The heavenly Sacrament which is upon the Altar, is improperly said to
be Christ's body. And upon cap. utrum sub Christu^ fas vorare dentibus no^ est
distinctione, ego Berengarius contr^ sed i^i hyperbol^e locu^ est and veritatem
excessit
figura, It is unlawful to devour Christ with the teeth, so says Gratian
here, but a little above in the Chapter beginning, I Berengarius, the contrary
is affirmed, but there he speaks hyperbolically and exceeds the truth: I
grant you that in his notes upon some other Chapters he seems to favor your
Transubstantiation, and contradict himself, and so appears like the Glossae
dissectae, though in a far (...).
other sense divided from himself.

But as for Gratian on whose Text he Commenteth, who lived in times not
altogether so corrupt, he saw the truth of this point concerning the
spiritual eating of Christ in the Sacrament by faith, and not with the mouth
so clearly, ac si solis radio descripta esset, as if it had been described
before him with a beam of the Sun. For to let pass the cap. per acta, in
which by a decree of Peract^ consecratione o^nes communicent qui noluerint
Ecclesiasticis carere liminibus.
Calixtus, he cashiereth your private Masses. And the cap. Divisio unius and
eiusdem mysterij sine grandi sacrilegio non potest perve^ire.
Comperimus, in which by a decree of Pope Gelasius, he brandeth your half
communion with the crime of Grandsacriledge.

1. In the Chapter Tribus, Pope Clemens gives charge to the Priest, Deacon, and
Minister, to keep with fear and trembling the relics of the fragments of
Christ's body, what means he I pray you by fragments, he cannot mean the
fragments of accidents, for accidents have no fragments or relics, neither
can he mean any broken parts of Christ's very body, for himself teaches out
of Austin. c. Nec quand^ manducamus par^es de ipso ^us.
qui, that when we eat we make not parts of Christ's body, but receive it
integerrime, most entirely, c. Omnes aequ^liter corpus Christi integerr^ (...).
Quid sit: It remains therefore, that by fragments, relics, or remains, he
understands broken pieces of bread, and if so, the substance of bread
remains in the judgment of Pope Clemens, not only after the consecration
but also after the Communion. Cum ad reverendii Altar cibis spiritualibus
satiandus ascendis, sacr^ Dei tui corpu^ and sangui^ side respice, mente
conti^ge, cordis man^ susci^ and maxim^ totum ha^stu interioris hominis assume.


2. In the Chapter Quia corpus, he alleges out of Eusebius Emissenus, these
words, When thou go up to the dreadful or venerable Altar, to be satisfied
with spiritual meats by faith, regard, honor, and admire the holy body and
blood of thy God, touch it in thy mind, take it with the hand of thy heart,
drink it by the draught of the inward man. What need he to have said, look
upon him with the eye of faith, touch him with thy mind, and with the hand of
thy heart, and draught of the inward man, but to Vt quid p^ ras de^ and (...)
(...), creed and m^ducasti, qui credit in au^ manducat (...). (Vid.) capu^
cred^re. Credere in Christum hoc est manducar^ p^ vivum.
exclude your carnal eating and drinking him with the hand and mouth of the
outward man.

3. In the Chapter Vt Quid out of Saint Austins book, de remedio penitentiae,
he quoteth these words, Why do thou prepare thy tooth and thy belly? believe
and thou have eaten, he that believes in him eats him: if the tooth and
belly have nothing to do in eating Christ's flesh, how do you affirm that he
is eaten with the mouth.

4. In the Chapter prima quidem out Vide supra in P. 11.
of Saint Austin his Comment upon the fourth Psalm, he repeateth those two
testimonies which before I produced in Paragraph the eleaventh. The first is a
strong evidence against the carnal interpretation of Christ's words, the latter
against the supposed existence of Christ's body in more places at once. The
former is this, spiritually understand what I have spoken, you shall not eat
this body which you see, nor drink that blood which they who crucify me
shall shed; I have commended a kind of Sacrament or mystery unto you, which
being spiritually understood will quicken you. The latter is, the body of
Christ in which he rose must be in one place, his truth or divinity is every
where.

5. In the Chapter Non, he mentions Non iste panis est qui vadit in corpus,
sed panis vitae ^rnae qui ^imae sub^antiam (...).
out of Saint Ambrose, a sentence which directly excludes your eating Christ
with the mouth, it is not this bread which goes into the body, but the bread
of eternal life which supporteth the substance of the soul.

6. In the Chapter Qui manducat he expounds out of S. Austin, the phrase of
eating and drinking Christ after this manner, he that eats and drinks
Christ, eats and drinks life, to Ill^ (...) ^re ^st resici, (...) (...) est
^vere, quod (...) Sacr^ visibiliter (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) and
(...)
eat him is to be fed or refreshed, to drink him is to live, that which is
visibly taken in the Sacrament, is in the truth spiritually eaten and drunk,
if in the truth he is eaten spiritually, hen not corporally or orally, for a
Spirit has no flesh and bones, and consequently no mouth and teeth. In the
same Chapter he adds, that which is ^.
seen and our eyes tell us is bread and the cup, but that which faith being to
be instructed requires is the bread, is Christ's body, the cup is his blood,
but bread can no way be Christ's body properly as I have demonstrated before,
Austin therefore and Gratian stand for a trope or figure in the words of the
institution.

7. In the Chapter Qui discordat Qui discord^ (...) non manducat carne^ eius
nec (...) sanguin^ eius.
out of the same Austin, he debarres all wicked men from tasting the heavenly
food of Christ's flesh. He who disagreeth (says he) from Christ, eats not his
flesh, nor drinks his blood, though he daily receive the Sacrament of so
great a thing to his condemnation and perdition. But he who is at distance with
Christ, may and does sometime eat of that which is in the Pix after
consecration: it is not therefore the flesh of Christ which no wicked tooth or
mouth can touch, but the Sacrament thereof only which is set on your Altar.

8. In the Chapter Panis est and cap. Revera, he diggeth much ore out of Saint
Ambrose his books de Sacramentis, whereof I will try a little at this
present. If there be such force in the word of the Lord Jesus that thereby that
began to be which was not before, how much more operatorie or effectual is it,
that things c. panis. ut sint quae eran^ and in ^iua commu^ur.
may be what they were and yet turned into an other thing, that they may be
what they were in substance, and changed into another thing in significancie
and supernatural efficacy. Christ says, This is my C. revera. ante
benedictionem alia species nominatur, post consecrationem corpus signatur.
body, before the blessing of heavenly words, an other kind is named, after
consecration the body is signed or signified, he terms the cup his blood,
before consecration it is called another thing, after Ante co^secrationem aliud
dicitur, post consecrationem sanguis Christi nuncupatur.
consecration it is called Christ's blood. Why? because the Wine is turned into
Christ's blood? no, but because it is a Sacrament of Christ's blood, and bears
the similitude thereof, so says Ambrose in express words, as thou C. panis:
sicut morti^ similitudine^ sumpsisti ita etiam san guinis similitudinem bibis.
take the similitude of Christ's death, so thou drinkest the similitude of his
blood.

9. In the Chapter Iteratur he brings in Pope Pascasius transubstantiating, if
I may so speak, your external, visible, and proper sacrifice of the Mass
into a significative and mystical. Quiae q^otidie labimur, quotidis Christ^
mis^ce pro (...) bis i^ ^la tur.
Because (says he) we offend daily, Christ daily is offered for us mystically,
and his Passion is delivered to us in a mystery.

10. In the Chapter De hac out of De hac quidem hostia quae in Christi
commemoratione mirabilt^r fit ed^re licet: de illa vero quam Christus in
Aracru^ i^ ob^lit secundum se nulli edere lices.
Hierom upon Leviticus, he determines, that it is lawful for us to eat of
that Host which is offered in memorial of Christ: but that it is lawful for
no man to eat of that Host in it self which Christ offered upon the Altar of
the Cross. Whereof no other good construction can be made then this, that we
may eat of the bread broken on the Lords Table, whereby Christ's sacrifice upon
the Cross is represented, but not of the very body of Christ it self which
was offered upon the Cross. We may eat with the mouth Christ's flesh in
Symbolo, but not in se or secundumse, we may eat it in the sign or Sacrament
thereof, but not properly and orally in it self. What you allege for your
self out of Gratian, makes very much against you, the P. 111.
words are, The sacrifice of the Church does consist of two things, the visible
form of elements, and the invisible flesh of Christ, both of a Sacrament, and
re Sacramenti, as the person of Christ does consist of God and man. To this
distinction we fully subscribe, that the Lords Supper or Sacrament consists of
a visible part, to wit, the outward elements offered to our bodily senses, and
of an invisible or heavenly part, the flesh and blood of Christ exhibited by
the Spirit to the eye of our faith, but you cannot allow of this distinction of
parts: For you have no elements at all. For accidents without substance are no
elements, and besides accidents you have nothing in your Sacrament but Christ's
flesh, which is the res Sacramenti. Moreover if the Sacrament consist of the
elements and Christ's body, as Christ's person consists of his humane and
divine nature (as Gratian out of Saint Austin affirms) then is not the
substance of the element turned into the substance of Christ's body, but both
remain entire, as the humane nature of Christ is not turned into the divine
but remains entire.

What your Chaplain urges out of (...) days Confere^ with Musk^ p. (...).
Gratian for himself, I have answered else where.

PAR. 13.
That the words of the institution, This is my Body, are to be taken in a
tropicall and figurative sense, is prooved, 1. By testimony of Scripture. 2.
By authority of Fathers, namely, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, Athanasius, Cyrillus Hierosolomitanus, Ambrosius,
Epiphanius, Hieronymus, Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Augustinus, Chrysostomus,
Theodoretus, Gaudentius, Issidorus, Oecumenius, and Arnoldus Carmotensis. 3. By
the confession of our adversaries, Gerson, Gardener, Bellarmine. 4. By force of
reason.

NOw I will ascend from the troubled brook to the spring, from the Canon Law
to the divine, from Gratian to the Author of all grace, Christ Jesus himself,
whose words This is my Body, you lay as the ground whereon you build both your
carnal presence and Transubstantiation, and the sacrifice of the Mass, and
the adoration of the Host. But it will bear none of them, nay rather as ground
shaken by an earthquake, it will utterly overthrow them all, as may appear by
this Syllogism.

If in this sentence This is my Body, the meaning be this Bread is my Body,
the speech cannot be proper, but must of necessity be figurative or tropicall.
But in this sentence, This is my Body, the meaning is, This Bread is my Body.
Ergo this speech cannot be proper, but must of necessity be figurative and
tropicall: and if so, down falls Transubstantiation built upon it, and carnal
presence built upon Transubstantiation, and the oblation and adoration of the
Host built upon the carnal presence.
In this Syllogism the consequence L. 3. de Eu^har. c. 19. Non potest ^eri ut
vera fit propositio ^n qua subiectum supponit pro pa^ and praedi^atum pro
corpore Christi, panis (...) and corpus Christi sunt res diversissime, and
post. si lice; affirmare disparatum de disparato, lice bit eodem ^ure affirmare
de nihilo aliquid, de ^ce tenebras, etc.
of the Major is so evident, that Cardinal Bellarmine affirms, that it is
impossible that bread should be called Christ's Body otherways then by a
figure, for bread and Christ's Body are things most diverse, and if disparate
substances, such as bread and Christ's body are, might be affirmed one of the
other, by the same reason we might affirm something to be nothing, light to
be darkness, and darkness to be light, etc. Bread is a substance
inanimate, Christ's Body is animate, bread of the figure of a loaf, or wafer,
Christ's Body of the figure of a man: bread inorganicall or without orgaines or
members, Christ's Body Organicall: bread made of wheat flower, Christ's Body of
Virgins blood: bread therefore in propriety of speech, can no more be Christ's
Body, then Christ himself a Vine, or a Door, or a Way, or a Rock, all which
speeches our Adversaries themselves confess to be tropicall and figurative.

The Minor or Assumption is prooved four manner of ways.

1. By testimony of Scripture. 2. By the authority of Fathers, 3. Confession
of our Adversaries. 4. Force of reason.
1. The Text is plain, Christ took bread, and blesse^, and brake, and said,
This is my Body, what he took, he blessed, ^e brake, he gave of that he
said, This is my Body. But he took, he blessed, he brake, he gave bread, of
bread therefore he said, This is my Body. When he said Hoe or This, he
pointed to something, not to mere accidents as you Bell. l. 3. de Euch. c. 19.
Hoc non supponit pro accidente sed pro substantia.
confess, for then he would have said hac not hoc, these not this, nor
pointed he to his own body sitting at Table, for neither did the Apostles, nor
could they doubt whether the body sitting at Table were his body; neither were
there any coherence in the words, take this bread, break and eat in
remembrance of me, for this is my body which you see sitting at table with you.
He pointed therefore to the substance of bread, when he said hoc This, and
consequently the meaning of his words are, This bread is my Body.

2. You take an oath to expound Scriptures, juxta unanime^ consensum Patrum,
according to the unanimous consent of Fathers, and therefore unless you will
incur the censure of perjury, you must allow of this interpretation of
Christ's words, This is my Body, that is, This bread is my Body, for so they
Anno 105. Apolog. 2. p 98. (...). Anno. 180. l. 4. cont Har. c. 57. eius
conditionis quae est secundum nos accipens panem suum corpus esse confitebatur
Anno 190. Paedagog. l. 2. c. 3. Benedixit vinum c^ dixit accip^e hic est
sanguis, etc.
are expounded by

1. Justin Martyr. The sanctified food which nourishes our flesh and our
blood, by the change thereof into our nature, we are taught to be the flesh
and blood of him that was incarnate for us, Jesus Christ. 2. Irenaeus. How did
the Lord rightly if an other were his Father, taking bread of this condition
that is usual amongst us confess it to be his body. 3. Clemens Alexandrinus.
He blessed wine when he said, take drink this is my blood. 4. Tertullian. So
Christ Anno 210. l. 4. cont. Marc. c. 40. panem corpus suum appellans. Anno
230. in Mat. Tract. 35. Panis quem Deus verb^ corpus suum esse fatetur. Anno
250. Epist. 63. vinum fuisse quod sanguinem suum dixit. Anno 340. i^ 1 Cor. 11.
Quid est panis Christi corpus. Anno 365. Cyrill Hiros Catec. mist. 4* Christus
de pane affirmat hoc est corpus me^ Anno 390. l 4 da sacra^^ c. 5. Panem
fractum tra didit Discipulis dic^ accipite ho^ Anno 390. ad Hedib. q* Nos (...)
(...) panem quim fregis Dominus deditque Discipulis s^is esse corp^ Domini ipso
dico^te hoc est corpus meum.
taught us, calling bread his Body. 5. Origin. Christ confesses the bread to
be his body. 6. Cyprian. It was wine which Christ said to be his blood, and
Epist. 76. Panem corpus suum vocat. 7. Athanasius. What is the bread, Christ's
body. 8. Cyrill. Christ said of the bread. This is my Body. 9. Ambrose. He
delivered broken bread to his Disciples, saying, This is my Body. 10. Saint
Hierom. Let us hear that the bread which Christ brake and gave to his
Disciples is his body as himself says. (...)
to salve his credit, nay his faith.

First, in this answer you contradict the Tenet of your Church and your self.
For if by hoc or this as the Fathers teach, we are to understand hic panis,
this bread, and the sense of the whole is, this bread is my body, and bread
here stands not for bread in substance, but in appearance only, or in the
exterior form, or that which is made of bread as your Chaplain has P. 1^.
it, then the words of institution are not taken in the proper sense, but are
absolutely and simply figurative, which your self denies, and Fisher the
Jesuit P. 72, 73.
of Transubstantiation, Sess. 2. and l. (...). 9. Proprie non figurate
explicanda sun^ illa verba ho^ est corpus meum.
Bellarmine of the Sacrament of the Eucharist (the words this is my body ought
to be taken and expounded properly, not figuratively) and Alfonsus a Castro,
and Sanctesius, and Salmoron, and Costorus, and Gardinerus, and Tonstallus, and
Panegyrolla, and Roffensis, and Suares, and Uasques, and other Papists named
and confuted by l. 10. de Eucha c. 15.
Chamierus.

Secondly, this your interpretation no better agrees with the Fathers words,
then a wet mould does with running metal which makes it fly back with a
great force, for instance, Justin Martyr in the words above cited by bread or
food, understands that whereby as he says our bodies are nourished, quae
mutata nutrit carnes nostras, but that is not bread turned into Christ's body;
for Christ's body is no meat for the belly, nor is it turned into our flesh.
Irenaeus speaks of bread, ejus conditionis quae secundum nos, of bread that
is usual among us, l. 4. c. 57. c. 34. of bread, qui est c terra, which is
taken from the earth, such is not super-substantiall bread, or
transubstantiated into Christ's body. Clemens by wine understands wine
allegorically termed Christ's blood, (...), but that is not wine really turned
into Christ's blood, for that is Christ's blood in propriety of speech, not by a
Metaphor or Allegory. Tertullian as you expound him Epist. 57. Corpus suum
p^nim vocat d^ mul^m granorum ad^tione congestum and sanguine^ suum vinum
appellas de botris ai^, aci^is pl^rimis expressum.
speaks of bread which was vetus figura, an ancient figure of Christ's body,
but that could not be bread transubstantiated into his body, for before his
Incarnation he had no body into which bread could be then turned. Cyprian
speaks of bread made of many corns or grains, and of wine pressed out of
many grapes. Ambrose speaks of bread broken, but super-substantiall bread or
turned into Christ's body is not broken bread. Saint Hierome likewise speaks of
broken bread, and consequently not of the heavenly bread which is Christ's
flesh. Epiphanius speaks of that which is of a round figure and without sense,
and such is bakers bread, but not that bread which Christ said, John the 6. He
would give us, to wit, his flesh for the life of the world. Gaudentius speaks
of bread consecrated, before he gave it or said, This is my Body; but it was
not according unto your doctrine turned into Christ's body before the words this
Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. 24. Quemadmodum panis ex multis granis ^itur. Aug. in
Ioh. Tract. 26. Dominus noster Jesus Christus corpus and sanguinem suum in ejs
rebus comme^davit quae in unu^ aliquid rediguntur ex ^ultis.
is my body are uttered, neither ^oth the Priest consecrate Christ's body but
the bread, for consecrare is ex communi sacrum facere, of a thing common
before, to make a thing Sacred or a Sacrament. Saint Chrysostom and Saint
Austin both speak of terrestrial bread, or as you call it bakers bread, not
of transubstantiated or celestial bread, for both of them observe in the
bread and in the wine a representation of Christ's mystical body which is one
consisting of many members, as a loaf of bread is ^c, yet made of the flower
of many ^res or corns, and the cup of wine is one ^ough made of the juice of
many grapes. ^int Isidore speaks of bread which ^engtheneth the body, and
therefore of ^ead in substance and not in appea^nce only, Lastly, Arnoldus
Carmo^nsis Arnol. de Card^nal. Chris op. de ^nct. (...) significa^ and
significaia ijsdem vocab^olis censeren^r.
whom you mistake, for Saint ^yprian says, not that bread is called ^hrists
flesh because it is turned into it, ^t because the thing signifying and ^ing
signified are called by the same ^ames.

Now to the shreds of sententes of Fathers which your Chaplain takes from your
bulk, I will return as short answers in the order as he has laid them.
Irenaeus says, that the bread (...) con ^re. c. 34.
in the Eucharist is not common bread, so say we also, for it is consecrated to
a holy and heavenly use. Tertullian (...). co^g. M^rc. c. (...).
says, that he made the bread his own ^ody, that is, as he expounds it
himself in the same place, the Dicendo hoc est corpu^ me^, idest sigura
corgoris m^.
sigure of his ^ne body. Saint Hierom Epist. ad He dib. q. 2. says, the bread
came down from heaven, but he means Christ himself, not the Sacramental
bread. for that came not down from heav^ but was made of wheat growing up^
the earth. Saint Austin as you quo^ De verb. Dom. Ser. 28.
but indeed Ambrose 15. de Sacram. c. speaks of super-substantiall bread,
(...) thereby he means Christ's flesh or the heavenly Manna, not that bread
(...) eat in the Sacrament with the mouth as he admonishes in the next word^
it is not the bread which goes in the body, but the bread of eternal (...)
which supporteth the substance of (...) soul, with whom Saint Austin him self
accords, Ser. 29. de verb. Do^ Thy Shepherd and thy giver of life is the
Pastor and vitae, dator cibus and panis aeternus, disce, and doce, vive and
pasca. quid tibi sufficit cui Deus non suffi cit.
meat and eternal bread, learn and teach, live and feed, what is sufficien^
for thee if thy God be not. In anchorato.
Epiphanius says, that he who believed not the bread to be as our Savior
said (his body) falls from salvation; it is true he that believes not the
bread to be our Saviors body, as our Savior said it to be his body
endangereth his salvation, for he questioneth the truth of our Lord, but
Epiphanius says, not that Christ's words are to be take literally, nay in
that very place he^ proves the contrary: for the brea^ (...) round and without
sense, but our Lord Hoc enim est rotundae sigisrae and insensibile, Dominum
vero nostrum novimus totum sensiti^um, totum sensum totum Deum. Cyril cattch.
mistag. 4 (...) Catech. mistag 3. Panis postinvo-cationem n^ ^st amplius, panis
communis sicut unguentum post invocationem non est amplius unguentum commune
sed chrism^ Descrip. eccles. ad an^. 250.
(...) know is wholly sensitive or rather all sense. Saint Cyrill says, that
which seems bread, is not bread, but Christ's body, but he in the words going
before, and in his Catech. plainly shows his own meaning, Come not
therefore as unto simple bread and wine, or ^are bread and wine. The bread
after the calling upon of the Holy Ghost, is no more common bread, as the
ointment after benediction is no more common ointment but chrisme. Yet oil
after benediction still retains the substance of oil, and so does the bread
after consecrasion the substance of bread. The Author Decaen. Dom. who is so
much in your Books, that we find him almost in every Section; is not the
blessed Martyr Saint Cyprian, as Bellarmine proves by many arguments, but a
far later Writer by name Arnoldus Carmotensis, as the Epistle Dedicatory to
Pope Adrian, who sat Anno 1154. extant in All-Soules Library in Oxford
testifies: but be he Cyprian or Arnoldus who wrote the Treatises de
cardinalibus Christi operibus, he is no friend to your carnal presence, or
Transubstantiation, for in the Chapter cited by you, he has these words, we
whet not our teeth to eat, but by Non dentes ad mordendu^ accuimus, sed fide
sincera panem sanctum frangimus and partimur.
sincere faith we break the holy bread. And in the words immediately following
those words which you allege, he says, that Christ powers his divine
Essence into the Sacrament, even as in Christ under the humane nature the
divinity lay hid, therefore according to this Author, there remains the
substance of bread, together with Christ's Body Sacramentally united, as in
Christ, the humane and the divine nature remain united hypostatically. And
moreover, that when he says the bread is changed, not in shape, but in
nature, and by the Omnipotency of the Word made flesh, that he speaks of a
Sacramental change and not substantial, and that by nature he means the
natural and common use, not the essence of bread, appears by his own words
a little before in this Immortalitatis alimonia datur a communibus cibis
differens corporalis substantiae retinens spectem.
Tract of the Supper of the Lord. That although the immortal food delivered in
the Eucharist differ from common meat, yet it retains the kind of corporal
substance. And in the Treatise following, Our Lord, De unct. Chrism. (...) dit
noster Dominus (...) mensa in qud ultimum cum Apostolis participa (...)
convivium proprljs ma^bus panem and vinum, in cruce vero manibus militum corpus
tradidit vulnerandum, etc.
says he, at the Table in his last Supper, gave bread and wine with his own
hands, and on the Cross he gave up his body to be wounded by the hands of
the Soldiers, (pray take special notice that he gave bread at the Table, and
his body on the Cross, not his body at the Table, no more then bread at the
Cross) that he might expound to the Nations, how diverse names or kinds are
reduced to the same essence, and the things signifying and signified are called
by the same names. If Cyril would be coming in as your Chaplain speaks with
his Conversion, and Nyssen with his Transmutation, and Theophylact with his
Transelementation, they shall be met with and repayed all three in their own
coin. Epist. ad Colosyrium convertens ea in veritatam propri^ carnis.
Cyril who in his Epistle to Colosyrius (if it be his, whereof Vasques
doubts in his 180. Disputation, upon the 3. part of Thomas his sums) says,
the bread and wine are changed into the verity of Christ's flesh: in his second
book upon John Chap. 42. says, that the waters of Baptism are by the
operation of the Holy Spiritus Sancti operatione ad divinam aquae reformantur
naturam.
Ghost changed into a divine nature. Orat. Catec. c. 37. pan^ in carnim. (...).
Nazianz. Orat. 40. (...).
Nyssen who says that bread is transmuted into Christ body, says in the same
Oration, that Christ's humane nature is transmuted into a divine excellency.
And Gregory Nazienzes, says, that by Baptism we are transmuted into Christ.
Theophylact who upon the 6. of John says, the bread is transelementated into
Christ's body (...), says that we are transelementated into Christ. You see
therefore that neither Cyrils (...), nor Nyssen^ (...), nor Theopylact's (...)
come home to your (...), they import no more then a spiritual (...)
Sacramental change. Were they (...) be taken in the most proper sense for a
substantial change: yet would they not help you a whit, for in the conversion
of water into wine, or the transmutation of one element into another, the
forms and accidents are changed: but the common matter remains the same,
whereas in your Transubstantiation the whole matter and substance perishes,
and the accident^ onel^ remain.

Thirdly, I prove that the Pronoune (hoc) this stands for hic panis by
confession of our learned Adversaries* Cont Flori^. l. 4 Dicendum est quod hoc
demonstrat substantiam panu.
Gerson, we must say that the Pronoune (hoc) demonstrateth the substance of
bread. De diabol. Sophu. Christus a^ evidentur, hoc est corpus meum,
demonstrans panem.
Gardener, Christ says plainly This is my Body, pointing to bread. De Sacr.
Euch. l. 3. c. 19. Dominus accepit pann^, beuedixit, and dedie Discipul^, and
de eo ait, hoc est corpus meum.
Bellarmine, The Lord took bread, blessed it, and gave it to his Disciples,
and of it said, This is my Body.

Fourthly, I prove it by force of reason, when this Pronoune hoc is uttered it
must signify something then existent, but that could not be Christ's body under
the accidents of bread, for vour Bellar. l. 1. del^ hoc 11. Aquinas p. 3 q 78
art* 5 In ulumo instante in quo profertur vox ultima ponitur conversio panis in
Corpus Christi.
selves teach, that the bread is not turned into Christ's body till the last
instant, in which the whole proposition is uttered: it remains therefore that
the Pronoune hoc stands for haec accidentia (which ye all disclaim) or hic
panis, this bread as then unaltered. Hereunto you answer, that hoc does
signify and suppose, not for that instant in which it is uttered, but for the
end of the proposition, when the praedicatum is in being, as when I say this is
a cross and make it withal, the word this does suppose for the cross, not
which is when the word (this) is uttered, but which is within the whole time
that I speak, so when I say taceo, I do not signify that I speak not while I
am uttering this word, but that I am silent when I have done uttering. So says
your Chaplain in these operative speeches P. 135.
of our Savior, Lazarus come forth, young man arise, the words Lazarus and
young man, did not signify persons existent then precisely when they were
uttered, but when the speeches were complete.

If Sophistry were the science of salvation, these knack and querkes of wit
Refut.
might be in high esteem, whereas they no more befit Divinity then it would
become grave Cato to cut many a crossecaper. I might justly remand you and your
Chaplain to the disputations in parvis, where such cummin as this is tithed,
or rather such gnats streigned by puneys in Logic: yet because you shall not
say that I let pass any apex or title in your book, I will examine all these
your instances. To which I reply, first in general, that you beg what you
ought to prove and use a base fallacy in all this di^ ^d petitio principij:
you take it for granted, that these words of our Savior (This is my Body) are
practical in your sense, that is, work a substantial and miraculous change,
which we deny, and you will never be able to make good proof of.

For first, bare words as they are words, have no operative power, much less a
virtue to work miracles, which cannot be effected without the employment of
the divine Omnipotency.

Secondly, words that are practical, that is used by God or men as instruments
to produce any effect of this nature, are imperative or uttered in the
imperative mood, as Be thou clean, receive thy sight, Lazarus come forth,
young man arise, sile obmutesce and the like, not in the indicative, as This is
my Body, This is my Blood.

Thirdly, the words of themselves can no more prove the bread to be turned
into Christ's Body then the accidents. For certain it is, and con^sed on all
sides, that when he uttered these words, This is my Body, he pointed to that
which he held in his hands, which was a substance clothed with the accidents,
color, quantity, taste and the like.

But your selves confess, that by virtue of these words This is my Body, the
accidents are not turned into Christ's Body: therefore neither can it be
prooved, that by virtue of these words, The is my Body the substance of bread
is turned into Christ's Body.

In particular to your first instance in a Cross, which at the same instant
you make, and say this is a Cross. I answer, first that if you could prove
Christ had a purpose to make his Body in your sense, as you have to make a
Cross, when you say this is a Cross, and make it withal, this instance of
yours were considerable, but till you prove the former, it is nothing to the
purpose. Secondly, either you have made the Cross with your fingers before, or
at the instant when you say (this:) or else your speech, this is a Cross, if it
be true, is figurative, the present tense est being taken pro proxime futuro,
that is, for the time immediately ensuing upon the uttering of your words.

To your second instance, in the word taceo, I hold my peace. I answer, that if
you will make a proposition of it, you must resolve it into ego sum tacens, I
am silent, and then the subject (I) is in being when this word (I) is uttered,
and likewise the praedicatum silent is in being as soon as the word is
uttered. Howbeit in ordinary and vulgar speech taceo is taken for jam nunc
tacebo, I hold my peace, tha^ is, I will utter not a word more.

To your third instance in Lazarus and the young man. I answer, that either
Christ by a Metonymie, partis pro toto, called Lazarus his soul, or his body
by the name of the whole Lazarus, or if Christ's speech be proper, that both
Lazarus and the young man, at that very instant when Christ called them were
persons existent, their souls being returned to their bodies. For though the
one came not forth out of his grave, nor the other arose till after our
Saviors speech was complete and ended, yet I say, and you shall never be able
to disproove it, that at the same moment when Christ called Lazarus, Lazarus
was in being, and so likewise the young man and the damsel. In a proposition
every part or word is vox significativa, as soon as it is uttered, as you may
learn out of Aristotle's book de interpretatione, C. (...), 2, 3.
and S. Quot verba sunt tot signa, signum nisi aliquid significat non potest
esse signum.
Austin his Dialogue with Adeodatus, therefore as soore as this Pronoune hoc is
uttered, it must then signify something then being. A proposition is a
complexum, like to a heap, or a number of three grains, whereof though the
number be not complete till the actual adding of the third grain, yet has
every grain his existence when it is first laid: if the parts of the
proposition signified not the parts of our conception, the whole could not
signify the whole, that which is in speech a proposition, is in the
understanding a composition, and the simple^ must needs be presupposed
existent, before we can actually compound them. If this will not satisfy you,
I leave yo^ to Cardinal Bellarmine and the Trent Catechism and Solmeron to be
better informed in this point both of Grammar and Divinity.

In Mat. 26. Profecto propositio non est vera nisi postquam factus est
circulus. Sed oration accipitur pro vera qua id quod futuru^ est accipitur pro
iam facto per tropum, neu iuxta proprietatem sermonis.
Solmeron affirms with a profecto and full asseveration, that the speech of
him who in drawing a circle does say this is a circle, cannot without trope or
figure be judged true.

The Fathers of the Catech. Trid, Huius vocis ho^ ea vis est ut rei praesentis
substantiam demonstret.
Council of Trent in a Catechism, set forth by the commandment of Pope Pius
the fifth, affirm directly against you and your Chaplain, that such is the
force of this word hoc, that it demonstrateth the substance of a thing present.

Cardinal Bell. l. (...). de Sacra Euch c. (...). In propositionibus quae
significant id quod ^unc fit cum dicitur, pronomina demonstrativa non
demonstrant (...) quod est, sed id quod erit, etc.
Bellarmine takes you also to task, relates your opinion and professedly
refuteth it. Some Catholics says he answer, that in such propositions which
signify that which is then done when it is spoken, the demonstrative pronounes
do not demonstrate that which is, but that which will be, and they give these
examples, as if one drawing a line or circle, says, this is a line, this is a
circle, as also the pronoune ought to be expounded in those words of Christ,
John the 15. This is my commandment. You cannot but say that this is your very
opinion, and the grounds you lay down for it. Now observe I pray you how
punctually the, Cardinal answers them: Etsi pronomen demonstra^ivum demonstret
rem fu^ram, quand^ n^hil est praesens quod demonstretur, ut in exemplis
allatis: tam^ si q^ digito aliquid ostendit dum pronomen effert valde absurdum
videtur dicere p^onomine illo non demonstrari rem praesentem. Atqui Domi^
accep^ (...) nem and illum porrigens, a^ accipite edite hoc est corpus me^,
videtur igitur demonstravisse panem, and sane in illis verbis bibite ex hoc
(...). (...) durum est non demonstrare id quod erat, sed id tantum quod (...)
(...)
Although says he, the pronoune demonstrative demonstrate a thing future when
there is nothing present which may be demonstrated by it as in the former
^xamples: Yet if a man should point to something with his finger when he
utters the pronoune hoc or this, it seems to be very absurd to say that the
pronoune this does not demonstrate something present. But our Lord took bread,
and reaching it, said, Take eat this is my Body: he seems therefore to have
demonstrated bread, neither is it any thing against (...) which they allege
for themselves, that a proposition does not signify till t^ end of the
proposition, when the whole is uttered, for though that be true of a
preposition which is a kind of Oration, yet the demonstrative pronounes
presently signify some certain thing even before the other words follow, and
verily it is exceeding harsh to say that in these words, Drink ye all of this,
the pronoune this does not demonstrate the thing which then was, b^ only that
which should be afterward.

Lastly, whether hoc signify as soon as it is uttered, or after the whole
proposition is pronounced, I demand of you what it signifies, not these
Bellar. de Sac. Euch. (...) 1. c. 11. Thomas di^it pronomen hoc non demonstrare
accidentia, quasi esset sensus hoc id est he accidentia sunt Corpus Christi;
id enim v^ absurdissi^um esset.
accidents, for the accidents are not Christ's Body. Aquinas, Vid (...). de
E^char. l. 10. 19.
Suarez, and Bellarmine, not only reject that Exposition, but also brand it
with the name of a most absurd conceit. Of the same judgment are Soto in
quare. Sent. dis. 9. q. 2.
Sot^ and Ians. concord. eva^g. c. 13^, hoc est demonstrativum substantia.
Iansenius. If the pronoune hoc demonstrate not accidents it must demonstrate
the substance; either of bread then or Christ's Body, if the substance of bread,
then is there in the words necessarily a Tropologie; if of Christ's Body, then
you make of them a Tautologie or Battologie. And here again you stick in the
mudd, and though your Chaplain labor with might and maine to pull you out of
it, yet he plucks you not out, but you draw him in, and both are swallowed up
in the same quagmire. For if this your interpretation be admitted, this body
of mine is my body, these absurdities will necessarily ensue upon it.

First, that these words are not consecratory. Secondl^, that they are not at
all (...). Thirdly, that they are not argumentative or (...). Fourthly, that
they are mere Identicall and ^ugatorie.
1. Consecratorie words are such, whereby something which before was common is
made sacred, according to the words of Saint Austin, accedit verbum ad
elementum and fit Sacramentum. But if the meaning of these words, This is my
Body be this body of mine is my body, nothing by them of common is made sacred.
For Christ's body was never common, but always most sacred, and by your
explication hoc this has no reference to bread but to Christ's body.

2. You teach generally that these words of the institution are not
contemplative, but practick and operatorie, that is, they effect what they
signify, and indeed upon this hinge hang^ all your doctrine of
Transubstantiation and carnal presence: but glossing the words with your
paraphrase, viz. This body is my body, you break down this hinge. For all
words which are operatory, or practicke, produce something by their prolation,
which was not before: but Christ's body was his body before the prolation of
these words; therefore by the prolation of these words it is not made. If you
answer as your Chaplain does, that Christ by these words made not indeed his
body, yet thereby he made his body to be under the shape of bread: you quite
overthrow your doctrine of Transubstantiation. For the putting a body which was
existent before, in a place or under a shape where it was not before, as for
example, a candle under a bushel, or a picture under a curtain, or a face
under a mask, is a translocation, or transposition, or alteration of habit, or
whatsoever rather then a Transubstantiation. This your acute Schoolmen well
saw, Aureolus, Vasques, and Suarez, and therefore contend for a new production
of Christ's body in the Sacrament. For a mere succeeding of it in the place of
bread, or union thereof with the accidents, or bringing it to, and placing it
on the Lords Table will not infer a Transubstantiation, their reasons are
good. In 4. Se^. did. 11 q. 1. Cum preci^ unum succadit alteri, (...) est
verum dicere quod illud cui succeditur acc^dat and convertatur in illud quod
succedit, i^ e converso succedens accedit ad illud cui' s^dit, illud (...)
transi^ in aliud quod desini^ antequam perv^niat (...) illud.
Aureolus thus argues, when one thing precisely succeeds another, it is not
true to say that that thing to which another succeeds does come, and is
converted into that which succeeds: that thing does not pass into another
which cease to be before it come to that other; as for example, we say not
that the Sea or a river passes into another, which is dried up before it can
come to it: as you say the substance of bread is abolisht before the substance
of Christ's body succeed. In 3. Thom, disp. 1^. c. 3. Unto cum illu qu^unque
mod^ fiat non potest non esse accidentaria
Vasques thus impugne^ your assertion, if Christ's body be (...) produced de
novo but only united and applied to the Sacramental signs to which it was
not before, this union, by whats^ver means it be wrought is only
accidental, and consequently cannot make (...) substantial conversion. In 3.
Thom. disp. 52. Sect. 4. Per sol^m actionem ad^uctivam rev non explicatur vera
conver^ substantialis and Tra^substantiati^ sed solum translocatio quaedam:
quando una substantia solum s^dit in loco (...) no^ potest prepri^ dici ^a
conv^i in alta^.
Suarez drive^ this nail to the head, by a mere addictive action (whereby
Christ's body (...) brought to be under the shape of bread) the true nature of
Transubstantiation is not unfolded, such an adduction imports only a
translocation and not a substantial conversion, when one substance only
succeeds in the place of another, the one cannot properly be said to be
converted into the other. For how absurd were it to say that D Bishop were
transubstantiated into D. Smith, because D. Smith succeeds him in the Sea of
Chalcedon: or that when your four Lecturers at the Sorbon one after another
read in the same pew, that at every new Lecture there is a new
Transubstantiation, and by name that D. (...) who (...) at seven a clock, is
transubstantiated into D. Filsac, who takes his room and reads at nine a
clock.

3. By this your Exposition you cut your self in the hammes, and enervat^ your
maine argument for Transubstantiation. For as I told you in the Conference, the
bare affirming Christ's body to be his body, prooves not that any thing is
turned into it. If Christ were now coming in the clouds, and any pointing to
the cloud should say this or there is Christ's body, could any from thence
conclude the conversion of the cloud into his body. Every proposition which is
of use in argumentation, and can afford or minister a reason to prove any
thing, must consist of one or more of the 4 praedicata topica, or at least one
of the quinque praedicabilia, as every young Sophister can inform you: but in
this proposition This is my Body, as you exp^und it, this my body is my body,
there is none of the 4 praedicata topica, or quinque praedicabilia. For the
predicate herein is neither genus, nor species, nor differentia, nor proprium,
nor accidents of the subject, but the self same with it re and ratione.

4. Hence it follows, that the proposition is merely Identicall and
neugatorie, which to affirm of any of the words of the word of life especially
of these whereby he instituted a most divine Sacrament were blasphemy, this
fearful consequence thus I infer upon your interpretation. Every
proposition in which the subject and predicate are the same, not only quoad
suppositum, but also quoad significationem, is merely Identicall and
nugatorie: In this propoposition God is wise, the subject and the predicate are
the same, quoad suppositum, but not quoad significationem, for the subjectum
Deus signifies Gods Essence in general, the predicate wise signifies but one
Attribute in particular: which though in regard of the simplicity of the divine
Essence, it be all one with God himself; yet is it distinguished from God
quoad nostrum modum concipiendi, according to our apprehension. Likewise in
this proposition, Petrus est Apostolus, Peter is an Apostle, or a man is a
living creature, the praedicatum and subjectum are the same, quoad suppositum,
for Peter is that Apostle, and that Apostle is Peter, a man is that living
creature, and that living creature is a man: yet they differ, quoad
significationem, for the subject signifies the person of Peter, the predicate
his office, and in the other proposition the subject signifies the compositum,
the predicate an essential part only; and so in all other instances your
Chaplain brings: neither can any one instance be brought of a proposition
which is not merely neugatorie, in which the praedicatum and subjectu^ are not
distinct quo ad significationem.

But according to yo^ exposition in this proposisition, This is my Body, the
subject this and the predicate body are the same, not only quoad suppositum,
but also quoad significationem, not only quoad rem, but also quoad modum; for
i^ it idem numero, which is maxim idem is predica^ de eodem numero, the
subject hoc standing for and signifying bread actually turned into Christ's
Body, and the predicate Christ's Body made of bread.

Ergo according to ^our interpretation, the words of institution, contain
(...) proposition merely Identicall or nugatorie.



If I thought you had not already you full ^ad. I could add more weight t^ my
former replies, from the authority of your great Gamali^ls, at whose feet you
and your Chaplain were brought up, I mean Aquinas, Soto, Durand, and
Bellarmine.

Aquinas thus loads you. Some have said that the pronoune this is to be
understood 3. p q. (...). 8. a^. 5 Alij dixer^, quod dictio hoc facit
demonstr^nem ad sensum, sed intelligit^ haec demonstratio (...) pro illo
instante locutionis qu^ profer^ur hac dictio, sad pr^ ^imo instants loc^tio is
sicu^ cum aliq^
not for the instant, in which the word is uttered, but for the last instant of
the whole speech, as when I say tacco, I do not signify that I speak not
while I am uttering this word, but that I am silent when I have done uttering
of it, (is not this your own instance, p. 127.) But says Aquinas this cannot
stand, because according to this gloss, the sense of Christ's words should be
my body is my body, which the above named speech does not make to be so,
because it was so before the uttering d ci^ tacco, etc. Sed hoc star^ no^
posest, quia secundum hoc huiu^ locutionis hic esset sensus, corp^ means est
corp^ meum, quod praedicta locutio non facit, quia hoc fuit ante prolati^em ^n
de nec hoc praedicta locutio significat.
of these words.

Soto thus presses you. This opinion I^s 4. Sent. did. 1^ q. 1. ar^. (...).
Sed ^que ista ops^n^ (...) consona^, ^am ^unc pronom^ demonstra. res corpus as
sensum s^ ^eret quod corpus est, corpus, haec autem forma non est operativa,
nec conversiva panis in corpus, quoniam ante etus prolationem id ipsum erat
verum.
says he, (which refers the pronounc hoc to that which is accomplished
after the pronunciation of the whole proposition, that is, to bread actually
turned into Christ's Body) is not consonant to the truth, for the the pronoune
should demonstrate Christ's body, and make this sense the body is the body. Now
this form of speech is no way operative, nor does it turn bread into Christ's
body, because, before the uttering of them it was true that Christ's body was
his body.

Durand thus charge you. If the pronoune hoc points to Christ's Body, the
proposition may be true, referring the Did. 8. q. 2. Si singulariter
demonstraret corpus Christi veritatem posset habere propositio, refere^do
demonstrationem ad ^imum instans prolationis verborum, quia tunc corpus Christi
est sub speciebus panis, and esset sensus, hoc, id est, corpus meum est corpus
me^, sed haec forma non congruit Sacramento; quia per Sacramentum non efficitur
us corpus Christi sit corpus sed solum efficitur quod corpus Christi continea^r
in Sacramento.
pointing thereof to the last instant of the prolation of the words, because
then Christ's body begins to be under the accidents of bread, and the sense may
be, this that is my body, is my body, but this form of speech is not
agreeable to the Sacrament, because this Sacrament does not make Christ's body
to be his body, but only makes it to be in the Sacrament or under the
accidents of bread, now the proposition so understood as above is expressed,
only implies that Christ's body is his body, and not that it is made by this
Sacrament, which is against the nature of every Sacrament all form wherein
that is effected, by the uttering of the words which they signify.

Bellarmine thus clearly confutes De Sacr. Euch. l. x. c. xx. Verba Sacramenta
lia secundum Catholicos non sunt speculativa sed practica, efficient enim quod
significant, unde etiam operatoria dicuntur. At si pronomen demonstrat solum
corpus, verba erunt speculativa non practica, semper enim v^run est demonstrato
Christi corpore dicero hoc est corpus Christi, five id dicatur a^te
consecrationem sive postea: sive a laico, sive a sac^rdote, a^ verba
Sacramentalia quia operatoria non sunt vera nisi dicau^r ab illo qui est
legitimus Minister, ^eque sunt vera antequam Sacramentum effisiatur.
you, and cuts your throat as it were with a knife whet upon your own
grindstone. Sacramenta words according to Catholics, are not speculative but
practical, for they effect that which they signify, whence they are called
operatorie, but if the pronoune hoc demonstrate only the body, the words will
be speculative not practical, for it is always true, pointing to Christ's
body, to say this is the body of Christ, whether the words be spoken before
Consecration or after, either by a Priest or a Lay person, but the Sacrament
all words, because they are operatorie, or working words have not their force
unless they be spoken by a lawful Minister, neither are they true before the
Sacrament is administered.

PAR. 14.
That in the words of the institution of the cup. this cup is the New Testament
i^ my blood, there are diverse figures is prooved by unavoidable consequences,
and the confession of our Learned Adversaries, Salmoron, Barradius and
Jansenius.

THe two kinds in the Lords Supper, are like the eyes in our body which are
moved by the same nerve opticke: or double strings in an instrument which are
tuned alike: (...) comparative reason therefore drawn from the one to the
other cannot but be of great force. The sixth argumen^ therefore in the
Conference as you reckon was from thence drawn after this manner.

The words used in the Consecration of the bread, are so to be expounded as
the like in the consecration of the cup. But the words used in the Consecration
of the cup, are to be expounded by a figure. Ergo the words used in the
Consecration of the bread, are to ^ee expounded by a figure.
In this Sylogisme, because you lay you^ batteries at both propositions, the
Major and the Minor I will fortify them both, and first the Major It is a
topi^k axiom similium est id^m judicium, like are to be judged by the like,
and these are so like, that I. (...). de Sacr. Euch. c. 10. Add^ argumentum
robustissi^ ex scriptura, Nam si hoc demonstraret (...), ita etiamin
consecratione vini hi^ sive hoc (...) vin^.
Bellarmine himself draws an argument from the one to the other. I will add
says he a most forcible argument. If the pronoune hoc used in the
Consecration of the bread, demonstrateth bread, then also the same pronoune
this used in the Consecration of the cup must needs demonsta^ wine, the
validity of which consequence depends upon the correspondencie between the
words used in the institution of each kind, neither indeed can any reason be
assigned why the words used in the one, may not as well admit of a figure as
the words used in the other: both are dogmaticall, both have a precept annexed
unto them, both are words of a Testament, both Sacramental, and according to
your doctrine alike operatory: never therefore exclaim against us for
expounding the words used in the institution of the bread by one figure, when
you expound the words used in the institution of the cup by two figures at
least. Blame not us for interpreting This is my Body, tha^ is a sign or
Sacrament of my body, when you your selves interpret This cup is the New
Testament, that is, this drink is (...) sign or Sacrament of the New
Testament: If you allege that Calix is expounded in the same place by
funditur, and argue from thence, that because the blood of Christ and not wine
is shed for us: therefore this cup must needs signify his blood: I answer,
that the figure in panis in like manner is expounded in the same place by
frangitur, and 1 Cor. 11. 24. This is my Body which is broken.
argue that because bread is broken in the Sacrament, and not Christ's body,
therefore (this) must needs signify thi^ bread. If you reply that frangitur
is ^t for frangetur, I will say in like man^er, that funditur is put for
fundetur. ^he Major being therefore put out of all doubt, let us examine the
Minor, which was this. The words used in the Consecration of the cup, are to he
expounded by one figure or more. For the words as they are recorded by Saint
Luke, are these, This Cup is the New Luke 22. 20.
Testament in my blood. Where we have a double figure: First, a Metonomie,
^ntinentis pro contento, the cup is taken for the thing contained in the cup.
Secondly, signatu^ pro signo, the Testament for the Sign, Seal, or Sacrament
of the New Testament. So says Theophylact, In Luke (...). Sanguine suo novum
Testamentu^ obsig^vit.
alleged by you. In the Old Testament Gods Covenant was confirmed by the
blood of bruit beasts: but now, since the Word was made flesh. He sealed the
New Testament with his own blood. So your Gorran, the blood of Jesus Gor. in
Luke 22. Sanguis Christi est confirmatio novi Testamenti.
Christ is the confirmation of the New Testament, for a Testament is confirmed
by the death of the Testator. Nay so your most accomplished Jesuits, Solmeron,
Sol^. Ies. Tom 9. Tract. 15. Subest in his duplex metonymi^, primo quia
continens pon^ur pro con^, id est poculum (...) (...) pro ^no ^o quod vinum in
ipso contine^r Secundum est in eo quod (...) in poculo foedus v^ Testame^tum
dicitur (...), cum s^us ^ymbolum.
and Barradius, Solmeron points to a double figure, saying, in these words we
have a double figure, first, the cup being put for that which is contained in
the (...) Secondly, the Testament for a Symb^ thereof. Barradius though he
expo^ the word Testament as you do for Legacy bequeathed by Christ's w^ yet he
adds expressly, that it is taken by a figure called Metony^ What say you
here to this, (...) word Testamentum is here taken p^ perly enough. For not
only a man's (...) ward will. but also his outward wri^ will in parchment, is
commonly called T^ stamentum, because it is an authent^ Tom. (...). l. 3. c.
(...). de iustit. Euch. T^stamentum su^ur pro legato Meto^, conti^ Testamentum
su ^ur pro cote^to leg^o vel (...), hoc sensu sangu^ Christi est Testa^ novum,
id est leg^ (...) novum and admira^le.
sign of his will. I pray express y^ self a little farther, what mean y^ by
properly enough? do you mea^ by an usual figure, or without a^ figure, if you
mean by an usual figure, assent unto you, and it suffices for the
strengthening of my argument: if (...) mean without a figure, name me (...)
Author of note, Divine or Civil^ who before you affirmed that either Legacy
bequeathed by will, or the p^ per and parchment in which the will^ written is
in propriety of speech with any figure, either (...) in Greek, Testamentum in
Latin, or Will in (...) glish. Not to take the advantage might against you,
that the blood of Christ as you believe it to be in the ^acrament cannot be
an authentical ^gne of Christ's will, because if we should grant it to be
there really, in your sense: yet it is not there visibly, and therefore cannot
be an authentical sign of it, like the paper or parchment ^ou speak of, or
as we teach the wine in the cup to be: I shall be much in^ebted unto you if
you can resolve me ^ow the blood of Christ can be without any figure, his last
Will and Testament, since

1. He made his Will at this his last Supper, but made not then his blood.
^igest. de test. Testamentum est volunt^ nostrae iust^ sententia de eo quod
qui^ (...) veli^ ^st mo^em s^m. Mat. 26. 28.


2. His Will was his just determination or appointment of what he would have
done after his death, his blood is no such thing.

3. The Scripture speaks of blood of the Testament, hic est sanguis novi
Testamenti, never of a Testament of blood.

4. Blood is a su^stantiall part of the Testator, and therefore not his Will or
Testam^nt.

5. Every Will is either written or nuncupative, the blood of the Testator is
neither.

After you have blunted the edge of these weapons, see how you can rebate the
point of Ian har. Evang p 91. Dicendum est certum esse hanc lacutionem, hic
calix novum Testamentum est in me^ sanguine, non posse accipi in proprio senso,
sed per tropum que^dam. Sive enim Calix dicitur accipi pro vasculo potorio d^
quo bibeb^ Apostoli, sive pro sanguine Synecdochice in ipso poculo contento,
non potest consistere ut is illis verbis sit propria (...): Ne^ enim dixerit
propria locutio^ vas^ulum illud potorium fuisse Testamentum, cum incertum sit
(...) (...) ex^ illud poculum, ^c nov^ Testamentum (...) esse o^es testat^r
(...), sed nec sang^is in calice (...) potest propria loc^ dic^ Testamentum.
Iansenius his dart^ which he lets fly level at you. These words says he,
cannot be taken properly, whether the cup be taken for the vessel used for
drinking, or for the blood of Christ by a Synechdoche: for no man will say that
the vessel in propriety of speech is Christ's Testament, since the Scripture
testifies that Christ's Will is eternal, so i^ not that cup, which no man
knows whether it be extant at this day or no, neither can the blood of Christ
be properly said to be his Testament, for his Testament i^ one, not many, and
Paul in the Epistle (...) the Hebrews, teaches out of Jeremie, that the
Gospel is the New Testament, Christ's blood is not therefore properly the New
Testament. Moreover in Matthew and Mark the blood is said to be the blo^ of
the New Testament, it is not therefore the New Testament no more then the blood
of Bullocks is the Old Testament. Lastly, the word cup cannot be taken for
blood contained in the cup, as it is evident by that which is added in my
blood. For the speech will not be congruous if thou say this blood is the New
Testament in my blood: the cup therefore must be properly taken for the
vessel, which undoubtedly in the proper signification is not the New
Testament, wherefore of necessity we must confess that these words this cup
is the New Testament in my blood, cannot be taken in the proper sense, but are
spoken by a trope or figure.

PAR. 15.
That the words of our Savior, Matthew* 26. 29. I will drink no more of this
fruit of the vine, are meant of the Evangelicall cup, or Sacrament, is prooved
against D Smith and S. E. by the testimony of Origin, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Cyprian, Austin, Chrysostom, Druthmarus, the Author of the book de
Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus, Jansenius, Maldonat, the Council of Worms and Pope
Innocentius: and D. Smith and his Chaplains evasions refuted.

THe last argument prosecuted in the Conference, was taken out of the 26. of
Saint Matthew, ver. 29. where Christ himself not only after the blessing of
the cup, but also after he had ministered the Communion, says, will drink no
more of this fruit of the vine. Doubtless Christ who institute^ the Sacrament,
and immediately before consecrated the cup, ver. 28. best knew what it was; wine
or blood, and he resolves us that it was the fruit of the vine, and that we al
know is wine, not blood, whence I framed this Syllogism.

No blood is in propriety of speech the fruit of the vine. That which Christ
and his Apostles drank in the consecrated Chalice was the fruit of the vine.
Ergo it was not blood.
For this blow you have a double ward; the first is, that Christ called his
(...)
blood the fruit of the vine, because it was such in appearance, the (...) of
wine remaining after the (...) thereof was tur^ed into Christ's blood. Put the
question but to your own conscience, and I dare say it will tell you R^fut.
that this your answer is a mere shift and evasion. For why should not Christ
who is the truth, rather call that he drank according to that which it was in
substance and truth, then that which it was as you teach only in appearance,
who ever heard accidents without substance, quantity or quality, moisture or
redness called the fruit of the vine? did Christ drink mere accidents in the
cup? or do you at this day in the consecrated Chalice? if so, your Priests
could never be at any time overseene or become lightheaded in drinking never
so much of the consecrated cup. For it is a thing never heard of, that mere
accidents should send up a fume, much less overcome the brain and cause
drunkenness in any man, and I hope you will not fly to a miracle, and say
that your Priests brains are intoxec^ted by miracle, in case he take a dram to
much of the wine he has consecrated. Your own Schoolmen put the case, that a
Priest may sometimes forget himself by drinking too deep even in the holy
cup. But I press not this so much as that you in this your answer forget that
we are about the Sacrament, where you will by no means allow of any such
figure as excludes the verity of the thing, otherways if you take a liberty
to expound these words by a figure, and say, that Christ by a trope here called
that which was his blood, wine, you shall never debar us of the liberty of
expounding the former verse by the like figure, and saying, that Christ called
by a trope that which was in truth wine, his blood. It Is hard to say, and more
then you can prove, that Christ ever drank his own blood upon earth: Mal. in
Mat 26. (...) c^o ness erat bib^rus sanguine^ suum nec vere nec metaphorice,
vinum arste^ metaphoric^ bibiturus erat. Ego inquit dispono vobis ut edatis and
bibat^ super mensam me am in reg^o m^o, ergo non de sang^e suo s^ de vino
dixit, non bibam amodo de hoc genimine vitis. Evas. 2.
Christ neither drank his blood properly nor metaphorically, but wine he was
to drink in heaven metaphorically as himself said, Luke the 22. 29, 30. I
appoint unto you a kingdom, that you may eat and drink at my table in my
kingdom, therefore Christ spoke not of his blood, but of wine, when he said, I
will drink no more of this fruit of the vine till I drink it new in heaven,
thus your own Maldonate.

Yet you have another ward you say, p. 162, 163, 164. that there is a Legal
cup, and an Eucharisticall, both mentioned in Saint Luke, and that these words
were spoken of the legal or common cup, as Saint Jerome, Saint Bede, Saint
Theophylact expound.

This ward will not bear off the Refut.
blow which comes with such a weight, that it drives your weapon to your head,
for

1. It Is evident to any man that wilfully shuts not his eyes, that this in the
29. ver. has reference to this in the 28. ver, drink ye all of this, for this
is my blood, but I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, these
words immediately follow the other, and of necessity have relation to them:
neither can they have relation to any other cup then the Eucharisticall here,
and in Saint Mark, because they make mention but of one cup, and that cup
whereof Christ said, drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the New
Testament. This reason alone convinced the conscience of your Learned B. Harm.
Evang. Afferunt quidam Catholici haec verba non esse dicta a Domino post
calicem sacrum, sed post priorem, cuius meminit Lucas, at id non patitur ordo
Evang: cum enim Mattheus and Marcus nullius alterius mentionem seccrint
praeterquam sacri, quando dicitur ex hoc genimine vitis, nullus alius calix
intelligi potest ab ijs demonstratus, quam cuius ipsi meminerunt.
Iansenius who thus writes upon this verse, Some Catholics says he, affirm
that these words were not spoken of the Lord after he had drunk of the
consecrated cup, but after the former, whereof mention is made in Saint Luke.
But the order of the Evangelists will not suffer it. For since Matthew and Mark
make mention of no other cup then the consecrated, when it is said by them, of
this fruit of the vine, no other cup can be conceived (...) be pointed to or
demonstrated by them, the^ that cup whereof they make mention. Of the same
mind is Titelmanus, whose opinion Barradius the Jesuit relates and defends
in his 3. Book of the Eucharist, c. 5.

2. The Authors alleged by you to the contrary do not weaken the sinews of
my argument, for neither Jerome, nor Bid, nor Theophylact deny these words to
be spoken of the consecrated cup, though they allegorize upon them.

3. By following Bellarmine, you and your Chaplain are fallen into a foul
flow, either you must say you took up your quotations upon trust, or else
confess you are a falsificator. For none of these Fathers alleged by you,
either in words or by consequence say that you put upon them, to wit, that the
words mentioned in Saint Matthew are to be understood of the Legal or common
cup, Saint Cum Iude^ credideri^e and adduxer^ ^os Pater a^ fidem, tuned^ vino
corll bi^ Dommus, ^i nea transpl^ tata est po^ pulus Israel i^per Ieremiam
Dominus sequitu^ dicit ^g se Domin^ ^e quaquar^ (...) ha^ vined off bib^srum
nisi in regno Patris, regnum Patris fidem intell^ (...) (...).
Jerome, and Vitis est plebs Iudaica, etc.
Bid, and Non delecta^or (...) (...), (...) populi.
Anselme have no distinction of two cups, but leaving after their manner the
literal sense, expound allegorically the vine to be the people of the Jews,
and the fruit of the vine to be either their belief or their legal
observances and ceremonies. Theophylact indeed makes mention of two cups, but
says not that the words alleged by me out of Saint Matthew are to be
referred to the legal or common cup mentioned in Saint Luke.

4. You are cast by your own witnesses, for Jerome, Bid, and Theophylact,
refer these words to the blood of Christ, and consequently to the
Eucharisticall cup as In Mat. c. 26. v. 29. Ierom in comment. Beda, Euthymius
and Theophylactus hoc loco ad sanguine^ Christi referunt. In Mat. Tract. 25.
Potus iste quem Deus verbum sanguinem suum fatetur, est generatio vita verae,
and est sanguis uvae illius quae missi in torcular passionis protu^t potum ^nc.
Paedag l. 2. c. 2. p 116. (...).
Maldonate confesses, wherein they do but write after the Copy of the
Ancient Fathers. 1. Origin. That drink which Christ confessed to be his
blood, is the fruit of the true vine, and is the blood of that grape which
being put into the wine press of his Passion brought forth this drink, we
cannot alone either eat of this bread or drink of this fruit of the true vine.

2. Clemens Alexandrinus. Christ showed that it was wine which was blessed,
saying, I will not drink from henceforth of this fruit of the vine.

3. Cyprian. Alleging the words of Saint Matthew, I will drink no more of
this Ep^t. 6^. Qua in part in^us call ^em (...) suisse (...) (...) ^inus. ^lit,
(...) vi^ ^sse (...) (...) ^guinem suum (...).
fruit of the vine, adds, where we find that the cup was mingled which the
L^d offered, and that it was wine which he called his blood.

4. Epiphanius fights against the Encratites with the same Com Her. l (...).
h^s. (...). I^ hoc a recto salvatorio sermon vedargu^ur, quia dicu^ non bibam
da fruct^ vitis h^.
weapon wherewith Saint Cyprian foiled the Aquarij. Their Sacraments says he
which are administered in water only, not wine, are no Sacraments, wherefore
they are reprooved by our Saviors own words, saying, I will not drink from
henceforth of the fruit of the vine.

5. Saint Chrysostom makes the like use of these words of our Savior against
the heretics in his time, why did he not say water but wine? to pluck up by
the routes another wicked heresy, for seeing that there are some who in the
Sacrament use water, he shows that when the Lord delivered the Sacrament, he
delivered wine In Mat. Ho^il. (...). Lucas non narrat historiam suo ordine, sed
per anticipatione^ narrat id quod suo loco Ma^theus and Marcus narrarunt and
quest. Evang. l. 1. c. 42.
of the fruit of the vine, says he, now the vine certainly produces wine not
water.

6. S. Austin in his 3 book of the consent of the Evangelists. c. 1. and
elsewhere professedly handles the point of difference between you and me,
whether Christ spoke these words of the Sacrament after the consecration of the
cup, or before, and resolves it thus, that he spoke them after the
consecration of the cup, as Saint Matthew and Saint Mark place his words, and
whereas you object out of Saint Luke, that they were spoken before, he
answers that S. Luke by anticipation related that which Matthew and Mark
relate in their proper place. Which his answer is so pertinent and so full for
us, that Bellar. l. 1. de Eucha. c 11. Augustinus non perpendit hunc locum
diligenter.
Bellarmine puts a s^ur upon this most Learned Father for it, saying, he did
not well weigh the place. I think the Cardinal rather did not balance his
own words with judgment, in censuring so rashly Gardener a^ obiect^. no^ bibam
amodo de fruct^ vitis d^e novum hibero in reguo Dei, regnum Dei licclesi^ est,
in qua quotidie bibie sangui^ suum Christus per sanctos suos, tanquam caput in
membris ex Eucheri^ In Mat. c. 2^ v. 29 Vitis Judea vinum Patriarcha^ and
Prophet^ (...), etc. sive simpli^iter ab illa hora caenae non b^ bis vinum
que^sque immortalis factus est and incorruptibi^ lis post resur rectionem. Aut.
de ecc^ dog. c. ^5 and Council. Wor^ c. 2. Vinum fuit in redemptionis nostrae
mysterio, cum dixit non bibam de hoc geni^ine (...).
the prime of all the Latin Doctors.

7. Eucherius Commenting upon these words, till I drink new wine with you in
the kingdom of my Father, says, the kingdom of God is the Church, in which
Christ daily drinks his blood by his Saints, as the head in the members.

8. Christianus Druthmarus after he had allegorized upon these words a while,
falls upon the literal interpretation, saying, that from the hour of the
Supper he drank no wine till he was made immortal and incorruptible.

9. The Author de Eccles. dogmat. and the Council of Worms say categorically
and expressly, that wine was in the mystery of our redemption, when Christ
said I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine.

10. Innocentius Bishop of Rome, a great stickler for your carnal presence,
and the Godfather if I may so speak of Transubstantiation, who christened it in
the Council of Lateran, yet in the exposition of this place dissenteth from
you, and consents with all the Ancient Fathers, Greek and Latin (...). 4.
dr my^t. missae. c. 27. quod autem vinum in calice consecraverat pa^ ex eo ^od
ipse subiunxit, non biba^ amodo de (...) (...).
above alleged, saying, it is manifest Christ consecrated wine in the cup by
those words which he added, I will not drink from henceforth of the fruit of
the vine.



Yea but your Chaplain S. E. wisely admonishes me, that the Council of
Worms and Innocentius, howsoever in the exposition of this place, they join
with us yet that they were thorough Papists. The stronger say I their
testimony against you, and a greater presumption of the evidence of truth on
our sides which extorteth such a confession from our greatest opposites.

PAR. 16.
Of the Bishops Chaplain and Champion S. E. his cowardly Tergiversation, base
Adulation, shameless Calumniation, and senseless Scurrilitie.

BY this time you see cause enough why in the forefront of my letter, I wish
you a better cause: I am now in the third and last place to assign you the
reasons why I wish you a better Advocate.

These are in sum four, viz. S. E. his

1. Cowardly Tergiversation. 2. Base Adulation. 3. Shameless Calumniation. 4.
Childish subsannation and senseless Scurrilitie.
Not hist. 2. c. 44. In Olympia por^icus fui^ (...) (...) ita ^nstructa ut
^icam ad (...) mul^s (...), ^icta (...), ^u sepiupla
Plynie writes that in the porch of 1. Tergiversa^ion.
Olympia the same voice is seven times repeated by an Echo, such is the
relation of S. E. wherein for answer to my seven arguments in seven Sections,
he returns your voice, and reiterates your dist^ctions and evasions seven
times at least, I am persuaded that he has by this time got your answers by
heart, he has conned them over so often. It should seem that at Doway they
profess an eighth liberal Science called Battologie. As for perfecting your
Lordships answers where they were lanke and defective he seems to have made
scruple of conscience thereof, least being but your second he should go before
you in any thing. Wherein he shows ^iadorus Si^lus. l. 3. (...).
himself as good a servant to your Lordship, as the ancient blacke-moores
showed themselves subjects to their Prince, who if he were maimed in any part
of his body, they maimed themselves in that part, because they thought it
unseemely that any subject should be a more proper man or complete then his
King. Among many instances of his halting together with you in your lame
answers, I note three which are most notorious and obuious to every vulgar eye.

1. In answer to my first argument to prove the words of institution to be
tr^picall or figurative out of Tertullian, y^ p. 28, 29. and seq. either
ignorantly or wilfully mistake a type for a trope, and a real figure, such as
were the legal rites for a figure in words or rhetorical ornament of speech
and tell us of a mere figure, and of a figure which has verity joined with
it, as when a King in triumph shows how he did behave himself in the war.
S. E. runs away with this error, through many Pages and Sections, and when he
is out of breath, p. 57. leaves the Reader to subsume, that if the distinction
be not good of a figure and a mere figure, that either the Son of God whom the
Scripture calls the figure of his Fathers substance is a mere figure void of
being, God without divinity, or that he is a mere fiction, and again, p. 58.
A sign, image, or figure, is not necessarily void of being, as you conceive a
shadow to be. Sacraments are signs and have some being, man is an image of
God, yet a substance, the Son of God according to Saint Paul is the figure of
his Fathers Heb. 1. 3.
substance (he should say image of his person) but not an empty figure, unless
that be empty which has in it a a whole infinity of perfection. Quid ad
Rombum? what is this to my argument, ego disputo de alijs ille respondet de Eras.
Adag.
cepis, I dispute of tropes, he answers of types, I dispute of words, he
answers of things: I dispute of Metaphors or Metonomies, he answers of images
and Sacraments. Is Christ I pray you a trope? is man a figure in Rhetoric?
are the Sacraments Metonomies? is a King acting his own tryumphs a Metaphor or
an Allegory? if you are ashamed to say so, be then ashamed of your and your
Chaplains shifting evasions in your answer to my first argument.

When in answer to my second argument taken out of Saint Austins third 2.
book, de doctrina Christiana, you said that the speech of our Savior, John
the P. 67.
6. Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, you have no life in you, is
according to Saint Augustine mixed of a proper and a figurative speech, and I
replied upon you, that it is most certain that Saint Austin in that place by
figurate locutio, meant such a one as could in no Ibid. de dec. Chris l. 3. c.
16. Si hoc iam propri^ sonat, nulla putetur figurata locutio.
sense be proper, for S. Austins words are, if this now be taken in the proper
sense, let it be accounted no figurative speech. Besides he speaks of such a
speech wherein an horrible wickedness is commanded or a verteous action
prohibited, which can in no sense be true in the proper acception of the
words: Otherwise it should be lawful to sin because expressly commanded, and
sinful to do well, because forbidden. To this reply he rejoynes negry quidem.

When in refutation of your answer 3.
to my argument, drawn from the pronoune this in the words of the institution,
whereby you will have understood this bread transubstantiated into my body: I
inferred this consequence thereupon, that the words of Consecration make
nothing for Transubstantiation P. 300.
or any thing else. For a proposition that is merely identicall, quoad
significatum proves nothing at all. I may truly say, pointing to Christ's body
in heaven at the right hand of his Father, this or that body of Christ is his
body, and will it hence follow, that bread or any thing else is substantially
turned into Christ's body? your Chaplain answers no, but something else, how else
could your mouth utter such an impertinent discourse, with which words he
concludes the fifth Section. And thus as when Philip of Macedon walked in state,
Clisophus his flatterer comes in strutting after him, and when afterward
Philips thigh was run thorough so that he halted downeright, in comes
Clisophus limping after him in the like manner: so where you are confident in
your answer, S. E. is peremptory, where you are profuse, he is redundant,
where you are imperfect, he is defective, where you are lame, he halteth
downright.

The best is, what he is faulty in his 2. Adulation.
answers, he mends in his encomiums, and where he is defective in
Argumentation, he supplies it to the full with flattery Numero 179. Cato
obieci^ Fulvio. Nobiliori quod milites per ambition^m donaret coronis,
levissimis de cansis, nempe quia vallum curavissent, (...) ^um strenue
fodissem, quis inquit Cato v^dit quenquam donari coro^d cum oppidum no^ esset
captum, au^ incensa hostium castra Gellius ^tic. l. 5^
and Adulation. Erodius in his book de Iure Armorum, teaches that none by the
law of the Romanesmight have a millitarie garland given him, but upon some
noble exploit done by him, as scaling the walls of a City, or firing the
enemies Tents, or the like. And therefore w^ read in Aulus Gellius, that Marc^
Cato that Roman Worthy, framed a bill of indictment against Fulvius Nobilior,
for rewarding his soldiers with garlands upon light occasions, and for mean
services, as for looking to their fence, for digging a well strenuously. A like
bill of indictement I might put in against S. E. for crowning you with a
garland for doing no noble exploit at all, but only holding up your buckler
most valiantly. I refer my self for proof hereof to his own words
wherewith he ends P, 19^
his Pamphlet, I should say his Pagent. So my Lord (says he) though he were
not permitted once to put an argument, nor so much as to show the grounds of
our tenet; using the buckler only, and never suffered for to draw the sword,
got the field, and bore away the prize. A noble prize no doubt Egregiam vero
laudem and spolia ampla refertis tuque puerque tuus.



A remarkable victory, and rich spoils, Eras. Adag* Sa m^cida spolia sine
sanguine and sud^.
like those at Salmacis gotten without shedding a drop of blood or sweat. If
C^esiphon had met with no better an Advocate before the Judges, that sat in
Ar^opaous at Athens, he had certainly lost his Crown, the best flower whereof
was Demost. ^rat. de co^ena.
Demosthenes his eloquence: yet as he ends, so he begins this his Panegyric
rather then Apology: as his last, so his first dishes after the French manner,
are larded with your praises in such a fulsome manner, that I wonder your
Lordships stomach could brook them. This Conference being short, I presently
read it over, and liked so well some fragments P. 3.
of my Lords answers which the Minister has imparted, that I desired to see
the whole: but could not then get a copy. Having lighted now at length on a
Latin one, and liking it exceeding well, P. 4.
I thought good to translate it, and impart it to others by the print. And
could the Reader have been a spectator, and seen P. 189.
this action in the life, he would have acknowledged what M. Knevet hereupon
did confess, that M. Featley was too young for D. Smith. He is many ways to
weak to undertake so great a wit, so ready in answer, so strong in argument,
so conversant in Scripture, Fathers, Divines, Much less (what ever
out-recuidance makes him think of his ability) is he able to over-match an
understanding so full of light, so ample, so vigorous, excellently furnished
with all variety of learning Davus ne ^oquitur an herus, who is the speaker
you, or your servant? if S. E. be your Chaplain as his every where exhibiting
unto you more then ordinary reverence should implie; I will be bold to tell him
that he is sometimes very saucie with you, to spend his judgment upon your
answers in such sort as he does. It may be the Bishops P. 3, 4.
of Chalcedons Chaplains use such familiarity with their Lords: but assuredly
the Chaplains to the Ordinaries of England know better their distance. But if
as we know that Matheus Tortus is Cardinal Bellarmine, and Doleman is Father
Parsons, and Marcus Antonius Constantius is Steven Gardener, so S. E. is
Smithus Episcopus, then I am sorry to see a Reverend Prelate so endeared to
the Pope, and Cardinal Brandinus to be driven to this exigent, for want of a
Herald to blazon his own arms and trumpet out his own titles and praises.
Yet I marvel not at it, because Chalcedon is very remote, and far from good
neighbors. Howsoever, whether it be he or you, Edward Stratford, or Episcopus
Smithus, it mattereth not much, domesticum testimonium is of little force in
this case, it will add no more to you then it can detract from me. For love
looks through that end of the perspective glass, which makes the object
seem bigger: but hatred through that end which makes it seem less then in
truth it is. Be it (...), or (...), or (...), self flattery, or servile
flattery, I pass by it, but I cannot so lightly pass the shameless slanders
which I find in this pamphlet cast by S. E. upon the dead and the living.

That you may be a Chevalter de gloire and a renowned conqueror, M Knevet 3.
Calumniatio^
must be your prize and die at Venice a Proselyte. For so S. E. your Herald
proclaims to the world. M. Knevet upon the Ministers poor carriage in the P.
191.
dispute and Tergiversation, afterward when he should have answered, disliked
the Protestants cause (which he saw their Champion could not make good with
argument in the presence of a Scholar, not durst face to face appear to
defend it) and soon afterward was reconciled to the Church, and at Venice
died a Catholic. In this whole passage there is not a word true in your sense,
but only that M. Knevet died at Venice, if he were reconciled to your Romish
Church, and died a Papist, name me the Priest who reconciled him, and on his
death bed annealed him, and after his death buried him with your Romish rites,
and bring some good proof and testimony hereof, to clear your Chaplain from
the foul imputation of belying the dead. Verily of all foul we most hate and
detest the crows, and of all beasts the A kind of Foxes in Barbary.
Iackalls, because the one diggs up the graves, and devoureth the flesh, the
other picketh out the eyes of the dead. Had M. Knevet after he left France and
traveled into Italy, when he was out of hearing the divine harp of Orpheus,
I mean the preaching of the Gospel, been enchaunted with your Siren song^, I
should have more grieved then marveiled at it: he being a young Gentleman of a
facile and affable disposition, and not deeply learned. But the truth is, he
was constant in the truth of his Religion to his last breath, and as the Lord
Knevet and other of his alliance, and M. Russell and other of his acquaintance
at Venice can testify, he crowned his other good parts and graces with
perseverance in the Orthodox faith to the end. Howbeit because Venice is far
off, and M. Knevet being dead cannot speak for himself, your Knight of the
post S. E. thought he might securely by an officious lie, tending so much to
your reputation, and credit of the Catholic cause indeare himself to your
Lordship. For he knew well mortui non mordent and Nulli gravis est percussus
Achilles. But certainly as he there forfeiteth his honesty, so he forfeited
his wits also, when p. 23. with a forehead (made o^ the same brass whereof the
images are he daily worshippeth) he affirms in print, that since our
Conference at Paris in England it self twice to his knowledge I refused to
meet your Lordship in dispute. For who will believe that your Lordship whom
your very Lib. praesid. Benedictinorum quem ^es habent pr^ doctissimo
prudentissi^oq^ magis^o.
enemies acknowledge to be endewed with a very great measure of wisdom, could
be so careless of your self as coming into England with faculties from the
Pope, and thereby incurring the penalty of the laws, that touched not only
your Miter, but your head, to send two challenges to the Archbishops Chaplain
in house, to meet you at a disputation, especially after you heard that there
were two Proclamations out for your apprehension. No Sir, it is well known,
that when you were in England you played least in sight and concealed your
self not only from Protestants, but from those l p^sid. Benedict p. 94 ^n
Anglia ad Episcop^m and e^s Vic^vios difficillimus est accessus, ^m ipsi se
ca^ssime occ^enr and p 124. nec potest ad^i Chalcedone^sis sine probabil^
per^lo carceris, mor^is, exilij, a^ gravis molestiae, and ta^s ips^ quam
Vicarij eiu^ m^ persecuti^ laten^.
who were most addicted to your Romish religion whereof they complain in
print. In England say they it is a very hard matter to have access to the
Bishop and his Vicars, because they most warily hide themselves, and again the
Bishop of Chalcedon cannot be spoken withal without probable danger of
imprisonment, death, banishment or grievous trouble, and as well himself as
his Vicars lurk for fear of persecution.

As for my declining a second meeting with you in France, which you upbraid me
with, p. 180. usque 188. the indiffident Reader even by your own relation will
perceive, that the fear and difference which hindered the second meeting was on
your part, and not on mine, for as your self relate, p. 184. I sent word by M.
Knevet to you, that I would be ready to meet you the next week upon
condition, a day might be allowed me to prosecute the rest of my arguments, and
again, p. 186. hea^ing of your purpose to leave Paris, on the Friday following
I sent to you the Monday before word by M. Knevet, that I would meet with you
upon Tuesday, on condition that I might have leave first to propose all the
rest of my arguments which you refused to give way unto.

You felt the smart of our weapons in the first conflict, in such sort, that
you would not meet the second time, unless I put in good security that I
would not so much as draw upon you or show you my weapons.

Yea but say you it is evident I declined the conflict by my own words to P.
187.
one of my friends, whom I told that Catholics brought so many testimonies of
Fathers, to prove the real presence, that there was need of many weeks to
read them over. And over against the words many testimonies you quote in the
Margent. Trait^e du S. Sacrament P. 188. ^rat P. Ma. ^oel. In quo ^on mod^
^imen non ^rebat sed ^ix diserti ^olescentis ^haerebat ^atio.
de l'Eucharistie, par l'illust^ Cardinal deu Perron. Paris 1622.

I answer as Tully does for Coelius, that there is little coherence, and much
less verity in this objection: this calumny like a bubble dissolveth it
self. It Is well known I never term you Catholics, but Papists, neither
could the many testimonies alleged by Cardinal Perron for the r^all presence
deter me from a second encounter with you in the mo^th of September, Anno
1612. for that book of Perron, as you your self note, was printed in the
year 1622. so that to make your relation true, I must needs have had some
special revelation, that the above named Cardinal ten years, after would
print a book of the Sacrament so fraught with Testimonies of the Fathers, that
there needed many weeks to read them. Yet farther to convince you, that I
feared not to supply the place of a Respondent in this very question,
notwithstanding all that Bellarmine, and Perron, and Co^ceus or Garetius
allege out of the Fathers for your carnal presence: a few w^ckes after our
Conference, I encountered D. Bagshaw at Paris, and since M. ^sher, and M.
Musket. and D. Egleston, and M. Wood ^e the Co^ (...) (...) (...) (...) the
App^ dix (...) the (...) sher cau^ in his ow^ net.
in England, and answered all they could allege out of Scriptures or Fathers
in this point. Neither has any of them as yet impeached any of my answers
extant in print now this 12. years. Which happiness I ascribe to the evidence
of truth on our side, and not to any the least opinion of sufficiency in my
self, who have ever studied that golden Text of the Apostle, (...).

The greater wrong does ^our Gnatho offer me in facing down his Reader, P 10
and 190.
that in a challenge to Fisher the Jesuit I compare my self to a Lion and him
to a butterfly, saying, Their strength with bulls let Lions try In tauro^
lybici rua^ l^nes ne sint papiliouibus ^olesti.
and not pursue the butterfly.

And he adds in the Margent Featly of himself in his sacrilege. It seems
to me that S. E. having learned out of Saint Austin that there is a threefold
lie, l. de menda^.
1. Officiosum an officious. 2. Pernitiosum or malitiosum a malicious. 3.
Iocosum and a merry lie or lie in jest.
He thought himself obliged to make use of all three in his masters service,
his officious and malicious lies, we have heard before, now he puts his wits
to it to frame a jocosum mendacium, to make himself and his Reader merry: but
having no occasion of any such jest from any words of mine, he breaks not a
jest upon me, but shows himself absurd and ridicu^ous. For the words I
allege out of Martial, are not spoken in the singular but in the plural
number, nor of my self but others. If he has not lost his sight together with
his wit, he might have seen a relation in the Margent to a book of Fishers,
set out in the year 1626. in which he takes upon him to refute a Treatise of
the Visibility of the Church, put forth by George Abbot Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, and a Sermon of D Ushers Lord Archbishop of Armath, and a reply
of D. White Lord Bishop of Elic. These Lions I wished in the Poets phrase to
fall upon the bulls, meaning the Popes bulls, and not look after that silly
butterfly, Fishers sorry pamphlet entitled sundry relations, This S. E. knew
well enough to be my meaning, but he was disposed to play with the Lions paw,
ex Vngue (says P. (...).
he) you may gather what a thing the Lion is: not minding what Iunius out of
(...) ^as. in embler^.
Aelian observes, that if the Lion he any way distempered or diseased, he
makes himself whole upon the Apc. To verify which emblem, what mops and mowes
does he make, with what Apish imitation and ridiculous scurrilitie does he
sport his Reader, saying, that I brought P. 190.
my arguments written in paper, and urged them so (poorly) that M. Porie did
prompt P. 141. and 142.
him diverse times. And hereafter Universities must all neglect art in speech,
and read your predicament, which before times has been Featleus homo animal
vivens corpus substantia, thus in English, accorto your Logic, Featley,
Featley, Featley, Featley, Featley, Featley, where you the supreme genus of
your new predicament are in predication to be common to other animals, bodies
and substances, for so the supreme genus must be. I could have answered these
insulsos sales with a mycterisme, but because Solomon advises sometimes to
answer a fool least he b^e too proud of his art or skill: let therefore S. E.
your Iester (I should say your Chaplain) tell me by what rule of Doway Logic
does this follow, M. F. disliketh D. Smith his exposition this is my body, that
is, this bread transubstantiated into my body, is my body, because it implies
a mere Tautologie, affirming idem numero de eodem numero, Ergo he overthrows
all the predicamentall classes. In this proposition this my body is my body,
the predication is neither generis de specie, nor speciei de individuo, nor
accidentis de subjecto, but ejusdem rei numero de eadem numero: the subjectu^
and praedicatum are both idem re and ratione, and therefore such an identicall
proposition may be remooved and casheered out of Logic, without any disturbing
of the predicamentall ranks or files. And that he may farther know that I
have climbed up Porphyrie his predicamentall tree as well as he, I will make
in it a bower or two for him and his fellows to shade themselves under them.

Vide arborem.

Place this before folio 229.

Vtram harum mauis accipe
s^oro
Ed: St:
Pithecus Simia Caudata absque cauda
Brutum Ferum Cicur
Animal Rationale Irrationale





ra^^o
Ed: St:
Scurra Dicax Facetus Infacetus
mendax Serius Iocosus
maledicus ueriloquus falsiloquus







PAR. 17.
A serious exhortation to D. Smith otherwise Bishop of Chalcedon to return
home to his dearest mother the Church of England, and famous Nurse the
University of Oxford.

THus leaving your Chaplain in a bad predicamens, I return to your Advers. D.
m^. It Is sa ipso lic^ exitis and vit temporalis e cessis pro a lictis rog^s
Deum: ad immortali^ tem sub ip morte tra^ tur.
self: and let me be bold to speak to you in the words of the blessed Martyr
Saint Cyprian, win the day in the edge of the evening, enter yet into the Lords
vineyard though at the eleventh hour. You were an ancient Doctor of Divinity,
when I conferred with you at Paris 22. years ago, and therefore now you
cannot in reason but think of the day of your dissolution, and in Religion
also, of making your accounts ready, which you Luke 16. 2. Redd^ ratione vil^
tionis t^.
know ere long will be called for from you. How will you dare to appear before
him who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, if you continue still perverting
his Way, impugning his Truth, and thereby depriving your self and others of his
Life? O that I might be so happy as Jason was, with my darts to open your
aposteme and wound you into health, and by arguments to confute you into
heaven. Take (I desire you) this occasion (of replying to my answers) to
retrive your former thoughts, and to examine upon what grounds you left both
your dearest Mother the Church of England, and your famous Nurse the University
of Oxford. Enter into a serious consideration what an ill change you have made
of home for banishment, of security for danger, of allegiance for disloyalty,
of truth for error, of Scripture doctrine for traditions and legendarie
fables, of Religion for Superstition, of the pure worship of God in Spirit for
manifold Idolatry, of Jerusalem for Babylon, of Christ for Antichrist: and the
Lord of his infinite mercy anoint your eyes with the eye salve of the Spirit,
that you may poc. 3. 18.
see your errors before you go hence and be no more seen.

August 31. 1634. Yours as far as you are Christ's, D. F.

The true Relation of a Disputation between M. Featley and D. Bagshaw, drawn
out of the notes of M. Ashley, and M. Ezekiel Arscot, taken in the Conference
at Paris, Anno Dom. 1612.
MAster Featley demanding of D. Bagshaw whether he would join in prayer with
him, and the other refusing, made a short prayer to himself, and after he had
ended it, began the Disputation as follows.

M. F. The Question we are to debate to give satisfaction to this Honorable
There were present, the L. Clifford, Sir Edward Summerset, and diverse other
persons of great quality bot^ English and French.
Assembly is, Whether the Body of Christ be truly, really, and substantially
contained in the Sacrament under the forms of bread and wine, as the Council
of Trent defines. Which is a question of greatest importance: for if the Body
of Christ be not there really and substantially, the Church of Rome which
adoreth the Host, commits Idolatry in the highest degree, by attributing
Divine honor or the highest degree of worship proper to God alone.
cultum latriae to a piece of bread. And that the Body of Christ is not there
in such sort as the Council determines, and the whole Church of Rome
believes, I will prove by necessary arguments drawn from the words of the
institution, the doctrine and practice of the ancient Church, and the very
principles of nature, and infallible grounds of Reason, Saint Paul fully
sets down the institution of the Sacrament. I have received of the Lord
(says he) that which I also 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26.
have delivered unto you, to wit, that the Lord Jesus in the night that he was
betrayed, took bread. And when he had given 24.
thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat: This is my Body, which is broken
for you: this do ye in remembrance of me. After the same manner also he took
the cup, when 25.
he had supped, saying, this cup is the New Testament in my blood: this do as
often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat this
breaed, and drink 26.
this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. In this faithful relation of
the Apostle many things are very remarkable. First, our Savior spoke to his
Disciples in a known tongue: you to the Communicants in an unknown: Christ
took bread and brake it: you break no bread at all. Christ after he had
broken the bread, took the cup and gave it likewise to all the Communicants:
you Gratian de co^secrat. did. 2 cap. caperimus aut integra Sacramunta
percipiant aut ab integris arceantur, quia divisio unius aiusde^^ m^sterij sine
grands sacrilegio non potest prov^ire. Gelasius papa. Ver. 20.
sacrilegiously mutilate the Sacrament, and debar the Laity of the cup.
Christ used no elevation at all, neither did his Disciples adore the Sacrament:
you practice both. Lastly, Christ when he said eat and drink, truly reached
the bread and cup to all which were present and thereby celebrated a Supper:
you use the same words, eat and drink you all of this: and yet eat and
drink all your selves. And call you this inviting Gods people to a Supper
where you eat up all and they feed nothing but their eyes?


D. Bagshaw. You promised to dispute (M. Featley) you do but discourse.


M. Featley. Thus I frame my argument. Christ in these words, This is my Body,
1 Argu.
called bread his body (for he took bread, and brake it, and said, take, eat
this pointing to the bread:) but bread cannot be called Christ's body properly,
therefore you must needs acknowledge there is a figure in these words, and by
consequence they make not for, much less make any Transubstantiation of bread
into Christ's body.


D. B. I deny your Major. Christ in these words, This is my Body, calls not
bread his body.


M. F. l* 3. contra Marcionem c. 19. sic Deus quoque in Evangelio vestro
revelavit panem corpus suum appellans, (...) hinc iam eu^ intelligas corporis
sui si guram pani dedisse.
Tertullian says he does. So God revealed in your Gospel calling bread his
body. Theod. dial. mutabilis. p. 30. versione Ge^ani Pontificij edit. Basil. In
mysteriorum traditione panem corpus suum appellavit. Et Servator nomina
mutavit, and corpori quidem id quod erat symboli ac signi nomen imposuit,
symbolo aute^ quod erat corporis.
Theodoret affirms the same in words most expressly Orth: In the delivering
of the mysteries he called bread his body. And a little after. Our Savior
changed the names, imposing the name of the Sign or Symbol upon his body: and
the name of his body upon the Sign or Symbol.


D. B. Tertullian speaks of that which was bread in the old Law, but now is
Christsbody. For in the words before he alleges Jeremie, mittamus lignum in
panem ejus, let us cast wood on his bread, Theodoret is not of great credit,
because he favored sometimes the heresy of Nestorius.


M. F. If Theodoret sometimes favored any heresy, that can be no just
exception against this passage of Theodoret, taken out of those books of his
which have always been approved for Orthodoxall even by your own Church. Your
answer to Tertullian neither satisfies the place, nor avoideth my argument,
for he proves not only by the words of Jeremy in the Old Testament, but of
Christ's also in the Gospel, the bread was and is a figure of Christ's body. His
argument stands thus: Christ by the Prophet Jeremy called his body bread
Tertul. l. (...) c. 40 ex-Pounding the same words. Conijcia^ lignum in panem
eius, id est, cr^ in corpus eius.
let us cast wood on his bread, that is, the Cross on his body. And in the
Gospel bread his body, Ergo bread was and is a true figure of his body. I
insist not upon Tertullians allegation out of Jeremy, but upon his explication
of the words of the institution in the Dominus (...) Evangelio panem corpus
appellam.
Gospel. The Lord in the Gospel called bread his body. And to the like
purpose he Tertul. l. 4^ c. 20. accep^ panem, and distributum, corpus suum
fecit; hoc est corpus meum dicen^, id est sigura corporis mei, and seq. our
pane^ corpus suum appellas?
speaks. The bread taken and distributed unto his Disciples, he made it his
body, saying, This is my body, that is, a figure of my body. A little after he
propounds this question, why does he call bread his body. Out of which places
I thus argue against your answer. Tertullian says that Dominus in Evangelio.
Christ in the Gospel called the bread which he brake and distributed unto his
Disciples, his body: and therefore he speaks not of that which was bread in
the old Law and you suppose to be Christ's body in the new, but of that which
was very bread then, when he called it his body: But I infer that which is
truly bread, cannot be properly called Christ's body, Ergo you must reject
Tertullian, or admit of a figure.


D. B. Prove that bread cannot properly be called Christ's Body.


M. F. No disparata can be properly affirmed one of the other.

Bread and Christ's body are disparata. Ergo

The one of them cannot properly be affirmed one of the other.


D. B. Panis and corpus Christi are not disparata, because they are not sub
eodem genere.


M. F. Nay for that very reason rather, they are disparata, because they are
not sub eodem genere. The especial difference between Contraria and Disparata
is, that contraria are sub eodem genere proximo, disparata may be sub diversis
as homo and lapis, corpus Christi and panis, the one sub corpore animato, the
other sub inanimato.


D. B. You ground your faith upon Scriptures not upon Fathers, therefore we
expect other arguments from you then such as these.


M. F. But you ground your faith not upon Scriptures only, but upon the
traditive doctrine of Fathers, and therefore we expect from you better answers
then these to the Fathers. You bear the world in hand that all the Fathers are
yours, and yet when it comes to the trial dare not stand to their authority,
but fly to the Scriptures which give you no countenance at all, but rather
check your errors.


D. B. Show me in Scripture, where Christ called bread his body, or else you do
but trifle out the time.


M F In the 1 of Cor. 11. v. 24. This is my body which is broken for you.


D B. Conclude your proposition from these words.


M. F. Thus I infer i^.

That Christ called his body which he said was then broken for us (this is my
body which is broken)

But that which was there broken was bread and nothing but bread.

Ergo he called bread his body.


D. B. I deny your assumption, Christ's true body was then broken.


M. F. You mean I hope non rei veritate sed significante mysterio, not in the
truth of the thing, but in a signifying mystery, as your Canon law
distinguishes.


D. B. Significante mysterio that is significante mendacio.


M. F. What is every mystery a lie with you? does not your speech rather
deserve the name of significans mendacium, a signal untruth, then Saint
Austins, cited by Gra. de consect. did. 2 cap. Immolatio carnis Christi quae
sacerdotis manibus sit vocatur Christi passio, mors, crucifixio, non rei
veritate sed significante mysterio.
Gratian? answer directly: say you Christ's body is truly and really broken in
the proper acception of the word? if not so, then you must acknowledge a figure
in the word frangitur: if you say that Christ's body is truly and really broken
in the proper acception of the word, you gainesay the Scripture and go against
your own belief.


D. B. Christ's body is truly broken, for he says so, which is broken.


M. F. Christ's body was whole when he administered the Sacraments, therefore it
was not broken.


D. B. It was whole in se, but broken sub speciebus.


M. F. That which is whole and entire sub speciebus is not broken sub
speciebus. Christ's body according to the Canons of the Council of Trent is
whole, sub speciebus and in qualibet part specierum, and is entirely eaten of
every Communicant, Ergo it is not broken sub speciebus.


D. B. Your Mayor is true, respectu ejusdem, not otherwise.


M. F. Whrt mean you by respectu ejusdem? ejusdem substantiae, or ejusdem
accidentis?


D. B. I say Christ's body which is whole in se sub speciebus, is not broken in
se sub speciebus, but alio respectu.


M. F. The species or accidents are not Christ's body, neither can they be
broken truly and properly, especially being without a subject as you hold they
are in the Sacrament: therefore if Christ's body be truly broken sub speciebus,
as you affirm, it must needs be broken in s^, and so your distinction stands
you in no stead.


D. B. Be it broken in se, but sub speciebus.


M. F. Now you confound the members of your own distinction. I need not to
contradict you, you contradict your self fast enough. Answer this argument I
pray directly.

That which is whole in se sub speciebus is not broken in se sub speciebus at
the same time.

But the Body of Christ is whole in se sub speciebus, for whosoever receives
the body of Christ sub speciebus, receives it wholly and entirely and cannot do
otherwise, because Christ as your Church teaches us, is totus in toto, and
totus in qualibet part hostis.

Therefore Christ's body is not broken in se sub speciebus.


D. B. I deny your Major.


M. F. If the Major be false, the concontradictorie thereof must needs be true,
which is this, that which is whole in se sub speciebus, is broken in se sub
speciebus at one and the same time.

Let this Proposition of M. D. Bagshawes be written. That which is whole in se
sub speciebus, at one and the selle same time, is broken in se sub speciebus, a
flat contradiction.

After this proposition was taken in writing by M, Arscot, and M. Ashly, M.
Featley proceeded to a new argument.


M. F. The words used in the consecration of the cup are figurative, therefore
2 Argu.
no ground in them for your real presence of Christ's blood in the cup.


D. B. They are not figurative but proper.


M. F. These are the words. This cup is the New Testament in my blood, but
these cannot be expounded but by a double figure: Ergo the words of the
institution concerning the cup are figurative.


D. B. They are not the words of the institution.


M. F. S. Luke Chap. 22. v. 20. and Saint Paul relate them for the words of the
Institution, will you disparage them as you did Gratian and S. Austin before?


D. B. S. Matthew and S. Mark have other words, hic est sanguis, etc. This is
the blood of the New Testament.


M. F. Others in sound, not in sense. All Christians are bound under the pain
of damnation to believe that all the Evangelists who were inspired by the Holy
Ghost, have faithfully set down Christ's speeches and actions. S. Luke and
Saint Paul affirm that Christ used these words, dare you impeach their
authority?


D. B. Admit these be the words of the institution you gain not your figure.


M. F. Yes, a double one, one in Calix, another in Testamentum. We drink not
properly the cup, neither is that which we drink in the cup properly Christ's
Testament.


D. B. I deny both.


M. F. What? is (...), or Calix properly that which we drink, write this
proposition down also. Calix or (...) is properly that which we drink, a man
drinks down a stone pot or silver chalice. How say you M. D. Stevens, is there
not a Metonymie in Calix, to wit, continens pro contento? I take it you granted
it on Saturday last, as did also D Smith in my disputation with him (D. Stevens
ingenuously here confessed as much, and said he would maintain it.) I leave D.
Stevens to confute you M. D. Bagshaw, touching the cup. I prove there is a
figure in Testamentum. Either there is a figure in Testamentum, or that which
is contained in the Chalice is proprie Testamentum, Christ's last will: but that
which is contained in the Chalice is not proprie Testamentum, or Christ's will
or Testament, Ergo there is a figure in the word Testamentum.


D. B. It is properly a Testament.


M. F. I prove the contrary: Christ made his Testament at his last Supper as
you grant, but he made not then his blood, his blood therefore is not his
Testament.


D. B. He made his blood at his last Supper.


M. F. Write this down also. Christ made his blood at his last Supper. Was not
his blood made and in his veins before?


D. B. It was: but till then he made it not potable.


M. F. To make a thing potable, is not to make it blood. If his blood were his
Testament which he made at his last Supper, it follows that he made it then
truly as he made his Testament truly. But to go on forward directly against
your answer, Christ made not his blood potable at his last Supper.

That he made potable (if he mad^ any thing potable at his last Supper) which
he put in and powered out of the Chalice.

But that was not his blood.

Ergo he made not his blood potable at his last Supper.


D. B. It was his very blood.


M. F. His very blood therefore was then truly shed.


D. B. What of that?


M. F. Therefore your sacrifice of the Mass which your Church acknowledges to
be incruentum unbloody is truly bloody.


D. B. How does this follow?


M. F. Most clearly and evidently as you may see in this Syllogism.

That sacrifice in which blood is truly shed, is truly blood.

But in the sacrifice of the Mass (as you have already granted me) the blood
of Christ is truly shed and powered out.

Ergo your sacrifice of the Mass is truly a bloody sacrifice.


D. B. Your Major is not current, unless you add thereunto externally.


M. F. As if a man could not truly bleed inwardly, my conclusion is not, the
sacrifice of the Mass is a bloody sacrifice externally, or visibly, but truly,
which is sufficiently inferred out of the premises without your addition. For
certainly blood truly shed and sacrificed, makes a truly bloody sacrifice.


D. B. I told you before blood could not be truly shed unless it were
externally shed.


M. F. And did not I also tell you of a vein bleeding inwardly.


D. B. Though the vein bleed inwardly, that is within the body, yet the blood
comes out of the vein.


M. F. And so must Christ's blood also if it be truly powered out: for fusio is
motio, and effusio is extra fusio, therefore if Christ's blood be truly powered
out, it must needs run out of his veins.


D. B. Every natural effusion is a motion, but this is a supernatural
effusion.


M. F. Every effusion is essentially a motion, if it be a natural effusion, it
is a natural motion, if a supernatural effusion a supernatural motion.


D. B. I admit of a supernatural motion.


M. F. Therefore you admit of a passing of Christ's blood from one place to
another, which cannot be as long as it remains in his veins.


D. B. Why so? cannot Christ's blood be powered out of the cup, unless it stir
out of his veins?


M. F. Not possibly, unless you will say the flesh and bones are powered out
together with it, and by a consequence that you drink properly flesh and bones
in the chalice which I thus demonstrate.

All that is in the Chalice you truly and properly drink.

But the veins, flesh, and bones of Christ you grant are in the Chalice, by
saying that the blood is there in the veins.

Ergo you drink properly flesh and bones.


D. B. These are gross and Capernaiticall arguments, unworthy to be urged by
Christians.


M. F. Sir, speak in your conscience, whither you think we come nearer to the
Capernaits, who teach a spiritual eating of Christ by faith, according to
those words of our Savior, My words are spirit and life, or you who teach a
carnal eating of him with the mouth and teeth? was not this the very error of
the Capernaites?


D. B. Nothing less: for the Capernaites supposed Christ's flesh should have
been cut and quartered and sold in the market.


M. F. This is your gross fancy of the Capernaits error, the Scripture
charge them with no other error, but such as arose from the misconstruction
of Christ's words, unless you eat my flesh, which they understood according to
the letter that kills, not according to the spirit which quickneth. Now the
letter of these words implies no such thing as cutting or selling Christ's
flesh in the shambles: only it imports a real and proper eating, which
consists in taking flesh into the mouth, chamming of it, and swallowing it
down the throat into the stomach. All this you do, are you not then true
Capernaites?


D. B. For shame leave these idle and foolish collections of yours.


M. F. I should easily return the like speeches upon you, but I fear to abuse
the patience of this Honorable Assembly, through our impatience, I thought to
have spared you, but since you have provoked me so far, I charge you with a
speech of yours. This blood is blood in my blood, which you gave me at our last
Conference for the true exposition of these words. This cup is the New
Testament in my blood, are you not ashamed of such an absurd Commentary?


D. B. The congruity of this exposition I have maintained in writing, and I
have long expected your reply.


M. F. You know who imposed silence upon us both, to whose authority I
acknowledge my self obnoxious whilst I stay in Paris. But I leave these
matters and come to my ar^uments drawn from the testimonies of ancient Fathers.


D. B. I know what you will allege, a place of S. Austin de doctrina
Christiana, and a sentence of Gelasius and Theodoret.


M. F. It should seem you remember these allegations the better, because you
have been gravelled with them, as Pli^. not. Hist. l. 8. Leo vulner^us
observatione mir^ percussorem ^ovit. and in quantal^bet ^ultitudine ^ppetit ^um.
Pliny reports, that the Lion takes especial notice of one that has
stricken him, and strangely finds him out among a great throng of people.


M. F. Well what say you first to Saint Austin, me thinks he speaks home to
the purpose in that very (...) Argu. (...) Austin l. 3 (...) doct. christ. c.
^6. (...) praecep^iva (...) est ^t s^agittum ^t facinus ^ans aut ^litatem (...)
benefi^iam (...), non est ^urata, si ^tem slagi^m aut facinus videtur iubere
aut utilitatem aut beneficentiam vetare figu^a est. Nisi manducaveritis inqui^
carnem filij homin^ and sa^guinem bibe^ non habebitis vitam in vobis. Faci^ vel
slagitium vid^ i^re: sigu^ est ergo praecipiens, passion^ Dominicae esse
communicandum and suaviter (...) ut^liter recondendum i^ memoria quod pro nobis
car^ (...) crucifixa and ^nerata si^.
place. If the speech command any good thing, or forbid any wickedness, the
speech is not figurative, but if the Scripture seem to command a sin or an
horrible wickedness, or forbid any thing that is good and profitable, the
speech is figurative, for example, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of
man, etc. the speech seems to command a sin or horrible wickedness, it is a
figure therefore.


D. B. What if I should say with some of your own side that these words on
which S. Austin commenteth, John the 6. appertain not to the Sacrament.


M. F. You should oppose Cardinal Bellarmine and others of your own side, you
should demolish one of the strongest pillars of Transubstantiation, if not the
doctrine it self of your carnal eating, for if those words of our Savior
John 6. (unless you eat my flesh, etc.) cannot be taken properly as S. Austin
proves by an invincible argument, it ensues necessarily thereupon that the
flesh of Christ cannot be properly eaten.


D. B. You cannot be ignorant of Bellarmine his answer to this place of S.
Austin, and the other you bring out of Theod. dia^ 2. Non rec^ dunt Sy^ b^ la
mys^ propria (...) ra, remane^ enim in pri^ re substanti^ for^ and sigur^.
Theodoret and Gelasius, look in him for an answer.


M. F. We come not hither to hear Bellarmines but D. Bagshaws answers, if you
approove of Bellarmines answers, why are you ashamed to bring them to trial.
If you approove them not, make us so much beholding unto you to acquaint us
with your new and better anseers.


D. B. Bellarmines works are every where to be had, what trouble you us with
these stale objections.


M. F. Your manifold Tergiversations (M. D.) show that either you are ignorant
of Bellarmines answers, or you dare not avouch Bellar. answer to the words of
Theod. that by (...) or substance is meant the accidents to the hiss of all
his adversaries and blush of his own side, seeing Theod. in this very sentence
distinguishes (...) from (...), as substance from accidents, and he disputes
in this place against the ^utychian heretics, who affirmed that Christ's body
after the Resurrection, was turned into divinam naturam, according to the
substance, his words are, ita corpus Domini post assumptionem in divinam
mutatur substantiam, as says the heretic, the elements of bread and wine are
after consecration. Theodoret retort^ this simile upon him, thus, quae ipse
tex^isti retibus captus es* neque enim Symbola mystica post sanctificatione^
recedunt a sua natura, (...).
them. Answer me but directly to a place of Chrysostom, and I will press you
with no more authorities at this time, the place of Chrysostom which seems
to me of all others most pregnant, is found Si ergo h^c vasa sanctificata ad
privatos usus transfer sic p^riculosum est, in quibus non est verum corpus
Christi sed mysterium ejus contine^, quanto mag^ vasa corporis nostri quae sibi
Deus ad habitaculum praeparavit, ^on deb^mus locum dare D. ab^lo agendi in ijs
quod vuls
Homil. 11. in cap; 5. Matthei, there he makes this inference. If it be so
dangerous to convert sanctified vessels to private uses, in which there is not
the body of Christ, but a mystery thereof is contained, how much more ought we
not to give up our bodies which God has fitted for an habitation for himself,
to the devil to do in them what he list.


D. B. Chrysostom was not the author of these Homilies, but an Arian heretic,
for he inveigheth against the Catholics under the name of Homoousiani.


M. F. Belike then your Church in her Breviaries, and your Popes in their Vid.
6. Senens. l. 4. ^b. Sanct.
decrees are foully mistaken, who frequently allege sentences out of these
Homilies under the name of S. Chrysostom. It is true, there are some places
corrupted by the Arians, whom this Author notwithstanding manifestly impugneth
and refuteth, Homil. 28. and 45. but that this place should be inserted by
Arians, there can be no color or show, for as much as the Arians never were
called in question for any error touching the Sacrament. Secondly, if it could
be prooved that Chrysostom was not the Author of these Homilies, yet in regard
of the It appeare^h that (...) flourishe^ about Chrysostome^ time, or shortly
after*
antiquity of the Author, whosoever he was, you should vouchsafe him some
answer.


D. B. I answer, that by non verum corpus he means not visible, by not true,
not visible.


M. F. Non verum corpus hoc est non visibile, a proper interpretation, as if
nothing were true but that which is visible: or as if Christ had two bodies,
one visible which Chrysostom called his true body, and another invisible which
must needs be his false body since you oppose it to his true.


D. B. I distinguish not so of Christ's bodies, but of diverse habitudes of one
and the self same body, to wit, visibility and invisibility.


M. F. You say then that Christ's body is visible and invisible at the same time.


D. B. Why not?


M. F. And in the same place too? to wit, at the Table?


D. B. What of all this?


M. F. Nothing but this apparent contradiction. That one and the self same
body at the self same time in the self same place, may be visible and
invisible to the same persons.


D. B. This is no contradiction, because I say not that his body is visible and
invisible respectu ejusdem.


M. F. Scis simulare cupressum, you know the story of the Painter who being
good at portracting of a cypress tree, when one gave him money to draw and
represent a shipwreck in a Table, asked if he would have a Cypress tree drawn
in it: dispairing to do ought else worth his ^eward. This your distinction of
respectu ejusdem is as fit to the purpose as a Cypress to a shipwreck, yet
still it comes at a dead lift. Once more explicate your self, what mean you
by r^spectu ejusdem?


D. B. Ejusdem habitudinis or modi existendi, the body of Christ as he sat at
the Table was visible in it self, but invisible sub speciebus under the forms
of bread and wine.


M. F. If the species cover Christ's body and hide it from sight, how say you
that they are visible signs to represent Christ's body and set it before our
eyes? visible signs you must needs make them, or you have none in your
Sacrament, for the bread according to your doctrine remains not, and Christ's
body is the thing signified, not therefore the sign. When Drusius in his
defense against a nimble Jesuit that called him heretic, alleged that
heresy must be in fundamentis fidei, in foundations of faith, the Jesuit
replied, that even that assertion of his was heresy. I may with far greater
reason reply upon your distinction of extra species and sub speciebus, whereby
you seek to avoid a contradiction, that even this very distinction of yours
implies a manifest contradiction, to wit, that the self same body the same
time is sub speciebus and extra species, under the forms and without the
forms, is within the forms of bread and wine and without. If Christ's body at
the same time may be sub speciebus and extra species, it may be under the
forms and not under the forms, sub speciebus and non sub speciebus. Is not
this a contradiction?


D. B. No, because he is not sub speciebus and extra species in the same place.


M. F. Who ever required identitatem loci to make a contradiction? are not
these propositions contradictorie? Deus vivit, Deus non vivit, Angelus movet,
Angelus non movet. Anima est in corpore, Anima non est in corpore: and yet in
none of all these propositions there is any respect at all to place; The
affirmation and negation ejusdem de eodem, ad idem secundum idem eodem Arist.
Elench.
tempore is a contradiction: but in these propositions, Christus est sub
speciebus, Christus non est sub speciebus, the same thing, to wit, esse sub
speciebus is affirmed and denied of the same thing, to wit, of Christ, secundum
idem, viz. according to the same nature and part of him, to wit, his body ad
idem, to wit, with a reference to the self same accidents numero. And lastly,
in eodem tempore, to wit, at the instant after the prolation of these words,
hoc est corpus meum, etc.


D. B. The respect to diverse places is sufficient to salve the sormer
propositions from contradiction. What urge you Aristotle in matter of faith
above reason.


M. F. I urge not Aristotle for any matter of faith, but for a question of
Logic touching the nature of contradictions, but because you so sleighten
Aristotle's authority, I prove it by reason, that a body cannot be in diverse
places, sub speciebus and extra species, under the forms and without the
forms: it cannot at all be in diverse places, therefore not in such or such a
manner.


D. B. How prove you that?


M. F. By this argument. One body cannot be divided and severed from it self.
But if it be in the same time put in diverse places distant one from another, it
must needs be severed and divided from it self. Ergo one and the self same
body cannot be put in diverse places at the self same time.



D. B. Divided and severed I grant you, respectu loci, non respectu
substantiae, in respect of place not of substance.


M. F. If the place be severed, I cannot conceive but that the substance that
is in those severed places must needs be severed.


D. B. This you are to prove.


M. F. Thus I prove it.

Those things between which there is a great space or way, and many bodies and
substances interposed; are really severed, and discontinued.

But between the Hosts consecrated at Rome and Paris, there is a great space
or way, and many bodies interposed.

Ergo the Hosts consecrated at Rome and at Paris are really severed and
discontinued bodies.


D. B. I deny your Syllogism.


M. F. Mark it once again, this is the Major. Those things between which,
etc. But the Hosts consecrated at Rome and Paris, are those things between
which, etc. Ergo, etc.


D. B. They are not those things between which many bodies are interposed.


M. F. Is it not a great way, and are there not many bodies interposed between
this and Rome.


D. B. I grant you that, but I deny that the Hosts consecrated at Rome and
Paris are things.


M. F. Between one thing therefore, and it self, many bodies may be
interposed. But if diverse wafers consecrated by diverse Priests, in diverse
places, be not diverse things, I know not what things you will call diverse. I
perceive it will be to little purpose to reason with you by arguments drawn
from reason, for you will make good any absurdity in reason by your faith. What
answer you to the words of your own Mass which you say every day. 4 Argu.
(...) (...) de tuis doni^ ac da^is hostiam param and sacram qu^ propi^ ac
sereno vul^ aspicere digneris and accepa haber^ sicut accepta habere dignatus
es mun^ra pueritui ^usti Ab^l; iube haec proferriper ma^us sancti Angel^ tui i^
sublime altar tuum in conspectu divinae Maiestati^ tuae, etc per Christum
Dominum nostrum per quem haec omnia semper bonacr^as, sanctificas, be^edicis.



M. F. After the Priest has consecrated and elevated the Host, he says. We
offer unto thee O Lord of thy gifts, a pure and holy Host, upon which
vouchsafe to look with a benign and propitious countenance, and to accept
them, as thou did vouchsafe to accept the gifts of thy child Abel the
righteous: command that these things be carried by the hands of the holy Angel
into thy high Altar, into the sight of thy divine Majesty by Jesus Christ our
Lord, by whom thou do always create, sanctify and bless these good things
unto us.


D. B. What do you urge me with the Canon of the Mass?


M. F. You a Mass Priest and not able to defend your own Mass, Council. Trid.
^es 6, Can. 6. Si quis dixeri^ Ca^one Missae errores conti^eri (...) sit.
are you not afraid of that thundering Canon? if any man say that the Canon of
the Mass contains any errors in it let him be acoursed. I should think my
self much disparaged, if I should refuse to maintain our own Church
Liturgy: Let this be noted that M. D. will not answer to the words he reads
every day in the Mass: do you make as little reckoning of the customs of the
ancient Church, as you did of the Canons and Constitutions of the present
Church of Rome set down in the Mass.


D. B. What an idle thing is this in you to urge the customs of the Church, a
moral argument in a theological controversy.


M. F. Your exception were plausible, if I purposed to urge a moral or civil
custom. I make an inference upon religious customs of the ancient Church,
whereby a man may as certainly gather what their opinion and judgment was
touching this point, as by their words. Evagrius says, that at Constantinople
l. 4. Hist. (...) Ecclesiast. cap. 5
they called children from the school and distributed the remainder of the
Sacrament among them. Hesychius l. 2. in Levit. c. 8. speaks yet of a more
strange custom of casting it into the fire.


D. B. What collect you from these customs?


M. F. That they thought not the Sacrament to be Christ's very body, but only a
mystery of it.


D. B. I see not any force in this consequence, conclude Syllogistically.


M. F. That which the ancients distributed to children, cast into the fire,
they believed not to be the body of Christ farther then in a mystery. But the
remainder of the Sacrament after the Communion they disposed of as above. Ergo
they believed it not to be the very body of their Lord and Savior farther
then in a mystery.



D. B. I make doubt of your Major.


M. F. I marvel how you can make any doubt of it? for if they had believed,
as you do the Sacrament to be the very body of Christ, by way of
Transubstantiation: they had grievously sinned against their conscience in thus
using or rather abusing the Lords body.


D. B. How prove you that?


M. F. It is a sin to give Christ's body to children that cannot discern it: a
greater sin by far to cast it into the fire: I say to cast the remainder of
the Sacrament into the fire, holding it to be the very body of Christ in your
sense, otherwise holding it to be but the figure or Sacrament of Christ's body,
they might burn it without sin, in imitation of the Israelites, who by the
commandment of God burnt the remainder of the Paschall Lamb, which was a
figure of Christ.


D. B. You answer your self, as you say the Jews burnt the remainder of the
Paschall Lamb to prevent worse inconveniences, so the ancient Church might
cast Christ's body in the Sacrament into the fire in a reverence to it.


M. F. A strange kind of reverence to throw a man (especially alive) into the
fire.


D. B. If the figure of Christ might be burnt in reverence, his body might
with greater reverence.


M. F. I scarce believe (M. D.) that you think a man should do you a greater
reverence, to cast you into the fire, then to burn your picture.

I see by my watch, that the two hours allotted for me to dispute are near
past, and therefore I knit up the four arguments which I purposed to prosecute
at large in three brief questions. 1. What does the mouse eat that lights
upon a piece of bread or drop of wine consecrated?


D. B. The form of bread returns again by a miracle.


M. F. Peter Lombard propounding this doubt: quid ergo mus comedit? answers,
Deus novit, God knows. Aquinas resolves it against you. ^e (...) (...).
And so does your church, saying, si mus corpus Domini comederit, if a mouse
eat the body of Christ.


D. B. What tell you me of Aquinas?


M. F. I must be brief, that I may not defraud the Auditorio of your
arguments. My second question is: what is that you call the consecrated Host?
the 6 Argu.
bread is not the Host, because it is not offered, the body of Christ is not
the Host, and I trust you will not say the accidents are the Host.


D. B. Christ's body is the Host.


M. F. Christ's body is not offered, therefore it is not the Host.


D. B. It is offered.


M. F. That is offered which is consecrated: Christ's body is not consecrated:
therefore it is not offered.


D. B. I deny your Major.


M. F. I had thought, you had held, that you offer a thing consecrated. What is
consecrated, since Christ's body is not?


D. B. The bread.


M. F. The bread remains not after consecration, and Christ's body you
confess, is not consecrated by the Priest: therefore you have no consecrated
Host.


D. B. The bread is consecrated to be offered, because it is consecrated to be
made Christ's body, which is offered.


M. F. Your answer in a word to my 7 Argu.
third demand. What becomes of Christ's body in the stomach? does it remain
there still? then you have Christ's body at this time within you. And what need
you often receive his body, if you have it still within you? does it go out of
the stomach? when and which way? Is it turned into the substance of our body?
or evaporeth into air? or is it altogether annihilated?


D. B. None of all these. But it cease to be, as the soul in a part of the
body that is cut off from the rest.


M. F. Chius ad Choum. I speak of a body, you answer of a soul. The soul of
a man, because it is a spiritual substance, may in an instant invisibly
disfuse it self through the whole body, and contract it self in like manner,
when a part is cut off, or rather stay her influxe into that part; but a body
that has parts of quantity and soliditie of substance cannot penetrate another
body, nor quit the former place, but by a true local motion, visible and
divisible, and that in time.


D. B. Christ's body is more spiritual then our soul.


M. F. What, according to the substance? If Christ's body be more spiritual
then our soul, it must needs be a Spirit.
for we speak not now of qualities or spiritual graces? Note this by the way.
It savoureth of heresy. Let me be so much beholding to you, before I leave,
to get of you a direct answer to this Syllogism.

Every bodily substance truly existent in a place, that neither abides in that
place, nor removes to another, nor is changed into something else, is truly
annihilated or brought to naught or nothing.

The body of Christ, according to your belief, was really existent in the
stomach, and neither continues there still, neither goes out of the stomach,
neither is converted into another substance or thing.

Ergo it is there truly annihilated.


D. B. Thus you dispute: Christ's body is annihilated in the stomach. Ergo it
is annihilated simpliciter, I deny your argument.


M. F. You deny your own argument not mine. I undertook not to prove that
Christ's body is annihilated simpliciter, simply, but that it is annihilated in
the stomach, which it seems you deny not, nor can, standing to your own
grounds. Yet because you are so brief with me, thus I prove the argument.

That which is made absolutely nothing in the stomach, cannot be something
elsewhere.

Christ's body as you grant is turned into nothing in the stomach.

Ergo it cannot be something elsewhere.


D. B. Your Major is most false.


M. F. That which is made simply nothing, is yet something. Nothing is a
contradiction, if this be not.


D. B. Respectu ejusdem, M. Featley. How often have I distinguished of diverse
respects.


M. F. And how often have I resuted this frivolous distinction of yours; which
was your first and now is your last.

Inchoat, atque eadem finit oliva dapes.

Here M. Featley being called off from farther objecting, D. Bagshaw opposes
as follows.


D. B. Christ's body may be in more places at once. Ergo it is in the Sacrament.


M. F. I deny your argument.


D. B. This is the reason why you deny Christ's body to be in the Sacrament,
because you suppose it cannot be in more places at once. Ergo if it may be in
more places at once it may be in heaven and in the Sacrament.


M. F. This argument as little follows as the former. Ex particulari non fas
est Syllogizare. Though this reason were not good, yet we have many other
strong and invincible.


D. B. It is no wickedness to eat Christ's flesh in the Sacrament. Ergo your
argument drawn from the impiety of eating Christ's flesh with the mouth is of
no force.


M. F. S. Austin indeed alleges this for a reason, to prove that Christ's
words, unless you eat my flesh, Ioh. 6. cannot be meant properly, but
figuratively, because it is an horrible wickedness to eat the flesh of a live
man. I approve of this reason and will maintain it. Yet if you could overthrow
it, it would not prove your argument: you know Aristotle distinguishes inter
argumenta (...) and (...). These arguments of yours, if you could prove them,
are but (...), they are not (...), they demonstrate not the conclusion of your
faith, that Christ is really and corporally in the Sacrament. At the most they
prove but that he might be in the Sacrament, for ought they bring to the
contrary that insist upon the former reasons. Let us hear one Syllogism from
you.


D. B. The words of Christ are literally to be taken, except you can bring
some just exception against the literal exposition.

But you can bring no just exception against the literal exposition.

Ergo the words of the institution are literally to be understood, and by
consequence the Sacrament is Christ's true body.


M. F. All the arguments I have hitherto used, are so many exceptions against
the literal exposition. But to restrain you to some certain reasons, I say
the words of the institution cannot be taken properly, because all the
circumstances of the Text are against it: first, Christ took bread and brake
it, and pointing to it, said, This is my body, and he added, do tlois in
remembrance of me. And after he had given the cup, said, I will drink no more
of this fruit of the vine. From all which circumstances many strong arguments
may be drawn. Bread cannot properly be Christ's body. Christ's body cannot be
given in remembr^nce of it self. That which is the fruit of the vine is not
properly Christ's blood. Moreover, Christ in these words, This is my body,
instituted a Sacrament, and therefore this sacred form of speech is to be
mystically and Sacramentally understood, answerable to the like used in the
matter of Sacraments. Genesis 17. 10. This is my Covenant, speaking of
Circumcision which was but a sign of the Covenant. Exodus 12. 11. It is the
Lords Passover, speaking of the Lamb, which was but a figure of the
Passover, 1 Cor. 10. The Rock was Christ, that is a figure of Christ. Luke 22.
this cup is the New Testament, that is, a sacred sign or memorial of the New
Testament. The literal exposition of the words is repugnant to the Articles of
our faith, clearly deduced from those words of our Savior, Ioh 16. I leave
the world and go to the Father, where it follows immediately now thou speak
plainly, now thou usest no parable. It is said, Act. the 3. that the heavens
must contain Christ, according to his humane nature, till his second coming.
Now if Christ, according to^is humane nature have lest the world, he is not in
the world: if he be contained in the heavens, then he is not without the
leavens upon the earth.


D. B. Thus I overthrow your reason. Christ's body was contained in heaven after
his Ascension, and there he remains.

And yet he was since that upon earth and stood by S. Paul, Acts 23. 11.

Ergo your strongest argument has no force at all.


M. F. First I answer to your Major, that many of our Divines and Aquinas 3. p
Sum. q. 57. art 6. no^ derogat dignitati Christi si ex aliqu^ dispensatione
quandoque cor poraliter ad terram descend (...) vel ut se ostenda^ omnibus
sicut in iudicio, vel alicui specialiter sicut Paula and Lorinu^ con. in Act.
c. 3. nihil absurdi est affirmar^ Christum ad exiguum (...) p^ de coelo
descendisle, solum enim ex hoc loco sequitur fi^ (...) in (...) Christ immorta^
s^ esse, neque (...) ven^um e coelo (...) (...) (...) minibus (...) versetur
inter illos fa^liarner.
yours also understand those words Act. 3. of the ordinary residence of Christ
not denying that Christ if he pleased might extraordinarily and miraculously
leave his place in heaven for a while, to do some great work upon earth: which
as it breaks the force of your argument, so it no way disableth mine; For if
heaven be the place of Christ's ordinary residence, it follows that he is not
daily and ordinarily according to the substance of his body, upon earth, to
wit, on the Altar as you believe, Secondly, I answer to your Minor, that S.
Paul Act. 23. speaks of a vision in the night, not of any real or corporal
presence of Christ.


D. B. He says, that the Lord stood by him, and spoke unto him, therefore it
was no vision.


M. F. I deny your argument. S. Peter says, Act. 10. that he saw heaven
opened, certain vessel came down to him, and he heard a voice, saying to
him, kill and eat. And this was done three times, the more to confirm him,
and yet all this was but done in a Lori^us i^ c 23. Act. v. 11. Probabilis est
sententia Carthusiani fuisse apparitione^ imaginariu^ dor^ienti facta^ ab
Angels, ^ec qui ex hac apparitione colligunt Christu^ ^sse in c^lo and
Sacrame^to firmiter argumentantur.
vision. Likewise we read in the book of Tobia, (which you receive for
Canonical) that the Angel did eat and drink with Tob. 12. 10. All these
days I did appear unto you, but I did neither ^ate nor drink.
Tobia, and yet all this was but done in a vision, nay the same word ((...)
standing by me) is used by S. Luke Act. 16. 9 there stood a man of Macedonia
and prayed him, etc. and yet he speaks of a vision in the night.


D. B. S. Luke says, Act. 23. 11. (...), which is the very word S. Paul uses,
Act. 22. 13. where he speaks of Ananias coming unto him. (...). But Ananias
truly stood by S. Paul, not in vision only. Ergo Christ likewise stood by him,
and did not only appear so to do.


M. F. The same word in diverse places of Scripture may be diversely taken,
according to the diversity of the matter and circumstances of the Text.

Ananias was a man that could not otherwise present himself to S. Paul then by
coming to him and visibly standing by him, Christ by his divine power might.

Besides Ananias was not in heaven, but upon earth, and therefore he might stand
by S. Paul visibly and locally, without any miracle or apparition. But Christ,
as we are both agreed, was at this present in heaven, sitting at the right hand
of the Father, and therefore could not otherwise be present with S. Paul, then
in spirit, or by vision, which I am induced to believe the rather, because the
Text says, this was done in the night, the most proper time for a vision. The
night following, the Lord stood by him, and said, etc.


D. B. This is petere principium, you suppose that which is in question, to
wit, that Christ could not at the same time be really present in body in heaven
and in earth.


M. F. I never heard that an answer could petere principium in dissolving an
Argument. Petere principium in my understanding is to beg that to be granted to
a man which he ought to prove. A respondent, as a respondent, is not to prove,
but to hold and maintain his own grounds against contrary oppositions. The
burden of prooving lies now upon you, M. Doctor, refell mine interpretations
if you can, or make it appear by some other argument, that Christ since his
Ascension has been truly upon earth in body.


D. B. S. Paul truly saw him and heard him, Acts 9. 22, ^6. And that with his
bodily senses. Otherwise he could not have been an eye witness of the
Resurrection. Chap. 26. Ergo Christ since his Ascension has been truly
present in body, upon the earth.


M. F. The Argument follows not S. Paul truly saw Christ, therefore Christ was
truly upon earth.


D B. S. Paul being upon earth could not see Christ in heaven; Ergo if he truly
saw Christ, he saw him upon earth, if he truly saw him upon earth, he was truly
upon earth.


M. F. S. Paul being upon earth, might Ambrose in Epist. ad Cor. 1 c. 15.
Paulus Christum videt in coelo vocantem and apparuit Christus illi primum in
coelo postea oranti in te^plo and Greg mor. in Job l. 19. c. 5. O Paul in
coelo iam Iesum conspicis and in terra adh^c homine^ fugis Aug. in ep. 1. Ioh.
tract. 10. I^m no^ invenis loqui Christu^ in terra invenis ipse illum loqui de
coelo Saul, Saul, and Isidorus Pel. l. 1. ep 409 (...).
see Christ in heaven, as well as S. Steven, Act. 7. v. 55, 56. Steven being
full of the Holy Ghost looked steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God,
and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, and said, behold I see the heavens
opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God.


D. B. S. Stevens might be a vision. I prove my proposition. The senses of our
body cannot apprehend an object so far distant, as is the heaven from the
earth: therefore S. Paul being upon earth, could not see Christ in heaven with
his bodily eyes.


M. F. Do we not see the Sun in the heaven, and it is said that the face of
Christ in his transfiguration shone like the Sun: but my direct answer to your
proposition is, that howsoever the eyes of S. Paul and S. Steven by the
strength of nature could not apprehend Christ sitting at the hand of his Father
in heaven, yet being miraculously enlightened and elevated as the Schools
speak, by divine virtue, they might easily. Here M. D. Bagshaw at the first
undertook to prove, that sense elevated could not discern a thing so far
off. But afterward perceiving it to be a matter of too great difficulty to
prove, took advantage of a Popish Gentleman's speech, that helped him out with a
falsehood, saying, the proposition to be prooved was not, that sense elevated
could not apprehend an object so far off, but that S. Paul's senses were not
elevated, which though it were an untruth, as many there present testified, yet
M. Featley to gra^fie M. D. Bagshaw left of his hold, and gave M. D. Bagshaw
leave to prove the proposition he desired, to wit, that S. Paul's senses were
not elevated, which he endeavored to do after this manner.


D. B. S. Paul saw Christ, as the other Apostles, (...) Cor. 15. v. 5, 6, 7, 8.
He was seen of Cephas, and then of the twelve: after he was seen of more then
500. brethren at once: after that he was seen of ^ames, then of all the
Apostles, last of all he was seen also of me. But the other Apostles saw
Christ with their senses not elevated. Ergo S. Paul saw him without any
elevation of sense.


M. F. S. Paul though his senses were helped, saw him as truly as any of the
other. A man by help of a perspective may discern an object farther off, yet
sees as truly and more certainly then without the same.


D. B. The same word is used in all the former verses. Ergo S. Paul saw Christ
altogether after the sa^ manner.


M. F. One and the self same word may be (...) versly taken not only in
diverse verses but in (...) same verse, as for example, In mundo erat, and
mundus per eum factus est, and mundus eum non cogno^ he was in the world, and
the world was made (...) him, and the world knew him not. Your own E^ positors
take the word (mundus) here in athreef^ sense. But I need not make use of this
observati^ For I take the word (seen) in all these places the same sense. S.
Paul saw Christ sensibly and tr^ ly with his bodily eyes; both when he was up^
earth by the elevation of his senses, and without also as we may probably
collect, when he was r^ in the third heaven.


D. B. That was not in body but in spirit.


M. F. That is more then you know or S. Pa^ either, for he says he knows not
whether it were (...) the body, or out of the body: but I stand rather to (...)
former answer, which clearly dissolveth your argument.


D. B. I will retort your own argument upon yo^ The words Hic calix est novum
testamentum (...) meo sanguine, are not figuratively to be taken, fir^ there is
no figure in (Calix) for calix or poculum signifies that which is in the
chalice without any figur^ as it is manifest by that verse of Virgill Pocula
sunt liquidi fontes.


M. F. As if it were a strange thing for a Poet to use a common figure? does
not the same Poet that calls fontes pocula, (...), sat pra^abiberunt, the
meadours have drunk enough by ^gant Metaphor.


D. B. If Calix signify vinum, as you say, it follows that you ^e no new
testament, and so consequently no religion.


M. F. This is a mavelous consequence: how infer you it?


D. B. Christ says, as you expound his words, the wine is the (...) testament,
but that material wine does not now remain: ^refore you you have no new
testament.


M F. What a woeful argument is this? what Protestant ever ^d, that the
Sacramental wine was properly Christ's Will (...) Testament: the wine was a
sign or memorial of his Te^ment: which wine though it do not remain now the
^e numero, yet the same remains inspecte: the bread which ^st brake remains
not the same numero. Will you here^on infer that the Church has now no
Sacramental ^ad?


D B. Here is a stir with figures. A figure in Calix and (...) ^ure in
Testamentum. Allyour answers are figurative. One ^ry fitly called you
figure-^ngers.


M. F. My figurative answers take away your proper arguments: and for your
figure-flinging, you had need cast a fi^re for your arguments, for they are all
gone and vanished.


D. B. I see the company grow weary, I will therefore conclude ^ith one
argument, S Luke says. That was shed for us, which is meant by Calix. But wine
was not shed for us. Ergo by Calix he meant the true blood of Christ and not
wine.



M F. Those words (which is shed for you) have a reference to ^e word (blood)
not to the word (cup) This cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed,
that is, which blood is shed (...) you. S. Matthew and S. Mark who relate the
same words, (...) them to the blood of Christ, saying, This is the blood of ^e
New Testament which is shed for you.


D. B. ^he Greek construction will not bear it: for (...) is the dative case,
and (...) is the nominative (...).


M F. The construction is no harder then we find in (...) John c. 1. 5, and
elsewhere, (...), f^ (...) and v. 6. (...) for (...).

Howsoever, it is far better to acknovvledge a (...) or an enallage, then
make an absurd tautologie as you do, expounding Calix blood, and saying it is
the New Testament in his blood; blood in blood, or as you mend the matter,
glossing the words thus: This cup is the New Testament in my blood; that is,
this blood is blood in my blood.


D. B This must needs be the meaning of the words, the latter words ((...))
cannot be referred in any tolerable construction to any other word then (...).
And therefore (...) here signifies Christ's blood, which he says, is the New
Testament in his blood. And with these words he arose from his chair, and
brake off the disputation.


M F. Although D. Bagshaw as it seems sitting upon thorns, would not stay to
hear out M. F. full answer, ye^


M. F. I held it fit for the satisfaction of those who desire to know the
truth to add to his former answer First, that Saint Basil in moral reg. 21. c.
3. reads the words in S. Luke (...), and not as they and we now read, (...)
Secondly, that admitting the words to be so read as our adversaries would have
them, I say yet still these words (which is shed for you) must be referred to
Christ's blood, as S. Matthew and S Mark refer them, and for the Grammatical
construction we have the like, Apoc. 8. 9. (...) there for (...) as here (...)
for (...), there for (...) as here (...) for (...)

(...)


FINIS

