OBEDIENCE AND SVBMISSION.

A SERMON Preached at St. SAVIOURS-Church in South-warke, at a Visitation, on
Tuesday, the eigth day of December: Anno Dom. 1635.

By JOHN FEATLY.

Obedientia non servili metu, sed charitatis affectu servanda est: non timore
poenae, sed amore justitiae. Greg. l. 12. Mor. LONDON, Printed by R. B. Anno
Dom. 1636.

A SERMON OF OBEDIENCE AND SVBMISSION.
Hebrews 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you; and submit your selves.


AVthority is the basis of regularity; and this of peace: for confusion raves
in disobedience; and the want of submission is the ground of contention. It Is
thus in Civil; it is likewise in Ecclesiastical government: Religion is
forced into a melancholic dejection, if not supported by Laws provided for
her content. She Is at least obscured where not countenanced with authority;
and languishes in a consumption where she despaires of regard. She requires
power, but such as either finds, or inforces obedience: She triumphs in
authority; but such as we find ascribed to the destinies, Fata volentem
ducunt, nolentem trahunt: gently leading the obsequious; but by violence
drawing the refractory mutiniers. For it is but idle air that is articulated in
commissions, and not necessitate's obedience. Superiority degenerates into the
misery of a Hieroglyphick, if it knows no more than a titular Chimaera, and
becomes the sad Emblem of its neglected self. It Is at most but a Mercuriall
statue, only pointing out, not speaking the way.

But why should I loose my time in the treaty of such a no-thing? For so it
is. Comparisons are Relatives; and ye know the Canon in Logic, Posito vno
Relatorum, ponitur and alterum. Relatives are Twins, and derive their being
from the same instant. There cannot be a great, but there must be a little:
there cannot be a superior unless we grant an inferior: the highest must
have a lowest: and how can this be granted in policy without obedience.
Otherwise it is a parity, not a government; it is a giddie confusion, not a
well-ordered command. Religion has her just policy. She proceeds by rule.
Authority speaks, and obedience answers. Thus does the Commonwealth, thus
does the Church too triumph though she is militant. Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of Man for the LORD'S sake, whether it be to the King, as supreme,
etc. It Is S. Peter's in his 1 Epist. 2. Chap. and 13. Verse. There Is the
prerogative of Supremacy, and the loyalty of the Subject. It is the same too
(although subordinate to sacred Majesty) in the Church, according to S. Paul
in the warrant of my Text, Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit
your selves.

Too curious a division may offer violence to my Text. For mine own part I
affect not their course, who endeavor rather the magnifying of their wit, than
the true dividing of the matter. The words are plain; my division shall
imitate. The sentence is a precept (properly, rather than counsel) to
obedience. Herein observe, 1 The Object of our duty: viz. They that have the
rule over us. 2 The Subject, or matter of our duty, turning upon two hindges,
scil. 1 Obedience. 2 Submission.



Of these in their order; and first of the Object of our duty, or persons to
be observed, Those that have the rule over us.

Those.] A number excludes a Deity; but power insinuates it. Where shall I
begin then to seek my Object, but there where I find the center of command? I
must look up first to thy Throne, O GOD, and acknowledge with submission, that
thou have the rule over me. I must acknowledge further too:

((...), says the heathen Poet. Homer. in ^. Odiss.
) Although thy Throne be far, yet thy power is near for my salvation, if it
may stand with thy gracious pleasure. And not so only, but yet further too I
must determine with the sweet Senec. in Ep. Quadam ad Lucilium.
Philosopher, that Prope es, mecum es, intus es: Thou art near me in thine
ordinances, if I obey; thou art with me in thy care, if I submit: thou art in
me by thy Spirit, if I humbly receive thee. Let me begin then with my GOD; and
so let me end too, since he is the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the
end, Apoc. 1.8. We had had no creation but by his power; we had had no
Kingdoms without that creation: we should have had no Laws without those
Kingdoms: and we can have no Magistrates to execute those Laws, but by his
election: so our Apostle tells us, There is no power but of God, Romans 13.1. It Is
strange to me therefore (when I consider that this GOD is but one) that the
Heathen should dream of a plurality. Yet it is true: ye have read it, and I
have known it among them. It Is strange too (when I consider of the infinity of
this my GOD) that the sottish Romans should style their Nero God, whose
wandering carkase so long since traveled in the bellies of the Worms. But
it is more strange when I read of Christians, that style a mortal man Dominum
Deum nostrum. Yet this is true; ye may find it among the Papists. They might
have had more pretense for it (I confess) had they at first entitled the
Papacy to it, and not the Man; for to that they ascribe a kind of
immortality. Again, it is strange too (when I ponder upon the Vbiquity of my
GOD) that a man could live which would deny a Deity. Yet such there is, I
must, I will believe it, for it is canonical, The fool has said in his heart,
there is no God, Psalm. 14.1. But where is no God? Thou Fool, if this night he
condemn thy soul, thou will find that there is a God. He Is in that heart
which denies him, either in mercy to convert, or in judgment to confound.
Behold then, here is the ground of our object, GOD; for the highest powers that
the Sun gazes upon, receive their command from his divine Ordinance. He
commands, and Kings obey; for by him Kings reign, Prove. 8.15. Kings command,
and we obey; it is our Apostles injunction, Romans 13. Thus must subjects, thus
must inferiors, subject, submit to their Kings; to their Superiors, in, and
for his sake who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, because (says my Text)
they have the rule over us.

But who are these which have the rule over us? We may be unjust in our
obedience if we submit to a Usurpation. Blessed be God (my beloved brethren) we
can have no such pretense for rebellion. It Is first our dread Sovereign, to
whom (without so much as the least suspicion of doubt) we must humbly, and
heartily submit with the greatest industry of obedient loialty: And let the
hearts of those Traitors that conspire disloialty, by a just Prolepsis teach
them their fate, in being the burning tormentors of their divelish selves. But
must we obey none else? Yes, his Ministers of justice too, or else we are
Rebels. His Ecclesiastical Judges; for those he appoints for the sweet
harmonious government of the Church, by religious and just discipline. His
Civil Magistrates too; for they administer justice in the weale-publike. All
these must be conscionably and carefully obeyed, for they have the rule over us.

Multiplicitie of expositions has begotten a plurality of opinions; some
making Sovereign Supremacy the aim of my Apostle; others only the reverend
Clergy. I will not neglect either; but give me leave to begin with the first,
the best, The King. Obey the King, for he has the rule over us.

Next under God, his Majesty's authority is to be acknowledged, and published
by the Clergy: so says the first Canon. It Is my loialtie to subscribe to it;
and it is my joy that your reverend selves are the just witnesses of my
canonical obedience. It Is our duty in generalll to acknowledge it; and it
shall be my forwardness. Yea, and it is fit for my Text too in part; for this
is the exposition of Aretius in locum.
Aretius and Zuing. in locum.
Zuinglius: the words of the former are these; Praepositos hic Magistratus
intelligo, aut certe Seniores qui populo praesunt, and in caetibus fidelium
authoritate antecellunt. The other is not so confident in his opinion, and
therefore says only, Videtur referendum esse ad Magistratus obedientiam. The
reason of both is rendered by them both, Quia de Ministris prius jam egit versu
septimo. I must confess, that I subscribe not in judgment to this their
opinion, but yet 'twill advantage me to make use of their mistake. S.
Chrysostom seems at first to be the Author of this opinion, sed parum commode
says Hyper. in locum.
Hyperius; and his reason is double; scil.

1 Because the Hebrews at that time had few or no Civil Magistrates that
professed the faith; but on the contrary, cruelly endeavored their violent
suppression. But (by his leave) if the sense would bear it, the exhortation
were just, to admonish the people to obedience, even to them, since they were
ordained their Magistrates: as ye shall hear hereafter.

2 Because in the ensuing words, the Apostle tells them, that they watch for
their souls. Atqui Magistratus civiles (says Hyperius) non incumbunt proprie
saluti animarum; sed tuentur ea quae sunt salutis externae, and corporalis: But
(says he) it is the property of the civil Magistrate, to care for the
external government of the body, and not to employ himself about the
affairs of the soul. That Is his reason indeed. But we know it otherwise
(blessed be our Almighty Protector) in these flourishing Kingdoms. For he
that is the Defender of the Faith, and Supreme, as well in Ecclesiastical, as
Civil matters, has, does, and I pray God long he may, Watch over our souls,
although not by immediately exercising the function of a Minister; yet
mediately executing his sacred and religious justice and providence, by the
learned and vigilant Lords, both spiritual and temporal. Yea, let me go a
little further yet too; and with humblest thankfulness let me acknowledge,
that immediately also he watches over us, by his care of the Church, and
preserving it from injuries by his royal protection. Thus do we justly
acknowledge that he is our (...), our Prince, to whom of right it belongs to
have the rule over us.

Our second sort of Expositors, will have the word to intend our reverend
Prelates: and justly. They are styled by 1 Tremellius, and Arias Montanus;
Duces, our Captains. 2 Beza; Ductores, our Leaders. 3 The vulgar Latins, Leo
Judah, Johan. Benedict. Parisien. and Stephanus; Praepositos, which 4 The
Rhemish Test. englishes, Prelates. 5 Fabritius, and Sebastian Castalion;
Gubernatores, our Governors.


1 Praepositos vocat pastores, and Episcopos, so says Cornelius a Lapide.

2 Pastores, and Gubernatores; says Hemmingius.

3 Praelatos, and Superiores; so Dionysius Carthus.

4 Ecclesiae Pastores, says Hyperius: And he renders the reason why these are
meant, and not the Civil Magistrates; Cum enim inter Hebraeos variae subinde
sererentur opiniones, etc. The Hebrews were contentious in the variety of
their opinions: Some denying CHRIST to be GOD: some rendering him not; and
some, but equal with Moses: some contending for the ceremonies of the Law: and
lastly some too, hammering out of their own brains other such doctrines of
errors; and yet every one boasting of his opinionative learning, and vaunting
of his skill in the exposition of the Scriptures. In the multitude of these
disturbances a cure was provided. They had a Prelate to appeal unto, whose
care it was to reconcile their differences. Our Apostle therefore endeavoring
their satisfaction, admonishes them to obedience to those that have the rule
over them. This I conceive to be proper. We Will follow this exposition, and
according to their Titles we will enquire into their Offices.

Ye have heard that they are our Captains, Leaders, Governors, Prelates,
which are here intended. They are those in every Country, to whom by a just
power is committed the government of the Church. Not any schismatic Sectarie
here; nor any selfe-conceited railer beyond the Seas. Not the grave-bearded
Brownists; nor the down-look't Separatists; nor the disorderly Anabaptists. Not
the Apron preachers of some Sects; nor the illiterate, pettish Baulers among
others. These are the Authors of distraction, not order; and the ringleaders
to mutiny and rebellion, not the composers of differences intended in my Text.
Such as these have formerly swarmed in this our Kingdom; but (God be blessed)
the care of those who watch over us, has corrected the fury of their public
disorder. Did ye but hear them in their Conventicles in those Countries where
they have gained their freedom, you would wonder that men should be sold to
such folly. Ye know what once did save the Capitol, Sollicitive Canes,
canibusve sagacior Anser.

But these we can scarcely imagine worthy to be ranked with them, because (on
the contrary) they are Traitors to ours. Ye would hardly believe how gravely
they will speak their undigested crudities; and father their contradictions
upon the blessed Spirit. They will maintain a precedencie indeed; but it is
preserved in each persons opinion of his particular self. Every man among them
is best, although none be good: all are Lords; none Subjects. Had they but so
much of reason as they want of religion, I doubt not, but they would epsy
their own enormities. But so long as they hug themselves in these their
vanities, give me leave to determine them to be none of the (...) my Apostle
means.

In our Church they are the most reverend Archbishops, the right reverend
Bishops, and those whom they appoint for the preservatio^ of discipline in our
flourishing Church. It Is confessed that some will storm at my opinion, to whom
the name of a Bishop is a strong purgation. But them I remit to their own
(...), Geneva: and if want of employment be the cause of their exception, let
them confer about a better exposition of S. John, Rev. 9.3. See the fate of
error, how it concludes in ignorance, and where contention is grounded upon a
disturbed passion, how does it vent it self in terms appropriated to folly?
If Learning and Religion be grown so much out of their favor, as that
Academicall Degrees, and Ecclesiastical Orders render us Locusts, we will wish
that they may once be banished into their wits, or else remit them to their
Furnace. They will be angry (I believe) if I should retort it upon themselves:
Plin. not. hist. tom. 1. lib. 11. cap. 26.
I resolve therefore not to style them Locusts, but me thinks they come very
near the Pyralis in Pliny, which so long as it is in the fire, it lives: but
if it chance to leap forth of the Furnace, and to fly far into the air, it
dies. Their beginning is the Ignis fatuus of an unhallowed zeal; I meddle not
with their end. These notes are truly Nigro carbone notandae: I leave them
therefore to the judicious censure of Authority.

It Is strange too, that their great Abbettour should so much mistake; as to
say, that Beza in annot in locum.
Gradus Episcopalis est Ecclesiae Apostolicae ignotus. Certainly in this, the
fury of his passion quarrelled with his learning, and thence he fell into this
raving frenzy. Otherwise I cannot imagine how it will be maintained, that
because our Apostle uses the plural numher in my Text, we may therefore
conclude with him, Nondum illum gradum Episcopalem fuisse in Ecclesiam
inuectum. He proceeds to speak what (for his own sake) I blushed at when I
read it, A quo certe Satan suam Oligarchiam auspicatus est, quae in tyrannidem
illam Antichristianam evasit, and nunc quoque Ecclesiae instaurationem
remoratur. I will not english it for their sakes whom it least concerns; nor
confute it, lest by that they conjecture at what I conceal. Such opinions as
these have spawned sedition and often howled and yelled in our Mother the
Church. But alas, did their maintainers but consider the burden of these our
Captains, our Leaders, our Governors, our Prelates; I presume their contention
would be changed into pity; and their opposition would end in obedience to
these that have the rule over us.

Would ye know their burden? Let my Apostle speak it in the ensuing words,
They watch for your souls as they that must give an account: And let Cor. a
Lapide in locum.
Cornelius a Lapide apply the words, Quantumuis honoris, reverentiae and
obedientiae deferas praeposito, nunquam onus, and periculum quod ipse pro te
suscepit adaequabis; All the honor, reverence, and obedience which ye perform
to your Prelates, will never countervaile their burden, and danger. Or else
here Hemmingius his conclusion, Gravissimum, and laboris, difficultatisque
plenissimum est pastorum officium: the ministerial function is both weighty,
and laborious even in inferiors, what then may we deem it to be in superiors?

Would you know their care? Let Fulg. in Verba, ipsi enim pervigilant, etc.
Fulgentius speak it. Soliciti sunt, says he, 1 Praedicando. 2 Bonum exemplum
praebendo. 3 Exterior a providendo.


They are careful in their 1 Doctrine. 2 Coversation. 3 Hospitality.


Hence our Countryman the Nic. (...) Gorran. in verba quasi rationem
reddituri.
Dominicane concludes, that curae praelatorum requiritur; 1 Solicitudo, quia
pervigilant. 2 Magnitudo, quia rationem reddituri. 3 Multitudo, quia pro
animabus vestris, non tantum pro suis.


Tho. Aquinas upon the place observes, that because they are Pastores,
therefore they do, or ought to imitate the Shepherds in Luke 2.8. Which at the
Nativity of our Savior, did both abide in the field, and also watch over their
flocks by night. Ye hear their burden and care; and (if as yet ye are not
snatched up into admiration) I shall heighten you with that of S. Chrysostom. in
locum.
Chrysostom, Miror si potest salvari aliquis rectorum: But let G. Estius in
locum.
Gulielmus Estius qualify him: Haec dicit respiciens ad multitudinem eorum qui
per ambitionem sese conjiciunt in illam tanti momenti functionem: for God
forbid that the admiration should extend to a universality without any
exception, Nam legitime vocato, and fideliter, atque ex charitate sacrum illud
munus exercenti, qualis fuit ipse Chrysostomus, periculum esse non potest,
says the same Estius.

Ye have heard their labor: or else let Aug. de civ. Dei.
Saint Augustine speak it, Episcopus nomen est operis. Wherefore (my beloved)
as ye are 1 Soldiers, so ye must obey your reverend Prelates, for ye heard
that they are your Captains. 2 As ye march in your ranks toward the Kingdom
of Heaven, so ye must observe them, for they are your Leaders. 3 As ye live in
the blessed time of a flourishing Church, so ye must submit unto them, for they
are your Governors. 4 As ye are in subjection, so ye must obey them; for they
are Praelati, they have the rule over you; so says my Text. I will conclude
this point with that of S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in locum.
Malum est ubi nullus est principatus, and multarum cladium extitit occasio:
which I will english thus: The want of Episcopal jurisdiction, has proved the
cause of many a bloody contention. Or I will conclude with that of Cornelius a
Lapide, Cum tantum sit onus praepositi, Cor. a Lap. in locum.
prompte illi obedito, ne si sis dyscolus, and inobediens onus ejus aggraves,
sub quo ipse gemat dum cogitat, quod pro tua inobedientia, and malitia Deo
rationem reddere debet. Let the weight of the Prelates function, be a forceable
argument to persuade you unto a submissive obedience. It Is most just, it is most
necessary: my Apostle commands it; Obey them that have the rule over you, and
submit your selves: which is the second General, The duty enjoined: viz.
Obedience, and Submission.


Unwelcome news commonly renders the messenger unacceptable; and when we are
displeased with the message, we frown upon the deliverer. An ill plea it is (I
confess) for my self, since the subject of my ensuing Tract must be that
which is generally cried down by opposers, Obedience. But he that for fear of
displeasing, neglects his commission, must undergo a censure for his
effeminate fearfulness. To you therefore (my beloved auditors) must I preach
the words of this great Doctor of the Gentiles, Obey, etc.

Whom ye must obey, ye have already heard. How ye must obey comes now to be
handled.

1 Obedite, and obsecundate, say Tremellius (out of the Greek) and Stephanus.

2 Parete, and obsecundate, says Beza.

3 Obedite and auseultate, says Tremel. out of the Syriac.

4 Parete gubernatoribus vestris, and estote dictis illis obedientes: so
Fabritius out of the Syriac.

5 Obedite and subjacete: So says the vulg. Lat. Arias Montanus, Johannes
Benedictus Parisiensis, and others.

6 Parete, and obsequimini. So Sebastian, Castalion.

7 Parete, and concedite. So Leo Judah, and Erasmus. Hyper. in locum.
Hyperius renders the reason why it is translated concedite. Non solum convenit
illis parere (says he) verum etiam quaeda^ concedere, and permittere, etc.
Since we know that it is impossible even for the worthiest Divine to be so
exactly accomplished, and his hearers so discreetly judicious, as that he may
hope to give content to every one in all things: Alij causantur pastorem non
satis doctum, etc. Some are accused for their lives, some for their ignorance
in Schoole-divinity; some for not being at all, and some for being too much (as
they will have it) read in the Fathers; every one is accused for one thing or
another, whether justly, or unjustly, Propterea Apostolus cupit aliquid eis
concedi.

8 Cedite says Pelican: primo enim obedientiam, deinde honorem illis deferri
jubet. And he wants not his reason: Cedimus enim (says he) and nos submittimus
iis quos honor prosequimur, and superiores agnoscimus.

9 Subjacete says Ludovicus Tena: and that, 1 Non resistendo. 2 Non vos iis
co-aequando; sed potius reverendo, and honorando ut superiores.


10 The Greek has the first word (...). Now (...) signifies oratione
flectere, as Stephanus will tell you: whence (...) Suada is made the Goddess
of Eloquence: so that the Apostle requires us to harken to, and obey the
doctrine of the Clergy.

The second word is (...), credo (not of (...) for that is too narrow) and it
signifies (as says Tertullian) obedientia humilem, submissam, and supplicem
exhibere; yea, such obedience as forbids all replying, or answering again.

G. Estius in locum.
Estius quotes Theophylact and Oecumenius for translating it Exactam
obedientiam, ut si operibus illis serviendum sit, non detractent: Such exact
obedience, as (upon a good occasion) denies not assistance by purse or pains:
For (says he) the Greek word signifies locum dare; submittere se; and
obsequiis subjectionem ostendere.

The variety of these Versions has caused diversity of opinions.

1 Fulgentius thus; Obedite quantum ad praecepta, ut faciatis ea quae per eos
praecipit ecclesia. Subjacete, ut reverentiam exhibeatis.

2 Hugo Cardin. thus; Obedite quantum ad praecepta: Subjacete quantum ad
correctiones, et disciplinas. And he confirms his interpretation of the latter
by the authority of Lev. 5.3. where the Vulg. Lat. reads it, Si tetigerit
quicquam de immunditia hominis, etc. subjacebit delicto, id est, says he,
poenae delicto competenti.

3 Dionysius Carth. thus, Obedite praepositis vestris, eorum praecepta
servando. Subjacete reverentiam exhibendo. And he confirms it by our Saviors
words in Luke 10.16. He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you,
despises me. From hence Gorran glosses upon the words thus: Obedite, etc.
mandata sua implendo. Subjacete reverentiam exhibendo.

Which although it be the same with the former; yet he grounds it upon another
place of Scripture, viz. Col. 3.20. Children obey your parents in all things,
for this is well pleasing unto the Lord: where by parents he understands, our
reverend spiritual parents.

Tho. Aquinas upon my Text observes, that a twofold duty is required in us
toward our spiritual overseers. viZ.

1 Obedientia, ut ipsorum mandata impleamus: which he presses by that, in 1 Samuel 15.22. Behold, to obey is better than Sacrifice; and to harken, than the
fat of Lambs: Quia per victimas aliena caro, per obedientiam vero voluntas
propria mactatur says S. Gregory. Because in sacrifices the flesh of others,
but in obedience the will of our selves is made the oblation.

2 Reverentia, ut eos honoremus tanquam patres and ipsorum disciplinam
toleremus: to honor them as Fathers, and to submit to their discipline. This
he confirms both out of the first of 1 Peter 2.13. and Romans 13.2. Whosoever
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God.

Thus then ye see according to the generality, that two things belong as due
from us to our Prelates, viz. 1 Obedience to their doctrine. 2 Obedience to
their discipline.


The former is due to the whole Clergy in general, who divide the word of
truth aright; the latter, to those in particular that have the rule over us.
Upon these two columns I shall erect the fabric of my ensuing tract: and
first of the first; viz. Obedience to their doctrine.

General positions for the most part command our belief; and require not
arguments to press our assent. To harken to the Preacher then we know it our
duty; and even children by imitation forbear a neglect. I hope therefore that
your religious approbation of this general Thesis, will not need my industry
in the proof of its necessity. It is Lippis, and tonsoribus notum. Yet to
satisfy the objections of a scrupulous conscience; and to correct the
petulancy of refractory disturbers, I shall first lay down the quality of
the persons to whom we must attend: secondly the manner of attention, and
obedience we are to perform unto them. And first of the first.

The Eye and the Ear are the darlings of the world, and outstrip the rest of
the senses in their general credit. Thus it is the custom to skan our
Ministers by their precepts and examples. They are both the Vbera, the dugs of
the Church, through which the people suck their divinity. That Church is
therefore subject to censure, of which (in respect of these) we may take up
that complaint in Cant. 8.8. We have a little Sister, and she has no breasts.
It Is far better where but one is dried up, so the other give milk, be it
precept or conversation; although I must confess even that case very
dangerous. It Is fearful for a Minister to be criminal in either: Yet for
those which have not the gift of preaching, our holy Church has ordained a
learned supply in the Books of Homelies: but for the other she cannot provide
any remedy but by discipline. Ye have heard of the Lawgivers answer; who
being demanded why he appointed no law for the punishment of a Parricide,
replied, because he never imagined that any would be guilty of such barbarous
inhumanity. I hope the same too of our Ecclesiastical brethren, that none will
be guilty. I shall only therefore put you in mind (my reverend and most
affected brethren) of that of S. Gregory; In exemplum culpa vehementer
extenditur, quando pro reverentia ordinis peccator honoratur. He Is yet more
tart; please you to hear him speaking to them especially who are placed in
authority; Scire debent Praelati quod tot mortibus digni sunt, quot exempla
perditionis ad subditos transmittunt. Or if you please to have a shorter
memento, take that of S. Hier. Grandis dignitas Sacerdotum, sed grandis ruina
si peccent.

But let me not forget my self. Come I here to question the Priest, or rather
to admonish the people? The former I refer to our judicious Consistories; the
latter is the business that is now to be handled.

It Is a common delusion of the deceiving Serpent to whisper into the Laity a
contempt of the Clergy. Alas, alas, it is too frequent; for we often see,
that their false accusations render him obnoxious, whom they desire to have so.
The rude vulgar sit in judgment upon their Pastors, and condemn them for
their innocence. Should their verdicts pass, Religion would become retrograde;
and he should be accounted wicked who refuses to bewicked. They strive upon a
curious inquisition to make him culpable; and upon the least discovery of the
smallest imperfection, they voice him scandalous. This (I am sure) is not the
effect of religious obedience.

The interlineall Bible upon our Obedite, tells us in a marginall note,
Praecipimur non discutere vitam praesidentium; nam qui illos spernit Deum
spernit. The inquisition into the lives of them that have the rule over us,
ought not to be the business of those that are of the Latty. Io. Arb. in loc.
And Johannes Arboreus goes farther. Non satagere debent subditi, and curiose
disquirere number sui Domini, and praefecti honest an turpiter vivant, modo eis
recta, and honesta praecipiant. Inferiors are presumptuous, if instead of
attention to the Doctrine, they pry into the conversation of their spiritual
superiors. Si been dixerimus vestrum est; si been vixerimus nostrum est, says
Saint Augustine: our wholesome doctrine benefits you; but our godly lives are
advantageous to our selves. S. Chrysostom. in loc.
Which puts me in mind of answering a question propounded by S. Chrysostom. and
others; Whether the doctrine of a Minister may be neglected, where his
conversation is to be blamed? Haymo says, Haymo in locum.
that we owe obedience to them, In quantum doctrina, and mores illorum sancta,
and pia existunt; so long as their doctrine is orthodox, and their lives
unreproveable. But yet (says he) Si a via rectitudinis aberrent, non faciamus
qualia agunt, sed qualia dicunt, etc. If their lives be tainted, let us follow
their precepts, and decline their practice. And he grounds it upon our Saviors
speech, as it is in Matthew. 23.2. and 3. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses
Chair: all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe, and do;
but do not ye after their works. Anselme (quoted by Ludovicus Tena) is of the
same opinion, that the enormities of the person ought not to bring contempt to
his doctrine: Subjacete praepofitis (says he) non tantum bonis, and sanctis,
sed etiam peccatoribus. Nazianzen will tell you, that although the Signet be
Lead, or Iron; yet it will leave the same impression as another of Gold. S.
Augustine will tell you, that the water which passes through an earthen
Pitcher, refreshes the Herbs, as well as if the Vessel were made of Silver.
Hear then S. Chrysostomes direction; In causa fidei dum praepositus malignus
extiterit, fuge illum, and evita, non solum si homo fuerit, sed etiam si
Angelus de Coelo descenderit. Si vero in vita moribus malignum dicis, noli
curiosus esse, etc. In matters of faith if he prove erroneous decline him; yea,
though he were an Angel from Heaven: but be not too quick-sighted into the
affairs of his life. Hisce etiamsi dyscoli sint, and scelerati, obediendum
est, says Theophilact: Their impurity must not detract from your obedience:
Aug. Ser. 5. ad fratres in eremo. De obedientia ad Sacerdotes suos. S. Chrysostom.
in comment. in Gal. 1.
but it must be with S. Aug. his distinction, Non quia mali sunt, sed quia bona
observare praecipiunt, quibus obedire debemus. Your obedience must be founded
upon the purity of their preaching; not the impurity of their manners. S.
Chrysostomes determination in an other place is good; Si qui praesunt improbi
forent, innumerisque scaterent malis, ne sic quidem fas esset discipulo dictis
non audientem esse, etc. Though they that are set over you should swarm with
impieties, yet it freeth you not from attending to their wholesome admonitions.
But with that take the limitation of Erasmus; modo ne pertrahant ad impietatem;
so they seduce not to evil. Or with that of Hemmingius; Sit regula vox
Euangelii, etc. Let the Gospel be their rule, against which if they preach, ye
are freed from obedience to their doctrine in that particular. His ground for
it is that of Cornelius to Peter in Acts 10.33: Now therefore we are all
present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God.
Anselme's opinion is the same; Obedite, id est, obtemperate jussis eorum in
omnibus, nisi forte malum aliquod jusserint, etc. But he goes yet further, sed
caetera omnia, etiamsi non videantur esse bona, etc. Obey their commandments
so far as they are good; yea, even in things which at the first appearance
seem not to be good. Wherein me thinks he gives a secret check to those whose
too too scrupulous consciences make them so superciliously strict, and so
haughty minded, that their own opinions (though never so erroneous) must sit
in judgment upon the actions of their Ministers. They will be censurers,
though their judgments are depraved; which makes indifferences appear to them
sinful. Their forward censures hurrie them into errors; and their
presumptuous selfe-conceitednesse is the ground of their disturbances. They are
out of the way, and yet they had rather to nuzzle themselves in an error, then
become so wise as to acknowledge their folly. Too many alas of these does our
country labor of: most of whom (for fear they should be convinced of their
opinions, and so become zealous with sobriety) have quit our country to fly
into their Canaan. Thus timor addidit alas, the fear of conformity has made
them to use the wings of their ships: and (as if they were begotten for
rebellion) their spirits of contradiction disdain the confines of our
flourishing kingdoms. But for my part I shall wish them always a prosperous
gale to carry them to their Port; Navigent Anticyras, so we be no more troubled
with their schismatic censures, and clamorous disturbances. Indifferent
things in themselves do in a manner alter their nature when they are commanded
by authority. It is the tenent of our Constitutions and Canons ecclesiastical;
Can. 30. in sin. Things of themselves indifferent, do in some sort alter their
natures, when they are either commanded or forbidden by a lawful Magistrate:
and may not be omitted at every man's pleasure, contrary to the Law when they be
commanded; nor used when they are prohibited.
Church, and it shall ever be mine. I will therefore obey even in such things,
Etiamsi non videantur esse bona: for my particular judgment shall never justle
the authority of so many reverend Divines, nor a private sauciness oppose the
learned acts of a judicious Convocation. I confess that I cannot choose but
take notice of the judgment of God upon these schismatic Precisians: for
whom spiritual pride has puffed up into a schism in our Church, a seduced
judgment banishes into ignorance of their temporal blessings.

The quality of the persons to whom ye are commanded to yield obedience, ye
have already heard: The manner of our obedience follows.

Aug. Ser. 7. ad fratres in eremo, etc.
Obedientia sine discretione cassa est, and vana, says S. Augustine: Obedience
without discretion is vain: but he tells you how, non ex part obedientis, sed
praecipientis; not in him that obeyes, but in him that commands. That lights
upon him that is the author of the edict; and not upon the conscience of him
that is obedient. Tho. Aquinas distinguishes of a threefold obedience, T.
Aquin. 2a. 2ae. q. 104. art 5.
which I may apply to that which is due to the Fathers of our Church: viz.

1 Sufficiens ad salutem: That which is sufficient to our salvation; which
bends in humility unto what it stands engaged.

2 Perfecta; quae obedit in omnibus licitis: such as is conversant only about
such things as are lawful.

3 Indiscreta, quae etiam in illicitis obedit: such as questions not the
lawfulness of the thing commanded; but by a too facile, and un-man'd
disposition, yields in obedience to matters unjust. Now whereas in another
place afterward the same * Schoole-man questions; T. Aquin. 2^. 2ae. q. 186.
art. 4
Vtrum obedientia pertineat ad perfectionem religionis? Whether obedience
concurs to the perfection of Religion? His conclusion is affirmative: Non quasi
indigentes dirigi ad perfectionem acquirendam; sed quasi per hoc se
conservantes in eo quod ad perfectionem pertinet. Should I english Aquinas I
must make use of the distinction between Incipiens, Proficiens, and Perfectus,
before I should render satisfaction to some curious inquisitors; and in
conclusion (for ought that I know) they might prove as captious. I shall leave
them to their frowning opinions; and conclude this point with S. Bernards
determination; Verus obediens mandata non procrastinat; sed statim parat aures
auditui, linguam voci, pedes itineri, manus operi, and se totum intus colligit
ut mandatum peragat imperantis. The obedient Christian upon his first command
devotes himself wholly to the observance of his command.

I have done with your obedience required to the doctrine of the reverend
Clergy, implied in the word (...), obey. I come now to your obedience required
to the discipline of the Church, included in the other word (...), submit your
selves.

Ex malis moribus bonae nascuntur leges: badnesse of conditions procured the
goodness of Laws. Vt quos natura ipsa in officio retinere non poterat, ij
magnitudine poenae a maleficio submoverentur, says Marc. Tul. Cic. that
punishment might supply the defects of nature. What was the ground of our
Laws, is the ground likewise of our obedience: for (says Johannes Arboreus)
Nos propter peccatum alijs hominibus subjecti sumus. Sin brought in subjection:
Nam natura omnes aequales genuit; sed inaequalitas quae accessit ex vitio, est
ordinata ex Dei judicio, unde nos oportet obedire hominibus: for nature
intended an equality at our generations; but the pravitie of our dispositions
was the cause of inequality in our persons. No marvel then that the Church may
not want her discipline, when so many of her members will not want their
defaults. Our Apostle not ignorant of the need of power in Ecclesiastical
government, insinuates the necessity in his precept to submission: And submit
your selves.

But durus est hic sermo. Diverse will better relish our doctrine than our
discipline, and will be content to obey so they may not submit. Miserable men
as they are, they would feign go to Heaven, but they are loath to stoop low
enough to enter in at the gate. Did they but consider, or propose unto
themselves the true and just ends of obedience and submission, I presume their
depraved judgments would easily condescend to the necessity thereof. Let
Hemmingius tell them of his twofold end thereof: viz.

1 Vt honesta, and gravi disciplina politeia ecclesiastica gubernetur: for the
government of the Church by grave and religious discipline.

2 Vt obtemperantes ministris Dei, consequamur promissam immortalitatis
gloriam: that by our submission we may inherit the promised crown of
immortality.

Well then, we must not only be obedient to the precept, but also subject and
conformable to the government. Yea, moreover (if Ludovicus Tena may speak) Non
tantum in his quae sunt de jure divino, sed etiam in his quae superaddunt de
humano; quorum observantia paci, and tranquillitati ecclesiae expediat; vel ad
mores bonos aliquo modo conducat, saltem ex part finis, licet res de se sit
indifferens: not only in things directly commanded in sacred writ; but also
even in things which are added by the reverend Fathers; conducing either to the
peace of the Church, or to the good behavior of men; yea, though in themselves
the things be indifferent.

If this be true (as no man I am sure can justly deny it) what shall we account
of the impudent disturbers of the Hierarchy of our Church? What, not a Bishop
to govern? Shall their Lay Elders, forsooth, (such as the Elder Church never
dreamed of) and their handicraft-sticklers in ecclesiastical matters, usurp
the authority that belongs to the Prelates? Alas (my brethren) ye know 'twas
Plato's determination touching Commonwealths, Tum demum fore beatas res
publicas cum aut reges saperent, aut sapientes intelligerent: that they would then
best flourish when Kings grew wise; or wise men Kings: and shall it not hold so
too in the Ecclesiastical discipline? Must a Dictator ab aratro be preferred
before a learned Doctor in divinity? Must we neglect the Universities to rely
upon Enthusiasmes? Away with these schismatic disturbers of our sorrowful
Mother. Shall our most reverend Clergy have all the labor, and shall their
requital be nothing but mallepert disobedience? Calvin in loc. Pastoribus
ergo non tantum obedientia debetur, sed etiam honor.
Calvin himself determines, that honor of duty belongs unto them. Saint
Bernard tells us, Parendum est ei tanquam Deo qui nobis est vice Dei, in iis
quae non sunt aperte contra Deum. We must submit to him as God, who is placed
over us as God, in all things not directly contrary to the word of God. And who
is that, but (in, and over both Church and Commonwealth) our gracious and
dread Sovereign: under him immediately in the Church the most reverend
Archbishops: and so descending to every particular, and Parochial Priest?
Every such particular Rectour of a Parish receives that command from God which
we find in 1 Kings 20.29. Keep these men; if by any means they shall be
missing, then shall thy life be for theirs: and shall they have no respect;
yea, though they are the most inferior of the Apostles? Yes doubtless, or
else when God shall question them in the words of the Prophet, Ier. 13.20.
Where is the flock that was given thee, that beautiful flock? If they reply,
that they were lost through their own disobedience, God will certainly rank
them among the Goats, which shall be separated from the Sheep. It Is true that
Iacobus Faber Stapulensis tells us of some, Iac. Fab. stap. in loc.
Qui suis non invigilant, quia sui non obediunt; who neglect their flocks,
because they neglect their obedience: but he concludes, hi inutiles sunt gregi,
and grex illis; these are unprofitable to their flock, and their flock to
them. The argument then holds current, A minore ad majus: If Parochial
discipline requires submission in the Parishioners to their particular Pastor;
ought not much more both Sheepherds and Sheep, both Priest and People, to
submit with all reverence and humility to Episcopal, to Provincial
discipline? The crimes of our age are too epidemicall to give me leave to
flatter my self with a belief of a general integrity, and concionable, lowly
obedience. I know that among us are diverse of Saint Paul's (...), unruly, and
disorderly persons, such as he found among the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
Yea, and of his (...) such as he complains of in the first of Titus, verse.
10. But let his command be fulfilled, Warn them: and if that will not suffice;
shall authority ly languishing in despare of redress? Shall the insulting
opposition of headstrong perverseness, foil the justice and pre-eminency of
power? Nay rather let the sharpest edge of Ecclesiastical Discipline make an
incision, than the gangrene be suffered to run into an universality.

The time is spent. I shall conclude in a word of Exhortation.

First to you (my reverent and learned brethren) I must crave leave to address
my self, not for your information, but your remembrance. Obedience and
Submission in the inferiors, is commonly grounded upon the examples of their
betters. Ye know your Obligations to Episcopal jurisdiction: let me beg your
continuance in the practice, for I doubt not your subscription. If the Sun
be eclipsed, the whole hemisphere is obscured. Let your burning Tapours light
the Laity to a sight of their duty; and your careful practice invite them to
submission. Your Canonical obedience requires your observance; and your sacred
functions will challenge imitation. For mine own part, if I am too young to
admonish, I am not too old to learn. Your gravest examples shall make me
travel in your religious steps; and your learned precepts shall make me your
disciple.

To you (my beloved of the Laity in general) I shall prescribe the duty of
obedience and submission, such as ye have heard me already treat of.
Correct the fury of your unhallowed vices; and trace the way which your Divines
prescribe you. Let their discipline be your government; and their doctrine
your practice. So shall your obedience be crowned in the end with joy, and your
observance with eternal reward.

To you in particular (who are elected the Guardians of your several Parishes)
I must preach both obedience and diligence. Remember that GOD whom ye called
upon to witness the promise of your fidelity. The enormities of your Parishes
are your own particular crimes, if ye proceed not legally in your just
presentiments. Ye remember your oaths; and ye know the punishment provided
for perjurie; wherefore let him that has ears hear. Affection is a Traitor,
and favor is a Parasite: briberie is deceitful, and neglect is damnable where
they win the person to abrogate his oath. Your cause is just; fear not
detraction: your oaths are religious; vallew not the envious: ye are
supported by power; shake not at affronts.

Thus if every one of us perform our commands, our consciences will be our
continual Feasts. If we all join in obedience, and submission to the powers
below, for the sake of him who sits above, our lives shall be free from
distractions here; and our deaths shall open to us the gate of eternity. Even
so, O God of Heaven, guide us whilst we live in this valley of tears; and
afterward receive us into our Masters joy. Amen.

Errata.
Page 9. line 6. for Latins, read Latin. p. 12. l. 20. f. here r. hear. p.
15. l. 32. credo r. cedo. p. 17. l. 27. notum r. nota. p. 19. l. 13.
interlineall r. interlineary. p. 22. in marg. 2a. 2ae. r. 1. 2ae.

FJNIS.
erlegi hanc concionem, cui Titulus Obedience and submission, etc. quae
continet folia 15. in quibus non reperio aliquid bonis moribus aut sanae
doctrinae contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate imprimi queat: Sub ea tamen
condition, ut, si non intra tres menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur, haec
licentia sit omnino irrita.

Guilielmus Haywood, Cap. domest. R.P.D. Archiep. Cantuar.


