Two homilies upon the first, second, and third articles of the Creed, made by
master John Feknam Deane of Paul's.
The first article.
I Believe in God the father almighty maker of heaven and earth.

Dearly beloved and servants of our lord God, I have here in hand this day to
read and set forth unto you the right and perfect know ledge of God, to be
learned and gathered out of our common Creed, the same being unto us (as it
were) an abridgement, or a brief collection of all things necessary to be
believed or known of God. Lift up your hearts therefore and prepare your selves,
like beneuolent and attentive hearers, to receive the same: Considering wish
your selves, that the time of your parts spent in ^ernyng thereof, shall be but
short: the labor therm taken, can not be great: the fruit and profit of
knowing God, is life everlasting. Our savior Christ wytnessing the same,
says: John, x^ii.
This is everlasting life, to know thee to be the only true God, and thy
son whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

And to the obteinyng of this sure knowledge of God, first give ear to learn
the first article of your Creed, which begins on this wise. I believe in God
the father almighty creator of heaven and earth. By the which article we are
taught the right and perfect knowledge of God, by the Catholyke faith of
Christ's church, and every man in following the doctrine of the same to say. I
believe in God. And albeit there is a knowledge here to be gathered and learned
of God, partlye by natural reason, partly by the testimony and record of
ancient writers and holy fathers, partly by the creatures, and by conference
made of them unto God: yet the most certain and surest knowledge here to be had
of God, is by the catholic faith of Christ's church, and by the doctrine of
the same church to say: I believe in God. First by natural reason, there is a
knowledge to be had of God, when natural reason says. Omne causatum indiget
alio vt sit. Every thing that is made must needs have another thing as his
causer or maker: And that causer or maker, being in like manner made, must have
of necessity another, which was his causer or maker: and so forth generally
to speak of al things made, until we must by natural reason come, and find
out one chief causer, creator and maker of all things, being it self not
caused or made of any other, which is only God, and none other. And as
touching the creatures of God, in what knowledge they bring us to of God, it is
easelie to be gathered: when the ample greatness, the profounde depenes, the
largenes, the strongnes, the beautifulnes, the pureness, and the swetenes of the
creatures, do instruct and teach us, how ample and great, how profounde and
deep, how large, how strong, how beautiful, how pure, and how sweet is God
the creator and maker of them all: all creatures acknowledging, and confessing
the magnificence of God their creator, every one of them saying after their
manner of speech. Quoniam ipse est, qui fecit nos, et non ipsi nos. It is he
that has made us. It is ipse deus, that God. Et non ipsi nos: And not we,
that did or could make our selves. The creatures of God are here in this
world, as it were, a myrrour or glass, wherein we may behold, and see the
wonderful might, power, and goodness of God. The Apostle Paul in witnessyng
of the same, says. Roma. ^.
The invisible things of god (as his eternal power and godhed) are perceived
and understand by his creatures, which he has made. But of all the most
certain and surest knowledge of God, is that which is here taught us in the
first article of our Creed by the catholic faith, and with the same to say.
I believe in god. And this my belief does ingraffe in me a reason, an
understanding, and a sure knowledge of God: So that the most assured, and most
certain knowledge that a Christen man can have here of God, is assuredly and
certainly to say. I believe in God. And to believe in God, is not only to believe
that God is, or that there is a God of such invisible and spiritual
substance, that he can not be seen with eye, nor yet by wit understood, or
yet to believe that God is of power infinyte, of nature eternal, without
beginning or ending, of knowledge incomprehensible, of wisdom not to be
apprehended, of goodness, justice, and mercy always forth infinite, and like
unto him self, or to believe that God in all his sayings and doings is just
and true: But to believe in God, is in beleuynge, to put our whole trust and
affiance in God, and in beleuynge and trusting in God, to love God, and so to
love, trust and believe in God, that our lives and conuersations be clean
turned and wholly bent to please and serve him: So that to believe in God (as
this first article teaches us) is in believing to renounce the devil, the
world, and the flesh, with all their pompes and works, and to dedicate our
selves wholly to the service of God. And therefore in this first article we say:
Credo in deam. I believe in God, speaking but of one God in the singular number:
thereby to seclude the service or belief of many gods, as of the deuell, the
world, the flesh, or other like: when it is written. Deuteronomy. vi. Give ear
Israel for the Lord thy God, is but one. And therefore thou shall fear the
Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. By this first article of our
Creed, is subverted all Idolatry, Psalm. xcvi.
false adoration and worshypping of many gods, when the Prophet David puts
us out of al doubts, quod omnes dij gentium daemonia, that all the gods of the
ethnykes, not believing in this one God, be deuels, and not gods. By this first
article, is abolished all forcery, witchecraft, and necromancie most, vaynely
abusing the creatures of God, against their creator almyghtye God. By this
article, are condemned all glotons and carnal lyuers: whose belly, is their
God, Philip. ii.
says saint Paul, and all covetous persons and inordynate lovers of the
world: when covetousness (as says saint Paul) est idolorum seruitus, Aephes. v.
is a service of idols. And more generallye to speak, by this first article of
our Creed, are condemned all kind of sinners, when sin does cause them to
prefer, and more set by the creatures, then their creator almighty God: so
that this article to believe in God, shall make our life here sweet and
pleasant, and deliver the same from all terror, dread and fear of Satan,
sin, death, helfire, and all their army: when this fyrme faith and belefe in
God, shall cause and encourage every one of us boldly to say with the prophet
David. Et stambulauero in medio vmbrae mortis, non timebo mala, quoniam tu
mecum es. Psalm. xxii.
And if I should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear
none evil, because thou art with me. Virga tuaet baculus tuus ipsa me
consolata sunt. Thy rod and thy staff do comfort me. For as thapostle Paul
says. Roma. viii.
Sideus pro nobis, quis con tra nos? If God be with us, who can stand against
us? gods providence and care being such over us, quod oe^s capilli capitis
nostri numerati sunt. That all the hears of our heads be numbered, Math. x.
and that not one of them shall peryshe, without his will and pleasure.

Seeing therefore (dearly beloved in our Lord God) so many and great evils, as
al kind of Idolatry, sin, and detestable living, are avoided, by this first
article of our Creed. Seeing that so many profits, commodities, and pleasures
are gotten and procured by the same: Let us therefore here first begin to
pitche and stay our selves, and with a firm persuasion of heart to believe, and
with no less truth of mouth to confess and say: Credo in deum patrem. I
believe in God the father. In that this first article of our Creed teaches us
to believe in God the father, it does express unto us two notable points of
faith. The first is, the unity of the Godhead and of the divine substance and
essence of God. The second, is the plurality of persons: when this word,
father, can not be verified of God the first person, but in relation of God
the son the second person: when with out a son God can not be a father.
Therefore in that this first article of our Creed teaches us to believe in God
the father, it teaches us, that Jesus Christ our Lord, the second person in
trinity, is God the son, being the very image of God the father, and of one
substance with the father, coeternal, and in deity coequal with God the
father, being one God with God the father, one nature, one essence, and being
with him, both of them being of like might, like power, like wisdom, like
knowledge, like righteousness, and in all other things like, appertainyng unto
the deity. The assured knowledge and understanding thereof can not be attained,
but only by faith taught us in this first article of our Creed, and every one
of us to say: I believe in God the father omnipotent. And therefore worthy to be
believed, and worthy to be beloved. To be believed, because he is omnipotent, and
hable to do all things that he will, both in heaven and in earth, and that
nothing is unto him impossible, and things being subject unto his power. And
to be beloved, because he is a father, and stretches out his great might and
power unto us, not as a rigorous lord, but as a merciful father: here in
defending us from the injury of all oppressors, as a father, in conseruing
and governing of us, as a father. in fedinge and clothing of us, as a father:
making and causing all his other creatures to obey and serve us as a most
benign and louinge father. And in sure proof and declaration of this our
fathers love, great might, power, and omnipotency, this first article of our
creed teaches us to believe in god the father Omnipotent, maker and creator of
heaven and earth. And in that, that he did create and make of nothing both
heaven and earth: it is probation sufficient of his omnipotency. And here is
to be observed, how by the creation of heaven which is the throne or seat of
God, Mat. v.
and the highest creature of God) and by the creation of the earth (which is
the fotestole of God, and the lowest creature) is meant and understood the
creation of all creatures mean and between both heaven and earth, and all
creatures therein contained, whether they be heavenly creatures above, or
earthlye beneth, spiritual or corporal, material or immateriall, visible
creatures or invisible. God the father is the creator of them all, and did give
unto them al their forse, might, and power, and does from time to time
continually preserve, govern, sustain and maynteyne the whole world, and all
the creatures thereof, by his only goodness and high providence: In so much
that without the continuance of his mighty workynge, nothing in heaven or in
earth, visible, or invisible should be hable any while to contynewe. And here
to conclude in this first part or article of our Creed. I believe in God, the
father almyghtye maker of heaven and earth. We be taught to believe in one God,
and to abolishe all other feigned and false gods, and this faith so steadfastly
to reteyne, and embrace in our herts, as never to swerve or decline from the
same for any argument, persuasion, or authority that may be objected, or for
any worldly affection, or respect of pleasure, pain, persecution or torment
what soever shall happen unto us. And beside this constant faith and belefe, we
are taught by this first article, most firmly to betake and commit our
selves, and all that we have, wholly to God, and to fyxe all our whole hope,
trust, and confidence in him, and to quiet our selves, and all our thoughts,
words and works in him: beleuynge most assuredlye, that he will in very
deed, show no less goodness, love, grace, mercy and favor unto us, then a
very dear and tender father unto his own children, being omnipotent and of
all might, force and power to perform the same: and to defend, help and save
us his poor creatures, not only from all afflictions, maladyes and miseryes
of this present life, but also at the term and end thereof, to reward us with
life everlasting, and to crown us with the eternal crown of glory, which
he grant us all, that has so louynglye, and most like a tender father,
prepared it for us. To whom with God the Son, and God the holy ghost be
praise, honor and glory both here and ever.

Amen.
The second Homily upon the second and third article of the Creed.
I Believe in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord which was conceived by the
holy ghost, borne of the virgin Marye. These two articles of our creed
entreated upon in your lesson and homily of this day, do apperteyne to Jesus
Christ, the very son of God, John. xvij.
and second person in Trinity: when, by the testimonye before recyted in the
first article, of the Evangelist S. John: Everlasting life does not only
depend and consyst in the knowledge of God the father, to be the only and
true God: but it does consyst also in the perfect knowledge of his son Jesus
Christ, whom he did send unto us. Of whom, to have a right and perfect
knowledge, to the winning of this everlasting life, you shall have here this
day, the right sense and interpretation of these two articles, apperteynynge
unto him, set forth and declared unto you. Whereof the first. (I believe in
Jesus Christ his only son our Lord) does bring us in perfect knowledge of
his divine nature, and deity. The second article (which was conceived by the
holy ghost, borne of the virgin Marye) does put us to knowledge of his
humanitye. In the understanding of both the which natures, does consist the
whole and perfect knowledge of Christ. And touching the first, it is with
much diligence of our parts to be observed, that where as our Creed teaches
us to believe in Jesus Christ his only son, meaning that Jesus Christ is the
only son of God the father: That we do not forth withal, like carnal men,
fantasey with our selves any kind of carnal propagation to be between God the
Son and God the father: But the manner of generation betwixt the^ to be such
that it is not to be mused upon, far exceeding al wit and imagination of man:
When God the first person in Trinity, is a very father to God the son the
second person, not by carnal generation, nor yet by predestination. Of the
which Paul to the Ephesians: Ephesians. i.
Grace and peace unto you from God the father, which has predestinate you in
adoption of the sons of God: nor by creation. Of the which Deu. xxxij. Deuteronomy.
xxxij.
Is not he thy father, which made the and created the? nor by redemption: of
the which the prophet Esaye says: Esaias. lxiii.
Tu dn^e pater noster, and redemptor noster. Thou o lord art our father and our
redemer: nor yet by any sacrame^tal regeneration, of the which S. Peter
speaks. i Pet. i.
Blessed be god and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has regenerate us:
(And to be short) nor yet father by adoption of grace, or conference of glory:
But God the first person is father to God the son, by an eternal generation:
of the which the prophet Esaias speaking says: Esaias. iij.
Generationem eius quis enarrabit? who is hable (says the prophet) to express
or to show this his eternal generation? When in this generation God the son
is begot of the nature and substance of God the father, being the very same
substance with God the father, coequal and eternal with God the father. The
mystery thereof is so wonderful that Esaias the prophet says: It can not be
expressed: and therefore not to be reasoned upon, but to be believed of all men,
and every man to say: I believe in Jesus Christ his only son (by eternal
generation) our Lord. In the which article of our Creed (beside that we are
taught to believe this eternal generation of Christ, and thereby his deity and
divine nature) we are by the same article taught also, to believe that he is
our Jesus and savior, our Christ, priest, and prophet: our lord, protector
and defend or: when to believe in Jesus Christ his only son our lord, is to
believe, that Jesus Christ was eternally preordeyned and appointed by the decre
of the whole Trinity, to be our lord and redemer, and to pacify the wrath
and indignation of god the father toward us, and to reconcile us into his
favor, and to loose and deliver us from the yoke and tyranny of Satan, sin,
death, helfyre, and all their army, that they shall no longer against us
prevail, but has made us free from them, and taken us into his own
protection, and made us partakers of his justice, his power, his life, his
felicity, and of all other his goodness, and has in such plentiful and
abundant ways powered upon us his holy spirit and graces: as his faith to
illumine and direct our weak reason and judgments: his charity to rule our
wills and affections: his wisdom to govern our feeble weakness: his clear
brightness to put away our darkness, that we may be bold to say and believe,
that neither sin, nor death, nor hell shall have any longer power or
prevail against us: but after this transitorye life, we shall perpetually
reign with him in glory, joy and felicity, And therefore of our parts
worthily to be believed and called Jesus, that is to say, our savior: to be
called Christ, that is to say, our anointed king and priest: And to be
called Lord, that is to say, our redemer and governor: when for our sakes he
has done and fulfilled the very office of a savior, of a priest, and of a
lord and king. Of a Savior, in that he has (according as the angel said)
saved his people from their sins. Of a priest, Math. i.
in that he has offered up his own body in sacrifice upon the altar of the
Cross for us. In the which oblation he was both the priest, and the sacrifice
it self. And of a king and Lord, in that he has like a most mighty
conqueror overcome and utterly oppressed his enemies, and has now spoiled
them of the possession of ma^kinde, which they wanne before by fraud and
deceyte, by lyenge and blasphemynge, and has brought us now into his
possession, and dominion, to reign over us in grace and mercy like a most
loving Lord and governor. And therefore sythen he is our Jesus and savior,
our Christ, priest, and sacrifice, our Lord, king and governor, let us put
our whole trust and confidence in him. For he is the lamb of God which takes
away the sins of the world. John. i.xi. Ibidem. John. x.
He is our resurrection, health, life, and salvation. He is the way, truth,
and life: no man comes to the father, but by him. He is the good shepherd, by
whom we be saved from the wolf: and the door, by whom we must enter into by
grace: He is the vine, Ibidem. xv.i. Cor. x.
in whom we being ingraffed, must needs bring forth much fruit. He is our
wisdom, righteousness, justification and redemption. He is our peace, Ephesians.
ij.i. Timo. ii. Apocs. i.xxi.
our mediator and advocate, and finally he is alpha and omega, that is, the
beginning and endinge of our salvation. Let us therefore have the self same
faith and affyaunce in him in all points, which we have in God the father,
acknowledgyng him to be our lord, our Christ, and our savior, like as we are
taught in this second article of our creed, most fyrmely to believe in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord.

The second article apperteignynge to the second person in Trinity, touched
in the homylie of this day, does teach us to believe his humanity and humane
nature, saying: which was conceived by the holy ghost, borne of the virgin
Mary. For declaration of the which article, ye shall understand, that when the
time was come, in the which it was before ordained and appointed, by the decree
of the whose Trinity, that mankind should be ransomed and redeemed: then the
son of God Jesus Christ the second person in Trinity, and very God,
descended from heaven into this world, and took upon him the very habit,
form, and nature of man, in the same to work, suffer, and fulfill all those
things, which were necessary for the redemption and salvation of man: unto
whom God the father commanded the world to give full credit, saying to al
men. Ipsum audite. Hear him: Who descendyng from heaven did light down into
the womb of the blessed virgin Mary, Mat. xvij.
and did take upon him of her flesh, our very flesh, very nature and
substance, and so did in her unite and conioyne together the same nature of
man, with his godhead in one person, with such an indissoluble and inseparable
knot and bond: that he being one person Jesus Christ was then and ever shall be
in the same person very perfect God, and very perfect man. Which holy work
of Christ's incarnation was brought to pass, not by the seed of man, but by
the holy ghost, descendyng into the womb of the blessed vyrgyn, and there of
her flesh and substance workinge this ineffable and incomprehensible mystery
of the incarnation of Jesus Christ, and that without any motion of
concupiscence, or spot of sin: So that she both in the conception and also
in the birthe and nativity of our savior Christ, and ever after, retained
still her virginity pure and immaculate (his conception and birth being, by
the only workemanshyppe of the holy ghost, accompleshed in her without any
violation or detriment of her virginity: Christ's birth being altogether thus
pure, holy, and undefiled, that he might be impollutus pontifex, an undefiled
priest and bishop, to make sacrifice and oblation to God the father for our
sins, and that he might by his immaculate pureness, purge the fylthines of
our sins, and that he being the lamb sent of God to take away the sins
of the world, might (being without all spot and wemme) purge and make clean
the great malice of our sins, and the fylthy wickedness of the same: that our
fylthynes being in this wise (by his pureness) cleansed and put away, we might
with him finally enjoy the benefyt and profit of his most holy conception, and
blessed incarnation, of his joyful birth and nativity, of his baptism,
fasting and temptation, of his great pains, trauayles, and labors, by
preaching teaching, and miracles doing, of his many wrongefull reprofes,
rebukes and infamies by the Jews, of his most tedious agonye, when he swette
both water and blood, of his fatigation and faintyng underneath the cross, of
his crucifixion and nayling, and most pytyfull hanging upon the same, of his
death, passion, and yeldynge up of his spirit into the hands of God the
father, and finally of his honorable burial, his glorious resurrection, and
merueilous ascension into the joys of heaven and of eternal glory. Unto the
which he bring us all, that by so many pains and traueiles has so derely
bought it for us: not by corruptible gold or silver, but by the effusion of
his most precious blood. To whom with God the father, and God the holy ghost be
all praise, honor, and glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
Excusum Londini in aedibus Roberti Caly.

Cum priuilegio.


