FENNORS Descriptions, OR A TRVE RELATION OF Certain and diverse speeches,
spoken before the King and Queens most excellent Majesty, the Prince his
highness, and the Lady ELIZABETH's Grace.

By WILLIAM FENNOR, His Majesty's Servant.

LONDON, Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN, for GEORGE GIBBS, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Flower-Deluce. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM, Earl of Pembroke, LORD Chamberlain of his
Majesty's household, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
THis silly Infant, borne before the time,
Got life by reason, though begot in ryme
By her true father; she is very young,
And yet as females quickly find a tongue,
So does this changeling babble for a Patron,
Forsakes her Father, and out-runnes her Matron.
At length for her protection she has found,
Your honor with a wreath of virtues crowned,
To whom her self she humbly dedicates
That knew her birth, and breeding, let the Fates
Prove happy to the end of your lives race,
To crown your Greatness, with immortal grace.
Your Honors ever bounden in all duties, William Fennor.

To the Gentlemen Readers.
WOrthy gentlemen, of what degree soever, I suppose this Pamphlet will hap into
your hands, before a play begin, with the importunate clamor, of Buy a new
Book, by some needy companion, that will be glad to furnish you with work for
a turned Teaster. I rest well assured some of you will know me at the sight of
the infant, to such I commend it for acquaintance sake; others (I make no
question) have heard of me, to those I send it, in hope of better acquaintance;
A third sort (it may be) never knew me, nor I think care not whether ever
they do or no: To them I present it as carelessly as unthrifts spend their
anuities. Last to Critics, I wish it may hap as seldom into their hands, as
Usurers give alms, or Lawyers plead pro nihil. If any chance to say my
invention runs low, in regard I sell relations for demonstrations, to such I
answer, not like a light huswife, that will be won before she be wooed; but
like a chaste virgin that would be scarce won with wooing: as for example, it
is three years since I spoke some of these speeches, and since that time I
have been earnestly entreated by noble personages (who have had private copies
for their own use) to print it for public delight, at length I consented, and
since I am won, have amongst you gallants, let it speed as it will. This is my
comfort, how ere it prove in the reading, it was well liked in the rehearsing,
by that Imperial power; for whose prosperous continuance we are all in duty
bound to pray, Farewell.

Yours in honest mirth, W. F.

In Laudem Authoris.
WHat Enthousiasmos, what celestial spirit,
what sacred fury does thy brains inherit?
When as without the liberty of time,
with reason thou do couch thy witty ryme
So quick, so nimble, and acute that all
wise men, will hold thy wit Canonical.
Why should thou not then wear a wreath of bays,
nay a whole grove of Laurel to thy praise
On thy ingenious temples, seeing no man
can match thee, our times best Ouidian?
Though in this wit-blest age there is many men,
have gained them endless glory by their pen,
Yet none of these could ever say like thee,
that what they writ, was done extempore.
Therefore were I thy Patron and possessed
but half that wealth wherewith some men are blessed:
Thou should for ever in thy life inherit
means, as were correspondent to thy merit:
And being dead thy name should live inroul'd,
not in course parchment, but rich leaves of gold.
John Meltonne.

In Laudem Authoris.
WHy has thy pen been hid in obscure shades,
or thy lines locked in the dark womb of night,
Which being published, when thy body fades,
in earths deep Cauernes may give others light?
Thy Muse the love of Noblemen persuades
to shelter her, by their protecting might,
Gain'st pining envy, who with rusty blades,
stands opposite against good works to fight;
With belching hate, who her full gorge vnlades,
to make wit loathsome in the vulgar sight
Of men illiterate, and Mechanicke trades,
that scarce can judge betwixt the wrong and right,
Of thy endeavors which the heart inuades
of worth (to praise thee) what though Critics byte,
And through the gulf of base disliking wades,
so far until she drown her self in spite
Of all man's succor, other winching iades
can like of nothing, but all things indight,
To their own censures; but bright fame shall spread
her leaves, where thou shall live, when thou art dead.
Tho. Gunson.

TO HIS FRIEND Mr. FENNOR.
I Praise thee not because thou art my friend,
nor would I hate thee, if thou were my foe,
But these good parts in thee I must commend,
which Art and Nature did on thee bestow
In thy blessed cradle, but go forward still,
Make thy friends sharers of thy nimble quill.
J. B.

THE CONTENTS of this Book.
1. THe description of a Poet. 2. The description of the Palsegraues Country,
with an addition of the marriage betwixt the Prince, and Princess, etc. 3.
Cupids journey to Germany with the effects of the same. 4. The original of the
most noble order of the Garter. 5. The deciding of the difference betwixt
Oxford and Cambridge, about the Kings entertainment. 6. The Gowries and
Gunpowder Treason. 7. A Parliament of Gods in a pastoral song.
The Description of a Poet.
A Poets life is most unfortunate,
Governed by Stars of high malignant fate;
Yet for his worth thus high my pen shall raise him,
The rankled tooth of envy never stays him
From writing nobly. A true Poet can
Describe the inside of an outward man:
Kill him in's life time, make him live being dead,
His lines with Bays adorn his victors head:
This is his chiefest blessing to be good:
But when his writings are not understood,
(O) it is a plague beyond man's patient thought,
What he makes good a multitude makes naught.
A horrid murderer, or a base thief
In his foul bosom harbers lesser grief,
Then heauen-bred Poesye: they shall be tried
By upright Justice, and their faults descried
Before a public Bench, hold up their hand
And plead not guilty, on their just cause stand,
Twelve men empannelled to find this out
Before the sentence pass, to clee^e the doubt,
Of judging rashly. But sweet Poesye
Is often convict, condemned, and judged to die
Without just trial, by a multitude
Whose judgments are illiterate, and rude.
Witness Sceianus, whose approved worth,
Sounds from the calm South, to the freezing North.
And on the perfumed wings of Zepherus,
In triumph mounts as far as Aeolus,
With more then humane art it was bedewed,
Yet to the multitude it nothing showed;
They screwed their scuruy jaws and looked awry,
Like hissing snakes adiudging it to die:
When wits of gentry did applaud the same,
With Silver shouts of high loud sounding fame:
Whilst understanding grounded men contemned it,
And wanting wit (like fools to judge) condemned it.
Clapping, or hissing, is the only mean
That tries and searches out a well writ Scene.
So is it thought by Ignoramus crew,
But that good wits acknowledge's untrue;
The stinckards often will hiss without a cause,
And for a baudy jest will give applause.
Let one but ask the reason why they roar
They Will answer, cause the rest did so before.
But leaving these who for their just reward,
Shall gape, and gaze, amongst the fools in th'yard.
Now to our Poets; they are much like mothers,
That love their own babes far above all others
Though harder fauor'd: so a Poets quill
With his own labors best does please his will,
The reasons this, because he knows the pains
He took in the Composing, from whose brains,
A Poets worth takes birth, at first it is weak
Till by the life of Action it does speak,
In a square Theator; yet understand
The Actor speaks but at the second hand.
The Poet scans, and knows, what best befits
His birth whom he adornes with Epethites,
Congruus accents: but I here strike sail
That have just cause my weakness to bewail,
That am no Poet, rather a poor pleader
For friendly sentence from the judging Reader,
As you allow the best, forgive what is ill,
Though harshly wrote accept of my good will.
FINIS.
A description of the Palsgraues Country, as it was delivered in a speech
before the King, the Prince, the Lady ELIZABETH, at White Hall.
By W. F.
THe mornings Bridegroom with his Rosy cheek
inuites chaste Cynthia to a Royal feast:
Long for her welcome presence did he seek,
to grace his Princely region in the East,
Fair Phebes light he does esteem divine,
to make his splendour among the Germans shine.
High Princely Palsgraue, Protestants Protector,
loud sounding fames report, Germans rich treasure,
Arch-shewer of the Empire, chief Elector,
whose yea, or nay, sets up, or puts down Caesar.
O! let it not in me be thought ambition,
To show the Countries worth, and Thy condition.
On the right side of Pals the river Rhyne,
runs swimming by the banks of pleasant vines,
Upon whose tops bright Sol so warm does shine,
that from the flintie rocks flow Rennish wines,
And on the left side glides the gentle maine,
there are few Lands have two such floods again.
These rivers meet at Mence and are united,
like Gemeni to swim toward Belgicke Seas,
But upward these sweet waters are divided
for Pals-Lands comfort and the people ease:
The Rhyne brings boats unto each Southward Town,
but in the North the maine brings treasure down
From Brandenburgh and High-borne Saxons Land,
great Chamberlain, and Lord high Martial;
Mence, Triurs, and Cullen, for the Popes right stand,
if either side in choice be partial,
Bohemiaes King he is indifferent,
betwixt the Papist and the Protestant.
These are the seven pillars of the Land,
on which great Europe Empire stands fast
Pals, Brandenburgh, and Saxony in one hand,
unite their strength which makes their powers last:
The Popish Prelates at these Princes frown,
yet these three Protestants uphold the Crown.
To second them there is Brund-swickes valiant Duke,
Hessons great Landsgraue worthy of renown,
And for the Popes right there is the Prince of Luke,
the City Cullen and great Ausburge Town,
But Franckfords force with Protestants does hold,
which by the Palsgraues power make Papists cold.
In this fair Franckford Caesar was instal'd,
this City borders on the Palsgraues Land,
It Is richly furnished and most strongly wal'd,
well stored with all provision, stoutly manned.
But leaving Frankford seated on the maine,
the bridge has brought me into Pals again.
Betwixt the Rivers that are named before
the Palsgraues Land stands like a Paradise:
The ground is fruitful yielding vine-yards store,
and mighty woods for hunting exercise
Stand on the hills, inuironing the plains,
these Forests brings the Palsgraue trebble gains.
First they enrich his Country (large) with wood,
secondly, they afford him venison store,
Thirdly, for hunting pleasures they are good,
to rouse the Stagge, or chase the tusked Bore:
If man on earth would choose a place of pleasure,
His Country yields it in exceeding measure.
On rocky clifts his stately Castles stand,
like to mount Sion built of Marble stone;
With turrets out of which he viewes his Land,
such worthy prospects here are few or none.
Their air it is so wholesome kind and sweet,
they seldom die till death and age do meet.
At Bachrade stands a Castle on a clift,
and underneath a City of some state,
Which ever is his eldest sons by gift,
it would seem tedious if I should relate
Each several Castle, but let me report
the state of Hedelberge his Princely Court.
Palace of pleasure and a house of State,
his winters White Hall, and his summers Hampton,
A River glideth underneath the gate,
which brings him plenty, nothing has he lack on:
There stands a vessel which shall near want wine,
so long as earth bears fruit, or sun does shine.
Brave Knights and Barons on his grace attend,
His Countries ordered by a Martial:
All strangers do his government commend,
because in nothing he is partial,
But deals withal according to desert,
which makes all people honor him in heart.
His Court is pleasant, and his person Royal,
his Council grave, his Officers care true;
His Gentry faithful, and his Commons loyal,
his lands are fruitful, what can then ensue?
Nothing but his Religion, which is grounded
upon the Gospel that has Rome confounded.
In him there flows the best of Art and Nature,
himself like David, and his Court like Sion;
Of lovely visage and of comely stature,
yet full of majesty as is a Lion,
For with severity his grace is kind,
Justice and pity in his heart are joined.
What may be in a Prince in him their flows,
excepting Vice for that he ever hated;
What should be in a Prince in him their grows:
for Englands good this good Prince was created,
His Laws are just his government is civil,
he does pursue good and escheweth evil.
Many brave Castles his fair Land does yield,
and toll houses upon the river Rhyne,
Which underneath his Castles he does build,
to store his Cofers with all Country coin,
Each passage boat before they pass away,
unto these Toll-houses must custom pay.
Five Princes in this iron age survive,
which makes it seem the silver world again:
To match them hardly shall we find out five
yet weell forbear to speak of France or Spain,
Five heirs, five youths, five kinsmen, and five Princes,
Of one Religion, though in five Provinces.
Young Prince of Hesson is the first must enter,
to act his virtues on the worlds Theater;
It Is hard to find a young man on earth's center,
that is a virtue lover and vice hater,
Old Landsgraues glass has many hours to run,
whilst all his virtues lives in his Son.
Young Prince of Brundswicke craves the second place,
whose virtues with him brings a noble spirit:
He Is mild and courteous, mixed with maiesticke grace,
his praise is not so much as he does merit:
A Prince, a Scholar, and a Trauailer,
a peaceful youth and yet a Soldier.
Young Prince of Brandenbergh, Prince absolute,
for now thou raignest in thy Fathers stead;
Thy ears are open unto euerr suite,
thy hand is prone to every worthy deed,
Many degrees thy virtues do commence,
Brandenburgh never had a better Prince.
Young Prince of Pals, or Palsgraue of the Rhyne,
were this a Chronicle and the letters gold;
To register thy virtues most divine,
to make all Nations wonder to behold,
Thy grace of all their goodness does allow,
But all their graces to thy goodness bow.
Young Prince of England period of my praise,
thy virtues now thou entrest fills the round,
Subduing evil and all good to raise,
thy powers ready now my praise is crowned:
Four kingdoms comfort, and Great Britains joy,
mischief befall him that thinks the annoy.
These Princes several virtues do agree,
and in a true conjunction symphathize;
When Princely fruit springs from a royal tree,
there future branches to the like state rise:
Each of these are their Countries joyful hope,
friends to the Gospel, foes toth' Devil and Pope.
Three matchless Virgins in this wanton age,
virtue does here commend for the worlds mirror,
Their hallowed feet tread on Dyanes stage,
their spotless thoughts are free from female error:
In framing of these three, Nature did well,
but made a fourth that does her self excel.
Hessons fair Virgin one of virtues train,
Lady of pleasure, and the Nymph of peace,
Whose face the stamp of beauty does contain,
which in her lively image near shall cease;
A match fit for a Prince, sweet Saint-like creature,
wonder of all that gaze on thy fair feature.
Brunswicks bright Virgin, Germ^ines lovely rose,
whose vestall lamp shines like the Moon at full,
Thou art admired by the Dutch-land Froes,
Saxony vows thy blowming bud to pull:
A Prince of virtues and a Princess true
who can deny, when such for love do sue.
Brandingburghs Sister of an Angels face,
the top of virtue and the branch of beauty;
Of humble, modest, and maiesticke grace,
the gods have strove who first should show their duty,
Dyan and Venus are for her at strife;
which choice is best for her, a maid or wife.
Thus they contend each hour 'boat all three;
Dyan speaks, Virgins hearken to my voice,
Keep your selves single if you would live free,
Venus says sports in bed cause maids rejoice.
But let them chide, I can judge neither rude,
till the fourth virgin wife the jar conclude.
Englands fair Phoenix, Europes admiration,
of matchless beauty, yet of virtue rare;
A kingdoms comfortable consolation
who ever rarest is, yet she is rarer.
Now in the East she lets her splendour shine*
all do confess she is a light divine.
She seeing Dyan and Loves Queen at odds,
Dyan made claim, bright Venus swore she would have her,
At last the cause being heard before the gods;
Hymen stood up and this sweet sentence gave her,
For chaste virginity, mates have thou none,
and being wed like thee, shall scarce be one.
Poets leave writing of the Grecian Queen,
and of Aeneas, Lady Venus son:
Two rarer beauties shortly shall be seen
in Almany, when Englands pride is won.
Make have young Prince, swim lively down the Rhyne,
to style her peerless Princess Palatine.
Lend all your hands to knit this Princely knot,
all everlasting joy bind sure the same;
A noble Prince, a Princess without spot,
will fill the trump of ever sounding fame:
All Europes bells that joyful day shall ring,
Pals has joined power, with Englands royal King.
FINIS.
Cupids journey to Germany and the effects of the same.
WHen Hymen had his sentence ended,
He of the gods was much commended,
Venus was buxome blithe and glad
But Dyans front with frowns looked sad,
Almaine was filled with loves desires
Their heart flamed Citharean fires,
Oldenburgs Earl and Hessons Prince
Sent presents from their hearts Province:
Love in a rich shape crossed the maine
From Courtly France and hauty Spain,
With hope to gain this matchless prize.
But storms of Non-suite did arise,
Which filled their sails with discontent,
And blew them back incontinent.
Then Cupid took a box of balm,
And gave to Neptune for a calm;
To Aeolus he sent a ring,
Entreating him no sighs to fling:
In his sails forefront thus he went
To the Seas imbark't with sweet content,
Sweet Zephirus to win a wreath
Into loves sails goodwill did breath,
Which soon conuey'd him to the Rhyne
Where Bachus quaffes up Rennish wine.
There Cupid feasted in each Court
And at the length met true report,
Whose news did cause the boy admire,
Filling his heart with ardent fire.
And presently he mounts the skies,
To crave one of his mothers eyes:
She grants the suite and thus she spoke,
I Will do it for the Princes sake.
Her left eye she placed in his for'head,
Which made the God of love adored.
He took his leave and humbly bends,
And from her Deity descends;
The winged youth who understood,
His way by's eye through thickest wood,
Where Siluian took up her stay,
And met with Cupid on the way,
But she from him began to fly,
When she perceived he had an eye,
Least he her nakedness should see
She shrowdes her self behide a tree.
For Autumn that the field bereaues
Had left her naught but withered leaves.
Cupid amazed kept still the path
Which brought him to a private bath,
And close by it a thicket stood,
More like an Arbor then a Wood,
The willowes twisted arm in arm,
To keep the Bower in winter warm,
And in the summer when the sun
Through the high Meridian run,
He cannot pearce in with bright eyes
But peep through hole cut checker wise.
This Arbor filled with naked Imphes,
The thrice three Muses and their Nymphs.
Dyan with sundry flowers crowned
Begirt abount with Virgins round:
Cupid drew nigh and got a sight,
Which bred in him no small delight.
None did deny the shamefast boy,
But in him took exceeding joy
Save Dyan, whose wrath did invade her,
Until at length all did persuade her
To smiling mirth which she allows
And took her violl from the bows,
Whereon most sweetly she did play
A well contrived Roundelay.
Which ravished so the god of Love,
That he a question thus did move.
You Nymphs and Goddesses of grace,
How do you call this sacred place:
This is (quoth they) the Muses fountain,
Impayl'd with many a craggy mountain,
The name of it is Helycon:
Hence Germans bounds first borders on,
It parts the low Dutch from the high,
And here great Caesar's crown does lie:
We know young Archer thou art sent,
To wound a Prince with Loves content;
Thy shaft shall not be shot in vain,
For he a fair Princess shall gain:
Whose beauty no Appelles needs,
Her virtues all our worths exceeds.
But have thee Cupid, fly away,
And Hymen crown their Nuptial day:
The one ey'de boy took leave of all,
And took vp's bow which he lets fall.
His quiver on his back he hung,
And spread both wings and up he sprung;
With matchless swiftness to the Rhyne,
Which shows the way to Palatine:
But being driven in by storms,
He was constrained to lodge at Worms.
The Cities worth the God admires,
And the next day he dined at Spyres.
But e're the night approached nigh,
He came to the University;
Called Hedelberg a famous place,
Where he beheld the Princes grace
Well mounted on a stately steed,
Which did Bucephalus exceed.
The day had left the Eastern Coast,
And to fair Thetis gallopt post;
Which made the German mountains dark,
Cupid drew nigh to view the mark:
And at his bosom sent a shaft,
Which after it a tincture left;
No sooner Cupid dedicates
This stroke, but straight he eleuates
To the gods, where he a lecture read,
How love had metamorphosed
This Princes heart perplexed with pain,
Which caused him to cross the maine
To Britains Coast, first Graue-send gains him,
And England bravely entertaines him.
The Court his company desires,
London the lovely Prince admires;
Such joy sprung forth on every side,
That all the Gods man's mirth enuide:
Therefore they held a Parliament,
How they might work his discontent,
Last they agreed (O! dismal day)
To take our chiefest hope away.
Grim visag'd death presumed to strike
A Prince that never had his like;
For as his virtue all excelled
His valor was vnparralel'd
Heaven took his worth, earth knew his want,
And made a general complaint;
Great Britain clad in sable black,
With endless tears lament his lack.
This hopeful match begot great gladness,
But Henry's death a solemn sadness.
And had not these two opposites
Met, England sure had lost her wits:
For had their been no funeral,
To stay this happy Nuptial
This Kingdom being ouerioy'd,
With mirth her self might have destroyed.
So had their been no Nuptial,
After this driery funeral,
This Island would her self confound,
Of force to drown with her own tears
A heart of cork. Therefore the Scene,
'Twixt mirth and mourning kept the mean.
And time which all things does expel,
Provided for this Kingdom well:
For though he took our hope away,
He left behind a second stay,
Whom heavens highest hand preserve
For he all goodness does deserve.
Thus leaving hearts with sorrows clad,
For him whose like earth never had;
It Is fit my pen pursue the carriage,
Of this selected sacred marriage:
Twixt these two Princes dignity,
Who were with all solemnity,
Joined with the forefront of the spring,
In Nuptial bands before a King.
But time that for no King will stay,
Conducts this Virgin bride away;
Toward her new confines, blessed conten
Attended on her grace in Kent:
The trees stood all in suites of green,
To guard this Nymph-like natures Queen.
She leaves a Land where she is known,
To see a strange Land of her own.
The lovely Nightingale did sing,
Her sweet farewell from Englands King.
Thus after many parting stories,
Time brought them to their teritories:
And ear twelve months their course had run
Betwixt them they possessed a Son.
This blessed news the Seas sent post,
To comfort us for him we lost;
From Henry's ashes, there is sprung,
A second Henry, who ear long
We hope shall in this Land arrive,
The hearts of all men to revive:
And greet his royal Grand-sires reign,
The Queen and's Uncle Charlamayne.
Whom heaven still protect and bless,
With royal issue to possess
This Kingdom, Scepter, and bear sway,
Till Sun and Moon do pass away.
FINIS.
The Original and continuance of the most Noble Order of the Garter, as it was
spoken before the Kings Majesty, on Saint GEORGES day last: Anno Dom. 1616.
By W. FENNOR.
EDward the third, that truly Potent King,
whose Temples worthily wore Englands Crown:
This Noble Order, of whose fame I Will sing,
inuents for Britains Trophy of renown.
Salsburies Countess, has all Ladies graced,
that loose their Garter, yet keep Honor chaste.
From Honored chastity the Garter fell,
and in a moment rose to royalty:
King Edward graced this Ladies favor well,
who humbly bends his kingly Majesty,
Caught up the ribbon had a leg inbrac't
that never capor'd with a step unchaste.
The Lady dies her cheeks with tell-tale read
which blabs she blushes, that her Garters found,
By him that had advanced it to a head,
which with Imperial dignity was crowned:
The Nobles murmur, and the King by chance
perceived, spoke Honey soit quy maly pense.
Exchanges lawless love for lawful Arms,
buckles on' armor, weell's his warlike sword,
Beats his brac't Drums, Trumpets sounds alarums:
thus like bold Hector rode he to the field,
Subdued his foes, and for his deeds in fight,
of the rich Garter was instal'd a Knight.
Which bred such luster in each Noble breast,
as if new Troy had mustred up the Sons,
Of strong backed Priam, and amongst the rest,
the bold black Prince toth' field most fiercely runs;
And with his sword hammor'd in Vulcans forge,
made the French Dennys kneel to English George.
For which he with the Garter was instal'd,
and made a Knight of that most Noble Order;
With many other Nobles that were called
worthy by fame, that ancient, true Recorder.
The Garter bred such luster in great hearts,
each strove for excellence in Arms and Arts.
Saint Patricks Cross, did to the Garter veil,
Saint Jacques Order waxt with anger pale:
Saint David's leeke began to droupe ith tale,
Saint Dennys he sat mourning in a dale;
Saint Andrew looked with cheerful appetite,
as though toth' Garter he had future right.
But Dragon-killing George that still depends
upon the Garter since third Edwards days;
In this age present has as many friends,
as well deserving high eternal praise:
As any ages ever had before,
never at one time better; never more.
Hanniball strove for Romes triumphant bays.
Scipio for the Carthaginians bough;
But thanklesse Senators did dim the rays,
of these two worthies, and would not allow,
Nor wreath, nor branch, they died and left their fame
unto the glory of the Garters name.
Impartially a royal King bestows it,
upon some Subject worthy of the wearing;
His Arms advanced within a Church that owes it,
the oath administered in public hearing,
Which being falsified, the Honors crossed,
by Heraldry, the Arms, and Garter lost.
Say that a man long languishing in love,
whose heart with hope and fear grows cold and warm:
Admit some pity should his sweetheart move,
to knit a favor on his feeble arm;
All parts would join, to make that one joint strong,
to appose any that his love should wrong.
The Garter is the favor of a King
clasping the leg, on which man's best part stands;
A poesye in to, as in a Nuptial ring,
binding the heart, to their liege Lord in bands;
That whilst the leg has strength, or the arm power,
to kill that Serpent would their King devour.
For which the George is as a Trophy worn,
and may it long, and long remain with those,
Which to that excellent dignity are borne:
as opposites unto their Countries foes.
God keep our King and them from Romes black pen,
let all that love the Garter say, Amen.
FINIS.
The Deciding of the Difference betwixt the two Universities, Oxford and
Cambridge, about the Kings entertainment, spoke before his Majesty at
Theobalds, the xiij. of July, 1615.
By W. F.
PErnassus and the fountain fell at ods,
Who should give best content unto the gods:
The mountain spoke, it is not thy fenne can yield
Such learned Arts, nor can thy foggy fiel'd,
Give such delightful taste to gods or men,
As my sweet shady groves; Hellicon then
Returns this answer, though thou that stands on high,
My brains are moist when thine are hot and dry.
But leaving this vpbraiding argument,
To stand to trial dare thou be content:
(Dare? quoth Pernassus) yes I dare and will,
Make trial when thou dare not show thy skill.
Thus throwing down their Gauntlets they appealed,
Unto the Gods who justly with them deal'd:
Jove sent his nimble footed Mercury,
With all the Trophyes of high Herauldry,
To signify unto the learned Mount,
That kingly Jove himself made full account
To visit him in's progress; she or'ioy'd,
Her chiefest, choysest, curest wits employed;
To give him welcome, Syluian left the woods,
Heards-men their cattle, Townsmen from their goods
Fled with amazement to be hold the show
Of royal majesty. Amongst this row
Stepped in some forty of Helconians race,
Amongst the Pernasitians took their place,
To view in secret note the whole event
Of his receiving, welcome, and content,
And where a word or letter was mistook,
To Brack a gram it in a Table-booke.
Time turned three hour glasses, whilst they stood
Expecting him whose sight should do them good:
But on a sudden all their voices sums,
A joyful general clamor, yon he comes,
See, see, whose that rides with agilitie;
Peace, peace, that is one of the Nobility,
Who passed by in state and due degree;
And after them his Royal Majesty.
Drawn by the winged Coursers of the sun,
About whose Chariot thousand people run:
With shouts of joy the multitude still speaks,
Welcome dread King, the Students, Viuat Rex:
The Heards-men moved to testify their loves,
Bestowed on him a pair of hunting gloves.
So vshard him unto Parnassus hill,
And there to welcome him showed their best skill,
With Masking, reuells, and a Comedy,
Which was performed very solemnly.
In penning it the Poet pains did take,
To cause Jove sleep, though he himself did wake.
But when their sports were past, great Jove retired,
Yet at their learned arts he much admired:
Helycons Nymphs returned to their Cell,
And there the whole discourse of all did tell:
Which when some heard, they laid their heads together,
And made a Ballad of the Buck-skins leather.
The kings entertainment at Cambridge.
Now time with stealing steps does swiftly have,
Imagine seven years completely past;
When Jove remembering the Gods request,
Has taken his royal journey North by East;
To visit the distressed Helycon,
Whose face till now his eye near looked upon.
Parnassus hearing, that he thither would,
From frozen Alps sent forth a bitter cold;
Which did congeale the waves of Neptune so,
That all the water in the air turned snow.
And from the ponderous clouds, fell down in flakes,
Covering high mountains, filling dales and lakes.
By which the little brooks forsook their bounds;
And waters all the passages so drown'ds,
That thousands durst not venture, yet his Grace
Held firm his resolution, spite the face
Of grisled Hyems, or strene Boreas,
Aeolus, Auster, or sweet Zephirus.
Thither he would to view the learned skill,
Betwixt the fountain and Parnassus hill.
Minerua hearing this, she cal's the Clownes,
And rusticke swains, and said, put on your gowns:
You first shall meet his Majesty in order,
By the advice and wit of your Recorder:
Out rode the rustickes in their glittering pride,
And when they had their royal Jove espied,
Vpstart God Pan, who with a studied speech
His kingly Majesty he did beseech;
That he would be pleased still to protect his darling,
Before his Croch came near by half a furlong.
Moreover that the Nymphs might bear no sway,
Above them and their wives by night or day.
And furthermore their good wills to unfold,
They gave a silver cup was three years old:
So gave him way, he on rides toward's the Town,
Met by Minerua in a scarlet gown;
Who spoke a rare speech, of such high deserning;
That at the very first she showed her learning.
Which when Jove heard he rode unto the Cell,
And after was conducted to the well;
Where he most freely of the water tasted,
And for four days this royal pastime lasted.
But when Mineruaes maids their wits had spent,
Great Jove retired thence incontinent:
Yet at his parting graciously did say,
He would return and visit them in May.
Which promise he performed, Parnassus then
Wrote sharp invectiues from her whipping pen,
Which sent to Helicon, were back retorted,
Thus these two worthies the wide world have sported.
The are like two famous Castles in one Town,
Who for their worth's would put each other down:
Or like a jealous husband who breeds strife,
If he espy another looks on's wife.
Two beauteous Virgins cannot well endure,
One man unto them both should be made sure:
Were there a difference t'wood be no contention,
But being equals both, breeds this discention.
But to conclude, Parnassus is the mountain,
Of learned Arts; and Helicon the fountain,
And this is all I Will say of both, I think
The one gives food to us, the other drink:
Then why should they each others worth control,
Since they can both give Physic for the soul?
FINIS.
A speech concerning the Gowries treason, and the Gun-Powder-Plot: spoken
before the Kings Majesty, at the Bishops Palace at Salysbury, Alias Sarum, the
fifth of August. 1615.
By W. F.
NO Poets Muse can better tidings bring
Then mine: the safety of a royal King;
Yet I with words cannot describe the faction,
So well as you, dread King, which tried the action
Of base deluding Traitors: whose invention
Proceeded from the author of discention.
Whose black plots in the heart all mischief sowes,
Which not prevented to rank Treason grows.
As this day well can witness to all ages,
The Gowries cruel and insatiate rages:
Well may their titles style them go awry,
Who in their bypath led a King to die.
But The Almighty for his chosen stands,
And strikes amazement, stays the villains hands,
That are lift up against his true Anointed,
All praise be to him, that all disappointed;
Nay, gave unto your Majesty such strength,
To grapple with your Butcher, till at length
He showed his power, as once to Abraham,
And in the place of Isaac sent a Ram;
Who rushing through the midst of bramble thorns,
He gored the Gowries with his two edged horns;
Which deed has raised his name eternally,
And hurled them down to lasting infamy.
For whosoever speaks of Ramseyes name,
Shall found it to the Gowries endless shame:
Or whilst the fifth of August can give light,
Let men give praises to the God of might.
And let it be as Holy Day observed,
Wherein your grace by wonder was preserved.
Or who soever shall that day remember
Let him record the fifth of cold Nouenber,
Where they the Devils highest plot shall read;
Who sought not to destroy the royal seed
Alone: but with it all posterity,
The Gentry and the States Nobility.
Making this Land a Chaos in an hour,
After replant in it their foreign power:
But heauen's just, when he begins to speak,
And sent a warning in Mounteagles beak;
As he by Joseph did to Pharaoh tell,
Of scarcity for th'good of Israel.
So in your royal heart he sent a doubt,
By which the hight of Treason was found out:
And the base Traitors for their works rewarded,
Thus a good Prince is by the Angels guarded.
What Plots were laid against Queen Elizabeth,
To cut her off by an untimely death?
Yet maugre all their blasted black infection
She lived, till heaven called her by election.
Enjoy abounding, and her Princely Throne,
She left unto your Majesty alone:
Whom God has placed with a peaceful hand,
The like has scarce been heard in any Land;
To have so many foes, and all turn friends
By th'which the sword of war, toth' Olive bends.
I guess the reason since you entered here,
The Lion rampant keeps the rest in fear:
The Dragon is dismissed, whose poisonous breath;
Has often been cause of many a thousands death.
And in the place you have put the Unicorn,
TO expel the poison with his precious Horn;
By which each royal subject safe may dyne,
And taste the propper fruit of his own vine:
Then if ungrateful men will this record,
Can they forget to praise or laud the Lord
For his preserving, of you many ways,
Giving them peace in your most happy days.
Sure who forgets, is an ungrateful guest,
Not worthy to enjoy this peaceful feast:
Which God continue many, many years,
And still preserve you from all foreign fears:
False plots at home, ever confounding those,
Who in their heart profess to be your foes.
But let good subjects Haleluiah sing
To God, for the protecting our good King,
O! let their prayers invoke again,
God long preserve your grace, Amen, Amen.
FINIS.
A Pastoral Sonnet containing a Parliament of the Gods.
WAlking of late it was my chance,
To view Floraes rosy bowers;
When drowsy Morpheus into a trance,
Did confine me certain hours
Where I might spy, very much resort pass to amain
And one did come unto me this meeting to explain.
Come, quoth he, prepare thy self to go,
Where thou shall attend,
I to thee the full event will show
Whereto and what end:
Straight me thought I was conuayed away,
Whereunto my sense he did display,
How that this meeting was of all the Gods,
And that brave Mars and Vulcane fallen were at ods:
Vulcane as plaintiff did for justice cry,
Cause Mars which was defendant, did with Venus lie.
And moreover would discover,
but (alas) it was, his fate:
Whilst he is working, they are lurking,
how they may cornute his pate*
Straight a discention there arose,
Who in judgment chief should sit,
Fearing that man would hold them as foes,
Each of other thought most fit.
At last it past, that bright Sol as Vmpire needs must stand,
For why, his eye underneath the Spheres,
has chief command.
Phoebus at the last did condescend,
Yet with this condition
Cynthia might sit as Venus friend,
Jointly in commission:
Presently was set a chair of State,
On which the pale faced Luna sat;
Next Jove and Juno, did assume their place;
Then Saturn, Aeolus, and Neptune with his Mace.
After Appollo with the Muses nine,
And blackt faced Pluto took his place by Proserpine:
And below, there sat a row of Shepherds,
Which adore God Pan;
Each one sitting, all thing fitting,
straight a silence there began.
A civil silence being proclaimed,
One there stood up presently,
And as I deem he was Mercury named,
Which full loud began to cry
O yes, then he pausd a while and began again,
O yes, silence in the Court on further pain.
Thus O yes, being thrice proclaimed,
they begin to plod,
On the inditements which pertained
against this worldly god.
Straight a Jury of twelve Shepherds Swains,
Which with rural pastime keep the plains;
Impannel'd were the sole events to prove
'Twixt Noble Mars, and Venus fair, the Queen of love.
Without Atturneyes Mars and Vulcane plead,
And Venus absent, Cupid stood in's mothers stead:
Vulcan still swore, Mars did ill,
in wronging of his marriage bed;
Which was cause against reason laws,
he always wore a Heart-like head.
Mars in reply was resolute,
As he e're in the field did fight,
And soon he did poor Vulcane confute
Sometime might, may ore'come right.
Yet he did gree unto all that Vulcan could report,
And would withhold, if this age would yield him better sport.
For, quoth Mars, alas, I am kept so long
From my wonted use,
'Its no marvel though I Vulcan wrong
With so small abuse.
Idely I sleep in Ladies laps,
Childishly I am dandled on their paps;
Armor, shield, sword, which often my foes did chase,
Are into silks and veluets turned, O too too base,
I that before my foes in field did just,
Now in a downe-bed lie, whilst all my Armor does rust,
Soldiers now, alas must bow,
unto each silken feathered Swain;
That before had gold good store,
besides the credit they did gain.
Thus having ended, the Jury resin'd
The sole verdict, which did say,
Mars in no error at all they could find,
But the Fault in Cupid lay:
Which then began to excuse himself, but all in vain,
And swore no more rusticke clownes,
henceforth his love should gain.
Crooked Vulcan seeing that his suit,
Might no whit prevail
On poor Cupid, which alas stood mute,
He began to rail,
Hud wink't boy, how dare thou be so bold,
As let fly those shafts whose heads were gold;
It had been fitter shot with them of lead,
Then Mars had never made me to wear a horned head.
Cupid made answer, urging this disgrace
If horns thou were,
thou need'st not fear to break thy face;
Sol stood up and drank a cup of Nectar, to his fellow gods
Which being done, he thus begun,
to sentence this there fore past odds.
Cupid, quoth Phoebus, hold up thy hand,
Hear thy sentence from my lips;
Twelve months I banish thee the Faiery Land,
Cause bright Mars thou do eclipse,
Thy flight with spite, has bereft soldiers thy chiefest joy
In place of disgrace, has took up her seat,
to work annoy:
Well, quoth Cupid, I your wills obey, but i will match you al;
And no doubt, ea're long i will find a day,
when to mind i will call;
How that you wronged the God of love,
As the stout's of all in time shall prove:
Peace else, quoth Jove, what do thou threaten me?
Yes Jove, ere long, shall find me strong,
to over match the^*
The Court being ended, long they did not stay
They to their Mansions, Cupid banished, went away.
Then came he that first led me,
with charge my vision to indite*
'Twixt wars King, and loves bright Queen,
to relate (...) spite*
He being gone, my eyes anon, from sleep (...)
their ha^ery freng^*
Now remains* I take some pains*
in the relating loves revenge*
FINIS.
Gentle R^^der, in Cupids journey to Germany, there is (...) a line misplac't,
being the second line of the last page (...).

Of force to drowned with her own tears, read

With her own tears, of force to drowned.


