The Souls Looking-glass, lively representing its Estate before God: with A
Treatise Of Conscience; wherein the definitions and distinctions thereof are
unfolded, and several Cases resolved: By that reverend and faithful Minister
of the Word, WILLIAM FENNER, B. D. sometimes Fellow of Pembroke-hall in
Cambridge, and late Parson of Rochford in Essex.

ACTS 24.16. I exercise my self to have always a conscience void of offense
toward God and toward men.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie; for John
Rothwell at the Sun in Paul's churchyard. 1640.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT Earl of Warwick.
THe late wife of the deceased, in thankful acknowledgment of your Lordships
many favors to her dear husband, humbly presents this small treatise.

To the Christian Reader.
IT was the saying of Solon, That there were many good laws made, but there
wanted one law to make us put all those laws in execution: The like may be said
concerning the books that are written now a days, Ille vere Scripturas legit
qui verba vertit in opera.
There are many good books written, but there wants one book to make us to
put those good books in practice. Such a book were worth writing, and worth
reading. And I know no reason but that this book (if the Spirit of God write it
in our hearts) may have this happy effect: For it is a book that will teach us
how to get into the State of grace, and how to get and keep a good Conscience.
And whosoever reads a book with a good conscience will make conscience to
practice what he reads: For a good conscience is, as Aristotle says of
Justice, (...).
a Synopsis and Epitome of all virtues: It is a (...), a sanandis omnibus
morbis.
Panacea to cure all soul-diseases: It is (...).
a medicine to digest all book-surfetting.

There are four sorts of Consciences: Some bad and unquiet, some bad and
quiet, some good and unquiet, some good and quiet. For a conscience to be bad
and quiet is the worst temper that can be: Better have a bad unquiet then a bad
and quiet conscience: better have a tormenting Tophet in the soul then a fools
paradise: The best frame of Conscience is the good and quiet conscience: This
is a Laetitia bonae conscientiae paradisus est animarum, gaudium angelorum,
hortus deliciarum, ager benedictionis, templum Solomonis, aula Dei,
habitaeculum Spiritus sancti, Bernard.
Paradise upon earth, * a pregustation and prelibation of heaven, (...).
a mansion for the Trinity to dwell in. Now this ensuing treatise will teach
us how to purchase this precious jewel of a good and quiet conscience. A
treatise very necessary in these unconscionable days, wherein most people make
no conscience to sin against conscience; and some have sinned so long against
conscience as that they have lost all conscience of sin. As Multi Christianum
nomen ad judicium habent non ad remedium.
S. Augustine says of the name of a Christian, so may I say of conscience,
Multi conscientiam habent, non ad remedium sed ad judicium, Many have a
conscience for their condemnation and not for their salvation. Conscience Domus
animae, Guil. Parisiens.
it is the house of the soul: But this house lies waste and is much ruinated
and decayed in these times, wherein Dum tempora superiora cum nostris comparo,
dicere consuevi plus* illos conscientiae minus habuisse; nos contra, scientiae
plus, conscientiae minus habere, Beza.
never more science but never less conscience. Conscience Praejudicium
judicii, Tertull.
it is a private judgement-day before the public day of judgment: And it is
an ill presage that most people will never stand upright in the court of
heaven, because they stand accused and condemned in the court of conscience.
Conscience is Gods preacher in our bosoms: And it is a most certain rule; That
that man that will not regard the preacher in his bosom will never regard the
preacher in the pulpit. And the reason why the preacher in the pulpit does no
more good, is because the preacher in the bosom is so much despised and
neglected. And therefore I doubt not but this book (these motives considered)
will be very acceptable to all those that have or desire to have a good and
quiet conscience. For as Vnicuique liber est propria conscientia; and ad hunc
librum discutiendum and emendandum omnes alii invenli sunt.
S. Bernard most excellently says, Every man's conscience is his book; and all
books are written to discover and amend the errors of the book of conscience.
Let those that read this book of conscience look into the book of their own
conscience, and amend all the faults of that book by this book.

The Reverend Author of this book was a Minister very conscientious, and one
that had a great ability given him by God to preach unto and work upon the
consciences of people, to awaken the sleepie conscience, to inform the
erroneous conscience, to settle the doubtful conscience, and to comfort the
wounded conscience: his sermons were all dipped in conscience: And therefore a
subject of Conscience must needs be welcome from such a preacher. It is true
that this birth is Posthumum opus, and comes out after the death of the
Author: But I hope it will be the more pleasing, to revive the memory of him
whose life and labors were deservedly precious in the esteem of Gods people.
And if conscience, though for a while blind, and dumb, and seared, and put out
of all office, will notwithstanding at last be put into office, and made to
see, speak and feel to the utter destruction of an impenitent sinner; why may
not a discourse of Conscience, though long ago preached, be suffered to revive
and live for the salvation of those that shall have grace to read it aright?
especially considering that these sermons were perfected by himself in his
lifetime?

Much I could say in commendation of this worthy Divine, both in regard of his
unwearisome pains in preaching, consuming his own body to save the souls of
others, Praelucendo pereo.
as also of his learning and exemplarie piety: but I forbear. All that I will
say is this; They that fully knew him did love and reverence him: and if any
did disesteem him, it was because they did not fully know him. He is now a
shining star in the firmament of heaven. And there are hundreds of people
that will bless God to all eternity for his pains. He needs not our praises,
but our imitation.

All that I desire from you that read this short treatise is this; That ye
would either get a good conscience by the reading of this book, or bring a good
conscience to the reading of it. Labor to make an addition to the heavenly
joys of this faithful servant of God by making this book a means to bring thy
soul to those heavenly joys which are at Gods right hand for evermore: which
are joys unspeakable and glorious, so great that, Tanta est dulcedo coelestis
gaudii, ut si una guttula difflueret in infernum, totam amaritudinem inferni
absorberet.
as S. Augustine says, If one drop of the joys of heaven should fall into
hell, it would swallow up all the bitterness of Hell. And that God would make
you heirs of this joy, is the prayer

of your soul-friend Edm. C.

An Enquiry after a man's estate before God. Coloss. 4.8.
WHat a man's estate before God is page 1 Ministers are to enquire after the
estate of their people page 4 Every man is either in an estate of grace or
sin page 11 This estate may be known page 16 Why every man ought to enquire
after his own estate page 20 Means whereby a man may come to know what estate
he is in page 23 Impediments which hinder this knowledge page 27 Motives to be
diligent in this inquiry page 29
2. A treatise of Conscience. Romans 2.15.
WHat conscience is page 31 I. Proposition.
There is in every man a conscience page 33 Why the Lord did plant a conscience
in every man page 36
II. Proposition.
The light that conscience acts by is knowledge 1. of Gods law; 2. of our
selves.
page 41 The great necessity of knowledge page 43
III. Proposition.
The office of conscience is to bear witness, accusing or excusing page 49 1.
Four properties of this witnesse-bearing It is 1. Supreme page 51 2.
Impartial page 52 3. Faithful page 53 4. Privy page 55
2. The parts of this witnesse-bearing: I. Its single witnessing 1. What we
have done page 57 2. What we intend to do page 58 3. What is the bent of our
hearts ibid.
II. Its judicial bearing witness page 64 1. About things to be done or
omitted: Where are considered 1. Its Office, 1. To judge page 68 2. To counsel
page 69
2. Its Adjuncts: It is either 1. Illightned page 76 2. Erroneous page 78 3.
Doubting page 85 4. Scrupulous page 88 5. Faithful page 95. or 6. Unfaithful
page 104

2. About things already done or omitted: and here also 1. Its Office is, 1.
To approve page 116 2. To absolve page 117 3. To mislike page 119 4. To
condemn page 121
2. Its Affections: It is either 1. Tender page 125 2. Sleepie page 126 3.
Benumbed page 127. or 4. Seared page 128


From all these proceed two other Adjuncts; I. A quiet conscience: concerning
which is considered 1. What it is page 132 2. How that in the godly differs
from that in the wicked page 137 3. How to know whether we have it or no page
152 Where is handled; Whether a child of God may fear death, and how far page
159 Whether a wicked man may be desirous to die, and in what cases page 164 The
great benefit of peace of conscience page 167


II. An unquiet conscience What it is, and the causes of it page 173 The
degrees of it page 178 The difference of it in the godly and in the wicked page
184
How a man may keep peace of conscience page 200 How it depends upon
obedience page 205 What manner of obedience that is which peace of conscience
depends upon? page 211 What a man must do to be freed from a burdened and
troubled conscience page 215
As conscience bears witness of our actions so of our persons page 222 It
can and does inform every man what estate he is in page 223 How it does this
page 229 When it does this page 232 Why many nevertheless are deluded about
their estate page 239 What a good conscience soundly renewed is page 247 What a
weak and infirm good conscience is page 256



IV. Proposition.
The bond of conscience is the law of God page 267 1. The Primarie and supreme,
is Gods word page 270 Gods law binds the consciences of the regenerate page
281
2. The Secondarie and relative; others, or ourselves page 296 1. Others may
bind our consciences, as Magistrates, Superiors; and how far page 297 2. We
may bind our own consciences by lawful vows and promises page 314

What vows are unlawful and not binding page 315 Of the vow made to God in
baptism, how great it is, and how much to be regarded page 318


An Enquiry after a man's estate before God.
COLOSS. 4.8. Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he may know
your estate and comfort your hearts.


THE estate of a man before God is the relation that he stands in unto God,
What a man's estate before God is.
as God is the free fountain of spiritual life and salvation, and the
^terminer of men's everlasting condi^ons either in heaven or hell: So that ^en
we question about a man's estate, (...) question, Whether he be in Christ (...)
not; Whether he have true grace, (...) or no; Whether he be one of Gods ^ldren
or no, or whether he be yet (...) better then a reprobate.

There be three things to be considered in this definition of every man estate.
First, it is a relation unto God not as a man is in himself, it may b^ rich, it
may be poor in the world; bu^ I speak here as he is in relation toward God,
Whether he be rich toward God, yea or no. I do not speak as man is in regard of
others; it may b^ he is a father or a son, a master o^ a servant, a king or a
subject: but i^ relation to God, Whether Gods servant or no, Romans 16.10.
Gods child or no. Salu^ Apelles, says Paul; and he tells us i^ what estate
Apelles was in before Go^ namely, in an estate of approbatio^ approved in
Christ. And the same Apostle speaks on the contrary of the unconverted
Gentiles, that they were strangers from the life of God, Ephesians. 4* 18. Ephesians.
4.18.
Secondly, As it is a relation unt^ God, so it is a standing relation: Tha^
wherein he stands toward God, tha^ is a man's estate before God. There a
difference between one that does (...) and one that is in the state of sin:
(...) child of God may sin, but he is n^^ in a state of sin; you cannot
call hi^ a wicked man. So also there is difference between one that does. some
good actions and one that is in a good estate: A carnal man may do some good
things, but he is not in a good estate. The estate of a man is a standing
thing, it is the relation that he stands in toward God. Thirdly, It is the
relation that a man stands in toward God as he is the free fountain of
spiritual life and salvation. It is not every standing relation toward God:
For a man may be considered in relation to God as a Creator, and so the
heavens and the earth and the very brute beasts stand in relation to God as
they are his creatures; but they have not this estate that we speak of, which
is a relation to God as the free giver of spiritual life and salvation (He is
free, he may choose whether he will give it or no.) Now this is a man's estate,
the relation he stands in unto God, Whether the Lord has given him his
saving grace, yea or no; spiritual life in Christ Jesus, yea or no; title to
heaven and salvation, yea or no? this is the meaning when we speak of a man's
estate. It is said of Sodom, Genesis 13.13.
They were sinners before God: that is, they were in a bad estate, a state of
sin. It is said of Zachary and Elisabeth, Luke 1.6.
They were both right^^^s before God; that is, they were both in a very good
state.

Observe. Ministers are to enquire after the estate of their people.
All Christians believe that there is a God: It behooves every one now to
consider in what estate he stands to this God. This is a great question that
we which are ministers ought to demand of our people, to know their estates.

Prove. 27.23.
Be diligent to know the state of thy flock, and look well to thy herds. Where
the wise man first requires that we should look well to our flocks, and then
directs us in the manner how, viz. by being diligent to know their estate how
it stands with them.

and we must know in what estate our work stands: else we may labor and
labor and all in vain; we may preach and ^^hort and call upon our people to
hear and to believe and obey, and all this may still be in vain, if we do not
enquire in what estate they are. This is the reason why Paul could not forbear
sending and enquiring how it stood with the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 3.5.
in what estate they were in, how it went with their faith, whether they kept
it or no, lest the tempter had tempted them, and his labor should have been in
vain; for so it had been for all his preaching and reaching them if they had
not been in a good estate: therefore he sent to know.

with them, though it would grieve him much, yet he had rather know it then
not; for if he know it he can better tell what to do. So it was with the
Apostle; his very bowels yerned upon the Philippians, Philip. 2.19.
Oh my poor people, thought he, I wonder what estate they be in. How if they
totter? how if they miscarry? how if the devil have tempted them to sin and
to apostatize? how if they be in trouble of conscience? He could never be at
quiet till he knew their estate: I trust in the Lord Jesus, says he, to send
Timotheus shortly unto you, that I also may be of good comfort when I know your
estate. He had a great care of their souls, and therefore it would comfort his
heart to know what estate they were in.

precepts and exhortations unto them: ^he describes unto them the mystery of
Christ, admonishes them to continue steadfast therein, to embrace the preaching
of the word, to beware of philosophy and the vain traditions and sophistry of
men, to take heed of doting upon ceremonies, which are all ended in Christ, to
set their affections on heaven, to mortify the deeds of the flesh, to put off
the old man; he warns them to be loving and humble: he bids wives do their
duties to their husbands, and husbands to love their wives; children to obey
their parents, and parents to encourage their children; servants to obey their
masters, and masters to deal well with their servants; all to continue in
prayer, watchfulness, thanksgiving, to walk wisely toward them that are
without, to be careful of godly and holy communication: Thus knowing their
estate only for the general he teaches them in general, and therefore now
he concludes, as if he should say, Col. 4.8.
I speak somewhat generally because I do not know your estates in particular;
and therefore I send to you Tychicus, a faithful good minister, that he may
learn your estates in particular, and deal with you answerably. It may be some
of you want corrosives; it may be some of you want cordials; it may be some
have need to be searched and humbled, some of you to be encouraged and
comforted: I have sent him to enquire into your estates in particular, that he
may do accordingly. Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he may
know your estate and comfort your hearts.

Uses.
The use of this is threefold.

1. Instruct.
First, for instruction. Hence we may see that a minister does but his duty
when he enquireth into men's estates how they stand before God: It is not prying
into other men's matters; it is not busie-bodinesse in other men's affairs; it is
not a spirit of meddling: No, a minister does but his duty when he does it.
How can a Physician apply true and proper physic unless he enquire into the
state of men's bodies? Now a minister is a physician to men's souls; Jer. 8.12.
and therefore he is to enquire of the state of men's souls how they stand
before God. They are men of Belial that say, What? must the minister know ^ll?
and, Can there be nothing done but the minister must hear of it? These are
very evil speeches. The minister does but his duty when he is inquisitive.

The second use may be for reproof. 2. Reproof.
If it be the duty of a minister to enquire of men's estates before God, then
those people are too blame that will not make known their estates. What is the
reason that so many men abide in a rotten state, but because they are loath to
o^en truly and fully what they are to Gods ministers? Nay many are like them in
the prophet, who say to the seers, Isai. 30.10.
^ee not. They would not have Gods ministers see what they do, nor see that
they are. I confess there be ^ome that will open something about their
estates, but not all they know ^y themselves: They keep in the main; ^^ke some
foolish clients who mis^^form their Counsel, making their ^ase better then
indeed it is, and so their cause miscarrieth: So some keep in that which would
give most light to judge of their estates: But this ought not so to be. I can
tell you an example of one that being troubled about his estate before God, and
some ministers being by, Oh, says he, I will tell you all that I know of my
self; I Will not hide a syllable from you: and, if I be yet no better then a
wretch, I beseech you tell me plainly that I am so; and if I be in Christ, I
beseech you prove it plainly unto me. This man took a right course, and thereby
through Gods mercy came in a little space to the assurance of his own blessed
estate and condition.

3. Exhortation.
Thirdly, for exhortation. Let Gods ministers know of your estates, that they
may be able to speak to you accordingly. By this means they may speak words in
due season, and like wise house-holders give every one his portion. If you had
but a cut finger, would not you be glad to have the right plastre? and if you
had a burning fev^^ would you not desire the right rem^dy? how much more in the
curing the sickness of the soul?

Now from the text it self without any cutting up of the words we may ^ather
four propositions:

1. That there is an estate that every man is in, either an estate of grace or
an ^state of sin.

2. That this state may be known.

3. That every man should be wil^ing to have his estate examined, that it may
be known whether it be good or ^o.

4. That a man can never have true ^omfort till it be known that he is in a
^ood estate.

1. For the first, Observe. 1.
That there is an estate that every one is in, either of grace or sin; See this
in Simon Magus: Acts 8.23.
I per^eive, says S. Peter, thou art in the gall of bitterness and in the
bond of iniquity. See, he tells him what estate he was ^n, viz. a very bad
estate, in a desperate and damnable condition. In this state of sin and misery
are all they that are not renewed by Christ Jesus. And for the other see an
example, Romans 16.7. Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord: Romans 16.7.
The text there tells us what estate he was in, a very good estate; He was a
man in Christ, a choice man, that is, a man in the state of grace and
salvation. In this estate are all they that are called and sanctified and made
new creatures unto God. Every man is in one of the two estates: there is no
middle estate which is neither the one nor the other, but in one of these two
are all the whole world. The reason is,

1. From everlasting the world was divided only into two ranks, either Elect
or Reprobates.

2. Here in this life the world is divided only into two companies, either
Godly or Ungodly.

Matthew. 25.32.
3. At the day of judgment the Lord will divide the whole world only into two
sorts, either Sheep or Goats.

2. Prop. Election may be known.
II. For the second proposition, This estate may be known: Especially every man
may come to the knowledge of his own estate before God. I do not say that every
man may know whether he be elect or reprobate: yet this I say too, That a godly
soul may know th^^ ^is elected to life. The Apostle exhor^th all that are godly
to give diligence ^ make their election sure, 2. Pet. 1.10. ^e that atteineth
to that faith which ^e Apostle calls the faith of Gods e^t, Titus 1.1. and
receives the word ^ God, as Paul says the Thessalonians ^d, and thence
concludes they were ^osen of God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5. he ^ay attein to much
assurance of his e^^tion. But though a godly man may ^ow he is elected of God,
yet for re^^obation the case is not alike: 1. Be^^use ungodliness is not
always joyn^ with perseverance. 2. Besides, ^od has many reasons why he does
^t reveal men's reprobation unto ^m: They would then be outrageous ^ evil,
desperate in wickedness; ^ere could be no order or government humane life:
Besides that, the form ^ Christ's administration of his king^^me could not be so
as it now is: for christ has bid his ministers preach the ^ospel to every
creature, to whole ^rishes and towns, and except none: christ will not tell his
ministers which be reprobates and which not, that the may preach unto all, and
labor t^ work upon every soul; and there i^ none in a parish but the minister
mu^ look upon him as one who may be saved: Christ will not tell his people
which be reprobates, that they man look upon every one as one that may b^ won
to the faith for any thing the^ know: Christ will not tell the reprobates
themselves that they are reprobates, that every one of them man come to the use
of the means; Ho^ do they know but they may find grace yea, and the Lord does
seriously ca^ them; and it is their fault if they obe^ not. It is Gods infinite
mercy, that ^lection, which is such a comfortabl^ point, may be revealed to
Gods children; and that reprobation, which i^ so intolerable and bitter, is not
reveale^ to the reprobate. Nevertheless let m^ add, That some particular men
have known their own reprobation, as Ca^ and Judas, etc. And there be shrew^
signs of it: Shrewd signs of it.
(I do not speak it as thoug^ I meant to persuade any man that ^e ^ne, but
only that he may take heed ^f them.)

1. Malicing the known truth is a ve^ shrewd sign: As, when men know ^at
godliness is pleasing to God, and ^et they hate a man for it; when men ^ow the
minister is commanded to re^uke sin, and yet they will spite him ^or so doing:
this is a very shrewd ^gne. Paul persecuted the truth; but ^t, says he, I
obtained mercy, because I ^d it ignorantly, 1. Tim. 1.13. intima^ng that if he
had done it against know^dge he had been in danger to have ^und no mercy. And
therefore ye that mock and hate those ways which ^od has commanded, I beseech
you, ^ke heed lest ye sin unpardonably.

2. Absolute apostasy is a shrewd ^gne too of reprobation: When men ^ave been
very forward in the professi^n of the truth, and fall totally away and prove
miserably profane, as the A^ostle shows, Heb. 6.6.

3. Final impenitency. This is an ^nfallible sign of reprobation, when a man
lives in sin dies in sin, and goes away without repentance. Luke 13.^ Except
ye repent ye shall all likewise peris^ There be many of us have stood ou^ long
in impenitency; let us take hee^ lest if we stay any longer we fall upon this
great evil.

That a man may know his estate, proved.
I return to the point: A man may come to the knowledge of his own estate before
God. I do not mean, Whether he be in the state of election or reprobation; but
he may know, Whether he be in the state of salvation or damnation, that is,
Whether he be in the way that leads to heaven o^ hell, Whether he be in such
a case tha^ if he die now he shall be saved or no^ saved: Every man may thus
know in what estate he is;

1. John 3.8.
As for example, He tha^ commits sin is of the devil. Mark; the Apostle
tells us what estate that man is in that lives in sin, in a very bad
estate. 1. John 3.3.
So on the contrary; He that has this hope purges himself. Mark; the Apostle
tells us what estate that man is in who purges himself; he is in very good
estate, in a state of true hope in Christ. And so 1. Cor. 6.10. the Apostle
names diverse who are not ^n the state of salvation but of damna^ion: if they
die in such case they cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven. So that if a man
will but search the word, and believe that God does say true, he may know his
estate.

Exodus 9.27.
I and my people are wicked, says Pharaoh. His con^cience did accuse him of
being in a bad ^tate. I am holy, says David; Psalm. 86.2
I am thy ^rvant. His conscience told him he ^as in the state of grace. So that
ye ^eed not go far to know what estate ^ou are in: there is that in your
bo^ome that can decide the matter.

an unknown estate: But men are commanded to fly from a bad estate, and seek
out a good one: Therefore they may know the one and the other. Matthew. 3.7, 8.
O generation of vipers, who has warned you to fly from the wrath to come?
Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance, says John to the Pharisees.
He supposes these men might easily know that they were in a very bad estate,
or else how could he say thus unto them?

Before I come to the Uses let us consider these three things:

1. That every man living is born in a very bad estate. We all know it well;
but oh that we would consider it! Ephesians. 2.3.
We are all by nature children of wrath. Now here lies the question, When did
we change our estates? We are in the same state of damnation wherein we were
born except we are come out of it. I say, here lies the question, Whether we
are come ou^ of it or no, whether we have mended our estate.

2. Consider that the greatest part o^ the world never mend their estates* But
as they were born in a cursed estate, ^o they live and die in it. And I speak
^ot this of heathen only; but alas! ^ow many in the visible church do so? ^ow
many were there in the church of Philippi whom the Apostle could not ^hink of
without weeping when he ^onsidered in what estate they were. Phil. 3.17
So ^n the church of Corinth, 1. Cor. 1.26.
not many wise, not many rich, not many noble ^alled; but commonly the meanest
in ^he eye of the world were in the best e^^ate toward God. Nay more then so;
Many of them who seek to get into a ^ood estate miss of it and perish. See,
^uke 13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait ^te: Mark; it is a strait gate, and
lets ^ut few in: for many shall seek to enter in ^ad shall not be able. Here
and there a few ^en where the constant ministry is.



(...) estate; they were in a state of justification: and from the knowledge
thereof they had peace. We are bound to get tru^ peace to our consciences: Oh,
what ^ lamentable maze are we in till our consciences have peace! and this they
cannot have until we are fully acquainte^ in what case we stand before God:
Job 22.21
Acquaint thy self with God, and be at peace.

3. Thirdly, we can never be fit for any duty of Gods worship as long a^ we
know not what estate we are in^ We can never be fit for any holy duty to hear,
pray, receive the sacrament Let a man examine himself, 1. Cor. 11.28.
and so let him eat, etc. First he must examine in wha^ estate he is before he
can be fit for tha^ high service. Lam. 3.40.
So for repentance: Le^ us search and try our ways, and turn gain to the
Lord: first find our selves i^ an ill estate, and then return. So for joy; It
is a duty to rejoice in the Lord: But we are never fit for rejoicing till we
have proved what estate w^ are in: Gal. 6.4.
Let every man prove his ou^ work; so shall he have rejoicing. We ca^ never be
fit for any duty until we know ^n what estate we are in, because every duty
varieth according as the estate of every man is. To instance in prayer; He that
is not in the state of grace must ^ray one way, and he that is in the ^tate of
salvation must pray another way: the one, that he may be converted and brought
home to God; the other, that he may be strengthened and increased in grace. And
so for the duty of hearing, etc.

The second use is for direction; Use 2. Of Direction. Means to know what
estate we are in.
to let us understand by what means we may know what estate we are in. There be
four means to know this.

1. By our outward and inward actions. I do not say, by our outward actions:
For a man may be in the state of hypocrisy, and yet his outward actions may be
good. Neither do I say by our inward actions alone: For a man may be in the
state of self-deceit, and yet say his heart is good and his meaning and mind
good. But I say, by them both put together. Our Savior sets it out by a
tree; Matthew. 7.17.
Every good tree brings forth good fruit: but a corrupt tree brings forth
corrupt fruit. So if the hear^ brings forth the fruit of righteousness, joy
in good things, patience meekness, gentleness, love, obedience, godly
conversation, etc. these evidence a good estate: but if the heart brings
forth deadness, earthlinesse, impatience, evil conversation, etc. these are
corrupt fruits and signs of a very bad estate.

2. Ye may know what estates ye are in by your inclinations and dispositions,
from whence these actions proceed. Psalm. 119.112.
Are your hearts inclined heavenward and Godward, as David's? are ye bent to
holiness and self-denial, etc. as a bow is bent to shoot the arrow? This is a
sign of a good estate: as 1. Chron. 22.19. there is speech of setting the
heart to seek God. Ye know when a man will do a thing indeed, we say he is set
on it. It may be ye do some good duties, make some fair offers of seeking God;
but are your hearts set on it? or are they set on the world and inclined
earth-ward? The inclinations of every creature in the world do ever show what
the creature is. How do we know that a stone is heavy? Because it inclines
downward. How do we know a man is choleric? Because he ^s inclined unto wrath.
So a man's estate may be known by his constant inclination either to good or
evil.

3. One may know what estate he is in by that reflexive act which is proper
only to man. There is an act in man's soul (we call it a reflex act) which no
creature has but only man, whereby he can perceive what himself is and does.
When a man thinks or speaks, he can reflect upon himself and perceive what
he thinks or speaks: when he prays, he can reflect upon his own heart,
and perceive how it carries it self all along in his prayers. I say, no
creature in the world has in it ^his reflexive act but only man. The ^ire
burns, but it cannot reflect upon its own burning: Oculus non videt se
^videre, The eye sees, but it does not see that it does see; that is, That
crea^ure does not perceive what it does when it sees. But every man has this
reflexive act in him, whereby he is privy to what himself thinks, does, is
None knows the things of a man save the spirit of a man that is in him. 1.
Cor. 2.11.
This is the reason why some know not what estate they are in, because they
choke their own spirit and hoodwink their consciences. Thine own heart knows
how it is with thee, and would faithfully tell thee if thou would enquire of
it and hearken unto it. Search with Gods candle, and thou may easily find
what is in thee. Prove. 20.27.
The spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts
of the belly.

4. Ye may know what estate ye are in by a certain kind of feeling. As there is
a kind of bodily feeling whereby every man knows the estate of his body
whether he be sick or in health, so there is a spiritual feeling. Luke 24.32.
The two disciples did feel their hearts burn: Paul did feel a great combat in
him between the flesh and the spirit: Ephesians. 4.19.
So if men be covetous and worldly, they may feel it. Yet indeed some men be
past feeling; Their case is the worse because they cannot feel how bad it is:
But for the most, they may easily feel what their estate is.

The third use is, Use 3. Impediments.
to show you the impediments that hinder this knowledge. If you would attein to
know what estate you are in, then remove the impediments; which are

1. Vain thoughts. Men who are in a state of sin and wrath, yet have many vain
thoughts lodging within them keeping them from knowing it: God is merciful;
and Christ died for sinners; and, There be worse sinners then they; why should
they think so ill of themselves? and, they may be better all in good time:
These vain thoughts hoodwink their eyes that they cannot see their estate, nor
resolve that it is so dangerous as indeed it is. O Jerusalem, Jer. 4.14.
wash thy heart from wickedness: how long shall these vain thoughts lodge
within thee? They were in a very bad estate; and yet they had such vain
thoughts that they could not see it.

2. Presumption is another impediment. Men pray, and hear, and do other good
duties, and so take all to be well without serious examining. This was the case
of the Laodicean people: They thought they had that in them which they had not,
Rev. 3.17.
and that their estate was good, when it was nothing so.

Another let are the Cares of this life: Whereby the heart is so occupied that
it does not find time to search its own estate. Therefore our Savior says,
Luke 21.34.
Take heed that your hearts be not overcharged with the cares of this life,
lest that day come upon you unawares; intimating that these cares are great
lets from considering our estates.

4. Another let is an Evil conscience: which affrighteth a man so soon as he
begins to stir, and makes him afraid to go on to look soundly into his
estate. John 3.20. Romans 3.11.
He that does evil hates the light.

5. Another let is Ignorance. There is none that understands, none that
seeks after God. Mark; they did not seek in what case they stood before God
because they did not understand.

6. Another let is Spiritual sloth and sluggishnesse of heart. Men cannot
en^ure to take pains with their own hearts till they have made out a true
judgment in what case they are: They ^egin and quickly give over; and so for
^^^vant of diligence and pains-taking ^ake nothing sure.

The last use is for exhortation; Use 4. Of Exhortation.
That all men would bestirre themselves and set in earnest upon this inquiry.
That we may every one know in what state we stand

1. Consider, this is an enquiry about our souls. We enquire about our outward
man, about the estate of our bodies, and worldly affairs, etc. oh, let us not
neglect this main enquiry, Am I in Christ, yea or no? Am I a new creature, yea
or no? Does my soul live to God or ^^o?

2. Consider, this is a question about our everlasting estate. We can never
have comfort until we have put this out of question: and therefore this is a
question which all questions must give way unto. If ye be not in Christ, ye had
need lay aside all and look about it only. How can men eat, drink, sleep etc.
since the wrath of God abidet^ upon all unbelievers? Me thinks ou^ souls should
take no content, do no thing else but faint after Christ, until we know our
interest in him. I say again, This is the grand enquiry, that business which
all businesses must give place unto. Oh, the sloth of our souls! Let us in time
awake and rouse them up, and never rest until we know our own estate to be
good before God, that so our hearts may have comfort, and that with God.

A treatise Of Conscience.
ROMANS 2.15. Which show the work of the law written in their hearts, their
consciences also bearing them witness, and their thoughts in the mean while
accusing or else excusing one another.


I Have showed you, What Conscience is.
That every man is in an estate before God. And that has made way now to a
treatise of con^cience; which will show us what estate ^e are in before God. I
desire to handle common-place-wise: And first I will ^^l you in brief what the
conscience of ^ery man is. I say, of every man: For ^ngels and devils have a
conscience ^o: ye may see it in the speech of the ^ngel to John when John would
have ^orshipped him, Rev. 19.10.
I am thy fellow-ser^ant, says he: see thou do it not. Mark; He had a
conscience that could say, I am a servant, and therefore must not ta^^ worship
to me. So for the devils: When our Savior bade them come forth o^ the
possessed, Matthew. 8.29.
they say, Art thou com^ to torment us before our time. See; the^ had a
conscience that told them ther^ would be a time when they should b^ further
tormented. But I am not t^ speak of such consciences, but of the conscience of
man. Now the conscience of man is the judgment of man upon himself as he is
subject to God judgment. Divines use to express i^ in this Syllogism, He
that truly believes in Christ shall be saved: My conscience tells me this is
Gods word. But I believe truly in Christ: My conscience tells me this also.
Therefore I shall be saved. And so also on the contrary side. So that
conscience is a man's true judgment of himself: 1. Cor. 11.31.
If we would judge our selves; that is, If we would bring our selves before the
tribunal of conscience to receive its judgment.

Four propositions are contained in that portion of Scripture which I have
chosen to make the subject of this ensu^ng treatise, Romans 2.15.

1. Four Propositions.
That there is in every man a conscience. [Their consciences bearing them
^itnesse,] Every one of them had a ^onscience bearing them witness.

2. That the light which conscience directed to work by is knowledge. written
in their hearts.]

3. That the bond that binds a man's conscience is Gods law. [which show the
effect of the law written in their ^^arts.]

4. That the office and duty of con^^^ence is to bear witness either with our
selves or against our selves, accusing or excusing our selves or actions.
bearing witness, and their thoughts ac^using or excusing one another.] I begin
^ith the first.

Proposition I. There is in every man a conscience.
THere was a conscience in all these heathen in the text: 1. There is in every
man a conscience
their consciences ^ring them witness. There was a conscience in the Scribes
and Pharisees: John 8.9.
being convicted of their own consciences There is a conscience in good men: as
in Paul; 2. Cor. 1.12.
Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience. There is a conscience
in wicked men: Tit. 1.15.
their mind and conscience is defiled. As it is impossible the fire should be
without heat, so it is impossible that any man should be without ^ conscience.
Indeed we use to say, Such an one has no conscience: bu^ our meaning is, that
he has no good conscience. But every one has a conscience, either good or
bad. The Lord engraved conscience in man when he created him at first. True it
is, since the fall of man conscience is miserably corrupted; but man can never
put it off: Conscience continues for ever in every man, whether he be in earth
or heaven or hell. The most base and devilish profanelings in the world have a
conscience: Let them choke it or smother it as much as they can, let them whore
it or game it or drink it away as much as they are able for their hearts; yet
conscience will continue in spite of their teeth.

1. No length of time can wear this conscience out. What made Joseph's brethren
to remember the cruel usage they showed him but conscience? It was about twenty
years before; yet ^hey could not wear it out.

2. No violence nor force is able to ^uppresse conscience but that one day ^^r
other it will show it self. What made Judas go and carry back the money that he
betrayed our Savior for, and also to cry out, I have sinned, but conscience?
No question but he la^oured to suppress it; but he could ^ot.

3. No greatness nor power is able do stifle conscience but that it will one
^ay like a band-dog fly in a sinners face. What made Pharaoh cry out, I am
^icked, but conscience? He was a great King; and yet he was not able to
over^ower conscience.

4. No music, mirth or jovializing ^an charm conscience, but it will play ^he
devil to a wretched soul for all that. What was the evil spirit of me^ancholy
that came upon Saul but conscience? He thought to allay it with instruments of
music; but it still came again.

5. Death it self is not able to part conscience from a sinner. What is that
worm that shall never die but only conscience? and in hell conscience is as
that fire that never goes out.

I confess some seem to have lost conscience quite: They can omit good duties
as though they had no conscience at all; they can defer repentance and
turning to God as though they had no more conscience then a beast: but one day
conscience will appear, and show plainly that it was present with them every
moment of their lives, and privy to all their thoughts and all their ways,
and set before them all the things that they have done. Be men never so secure
and senseless, and seared for the present, conscience will break out either
first or last: Either here or in hell it will appear to every man, That he has
and ever had a conscience.

Reasons
Now the reasons why the Lord did plant a conscience in every man living are,





Conscience is hanged a great while ago. No, no; Achitophel may hang himself,
bu^ he cannot hang his conscience: Sa^ may kill himself, but conscience cannon
be killed. Mar 9.44.
It is a worm that never dies As the reasonable soul of man is immortal, so
conscience also is immortal.

1. Cor. 11.28.
Let a man examine himself, that is, his conscience Judge in your selves, verse
13.
that is, Judge i^ your consciences.

^ut a present fit of melancholy. No; It causes it may be the present
melancholic fit, but it is not it. Conscience (...) a standing power in a man
that is e^ermore with him, and will evermore ^dge him and condemn him if he be
^uiltie before God. It will be with him when his dumpish fit is over. Let him
laugh and be merry; yet conscience lies (...) the bottom of all, and will
spoil all the mirth. Prove. 14.13.
Let the drunkard be never so joviall; I will not believe but ^onscience in the
midst of that drunken mirth causes some sadness within, and tells him this
is a very wicked life. Let the carnal hypocrite daub up the matter with good
duties and good prayers and good hopes; I cannot believe but ^here is a
conscience lies at the bot^ome and tells him he is rotten for all ^his. You
may see this in Cain: Genesis 4.5.
He had ^een at a good duty, sacrificing to the Lord; but his countenance fell
when ^e had done, conscience did lie at the bottom, and did tell him God did
not accept him. Conscience is with evil men at church, at sermon, at sacrament,
and tells them secretly that they an^ not the persons to whom the blessin^ of
these ordinances belong.

ye are always to live with. Ye are not always to live with your husbands, ^r
always with your wives, nor al^ayes with your parents or masters; ^ere is a
time when you must part: but ^onscience and you will never part: therefore
labor to keep it void of of^nse. And thus much of the first proposition, There
is in every man a consci^nce.

Proposition II. The light that conscience acts by is knowledge.
THis knowledge is twofold; II. Proposition
1. Of Gods law, 2. Of our selves.

1. The knowledge of Gods law. To know Gods will what is good, what is ^ad;
what God commands, what he forbids. Every man under heaven has this law
of God in some measure writ in his conscience. I confess, Gods children only
know Gods law to purpose, ^as it is a light to guide them in the way of
salvation: but all the world have some measure of knowledge, whereby they may
gather that there is a Go^ and that he ought to be worshipped a^ obeyed, and
that he has power ov^ life and death. All the world ha^ knowledge in some
measure what (...) good and what is not, what is to b^ done and what not, what
is accordin^ to conscience and what not: All the world have this knowledge in
some measure; I do not say, enough for salvation, but enough to make them
inexcusable before God for not following that light and not living according to
that knowledge which they have. I^ there were not some light in this behalf,
some knowledge of the law o^ God in every man, conscience could do^ nothing.

2. Knowledge of our selves: This also is the light that conscience acts by.
There is in every man some measure of knowledge of himself according to the
measure of knowledge that he has of Gods law. Our consciences look backward
and forward; forward to Gods law, and backward on our selves, Whether we be
such as Gods law requires, yea or no. First, ye may find this in good men.
This light did the conscie^^e of David go by: Psalm. 18.23.
I was upright be^e God, says his conscience, and I kept (...) self from mine
own iniquity. His ^^nscience had a light whereby he ^ew what he did. Secondly,
ye shall ^d this in wicked men. This light the conscience of Achan went by:
Josh. 7.20.
I have ^ed against the Lord God of Israel, and ^us and thus have I done.

These are the two lights that every ^ans conscience goes by: It has light in
some measure to know the law of God, what he should do and what he should not
do; and it has light in some measure to know himself, what he has done or not
done, whether he has done ^s he should yea or no. Now these two ^ights are
necessary; as thus I prove.

First, the knowledge of Gods law is necessary. For else conscience cannot
work. A drunkard might be drunk every day in the year, and yet conscience could
not trouble him nor condemn him of sin unless he knew the law,

That God has forbid drunkenness. And so the swearer. And so evil wo^ and bad
thoughts conscience cannot a^cuse for, unless there be so much lig^ as to know
they are forbidden. A^ therefore Divines do all say that the Synteresis is
necessary to the exercise (...) conscience. The Synteresis is this: When a man
keeps in his mind the knowledge of the things contained in Gods law namely,
That we must obey God, honor our parents, not commit adultery not kill, not
steal, not lie, not covet, etc Unless the knowledge of these be kep^ in mind
conscience cannot work. And therefore when we would stir a man^ conscience,
we appeal to his knowledge; 1. Cor. 6.9.
Know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? As if
he had said, Your own consciences may condemn you to the pit of hell if ye be
unrighteous, because your Synteresis can tell you that the unrighteous shall
not inherit the kingdom of God. This is the reason why we say that there is a
natural conscience and there is an illuminated conscience; because some have
no light but only the light of nature, some have besides the light of ^s word,
which shows that which ^re shows, and much more clearly, ^eacheth many
things more which ^e cannot teach: And hence the ^cience of the illightned
condem^^ for such things as the natural con^^ce never stirs about.

^econdly, the knowledge of our ^^lves is needful; else conscience can^^t
neither. Though we know what ^s law requires and what not, ^t is good and what
not, yet un^ we know whether we go with it (...) against it conscience cannot
accuse nor excuse. As for example; A close hypocrite, he knows well enough
that the Lord has condemned hypocrisy, and that hypocrites must have their
^^tion in hell: yet if he do not know ^^self to be an hypocrite, his consci^^^e
can never condemn him for being ^e. And therefore both these know^^^ges are
necessary, as well the know^^^ge of a man's self as of Gods law. ^any who had a
hand in crucifying our ^^viour, sinned grievously; yet they sinned not against
knowledge beca^ they knew not what they did: Luke 23.34.
Fath^ forgive them, they know not what they (...)

Thirdly, It is a contradiction to (...) a blind conscience in act. The
cons^^ence cannot be blind and yet actual^ condemn. Indeed the conscience it s^
may be blind, but it can never act and (...) blind: If it truly accuse or
excuse must have some light. It is true, it man erroneously excuse or accuse,
and y^ have no true light: Seeming light (...) enough to do that: seeming
knowledge is enough to make conscience erroneously excuse: As they who killed
the Apostles, John 16.2
their consciences excuse^ them, and told them they did Go^ good service: they
seemed to know i^ was good service to God, and therefore their consciences
excused them, etc* Thus ye see that the light that conscience workerh by is
knowledge.

^is is the reason why so many thou^ds go on in their sins without re^tance,
because being ignorant they ^e no conscience to prick them there^o: as Jer.
8.6. No man repents him ^his wickedness, saying, What have I ^e? Why, what
was the reason that ^nscience did not prick them, and say, ^is thou have done
and that, Thus ye ^e rebelled, etc? The text answers (...) the next verse, My
people know not (...) judgment of the Lord. The stork ^weth her time, and the
turtle, and the ^llow; but my people do not know their ^ies.

at a loss in our way to happiness, never step out of the right path but o^
conscience may be able to put us in ^gain, never go slowly but our cons^^ence
may spur us on faster; that o^ conscience may not be like the s^^ of a candle
in a socket, that flameth (...) now and then and then is dark aga^ and again it
flameth out and is dark ^gain: A man may see his book by i^ but he cannot see
to read; he may se^ his pen and ink by it, but he cannot se^ to write; a woman
may see her need^ and cloth by it, but she cannot see t^ work: so it is with
some men's consciences: Their light is so dim tha^ they can see the duties,
but they cannon see to do them; they can see the commandments of God, but they
cannon see to obey them. O labor to perfec^ the light of your consciences,
that ye^ may see to walk by them. And thu^ much also of the second proposition,
The light that conscience acts by is knowledge.

Now I should come to the third proposition which as I first propounded them
was this, The bond that binds conscience is Gods law: But I will now a little
^ter the method, and make the other which was propounded last to be the ^ird in
the handling; and it is this,

Proposition III. ^he office of Conscience is to bear witness, to accuse or
excuse.
COnscience is put into this office by God himself. It is Gods officer: III.
Proposition. The office of Conscience is to bear witness.
^ot only his register-book that shall (...) opened at the day of judgment,
^herein is set down our thoughts, words and deeds: but it is a preacher also to
tell us our duty both toward ^od and toward man: yea, it is a ^^werfull
preacher; it exhorts, ur^th, provokes: yea, the most power^ll preacher that
can be; it will cause ^e stoutest and stubbornest heart un^r heaven to quake
now and then; it ^ill never let us alone till it have ^ought us either to God
or to the de^. Conscience is joined in com^ission with Gods own spirit to be
an instructour unto us in the way we should walk; so that the spirit and it are
resisted or obeyed together, grieved or delighted together: We cannot sin
against conscience but we sin also against Gods spirit; we cannot check our
own consciences but we check and quench the holy spirit of God.

The office of conscience to our selves is, Romans 9.1.
to bear witness: My conscience bears me witness, says Paul. Conscience is
always ready to do this office, if it shall at any time be invited unto it:
For conscience looks sometimes for inviting; sometimes it will not bear
witness unless we invite it and call upon it so to do. But there will come a
time when it will do it and must do it and shall do it, namely at death or at
judgment: then it will bear witness whether men invite it or no. Now it may
be suppressed and silenced and kept under from witnessing; but then it must
bear witness and shall, either excusing or accusing, acquitting or condemning,
when God shall judge the secrets of men's hearts, as the Apostle speaks.

The properties that are given unto conscience in the discharge of its office
are four: Four Properties of Conscience.
1. It is supreme; 2. It is impartial; 3. It is faithful; 4. It is privy.

1. It is supreme: It has highest authority; it is the most uncontrollable
and ablest witness that can be: the greatest, weightiest witness in the
world; better then ten thousand witnesses. Though all the world do condemn us,
yet if our own conscience do not, we need not fear: And so on the contrary, if
conscience do condemn us, it will be small comfort though all the world flatter
and commend and excuse us. It is a supreme witness: Though all the Angels in
heaven should come and bear witness, their witness is not so uncontrollable
as conscience is. There is no appealing from the witness of conscience; we
must be tried by it. If conscience do accuse and condemn us, the Lord only is
greater then our conscience, 1. John 3.20. and will give judgment with it when
it does its office. And if our conscience do not (...) and commend us and
applaud us when we are naught, and call us good men and good women when we are
nothing so: but this will tell us plainly how vile and sinful we are; and if
we say we are good when we are not, it will tell us plainly we lie. 1. John 2.4.
He that says I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar. Mark;
though he say it, yet his conscience gives him the lie. It is faithful again
in excusing. It bears witness of every good duty we perform and of
whatsoever good is in us. Though all Jobs friends spoke evil of him, and God
himself by his outward judgments seemed to condemn him for a wicked man, yet
still his conscience (like a faithful witness) did not forsake him, nay, it
offered to reason with God himself, Job 13.3.
I would reason with God: I know I shall be justified, and I will never forsake
mine innocence till I die. Still his conscience stood for him and excused him.
Thus on both sides conscience is a faithful and sincere witness: it will not
be corrupted to speak otherwise then it knows the matter is.

4. It is most privy to what it does witness. It is more privy to what we have
done then all the world: It can say more for us or against us then all the
world. Thou know all the wickedness that thy heart is privy unto, says
Solomon to Shimei 1. Kings 2.44.

The use of all this is; Use.
Seeing conscience is so supreme, so impartial, so faithful, so privy, we
should take heed ^ow we do any thing that might give ^t advantage against us.
If we were to ^ppear before an earthly judge to an^wer for our behavior, and
should have a companion present continually with us, marking every thing in us,
tel^ing us of every fault, and witnessing it against us unto the judge, how
careful would we be of doing any thing that might give him advantage against
us? Lo, we have conscience as a continual watchman, espying out all our
ways, ^etting down whatever we do amiss, ^hecking us for it for the present,
and one day accusing us before God and ^etting all things in order before our
faces; Oh how should we then labor (...) it two years after: Genesis 41.9.
I remember my faults this day, says his conscience. Adonibezek had forgot his
cruelty; but his conscience brought it to his mind: As I have done so God has
requited me, Judge. 1.7.
says his conscience.

2. Conscience bears witness of what we intend and purpose to do, whether
against God or man. It will testify every purpose and project of the heart
though it be never acted, though it die in the heart and never come to light.
Men little think of this: Tush (says one) I never did such a thing, though I
once intended it, or had some thoughts about it. Mark; those very thoughts will
conscience bring forth and testify what they were. Hear the Apostle; Romans
2.16.
in that day God shall judge the secrets of men, etc. The most hidden things
conscience shall bring to light, and Christ shall judge them.

3. Conscience bears witness of the bent and frame of our hearts, what we
affect most and love most, and rejoice and delight in most, and desire most and
grieve for most, what our affections run upon most, whether upon God or the
world, whether upon heaven or the things of this life. Conscience bare witness
to David, Psalm. 119.77.
that his delight was in the law of the Lord, that God was his portion, that
Gods statutes were his counselors. Conscience bare witness to the false
teachers in Christ's time, that they affected vainglory and the praise of men
more then the praise of God. Conscience bare witness to Demas, that
notwithstanding his fair profession his heart was set upon the world.
Conscience bare witness to Jehu, that for all his seeming zeal his heart was
not upright.

But it may be objected, Obj. 1. Jer. 17.9.
How can this be? The heart is deceitful above all things: who can know it?

Who can know it? That is, Answ.
Who else can know it but a man himself? None under God can know the heart of
man but a man's own conscience, the spirit of man that is in him. I confess a
man may be ignorant of some secret and particular deceit in his heart: but who
knows not the general standing of (...) God small; and so we are deceived,
no^ seeing the radical power of this love of God, which in regard of its
virtue is stronger then the other: As a fool, if he should feel hot water,
would conclude that there is no cold at all in it; whereas there is radical
cold in that water, such as will expel all that heat in a little space. Or
else this arises from anguish of spirit, which so disturbeth the mind that it
cannot see its own condition nor be capable of the comforts belonging unto it;
as it was with the Israelites, Exodus 6.9. otherwise doubtless we may know our
own hearts; and when our conscience bears witness its witness is right.

Not guilty, though never so much evidence come against them, though
conscience often tell them, this they have done, thus they do, such they are. Oh
stop not your ears against conscience; stand not out against it, but believe
its testimony, and make use of it to repent of the evil it accu^^^h of while
mercy may be had, before ^od himself comes and joyneth with conscience to
condemn for ever.

miserable comforters, and God himself seemed to write bitter things against
him, yet his conscience witnessed that he had been eyes to the ^lind, and feet
to the lame, he had fed ^he hungry and clothed the naked and comforted the
fatherless. There is not ^ good thing that ever we do but conscience will
afford us the sweetness and comfort of it in our troubles: Isai. 38.3.
Remem^er, O Lord, says Hezekiah, that I have walked before thee in truth and
with a perfect heart.

We have spoken of consciences single bearing witness: Now follows its (...)
now only of those who drown their consciences in their cups, and fear their
consciences by their gross sins; but of those who would seem godly and
perform good duties, but with hypocritical hearts and carnal minds. O that
they would hear but conscience argue a little in this manner; To be carnally
minded is death, that is, is an evident sign of a man that is in the state of
death and damnation: But, says conscience, I am carnally minded; or we are
carnally minded: Therefore we have an argument about us of death and damnation.
And so also for all other sins; There is not a wicked man under heaven but he
may argue out of his own miserable estate by his conscience, or he might if it
were awaked, as one day it will be.

thee: but the question is, What is t^^ judgment of conscience? Does nor thy
conscience tell thee thou art but a proud fool, conceited of thy knowledge, and
^ovest to hear thy self talk? And so for thy performance of good duties, what
testimony does conscience give of the manner of doing of them? The testimonial
of conscience is above all testimonials in the world: 2. Cor. 1.12.
all the good opinions of the world are not worth a ^ush without this: If
conscience can ^ay that in our ways we seek to please God, and allow not our
selves in any ^vil way, this testimony is full and sa^isfactory, and only this.

Yet further concerning this judicial witness of conscience: It is either
about things to be done or omitted, or things ^lready done or omitted. The
judicial witness of conscience about things to ^e done or omitted is double:
1. To ^dge out of Gods law whether it be ^ood or evil; 2, To counsel out of ^ur
own judgments either to do it or ^orbear it according as the nature of the
^ction is: If it be good, conscience will (...) so on the contrary, if it be
evil, conscience will counsel us to forbear, yea bring arguments to dissuade; O
do it not: it will tend to the dishonor of God, and be offensive to others,
and wound our souls, etc. It was conscience that withheld David from killing
Saul, and pressed him from it by a strong argument, 1. Sam. 24 10.
O he is the Lords anointed. It was conscience that withheld Joseph from
yielding to the enticings of his mistres, and yielded him an argument to
dissuade him from it, How shall I do this great wickedness, and so sin
against God? It was conscience that dissuaded Nehemiah from flying, Neh. 6.11.
Should such a man as I fly? And if one argument will not serve, conscience
will use more.

This is very good; do it: This is very sinful; forbear it. This therefore is
no sign of grace in any man to have his conscience calling upon him to do good
or ^isswading him from evil: The very heathen had so according to their light;
yea and in many of them it was forcible to restrain them from many sins which
they were inclined unto. And so may many men be put upon many good duties, not
for any love or liking of that which is good, but because they would please and
satisfy conscience, which otherwise will not suffer them to be quiet. It was
conscience that kept Abimelech from defiling Sarah, and yet a carnal man.

Here then a question may be asked, Obj.
Whether a mere natural man can avoid sin for conscience sake.

I answer, Answ.
That this expression, for conscience sake, may be taken two ways: either 1.
for conscience of the commandment of God and love to it; and so none but Gods
children do obey for conscience sake: and so it is meant when Paul speaks of
being subject for conscience sake, Romans 13.5 1. Pet. 2.19.
and Peter speaks of suffering (...) science may not reproach him all his
days for not following it: Whereas it is otherwise with the wicked.

1. Sam. 23.2.
May I go this way to work, or shall I take an other course? Hear counsel and
receive instruction, Prove. 19.20.
says Solomon, that thou may be wise at thy latter end. Conscience is a
faithful counselor; hear it. It is the great mercy of God that thou have
such a privy counsel: Thou can go nowhere but it is about thee to advise
thee. Therefore as Rehoboam said to his green heads, What counsel give you? so
say thou to thy conscience, What advise give thou, Conscience, in this case?
my carnal friends counsel me thus and thus; mine own carnal heart and lusts
would have me go this way: but, Conscience, what counsel give thou?

The counsel of conscience, they say, is not ^ood at this time, as he said of
Achito^hels: They will hear conscience at another time, but not now. But take
^eed; for if you reject the counsel of ^onscience, it is because the Lord has
^ purpose to destroy you.

The Adjuncts of conscience, which show themselves in the discharge of this
duty of judging and counselling.
THe adjuncts are of two sorts: The adjuncts of conscience.
1. such as respect consciences ability to ^ischarge its duty; 2. such as
accompany conscience in the discharge thereof.

darkness knows not whither he goes John 12.35. O labor therefore to get a
conscience illightened. It is true, a man may have an illightened conscience
and yet go to hell: but this is most certain; without an illightened conscience
a man cannot go to heaven. And if thy conscience be something illightened, yet
labor for more light. It will prevent many a stumble, save thee from many a
knock. Thou know not what case thou may be in, what difficult straits
thou may be put unto: if thou have not light in thy conscience to direct
thee, what will thou do?

II. An erroneous conscience.
SEcondly, an erroneous conscience is, 2. An erroneous conscience
when conscience not understanding Gods law, or misapplying it, does judge
amiss and direct amiss. So Joseph's conscience for a while was in an error
when Mary was found with child: Matthew. 1.19.
His conscience informed him that he must either make her a public example or
put her away privily. Here his conscience erred about this particular until
the Angel had better inform^d him. There is a question Quest.
here rai^ed by Divines, and it is, Whether we ^ught to follow conscience
erring or ^o? A question very necessary to be ^andled, partly because of men's
igno^^nce in this kind, and partly because of ^^e frequency of the case. I
answer ^^us;



Because the law of God is above conscience; and therefore the com^andment of
Gods law stands in full ^^rce though conscience command ^^ntrary to it.
Suppose a man should ^^ink in his conscience he might not ^^ke an oath though
never so lawfully ^^lled thereunto by the magistrate and (...) never so
necessary a case, when as the lord of God commands us to swear (...) truth,
in righteousness, and in judge^ent; I must follow the commandment (...)
different to do or not to do which yet is not indifferent but absolutely
commanded, then it is always a sin not to do it, but it is no sin to do
it. The third proposition is this, If conscience hold a thing necessary which
God has left indifferent, as if a man in conscience thought that he ought to
pray four times a day (which thing yet God has left indifferent;) in this he
is bound to obey conscience though it err. And it is no sin to obey
conscience thus erring; though it be a sin in conscience thus to err.

thing. 2. Because we break a commandment through the loins of a sin, when we
go against conscience. Ajax light upon a beast and slew it: his conscience
thought verily it was a man; Kill it not, says conscience, it is a man: he
goes against his conscience and kills it. His conscience here was in an
error, yet he as truly guilty of murder before God as if he had indeed slain a
man, because he slew a man through the loins of this beast: His bloody mind
looked at a man, and smote at a man, and slew a man. So when conscience is
erroneous, and thinks this is a commandment of God; it is not so, but he
thinks it so in his conscience; if he do contrary he breaks a commandment
though it be none, because the error of his conscience made it one to him. Was
not Herod truly guilty of the murder of Christ? He thought in his conscience
that Christ had been among the infants slain at Bethlehem. Thus conscience is a
sovereigne thing: It is always a sin to go against it, err or not err: and
if it be a sin to go against (...) one doubts of the lawfulness of playing
at cards and dice; he is sure it is no sin not to play, but whether he may
lawfully play he doubts: in this case he is bound not to play. So when one
doubts whether it be a sin not to call his family together every day to
prayer; Gods ministers tell him he must or he sins: I doubt of that, says
he. Do you so? but you are sure it is no sin to do it: Therefore you are
bound to do it, because you are bound to decline the doubtful part and take
that which is certain. And so of all other the like particulars.

to urge both the one or the other seeming of like weight, then this must be
put into the scale and resolve the doubt.

doubts and scruples whether he is right or no, especially in matters of
greatest moment. It is a great misery to have our consciences blind, which
should be our guides, and which it is a sin to disobey. This is the reason
why St Paul does so often speak, I would not have you ignorant, 1. Cor. 10.1.
and 11.3. It is a very great misery that ones conscience should be ignorant
what to do, what to hold, what to follow: I say, it is a lamentable misery,
that many who have followed the directions of conscience, should by it be led
to death and damnation, to do things contrary to Gods word. What a misery was
it for the Jews to have zeal and not according to knowledge? etc.

Without knowledge the heart is not good; Prove. 29.1
that is, it is most profane. There be three means to get knowledge. Means to
get knowledge.
may be able to direct us aright. The truth is, it is God only that can
soundly illighten our consciences: and therefore let us pray unto him to do it.
All our studying, and reading, and hearing, and conferring will never be able
to do it: it is only in the power of him who made us to do it. Psalm. 119.73.
Thy hands have made and fashioned me: O give me understanding, that I may
learn thy commandments. He who made our consciences, he only can give them
this heavenly light of ^rue knowledge and right understanding: and therefore
let us seek earnestly to him for it. Psalm. 25.9.
The humble ^od will teach: Pride and self-conceited^esse blinds exceedingly.
ty, offends conscience; and conscience will keep a grudge a long time, and
will give many a secret wound, deading the heart to duty, making faith and
confidence in God dull: we cannot pray with courage, nor come before God with
boldness. If our hearts condemn us not, we have confidence, says John. 1.
John 3.21.
An erroneous conscience will defile you; a doubting conscience distract you; a
scrupulous conscience unsettle you: but above all other, an illightened
conscience, if it have any thing against you will exceedingly disable you; this
stabbeth at the heart your confidence toward God. Go then and labor to purge
conscience, else conscience will hinder you; whether you pray, or hear or
receive the Sacrament, etc. it will deprive you of comfort. Matthew 5.23.
If thou bring the gift to the altar, and there remembrest tha^ thy brother
has ought against thee, leav^ there thy gift before the altar: first go an^ be
reconciled to thy brother, and then com^ and offer thy gift. The case is
greater an^ more dangerous when conscience hat^ something against us: there is
no offering will be accepted until conscience be satisfied. If thou should
be about to pray, and conscience should stand up against thee as an adversary,
and tell thee thou have been vain, and loose, and carnal all this day, thou
have not set thy self to keep close to God this day, thou have fallen into this
and that sin this day; thou art not fit to pray till thou have reconciled thy
self to conscience: Alas, thy conscience will secretly undermine all thy
praying. First, therefore reconcile conscience by hum^ling thy self, and
breaking thy heart, and resolving, I have sinned, I will do no more. When
conscience can say thy sorrow, and repentance, and resolution for new obedience
is sincere, then thou ^^rt fit to pray, but not before. So what^ver other duty
thou go about, be ^ure to reconcile conscience; else all will miscarry.

V. A faithful conscience.
THus I have expounded the adjuncts of conscience which show themselves in the
discharge of its duty, (...) every motion and inclination to evil: it is awake
to see when evil is conceived, to tell us of it, to oppose it, and to dissuade
us from it: like a watchman on the top of a tower, always awake to see when
any danger approaches. It is Gods minister with eyes on every side, to epsy
seasons of good, and stir up to make use of them; and of evil, and give
warning to avoid them.

2. As a faithful conscience is watchful, so also it is rigid and severe. 2.
It is severe.
In every cause it delivers its judgment: nothing can escape its sentence:
it will not favor our lusts in any particular. If there be any opportunity of
duty to God or man, it makes us to hear of it; though it be such a duty as
none other will call upon us for, or it may be dare not put us in mind of; as
of love, and care, and help toward inferiors: yet conscience will: It titheth
mint and cumine, and will tell us of the least duty. And so on the other side,
it will not swallow the least sin. As it will not swallow a camel, Luke 16.10.
so it will strain at ^gnat. A faithful conscience is faithful in the least.
If David sin but in the lap of a garment, conscience smites him for it. It
made Abraham so precise to a thread or a shoe-latchet; he would not take so
much as that of the king of Sodom. It made Moses strict to a very hoof: It made
Paul find fault with the Corinthians about their hair: It made Augustine
condemn himself for an apple.

3. As a faithful conscience is watchful and severe, so also it is
importunate 3. It is importunate.
(...) all its counsels. It does not only deliver its judgment, but does with
importunity urge the following of its counsel. It will have no nay, but will
be obeyed. It leads us bound in the Spirit to do it; as Paul said, Acts 20.22.
I go bound (...) the spirit. See how importunate this ^^ithfull conscience was
with the Psal^ist: I will not give sleep to mine eyes, Psalm. 132.4.
nor ^^mber to mine eyelids, until I find out a ^^ace for the Lord. It will
not take any ^^y, say we what we will: say we be ^^epie, say we be busy, say
we be loath ^^d full of excuses, it will be importu^^te, and that with
vehemency. It will (...) omitting good or committing evil, will not let thee
slumber and sleep in security, but continually joggeth and awaketh thee? Has
he given thee a severe, a precise conscience, that will not favor thee in the
least evil? It is a most comfortable sign that the Lord means well unto thy
soul.

John 15.14.
Ye are my friends if y^^ do whatever I command you; So I may say of
conscience. For conscience if i^ be truly illightened will command nothing but
what Christ commands. I^ we deal so in our constant course with conscience,
be willing to hearken to it and be ruled by it, then if we be out o^ the way
now and then, conscience will be true to us, and be importunate with us for our
good.

Maxima violatio conscientiae est maxim peccatum.
The greatest standing out against conscience is the greatest sin: it is a
sin which comes nearest that against the holy ^host, which accompanied with
some other adjuncts is the greatest standing out against conscience. There is
no sin that does more harden the heart then to do evil when conscience is
importu^ate to dissuade from it. This sin ^as the cause why Saul was rejected
of ^od; I forced my self, says he: 1. Sam. 13.12.
He for^^d his conscience; his conscience was ^^portunate to have him stay
accord^^g to the commandment of God, but (...) forced himself to the contrary.
I ^^nfesse, if conscience be importunate ^o the utmost, as it is with Gods
chil^^en, men cannot with any force put it (...) zealous in Gods cause against
the house of Ahab and the priests of Baal; 2. Kings 10.29.
but it suffered him to maintein the high places which Jeroboam had set up.
Thus Gamaliel's conscience made him speak well for Paul, and yet continue (it
seems) in much other evil. This conscience will restrain from great staring
sins, or from such sins as the man has no natural propensity unto: but
others which seem of a lower nature, or which are suitable to a man's particular
desires, these conscience will swallow without remorse. As civil people, that
cannot swallow down couzenage and injustice, and yet neglect of prayer and
other religious duties never troubles them. And so some professors, who
cannot omit hearing sermons and talking of religion, and yet can rest without
the power thereof.

3. It is remiss; 3. It is remiss.
that is, though it does counsel and direct, yet it does it with such coldness
and remissness that it is easily answered and put off. Thus it was with
David. It cannot be thought but his conscience said, Plot not against Vriah's
life: But he would; and so conscience let him do it. This conscience will be
answered with every slight and ^dle excuse: As when conscience tel^eth one,
Your ways are not good: I wish you to repent, and make your peace with God; it
may be the man answers, Yea, so I mean to do; but I cannot yet intend it:
when I have dispatched such and such business then I will do it. If conscience
speak again, Yea, but you were best to do it now; True, says he, I know it, I
know it. If God would give me repentance I would repent: It is his gift; of my
self I cannot do it. Or when it tells him of family duties, it may be he
answers, I have no leisure; so long as I go to God by my self, I hope it will
serve turn. Or when it tells him of his wickedness, ^t may be he answers,
Many worse then I have found mercy; and I hope so shall I. This is the
conscience that lets a man's heart say, I shall have peace. Deuteronomy. 29.19.
Now ^onscience being remiss and cold, it is ^asily put off and answered with
these idle and foolish excuses, or with some other pretenses like these, and so
lets the man go and live as before. This conscience is like Eli, which said,
Ye do not well, my sons, but exercised no severity to cause them to do
otherwise.

Use.
By this we see the dangerous estate of those men who have such a conscience.
There be many who live in many sins, in carnal courses, some in
company-keeping and drunkenness, some in hatred and variance, some in
chambering and wantonness, some in covetousness and love of this present
world^ your consciences no question can say Ye should do well to be more godly,
to look more after Christ and after heaven, and ye should do well to get the
truth of saving grace; yet it may be they say nothing or nothing to the purpose
in this behalf. Therefore is these men's case so dangerous because their
consciences are so silent and so remiss. They have lost the most sovereigne
remedy, namely conscience. Conscience is the most sovereigne means (under God
and his holy Spirit) to work repentance in men that can be; and is it not
dangerous to have it prove traitorous and unfaithful? What good can the
ministry of the word do unto you when every idle and false excuse or pretense
which the wisdom of the flesh can devise can stop ^he mouth of your conscience
when it ^alleth upon you to do what the word ^equireth? It must needs be
dangerous, and so much the more because it is so pleasing unto you: ye take
delight in such silent, and large, and remiss unfaithful consciences; ye love
not to have your consciences too busy with ^ou; ye like not that your
consciences should be too clamourous and importunate with you; ye would have
them not too rigid and vehement against your sins. It fares with you as with
many young men who have sold themselves unto folly, and think none their
friends but parasites that flatter them, or those who connive and wink at their
folly: but such friends will soon prove foes, and so will such moderate and
quiet consciences. It is a dangerous thing to have such a silent conscience; to
want the chief means under God of doing a man good. It was conscience that told
the lepers, 2. Kings 7.9.
We do not well to hold our peace: It was conscience that never would let the
prodigal son be quiet till he returned to his father, and said unto him, I
have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called
thy son: It is conscience that is the most powerful means under God to
quicken a man upon to repentance and obedience; and therefore they are in a
miserable case that want this great help.

Quest.
But what are the causes why men's consciences be so evil and unfaithful?

Answ.
The causes hereof are chiefly these four:

1. Ignorance is one cause why a man's conscience is unfaithful, when we do not
labor to have conscience thoroughly illightened and informed. Who are more
careless and negligent of their duties both to God and man? who can with more
freedom lie, steal, covet, sin, etc. then those that are ignorant of the law
of God? They know not that they do so much hurt to their own souls as they do.
An ignorant mind has always an evil conscience. ^t is impossible conscience
should be ^^ithfull where it is not illightened: and ^ence it comes to pass
that conscience i^ so negligent and unfaithful, because ^e have been so
careless of informing (...). Thy conscience must needs be silent (...) long as
thou art ignorant. 1. Pet. 2.15.
Ignorance (...) soon put to silence.

2. A second cause is often slighting of conscience. It may be conscience
speaks not, or but coldly and remissely, because when it has advised, and
c^unselled, and admonished, thou have neglected it and disregarded it from time
to time. Though it judge and counsel, yet thou will not listen: Like Cassandra
the prophetess, who though her predictions were true and certain, ^^t were
they never believed: so though ^^nscience speaks true, yet men fol^^w it not;
and therefore it becomes ^ent when it is not regarded, but all (...) counsel,
and advise, and persuasions ^^ghted and neglected. Hence, I say, it ^^meth to
pass that for want of im^loyment it is still and falls asleep, till the time
come that it must be awaked.

3. The third cause is that violence that is often offered unto it. Many times
when conscience persuades to any good duty, or disswadeth from any evi^
course, men will do against it and withstand it violently, and put off the
wholesome advise of it: hence it comes to pass that conscience having so many
injuries offered unto it, begins to provide for its own ease, and so either
it is silent and says nothing, or else i^ soon answered and rebuked; as it was
with Moses: When Pharaoh would never hearken unto Moses, but still fell to
excuses, and at last to deny all, he would not let Israel go notwithstanding
all that Moses could urge, but said to Moses, Exodus 10.29.
Get thee from me; take heed to thy self; see my face no more; Moses then
answered, Thou have spoken well: I will se^ thy face no more. So it is with
conscience; When men have been obstinate and have refused to hear it, and
would have it speak no more, Thou have wel^ spoken, says conscience:
henceforth I will trouble you no more, but let you alone to take your course: I
will advise you no more; or if I do I will not be any more impor^unate.

4. A fourth cause is, that men do wilfully stop the mouth of conscience: ^f it
begins to speak, presently they ^usie themselves about other things; or if
that will not do, they run into company, and there spend their time, that
the howlings of conscience may not be heard; and if still it be loud, they
strike up the drum, and ring all ^^e bells, that the voice of it may be
^^terly drowned: and so conscience at last is content to stand by, to hear and
see and say nothing. By this means many ^^mes it falls out that those who
^ave had very turbulent and clamou^us consciences not suffering them (...) be
quiet, have at last tamed them ^^d put them quite to silence; or if ^^ey do
speak, it is so coldly and re^issely that they care not whether they ^ obeyed
or no. Oh these are damna^e and devilish devises! Whoever ye ^e that do thus,
ye are in a dangerous estate, and ye carry the brands of hell and damnation
upon you. If ever you desire to avoid this dangerous estate, then shun the
cause: Labor to have your conscience thoroughly illightned and informed by the
word of God, that it may read you your duty. A friend that knows but little
can give but little counsel. Again, give heed evermore to the counsel of
conscience. You know Achitophel took it ill that his counsel was not followed;
therefore he made away himself in displeasure: So conscience will take it very
ill if its counsel be not followed: it will strangle it self, and smother it
self; you shall hear no more of it. Especially take heed you do not reject
conscience, nor offer violence to it: If you do, you will make it unfaithful
and remiss; and then you lose the best means under heaven of your good: Then
deadness of spirit succeeds, and hardness of heart takes place, and you
deprive your souls of all possibility of cure. As long as a sick man has any
possibility of cure he is still under hope; but if ever he lost that he is
gone: Conscience is the possibility of the soul to amendment; and therefore if
you dull conscience, and make conscience remiss and unfaithful, you take the
ready way to deprive your selves of all possibility of rising again. Consider
these things, and have a care of your consciences.

And thus we have handled the office of conscience about things to be done and
omitted, with its adjuncts, affections, and properties in that behalf. I ^ome
now to consider the office of conscience about things already done or omitted,
together with the affections of conscience in the discharge of that office.

The office of conscience about things already done or omitted.
THis has four parts: 1. To approve; 2. To absolve; 3. To ^islike; 4. To
condemn, according ^o the good or evil of our actions or ^omissions. The
judgment is not only of the things, what they are; but whither they tend, and
what they will ^roduce.

I. An approving conscience.
FIrst, when that which is done is good, conscience approves it: as Paul
says, This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience, 2. Cor. 1.12.
When he had lived uprightly and sincerely, his conscience approved of it: so
when he had great sorrow and heaviness for his brethren, his conscience
approved it; Romans 9.1.
my conscience bearing me witness, says he. So at his latter end we may see
how his conscience approved the whole course of his life: 2. Tim. 4.7, 8.
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, etc. there is consciences
approbation of him: from henceforth, says he, is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness: there is consciences judgment concerning the issue of it.
Conscience so approves every particular good action done by a faithful man,
that by it he may gather a testimony of the uprightness of his heart: as
Hezekiah; Remember, Lord, that I have walked uprightly before thee. 1. John
3.14.
Hereby we know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren. Mark; Love to Gods children is a sufficient testimony not only of
our uprightness in that particular act, but also of the simplicity of our
hearts in the general, and that we are translated from death to life. So when
good old Simeon had now even finished his days, see what an approbation his
conscience gave of him; Luke 2.29.
Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word. His
conscience here gave a threefold blessed approba^^on of him. 1. That he had
been Gods ^^ithfull servant: thy servant. 2. That he had walked in the ways of
true peace and comfort: depart in peace. 3. That the promise of Gods word was
his in particular; according to thy word.

II. An absolving conscience.
THe second part of the office of conscience is to absolve and acquit. ^hus
Samuel pleading his innocence, ^d his conscience testifying for him, those ox
have I taken? 1. Sam. 12.3.
or whom have I de^auded? and his conscience absolved ^m as clear and free from
those sins. Thus also Job; If I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless,
when I saw my help in the gate; If I rejoiced because my wealth is great; If I
have not given my bread to the hungry; or if I have rejoices at the misery of
mine enemy: then let i^ be thus and thus to me. His conscienc^ absolved him as
clear of those sins* Nay, the conscience of a child of God does not only
absolve him from the guilt of those sins which he never committed, but also
from the guilt o^ those sins which he has committe^ against God or against
man. It can tel^ him he has truly repented, and trul^ been humbled, and truly
got pardon Ye know David had committed dive^ sins: yet when he had humbled
(...) soul before God, and obtained pardon his conscience tells him as much
an^ absolveth him, Psalm. 103.3. Bless t^^ Lord, O my soul, etc. who forgiveth
(...) thy sins. Nay, though a child of Go^ have many infirmities daily and
hou^ly, yet his conscience does absol^^ him: It is no more I that do it, says
(...) conscience, but sin that dwells in (...) If I distrust, it is no more
I; for I fight against it: if I be overtaken by any weak^esse, it is no more I;
for I labored against (...), and do bewail it.

III. A misliking conscience.
THe third part of consciences office in things done is to mislike if we ^ave
done ill. There be imperfections in the best obedience of Gods dearest
servants: What I do I allow not, Romans 7.15.
says ^aul: His conscience misliked some ^^ing done by him. But that mislike
of ^onscience which now I speak of is of ^^ings that are ill done, that is, not
done in truth and sincerity. Thus it is (...) all that are not renewed by the
holy Ghost: The office of their conscience ^^deed is to mislike what they do:
When they have prayed, their consci^^ce can mislike it, and say, I have not
^ayed with a heavenly mind, a holy heart: When they have been at a Sacrament,
^onscience can truly mislike it, and say, ^ have not been a fit guest at
Christ's ta^^e, etc. When they are crossed and ^empted, their consciences truly
mislike their carriage, and say, I do not fight and resist, but readily and
willingly yield t^ every invitation to evil. Do ye no^ think that Jeroboams
conscience misliked his altering Gods worship, hi^ innovating religion, his
making Israe^ to sin? do not ye think his conscienc^ misliked him for these
things? Do no^ ye think that Nabals conscience misliked his griping? and Doegs
conscience misliked his slandering? and Pashurs conscience misliked his
opposin^ and misusing Jeremie? and the old prophets conscience misliked his
lying* Who would have thought but Balaa^ said well, Whatsoever the Lord says
unto me that will I speak, and, I cannon go beyond the commandment of the Lord
to do less or more; no, not for Bala^^ house full of gold? who would have
thought but that this was well said yet his own conscience could no^ choose but
mislike it, being not spoken in sincerity. Many a man has goo^ for a
Christian twenty or thirty years and every one likes him; and yet i^ may be
his conscience has disliked him all the while.

IV. A condemning conscience.
THe fourth part of consciences office in this behalf is to condemn ^f we have
done evil and contrary to Gods law. Conscience has an office ^ot only to
mislike us but also to con^emne us: nay, it will hasten more to ^ondemne us
then God. We see it in Adam: Genesis 3.7.
When Adam had sinned his ^onscience condemned him before God did: he knew he
was naked, that (...) had made his soul shamefully naked; ^^s conscience
condemned him for an ^^ostate before the Lord came to pass ^^ntence upon him.
Nay, it condemn^th us oftener then God: God will condemn a sinner but once for
all, viz. (...) the last day; but conscience con^^mneth him many thousand times
be^^re that. Many men and women who (...) seem godly in the worlds eyes, God
^^oweth how many of them have con^^mning consciences in their bosoms, (...)
all their civilities, and formalities, ^^d crying God mercy, and patched^^
hopes; many who would say that man were uncharitable who should condemn them
for such and such, who (it may be) find conscience within so uncharitable, and
saying plainly, Ye are so; like the conscience of Paul's heretic, Tit. 3.11.
who is said to be condemned of himself.

Romans 2.15.
wherein is showed both that God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the
world, verse. 16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of all men
according to my Gospel: and then in the verse going before the Apostle shows
that now in the mean while every man's conscience makes way for this just
judgment of God; their conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts in the
mean time accusing or excusing one another. At the last day every man shall be
judged according to his conscience; a child of God according to his; a carnal
man according to his. The Lord shall absolve all his children, and their own
consciences shall absolve them. The Lord shall condemn all the rest, and their
own consciences shall condemn them. This is the book that every man's life is
set down in? Every passage of conversation both of the godly and the wicked is
recorded daily in this book: And according to what is written therein will the
Lord judge every soul at the last day, as Rev. 20.12. The dead were judged out
of those things which were written in the book according to their works. The
Apostle there speaks prophetically, and puts the past time for the future;
they were judged, that is, they shall be judged. So that ye see that by the
judgment of conscience way is made for the just judgment of God.

whether they be good or evil. We had need to take heed what we write in our
consciences; for according to what is written there so shall we be judged.
Therefore if any sin stands upon record in our consciences, we had need get
it blotted out by the blood of Christ. Repent, be humbled, beg for pardon, rest
not till thou see this debt-book conscience crossed, and thy sins stand
there cancelled and discharged.

THus I have showed you the offices of conscience about things heretofore done.
Now let me show you the affections of conscience in the discharge of these
offices. Ye have heard that conscience has four offices in things heretofore
done; 1. an office to approve; 2. an office to absolve; 3. an office to
dislike; 4. an office to condemn; The two former when we have done well* and
lived well; then the office of conscience is to approve and absolve: The two
latter when we have done ill and lived ill; then the office of conscience is to
mislike and to condemn. Now follows the affections of conscience in the
discharge of these offices; and they are four: 1. A tender conscience; 2. A
sleepie conscience; 3. A benumbed conscience; 4. A seared conscience.

First, a tender conscience; 1. A tender conscience.
that is, a conscience touched with the least sin, and checking us for the
least sin; as for vain thoughts, exorbitant passions, ^dle words, and the
like. 1. Sam. 24 5.
Such was David's conscience, which smote him for ^utting off the lap of Saul's
garment. Such was Zaccheus his conscience, which troubled him for supposed
sins: ^f I have wronged any man, says he. He ^id not know; but his conscience
was so ^ender that it made him careful of Ifs. This tender conscience is a
singular blessing of God: And if we desire to ^ttein unto it we must labor to
see the ^diousnesse of sin, yea the malignity and exceeding evil there is in
the least ^inne: this will make us tender of it. Secondly, we must labor to
mourn for very sin though it seem little: this ^lso will keep our consciences
tender. And we have great cause to prise a tender conscience. What got the
Bethshemites by not being tender in conscience? They looked into the Ark, and
because they durst venture upon it the Lord smote fifty thousand of them a^
once. 1. Sam. 6.19. Numb. 15.32, 36.
What got the man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath for not being tender in
conscience? He was stoned t^ death. Conscience should tender the least
commandment of God, and so b^ tender of the committing the least sin^ This
conscience is a great blessing.

The second affection of conscienc^ is sleepiness. A sleepy conscience 2. A
sleepy conscience.
i^ not so quick in smiting us as it ought either it checks not, or else with
suc^ faintness that it works not upon us it makes us never the more
watchful^ against sin. This we see by many wh^ can commit such sins without
trouble or disquiet as would bring others on their knees and make the^ walk
heavily long after. This sleep^ conscience is very dangerous: it makes men as
ready to fall into the same sinne^ tomorrow as to day, and next day as
tomorrow: it lets them see their faults, but amendeth none; because this is
such a conscience as does not cause men to feel the burden of their sins. A
man can never come to Christ as long as he has a sleepy conscience; because it
does not cause sin to be burden^ome. They who have this conscience ^an sleep
for all it, and eat and drink and ^e merry for all it: Now a man can never come
to Christ that is not burden^d with his sin, that he cannot bear (...),
cannot be quiet for it, cannot sleep ^or it: then Christ calls him, Come un^o
me, Matthew. 11.28.
all ye that are weary and heavy la^en, and I will ease you.

A benumbed conscience; that is, 3. A benumbed conscience
^^ch a conscience as is in a deep sleep. This differs from the former in
degree. You know there is a less sleep, and ^ere is a greater sleep: There is
a less ^eep, when only the outward senses ^^e bound; and there is a sleep
when ^^e inward senses are bound too. Now benumbed conscience is a conscience
that is in a deep sleep; Preach to it, it ^ourneth not; cry to it, it listeneth
not: This is a benumbed conscience. Nor the greatness of sin, nor the wrath
of God denounced against it can move it. Men can know themselves guilty of such
and such sins, and yet not lay them to heart: conscience never tells them
about it. Thus the Apostle speaks of those who knew the judgment of God,
Romans 1.32.
that they which commi^ such things are worthy of death, yet no^ only do the
same, but have pleasure i^ them that do them: Their conscience^ though
informed, and in some measure knowing the evil of their courses and the
severitie of Gods judgment, yet le^ them go on still, and not only commi^ the
evil themselves, but delight to se^ others as bad as themselves. Such ar^ our
swearers, and drunkards, and company-keepers, etc. This is a ver^ wretched
conscience: the Lord delive^ us from it.

4. A seared conscience
Fourthly, a seared conscience; tha^ is, such a conscience as speaks not (...)
jote; seared with a hot iron, as the Apostles phrase is, 1. Tim. 4.2. a sense
less conscience, a past-feeling conscience: when men can swallow down sin
like drink, oaths, contempt of God, his word and worship, mockage of Gods
servants, hating to be reformed; such as sin without any remorse. This kind of
conscience is in four sorts of men: 1. In dissolute and profligate persons;
who like common strumpets have their souls lie open to every sin that comes
by. 2. In obstinate sinners, such as, like Ahab, have sold themselves to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord. 3. In scoffers and jeerers; who speak
evil of them who run not in the same excess of riot with themselves, and
nickname the godly. 4. In Apostates and backsliders; who speak lies through
hypocrisy, and have fallen from the profession of the truth: All these men
have a conscience seared with a red-hot iron. This is a great judgment of God:
greater then this there cannot ^e: No outward judgment that can fall upon us
is like unto it: not the plague, nor shame, nor beggary, no nor any curse
besides hell it self is equal to it. By this the only means under God of
repentance is taken away. Such may come to repent; but it is a thousand to one
if ever they do. It is like a gravestone lying upon their consciences, which
keeps them under until the day of judgment: at which time God will awaken
their consciences, and then they will be more furious in tormenting then the
very devils themselves.

Use.
Ye that are not yet fallen upon this wretched conscience, I beseech you take
heed that ye never do. But ye will ask me, How may we avoid it? Avoid it?
alas, ye may avoid it if ye be careful: for conscience never seareth it self:
If ever it be seared, it is ye your selves that do fear it. Indeed the mind of
man may blind its own self, and the heart of man may corrupt its ownself; and
the affections of man may defile their own selves: but conscience never
corrupts it self, never seareth it self. But you will say, What must I do to
avoid this searing of conscience?

First, listen to conscience well, that whatever it says to thee from God thou
may do it. This was the course of the Psalmist; I will hearken what the Lord
God will say in me (so some translate it.) Hear then and listen what the Lord
God will say in thee, what thy conscience illightened says in thee, and do it.

Secondly, whenever this conscience is quick follow it. Nothing more seareth
conscience then suffering quickneings to die. Blow the coals if they do but
smoke. As the Apostle says, quench not the Spirit; so quench not conscience.

I have hitherto showed you that every man has a conscience, and the reasons
why God has given us a conscience, the light that it acts by, the offices of
it, and the affections of it. Now from all these proceed two other adjuncts of
conscience: 1. A quiet conscience; 2. An unquiet conscience.

A quiet conscience.
COncerning a quiet conscience three things are to be considered: 1. What a
quiet conscience is; 2. How it differs from that quiet conscience which is in
the wicked; 3. The examination whether we have this quiet conscience or no.

I. For the first, What a quiet conscience is; It is that which neither does
nor can accuse us, but gives an honorable testimony of us in the course of
our lives and conversations ever since we were regenerate (I put that in too:
for 1. we do not begin to live till we be regenerate, and 2. we can never have
a true quiet conscience till then.) Such a quiet conscience had good Obadiah;
1. Kings 18.12.
I fear the Lord from my youth, says his conscience: This was a very
honorable testimony that his conscience gave him. Such a quiet conscience had
Enoch: Heb. 11.5.
Before his translation he received this testimony, that he pleased God.
Dicente scriptura, inquit ille.
Haymo says, this testimony was the testimony of scripture, Genesis 5.24. where
it is said that he walked with God. This is true; but this is not all: The text
says not there was such a testimony given of him, but he had it: and that
before his translation; but the testimony of Moses was after his translation:
Therefore it was the testimony of his conscience that bore witness within that
he pleased God. So that this is a quiet conscience, which neither does nor can
accuse us, but gives an honorable testimony of us in the whole course of our
life and conversation. Now to such a quiet conscience there be three things
necessary: 1. Uprightness, 2. Purity, 3. Assurance of Gods love and favor.

First, uprightness is when a man is obedient indeed. Many will be obedient,
but they are not obedient indeed, not humbled indeed, not reformed indeed. What
it is to be obedient indeed ye may see Exodus 23.22. But if thou shall indeed
obey his voice, and do all that I shall speak, etc. Mark; that is obedience
indeed when we do all that God speaks, and are obedient in all things. This
is an upright conscience, when the heart is bent to obedience in all things. An
example we meet with in Paul; Acts 23.1.
I have lived in all good conscience before God until this day. His conscience
could not accuse him of any root of wickedness and corruption allowed and
cherished in him: That is an upright conscience. Have thou such a conscience as
this, My conscience can truly bear witness there is no sin I favor my self
in, allow my self in, but condemn all, strive against all. Thus David proves
that his conscience was upright; If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord
will not hear my prayer. The regarding of any iniquity will not stand with
uprightness.

A second thing required to a true quiet conscience is purity. Though ou^
heart be upright and stand generally bent to do the Lords will, yet if we be
guilty of some particular sin this will hinder the quiet of our conscience.
Therefore says Paul, 1. Cor. 4.4.
I know nothing by my self; that is, no thing to aco^ me; no corruption, no
root of unbeli^^ reigning in him: Infirmities he ha^ many, and frailties he had
many, and h^ knew them, but he knew nothing (...) accuse him. Whatever was
amiss i^ him, his conscience told him he use^ all holy means against it. If
thy conscience can truly say thus also of thee, then have thou a truly quiet
conscience.

Thirdly, Assurance of Gods love, favor, and pardon. Though we have fallen
into great sins, yet our consciences may have quiet if we can be truly
assured of Gods love and favor in the pardon of them. Heb. 10.2.
The Apostle proves that the sacrifices of the law could not purge away sin;
but only Christ's blood can do it. His argument to prove it is this, Because
those sacrifices could not free a man from having conscience of sin; they
could not purge the conscience: but Christ's blood can: After assurance of
pardon in Christ's blood conscience can no more condemn for sin, how many or
how great soever the sins were which have been committed. These are the three
things required to a true quiet conscience.

Furthermore a quiet conscience implies two things: 1. A calmnesse of spirit:
2. A cheerful, merry and comfortable heart. These two I mean when I speak of a
quiet conscience.

1. A calmnesse of spirit, or a quietness of mind, not troubled with the
burden of sin nor the wrath of God, nor terrified with the judgments due
unto sin. This quietness and calmnesse of spirit is promised to all them
that truly hearken unto Christ and obey him; Prove. 1.33
Whosoever hearkeneth to me shall be quiet from fear of evil.

2. A cheerful, merry and joyful heart. When our conscience gives a
comfortable testimony of us, it cannot but make our hearts joyful. 2. Cor.
1.12.
This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience, says Paul: The
comfortable testimony which his conscience gave of him made him to rejoice. A
wicked man cannot truly rejoice: no, though he be merry and joviall and laugh,
yet his carnal estate is a snare, he can have no true joy; but the righteous
sing and rejoice, Prove. 29.6. No mirth like the mirth of a good conscience. All
other joy is but outside, painted, seeming joy: That is only true joy that is
rooted in the comfortable testimony of an upright good conscience, which
tells a man his peace is made with God, and that whether he be in sickness
or in health God loves him, whether he live or die he is the Lords. Thus ye
see what a quiet conscience is.

How a quiet conscience in the godly differs from the quiet conscience that
is in the wicked.
THe second thing propounded to be considered about a quiet conscience, is, How
it differs from that quiet conscience which is in the wicked. 1. I confess
that the wicked seem to have a very quiet conscience: Many thousands of carnal
people seem to live and the in quiet. Look into alehouses, lewd houses, into
all places; who so merry and brisk, and heartwhole (as they say) as they who
have no saving grace? Job 21.23.
Yet 2. this quiet conscience in them must needs differ from the quiet
conscience of the children of God. Certainly the Lord will not give the
childrens bread unto dogs; neither will he smile upon their souls* neither does
he pardon the sins nor accept the persons of the ungodly: And therefore if
they have a quiet conscience, it must needs differ from that i^ the godly. Must
not copper needs differ from gold? And we who are the Lords messengers must
teach you the difference: Ezekiel. 44.23.
They shall teach my people the difference between the holy and the profane.
Now the question is this, Where in lies the difference between the qui^
conscience of the righteous and the quiet conscience of the wicked? Answ The
difference between them lies i^ four things: 1. In the thing it self 2. In
the cause; 3. In the effect; 4. I^ the continuance.

I. In the thing it self. The quiet conscience in the godly is double; not
only apparentiall and nominall but rea^ and substantial: It is quiet and qui^
too, Isai. 57.19.
peace and peace too: I create t^ fruit of the lips, peace, peace. Mar^ peace
and peace too; peace in appearance and peace in truth and substance also But
the peace and quiet of conscienc^ which the wicked have is not such peace: It
is peace and no peace; peace ^n appearance, but no peace in truth. Their god is
the god of this world, and he persuades them they have peace: But my God,
says the prophet, ^peaketh otherwise; verse. 21.
There is no peace to ^he wicked, says my God. They talk of a good conscience
sometimes, and boast they have a good conscience; but the truth is, they cannot
have true peace within: for, says the prophet, the wick^d is like the troubled
sea which cannot ^est, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. So does a wicked
man's conscience se^retly cast up mire and dirt in his face: His peace can only
be outward and apparentiall.

II. There is a difference in the cause. The quiet of a good conscience arises
from one cause, and the quiet of a bad ^onscience arises from another.

1. The quiet of a good conscience ^riseth from a distinct knowledge of the
word of God, and of the precepts and promises contained in it: But the quiet of
an evil conscience arises from ignorance: When men know not Go^ nor his holy
word, which should bin^ conscience, they fear nothing because they see nothing;
they know not the danger of sin: Like a blind man standing before the mouth
of a cannon, he fears no danger because h^ sees none: so carnal men fear
not because they know not what cause the^ have to fear. Their very prayers the
they make are an abomination to Go^ and they know it not: their good duties
they do are all like cockatrices eg^ and they know it not; they know no^ that
they are in the bond of iniquity, i^ the snare of the devil. Their conscience^
are quiet because they know not wha^ cause they have to be otherwise. Thi^ is
one difference; The quiet and peac^ of a good conscience arises from ligh^ and
from knowledge; the quiet an^ peace of an evil conscience, from darkness and
ignorance.

Heb. 10.22.
2. The quiet of a good conscienc^ arises from a due examination of ou^selves
by the word, and purging of ou^ consciences. Conscience never can be^ good
without purging and sprinkling; ^o nor without a due examination: the ^uiet of
a good conscience arises from ^is. Whereas the quiet of a wicked ^ans
conscience arises from want of ^is: He never examineth his consci^ce, but
lets it sleep till God awake ^ with horror. I say, a wicked man's ^onscience
sleeps, and that makes it ^uiet, and he is not troubled nor mo^sted with it.
Like a baillif or sergeant ^^llen asleep by the way; the desperate ^btour whom
he lies in wait for may ^sse by him then, and find him very ^iet, and not to
offer to arrest him: ^r like a cursed dog fallen asleep; a ^anger may pass by
him then and not (...) meddled with: Such like is this quiet ^il conscience.

3. The quiet of a good conscience ^iseth from a good ground, from the ^ork of
Gods Spirit, from true saving ^ace, from righteousness. Romans 14.17. ^e read
of righteousness and peace: ^rue peace of conscience arises from
^ghteousnesse: Whereas the false peace ^f the wicked arises only from vain
hopes and conceits; They are not guil^ of such and such great sins; or, The
are not so bad as some others: As the Ph^risee's conscience was quiet; why ^
God, I thank thee, I am not as other m^^ are, no drunkard, extortioner, nor li^
this publicane. Or perhaps from thi^ ground their peace arises; The Lord is
very merciful; and, The Lord Jes^^ died for sinners. Or perhaps this i^ their
plea, They are good comers to church They have prayers in their families; The
have been professors of Christ Jesus (...) many years: From hence they drea^
of peace upon false grounds, when ^ the way of peace they have not know^ When
conscience shall be awaked, the^ it will tell them how they have by flatery
deceived their own souls, and tha^ having no true righteousness they could
have no true peace.

4. The quiet of a good conscienc^ arises from tenderness and from life*
Therefore the Apostle joyneth together life and peace, Romans 8.6. Tru^ peace of
conscience arises from life ^ whereas the quiet of a wicked conscience arises
from searednesse and be^mbednesse and deadness, when men ^eing past feeling of
sin are not trou^ed at the committing of it. Thus ye ^e the second thing
wherein the diffe^nce lies, namely in the cause.

III. They differ in the effect. First, ^he effect of the quiet of a good
con^cience is comfort and rejoicing: Romans 5.1.
Be^^g justified by faith, we have peace with ^od through our Lord Jesus
Christ. What follows? By whom we have ac^sse by faith, rejoicing, etc. Mark;
The ^eace of conscience brings forth re^ycing. And so in other places peace
and joy are joined together. Romans 15.13. Gal. 5.22.
But the ^vil conscience, though quiet, wants his rejoicing. If carnal men
had no ^ore mirth then what the quiet and ^eace of their consciences does help
them to, they would not be so merry ^s most of them be. Secondly, Another
effect of true peace of conscience ^, It sanctifies the soul, it purges the
^eart, purifieth the life, and reformeth ^he whole man. It is the instrument
whereby God sanctifies his people more and more: 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
The God of peace sanctify you wholly. Observe the title which the Apostle
there gives unto God when he sanctifies his people, he calls him the God of
peace; he sanctifies his people by peace: It makes them think thus, We must
not do thus or thus as others do; we shall lose the peace of our conscience if
we do. This makes them strive against sin, deny their own wills and carnal
appetites; If I should not do so I should have no peace. This peace
sanctifies: But the peace which carnal men seem to have does not sanctify
the soul: they are never the more holy for the same. Again, another effect of
the peace of a good conscience is, to put life into us in the performance of
good duties: it makes us with gladness and delight perform the duties of our
general and particular callings: But the false peace of an evil conscience
suffers the wicked to be dead and dull to good duties. The true peace keeps
our hearts and our minds: We should lose our minds in the things of this life,
but this peace does keep them upon God; we should lose our hearts upon our
profits and pleasures and affairs in the world, but the peace of conscience
does keep them upon heaven: Phil. 4.7. The peace of God which passes all
understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds. This does the peace and quiet
of a good conscience: but the quiet of a wicked man's conscience does not do
thus; it keeps not his mind in this manner, but it is upon earthly things for
all that.

IV. They differ in respect of duration and continuauce. The quiet of a good
conscience is settled and grounded in the godly; it never fails them nor
forsakes them: the other peace is fading. Let a feeling sermon come and rifle
carnal men, it takes away their peace from them; their consciences then fly
in their faces, and then they see they are not right: Let loss of outward
things come and light upon them, or any other affliction, it takes their peace
from them; conscience then breaks out upon them and shows them how they
have deceived them selves with false peace, especially at their death, then an
evil conscience (that has been quiet before) in stead of comforting will
affright and amaze them. But if we have the quiet of a good conscience, it will
make us hear the word with comfort, and not be troubled and disquieted by a
searching sermon or the threatenings of Gods judgments: Nay, if we be in
trouble, this will quiet us; if in affliction, this will comfort us: It will
endure all ou^ life, and be present at our death; then especially it will show
it self a friend unto us, in standing by us to cheer and refresh us. Psalm.
119.165.
Great peace have they which love thy law, and nothing shall offe^^ them, says
David: nothing shall offend them or take away their peace: it is an^ eternal
and everlasting peace. The you have seen how the true and false peace of
conscience differ.

But here comes a question to (...) answered, and it is this; Have all God
children this peace of conscience? I dare say some of you look for this
question, and long to have it answered I answer therefore, No; they have it not
always. Job seemed one while not to have it: I have sinned, Job 7.20.
says his conscience: what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men.
David seemed one while not to have it: Mine iniquities are gone over my head as
a heavy burden; they are too heavy for me, Psalm. 38.4. His sins lay heavy
upon his conscience for a fit. Hezekiah one while seemed not to have it:
Behold, for peace I had great bitterness. And therefore I say the children of
God have it not always. But let me tell you; They might have it always. 1. It
is possible they should have it always: Their sins of ignorance and
infirmity do not break the peace of their consciences: cannot; for if they
could, then no man should have true peace of conscience at any time. Nothing
but willing and witting sins, sins against conscience, can break the peace of
conscience: and as it is possible for the children of God to live without
these, so it is possible for them always to have peace; yea, they may have
daily more and more peace. 2. As it is possible for the children of God always
to have peace, so they are commanded to keep their peace always; and it is
their own fault if at any time they lose it: Job 22.21.
Acquaint thy self with God, and be at peace, says Eliphas. Col. 3.15.
So, Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, unto which ye are called. We are
not only commanded to have peace in our hearts, but also that it may rule
there, that no corruption perk over it to hinder it: we are called to this
peace, and commanded to have it; and therefore as it is a sin in the
commonwealth when one breaks the peace, so it is a sin in the spirit to
break the peace of conscience: we are all bound to the peace. 3. If the
children of God have it not always, then they feel the want of it: and in the
want of that comfort nothing else will comfort them. It is not all the peace
and prosperity of the world that can comfort their hearts as long as they have
not this peace; not all the mirth in the world can content them until they
enjoy this peace again, the peace and quiet of a good conscience: they faint
for it, and long after it, they can have no strength without it; Psalm. 29.11.
The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his people
with peace. It is not so with corrupt hearts: they can be without peace, and
yet never faint; they can eat and drink for all that, and sleep and be merry
for all that, yea and go about their profits and their earthly businesses as
roundly as ever for all that: But the children of God if they want the peace of
conscience, they have no strength to do any thing almost, they faint till they
have it again. 4. The godly always have the seeds of it in them: Light is sown
for the righteous, Psalm. 97.11.
and gladness for the upright in heart. Mark; it is sown in their hearts, and
it will spring up at one time or other to cheer them and to comfort them. As it
is with the wicked; they may seem now and then to have true peace, but they
have the seeds of horror always in them, which will sprout forth at last, and
then they shall find the worm of an evil conscience again: so on the contrary
side, the godly may seem now and then to have no peace, but yet they have
always the seeds of true peace in them, which will in time show themselves and
solace their souls for ever. 5. They never want peace as the wicked do want it:
The wicked want it, and have no possibility of having it: they go in such
paths as wherein they shall never know peace, Isai. 59.8.
such paths as will never lead them unto it: still their conscience is able to
say they are not right, they are carnal and not spiritual; they know no true
peace of conscience, neither can they: But the children of God walk in such
ways as will bring them to true peace of conscience ere they have done.

By this ye see what a good and quiet conscience is. It cannot be but that all
must like it, and wish, O that we had it! Beloved, let us labor to get it and
the assurance of it. No blessing under heaven is like it: It is a heaven upon
earth. Happy are they who can show they have it: and miserable are they who
have it not. Dulce nomen pacis, Sweet and pleasant is the very name of peace,
especially of the peace of a good conscience: If ye have it, no misery can make
you miserable: and if ye have it not, no happiness can make you happy. It is
Christ's legacy which he bequeathed to his Church; John 14.27.
Peace I leave with you; my peace I give unto you. It is glorious and
honorable: Be thou never so mean in the world, thou art glorious if thou
have this peace: be thou never so despised and disgraced among men, thou
have honor enough if thou have this peace: Romans 2.10. To every one that does
good, glory and honor and peace. Mark how it is accompanied; namely, with
glory and honor: But shame and confusion and dishonor is upon all them that
have it not.

III. Examination, Whether we have a quiet conscience.
COncerning a quiet conscience I propounded three things: 1. What it is; 2. How
it differs from that quiet conscience that is in the wicked; 3. The
examination whether we have this quiet conscience yea or no. The two former we
have handled already: namely, What a quiet conscience is; and, How it differs
from that quiet conscience which is in the wicked. Let us pass on now unto the
third, namely, to an examination of our selves whether we have a true quiet
conscience yea or no.

A quiet good conscience is such a mavelous blessing that it cannot possibly
be but we must like it and wish, O that we had it. Let us then examine our
selves and see whether we have it or no. Many have peace and quietness (as
has been showed already) arising from false grounds: they have peace of
conscience because they know not what belongs to trouble of conscience; or if
they know that a little (as some of the wicked do) yet they do not consider
that sorrow which one day will burst in upon them and sink them utterly: Let us
try then our peace by these notes.

I. If the quiet of our consciences be good, it is such as we have carefully
sought for at the mercies of God in the blood of Jesus Christ, when being
pinched with the burden of our sins we did fly to the promises of God ^o seek
comfort, to the blood of Christ to find ease and to get assurance ^f Gods
favor. If our peace come not ^his way, it is naught, and we were better to be
without it then have it. It may be we speak peace to our selves; ^ut does the
Lord speak peace to our ^onsciences? Psalm. 85.8.
I will hear what the Lord ^ill speak: for he shall speak peace to his ^^ople,
and to his saints: but let them not ^rn again to folly (for that will break
(...) their peace.) O go to God then, and ^eare whether he speaks peace to
^our consciences; whether it be God in Christ reconciling the world to himself
^at speaks it to you. It is not true ^eace without we have sought for it at
^e throne of grace, without it be peace (...) Gods making. Now the Lord speak^h
peace to his people who come to ^m for peace three ways. 1. He ^peaketh peace
to them by his word. ^his speaking is thus; When the word ^romiseth peace to
those who walk by such a rule, and they walk by that rule, then Gods word
speaks peace to their souls. The rule is set down Gal. 6.15. In Christ Jesus
neither circumcision avails any thing nor uncircumcision, but a new creature:
and the^ follows, As many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon them*
2. God speaks peace to his people in their consciences. This speaking i^
thus; When the conscience can say, ^ am in Christ, I am engraffed into Christ
then the Lord speaks peace by the conscience, 1. Pet. 5.14.
peace be with you all that (...) in Christ Jesus: so also when the conscience
can say, I hunger after righteo^nesse, I truly mourn for sin, I desi^ in all
my ways to please God. Thirdly God speaks peace by his Spirit. The speaking
is thus; When the word hat^ spoken peace by the promise, and wh^ the conscience
speaks, I am thus a^ thus qualified, and therefore I have pe^ then the Spirit
of God comes in a^ witnesses, Yea, you say right; peace b^longeth unto you
indeed, and I say A^^ to it. When the Spirit of God do^ say thus, then the Lord
speaks peace ^o the soul. Gal. 5.22.
The fruit of the Spirit is ^ve, joy, peace. Peace is the fruit of ^e Spirit:
it speaks it to the soul, ^reedeth it in the soul. Now, beloved, ^xamine your
selves: Is your peace of ^is stamp? do ye seek it of God and ^et it in the
blood of Christ Jesus? do (...) get it by the word, and by your true-^eaking
conscience, and by the holy ^irit of God? If ye get it on this wise, ^en it is
true peace of conscience in^ed. If ye get it by your own vain ^pes and by your
good meanings, etc. ^s peace will not hold always: when ^ur consciences come
to be awaked, ^ur peace will all vanish away and be (...) more. This is the
first note to try ^d examine your selves by.

II. If our quiet and peace of con^ence be good, it is accompanied ^th such a
life as is agreeable to the ^ll of God: it avoydeth sin, as the ^ng that
disturbeth the peace. How ^n any man have true peace of consci^ce when his life
does not please God ^t provokes his wrath against him? It cannot be that he
should have tru^ peace who in his heart does regar^ sin: There is no peace to
the wicke^ says my God. No, where ever tru^ peace of conscience does inhabit,
(...) dwells with godliness of life and unblameablenesse of conversation; as
the Apostle Peter joyneth them togethe^ 2. Pet. 3.14. Wherefore, beloved, seen^
ye look for such things, be diligent the ye may be found of him in peace witho^
spot and blameless. Mark the words In peace, without spot and blameless.
(...) ever we would be found in true peac^ we must live without spot and
blameless. A wicked man's conscience man seem to have peace, and tell him he
ha^ served God; Prove. 7.14.
This day I have paid (...) vows, says the conscience of the who^^ but this
is a rotten and deceitful peac^* True peace of conscience is ever accompanied
with such a kind of life as is ^greeable to the will of God in his wo^*

III. If our peace be good, it w^ make us endure to hear any point (...) Gods
word with joy and delight. (...) wicked heart can hear points of merc^ and
comfort with joy: so long his peace ^steth: Every man that calls upon the
^ame of the Lord shall be saved; If we con^sse our sins, God is just to forgive
us our ^ns; If any man sin, we have an Advocate ^ith the Father, Jesus Christ
the righte^s; Whoever shall confess that Jesus (...) the Son of God, God
dwells in him ^d he in God: Such points as these a ^icked heart can read
with delight though if they were truly opened and ^pounded they would yield him
cold ^mfort, yet he can hear them with ^light in the lump:) But if a search^g
point or some terrible point co^eth, he is afraid to hear that. Ahab ^d a
quiet conscience but only when ^icaiah did preach: Felix had a qui^conscience
no doubt; yet he trem^d to hear Paul preach of death and (...) judgment, Acts
24.25. One would we thought that Paul (a prisoner) ^ould rather have been
afraid: but ^ul had true peace of conscience, and ^erefore he could think and
speak of ^ath with great comfort, and of judge^ent with joy: So could not
Felix. Beloved, this is a strong sign of a sa^ peace, when some points of Gods
wo^ lay us flat and bereave us of our hol^* Ye shall have many say, O they ha^
such peace, and they have such a good conscience, as quiet as can be, and as
hea^ whole as can be: By and by a sou^ searching point comes and ransacke^
them to the quick, and they are go^ I confess they go and get some unte^pered
mortar or other, and dawb (...) their consciences again; but they (...) gone
for the time. This is a stro^^ sign of a rotten peace. But a child ^ God can
hear any point, hear ^ death, of judgment, of any thing contained in the
word, with delight a^ comfort. It is true, he may be a^zed thereat: but he is
glad at heart t^^ he hears it, and will make use of^ be it mercy or
judgment. Sweet (...) bitter points all are welcome to hi^ even the bitterest
points are sweet (...) him, because God and he are at peace^ and therefore he
knows there is (...) news from God but it is good.

IV. If our peace of conscience (...) good, it will heal that base fearfulness
which is in many: who dare not be in ^e dark, dare not go through a ^urch-yard
in the night. Some will ^ake at the very shaking of a leaf, as ^e wicked in
Job: Job 15.21.
which is nothing ^t a guilty conscience. I grant this ^rfulnesse is natural
to some: yet I (...) the true peace of conscience will ^re it. I do not say
this is a recipro^ll sign of true peace of conscience; ^r many wicked men may
be bold ^ough: but I say true peace of con^ence will cure this immoderate
fear^nesse in the godly.

But here two questions are to be ask^. I. Whether every true child of ^od that
has true peace of conscience ^n think of death with comfort and (...) desirous
to die.

Answ. 1. Peace of conscience does ^t take away natural fear. It is the ^ture
of every living creature to be ve^ fearful of death. The Philosopher ^lleth
death (...), the fear^llest thing of all fearful things. Bildad ^lleth it the
king of terrors. Job 18.14.
Nature loves its own preservation; and therefore fears the destruction of
it. Peace o^ conscience does not take away all the fear. 2. Besides, peace of
conscien^^ does not take away always all degre^ of slavish fear of death. The
reason i^ because peace of conscience may (...) weak, mixed with much troubles
(...) conscience. For as faith may be ve^ imperfect, so peace of conscience m^
be in some very imperfect. Good o^ Hilarion was very fearful to die: H^ cried
out to his soul when he lay on h^ deathbed, O my soul, have thou serv^ Christ
these fourscore years, and art the now afraid to die? Again, a man's lo^ may be
very imperfect. 1. John 4.18.
Perfect love i^deed casts out fear; but imperfe^^ love does not. Hezekiah
had pea^ of conscience: Remember Lord, says (...) I have walked before thee in
truth, 2. Kings 20.3.
(...) with a perfect heart. Mark; He had t^ peace of a good conscience; his
conscience told him he had a sincere hea^ and that his ways pleased God: y^ he
was afraid to die: I do not think^ was only because he had no issu^ though
that might be some reason of it. ^. When a child of God is afraid to ^ie, it is
not so much for love of this ^ife as out of a desire to be better prepa^ed.
This made David cry out, O ^pare me, that I may recover strength, Psalm. 39.13.
before I go hence and be no more. And so ^ob; Let me alone, Job 10.20, 21.
that I may take comfort a little, before I go whence I shall not ^eturn. These
good men were then ^omething unwilling to die: They ^ight have many reasons;
most likely ^is was one, That they might be better prepared, and more fit and
ready for ^eir departure. 4. Some of Gods people; as these, Job and David, at
^ther times; I say, some of Gods peo^^e have such mavelous peace with ^od as
that if it were Gods will they ^ad much rather die then live; Phil. 1.23.
I desire (...) be dissolved, says Paul, and to be with christ; which is far
better. It may be ^ regard of the church, or the care of ^eir children and
charge God has laid ^n them, they could be content to re^ain still in the
body: nevertheless, ^hey account their state after death much better; and,
were it put to them whether to die or to live longer here, they would choose
death rather of the twain. 1. Kings 19.4.
Nay, Elias requested for himself that he might die: It is enough, Lord take
away my life. Not that they lov^ death it self; for death is evil in its ow^
nature, contrary to nature, a badge o^ sin: but for the love they have to an^
the assurance they have of eternal lif^ after death. 5. Nay there is no chil^
of God but may truly be said to lov^ death, and to love the day of judgment
and the appearing of Christ Jesus Divines use to put this as a sign of God^
children: Nay, the Apostle makes thi^ as a property of Gods children; to lov^
Christ's appearing: I have fought a goo^ fight, says Paul, I have finished m^
course: There he tells us of his ow^ peace; and then he tells us of his
reward: 2. Tim. 4.8.
From henceforth is laid up for (...) a crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me in th^^ day; and not to me only, but to them
also that love his appearing: that is, to al^ his children: For all the
children o^ God love the appearing of Jesus Christ to judgment. Though all do
not desire it with the same strength of faith, ^et all desire it with faith.
They be^ieve that Christ has destroyed him that ^ath the power of death, Heb.
2.14.
which is the de^il; they believe Christ has taken ^way deaths sting, which is
sin, 1. Cor. 15.56, 57.
and (...) allowed death up in victory; and may ^l say, Thanks be unto God who
has gi^en us victory through our Lord Jesus christ. Neither do they so much
que^on this as their faith to believe it; ^ying, Lord, help our unbelief. 6.
Gods ^ildren have good reason to do so, ^d to check their own hearts when^er
they do otherwise. Whenever any ^strust comes, they should check it ^wn again:
whenever any fear ari^h, they should say, What? I fear ^^th? which is a thing
so precious? Psalm. 116.15.
Pre^us in the sight of the Lord is the death ^his Saints. Is death precious,
and shall I ^so vain as to fear it? Thus ye see (...) answer to the first
question, Whe^er every child of God that has true ^ace of conscience can be
desirous to ^e.

II. Quest. Whether a wicked man that has no peace of conscience may not be
desirous to die too? Answ. 1. The horror of conscience man make a wicked man
desirous to die. H^ may have so much horror of conscience as that he may think
certainly he^ cannot be worse: (Hell is infinitel^ worse; but he may not think
so.) The Judas was desirous to die, Matthew. 27.5.
when he we^ and hanged himself: Thus many in d^spair do make away themselves.
I confess some in despair may be fearfu^ to die: as Cain was fearful to die;
^ was fear of death made him spea^ thus unto God, It shall come to pass the
every one that finds me shall slay m^ Genesis 4.14. The reason was, because
though he were in despair, yet he w^ not so sensible of his horror as Jud^^
was: for Cain could go and build (...) all this, and train up his children
(...) music and the like for all this; b^ Judas was in a case more sensible of
h^ misery. 2. Dolor of pain may man a wicked man desire to die. Thus ^ was
with Saul: Saul had received b^ deaths wound, and was in most grie^ous pain: he
could not die presently, neither could he live; but lying in very ^reat pain
between both, desired the Amalekite to stand upon him and slay ^im, 2. Sam.
10.9. (though Osiander ^hink the Amalekite lied unto David ^o curry favor with
him; but Jose^hus and others think he spoke the truth.) Sure it is, that many
wicked ^retches, having no peace of consci^nce to sweeten and allay their
tor^ents, have been desirous to die: nay, ^ome have hastened their own death.
^. Malecontentednesse, and shame, and ^isappointment of their aims may also
^ake wicked men desirous to die, and, (...) death come not soon enough of it
^elf, to dispatch away themselves with ^ruel self-murder. Thus it was with
A^hitophel: 2. Sam. 17 23.
when he saw his counsel was was not followed he haltered himself: He had no
peace of conscience to comfort him against all his dumps and dis^ontents; and
therefore he was desi^ous to die. 4. Wicked men, being ^exed at something for
the present, may seem to be desirous to die; and ye^ if death should come
indeed, they would be of another mind, and be content death should be further
off. Nay* Jonas (that strange man of a good man^ O for a fit he would be dying,
yea tha^ he would; Jon. 4.3.
Lord, take my life from me^ for it is better for me to die then to live. ^
suppose if God had taken him at hi^ word, he could have wished his word^ had
been in again. But thus it is often in the mouths of wicked people; ^ would I
were dead; and, I would I were o^ of the world: not for any peace of conscience
they have, nor for any desire o^ death, but only for a momentany pang^ If they
were to die indeed, they would be loath enough to it. Like the man i^ the Fable:
who being wearied with his burden of sticks, lay down and called for Death; but
when Death came indeed to take him, and said, What shall I do, man? thou
calledst me: I pray thee, said he, help me up with my burden of sticks. When he
was to die indeed, then he would rather have his own wearisome burden. It is
but a fable; but this is the fashion of many. 5. When wicked men are desirous
to die indeed ^ometimes not out of discontent or any such like reason, yet it
cannot be out of any true peace of conscience: They may go away like lambs, as
we ^ay; but it is in a fools paradise. It may be whilst they lived they
thought ^o go to heaven; but when they die, then ^ll their thoughts perish, as
the Psalmist ^peaketh in another case.

To return therefore where we left; O beloved, is there any of you that want
the peace of a good conscience? and do ye know what you want? what ^ great
benefit and blessing? That ye may see this, and fully know it, and by ^nowing
it earnestly desire it, con^ider

First, That it is the very head of all ^omforts. A worthy Divine calls it
Abraham's bosom to the soul: Ye know what a blessing it was unto Lazarus to be
taken from his sores into Abraham's bosom: The peace of a good conscience is
like this bosom of Abraham: Who would not gladly lie in it? Such a man who
has it can never look upon another man's comfort, but a good conscience will
say, Yea, and I have my comfort too. When Paul was commending of Timothy, see
how his own conscience spoke of himself at the same time: 1. Cor. 16.10.
He works the work of the Lord, as I also do. Mark; his conscience would be
putting in comfort for himself: Does Timothy work the Lords work? yea, and so
do I too, says his conscience: It is Musculus his observation upon the place.

Secondly, A quiet conscience makes a man to taste the sweetness o^ things
heavenly and spiritual: It makes the word to be to him, as to David, Sweeter
then honey, yea then the hony-combe: I have not departed from thy judgments, O
Lord, says he (thus says his conscience:) now what follows next? Psalm.
119.103.
How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter then honey unto my mouth. A
good conscience makes a man taste sweetness in prayer, when his conscience
tells him he prays aright: It makes him taste sweetness in a Sabbath, when
his conscience tells him he sanctifies it aright: so also in the sacrament,
when his conscience can witness he receives aright. What is the reason so few
of you taste sweetness in these things? The reason is this; Because ye have not
the peace of a good conscience: It would find sweetness in every good duty,
in every good word and work.

Thirdly, A good quiet conscience makes a man taste sweetness in all outward
things, in meat, in drink, in sleep, in the company of friends: it puts a
Better upon a very morsel, Prove. 17.1. Brown bread and a good conscience, there
is a Better upon it then upon all the costly fare of the wealthy without it.
Bernard calls a good conscience a soft pillow: An other calls it a dear
bosome-friend: Solomon calls it a continual feast. It makes a man taste
sweetness in every outward thing. The healthy man only can take pleasure in
recreations, walks, meats, sports, and the like: they yield no comfort to those
that are bedrid or sick, or half-dead: But when the conscience is at peace, the
soul is all in good health; and so all things are enjoyed with sweetness and
comfort.

Fourthly, It sweetneth evils to a man, as troubles, crosses, sorrows,
afflictions. If a man have true peace in his conscience, it comfort him in
them all. When things abroad do disquiet us, how comfortable is it to have
something at home to cheer us? so when troubles and afflictions without turmoil
and vex us and add sorrow to sorrow, then to have peace within, the peace of
conscience, to allay all and quiet all, what a happiness is this? When
sickness and death comes, what will a good conscience be worth then? Sure
more then all the world besides. If one had all the world, he would then give
it for a peaceable conscience. Nay, what think ye of judgment and the tribunal
of Christ? Do but think what a good conscience will be worth then? When Paul
was accused and hardly thought of by some of the Corinthians, this was his
comfort; I know nothing by my self, 1. Cor. 4.3, 4.
says his conscience: I count it a very small thing to be judged of you. Nay,
he goes further: His conscience tells him he has the Lord Jesus (who
justifies him) to judge him; he has a sweeter Judge then his own conscience,
even his Savior, to judge him. O there is no created comfort in the world like
the comfort of a peaceable conscience. The heathen Menander could say, (...),
Conscience is a little petty god. We may not give it such a big title: but
this is most certain; The conscience is Gods echo of peace to the soul: in
life, in death, in judgment it is unspeakable comfort.

Is there any then that want this? Exhortation.
Let them above all things labor to get it: It is more worth then all things
else. Whatever we neglect, let us not neglect this. It is safer to neglect
body, health, means, maintenance, friends, and all that ever we have in the
world then to neglect this. The more we have the worse it is for us, if we have
not this. Had we all this worlds good, it is like a stone in a serpents head or
a toads head, or a pearl in an oyster, not our perfection but our disease.

Again, you who have a peaceable conscience, 1. Labor to maintein it. Be often
in communion with God, be not strangers to him the light of whose countenance
is the peace of your souls. It is the walking with God that breeds true peace
and preserves it. It is said of Levi, Mal. 2.6.
that he walked with God in peace. O let us stir up our selves to walk close
with God, that so we may have peace: No sweet peace but in so doing. 2. We must
take heed we do not trouble nor disquiet it, that we do not resist it, or offer
violence unto it by committing sin against the peace of it, but endeavor to
maintein the peace of it by obeying the voice of it. Get the fear of God, which
is wisdom; and to depart from evil, which is true understanding: All her paths
are peace, Prove. 3.17. We cannot walk in any one path of true wisdom but we
shall find in it peace: There is peace in humility, and peace in charity, and
peace in godliness, and peace in obedience, etc. Break any of these things,
and ye break the peace. Ye hear what an admirable thing the peace of
conscience is: O then, if ye have it, make much of it: nay, if ye have it, ye
will for certain make much of it. The very having of it will teach you the
worth of it, and learn you to prise it, and make you above all things unwilling
to leave it. And thus much of the first, viz. a quiet conscience.

An unquiet conscience.
I Have already handled a quiet conscience. I come now to speak of a troubled
and unquiet conscience: Concerning which I shall show you three things: 1. What
it is; 2. The degrees of it; 3. The difference of the trouble that may be in a
good and that may be in a bad conscience.

I. What a troubled conscience is. What it is
It is a conscience accusing for sin, and affrighting with apprehensions of
Gods wrath. And here I would have you consider two things: 1. What are the
causes of it; 2. Wherein it consists.

First, The causes of it are these five. 1. The guilt of sin: When a man has
done evil, and his conscience does know it, then does the conscience cry
guilty: Lev. 5.4.
when he knows it, says the text, then he shall be guilty. This is it which
wounds and pierces conscience; this is the sad voice of conscience. Like
Judas; I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood: Like Cain; My sin is
greater then can be forgiven. So the brethren of Joseph; Genesis 42.21.
We are guilty, say they, concerning our brother. It is like the head of an
arrow sticking in the flesh, or like a dreadful object continually presenting
it self before our eyes: My sin is ever before me, Psalm. 51.3.
says David. When we have transgressed Gods law, and our conscience can cry
guilty, when the guilt of sin lies upon conscience, this is one cause of
the trouble of it.

2. Another cause is the apprehension of Gods wrath for sin: When knowing
that we have sinned and offended God, we apprehend his wrath in our minds, and
behold the revenging eye of his justice against us. This is a very grievous
thing, so terrible that no man or angel is able to abide it: As we see the
kings and potentates, the mighty men of the earth, call for the mountains ^o
fall upon them, and the hills to cover them from the wrath of God, Rev. 6.15,
16. When we have incurred Gods displeasure and our consciences see it, when his
anger rests upon us and our ^onsciences feel it, this is another cause of the
trouble of conscience.

3. A third cause of the trouble of ^onscience is the fear of death and of
^ell: When we know we have offended Gods law, and we know also what our sins
do deserve, namely death and judgment and damnation for ever; ^his does most
trouble and disquiet conscience, when it fastneth on the apprehension of it.
The Apostle calls ^t a fearful looking for of judgment. When conscience
looks for nothing else but for hell and damnation, this must needs trouble
conscience.

4. Another cause is privative, want of supportance; when God does withhold
from conscience the help of his Spirit. Ye know the Spirit can enable
conscience to undergo all its troubles; the Spirit can prompt it with mercies
and the promises of God, and hold it up: but when the Lord bereaveth the
conscience of this help, and does no^ at all support it, this must needs also
trouble conscience.

V. When God does fasten on the conscience such thoughts as may affright and
terrify it; as thus, God does not love me; Christ will not own me; (...) have
sinned, I am a reprobate, past hope, etc. When such thoughts as these fasten o^
the conscience, it cannot choose then but be troubled. Thus I have showed you
what are the causes of the trouble of conscience.

Secondly, This trouble of conscience consists in two things: First, in want
of comfort: It cannot apply to it self neither the promises of this life nor of
that which is to come. Conscience cries, This belongs not to me: This mercy,
this comfort is not my portion. Secondly, In a terror and anguish of mind from
these three heads: 1. From the guilt of sin; 2. From the apprehension of Gods
wrath; 3. From fear of death and of judgment. This is the three-stringed whip
wherewith conscience is lashed. These ye shall find upon the conscience of Adam
and Eve, when they had sinned against God. Their conscience was whipped 1. With
the guilt of sin; they saw they were naked, Genesis 3.7. 2. With the
apprehension of Gods wrath; they hid themselves from the presence of God, verse
8. 3. With the fear of some vengeance which they began to look for; I was
afraid, says Adam, verse 10. This three-stringed whip ye may see also was upon
the conscience of Cain after he had slain his brother: His conscience was whipped
1. With the guilt of sin; My sin is greater ^hen can be forgiven: 2. With
the apprehension of Gods wrath; From thy face, O Lord, am I hid: 3. With the
expectation of death and of judgment; It shall come to pass that every one
that finds me shall slay me. Thus I have showed you what a troubled
conscience is.

The degrees of a troubled conscience.
II. THe next thing I promised to show is the degrees of a troubled conscience.
A troubled conscience has diverse degrees: For some conscience are more
troubled then other some. 1. The first degree is such a degree as may be in
Gods children: and this arises not so much from the apprehension of Gods wrath
as from the guilt of sin: Their consciences grieve an^ are troubled to think
that they have sinned and offended the Lord God. Thu^ we see David could not be
at quiet: Although Nathan had told him from Go^ that his sin was forgiven,
yet his conscience still troubled him: Psalm. 51.4.
Against the only have I sinned, and done this evil i^ thy sight; says he. I
grant the consciences of Gods children are troubled a^ the apprehension of Gods
anger; but then it is his fatherly anger, not the anger of an enemy. Though for
a s^^ they may seem to apprehend that too, yet mostly it is for that they have
provoked their loving Father to anger against them. A father may be angry with
his child out of love; and so the Lord may be with his dear children. The Lord
was angry with me too, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 1.37. O let not my Lord be angry,
says Abraham the father of the faithful. O God of hosts, Psalm. 80.4.
how long will thou be angry with thy people that prays, says the Psalmist.
Sometimes ^he Lord is angry with the prayers of his people; but it is in love,
because he would have them pray better, and obey better, and look to their
standing ^etter. Now the consciences of Gods people are very much troubled when
^he Lord is thus angry with them.

2. The second degree of trouble of ^onscience is such as is in the wicked, and
yet not altogether without hope. The conscience is troubled, but yet so ^s it
conceives hope: God is merci^ull; and, Christ died for poor sinners, ^c. Thus
many a wicked man is trou^led and affrighted in conscience, not ^or sin, but
for the wrath of God against it; yet he conceives for the present that the
sin is pardonable and may be forgiven: Christ may forgive; God may pardon. It
is indeed but a poor ground of hope and comfort upon possibilities: but yet
this lightneth the trouble in the mean time, and it may be within a while
shakes it quite off: Like the wicked Jews Isa. 57.10. who were worried and
wearied most grievously; yet they said not, There is no hope. There may be much
horror and disquiet in these consciences for a time: but there is a higher
degree yet, a worse troubled conscience then this.

3. The third degree of a troubled conscience is, when it is for the present
altogether hopeless; such a conscience as is swallowed up in despair: when men
thinking of their manifold sins, of the direful wrath of God, of the
dreadful torments of hell for ever^ their consciences make them despair of all
hope or possibility of avoiding this bringing such thoughts as these, Wha^ a
deal of time have I spent in sin wherein I might have made my peace with God
an^ have prevented all this? What a great and omnipotent God have I offended?
What an infinite Judge have I provoked, who is able to revenge himself on me,
and who will be my foe to eternity? conscience also bringing in thoughts of
the torments and unsufferable pains to be endured in hell, and such swallow up
in despair without all hope for the present or the future. Like the wicked man
which Eliphaz speaks of, Desperatio est homicida animae, Aug.
He believes not that he shall return out of darkness, Job 15.22. So these
have no hope of escaping, expect to perish as Spira; O, says he, I envy Cain
and Judas: I would I were in their cases: They are damned; but I shall be
worse for evermore. Now though to these all hopes be gone for the present, yet
some of these troubled consciences scramble up again with vain hopes, and some
do not. Cain got ^p again, it should seem: but Judas did not. Those that never
get up again, either 1. they live in intolerable horror and vexation of
spirit, Desperare est in infernum descendere, Isid.
as if they had a devil in them to put them to anguish, and often (being weary
of their lives) do make away themselves, and so leap quick into hell: or else
2. they run desperately into all abominable courses: Their consciences
telling them there is nothing to be expected but damnation, they give
themselves desperately to commit sin with greediness, saying with them in
Jeremie, There is no hope; therefore we will wall after our own devises. Jer.
18.12. Or else 3. they grow senseless of it. They see they are wrong, but they
are not sensible of it. It may be they pray and read and hear; but their
consciences secretly whisper, All is to no purpose. Conscience eats and
eats like a worm, and they pine away in their iniquities, Ezekiel. 4.23.
as the prophet speaks. A kind of sorro^ they have, but they cannot mourn; ^
kind of sad dolor, but they cannon weep: Ye shall not moan nor weep, b^^ pine
away in your sins, says the text I confess there be more presumers i^ the
world, who promise themselves that all shall be well with them: but yet there
be despairers too, and very many, whose consciences are troubled with secret
despair; though it may be not apparently to others.

Now the causes of these despairing consciences are these. 1. The greatness of
sin; when the heart thinks secretly thus, Certainly the Lord cannot find in
his heart to forgive me. As it was with Cain: When he had lived in
earthly-mindednesse, and then in formality, and then in discontent and in
hatred, and then in hardness of heart, the Lord rebuked him, and yet his heart
was so hard that still he went on in evil; then he murdered his brother; and
lastly he despaireth; Genesis 4.13.
My sins are greater, says his conscience, then can be forgiven. He thought
God could not find in his heart to forgive him. So when men sin and sin,
and the Lord does rebuke them, and yet they do sin, and their consciences do
check them, and yet they go on, at last they come to have secret despairs in
their heart, that God now will not look toward them; whereas if yet they had a
mind to stoop to Jesus Christ, they might be forgiven. 2. A second cause of
despairing is multitude of temptations. Indeed the godly should not be so apt
to think themselves forsaken of God by reason of temptations as sometimes they
are; they should rather count it joy, as James speaks, chap. 1.2. But yet
many of the wicked despair finally by this means: Because they do so often fall
into temptations, therefore they conclude they are forsaken of God. 3.
Ignorance of Gods word. When the guiltiness of sin meets with minds not
instructed in the doctrine of free grace and reconciliation by Christ, this is
a cause of despair. 4. So also inured custom of sinning is another cause. When
men are often quickened, and grow dead again; then quickened again for a fit, and
then hardened again: in the end they fall to despair. These and the like are the
causes of despairing consciences. And thus I have showed also the second thing
propounded to be handled, namely, the sundry degrees of troubled consciences.

III. The third thing is the difference between the troubled conscience in the
godly and in the wicked. The consciences of Gods children may be troubled, and
are many times; and the consciences of the wicked they are troubled too: now
the question is, How do they differ? I answer,

1. That trouble in the conscience of wicked men is accompanied with
impenitency, and sometimes with blasphemy: I would I were able to resist God,
says Francis Spira: like those in the Revelation who blasphemed God because of
their torments. Sometimes it is accompanied with cursings, as Isai 8.21.
sometimes with infinite murmuring. But in Gods children it is not so: When
their conscience is troubled, they justify God, and clear God, and give him
the glory of all, and submit under his hand, and subdue their hearts unto him:
as David in his trouble did not fret and murmr against God, but says he, If
God have no pleasure in me, lo, 2. Sam. 15.26.
here I am: let him do with me what seems him good. So that the trouble of
conscience in the children of God and in the wicked does much differ in this
first respect

2. The trouble of conscience in the wicked arises only from the apprehension
of Gods wrath and fear of judgment for sin, not for the sin it self and
from the love of holiness: But that in Gods children arises chiefly for
sin, and the want of the apprehension of Gods love unto them: How long will thou forget me, O Lord? for ever? how long will thou hide thy face from me?
Psalm. 13.1. Mark whence the trouble of the Psalmist came: This was his trouble,
that God did hide his face.

3. Trouble of conscience in the wicked never makes them part with sin,
never breeds a hatred of sin in them; but that in Gods children does. True it
is that a wicked man's troubled conscience may make him vomit up his sin, like a
dog that vomiteth up his troublesome meat: but he does not vomit up his stomach
to that meat; for when the trouble is over he returns to his vomit again. So
a carnal man returns to his deadness of heart again, and to his security
again, when the trouble is over. Pharaoh, whilst his conscience was troubled
at the sense of Gods judgments, O then says he, I have sinned: I pray, Moses,
let me have your prayers; and I will let you go. If the children of Israel
could have packed up and departed while this trouble had lasted, they might
have been gone. But when he saw there was respite, Exodus 8.15
he hardened his heart again. Mark; His trouble of conscience did not make him
part with his sin: But that in Gods children does.

4. That in the wicked drives them from God: They have little heart to come
unto him: They see nothing but wrath; and they rather go about to seek ease in
other things then to seek his favor: as Saul sought ease in music, and Cain
in building castles and cities, and Judas in a desperate course. Their trouble
fetches them not to God. But the trouble in Gods children works otherwise:
In the midst of trouble of conscience they rest upon God: as Heman cries,
Psalm. 88.1.
O Lord God of my salvation, in the midst of the troubles of his soul. The eyes
of Gods children are still toward heaven; they think still they should have
some help from God: They pray and cry, and though God seems to neglect them,
yet they cannot give over: They will not be beaten off from waiting on God when
he will speak comfort to them.

5. That trouble that is in the wicked makes their heart sullen: but that in
the godly melts their heart: My soul is like melting wax, says David in his
troubles of conscience. His soul melted before God, and was even poured out
before him, Psalm. 22.13. This is a kindly working. Thus ye see the difference.

Uses.
The spirit of man will sustein its infirmities: Prove. 18.14.
but ^a wounded spirit who can bear? As long as a man's spirit is sound, it will
bear any thing. Some have born agues, fevers, stones, colicks, convulsions,
rackings, torturings: as long as a man's spirit is sound he is able to bear any
of them, all of them: but a wounded spirit who can bear? Never was there man
that was able to bear a wounded spirit. We may see by many of Gods children how
heavy it is: David rored with the anguish of it: a strange phrase. He man was
ready even to run out of his wits with it: While I suffer thy terrors, says
^he, I am distracted, Psalm. 88.15. Moses puts himself into the number; We
are even consumed by thine anger, Psalm. 90.7. Ethan complains that it was
like a burning fever: How long, O Lord, will thou hide thy face? for ever?
shall thy wrath burn like fire? Psalm. 89.46. If it be thus with Gods children,
what may we think of the wicked? If we could search into the bosoms of some
wicked men who are enemies to God, then we might see and understand the true
weight and burden of this troubled conscience. Cain cries out of more then he
can bear. Judas thought to find more ease in hell then in his own heart: So
terrible was the torture of his troubled conscience, that he murdered himself,
thinking verily that hell could not be worse.

will tell you of it, and then your hearts will die within you and be like
stones, 1. Sam. 25.37.
as cold and as heavy as a stone within you. As Samuel met with Saul, 1 Samuel
15.26.
Because thou have forsaken the Lord, the Lord also has forsaken thee: so
conscience will find you out. However for a while ye slight and neglect it, or
else perhaps suppress it, yet it will find you out, as Eliah did Ahab, and
then ye will say as he did, Have thou found me, 1. Kings 21.20.
O mine enemy? yea, I have found thee: Thou have sold thy self to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord: thou have been a profane beast, thou have
run against heaven, and against God and Christ; and thy life has been full of
rebellions, etc. now I have found thee out. The day will come when thy
conscience shall be like Jobs messenger. Ye know what news the messengers
brought Job; first news of one great evil, and then of another greater, and
then of a third worst of all; cattle and goods taken away, servants dead,
sons and daughters dead, I only am left alive to tell thee: So, I say, the
time will come when conscience shall thus report, Thy pleasures are dead; thy
profits are dead; thy comforts are dead; thy heart is dead; thy soul is cursed,
and must die for ever: and I only am left alive to tell thee: And then he
shall cry our, Cursed was I that ever I was born: and cursed be the womb that
bare me, and the paps that gave me suck. Then shall thou mourn at the last,
when thy flesh and thy body are consumed, and thy conscience shall say, How
have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof? I have not obeyed the
voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ears to them that instructed me. Such
doleful messages conscience will bring in one day; and then it shall hiss
like a snake in thy bosom, Know now that for all these things thou shall come
to judgment. And so thy conscience shall bray thee like a fool in a mortar, as
it were with a pestill, and it shall pounce thee and beat thee and distress
thee for evermore. This is the moth that gets into the cloth, and does eat
it: Psalm. 39.11.
When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty
to consume away like as when a moth fretteth a garment. This will make thy face
gather blackness, and thy spirit be overwhelmed for evermore.

I must add another use yet: For all this is the law: and until ye be in
Christ ye are all under the law, the curse of it, the rigor of it: And we are
bound to tell you how ye shall find it if ye do not submit to the
righteousness of Christ. But though we do preach the law, yet we do preach it
in the hand of a mediator, says Paul, Gal. 8.19. a terrible killing law, but
yet in a merciful hand, in the hand of a mediator, to drive us to seek for
mercy: and therefore

at the last, and then woe be to you. Your consciences will make all things
grievous and bitter to you, even those things which in themselves are most
sweet and good: When ye hear of heaven, of mercy, of the blood of Christ,
these will but increase your misery: conscience will say, You have no part in
them. When you hear the word, any promise or comfortable passage in it, your
conscience will say, Yea, this is my misery, I have no share in these things.
This will be a hell unto you, and will torment you before your time. This will
also make all outward good things bitter unto you: When you see wife and
children and friends, then conscience will whisper and say, I shall not have
these long: ere long I shall have none but damned company. When you see your
goods, estates, and the like, conscience will mutter, Alas, ere long I shall be
in a place where a drop of water shall not be afforded me to cool my tongue.
When you see the light and other comfortable objects, O woe is me; I shall
shortly be in a place where I shall see nothing but darkness, utter and
everlasting darkness. Conscience will make your afflictions intolerable, your
sickness intolerable, your deathbed intolerable, the face of death
intolerable. I beseech you, brethren, consider these things, you that have not
felt a troubled conscience until this hour. Ye hardly know yet what it is: ye
will know it to your sorrow, if you do not consider it. There is a phrase in
Ezekiel. 30.24. where God says he will make Pharaoh groan with the gronings of a
man deadly wounded: So it will be with you, if you will not hearken and submit
to Jesus Christ: conscience will make you groan with fearful groans; O woe is
me, I am undone, without hope, without remedy. Consider this therefore, and be
wise, before the things which concern your peace be hidden from you.

And let me the rather exhort Exhortation.
you to this in regard of the danger of the times. The Lords wrath is gone out,
and his judgments do fly through the earth, and his plagues do fall on every
side of us: What will your guilty consciences do now? oh you can never endure
them. Ye had need of purged consciences now, lest ye be quite comfortless in
the day of visitation. How miserable is their case who want the peace of
conscience in the time of distress? When troubles and afflictions are without,
then how grievous is it to want peace and comfort within? When Gods mortal
arrows are in your bodies, then to have the arrow of his wrath sticking in your
souls, this will add sorrow to sorrow, and make your estate much more
uncomfortable and unsupportable. Beloved, peace of conscience is good at all
times; but it is most precious when calamities fall on us: Then to have the
peace of a good conscience that may bring us good news from heaven, that all is
well within, all peace there, this is such peace as all the world cannot give
nor sell nor buy. Never more need of the peace of conscience then now. M. M.
As one said of the books of faith, There be abundance of books written of
faith: buy them all up, says he; ye will need every one of them ere long: So
may I say of whatever may forward the peace of conscience; Buy it, purchase it,
get it, as much peace as you can possible: ye will have need of it all ere
long. Take heed of troubling your consciences or clogging them with guilt, lest
the Lord cast you off, and lest ye be hardened, and so ye perish from the right
way. Do not think thus, O we are believers, and have no need of such
threatenings. He who is certain of his salvation knows assuredly he should be
damned if he should go on in sin without repentance; This If is true enough;
Ezekiel. 18.26.
If the righteous forsake his righteousness, all his former righteousness
shall be forgotten. And, Woe is me, says Paul, 1. Cor. 9.16
if I preach not the gospel. In the state of innocence there was use of
threatenings: so is there now in the state of grace. The Lord threatened Adam in
innocence, If thou eat thereof thou shall die the death. Job was awed by
threatenings not to lift up his hand against the fatherless; for, says he, Job
31.23
destruction from God was a terror to me. My flesh, says David, trembles for
fear of thee, Psalm. 119.120.
and I am afraid of thy judgments. Let us have grace, says the Apostle, Heb.
12.28.
whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear. Why? for
our God is a consuming fire. For be it that Gods children (that is, all
believers) shall never fall finally away; yet this threatening is one of Christ's
instruments whereby he keeps them from falling: and they also may taste of
much bitterness if they grow indulgent to their corruptions. O therefore take
heed of this curse, that your consciences may not dog you with the guilt of
sin and the apprehension of Gods wrath. You will never be able to bear it,
much less in the time of affliction. O it is good being in a dry house when a
great tempest is up: and it is safe being in a good harbor when a storm
beats hard. A good conscience is good at all times; but O how sweet then!
When Jonah fell into affliction, the want of peace in his conscience made him
look upon his affliction as upon hell, as though he had been in the belly of
hell: They who follow lying vanities, forsake their own mercies, says he.
Mark; his conscience dogged him with his fleeing from God, and forsaking his
own mercies. Ye see he was miserably distressed by it till the Lord did deliver
him. Be charie then of conscience, and get it purged, that it may speak peace
to you in trouble.

4 Questions.
NOw I have declared unto you, What a troubled conscience is; What is the cause
of it, and wherein it consists; How many degrees there be of it; How the
troubled conscience of the godly differs from the troubled conscience of the
wicked; the misery of a troubled conscience; and, What a deal of mischief it
does one, especially in affliction: now I should leave this point, but that
there be sundry questions to be answered about it.

I. Suppose a man be rid of this trouble, and have peace of conscience, how
shall he maintein it, and keep out troubles from it?

II. Whether and how the peace of our conscience depends upon our care and
obedience?

III. What manner of obedience it is that peace of conscience does depend on?

IV. If a man have no peace, but only a burdened conscience, what must such a
man do to be freed from it and to attein true peace?

I. Question; How a man may keep peace of conscience.
I begin with the first: Suppose a man have peace of conscience, what must he
do to keep and maintein it? I answer,

First, We must labor to prevent troubles of conscience by taking heed that we
do nothing contrary to conscience. We must not be drawn by friendship, or
credit, or the love of any lust, to do that which conscience forbids.
Nothing should be so dear unto us as the peace of conscience: nothing for the
love of it should make us do ought against our conscience. How miserable are
those comforts, delights, satisfactions which we get to our selves in such
courses as our own hearts do condemn! However they seem comforts for a while,
and contentments for a while, and delights for a while, yet at last it will
appear that miserable comforts are they all. Nothing that we get in any evil
way will cheer and comfort us in a time of need. What said Francis Spira at the
time of his death, when seeing his wife and children about him, and thinking on
the goods and estate which he had got for them by denying the truth which he
had before maintained against the Romish errors, he cried out in the horror
of his conscience, How terrible is the sight of these unto me! However before
they had been comforts to him, yet now he could not endure the sight of them.
O, thought he, I recanted for your sake; I yielded to superstition, and it was
long of you: Therefore he abhorred now the sight of them. Wretched is he that
allows himself in any course which his conscience finds fault with. It is a
good rule the Apostle gives, Romans 14.22.
Blessed is he that condemns not himself in that which he allows: that is,
Blessed is he that has not a condemning conscience, that allows not himself
in any course wherein his conscience does condemn him. So that if we have
peace of conscience, and desire to maintein it, let us never allow our selves
in any course that our conscience may condemn us in. That is the first answer.

The God of love and peace be with you. If he be the God of love to us, it is
sure enough he will be the God of peace also: If we know once that God loves
us, then we may set our hearts at rest: As long as we doubt of his love our
conscience can never have true peace: And therefore if we would maintein true
peace of conscience let us labor to be assured of Gods love.

Zech. 13.1.
set open for Judah and Jerusalem, and for every poor soul to wash ^n. As we
sin daily, so he justifies daily, and we must daily go to him for ^t: As
every day we run into new debts, so the Lords prayer teaches us every day to
beg forgiveness: We must every day eye the brazen serpent. Justification is an
ever-running fountain, and therefore we cannot look to have all the water at
once. A fountain ever runs anew; so justification ever flows anew, and we
must go to it. Christ is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. O
let us sue out every day a daily pardon of course! Let us not sleep one night
without a new pardon. Better sleep in a house full of adders and venomous
beasts then sleep in one sin. O then be sure with the day to clear the sins
of the day: Then shall our conscience have true peace. Object.
But how if I have relapsed? what shall I do then? Sol.
I answer, Every man that falls does not fall on all four, as we use to say;
he does not fall quite: There be degrees of falling. As in a sick man, though
he be ill yet he is not by and by dead; some life remains still, which will
look out toward health again: so there is so much life in justification as to
recover thee again. Be constant therefore in this course: Ever go to Christ,
ever wash in this fountain, ever bring thy soul hither to be cleansed; and then
thy conscience ever shall have peace.

Whosoever keeps his word, in him verily is the word of God perfected; and
hereby know we that we are in him, 1. John 2.5. Mark; Hereby our conscience may
tell us that we are right, and speak peace to us, if we keep his word.

II. Question; How the peace of our conscience does depend upon our care and
our obedience.
The reason why I raise this question is this, Because as our justification is
only in Christ, so our peace is only in him; how then does the peace of our
conscience depend on obedience? The place of scripture that occasioneth the
doubt is, 1. Pet. 3.21. The answer of a good conscience toward God by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. It is by Christ; how depends it then on our
obedience?

Answ. 1. A good conscience does not depend upon our obedience as the
principal cause of it, but upon justification which we have by Christ if we be
in him: Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith we have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Ye see then that our peace is grounded upon our
justification as the principal cause of it. If we should seek for peace from
our works and obedience, alas, they are sinful and defective; there is no
peace to be found in them: Our conscience would be troubled at our best duties,
at our weakness in prayer, our frailties in hearing, our slips in every holy
service: There is nothing we do but our conscience might find fault with it,
and pick a hole in it; and therefore we had need to fly unto Christ for true
peace. No wonder then that Papists have not true peace, but professedly say
that every man must doubt, and no man can be sure of his salvation. They must
needs doubt indeed who trust to their own works: which can never bring true
peace. The conscience must ever be quarrelling and finding of fault, and be
without peace, if we trust to the best works. So that this is the first answer,
All true peace depends upon justification by faith in Christ as the
principal cause.

Secondly, We answer, That our peace depends upon our obedience in this sort,
that we can have no peace except we be given to obedience. Those men that can
sin and yet be at peace, were never justified in their lives. A child of God
when he sins; as for example, if he should be tempted to lie, or to omit a
good duty, which he knows he is bound to perform; yet this would much
trouble his conscience; his soul would be ashamed, his heart perplexed, he
would not know how to look the Lord in the face; I have sinned: what shall I do
unto he, O thou preserver of men? When David had sinned against God, Psalm.
38.6.
I am troubled, says he; and I go mourning all the day long. And therefore
peace of conscience does depend thus far on obedience, as that a man cannot
have peace ^nlesse he be obedient, and take heed of sin, and labor in all
things to be up^ight before God. Now if you ask me, But how does our peace
depend upon our obedience? I answer, Dub. Sol.
It depends upon obedience as the removing cause: It removes that which
would hinder our peace. Sin would interrupt our peace: now obedience removes
sin. To this purpose the Apostle speaks 1. John 3.18, 19. My little
children, let us not love in word and in tongue, but in deed and in truth: For
hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before
God: Hereby we shall assure our consciences that we are in him, if we take heed
of hypocrisy: If we love in truth, and be obedient in truth, we shall thereby
remove all our doubts and our fears, our troubles and perplexities of
conscience. So that peace does depend on obedience as the removing cause: It
removes that which otherwise would hinder peace. This is the first. Again, our
peace of conscience depends upon our obedience as the witnessing cause of it.
Obedience is one of the witnesses of true peace; it witnesses that we have
peace with God. 2. Cor. 1.12.
This is our rejoicing, even the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity we have had our conversation in the world. See
here, it is the witnessing cause of it: Paul had peace of conscience; his
conscience was able to make him rejoice: How? Because it gave testimony that
his conversation was godly and simple and gracious. Though we be in Christ, yet
we can have no peace unless holy obedience does witness the same. Obedience
is not the cause of the peace of our consciences before God, but it is the
cause of our perceiving the same: We know we have peace by reason of our
obedience: 1. John 2.29.
We know that every one that does righteousness is born of God: We know we
are passed from death to life, 1. John 3.14. 1. John 4.13.
because we love the brethren: Hereby we know that we dwell in him and he in
us, by the spirit that he has given us. Mark; we come to know it by obedience
and by the fruits of obedience. Take away obedience, we can never know peace.
They that walk by this rule, Gal. 6.16.
peace shall be upon them and upon the Israel of God, says the Apostle.
Thirdly, our peace of conscience depends on our obedience as the confirming
cause: Christ confirms our peace to us by making us walk close to him and
obedient unto him. Paul shows how it preserves peace, as a shoe preserves
the foot: ye know if we should walk without shoes, barefoot, our feet would be
in danger of pricking and hurting. So does obedience to the Gospel preserve our
peace: Stand, Ephesians. 6.15.
says the Apostle, having your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace. Mark; he compares it to a shoe, which he would have us shod with; and
then it will be the Gospel of peace to us, and our peace shall be in safety.
Fourthly, our peace depends upon our obedience, not only as a sign of true
peace, nor only as a guard to it, but as a thing pleasing to God, without the
which we displease God. For though God be pleased with his children always in
Christ, yet he is not pleased that any in Christ should be disobedient to him.
1 Thessalonians. 4.1.
Ye have received of ^^ how ye ought to walk and to please God, says the
Apostle. When Gods children walk in obedience, that is pleasing unto God. So
that peace of conscience does greatly depend on obedience: For otherwise
conscience will be troubled; O I do not please God; This is displeasing unto
God; and, This does provoke God. Not as though there were any such perfection
in our obedience that can satisfy any tittle of Gods law; but because when our
persons are pleasing to God in Jesus Christ, then our obedience to God is
pleasing too in Jesus Christ, and conscience will say it. Thus much shall
suffice for answer to the second question.

III. Question; What manner of obedience it is that peace of conscience
depends upon?
The reason of this question is this; Because it should seem there is no such
obedience in this life as any peace of conscience should depend on. Does not
James say, In many things we sin all? Does not our Savior say, When ye have
done all that ye can, say, We are unprofitable servants.? If our conscience can
still say that we are unprofitable, and that we do sin in every thing that we
do, yea in many things, in all the duties we go about; if our consciences can
say thus, How can any peace depend upon obedience? What obedience do you mean
that peace of conscience depends upon?

I answer, 1. Absolute perfection in obedience is not required unto
evangelicall peace. For if it were, no man could have peace; no not Paul, nor
Abraham, nor any of the holiest of Gods children: and therefore absolute
perfection is not required. If we say we have not sinned, we make Christ a
liar, and his word is not in us, 1. John 1.10. Our conscience can still say we
have sinned; and it can still say our obedience is imperfect: A halting leg can
never go perfectly. A Jacob is called he that halteth; and every godly soul
halteth: Though he do not halt between two, as wicked people do, yet he halteth
in following after God. What purblind eye can see perfectly? or thick ear
hear perfectly? He that has these imperfections of body can neither go nor
see nor hear perfectly: So the best of Gods children have imperfections of
heart and spirit and mind: their faith is imperfect, their love is imperfect;
and therefore their obedience must needs be imperfect. But absolute perfection
is not required to true peace of conscience; and therefore this does not hinder
it. 2. Though absolute perfection be not required to peace, yet such obedience
is required as may be acceptable to God. So says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 5.9.
We labor that whether present or absent we may be accepted of him. Such
obedience we must show as may be accepted of him, or we cannot have true peace.
If our endeavors be not acceptable, our conscience will quickly hear of it,
and tell us so: If we pray coldly, or hear unprofitably, or live loosely, if
we do not do that which is acceptable to God, our consciences will soon
complain. Nay though we do do the duties, if we do not do them in an acceptable
manner, conscience will have matter against us still. 3. This acceptablenesse
of obedience lies in this, when our obedience is sincere, universal, and
total, and proceeding from the spirit of Christ Jesus dwelling in us. The
Apostle gives it this phrase, When we walk not after the flesh but after the
Spirit, Romans 8.4. That is our fulfilling the law, when Christ has fulfilled
the law for us, and makes us sincerely to walk by it, not after the flesh but
after the Spirit: when we do not favor our selves in one lust, nor suffer our
selves in any beloved sin; but whatever it be that is evil, our conscience
can say we truly do hate it and labor to avoid it; whatever it be that is
commanded us, be it never so contrary to our nature, yet our conscience can say
we sincerely set our selves to do it. So walking not after the flesh but after
the Spirit, this is sincerity of obedience, and this is required unto peace. 4.
This sincerity of obedience makes us to bewail our very infirmities, and to be
humbled for them: not only to be humbled for greater sins, but also to be
humbled for our infirmities. If we be not soundly humbled for our very
infirmities also, they will hinder the peace of our conscience: We can have no
peace except our conscience can witness that our infirmities do humble us and
drive us to Christ and cause us to sue out a pardon. If conscience have not a
pardon sealed for infir^ities also, it will not be at peace, Christ bare our
very infirmities: Matthew. 8.17.
therefore we must be humbled for them, Matthew. 8.17.
and go to him for pardon of them too, or conscience will not be at peace. Thus
I have answered also this third question.

IV. Question; How if a man have a burdened and troubled conscience, what must
he do to be freed from it?
The reason of this question is this; Because men are ignorant about it. When
men are troubled in conscience and burdened a little that way, presently they
daub all with peace, and go a wrong way to work. This course the Lord does
complain of in the false prophets who preached too much peace; They have healed
the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace, Jer. 8.11.
when there is no peace. And so they do more hurt then good: Like a surgeon
that skinneth the wound before he gives searching salves to kill the matter of
it: afterward it breaks out worse, and it is a hundred to one but it will
cost the patient his life: So it is with many men: A man cannot rore a little
for his sins, I have been a sinner, and what shall I do? I have been a beast,
etc. But, O, say they, believe man, Christ died for thee, and the promise is to
thee, and God will pardon thee. Thus they heal him slightly with Peace, peace,
and it may be there is no peace to him yet; he had need to be searched more
deeply: they skin the wound, and it is a thousand to one but it loses the
man's soul, by giving a cordial where a corrosive was necessary. And therefore
great reason that this question should be answered, If a man have a burdened
troubled conscience, what must such a man do to be freed from it?

I answer, 1. Let him take heed that he meddle not too much with the secret
will of God, what his decree and purpose is from eternity. As soon as an arrow
is shot into the conscience, and the conscience comes to be humbled, commonly
the heart lays about it, And how if God have reprobated me? and what if he
have appointed me to wrath? how then? Beloved, ye must take heed of this: If
your hearts fasten upon reprobation, that will mar all; that will quite
discourage a poor soul from going to God.

2. Understand the word right. Do not think that because God has not in
particular named thee, therefore he has excluded thee. Gods promises are made
in general to all that believe; and they are to be applied in particular to
all them that believe: why then should thou exclude thy self when God does
not exclude thee? Would thou have Christ? Christ to justify thee? Christ to
sanctify thee? Christ to rule thee? Would thou be under Christ's regiment,
and live at his will? Come and welcome: no soul is excepted. Whosoever will,
Rev. 22.17.
let him take of the water of life freely. Ye see there is a Quicunque vult,
Whosoever will. Indeed if thou have not a will to be in Christ; but thou will
do thus and thus, and thou will have thy will, and this lust, and that friend,
and such a course, and, Tush, this is too strict; nay, if you be there thou art
not for Christ: I have nothing for thee but hell and damnation. But if thou
would have Christ indeed, and be in Christ indeed, thy heart in Christ, thy
will in Christ, thy whole self in Christ; then arise, he calls thee. Thus
understand the word right, the gospel does not exclude thee whosoever thou art.

3. Thou must not for fear of shame or loss, etc. keep from restitution
wheresoever thou have done wrong, or satisfaction wheresoever thou have
cozened, or reformation wheresoever thou art accustomed to any evil, or the
doing any thing that may procure ease and quiet to thy conscience. It may be
one is troubled in conscience for his wronging his neighbor in twenty pounds,
and if he would make restitution he might have sound peace: but he will not;
no, he daubeth up his conscience some other way. Another it may be suffers
disorders in his family and foul abuses, which if he would redress he might
have peace: but he will not. Another, if he would down with his pride, another,
if he would be acquainted with Gods servants, or if he would take any pains in
good duties, be more diligent for the work of repentance, etc. but these things
will not be done: Men plaster up their consciences (I know not how) some other
way, and so go to hell for not taking the right way. But if any of you be
troubled in conscience, keep back nothing, hold back nothing that may make for
your true peace and quiet.

4. Thou must wait on God: Cast thy self at his feet, humbly desire him to give
thee the true peace of conscience. But wait Gods leisure, knowing thou have
deserved to be utterly deprived of it: and thus doing thou shall find it to thy
great comfort at last. Isai. 30.18.
Blessed are all they that wait for him; that is, when the Lord will be
merciful. He will do it with judgment, he will do it when it may do thee the
most good, when it may bring himself most glory: therefore it is fit thou
should wait for his time of comforting. Now because many do misconstrue this
waiting Gods leisure, (As for example, one is dead to all good duties, O, says
he, I wait the Lords leisure till he quicken me: My heart is much hardened,
says another; but I wait the Lords leisure till he be pleased to soften it.
Thus men are lazy in the mean while; and yet they think they wait the Lords
leisure. O beloved, this is not the waiting the Lord means; this will not
stay conscience; conscience is guilty for all this waiting) therefore I
beseech you consider what waiting I mean. 1. Wait upon the Lord, and keep his
way; thou do not wait else, unless thou keep praying, and striving, and
meditating, and enquiring, and watching thine own heart lest it should slip
aside. 2. Thou must wait as a servant waits upon his master: If his master
calls, he comes; if he sends, he goes; if he beckeneth, he takes notice:
Psalm. 123.2.
So thou must wait. As servants wait upon their masters, so our eyes wait upon
the Lord till he have mercy upon us. Be obedient in the mean time: go when he
sends; come when he calls; observe when he beckeneth; be diligent to be
doing his pleasure. 3. Thou must wait only upon God, not upon thy lusts too,
and upon other things too; but thou must wait only upon God: My soul, wait
thou only upon God, says David, Psalm. 62.^5. If thou wait upon any thing
else, this is not to wait upon God. One waits a time to be revenged; another
waits a time to satisfy this or that lust: this is not to wait upon God at
all. 4. Take heed of healing thy self, and comforting thy self, or daubing up
thy conscience thy self: If thou do so, thou do not wait upon God to do it:
If thou do it thy self, and snatchest at comfort thy self before he do give
it, then thou do not wait till he give it. Suppose a man has done thee an
injury; the Lord he will right thee if thou will wait: but if thou go and
recompense evil for evil, and right thy self, thou do not wait upon God, as
Solomon advises, Prove. 20.22.
Say not thou, I will recompense evil; but wait on the Lord, and he will save
thee. Mark; thou must not save thy self, thine own credit, etc. by revenging,
but wait on God for all. So here if thy conscience be troubled, thou must wait
upon God to comfort it: If thou go and daubest up the matter thy self, and
criest, Peace, peace, to thy self, thou do not wait upon God. Thus I have
answered the last question, How if a man have a burdened and troubled
conscience, what must such a man do to be freed from it? And hitherto we have
spoken of the two last adjuncts of conscience, a Quiet conscience, and an
Unquiet conscience; What they be, and, How they differ: and we have resolved
and answered the questions and difficulties about them.

Conscience bears witness of our persons.
COncerning the witness of conscience, I told you that conscience bears
witness of two things: 1. It bears witness of our actions; 2. It bears
witness of our persons. The former has been declared unto you at large: I
come now to the latter; Conscience bears witness also of our persons,
whether we be good or evil, whether in Christ or in sin: And here I will show
you four things:

1. That every man's conscience may inform him what state he is in, whether of
salvation or damnation, whether of grace or of nature.

2. How conscience does it.

3. When conscience does it.

4. How it comes to pass then that so many thousands mistake and are ignorant
and deluded about their estates.

I. For the first, That every man's conscience may inform him what estate he is
in, 1. Every man's conscience may inform him in what state he is.
whether good or bad; (I speak especially of such as live under the light of
the Gospel of Christ.) There are two rules: the one is Gods word, which
points out both estates; and the other is every man's conscience, which is
privy to the frame and standing of every man's own heart, and which of these
estates his estate is, conscience is privy ^o this. I will instance in some
sorts of men. 1. The Jews, who contented themselves with formality: they
sacrificed, they offered, they paid their tithes, they did that which Moses
commanded them for the letter of it: now ye shall see their conscience could
tell them that they were not perfect nor upright with God: All their duties,
and formalities, and gifts, and sacrifices could not make them that did the
service perfect, as perteining to the conscience, Heb. 9.9. Mark; Their
consciences could say they were not upright for all this. As they were not
upright, so their consciences could tell them they were not upright. 2. Another
instance we have in the Scribes and Pharisees: When they would have condemned
the woman taken in adultery, their own conscience was privy that they were
sinners themselves, John 18.9. So also it is with a child of God: His
conscience is able to inform him that he is a child of God, and that he does
truly serve God. 2. Tim. 1.3.
I thank God, says Paul, whom I serve with a pure conscience. His conscience
told him he was a true servant of God, and that he was Gods: whose I am, says
he. So David's conscience; I am thine; save me: for I have sought thy
commandments. So the church; My beloved is mine, and I am his. Ye see then how
conscience can inform and tell us what estate we are in, whether we be godly or
carnal, whether our conversation be in heaven or on earth, whether we be in
Christ or out of him. The spirit of man knows what is in him. It is easy to
know what our great thoughts of heart are upon, what our greatest purposes and
projects and studies be; whether about God or the world: the spirit of a man
must needs know it: And therefore every man may draw out from conscience a ^rue
conclusion how it is with him. The ^easons are these:

1. The first is taken from the nature ^f conscience. The nature of consci^nce
is such that it must needs be able ^o know what is with a man. Now his
welldoings or his illdoings are with ^im: he was with himself when he did them.
When thou art proud, or impa^ient, or careless in any duty, thou art with thy
self when thou art so: All thy illdoings are with thee: and therefore thy
conscience must needs know what thou art. Isai. 59.12.
Our transgressions are with us; and as for our iniquities we know them. Take a
curser; and, as Solomon says, Thine own heart knows that thou have used to
curse others. Eccles 7.22.
So it is with a godly soul: Thine obedience is with thee, and thy self-denial
is with thee, and thy care to walk before God, all is with thee; and therefore
thou must needs know it. This is the nature of conscience; It is privy to what
is with one.

2. The second reason is taken from the equity of Gods judgments on the
wicked. The Lord he will judge none to hell, but his conscience shall confess
he was one that walked in the way to hell and death. Ye may read it in the man
that had not on the wedding garment: When Christ did charge him with his not
having on a wedding garment, and did condemn him to utter darkness, the text
says, Matthew. 22.12.
he was speechless; that is, his conscience confessed that Christ's judgment
was just: I have not on a wedding garment, says his conscience; and it is my
fault that I have none; and I am rightly condemned. Thus his conscience did
know it; otherwise he could not have been speechless in his own defense. As
Festus told Agrippa that he answered the Priests, Acts 25.16.
It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to dye before that he
who is accused have his accusers face to face, and have license to answer for
himself concerning the crime laid against him: So may I say, that the great
Judge of quick and dead will not judge any man to hell but he will have his
accusers face to face, and if he can answer for himself he may. Now if
conscience be not privy to what estate soever a wicked man is in, his
conscience could never accuse him face to face at the last day, nor justify
the Lord Jesus, and make the sinner stand speechless before God. He might
answer, Lord, I do not know any such thing as is laid to my charge: I am not
convinced that the case is thus and thus with me, that I am in such an estate
as I am accused of. No wicked man shall be able to say thus: Therefore
conscience can inform a man in what estate he is.

3. The third reason is taken from the Lords manner of judging the godly. He
will judge them and absolve them secundum allegata and probata, as we say,
according to the word and their own consciences. Ye may see the true form of
judgment which the Lord will go by Matthew: 25. Where the Lord convinces the
whole world who were righteous and who not, who to be judged to punishment and
who to life for ever; at last he concludes, The wicked shall go away into
everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. As if he had
said, Your consciences can say ye are wicked: ye did not feed, nor clothe, nor
visit me: Go your ways to hell. So for the righteous: Your consciences can say
ye are righteous: Go ye to heaven. Thus the Lord will do. Now this could not be
if conscience could not inform every one that is godly that he is so: If
conscience could not witness what estate they are in, this could not be. Thus
ye see the truth of the first thing.

II. The second thing that I promised to show you is, How conscience does this.
2. How conscience does this.
Ye have heard that it is able to inform every one what estate he is in before
God: Now it follows to consider, how conscience does it. This it does by
comparing the word of God with our hearts, and our hearts with the word: As for
example; Psalm. 119.6.
They who have respect to all Gods commandments shall never be ashamed, says
the word: But, says conscience, I desire to know all my duty to God and man,
and to perform all that I know: and therefore I shall not be ashamed. Prove.
11.18.
To him that sows righteousness shall be a sure reward, says the word: But,
says conscience, I plough up my nature and all the fallow-ground of my heart,
and I sow righteousness: and therefore to me shall be a sure reward. So, To be
spiritually minded is life and peace, says the word; But, says conscience, I
am spiritually minded; my mind is set upon things that are spiritual:
therefore I have life and peace. So conscience also judges of the state of
sin. Romans 8.6.
Those that live after the flesh shall die, says the word: But, says
conscience, my life is led after the flesh and the lusts of it: therefore I
shall die. Romans 8.13.
He that believes not is condemned already, says the word: But, says
conscience, I do not believe: therefore I am in the state of condemnation. The
word says, John 3.18
A good tree brings forth good fruit, and a corrupt tree brings forth
corrupt fruit: But, says conscience, My works and my courses are corrupt and
naught: therefore so is my heart. Thus ye see that conscience does it by
reasoning: And this conscience can very well do; 1. Because conscience has a
very good judgment. It is a very wise and judicious faculty in the soul of
man. Some make it an act of judgment. We do not take it so: It is not an act
of judgment, but it is a reflexive faculty of the soul having a very good
judgment. Whether it be right to obey you rather then God, judge ye, says
Peter, Acts 4.19. appealing to their own consciences to judge in the point. So
that conscience is a faculty of a good judgment. Now if it be judicious, it
must needs be able to reason and to argue about our estates, and find out
whether they be good or no. It is the judgment of man that is able to argue,
and able to hold an argument: We thus judge, says the Apostle, that if one
died for all, then are all dead, 2. Cor. 5.14. Mark; His proposition he would
prove was, That all the believers in Christ are dead to themselves and alive
unto God. Now ye may see how his judgment makes here an argument; If Christ
died for them all, then they are all dead: but Christ died for them all:
therefore they are all dead. Judgment is able to make arguments: and therefore
if conscience be a reflexive faculty that has a very good judgment, it must
needs be able to frame arguments, and so make out what our estates are. 2.
Because there is natural logic in every man's conscience: It can frame
syllogismes, thus, As many as be led by the spirit of God, are the sons of
God, says the word: But, says a godly man's conscience, I am led by Gods
spirit, and I am careful to follow the leading of Gods holy spirit: therefore
I am one of Gods sons. And so on the other side. Ye will say, How can a
countrey-mans conscience make syllogismes? It is only for scholars and such as
have studied logic in the schools to make syllogismes. I answer, It is true;
Artificial logic is only among scholars. But there is natural logic in
conscience, which does not stand upon forms. The godly people at Rome were
never brought up at Universitie: yet the Apostle tells them they had logic
enough to argue themselves to be dead unto sin and alive unto God through
Christ; Romans 6.11.
Likewise also, says he, reckon ye your selves to be dead indeed unto sin,
but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. The original is, (...),
Exercise so much logic in your selves; Like good logicians prove your selves
to be dead unto sin and alive to God. So that ye see there is natural logic
in conscience: and therefore conscience is able to frame arguments about our
estate, and to inform us what it is.

3. When conscience does this.
III. The third thing I propounded to consider is, When conscience does ^his.
This is a very necessary point: and indeed so they are all; but this ^ore
especially. I have showed that ^onscience is able to inform us what ^state we
are in, whether of grace or nature: but when does it perform this? ^ answer, I
need not so much speak of ^he godly, because they do mark ^onscience. But let
me speak of such ^s are foolish, disobedient, serving di^ers lusts, who never
had yet the wash^ng of regeneration nor the renewing ^f the holy Ghost: I
answer about them; 1. Their conscience must needs ^ave a time when to do it. I
do remem^er my faults this day, says Pharaohs ^utler, Genesis 41.9. His
conscience did ^nform him; and there was a time when ^is conscience did inform
him. 2. Con^cience would choose a time by it self: ^ would inform a wicked man
solemn^y and punctually of his rotten and cur^ed estate he is in. I say, it
would have ^ solemn time by it self for this, if it ^ould have it: but a wicked
man takes ^n order with his conscience that it shall not tell him solemnly how
it is with him; neither will he find a time t^ suffer it: As it was with Felix;
When his conscience began to grumble against him, when Paul had told him ^
righteousness and of judgment, h^ trembled, his conscience began to stir
and would then have solemnly dea^ with him indeed: but he shuffled it o^ and
would not find time; Acts 24.25.
Go thy way ^ this time, says he to Paul; I will hea^ thee at a more
convenient time. And ^ he said to his conscience too. Conscience would take a
solemn and set tim^ to inform men what their estates an^ but men will not
suffer them: an^ therefore conscience is fain to tak^ such sudden times as it
can get. Y^ will ask, What times be they?

I answer, First, when conscience interlineth: Conscience interlineth.
As for example, in the hea^ing of the word: While men are hearing the word, it
may be the preache^ preaches of holiness, and a wicke^ man hears it; But I
have it not, sait^ his conscience. Mark; his conscienc^ interlineth. It may be
the preacher i^ preaching how desperately careless^ men are of their souls, how
they look ^ every thing more then to them; ^onscience interlineth, This is my
^se. It may be he is preaching against ^^ulterie; This sin I have com^itted,
says a guilty conscience: or against rushing upon Gods ordinances without
preparation; This is my constant ^urse, says an evil man's conscience. ^ may be
the preacher is preaching of ^onversion and becoming a new crea^^re in Christ;
This I am yet to seek in, ^ith conscience. Thus conscience in^erlineth: Though
the man hears on, ^^d it may be takes little to heart, yet ^onscience
interlineth a sudden information of his wretched estate. Like a (...) bird that
flies by, or like a swift^ot arrow, that is presently out of ^^ght, so it may
be a man takes very ^ttle notice of it. Acts 24.25.
Like the forenamed ^elix: as Paul was preaching of righ^eousnesse and
temperance, I have it not, ^ith his conscience; and of judgment ^o come, What
shall I do then? says his ^onscience? Thus conscience interli^ed, and made him
tremble on a sudden, like a sudden shivering of a co^ or a sudden startle of a
man affrighte^ and away it was gone quickly. I b^seech you observe your own
bosom Do ye not feel this now and then at sermon, when ye hear it? do not yo^
consciences interline our sermons, a^ put in parentheses now and the^ When ye
hear such and such a sin^ reproved, condemned, And this is ^ sin, says
conscience: when ye hea^ these and these graces commended, An^ I never had
these, says conscience: when ye hear these and these marks of a ca^nall
estate, And these or some of these a^ in me, says conscience? do not you
consciences interline in this manner* As Paul was speaking to the ship-me^
concerning God, his conscience di^ sweetly interline thus, Acts 27.23.
There stood by me^ this night an Angel of God, whose I am, says his
conscience. And as he was writing to the Romans, Rom 1.9.
God is my witness, says he, whom I serve in my spirit. But do not your
consciences interline otherwise with you? If they do, I beseech you consider
it: Your consciences do then truly inform you of your ^^ten estates: listen to
them.

Secondly, when conscience falls a ^oking. Conscience choketh.
As for example, in prayer: wicked man prays; But I do not ^^y right, says
his conscience. I humbly ^eech thee, O Lord: Nay, but I do not ^eech humbly,
says his conscience. I ^ire to be sanctified and purged from my ^nes: Nay, but
I do not hunger after any ^h thing, says conscience. I do not con^e ^e my sins
right, nor beg for grace right. (...) your consciences choke you thus? ^ow your
consciences inform you of ^ur estates. Peradventure ye hardly ^rceive this
choking at all: It is done a moment, and it presently cease, ^cause ye are
not willing to hear it: ^d therefore it may be conscience does by sudden
flashes. Number. 12.4
It is said the Lord ^^ke suddenly to Moses: so often consci^^ce speaks
suddenly to men, a word ^d away. As David says of the wic^d, God shall shoot
an arrow at them, and ^ey shall be wounded on a sudden: So con^ience shoots a
quick arrow, and it ^oundeth men in the twinkling of an eye, and it is gone.
Lord, have m^^ upon us, said one: But I should not sa^ vainly and in ordinary
talk, says consc^ence. I do not hate this man for his ho^^nesse and
strictness: But you do, sai^ conscience. And so when men are d^fending evil by
arguments; But this false, says conscience. Thus conscien^ choketh on a
sudden, and is gone. confess, generally the men of the wor^ mark not these
things: They are suc^ sudden sparklings of conscience the men for the most part
do not he^ them: But these are Gods witnesse^ and men shall know one day they
we truly informed of their estates by the^ instantaneous Items of conscience.

Thirdly, when conscience shooter like a stitch in a man's side. As for example;
Sometimes when men are abo^ their callings and their worldly business, then
comes conscience like ^ sudden stitch in ones side, and gives them a twitch,
O how wordly am I! says conscience: Shall I never get this worldly-mindednesse
cured? Many times conscience speaks while men are working, or playing, or
eating, or buying, or ^ling.

Fourthly, so likewise when consci^ce commenteth upon the judgments (...) God.
Let an adulterer fall sick; Yea, ^is is for mine adultery, says consci^ce.
Let a company-keeper be in ^ant of outward things; Yea, this is my ^unkennesse,
says conscience: Jer. 4.18.
This is ^y wickedness, my way, my doings which ^ve procured me these things;
this ague, ^is poverty, this shame, this discomfort. ^hus I have showed you how
consci^nce does inform the wicked of their ^retched estate; and, when it does
it. (...) remains now that I speak some^hing of the fourth point.

IV. How comes it to pass then that so many thousands mistake, and ^re
ignorant and deluded about their e^tates? 4. Why many are deluded about their
estate.
The reason of this doubt is this; Seeing conscience is able to inform every
one what his estate is, whether it be blessed or cursed; and seeing also that
conscience does it; and does it by ^rgument; and has its time when it does it:
a man now would wonder that any should be ignorant of his esta^^ when his own
conscience does tell hi^ how it is with him. For answer I will explain unto you
two things: 1. The reasons why men are mistaken; 2. The reasons why they are
mistaken thoug^ conscience inform them.

First, They build upon false ground which are not in Gods word. Some are so
foolish that they build upon onward things, as health, peace, prosperity,
success, and the like. They prosper, and all things go well with them and
therefore sure God is at peac^ with them: This is not so; but they think so
though. Some again buil^ upon grounds which men of corrup^ minds do give them,
or which they take from the common opinion o^ most, thinking that to be faith
and repentance which the most take so to be* or which a teacher fit for their
pala^^ takes so to be. On the contrary side, weak Christians oftentimes
mistake themselves by judging their estates to be bad because God lets them
be poor and mean and comfortless in the world: Therefore they conclude God is
angry with them, or that they are not that which they seem to themselves to
be, because they are so crossed in all outward things. This is the first reason
of error in this kind.

Whosoever calls upon the Lord shall be saved, Romans 10.13. Hence the wicked
may false^y conclude, I call upon the Lord, and I pray unto him; therefore I
shall be saved. And so on the contrary, a weak Christian who finds not in
himself those degrees of grace which some places of Scripture seem to require
concludes from thence against himself, Therefore I have no grace at all. This
is a second ^cause of mistaking.

as that they are in such a course as wherein God will not love them. Nay, they
cannot endure that others should discover their hearts unto them: They had as
lieve they should show them the pit of hell as show them themselves. They look
to some common gifts and graces that are in them, such gifts and graces as may
be in a reprobate, but they will not think so; as illumination, knowledge, the
gift of prayer, of temperance, etc. These they look to, and these they speak
of, though they have reigning lusts within in their hearts: As Jehu; Come, see
my zeal, says he, 2. Kings 10.16. He does not say, Come, see my pride and
hypocrisy; but, my zeal. Jehu looked at his zeal, and so thought he was right.
So on the contrary, weak Christians may sometimes look only at their sins
and infirmities, and take no notice of Gods graces that are in them, and so may
mistake their own selves, and conclude amiss of their estates. Thus I have
showed you the reasons why men are mistaken about their estates. Now I will
show you the reasons why men are mistaken though conscience do tell them.

1. Because the speeches of conscience in the wicked many times, yea most
times, are low speeches. The gnawings of conscience whereby they are told they
are in a bad and a damned estate are like the gnawings of a very little worm
that a man can hardly feel. Where their worm dies not: Isa. 66.24.
The word in the original, (...), signifies a very little worm that breeds
in scarlet, that a man can very hardly see or perceive: so men sometimes do
hardly see or perceive the condemning and gnawing of conscience. Again,
conscience biteth suddenly, as I told you; it gives a little nip, and away:
Like a sparrow that flies by; it flies so fast by a man's eye that he can
scarce tell whether it be a sparrow or no: So it is not easily perceived
whether it be a condemning conscience or no: it gives such sudden nips, and
away, that men seldom take notice. Beloved, there is never a wicked man under
heaven, unless he be delivered up absolutely to a reprobate sense, but has a
thousand of these sudden momentany nips every day in the year. Had he the
heart to observe them: (but he has not) he might see his wretched estate, to
trouble him, and provoke him to Christ, and to be converted that God might heal
him; I say, had he a heart he might see it: but these nips are so secret and
sudden that he does not. So likewise it is with the godly in regard of true
comfort: Their conscience suddenly flasheth in comfort, and they many times do
not observe it. As Job speaks of God, Lo, Job 9.11.
he goes by me, and I see him not: he passes on also, and I perceive him not:
So does the Lord go by his children in the sudden flashes of comfort in their
conscience, but many times they see him not, perceive him not.

2. Because the devil blinds men's eyes, therefore they do not see what their
consciences do show them. Ye may read this of the wicked people in Corinth: 2.
Cor. 4.2.
St Paul says he commended himself and the Gospel to every man's conscience in
the sight of God; that is, He did so preach, and so live, that every man's
conscience could not choose but say, Certainly Paul preaches the truth, and
Paul lives right, and we must live as he speaks and does. He made their
consciences say thus, and to tell them they were not right if they did not. But
mark what follows: Some did not see this: Why? The god of this world, says
he, has blinded their eyes. So the god of this world blinds the eyes of the
wicked that what their consciences show them they do not see it nor observe it.
So for Gods people; Though they be in a good and a blessed estate, and their
consciences can say it, yet Satan oftentimes hinders them that they do not
perceive their own comfort.

3. Men do not love conscience. We should love conscience better then the
dearest friend we have under heaven. We would do much for a friends sake: but
we should do a thousand times more for conscience sake: Romans 13.5.
Obey Magistrates for conscience sake: suffer disgrace, reproaches, any thing,
for conscience sake. It is better then all the friends in the world. But the
wicked they do not love conscience: let conscience speak, they care not to
hear it. They will hear friends, but they will not hear conscience. Let
their lusts call, and their profits and pleasures call for this and that thing,
they hear all: but they love not to hear conscience. Nay, many wicked men are
angry to hear talk of it. When Paul had made mention of conscience, Ananias
commanded he should be smitten: Acts 23.1.
Men and brethren, says Paul, I have lived in all good conscience before God
until this day. Smite him on the mouth, says the high Priest Ananias. He was
angry to hear him talk of a good conscience. This is most certain; men do not
love conscience, nor to be curbed by conscience, nor informed by conscience:
They had as lieve see the devil as that their consciences should inform them of
their estates, and tell them thus and thus they are. They are told rightly, and
yet they are mistaken, because they do not love to hear conscience of that
theme.

Of a good and bad conscience.
YE have heard concerning the witnesse-bearing of conscience about our estates.
The next thing to be spoken of is that welknown distinction of ^ Good and a Bad
conscience. This di^tinction we read of in Scripture: Concerning a good
conscience see Heb. 13.18. We trust we have a good conscience. Concerning a bad
conscience see Heb. ^0.22. Having our hearts sprinkled from ^n evil conscience.
There be both the members. Of the distinction of them both briefly and in
order; and first of a good conscience.

The goodness of conscience is twofold; natural, and renewed. Concerning a
good conscience
1. The natural goodness of conscience consists in those relics of
goodness which it reteineth since the creation. Ye know man depraved and
corrupted his conscience by his fall: yet there be some relics left, as
reason, and knowledge, and reflection. I do not mean relics of any spiritual
goodness in conscience: For as there is no spiritual goodness left in the
other faculties of the soul, so neither in conscience. But the natural
goodness which I mean is nothing else but the veracity of conscience, whereby
it is enforced according to the knowledge it has to tell the truth. Thus every
wicked man has a good conscience: Their conscience is good in that sense;
their conscience has this natural goodness, that it tells them the truth
how it is with them. Nay, it is essential to conscience to be good in this
sense. It is the essential property of conscience to speak according to its
knowledge. It is the best faculty a wicked man has: it is better then his
mind, or heart, or will. There is more goodness in a wicked man's conscience
then in any other of the powers of his soul: His conscience speaks more for
God then himself does, and stands more for God then himself will. Not but
that as all the powers of the soul are desperately corrupted by sin, so
conscience is desperately corrupted as well as any of them: but I speak of the
essential goodness of it, which can never be lost. The de^ls in hell have not
lost the goodness ^ their essence: Nay, their essence is ^etter then the
essence of Gods Saints: ^^eir essence must be good because that ^ Gods
creature; nay, better then any ^ans essence, because the Lord made ^^em a
degree above man. And as man ^ a degree above beasts, so angels are degree
above man: so conscience is a ^egree above other powers of the soul ^ its
natural goodness. That consci^ce has such a natural goodness in it, ^e it
in those cursed Scribes and Phari^es, hypocrites, who brought the wo^an taken
in adultery to Christ: Their ^onscience was good; John 8.9.
they were convict^^ of their consciences: their conscien^es dealt honestly
with them, and told them the truth that they were wicked ^^nners themselves.
This is the natural ^oodnesse in conscience.

2. A renewed good conscience. I ^ll it a renewed good conscience, because when
a man is renewed, all the ^an is renewed; all his mind and the spirit of it is
renewed, Ephesians. 4.23. That ye may be renewed in the spirit of you mind. If the
man be renewed, all the mind must be renewed; and therefo^^ the conscience must
be renewed too for the mind and the conscience ever g^ together: nay,
conscience is mainly seated in the mind; and therefore if the mind be renewed,
so is the conscience and if the mind be defiled, so is the conscience. Tit.
1.15. To them that are defiled is nothing pure, but their minds a^ consciences
are defiled. Mark; When the^ are defiled, they are defiled together so when
they are washed and renewed they are washed and renewed together Now this
renewed conscience is either perfect or defective. 1. Perfect. I mea^ not
perfect in every degree of goodness: For so no man's conscience in the world is
perfect: But I mean perfect i^ every part and condition of goodness 2. A
defective good renewed conscience is that which fails in some conditions of
goodness. We call it a we^ conscience, which is apt to be pollute^ and defiled
again. 1. Cor. 8.7. Their conscience being weak is defiled. This is a defective
good conscience, a conscience ^ewed, but imperfectly renewed.

I. To a good conscience A firm conscience
that is ^ndly renewed five things are neces^^^y.

^. Knowledge of Gods will, and ^t which does follow the true know^^^ge of his
will, namely true humilia^ and fear. By nature the conscience ^lind and sturdy
and venturous; and ^^^refore it is necessary that it should be ^ghtened to
understand the will of ^d and to press it: and again it is ne^^^sary that the
heart should be hum^d, or else it will not stoop to Gods ^l: and it is
necessary also that this ^y fear should fall upon the heart, ^t it may not dare
to transgress. St ^^^ter being to speak of a good consci^^ce, premiseth all
these as necessary ^^^reunto: First he advises that Chri^^^^ns have knowledge
to be able to give ^^ason of the hope that is in them; and ^n that they should
have meekness and (...), for to do it: 1. Pet. 3.15, 16.
with meekness and ^, says he, having a good conscience. ^^rk; Knowledge and
meekness and fear are required to make a good conscience; without them the
conscienc^ cannot be good. By nature we are al^ blind, and stubborn, and
fearlesse of sinning: and therefore till we be cured o^ these evils, our
consciences cannot be good.

2. The second thing is a watchfulness and warfare against sin: Thi^ is
required too to a renewed good conscience. By nature we are drowsy, and
careless, and secure, and do not stand upon our guard to wage war against
our lusts and the desires of our flesh; and so long our consciences can never
be good: and therefore this spiritual watchfulness and mainteining war
against sin is required to the having a good conscience: That thou may
war a good warrefare, says Paul to Timothy, having faith and a good
conscience, 1. Tim. 1.18, 19. Some who seemed to have a good conscience,
because they did not maintein this holy warfare against sin and the flesh,
they have lost it: Therefore this is another requisite required to a good
conscience.

3. The third is tenderness of conscience. By nature our hearts are seared,
and dead, and unclean: and therefore we must get us tender and pure hearts ^f
we would have good renewed consciences. The end of the commandment is love, out
of a pure heart and good conscience and faith unfeigned, 1. Tim. 1.5. See ^ow
the Apostle compoundeth them together, a pure heart and a good consci^nce. We
must get our hearts purged and quickened, that they may be sensible of the
least evil; and then our consciences will be good and be as a bridle to hold us
from evil. A hard heart and a good conscience can never stand together.

4. The fourth is the cleanness of conscience by the washing of Christ's blood.
This is the main and the principal of all: Yea indeed the blood of Christ is
the sole and only cause of a good conscience. I would not be mistaken: I named
indeed other causes; Knowledge, and Humbling, and a holy Fear, a Combat against
sin, and Tenderness: but I do not mean as though a good conscience were part
beholding to them and partly to Christ blood: For it is wholly and only
b^holding to Christ's blood for its goo^nesse; his blood is the only price of ^
But my meaning is this, That thoug^ Christ's blood be the one only cause ^
redemption, yet in the application of r^demption the Lord uses all those fo^^
named graces while he applies it ^ the conscience. Therefore this now (...)
add; The washing of Christ's blou^ this is chiefly required to the goodnes^^ of
conscience. We have two places o^ Scripture to prove it: The one, Heb. 9.14.
How much more shall the blood ^ Christ purge your consciences from dea^ works?
It is that only can do it. The other text is 1. Pet. 3.21. The answer of (...)
good conscience toward God by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Where the
Apostle first gives this title to a renewed conscience, to be called a good
conscience* Secondly, he names the cause that makes it to be good, the power
of Christ's resurrection: When the resurrection of Christ Jesus is powerful^
upon us, then conscience becomes good.

5. The fifth is quietness. By nature nothing is so fierce and violent, if it
be ^nce awaked, as conscience is: O it is ^nspeakably furious. Thus is
consci^nce by nature: and therefore it can never be good until we get it
appeased with the assurance of the pardon of our ^innes, and so true peace and
comfort ^stablished in it. This is the reason why ^he Scripture joyneth a good
consci^nce and faith so often together: as ^. Tim. 3.9. Holding the mystery of
faith ^n a pure conscience. It cannot be a pure or good conscience if faith be
not held ^n it. As long as the conscience is not ^nderpropped by faith, the
conscience must needs be in a wilderness: Perhaps my sins are imputed unto
me; perhaps ^hey are pardoned: Perhaps they are cover^d, perhaps not. As long
as the conscience lies under these uncertainties, it cannot be firm and
foundly good indeed: therefore we must labor for assurance of pardon by faith.
Thus much of a good renewed conscience that is perfectly and soundly renewed.

An infirm conscience
II. Secondly, There is a good conscience renewed but not soundly renewed, very
much as yet defective and imperfect. The former conscience is called
conscientia firma, a firm conscience: This is called conscientia infirma, an
infirm conscience. Romans 15.1. We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities
of the weak. This infirm conscience is a good conscience too, and renewed, but
cumbred with sundry imperfections; which in process of time by growth in grace
are, for the most part, conquered in the godly. True faith is required unto
this: For the Apostle calls such an one a brother in Christ, one that has
this infirm conscience: Romans 14.21.
It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy
brother stumbleth. And we must not set such an one at naught Tush, what care I
for him? I know I may lawfully do thus: and this is my Christian liberty; and
shall I lose it for him, because of his conscience? Nay says the Apostle, Romans
14.10.
Why do thou set at naught thy brother? Mark; The Apostle counts such an
one a Christian brother, and not to be set at naught: and therefore this is a
good conscience too, differing as much as white from black from such
consciences as are weak through superstition of mind and through pride of heart
because they will not be otherwise, or through affected ignorance because they
love not to be better informed. These weak consciences are wicked; I speak not
of these: I speak of a good conscience, a conscience renewed, but renewed
imperfectly, having yet sundry defects and imperfections. The imperfections of
it are

1. Imperfection of knowledge. It does not yet soundly and clearly understand
what is lawful and what is pure, and what is by Christian liberty indifferent.
Paul says, Romans 14.14.
I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it
self: but to him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean.
He speaks of things that are indifferent: The Apostle had knowledge: but
there were others who did not know this; O I may not eat this meat; I may not
play at bowls, or use any other recreation: I should sin if I should, etc.
This is one weakness in this kind of conscience, weakness of knowledge.

2. The second imperfection is to be grieved where it needs not be grieved:
As when it sees other do that which it self through mistake does judge to be
evil, it is apt to be grieved and troubled to see it; Romans 14.15.
If thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not charitably. It
may be thou think it lawful to eat such meat; but he thinks otherwise,
and so is grieved to see thee eat. This is another imperfection in this
conscience, to be grieved and offended without just cause.

3. A third imperfection is in judgment: It is apt to judge and condemn
another man's liberty: 1. Cor. 10.29. Why is my liberty judged of another man's
conscience? He speaks of a weak conscience. It is apt to be judging and
condemning my liberty, says he; but why so? This is a fault and an
imperfection indeed; O such an one sins, he does so and so: yet it may be
the thing is not unlawful, but a weak conscience is apt so to judge it, and to
condemn him that does it. Let not him that eats despise him that eats not:
and let not him that eats not judge him that eats, Romans 14.3.

4. A fourth imperfection is this: A weak conscience is apt to be misled. So
the Apostle intimates; Take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours
become a stumbling block unto them that are weak: for if any man see thee who
have knowledge sit at meat in the idols temple, shall not the conscience of
him that is weak be emboldned to eat those things which are offered to idols?
and through thy knowledge shall thy weak brother perish for whom Christ died?
1. Cor. 8.9, 10, 11.
Where ye see that weak consciences are apt to be misled. The reason is this,
Because when they see others whom they know to be more learned and judicious
then themselves to do so and so, that may soon tempt them to do it though their
conscience be against it.

strengthen them. Ye see what imperfections are in a weak conscience; how apt
it is to be offended and to judge other men's liberty, how prone to misleading:
therefore let every good soul labor to be strengthened.

Romans 14.13.
Let no man put a stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his brothers way.

a grief to their souls to see it. Let me tell you; It is a sin to be wicked
however, and the highway to hell: but to be wicked when ye have godly
neighbors about you, your sin now is double: For as you offend God, so you
offend them too. Ye may remember what Christ says, Whosoever offends one of
these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone
were hung about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea,
Matthew. 18.6. Ah ye vile wretches! ye little imagine what fearful vengeance ye
pull on your own heads: It were better for you that a millstone were hung about
your necks, and ye thrown into the sea, then that ye should offend one of these
little ones. Ye may call them what ye will; call them puritanes, precisians,
uncharitable people, censurers; ye may call them as Satan teaches you to call
them: but it is certain, it were better a millstone were hung about your neck,
and ye thrown into the sea, then that ye should offend any one of Christ's
little ones: The Lord open your eyes that ye may repent and believe the gospel
your selves and be saved.

4. Lastly, be exhorted, brethren, to labor after a good conscience. How
excellent a thing is it that has so many good ingredients! Illumination is one
ingredient, and Faith is another, and Tenderness another, and Pureness
another, and Quietness another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ another. It is
like Aarons composition, which smelt sweetly when he went into the sanctuary:
It is compounded of excellent conditions, such as smell swee^ when we come
before God: the Lord loves that such should come nea^ him. We may come with
assurance t^ speed if we come with a good conscience; Heb. 10.22.
Let us draw near with assurance o^ faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an
evil conscience. Mark; we may draw near with assurance if we come with t^ good
conscience. It will comfort us in all troubles, and support us in all dangers:
It makes us happy: nay, there is no happiness without it. It will make us
with quietness and contentedness of spirit undergo whatever it shall please
God to lay upon us. How can they want comfort that have this? It is a spring of
comfort within them. This will remain with us when all other comforts will
forsake us: When friends fail, and estate fails, when credit and health and
strength and all fail, then a good conscience, if we have it, will speak peace
to us, yea and it will effect it in us, comfort us, and fasten comfort upon us.
Friends may speak words of comfort and peace to us; but it may be we are not
able to receive it: the minister may preach peace; but it may be we are not
able to take it: But a good conscience speaks peace and effects it; it does
not only speak it but it puts it into our hearts. It proppeth us up in all
miseries, in sicknesses, yea in death it self. A good conscience then makes us
hold up our heads when all the world shall be confounded: A good conscience
will bear us out against the King of terrors: It is only a good conscience
that can look death in the face, 1. Cor. 15.55, 57.
and say, O death, where is thy sting? thanks be to God who gives us victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Yea, at the day of judgment, when the whole
world shall be burning before us, when the great men of the world who go in
silks and scarlet and broidred hair shall fear and shiver as a reed shaken with
the wind, this will make us with boldness undergo the terror of it. This will
make us happy in all our distresses: When crosses pelt us, and sickness
paineth us, and death attacheth us, we are happy men. What if we have the
tokens of Gods wrath upon our bodies so we have the marks of his love upon our
souls? What outward calamity soever happens to us, yet if we have this good
conscience we are happy. O then let us labor to get it by faith and a holy
life. If we would be safe in the floud-time, in the day of Gods wrath, we must
be busy now about the ark, we must provide beforehand for it: Nothing but this
ark will save us in the deluge of Gods anger. It is in vain to trouble our
selves about other things: Jubal was a merry man; Genesis 4.20.
he made pipes and organes: Jabal built tents; others planted vineyards: but
Noah provided his ark. Many desire comfort in sickness, in death; but they do
not provide for it beforehand: They look after their sports or businesses in
the world; but this ark is neglected, this good conscience, without which all
men's labor is vain. Be they what they will be, in never so much credit and
esteem, they are yet most miserable when troubles and afflictions come on them,
as one day they shall and shall not tarry; then all their comforts will
forsake them: When death looks them in the face, then their hearts die within
them. How full of pride and haughtiness soever they were before, yet when they
come to die, if their consciences be awaked, they will with Saul fall down to
hear the name of death, 1. Sam. 28.20.
and no spirits be left in them. Nay, if we want a good conscience when we lie
on our deathbeds, and desire good people to pray for us, Good sir, I beseech
you let me have the benefit of your prayers to God for me: Alas, if thou have
not a good conscience, all the prayers under heaven will not help thee. See
Heb. 13.18. Brethren, pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience.
Mark; The Apostle tells them they may pray for him with comfort, because he
had a good conscience. As if he had said, If we had not a good conscience, it
were in vain for you to pray for us. If ever God hear the prayers made for us,
we must have a good conscience. Those that have not this good conscience shall
never enter into the kingdom of heaven: Though they had Moses, Daniel, and Job
to pray for them, yet all their prayers could not help them in the time of
their distress.

The bond of conscience.
NOw we must look back unto the four propositions which at the beginning I
observed in the text I am upon;

1. That there is in every man a conscience.

2. That the light which directs conscience is knowledge.

3. That the bond which binds conscience is Gods law.

4. That the office of conscience is to bear witness, to accuse or excuse.

I have in the handling of these a little altered the method, and spoke of the
two first and the last. Now follows the third, and that is consciences bond,
which is Gods law: which show the work of the law written in their hearts, etc.
It is only the work of Gods law that it bears witness of, that it accuses
or excuses for: The bond of conscience is Gods law.
The law of God is consciences bond. Nevertheless we must here distinguish:
The bonds of conscience are either primarie and supreme, or secondarie and
relative.

1. The primarie and supreme bond of conscience is only Gods word and law:
that only is the supreme bond of conscience: There is one lawgiver, Jam. 4.12.
who is able to save or to destroy: who art thou that judge another? that is,
There is but one supreme lawgiver to bind the consciences of men, and that is
God. And the reason is given, Because it is God only who is able to save and
to destroy. As if he had said, God only has power over life and death, either
to save a man for ever, or destroy a man for ever, and to judge a man according
to all that he has done: and therefore he only can make laws to bind the
consciences of men.

2. Now the secondarie or relative bond of conscience is, when others who have
authority from God bind conscience to this or that. I call this a relative
bond, because it is only in relation to the authority of God. For though men
cannot challenge any doings or omissions contrary to their law to be sins,
yet if they have authority from God to command any thing, then they become
beams and parts of Gods law, and do by virtue of that bind a man's conscience.

This relative bond of conscience is twofold. First, other men may bind our
consciences; as magistrates, and masters, and parents: who though they cannot
bind conscience as they are men, yet when they have authority from God, their
commands have Gods seals upon them, and do bind, I say, in relation to Gods
law, which bids us obey them; Romans 13.5. Ye must needs be subject, not only
for wrath but also for conscience sake. The Apostle there speaks of
Magistrates; and he tells us that their laws bind our consciences in relation
to Gods, and therefore we must be subject unto them for conscience sake. Thus
others may bind our consciences. Secondly, we our selves may bind our own
consciences; and that is by vows which we make unto God, or by our promises
which we lawfully make unto men. The vows which we freely make unto God, these
bind conscience to keep them: Numb. 30.4. the vow of a woman is called the bond
wherewith she has bound her soul. Mark; she binds her soul and her
conscience with it. So the promises which we lawfully make unto men, these also
bind conscience: For though before we promise it was in our own power, yet when
we have promised we have bound our own consciences to the performance, because
there is Gods seal upon it; Gods law commands us to be true of our words.
These are relative bonds, bonds only in relation to Gods law: Gods law is
still the supreme bond of conscience. I will handle that first.

The law of God the prime bond of conscience.
I. The law of God whereby he wills and commands and forbids this or that
in his word, this is the main bond of conscience: When this binds it, nothing
else can loose it; and contrary, if this loose it, nothing else can bind it. It
so binds conscience as the observing or violating of it is that which makes
conscience clear or guilty before God. This is it which makes a man a debtour;
Romans 1.14.
I am a debtour, says Paul, both to the Grecians and to the Barbarians: that
is, I am bound in conscience by Gods command to preach the Gospel unto both.
This is it that denominateth a man to be bound: Acts 20.22.
I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem; that is, I knowing it to be Gods will
am bound in conscience to go. This is that which lays a necessity upon a man;
A necessity is laid upon me to preach; 1. Cor. 9.16.
i. I am bound in conscience by Gods word so to do. This is that which lays a
kind of enforcement upon men; Acts 4.20.
We cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard; that is, If we
should not, our consciences would fly in our faces: We are bound by Gods will
to do so, and our consciences lay a charge upon us that we cannot go against
it. The only will and word of almighty God is that which supremely binds
conscience.

1. Because God only knows the heart; he sees our thoughts, Reasons
and he only can reach to the secrets of our spirits; and therefore he only
can bind our conscience. For who else can tell whether we make conscience of a
thing yea or no? perhaps we do, perhaps we do not. Nor man nor angel can tell
certainly: but God knows certainly, and he only; and therefore he only ^an
bind our consciences. When the Lord does command or forbid, the conscience is
privy that God sees it; and herefore now it is bound. The word of God is quick
and powerful; Heb. 4.12.
it pierces even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. This binds a man's
thoughts and intentions; he cannot be free in these things: and the reason is
given by the Apostle; verse. 13.
All things are naked and open to the eyes of him with whom we have to do. As
if he had said, We are conscious of Gods all-seeing power; he sees our hearts
and our thoughts and all that is in us: and therefore his word does bind us,
yea it binds all our secrets: we cannot think a vain thought but our
conscience will cry guilty before God, because our conscience does know that
God knows all. Besides, the conscience cannot fear any law but only Gods
law. Ye know when conscience is once in a doubt, it is fearful, and begins
to ask questions with it self, May I do this? or may I not do it? 1. Cor. 10.27.
asking no questions for conscience sake. The conscience when it doubts uses
to ask questions. Now this supposes the lawgiver to be able to see it:
otherwise the conscience would not be thus afraid, if it were only the
commandment of a creature, that could not search the heart. So that here ye see
one reason why Gods law is the supreme bond of conscience; Because no eye can
see it but Gods.

2. Because God only has power over conscience: It is his commandment only
that makes any thing sin or not sin unto us. Augustine defines sin to
be A thought, or word, or deed, or lust against the commandment of God. Psalm.
51.4.
Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, says David. He says he had
sinned only against God. Why? you will say, he sinned also against man: Did
not he commit adultery? that was a sin against Bathsheba: and murder? that was
a sin against Vriah. True, he sinned against man relatively, in relation to the
commandment which says, Thou shall not injure thy neighbor: but primarily and
principally the sin was against God. Conscience is like the kings servant,
whom none can arrest or attach without leave from the king: so no man can bind
conscience without leave had from God: for conscience is only subject to his
power: he only has power over conscience.

3. Because conscience is Gods book. Now no creature can add to Gods book or
diminish from it. Ye may remember that dreadful anathema at the end of Gods
book; Rev. 22.18, 19.
If any man shall add to this book, God shall add to him the plagues that are
written in this book: And if any man shall diminish from this book, God shall
take away his part out of the book of life. Now conscience is also Gods book
wherein his law is written. Nay, conscience is called Gods law: For it is said,
Romans 2.14.
that when the Gentiles which have not the law do the things contained in the
law, they having not the law are a law unto themselves: that is, Their
conscience is Gods law unto them. Like as the Bible contains Gods law for us
Christians, so did their consciences contein the law of God to them: yea, to us
Christians much rather: For we are not to let Gods law be written only in our
Bibles, but we must get it written in our consciences: our consciences are to
be Gods books wherein his laws are to be written. And therefore if it be a
sin to add a new law in the material book to bind men, then it must needs
be a sin for any creature to put a new law into conscience, which is the
spiritual book of God. It is God only who can write laws in this book: his
book is above all the laws in the world; and none but God can put in and put
out: and therefore none but he can bind conscience. I speak still of this
absolute, and supreme bond of conscience: For Magistrates may bind relatively;
but not as they are their laws, but by the law of God before made. Thus ye see
the necessity of this truth, That Gods law is the absolute and supreme bond of
conscience.

Uses.
will and Gods command. Tell conscience never so much, that we should do thus
or thus upon other grounds and inducements, it starteth not at that, except it
be convinced by the word of God that it is Gods will, the commandment of the
great God of heaven, the God of the spirits of all flesh, who will look for our
obedience: This makes conscience to startle, this affects it and binds it.
St Paul when he said that he approved himself and his preaching to men's
consciences, 2. Cor. 4.2.
what follows? If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish, etc. As
if he had said, This makes all the world to startle, except they be reprobates
and men delivered over to Satan. It is easy to see what ministry affects
most and does the most good in the hearts of the people, namely that which
brings the clearest voice of Gods Spirit calling to obedience and binding the
conscience. They can hear with ease and great pleasure the sermons of those
whose doctrines are stuffed with humane discourses. Learning and policy never
pierce conscience. Nay, let carnal preachers preach never so much against
peoples sins, they can make a sport of it, though they hear their sins
with humane learning declaimed against. When the preacher does not clearly
preach the Lords voice, though he rip up sin, yet if it be not in the
demonstration of the Spirit of God, and showing his clear authority, the heart
will not be affected. Conscience knows when it is bound, and when it is but
dallied and jested with: And therefore if Ministers desire to have their
ministry work upon the hearts of their people, they must show them Gods
authority, and confirm it by his word, and let them see that it is the
commandment of the Lord, that which will one day judge them. Let him know, 1.
Cor. 14.37.
says Paul, that the things that I write are the commandments of the Lord. It
is the Lord of heaven and earth that bids thee yield, and commands thee to
give over thy base lusts: It is he in whose hands thy breath is; thou had
best be obedient. I tell thee, thy conscience observes it; and if thou will
not obey, it will rore like the roaring of the sea one day against thee, and
sting thee like a scorpion. The things that thou hear, know thou that they
are the commandments of God: and if thou disobey, thou do disobey not men but
God.

conscience unless we have an eye unto that. If we do not aim at Gods will in
doing what we do, conscience counts our obedience as no obedience at all. As
for example; Ye that are husbands, ye love your wives: but is it because God
commands it? It may be ye love them because they love you, or because your
affections are to them: Alas, this is nothing: Pagans and reprobates can do so.
But do ye aim at the doing of Gods will, who commands you? O say you, The
Lord does command me, and I do it. What of that? Do ye look at his commandment
when ye do it? If not; be humbled, and know ye must get grace to do so, or ye
are not obedient to God, neither will conscience set it down for obedience. Ye
that are servants, ye serve your masters: but do ye aim at Gods will? thus, O
the Lord has commanded me to be faithful and painful in my service. Does
your soul look to this? It may be ye serve them because they are kind, and
because they pay you your wages, and the like: This is nothing to conscience:
conscience looks at the commandment of God; and if your souls do not aim at
the commandment of God, it will not satisfy conscience. Ye that are neighbors,
it may be ye love one another, and be friends one with another: but does your
soul look at Gods commandment? is it because God has commanded us to love one
another? People seldom aim at God in these cases: They are friends with their
neighbors: why? Their neighbors are friends with them. But they do not
trouble their thoughts to aim at Gods commandment in it. Let me tell you;
Conscience will not count this obedience: For conscience feels no bond but
Gods word: and if ye do not look at that, it is no obedience with conscience;
conscience will never acquit you or absolve you for this; it accounts of this
obedience as no obedience at all. See 1. Cor. 10.25. and so forward. There the
Apostle handling that question of conscience, at last concludes, Whether ye
eat or drink or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God, verse. 31. Let
your hearts look at that, and aim at that; in whatsoever ye do still look at
God: all is lost with conscience else. Though ye eat never so soberly, and
drink never so moderately, pray never so duly, conscience counts it all
nothing if ye do not look at God: It is God only and his word that does bind
it; and it will never give a discharge except your hearts look at him.

From what Christians are freed.
We confess the conscience of the regenerate is freed from many things by
Christ. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be
not entangled with the yoke of bondage. Every man's conscience is freed from
that yoke of the ceremonial law, because it ended in Christ. Secondly, the
conscience of the regenerate is freed from seeking justification by the deeds
of the law. Indeed the first covenant was by the works of the law; He that
does them shall live in them: But the second covenant speaks better things;
He that believes shall be saved. It is true, if God had not sent his Son, we
must have sought justification by the works of the law: Though it were
impossible to find it by reason of our sins, yet conscience was bound that
way. But now that Christ Jesus has sealed up a new covenant in his own blood,
conscience is freed from that former: Romans 3.28. Therefore we conclude, that a
man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law. For though justifying
faith never be without the sincere doing of the law, yet the deeds of the law
have no influence into justification: Conscience is freed from seeking
justification thereby. Thirdly, the conscience of the regenerate is freed from
the rigor of the law. They are bound in conscience to use the law as a rule of
their life, and in sincerity to obey it; but are not bound by the gospel to
the rigor of it: that they are freed from; Romans 6.14.
and so they are not under the law but under grace. I grant that all carnal
people, who are yet out of Christ, do all lie under the rigor of the law: and
as long as they submit not to Jesus Christ, nor get into him, they are bound in
conscience to keep it, though they cannot: They cannot sin in one tittle, but
conscience will condemn them before God. They shall be condemned for every
vain thought, for every idle word, for every the least sin, for every the
least lust, for any the least omission of good. They lie under the rigor of
the law, and they are bound in conscience to keep it, and they shall be
countable for every transgression, because they are under the law. But the
conscience of the regenerate is free from this rigor, because they are under
grace, and therefore they are delivered from the law: Romans 7.6.
The Lord has delivered them by the body of Christ; and therefore they are not
bound by the gospel to all that obedience that the law in rigor requires.
Fourthly, the conscience of the regenerate is freed from the curse of the
moral law. For though the law does condemn, yet their conscience needs not
fear it, because they are in Christ: There is no condemnation to those that are
in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.
which walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. Indeed those that are not
regenerate, not ingraffed into Christ, they are still in the mouth of the
gunshot: the law does condemn them, and they have no shelter, and their
conscience is bound by it; and they shall find one day that by it their
conscience will condemn them to hell. It may be now for the present their
conscience is quiet, and they choke it, and so it lets them alone: yet they
are condemned in conscience, and one day they shall find it. But the regenerate
are by Christ freed in conscience from all this condemnation. Thus far we
grant.

But the Antinomists Antinomists.
and I know not what Marcionites would have more. They cannot abide to hear
that a regenerate person is bound to any sincere obedience to Gods law as the
rule of their life: They cry out against the moral law as once the
Babylonians did against Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it, even to the
ground: O ye do not preach Christ if ye talk of the law. Beloved, these are
drunken opinions, fitter to be preached among drunkards and Epicures and
monsters then among the peculiar ones of God. The law of God does bind the
conscience of all the people of God, so that they are bound to make it a rule
of life. Nay, the Scripture calls it Christ's bond whereby he binds his
people to him: Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3.
The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together
against the Lord and against his Anointed, saying, Let us break their bonds,
and cast away their cords from us. Tush, we will not be tied by his laws, nor
be so precisely strait-laced with such commandments as these. Here the laws of
the Lord are called bonds and cords: Gods people are bound to him by them: But
the wicked they stand out and refuse to be bound. Now if the law be called a
bond, I pray what bond is it, but of conscience? It is not a bond like a
prisoners fetters, to be put about their legs: This is a spiritual bond, that
binds the conscience. But let me prove it to you by arguments. There be
sundry arguments to prove it.

Arguments, That Gods law binds the conscience of the regenerate.
This is thy duty, and this must be done, that binds the conscience: But the
law of God has power to say thus to the conscience, This is your duty. Who
can tell better then Christ? When ye have done all these things that are
commanded you, Luke 17.10.
say, We are unprofitable servants; we have done that which was our duty to
do. Mark; He speaks of Gods law, things commanded: now the law is nothing
else but a catalogue of those things that God has commanded us. When ye have
done all these things, says our Savior, know it is your duty. Here ye see
the law has power to say to the conscience, This is your duty. But ye will
object, We are under faith; and do ye tell us of law? I answer, as Chrysostom
answers out of Paul, Romans 3.31.
Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid: Yea, we establish the
law. See how the Apostle does abhor this thought: God forbid, says he. As if
he had said, Far be it from me to teach such an abominable doctrine: No, no;
we establish the law. Hear what Christ says himself, Think not that I am come
to destroy the law: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill it. O thought
some, If we believe in Christ, then we hope we shall have done with the law.
No, no, says Christ; ye shall as soon pull the heavens and the earth out of
their place as disannull one tittle of the law.

heed of sin: 1. John 3.4.
Whosoever commits sin transgresses also the law. David was a regenerate
man; yet when he had defiled Bathsheba, I have sinned, says he. Joseph was a
regenerate man; yet confesses, if he should transgress the Lords commandment,
he should sin: How shall I do this great wickedness, and so sin against
God? But ye will object, This is old testament. What of that? I hope you will
not take up the old damned heresy again of the Cerdonians, and Cainites, and
Apellites, and Manichees, and Severians, and other such cursed heretics
condemned by the Church of God: Their heresy was, To hedge out the regenerate
from the old testament. And St Augustine proved it against them, That the
moral law of God was ever the rule of obedience, and shall so continue with
the gospel to the end of the world; and every transgression thereof is sin.
The breach of the ceremonial law was a sin once; but now it is not: because
once it bound the conscience; now it does not: But the breach of the moral law
is still sin: therefore still it binds the conscience. Do ye not remember
what St James says now under the Gospel? he presses it yet on men's
consciences: He that said, Jam. 2.11.
Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill. Now though thou commit no
adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressour of the law. And
though ye may call it a law of liberty in what sense ye please, yet he tells
you, Ye had best look to your words and deeds: for ye must be judged by this
law of liberty: So speak ye and so do as they that shall be judged by the law
of liberty.

binding of conscience but this?) But the law of God being observed does cause
the conscience to excuse; being transgressed, to accuse; In many things we
sin all, says the Apostle. Mark; Our consciences do accuse us: as we do
sin in many things, so our consciences do accuse us when we do so. I am a
sinful man, says St Peter, Luke 5.8. His conscience did accuse him of sin.

To remember his holy covenant, and the oath that he swear that he would give
us, That being delivered out of the hands of our enemies we might serve him
without fear in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life. Mark; Sincere and universal obedience is a condition of the covenant of
grace, not only for a manifestation to our selves that we are truly justified;
as these upstart patritians do hold: but it is the condition of the covenant of
grace. Every covenant has its conditions annexed; and therefore it is called
the book of the covenant, Exodus 24.7. the words of the covenant, Exodus 34.28.
the tables of the covenant, Deuteronomy. 9.11. The reason is this; Because when a
covenant is made, the conditions are put into a book or a table and expressed
in words. Only here is the difference between the first covenant of works and
the second covenant of grace: Both have conditions; but here, I say, is the
difference; In the one grace gives the covenant, and grace gives the
condition of the covenant; but a condition is annexed though: Now hence we may
argue, (and none but enemies to the Gospel can deny it) If the covenant of
grace do bind a man's conscience, then certainly the condition of the covenant
binds a man's conscience too: But the covenant of grace binds the conscience
of the regenerate; and therefore the condition of it binds. If you ask, What
is this to obedience? the answer is, That obedience is the condition of the
covenant of grace, as the forenamed Scripture expresses, Luke (...) 72. Thus
ye see the law of God binds the conscience of all the regenerate. This is the
third use.

we may learn, that no creature can dispense with it, nor free conscience from
guilt when a man transgresses the word. What a damned usurpation is it in the
Pope to offer to dispense? The Canonists say he may dispense de praceptis
veteris and novi testamenti. (They are their own words.) he may dispense with
the commandments of the old and new testament. He dispensed with king Henry the
eighth, and undertook to free his conscience from guilt though he married his
own brothers wife. Azorius the Jesuit reports it.
Gregory the second undertook to free subjects from being bound in their
consciences to keep their oaths of allegiance to Leo the Emperor. O these are
damned aspirings; and they plainly declare him to be Antichrist, who exalts
himself in this manner. The word of God is the supreme binder of conscience:
And therefore not all the Angels in heaven can dispense with one idle word.
Psalm. 119.89.
For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven. Gods word is settled for ever
in heaven, and therefore ye may as soon remove the heaven from its place as one
tittle of the word from binding conscience. Does the word say thus or thus?
thou had best do it: If thou will not, all the whole world cannot help thee;
thy conscience will condemn thee at the day of judgment without remedy. Has
the word convinced thee of thy sins, and made thy conscience say, I am a
sinner, and am guilty before God? I tell thee then, Thy conscience is bound,
and all the world cannot loose it. But have thou been humbled and emptied of
thy self, and does the word pronounce pardon of thy sins in Christ's name,
that thy conscience can say, The Lord speaks peace to my soul? I tell thee,
Thou art loosed, and nor hell nor devil nor sin nor flesh nor any thing can
bind thee. Ye may see the power of Gods word in that speech of our Savior,
Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, Matthew. 18.18. That
is, My word which ye preach is of that nature, that if that loose your
conscience, it is loosed indeed, and nothing can bind it; if that do bind it,
it is bound soundly indeed, and nothing can loose it. O this is a terror to
the wicked! Does the word of God say, Prove. 29.1.
He that hardneth his neck, being often rebuked, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and cannot be cured? O fear and tremble ye that harden your necks against the
reproofs of the Almighty: his word binds over your consciences to Christ's
bar. Does the word say Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge? If thou
be such an one, thy conscience is bound with this word, and it will apply it
to the soul before the tribunal-seat of Christ. Does the word cry out against
any of thy courses? thy conscience is bound as with chains, and it is not all
thy vain hopes and excuses can loose thee. Again, this is comfort to the godly:
Gods word is the supreme binder of conscience. O ye blessed of the Lord, the
word of God tieth such a fast knot to your comforts that all hell cannot open
it with their teeth: The word of the Lord Jesus is with your, who has the key
of David, that opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens.
Yea, but say thou, My sins are against me: What then? mark what the word
says, We have an Advocate with the Father: Thy conscience is bound to believe
that. Yea, but I have a very naughty heart, and I cannot tell what to do with
it: Mark what the word says; Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be
saved: This binds thy conscience. But I offend daily: Mark still what the
word says; Christ brings in everlasting righteousness. Dan. 9.24.
If thou be unworthy to day, there is righteousness for thee to day; if
unworthy to morrow, there is righteousness for thee to morrow; if unworthy for
ever, there is righteousness for thee for ever. This is Gods word, and thy
portion; this binds thy conscience to lay hold on it. But I have abundantly
sinned: What says Christ's word? I will abundantly pardon. O what comfort is
this to every poor soul which the Lord Jesus has humbled! His word is the
supreme binder of conscience, above the law, above justice, above threatenings,
above all the world besides. His promising word is the supreme binder of thy
conscience, if thou be one of Christ's: And therefore fear not; only
believe, and be thankful, and give glory to God. This is the childrens bread;
no stranger can intermeddle with it.

The secondary bond of conscience.
YE have heard that the bonds of conscience are of two sorts: First, there is a
supreme bond of conscience, and that is Gods word: of which I have already
spoken. Secondly, there is a relative bond of conscience, which binds
conscience indeed, but it is only in relation to Gods word, because Gods word
puts authority upon it. And this latter is also of two sorts: 1. Others may
bind conscience; 2. We our selves may bind our own consciences.

I. Others may bind our consciences.
I. Others may bind our consciences, namely, when they have authority conferred
upon them from God, and so their laws and commands receive vigor and force
from Gods laws. Thus the laws and commands of Magistrates bind the conscience
of People; of Parents bind the conscience of Children; of Masters bind the
conscience of Servants: For though they do not bind conscience as they are the
commandments of men, yet having Gods seal and authority upon them they do. I
will set down some conclusions whereby ye may know how far the laws and
commandments of others bind or not bind conscience.

1. Conclusion.
1. Magistrates have power to command us. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers: for there is no power but of God; and the powers that be are
ordained of God, Romans 13.1. That chapter does most clearly prove this
conclusion unto us.

Out of the first part of the chapter we learn, 1. That Magistrates have power
and authority to make laws, and to establish orders among men; and therefore
they are called powers: 2. We learn that these laws of Magistrates receive
strength and force from the law of God: For the powers that be are ordained of
God, says the text. 3. Those laws made by the Magistrate and confirmed by God
have power to bind conscience, verse. 5. Wherefore we must be subject not only
because of wrath but also for conscience sake. And the violating of them is
sin. When their authority is confirmed by God, we cannot resist them but we
resist the ordinance of God, says the Apostle: nay, we may pull condemnation
upon us if we do; They that resist shall receive to themselves condemnation,
verse. 2. So that this first conclusion tells us what laws of men are to be
obeyed; viz. 1. Such as do virtually flow from Gods word, though not expressly
commanded in it; 2. Such as are good and wholesome and profitable for the
commonwealth: These though they are not particularly commanded in Gods word,
yet are they by virtue of it enjoined: and therefore to neglect them and be
disobedient unto them, is to neglect and be disobedient to God. Again, so far
only are they to be obeyed (so far only, I say) as they virtually do flow
from Gods word: for so far only they receive force from Gods law. This is
the first conclusion.

2. Conclusion.
2. The commandments of Magistrates and those that are in authority lose their
power of binding the conscience in four cases:

1. When they command that which though in it self it be not simply and
absolutely sinful and unlawful, yet it does put us upon a necessity of
sinning: As for example, If a Magistrate command single life to all Ministers,
this thing is not in it self simply unlawful, (for it is lawful to marry, and
it is lawful not to marry) yet this commandment is unlawful, because it would
put Ministers upon a necessity of sinning: The reason is, because all have not
this power. And therefore such a commandment as this would not bind conscience:
For the conscience cannot be bound to impurity, or an apparent danger of
impurity: and therefore though the thing be not simply unlawful, yet the
commandment is simply unlawful, and does not bind conscience. The Apostle
makes such a commandment to argue a seared conscience in the commander: and
therefore none but a seared conscience can think it is bound by it, 1. Tim.
4.2, 3.

2. The commandments of Magistrates lose their power of binding the conscience
when they command things that are unlawful in themselves and contrary to the
word of God. In this case they do not bind conscience, because Gods seal is not
on them. We have an example of this in the three blessed children; Dan. 3.16.
Who when the king commanded them to worship the image that he had set up, they
did not conceive themselves bound in conscience to obey: they would rather
suffer torment then obey it. So also Daniel, when he was commanded not to ask
any petition of God for thirty days space, but only of the king, Daniel did
not conceive himself bound in conscience, nay he chose rather to be cast into
the den of lions then obey. Dan. 6.16.
In this case the answer of the Apostles is necessary; who when they were
commanded not to preach any more in the name of the Lord Jesus, thus they
answered, Whether it be right in the sight of God to obey men rather then God,
judge ye.

3. When men's laws and commands overthrow the liberty of Christianity, that
Christian liberty which Christ has purchased for us, then they lose their
power of binding the conscience. But here I must tell you of a caution; viz.
That this liberty may be considered in a double respect: 1. In regard of it
self, the liberty it self; 2. In regard of the exercise or use of this
liberty. Now there is a very great difference between these two
considerations; as there is a great difference between a man's having a sword
and a man's wearing a sword. The Magistrate may restrain a man from wearing a
sword at such or such a time, though he do not take his sword from him: so
there is difference between the having our liberty and the using our liberty.
There is a liberty purchased for Gods children, whereby all things are become
lawful unto them: All things are lawful unto me, says Paul 1. Cor. 6.12. and
there is nothing evil in it self: Romans 14.14.
(he speaks of indifferent things.) Gods children are freed from the
observation of meats, and drinks, and times, and garments. Now whatsoever
commandment is made by the Magistrate contrary to this liberty does not bind
conscience: for nothing can bind conscience when Christ does loose it: Yet
there may be a restraint of the use of this liberty: as for example, the
Magistrate may command us to forbear some kinds of meats at some certain times;
and so also for garments, and the like: namely, when the doctrine about meats
and drinks and garments is pure. And therefore in such a case the command of
the Magistrate binds the conscience; otherwise not.

4. When they command things indifferent to be absolutely necessary, to make
them idolatrous or superstitious, then in this case they are unlawful and bind
not the conscience to obey them. But when are they idolatrous? I answer; 1.
When they are commanded either as absolutely necessary to Christianity, to
the very being of religion and the worship of God, and with as much necessity
as holiness it self, then they are made superstitious and idolatrous: And in
this case the caveat of St John is strongly to be kept, Babes, 1. John 5.21.
keep your selves from idols. 2. When they are commanded as things
meritorious, as pleasing to God for themselves, and to merit of him, then they
are idolatrous. 3. When they are commanded for the substantial perfection of
religion, as though religion were imperfect without them, then they are made
idolatrous, and lose their virtue of binding the conscience. But all such
commands of things that are indifferent, which are commanded without respect to
make them idolatrous, they may be obeyed. This is our second conclusion.

3. Conclusion.
3. Those laws and commandments of Magistrates which want the authority of
Gods law to confirm them (and therefore bind not the conscience) ought not to
be disobeyed for all that with scandal or contempt and by unreverent slighting
or despising the Magistrate or his laws. He must be acknowledged a Magistrate
under God for all that: 1. Tim. 2.1, 2. I exhort that supplications be made for
Kings and those that are in authority. He speaks there of heathen Kings; yet
he calls them Kings, and says they have authority; and we ought to pray for
them: and therefore how much more when Kings and Magistrates subscribe to
Christian religion? Nay, though they command that which is utterly unlawful,
we must not rise up against them: for if we do, we rise up against God. We must
obey them one way or other, either actively or passively: When they command
that which is lawful for us to do, we must obey them by doing: when they
command that which is unlawful for us to do, and threaten punishment, then we
cannot actively obey them by doing, because they command against God; yet we
must passively obey by suffering and submitting to their penalties, because the
Lord has given them authority over us. This is our third conclusion.

4. Conclusion.
4. Those laws of Magistrates which by Gods law do not bind conscience, do yet
in matter of scandal bind us to obedience. If the Magistrate shall command any
thing beyond his power to command yet not unlawful for us to do, though such a
command do not bind to obedience in case of conscience, yet in case of scandal
it does. Thus Christ was content to pay tribute though he needed not to have
done it: The children, says he, are free: Matthew. 17.27.
nevertheless, lest he should offend the Magistrate, he did pay it. I will put
an example of another nature: In a private wrong, though we are not expressly
bound to it, yet rather then scandalously to contend, conscience does bind us
to yield. Needed Abraham to have condescended so far unto Lot as to let him
take his choice before him? No, rather then scandal of religion should arise,
ye may read that he did it. Thus I have briefly made it manifest how far the
commands of the Magistrate do not bind conscience, and how far they do.

Objections.


Answ.
I answer, It is true, as the supreme and absolute binder of conscience: but it
has a relation also unto men in the second place, inasmuch as God puteth upon
men such terms as conscience has relation to, Acts 24.16. Herein I have
always endeavored my self, to have always a clear conscience both toward God
and toward men. Mark; Conscience has relation to both: For though it have its
main relation to God and his word, yet in him it has relation unto men.

Magistrates do not undertake, nor can they, to meddle with men's invisible
spirits; for they are not able to see whether the spirit of man be obedient or
no: and therefore how do their laws bind us in conscience. The Magistrate only
looks at the body: men's thoughts and affections and consciences are naked
only to God.

It is true, Answ.
the Magistrate does not undertake but only to bind the outward man:
nevertheless the conscience of the subject feels it self to be bound to
obedience under pain of sinning against God, who gives this general precept,
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, to the King,
etc. 1. Pet. 2.13.
The conscience feels this, and so it comes to be bound.

mend our highways, to moderate expenses at nuptials, or the like; these are
civil things and not religious, and therefore how can they bind conscience? We
make conscience only of religion and the worship of God.

^nsw.
Such laws do not bind conscience under the name of religion, but under the name
of civil discipline. And again, though they do not bind conscience per se and
immediately, yet they do per aliud and as subjoyned to an higher law. For
though the breach of such laws be only a civil fault in it self, yet in
another respect it may be a moral sin, if the powers that are ordained of
God be neglected and disobeyed. And therefore though the conscience do not
regard civil laws as they are civil; neither do we make conscience of them as
they are civil: yet as they are made by the minister of God, and backed by his
authority which the Lord has set on them, so they do take hold of conscience;
and not to perform them is contrary to justice and charity and the profit and
safety of the commonwealth, and so a sin.

Uses.
Fear not him that can kill the body, and there is all that he can do: but
fear him who can cast both body and soul into hell: I say unto you, Fear him,
Luke 12.4. As if he had said, Men can reach no further then the body, and
their punishments can go no further then the death of the body.

We shall displease the King if we do not. For this sin of theirs they were
broken in judgment, Hos. 5.11. Ephraim is destroyed and broken in judgment,
because he willingly walked after the commandment. Beloved, Gods commandment is
sovereigne, and the supreme binder of conscience: Whatever commandment is
repugnant to Gods word, woe to us if we do it; nay, though it be to save our
goods or our lives. It is true, we must give to Caesar the things that are
Cesars; but so as withal we must be sure to give to God the things that are
Gods.

Ye are irregular and despisers of authority. I say, this is comfort to the
godly, that God is able to bear them out in obeying him rather then men. Gods
word is the supreme binder of conscience; and therefore, whatever men think of
such, they are absolutely bound to obey God. If men command us against the word
of God, we know their authority is the ordinance of God; and therefore if they
go beyond that, they do not bind us in conscience. If God had not bound us in
conscience to him, others might have taken it ill if we should not obey them:
but now what cause have others to think ill of us? What folly were it in us to
seek to please men and to displease God? If we were at liberty, then we might
choose whom we would obey: but now we are bound unto God, and must be obedient
unto God, whatever men command to the contrary, let us do it therefore with
cheerfulness. By this we show our submission to God; by this we satisfy
conscience, which being bound unto God does continually urge us to obey him.
Why should we omit part of the exactness of our obedience which the word of
God does require? We have more to do then ever we shall be able to perform: we
should therefore be careful to do all that we may. By our obedience to God in
this kind we convince the conscience of others of our uprightness toward God:
Though through the overruling dominion of their lusts and passions they rage at
us, and their mouths speak evil of us, yet we may have an evidence in their
consciences within which may testify for us: their consciences will whisper
within them, Surely they do well to please God rather then men: their
consciences will be on our side, though their actions and tongues be against
us. We have a notable example of this Acts 4.15, 16. When the rulers of the
Jews had threatened the Apostles, and had reviled them with many bitter words,
and had bidden them go aside for a while, then they concluded among themselves,
Surely an evident sign is done by them, and we cannot deny it: So that their
consciences acquitted them for good men. So when the wicked of this world have
spoken evil of the ways of the righteous, and blasphemed the holy name after
which they are named; yet when they are alone, and their consciences at counsel
within themselves, then they conclude, Indeed they do well. Thus their
consciences give a good evidence of us, and accuse them for not doing the like.
And thus much shall suffice to be spoken of other men's binding of conscience.

II. We may bind our own consciences.
II. We our selves may bind our own consciences: And that is by those vows and
promises which we make to God of any thing lawful and in our power. Those vows
and promises which we make unto God according to the warrant of his word they
do bind our conscience. They are our own before we have made them: as Ananias
and Sapphira their gift was their own before they vowed it to the church; While
it remained was it not thine own? and when it was sold, was it not in thine own
power? Acts 5.4. We need not vow unless we will: but after we have vowed our
vows are Gods bonds, and do bind the conscience to the performance of them.
Nay, we lie unto God, as the text says they did, if we do not stand to the
performance of them.

But it may be demanded, What vows are they which are unlawful, and do not
bind conscience? I answer;

1. Such as we make of things impossible and beyond our power: These are
unlawful, and do not bind conscience.

2. Such as we make of things unlawful; when we vow to do that which is
contrary to Gods law: such as David's was when he vowed the destruction of
Nabals family: 1. Sam. 25.22.
This does not bind conscience: nay, we are bound in conscience to break it.

3. Such as though they be of things lawful and possible, yet we want freedom
in the performance of them: as for a wife or a servant or a child to make a
vow, when their relation to such as are over them will not suffer them to
perform it: Numb. 30.3.
This binds not conscience. Nothing binds conscience but that which has
Gods seal upon it: but this has not Gods seal on it; and therefore it does not
bind conscience: indeed it binds us in conscience to repent of it.

4. Such as though they be lawful and profitable and in our own freedom, yet
if there fall a greater consequence before the time of performance, we are not
bound in conscience to perform them: as if a man upon the receipt of some mercy
should in testimony of his thankfulness vow a hundred pounds to good uses, in
the mean time his estate so decays as that he shall undo himself and his
family if he perform it; this is so great a consequence, and contingently
happened, that it freeth his conscience from performing what he had vowed: Or if
a man should promise marriage to a woman, and before the time of nuptials she
be found unchaste; this is a far greater consequence, and he is not bound in
conscience to marry her. These kinds of vows do not bind in conscience: But all
other do bind us.

1. Use; We may learn from hence never to vow but with good judgment and
counsel. For either we must keep our promise, or not: If we must, that is a
sign it is good, and therefore had need of deliberation: If we must not keep
it, then it is a sign of rashness and inconsiderateness; and besides it may
prove scandalous and offensive to them to whom we make it, and also to them
that shall hear of it: And therefore it requires good judgment and advise to
vow. What a rash vow was that of good Jephthah? Judges 11.30.
If thou will deliver Ammon into my hand, whatsoever meets me I will offer it
for a burnt-offering. How if a dog had first met him? what a sin had it been?
How if his daughter? what a thing had that been? And indeed it proved to be his
daughter. Vows without judgment do but increase our sins and aggravate our
transgressions against God.

2. Use; This teaches us to keep our good vows whatsoever they be that we
make. Indeed it is hard to keep a good, yea it is hard to make a good vow in
that manner as we should: It requires a great deal of faith and selfdeniall
and humility and strength of resolution: But when we have made it, our sin
is the greater if we do not then keep it; ^cles 5.5
Better it is not to vow then that thou should vow and not pay. Have thou
vowed a vow? then defer not to pay it: God has no pleasure in fools. As if
the holy Ghost had said, It is the part of a fool to vow before he consider and
be absolutely resolved to perform, to be off and on with the Lord God of hosts:
The Lord has no pleasure in fools: Therefore pay all thy good vows, and be
humbled for thy rash vows. But we are fallen into bad times, when truth and
equity is perished from among men: Every one is a deceitful bow; yea, the
best (almost) is a briar: Nothing so common as vows and promises; but few make
conscience of performing them. Nay, men are careless of their grand vow which
they have made unto God in their baptism. ^aptisme.
O this is a very fearful sin! Ye have all made a vow unto God in your
baptism that ye would live otherwise then ye do, and ye make no conscience to
keep it. Baptism is a very weighty thing: If there were no other thing to
bind you to holiness and obedience and faith but only the vow ye entered into
in your baptism, did ye consider what a vow it is, it would move you alone. It
is said of Apollos that he was fervent in spirit though he knew nothing but the
baptism of John: Acts 18.25.
Apollos considered what a vow he had made unto God in his baptism, that,
though he knew nothing else, it made him zealous for God. Baptism is a very
great binder of conscience: It binds a man to believe, and to go out of
himself, and to submit to Jesus Christ. The wicked Pharisees saw this to be
true: Matthew. 21.25.
If we shall say that John's baptism was from heaven, he will say, Why did ye
not then believe? Beloved, was not your baptism from heaven? was it not an
ordinance of God? and did ye not solemnly then vow unto God? Why then do ye not
believe? why do ye not deny your selves, your works, your ways, and take up
Christ's cross? As Christ says of John Baptist, Among them that are born of
women there has not been a greater then John the Baptist; Matthew. 11.11.
so may I say of bonds and of vows and covenants, Among all the vows and
covenants that ever were made there has not been a greater then this of
Baptism: And therefore ye had best look to the performing of what ye then
vowed: If ye do not, ye are grievous breakers of covenant with God; which sin
will surely stand against you for evil. It is most certain, that Baptism does
greatly bind us in conscience to walk answerably to it in all righteousness
and true holiness: And we can never be saved (though we are baptized) except
we can answer with a good conscience that we live as we vowed in our Baptism:
1. Pet. 3.21. The like figure whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save us;
not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God. Mark; Unless we can answer with a good conscience that
we live according to our promises in it, our Baptism cannot save us. I pray,
consider that speech of St Paul; (...). 6.4.
We are buried with Christ by baptism into his death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk
in newness of life. Mark; There is the vow that we made unto God in our
Baptism: And the Apostle ^ere tells us we are bound in con^ience to keep
this vow; otherwise we and better have been without our Ba^tisme. Do not think
that God will ^e mocked: Ye are content to go for Christians: but if ye be
Christians, ^^nsider ye are under a great vow; and (...) ye do not keep it,
Gods covenant ^^th a quarrel against you, and ye ^all be broken in judgment.
There is ^o sin that ye live in, no lust that ^our conscience tells you
has enter^^^nment in your hearts, but it is sacra^entall perjurie against the
vow that (...) made unto God in your Ba^tisme. Are ye dead to good du^^es? Ye
vowed in your Baptism ye would not be so. Do ye not daily ^ortifie and subdue
your affections? (...) vowed in your baptism ye would. (...) ye not daily
fight against sin and ^^lesh, like the faithful soldiers of Christ? Ye
vowed in your Baptism ye would. What a horrible perjurie is this? Nay, it is
worse: it is a sacramental perjurie. When the Apostles saw any sin in the
people, presently they tell them of Baptism: as if they should say, Do ye live
thus and thus, when ye vowed the contrary in your Baptism? When there were
divisions in Corinth; Some would be of Cephas, and some of Apollos, and some of
Paul: Paul then tells them of their Baptism, Were ye baptized in the name of
Paul? 1. Cor. 1.13.
As if he had said, I pray, consider how contrary this is unto your Baptism:
Ye were baptized into Christ; and are ye that divided among your selves? So
when there was corruption crept into the people of Galatia, St Paul tells
the^ of their Baptism: Gal. 3.27.
As many of ye says he, as have been baptized into Chr^^^ have put on Christ.
As if he had sai^ This corruption of yours is contrary to your baptism: Ye
were baptized into Christ, and ye have vowed to put on Christ and do ye yield
to such corruptions as these* So also when there was want of love and unity
and affection between one another among the Ephesians, St Paul tells them of
their Baptism: O says ^ There is one God, one faith, Ephesians. 4.5.
one ba^^^sme. As if he should say, This is con^^arie to your baptism: Ye were
all bapti^^d with one baptism, and do not ye live (...) peace? and is there
not unity of spirit ^e with another among you? What? and are all baptized with
one baptism? Beloved, ye never do that which is not ^^od but ye go clean
contrary to your ^^ptisme. What? were ye baptized into christ, and do thus?
baptized into christ and pray thus? baptized into christ, and hear the word of
Christ ^^^us? serve God no better then thus? Your Baptism binds you in
conscience against every sin and every evil ^ay: O let us take it to heart
and con^^ler it.

FINIS.
Imprimatur Cantabr.

R. Brownrig, Procan.


