Deo Amicisque

Amor

Innocentia

Prudentia

Resolves Divine, Moral Political by Owin Felltham

Hor. ser. lib. jo. His ego Comodius, quam tu praeclare Senator millibus atque
alijs Viuo. London Printed for Henry Seile

LEX

EVAN^

FIDES



TO THE MOST VIRTUOUS, DISCREET, AND Noble; the Lady DOROTHY CRANE, daughter to
the right Honorable, and Religious, the Lord HOBART.
MADAME,
IF ever Resolutions were needful, I think they be in this Age of looseness;
wherein, 'twere some unhappiness to be good, did not the Consciousnesse of
her own worth, set virtue firm, against all disheartnings. This makes her of
so specious a glory, that though she need not the applause of any, to add to
her happiness; yet she attracts the hearts of all that know her, to Love,
Service, Admiraration. That I have sacred this offertory of my thoughts to your
Ladyship, this is reason enough; if not, your Love to my dearest friend, may
second it. To apparel any more in these paper vestments, I should multiply
impertinents; and perhaps displease. For I have ever found facecommendation to
dye Wisdoms cheek of a blush-colour. Discreet Nature is always modest, and
deserving best, loves least to hear on it. This only I will truly add: that
I know not the thing of that value, should make me shrine up a work of this
nature, to any, in whom I could observe, the possibility of a fail in Virtue.
Such a Dedication were to put Virtue to a Stepdame, that would not nurse, but
stifle her. With your Goodness, I am sure, she shall find the tenderness of
a maternall love. And if in these weak extractions, your Judicious eye light
you to ought, increasing that affection (all by-respects put away) my next
Petition will be: that it may please you to command

Your immutable servant, OW. FELTHAM.

TO THE PERVSER.
TO begin with Apologies, and entreat a kind Gensure, were to disparage the
Work, and beg partiality: equal with Ostentation I rank them both. If
thou be wise, pleasing words cannot blind thy judgment from discerning
errors, wheresoever they appear. If thou be foolish, they can neither
bla^ch thy folly, nor make thee think better, than thy indiscretion leads
thee to. Requests from others, may sway our words, or actions; but our minds
will have their own free thoughts, as they apprehend the thing. Internal
judgment is not easily perverted. In what thou shall here meet with, use the
freedom of thy native opinion: Et Lectorem, et Correctorem liberum volui. I
shall ever profess my self his debtor, that greets me with reprehensions of
Love. The noblest part of a friend, is an honest boldness in the noting of
errors. He that tells me a fault, aiming at my good; I must think him wise and
faithful: wise, in spying that which I see not: faithful, in a plain
admonishment, not tainted with flattery. That I have made it public, I plead
not the importunity of friends: that were to play at Hazard for folly, if it
prove not. I writ it without encouragement from another; and as I writ it, I
send it abroad. Rare, I know it is not: Honest, I am sure it is: Though thou
find not to admire, thou may to like. What I aim at in it, I confess,
has most respect to my self; That I might out of my own School take a
lesson, should serve me for my whole Pilgrimage: and if I should wander from
these rests, that my own Items might set me in heavens direct way again. We
do not so readily run into crimes, that from our own mouth have had sentence
of Condemnation. Yet, as no Phisician can be so abstemious, as to follow
strictly all his own prescriptions: So I think there is no Christian so much
his minds master, as to keep precisely all his resolutions. They may better
show what he would be, then what he is. Nature has too slow afoote, to
follow Religion close at the heel. Who can expect, our dull flesh should wing
it with the flights of the soul? He is not a good man that lives perfect; but
he that lives as well as he can, and as humane fraileties will let him. He
that thus far strives not, never began to be virtuous; nor knows he those
transcending joys, that continually feast in the noble-minded man. All the
external pleasures that mortality is capable of, can never enkindle a flame,
that shall so bravely warm the soul, as the love of virtue, and the certain
knowledge of the rule we have over our own wild passions. That I might curb
those, I have writ these: and if in them, thou find'st a line may mend thee; I
shall think I have diuulg'd it to purpose. Read all, and use thy minds
liberty; how thy suffrage falls, I weigh not: For it was not writ so much to
please others, as to profit my self.

Farewell.
Ad Librum:
-- Quid miser egi?
Quid volui? Dices.
RESOLVES: DIVINE, MORAL, POLITICAL.
I.
IDLE books are nothing else, but corrupted tales in Ink and Paper: or indeed
Vice sent abroad with a License: which makes him that reads them, conscious of
a double injury: they being in effect, like that bestiall sin of brutish
Adultery. For if one reads, two are catched: he that angles in these waters,
is sure to strike the Torpedo, that in stead of being his food, confounds him.
Besides the time il spent in them, a twofold reason shall make me refrain:
both in regard of my love to my own soul, and pity unto his that made them.
For if I be corrupted by them, the Comprisor of them is mediately a cause of my
ill: and at the day of Reckoning (though now dead) must give an account for it,
because I am corrupted by his bad example which he leaves behind him; So I
become guilty by receiving, and he by thus conuaying this lewdness unto me:
He is the thief, I the recieuer; and what difference makes our Law betwixt
them? If one be cut off, the other dies; both I am sure perish alike. I will
write none, lest I hurt them that come after me. I will read none, lest I
augment his mulct that is gone before me: neither write, nor read, lest I prove
a foe to my self. A lame hand is better then a lewd pen: while I live, I
sin too much; let me not continue longer in wickedness, then life. If I
write ought, it shall be both on a good subject, and from a deliberated pen:
for a foolish sentence dropped upon paper, sets folly on a Hill, and is a
monument, to make infamy eternal.

II.
The humble man is the surest Peacemaker: of all moral virtues, Humility is
the most beautiful; she both shunnes Honor, and is the way to it: she rocks
Debate asleep, and keeps peace waking, nay, does foster, does cherrish her:
which is well expressed in a pretty story of two goats, that met at once, on a
very narrow Bridge, under which there glided a deep, and violent stream:
being both met, the straitness gave denial to their Journey; get back they
could not, the planke was too narrow, for their returning turn: stand still
they might, but that could neither be continual, nor to purpose: and to fight
for the way in so perilous a place, was either to put a wilful period to
their lives, or extremely hazard them. That they may therefore both pass in
safety, the one lies down, and the other goes over him: so while their passage
is quiet, their lives are secure, from death, from danger. I have ever thought
it idle to continue in strife; if I get the victory, it satisfies my mind, but
then, shall I have his malice too, which may endamage me more: so my gain will
be less then my hindrance: If I be overcome unwillingly, the^ is the disgrace
mine, and the loss: and though I have not his malice, yet shall I not want his
scorn. I will (in things not weighty) submit freely: The purest gold is most
ductible: it is commonly a good blade that bends well. If I expect disadvantage,
or misdoubt the Conquest, I think it good wisdom, to give in soonest; so
shall it be more honor to do that willingly, which with stiffenesse I cannot
but hazard upon compulsion. I had rather be accounted too much humble, then
esteemed a little proud: the Reed is better that bends, and is whole; then the
strong Oak, that not bending, breaks: If I must have one, give me an
inconvenience, not a mischief: the lightest burden, is the easiest borne.

III.
To make a perfect man, there is requisite both Religion and Nature. Nature
alone we know too loose: religion alone will seem too hard; some for Religion
have I known formal, strict; yet have so wanted the pleasing parts of a good
nature, as they have been feared, but not loved: for being of a fiery spirit,
even slender occasions have made way to the divulging of their own
imperfections: either by too severe a reprehension, or else by too soon
sudden Contempt: both which make much for the harboring of hate against
themselves, by making them esteemed either rash Censurers, or angry proud ones:
and we all know, that as Judgment is never shot suddenly but from a fools
bow; so blind Choler broke into expression, is the true mark of an
intemperate mind; others there yet rest, whom it tickles much to chatter of
their own merits, and they cannot lay an egg, but they must cackle, or like
the boasting PHARISEE, trumpet out the report of their own praises: if not out
of an affected singularity, and an ouerweening opinion of their own
excellence; yet for lack of an humble and discret nature, that should cause
their observation be busied at home. And this is that makes the world
disdain, contemn them: self commendation is an arrow with too many feathers:
which, we leuelling at the mark, is taken with the wind, and carried quite
from it. Some again for nature, I have found rarely qualified: ennobled with
such a mild affability, such a generous spirit, and such sweetness of
disposition, and demeanor, that their humble and courteous carriage have
prevailed much in the affection of those with whom they have had commerce: yet
because they have wanted Religion (that like a good subject should make an
elaborate work rare) they have, only in a superficial applause, won the
approbation of the unsteady multitude: who love them more for suffering their
rudeness, then for any noble worth, that is obuious to their undiscerning
Judgments. But in all this they have got no reverence, no respect at all. Thus
Religion without Nature (in men merely natural) begets a certain form of
awful regard: but to them it is like a tyrannical Prince, whom the people obey
more for fear of an austere rebuke, then for any true affection, they bear to
his person. Now Nature without Religion often wins love: and this is like a
Master too familiar with his servant: that in the beginning gains love, but
shall in the end find contempt: and his toleration will be made an allowance of
ill. Both together are rare for qualification. Nature has in her self
treasure enough to please a man; Religion a Christian: the last begets fear,
the other love, together admiration, reverence. I will like, I will love them
single; but conioyn'd, I will affect and honor.

IIII.
I find, to him that the tale is told, belief only makes the difference
betwixt a truth, and lies: for a lie believed, is true: and truth vncredited, a
lie; unless he can carry his probation in's pocket, or more readily at his
tongues end: for as he that tells a smooth lie, is judged to speak truth, till
some step forth to contradict his utterance: so he that tells an unlikely
truth, is thought to broch a lie, unless he can produce conuincing reason to
prove it; only the guilt, or justice of the thing rests in the knowing
conscience of the Relator. In the hearer I cannot count it a fault: it is easy
to be deceived in miracles, in probabilities: albeit the judgment that
passes on them, be both honest, wise, apprehensiue, and clear. In the teller
justly; if it be a lie, there needs no text to confute it; if it seem so, and
he cannot purge it, discretion were better silent. I will tell no lies, lest I
be false to my self: no improbable truths, lest I seem so to others; If I
hear any man report wonders, what I know, I may happily speak; what I but
think, shall rest with my self; I may as well be too suspicious, as over
credulous.

V.
Three things are there which aggrauate a misery, and make an evil feeme
greater then indeed it is. Inexpectation, Vnacquaintance, want of Preparation.
Inexpectation, when a mis-hap comes suddenly, and unlooked for: it distracteth
the mind, and scares both the faculties and affections from their due
consultation of remedy: whereas an evil foreseen is half cured, because it
gives warning to provide for danger. Thus the falling of a house is more
perilous, than the rising of a flood: for, while of the former, the hurt is
more unavoidable, by reason both of the violence, and precipitation: The
latter, through the remissenes of coming, is less dangerous, less
prejudicial; there being time, either to avoid the place, or to countermure.
If this suffice not, think but how odious treason would show in a dear friend,
from whom we only expected the sweet embraces of love: the conceit only is
able to kill, like a mad Dogg's biting, that not only wounds the body, but
insaniates the soul. Secondly, Vnacquainta^ce. Familiarity takes away fear,
when matters not usual, prove inductions to terror. The first time the Fox saw
the Lion, he feared him as death: the second, he feared him, but not so much:
the third time he grew more bold, and passed by him without quaking. The
Imbellicke peasant, when he comes first to the field, shakes at the report of
a Musket: but after he has ranged through the fury of two or three Battles, he
then can fearelesse stand a breach; and dares, vndau^ted, gaze death in the
face. Thirdly, want of preparation. When the enemy besieges a City, not
prepared for War, there is small hope of evasion, none at all to conquer,
none to overcome. How much more hard is the winter to the Grasshopper, then the
Pismire, who before, having stored her Garner, is now able to withstand a
famine? Lest then, I make my death seem more terrible to me, then indeed it is;
I will first daily expect it: that when it comes, I may not be to seek to
entertain it: if not with joy, as being but flesh: yet without sorrow, as
having a soul. Secondly, I will labor to be acquainted with it, often before
it come, thinking it may come: so when I know it better, I shall better sustain
it: with less fear, without terror. Thirdly, I will prepare for it, by
casting up my accounts with God, that all things even and straight betwixt us,
whenever he shall please to call for me, I may as willingly lay down my life,
as leave a prison. Thus shall I make my death less dreadful, and finish my
life before I dye. He that dies daily, seldom dies dijectedly.

VI.
A good beginning have I often seen conclude ill. Sin in the bud is fair,
sweet, pleasing: but the fruit is death, horror, hell. Something will I respect
in my way, most in my Conclusion: in the one, to prevent all wilful errors; in
the other, to insure a Crown. For as Judgment has relation to the manner of
dying; so has death dependence on the course of living. Yet the good end has
no bad beginning; it once had. A good consequence makes the premises so
esteemed of, and a sweet relish at the leaving off, makes the draught
delightful, that at the first did taste unpleasant. That is well that ends
well: and better is a bad beginning that concludes well, then a prosperous
onset that ends in complaint. What if my beginning has been ill? sorrows
ouerblowne, are pleasant; that which has been hard to suffer, is sweet to
remember. I will not much care what my beginning be, so my end be happy. If my
Sun set in the new Jerusalem, I have lived well, how-euer afflictions have
sometimes clouded my course.

VII.
Extreme longings in a Christian, I seldom see succeed well: surely God means
so to temper his, as he would not have their affections violent, in the search
of a temporal blessing: or else he knows our frailety such, as we would be
more taken with the fruition of a benefit, then the Author. Prosperities are
strong pleaders for sin: Troubles be the surest Tutors of goodness. How many
would have dyed ill, if they had lived merrily? GOD has several ways to
reduce his to his own orders, among which, I am persuaded none is more
powerful, then restraint of our wills. It sends the soul to meditation, whereby
she sees the worlds follies in such true colors of vanity, that no sound
discretion can think them worth the doting on: and though our discontentments
so transport us, as we see not the good we reap by a Deprivation: yet sure we
are happier by this want: for we are all like women with Child, if we had the
things we long for; how soon should we eat and surfeit? When nature finds her
ardent desires fulfilled, she is ravenous, and greedy; yea then she has so
little moderation, as it is not safe to satisfy her. If I can, I will never
extremely covet: so though I meet with a Cross, it shall neither distemper, nor
distract me: but if my desires outstrip my intention, I will comfort my self
with this, that the enioyment might have added to my content, and endangered my
soul: but the want shall in the end be a means to embetter them both. Gods
Saints shall with joy subscribe to his will: though here for a time it may
seem to thwart them.

VIII.
A worthy Act has he done, that has learned to refrain his tongue: and
surely much evil has he prevented, if he knows when to be well silent.
Unkindness breed not so many Iarres, as the multiplying of words that follow
them. How soon would these coals dye, if the tongue did not enkindle them?
Repentance often follows speaking; silence either seldom, or never: for while
our words are many, sin is in some, in most. Go to the Crane, thou Babbler,
read her story, and let her inform thee: who flying out of Sicily, puts
little stones in her mouth, lest by her own garrulitie, she bewray her self
as a prey to the Eagles of the mountain Taurus: which with this policy, she
flies over in safety: even silence every where is a safe safeguard: if by it, I
offend, I am sure I offend without a witness: while an unruly tongue may
procure my ruin, and prove as a sword to cut the third of my life in two:
it is good always to speak well, and in season: and is it not as safe
sometimes to say nothing? he that speaks little, may mend it soon: and
though he speaks most faults, yet he exceedes not, for his words were few.
To speak too much, bewrayes folly; too little, an vnperceiuing stupiditie: I
will so speak, as I may be free from babbling Garrulitie: so be silent, as my
Spectators may not account me blockishly dull. Silence and speech are both as
they are used, either tokens of Indiscretion, or badges of Wisdom.

IX.
It Is a hard thing among men of inferior rank, to speak to an earthly Prince:
no King keeps a Court so open, as to give admittance to all comers: and
though they have, they are not sure to speed; albeit there be nothing that
should make their petitio^s not grantable. Oh how happy, how privileged is
then a Christian? who though he often lives here in a slight esteem, yet can
he freely confer with the King of Heaven, who not only hears his
entreaties, but delights in his requests, inuites him to come, and promises a
happy welcome; which he shows in fulfilling his desires, or better, fitter for
him. In respect of who^, the greatest Monarch is more base, then the basest
vassaile in regard of the most mighty and puissant Emperor. Man cannot so much
exceed a beast, as God does him: what if I be not known to the Nimrods of the
world, and the Peers of the earth? I can speak to their better, to their
Master; and by prayer be familiar with him: importunity does not anger him;
neither ca^anything but our sins make us go away empty; while the game is
playing, there is much difference between the King and the Pawn: that once
ended, they are both shuffled into the bag together: akd who can say whether
was most happy, save only the King had many checks, while the little Pawn was
free, and secure? My comfort is, my access to heaven is as free as the
Princes; my departure from earth not so grievous: for while the world smiles on
him, I am sure I have less reason to love it then he. Gods favor I will
chiefly seek for; man's, but as it falls in the way to it: when it proves a
hindrance, I hate to be loved.

X.
The virtuous man is a true wonder: for it is not from himself, that he is
so. But that I see so many wicked, I marvel not. It Is easier running down
the hill, then climing it. They that are this way given, have much the
advantage of them, that follow goodness. Besides those inclinations that sway
the soul to vice, the way is broader, and more ready: he that walks through
a large field, has only a narrow path, to guide him right in the way: but on
either side, what a wide room he has to wander in? Every virtue has two
vices, that close her up in curious limits: and if she swerues, though but a
little, she suddenly steps into error. Fortitude has Fear, and Rashness:
Liberality, Avarice, and Prodigality: Justice has Rigor, and Partiality.
Thus every good mistress, has two bad servants: which has made some to
define virtue, to be nothing, but a mean between two vices, whereof one leads
to excess, the other to defect: making her like the roof of a Church, on
whose top, we scarce find room to turn a foot in: but on either side, a
broad road to ruin: in which, if we once be falling, our stay is rare, our
recovery a miracle. The man that is rare in vice, I will never admire: if he
goes but as he is driven, he may soon be witty in evil: but the good man, I
will worthily magnify: he it is can sail against the wind, make the thorny
way pleasant, and vnintangle the incumcumbrances of the world.

XI.
What sin is there, that we may account or little, or venial, unless
comparatively? seeing there is none so small, but that (without repentance) is
able to sink the soul in eternal Damnation? Who will think that a slight
wound, which gives a sudden Inlet to Death? But should we grant this error,
yet these of all other, I observe the most dangerous, both for their frequency,
and secrecy; the one increasing them to a large heap, the other so covering
them, as we see not how they wrong us: The rain that falls in smallest drops,
moistens the earth, makes it mire, slimy, and durte: whereas a hard shower,
that desce^ds violently, washes away, but soakes not in. Even the smallest
letters are more hurtful to the sight, then those that are written with a text
pen. Great sins, and public, I will avoid for their scandal and wonder:
lesser and private, for their danger, and multitude: both, because my God hates
them. I cannot, if I love him, but abhor, what he loathes.

XII.
Memory and forgetfulness, are both in friendship necessary. Let me remember
those kindnesses my friend has done to me, that I may see his love, and
learn gratitude. Let me forget those benefits I have performed to him, lest
they shuffle out the effect of my love, and tell me he is requited. Thus may
we together increase our friendship, and comforts: otherwise, a man may have
many acquaintances, but no friends; though unthankfulness banisheth love,
Gratitude obtaines a repealement.

XIII.
I observe, besides the inward Contents of a peaceable conscience, two things,
wherein a Christian excels all other men. In true Valor: In Fidelity. In true
Valor; that is, in a just quarrel: for if his cause be naught, there is none
more timorous then he; and indeed to show much Courage, in a bad matter, is
rather a token of desperate folly, then any badge of a magnanimous mind; but
in a just cause, he is bold as a Lion. Nothing can daunt his ever undaunted
mind. Not Infamy, for he knows in this, his share is not worse then his
Masters; and while it is for his names sake; he knows he is in it, blessed. If
there be any Nectar in this life, it is in sorrows we endure for goodness.
Besides, he weighes not how he falls to the world, and men; so he may stand
firm, to his heavenly Father. That God we fight for, is able enough to
vindicate al our wrongs. Not afflictions; how many did Job, and the Apostles
wade through with Courage, with Content? These he knows are here but for a
time, transient, and momentany; neither shall the Israelites live always,
under the tyranny of Pharaoh, or the travels of the Wilderness: He knows also,
the more abundant in sorrows here, the more abundant in joys hereafter; His
tears shall return in smiles, his weepings in a stream of pleasures. God
does not recompense with a niggardly hand; he shall find his joys as an
ouer-flowing Sea; and his glory beyond thought, exuberant. Not Death; for he
knows, that will be his happiest day; and his bridge, from woe, to glory.
Though it be the wicked man's shipwreck, it is the good man's putting into
harbor: where striking sails, and casting Anchor, he returns his lading with
advantage, to the owner; that is, his soul to God; leaving the bulk still
mored in the Haven; who is vnrigg'd, but only to be new built again, and
fitted for an eternal voyage. Had not Christians had this solace; how should
the Martyrs have dyed so merrily, leaping for joy, that they were so near
their home, and their heaven? dying often like Samson among his enemies, more
victory attending their end, then proceedings. Ah peerless Valiance!
unconquerable Fortitude! Secondly, in Fidelity. There is no friendship like
the friendship of Faith. Nature, Educatio^, Benefits, cannot all together, tie
so strong as this. Christianity knits more sure, more indissoluble. This makes
a knot, that Alexander cannot cut. For as grace in her self, is far above
nature; so likewise is she, in her effects: and therefore unites, in a far more
durable bond. And a Christian, though he would resolve with himself, to deal
double; yet if he be sincere, in spite of his resolution, his conscience will
rate him, check him, and deny him to do it; nay, though he would, he cannot
resolve. He that is borne of God, sins not; and the Spirit of sanctification
will not let him resolve upon ill. This is that Fidelity that we find, and
admire in many, that have chosen rather to embrace the flame, and dye in
silence, then to reveal their Companions, and Brethren in Christ. Tyrants shall
sooner want invention for torments, then they with tortures be made
treacherous. The League that heaven has made, hell wants power to break. Who
can separate the conjunctions of the Deity? Again, as well in reproof, as in
kindness, does his love appear. For howsoever he conceales his friends
faults, from the eye of the world; yet he affectionately tells him of them, in
private: not without some sorrow on his own part, for his brothers fall. He
scorns to be so base as to flatter: and he hates to be so currish as to bite.
In his reprehensions, he mingles Oil and Vinegar: he is in them, plain, and
loving. Inviolable amity! Inualuable love! Here is met Courage and Constancy;
one to withstand an Enemy, an other to entertain a friend. Give me any foe,
rather the^ a resolved Christian: no friend, unless a man truly honest. A
father is a ready treasury; a brother an infallible comfort; but a friend is
both.

XIIII.
I will in all losses, look both to what I have lost, and to what I have left.
To what I have lost: that if it may be, and be good, I may recover it: if not,
that I may know what I have forgone. To what I have left: that if it be much, I
may be thankful, that I lost no more, having so much, that I might have been
deprived of: if little, that I may not repine; because I have yet something: if
nothing but my life, that I may then be glad: because that will be the next
thing I shall lose. Which whenever it happens will with double Joy recompense
all the rest. Gods presence is abundant plenty: having that, I know nor want,
nor loss, nor admission of ill.

XV.
A man that would establish a troubled government, must first vanquish all his
foes. Factious heads, must be higher by a Pole then their bodies. For how will
the Folds be quiet, while yet among them, there be some Wolves? He that
would rule over many, must fight with many, and conquer: and be fure, either to
cut off those that raise up tumults: or by a Maiesticke awe, to keep them in a
strict subjection. Slacknesse, and conniuence, are the ruins of unsettled
Kingdoms. My passions, and affections are the chief disturbers of my Civil
State: What peace can I expect within me, while these Rebels rest vnouercome?
If they get a head, my Kingdom is divided, so it cannot stand. Separations are
the wounds of a Crown; whereby (neglected) it will bleed to death. Them will I
strive to subdue. If I cut them not off, I will yet restrain them. It Is no
cruelty, to deny a Traitor liberty. I will have them be my Subjects, not my
Prince: they shall serve me, and I will sway them. If it cannot be without
much striving; I am content with a hard combat, that I may have a happy
reign. It Is better I endure a short skirmish, then a long siege: having once
won the field, I will hope to keep it.

XVI.
Death to a righteous man, whether it comes soon, or late, is the beginning
of joy, and the end of sorrow. I will not much care, whether my life be long,
or short. If short; the fewer my days be, the less shall be my misery, the
sooner shall I be happy. But if my years be many, that my head wax gray, even
the long expectation of my happiness, shall make my joy more welcome.

XVII.
'Twas anciently said, that whatsoever good work a man does with labor, the
labor vanishes, but the good remains with him that wrought it. And
whatsoever evil thing he does with pleasure, the pleasure flies, but the
evil still rests with the Actor of it: goodness making labor sweet; evil
turning pleasure to a burden. I will not care how laborious, but how honest;
not how pleasurable, but how good my actions be. If it could be, let me be
good without pleasure; rather then lewd, with much joy. For though my good be
at first tedious; I am sure in time it will yield me content: whereas the evil
that now is delightful, cannot but prove a woe to my soul. The sweetest
liquor, is not always the most wholesome. The Limon is more tart, yet
excels the Orange, that delights the taste: poison may a while seem
pleasant, and a weak stomach think a Cordial fulsome.

XVIII.
What if I were the worlds chief Favorite? endowed with the choycest
ornaments her Treasury could afford me, adorned with beauty, imbellisht with
a fair proportion, in policy subtle, in alliance great, in revenue large, in
knowledge rich, famed with honor, and honored with attendants; and to all
these, had adjoined the prolonged years of Methusalah, yet if I wanted grace
to use these graces right, they would all turn to my greater disgrace and
confusion. Good parts employed ill, are weapons, that being meant for our own
defense, we madly turn their edges, and wound our selves: they might make me
fair in show, but in substance more polluted: they would be but as a saddle
of gold to the back of a galled horse; adorn me, they might, better me they
could not. Grace only can make a man truly happy: what she affords, can
content sufficiently; and with ease furnish the vast rooms of the mind:
without her, all are nothing; with her, even the smallest is true sufficiency:
how fully can she be rich, in the penury of these outward royalties? something
indeed they add to her ornament, but it is from her, that they assume their
goodness. For though heaven has made them so in their own nature, yet is it
from her that they prove so to me. Do we not oftener find them, lights to
blind us, then to direct us? I will never think my self nearer heaven, for
having so much of earth. A weak house with a heavy roof is most in danger.
He that gets heaven, has plenty enough; though the earth scorns to allow him
any thing: he that fails of that, is truly miserable; though she give him
all she has. Heaven without earth is perfect. Earth without Heaven, is but a
little more cheerly hell. Who have been more splendent in these external
florishes, then Heathen? but in the other, it is the Christian only can
challenge a felicity. Having these, I might win applause with men; but the
other wanting, I shall never gain approbation with God. And what will all
their allowance avail, when the Earths Creator shall Judge and Condemn? it is a
poor relief in misery, to be only thought well of, by those that cannot
help me.

XIX.
Is not man born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward? is not his time short,
and miserable, his days few, and evil? What madness then were it in me, to
hope for a freedom from sorrows, or to think my self exempt from the common
appointment of the most High? It has been censured as frenzy, to undertake
to expel nature; what shall I think it, to hope to frustrate the designement
of the Lord of Nature? Humanity, and misery, are always paralels: sometimes
indiuiduals: and therefore when we would put sorrow in an Emblem, we paint
him a man. If I have but few Crosses, I will truly then account my self
favored: if I have many, and be sometimes free, I Will think I escape well,
being so untoward. If I have nothing but troubles; yet may I not complain:
because my sin has deserved more, then here I can be able to suffer. Had I
but a being, though full of woe, yet were I beholding to God for it. His very
least, and meanest gift, exceeds much, even all, my best desert. I do
infinitely want, how to merit a permission to live.

XX.
To have every man speak well of me, is impossible: because howsoever I carry
my self, some Cynick will bark at my course. Who can escape the lash of
Censure? If I should be vicious, and profuse, I should be loved of some; but
not the best, not the good. If I should Camelion-like, change my self to every
object, if I were not extraordinarily wary, I might soon counterfeit some man's
humor false, and that would bane my drift. For both to Virtue, and to Vice, is
Flattery a false glass, making the one seem greater, the other less then it
is: and if it lights on a noble discretion, it is ever so unhappy, as to beget
the ruin of it self. But I imagine I could do it with such exactness, that
even the eye of Lyncaeus could not espy it: yet when one should commend me for
one thing, and another for the contrary; what would the world think of me,
that could thus in one, be hot, and cold? should I not be censured as a
Tymorist? Yes surely, and that justly: neither could it but be just with God,
at last to unmask my Flattery, and unrip my folly, in the view of the
multitude. Private sins are punished with a public shame. A supposed honest
man found lewd, is hated as a grown Monster, discovered by the blabbe of Time.
Sin is a concealed fire, that even in darkness will so work, as to bewray
it self. If I live virtuously, and with piety, the world will hate me, as a
Separatist: and my Reputation will be traduced, by the Ignominious aspersion of
maleuolent tongues. To be good, is now thought too near a way to contempt:
That which the Ancients admired, we laugh at. A good honest man is a fool.
What then? shall I, to please a man, displease a Christian? I had rather live
hated for goodness, then be loved for Vice. He does better that pleases one
good man, then he that contents a thousand bad ones. I would, if it could be,
please all: yet I would win their loves with honesty: otherwise, let their
hate wound me, rather then their love embrace. What care I for his friendship,
that affected not virtue? having his hate, he may hurt me outwardly: but
inioying his love, I will justly suspect my soul of some ill. For if his
affection be toward me, it is sure because he sees something in me, that
pleases himself: but while he sees every thing unlike him; how is it possible
I should be beloved of him? since diversities breed nothing but disunion: and
sweet Congruitie is the mother of Love.

XXI.
Who admires not the Wisdom of Demosthenes, in the answer he returned to
Corinthian Lais? [Poenitere tanti non emo.] Certainly, had he not known it
from a self experience, it is not possible a Heathen should have spoke so
divinely. All our dishonest actions, are but earnests laid down for grief.
Vice is an infallible forerunner of wretchedness. Let the Worldling tell me,
if he finds it not true, that all his warrantable aberrations, wherein he has
dilatedly tumbled himself, end at last, either in anguish, or confusion; Sin
on the best condition, brings repentance: but for sin without repentance, is
provided hell. It Is not folly, but madness, even the highest, that makes a man
buy his vexation. I will force my self to want that willingly, which I cannot
enjoy without future distaste. Though the Waspe falls into the honey, that
after drownes her: yet the Be chooses rather, to go to the Flower in the
field, where she may lade her ^highes securely, and with leisure; then to come
to the shop of the Apothecarie, where she gets more, but makes her life
hazardable.

XXII.
Works without faith, are like a Salamander without fire, or a fish without
water: In which, though there may seem to be some quick actions of life, and
symptoms of agilitie: yet they are indeed, but forerunners of their end, and
the very presages of death. Faith again without Works, is like a bird without
wings: who, though she may hop with her companions here upon earth; yet if she
lives til the world ends, she will never fly to heaven. But when both are joined
together, then does the soul mount up to the Hill of eternal Rest: these can
bravely raise her to her first height: yea carry her beyond it; taking away
both the will, that did betray her: and the possibility that might. The former
without the latter, is selfecoozenage: the last without the former, is mere
hypocrisy: together, the excellency of Religion. Faith is the Rock, while
every good action is as a stone laid; one the Foundation; the other the
structure. The Foundation without the walls, is of slender value: the building
without a Basis, cannot stand. They are so inseparable, as their conjunction
makes them good. Chiefly will I labor for a sure Foundation, Saving Faith:
and equally will I seek for strong walls, Good Works. For as man judges the
house by the edifice, more than by the Foundation: so, not according to his
Faith, but according to his Works, shall God judge man.

XXIII.
It Is a rare thing to see a rich man religious; we are told, that his way is
difficult: and not many mighty are chosen. For while the earth allows them
such joys, it is their heaven; and they look for no other: Their pleasures are
sufficient unto them, both for honor, solace, and wealth: who wonders to see
them careless of the better, when they dote upon the worse? neither the mind,
nor affection, can be seriously divided at once. Again, even low Commons whom
they think meanly of, are higher often in virtues of the mind; are dearer
unto God then they: and shall sit in heaven above them. Are there not many
servants, that in life have born the burden now crowned with vnending Joys,
while their masters are either in a lower degree glorious, or excluded that
celestial society? I dare make it a part of my faith; yet avouch my self no
Heretic. Even in meanest things GOD shows his mighty power: Impossibilities
are the best aduancers of his Glory. For what we least believe can be done, we
most admire being done. Yet in this observe the mercy of God, that though the
Worldling has not piety in his thoughts, yet God gives him all these good
things that he has no right to: albeit by his own ill, he, like envy,
extracts evil out of good; so they prove in the end, nothing but paper pillars
and painted fruit. Let all men bless God for what they enjoy: they that have
wealth, for their riches: I will praise him, that he has kept them from me. I
have now what is good for me: and when my time comes, my joy shall abound.

XXIIII.
A virtuous man shining in the purity of a righteous life, is a Lighthouse set
by the Seaside, whereby the Mariners both sail aright, and avoid danger: But
he that lives in noted sins, is a false lantern, which shipwrackes those
that trust him. The virtuous man by his good carriage winnes more to godliness,
and is the occasion of much good, yea it may be, so long as the Moon renewes:
For his righteousness dies not with him: those good examples which he lived in,
and those pyous works which he leaves behind him, are imitated and followed
of others, both remaining and succeeding. So they are conveyed from one
generation to another: and he, next God, is a primary cause of a great deal of
the good they atchieue. So we cannot but grant, that while here his memory
wears out, his glory in a better world augments daily: either by his good
presidents, his pious institutions, his charitable deeds, or his godly works;
each of which with Gods blessing, are able to kindle some heat in the cold
zeal of posterity. Examples are the best and most lasting lectures; virtue
the best example. Happy man that has done these things in sincerity; Time
shall not outliue his worth: He lives truly after death, whose pious actions
are his pillars of remembrance: though his flesh moulders to dross in the
grave, yet is his happiness in a perpetual growth: no day but adds some
grains to his heap of glory. Good works are seeds, that after sowing
return us a continual harvest. A man lives more renowned by some glorious
deeds, then ever did that Carian, by his Mausolean monument. On the contrary,
what a woeful course has he run, that has lived lewdly, and dies without
repentance? his example infects others, and they spread it abroad to more; like
a man that dies on the plague, he leaves the infection to a whole City: So
that even the sins of thousands, he must give an account for. What can we
think of such as have been the inuentors of unlawful games, and callings that
are now in use? sure they have much to answer for, that thus have occasioned
so much ill: yea better had it been, they had not been at all, then being, to
be laden with the sins of so many. Miserable man! that when thy own burden
is insupportable, thou yet causest others to add to thy weight; as if thou
would be sure desperately to make thy rising irrecouerable: are the waters
of thy own sins so low, that thou must have streams from every place, to
run into thy Ocean? Who can without a shower of tears, think on thy
deplorable state, or without mourning, meditate thy sad condition? Oh! Let me
so live, as my life may be beneficial, not hurtful to other. Let my glory
increase, when my life is done: I am sure, satietie in heaven, is not capable
of either complaint, or discontent: but as for spoiling others, by my own
confusion, sin: I should think death a fair prevention. I love not that life
which makes death eternal. I have sin enough of my own, to sigh, and sorrow,
and mourn for: I need not make others mine by my own bad actions. A little of
this is too too much; yea, he has enough, that has none; he has too much,
that has any at all.

XXV.
He deserves not commendation, that for being commended grows proud: every
good thing, a good man speaks of me, shall, like the blast of a trumpet in
war, incite and encourage me, to a closer pursuit of more nobler virtue: not
like Bucephalus trappings, blow me up in a higher conceit of ouerprizing my
own weakness: So while some speak well, let my deeds exceed their tougue. I
had rather men should see more the^ they expect, then look for more then they
shall find.

XXVI.
When a man has the project of a course in his mind, it is good wisdom to
resolve of secrecy, till the time his intent be fulfilled: neither can he but
be foolish, that brags much, either of what he will do, or of what he shall
have: For if what he speaks of, falls not out accordingly, then will the
world mock him with derision and scorn: and oftentimes his liberal tongue,
may be occasion of some ones sudden intercepting his aim: divulged intentions
seldom proceed well: multitudes make a jar in businesses; their opinions, or
Councels either distract Judgment, or divert resolution: But howsoever, if
what we boasted of comes to pass, yet shall we be reputed vainglorious,
boasters, unwise. Bragges lift up expectation so high, that she ouerthinkes
the birth: and many times, the child which indeed is fair, we think not so,
because we were possessed with hopes of finding it rare. Secrecy is a necessary
part of policy: things untold, are yet undone: then to say nothing, there is
not a less labor. I observe, the Fig Tree whose fruit is most pleasant,
bloomes not at all: whereas the Sallow that has glorious palms, is
continually found Barren. I would first be so wise, as to be my own
Councellor: next, so secret, as to be my own Councell-keeper.

XXVII.
Some men read Authors as our Gentlemen use flowers, only for delight and
smell; to please their fancy, and refine their tongue. Others like the Be,
extract only the honey, the wholesome precepts, and this alone they bear away,
leaving the rest, as little worth, of small value. In reading I will care for
both; though for the last, most: the one serves to instruct the mind; the other
fits her to tell what she has learned: pity it is, they should be divided: he
that has worth in him, and cannot express it, is a chest keeping a rich
Jewel, and the key lost. Concealing goodness, is vice; virtue is better by
being communicated. A good style, with wholesome matter, is a fair woman with
a virtuous soul, which attracts the eyes of all; The good man thinks chastely,
and loves her beauty, for her virtue; which he still thinks more fair, for
dwelling in so fair an outside. The vicious man has lustful thoughts; and he
would for her beauty, feign destroy her virtue: but coming to solicit his
purpose, finds such divine lectures, from her Angels tongue, and those
delivered with so sweet a pleasing modesty, that he thinks virtue is dissecting
her soul to him, to ravish man with a beauty which he dreamed not of. So he
could now curse himself, for desiring that lewdly, which he has learned
since, only to admire, and reverence: Thus he goes away better, that came with
an intent to be worse. Quaint phrases on a good subject, are baits to make an
ill man virtuous: how many vile men seeking these, have found themselves
Conuertites? I may refine my speech without harm: but I will endeavor more to
reform my life. It Is a good grace both of Oratory, or the Pen, to speak, or
write proper: but that is the best work, where the Graces, and the Muses meet.

XXVIII.
We see in the Moon a threefold condition, her Wane, her Increase, her Full:
all which, I lively see resembled in a Christian, three causes working them:
Sin, Repentance, Faith. Sin; which after the act, when he once considers,
it makes him like the Moon in her Wane, or state of Decrement, obscuring, and
diminishing that glorious light of the spirit, which vvhilome shined so
brightly in him: nay, sometimes as the Moon in her latest state of Diminution,
he seems quite gone, resting for a time like a man in a trance, like a tree
in Winter, or as fire buried in concealing Embers, without either sense, or
show, of either light, or heat. But then comes Repentance, and casts water in
his face, bedewes him with tears, rubbes up his benumbed soul; that there is
to be seen some tokens, both of life, and Recovery: This makes him spring,
causes him to begin to bud again, vnburies his lost light, and by little and
little, recollects his decayed strength of the apprehension of Gods Spirit: so
sets him in the way to joy, and renewed courses. But lastly, Faith appears, and
perfects what Repentance began, and could not finish: she cheeres up his
drooping hopes, brings him again to his wonted solace, spreads out his leaves,
blows up his fainting fire to a bright flame: makes him like the Moon in her
full glory, indues him with a plenteous fruition of the presence of the
Almighty, and never leaves him, till he be resettled in his full joy,
contentment, happiness. Thus while he sins, he is a Decressant; when he
repents, a Cressant; when his faith shines clear, at full. Yet in all these,
while he lives here, he is subject to change: sometime like a Beacon on a
Hill, he is seen a far off, and to all: sometime like a Candle in a house,
nearer hand, and only to his familiars: sometimes like a Lamp under a bushel,
he is obscured to all; yet in all he burns: though in some, insensibly: and is
never without one sound consolation, in the worst of all these: for as the
Moon when she is least visible, is a Moon as well, as when we see her in
her full proportion; only the Sun looks not on her with so full an aspect,
and she reflects no more, then she receives from him: So a Christian in his
lowest ebb of sorrow, is the Child of God, as well, as when he is in his
greatest flow of comfort, only the Sun of Righteousness darts not the
beams of his love so plentifully, and he shows no more, then God gives him.
When God hides his face, man must languish: his with-drawings, are our
miseries: his presence, our vnfailing Joy. Sin may cast me in a trance, it
cannot slay me: it may bury my heat, for a time, it cannot extinguish it: it
may make me in the wane, it cannot change my being: it may accuse, it shall not
condemn: Though GOD deprive me of his presence for a time, he will one day
re-inlighten me, pollish me, and crown me for ever: where the Moon of my
inconstant joy shall change to a Sun, and that Sun shall never set,
beclouded, or eclypsed.

XXIX.
In expenses I would be neither pinching, nor prodigal: yet if my means
allow it not, rather thought too sparing, then a little profuse: it is no
disgrace to make my ability my Compass of sail, and line to walk by. I see
what I may do; others but what I do: they look to what I spend, as they
think me able; I must look to what my estate will bear: nor can it be safe,
to strain it at all: it is fit I should respect my own ability, before their
forward expectation. He that when he should not, spends too much, shall when
he would not, have too little to spend. 'Twas a witty reason of Diogenes, why
he asked a halfe-penny of the thrifty man, and a pound of the prodigal; the
first, he said, might give him often, but the other e're long, would have none
to give. Yet say I had to dispend freely; as to be too near having enough, I
esteem sordid: so to spend superfluously, though I have abundance, I account
one of follies deepest ouer-sights. There is better use to be made of our
talents, then to cast them away in waste: God gave us them, not to spend
vainly, but to employ, for profit, for gain.

XXX.
As the Needle in a Dyall removed from his point, never leaves his quiuering
motion, till it settles it self in the just place it always stands in: So fares
it with a Christian in this world; nothing can so charm him, but he will
still mind his Savior: all that put him out of the quest of Heaven, are but
disturba^ces. Though the pleasures, profits, and honors of this life, may
sometime shuffle him out of his usual course; yet he wauers up and down in
trouble, runs to and fro like Quicksilver, and is never quiet within, till
he returns to his wonted life, and inward happiness: there he sets down his
rest, in a sweet, unperceived, inward content: which though unseen to others,
he esteems more, then all that the world calls by the name of felicity: they
are to him, as May-games to a Prince; fitter for children, then the Royalty of
a Crown. It shall not more grieve me, to live in a continued sorrow, then it
shall joy me, to find a secret perturbation in the worlds choycest solaces.
If I find my joy in them, without unquietness, that will prove a burdensome
mirth: For finding my affections settle to them without resistance, I cannot
but distrust my self, of trusting them too much. A full delight in earthly
things, argues a neglect of heavenly. I can hardly think him honest, that loves
a Harlot for her bravery, more then his Wife, for her virtues. But while an
inward distaste shows me these Cates unsavory, if my joy be vncompleat in
these terrene felicities, my inward vnsettlednesse in them, shall make my
content both sufficient, and full.

XXXI.
Strange is the enchantment that the world works on us, when she smiles, and
looks merrily: it is justly matter of amazement, for a man to grow rich, and
retain a mind vn-altered: yet are not all men changed alike, though all in
something admit variation. The Spider kills the man, that cures the Ape.
Fortunes effects are variable, as the natures she works upon: some, while their
baskets grow more full, their minds are higher, and rise: they now know not
those friends, that were lately their companions: but as a Tyrant among his
Subjects, grows haughty, and proud: so they, among their familiars scorn, and
contemn: spurning those with arrogant disdain, which but of late, they
thought as worthy as themselves, or better: high fortunes are the way to high
minds: pride is usually the child of riches. Contempt. too often sits in the
seat with Honor. Who have we known so imperious in Offices, as the man that
was borne to beggary? As these rise, so some fall: and that which should
satiate their desire, increases it: which is ever accompanied with this
unhappiness, that it will never be satisfied: this makes them baser, by being
wealthier: profit (though with drudgerie) they hug with close arms. All
vices debase man, but this makes a Master a slave to his servant, a drudge to
his slave; and him that GOD set over all, this puts under all. Pitiful! that
man when good things are present, should search for ill: that he should so care
for riches, as if they were his own: yet so use them, as if they were
another: that when he might be happy, in spending them, will be miserable
in keeping them: and had rather dying, leave wealth to his enemies, then being
alive, relieve his friends. Thus as one aspires, the other descends: both
extremes, and justly blameable. If my estate rise not, I hope my mind will be
what it is, not Ambitious, nor Auaricious. But if ever the Divine providence
shall, beyond either my desert, or expectation, bless me, I will think, to
grow proud, is but to rise, to fall: and to prove covetous, only to possess
wealth, that the nobler minds may hate, and scorn me. For what is there they
esteem more sordid, then for a man's mind to be his moneys Mercenary?

XXXII.
A weak Christians life, is almost nothing but a Vicissitude of sin, and
sorrow. First, he sins, and then he laments his folly: like a negligent
schooleboy, he displeases his master; and then beseeches his remission with
tears. Our own coruptions are diseases incurable: while we live, they will
break out upon us; we may correct them, we cannot destroy them: they are like
the feathers in a foul, cut the^ they will come again: break them, they will
come again: pluck them out, yet they will come again: only kill the bird, and
they grow no more. While blood is in our veins, sin is in our nature; since
I cannot avoid it, I will learn to lament it: And if through my offenses, my
joy be made obscure, and vanish: that sorrow shall new beget my joy; not
because I have been sinful, but because, for sin, I find my self
sorrowful. All other sorrows are either foolish, fruitless, or beget more:
only this dark entry, leads the way to the fair Court of happiness. God is
more merciful in giving repentance to the Delinquent, then in granting
remission to the Repentant: He has promised pardon to the Penitent, no
Repentance to the Peccant.

XXXIII.
In choosing friends there be two sorts of men, that I would for ever avoid:
For besides the learning of their vices, I dare not trust them with a secret.
There is the Angry man, and the Drunkard: The first in his fit is merely mad,
he speaks not a word by reason, but by brutish passion: not upon premeditated
terms, but whatsoever his memory on the sudden catches, his violent passion
drives out, be it known, or hidden: so often in a braule he blabbes out that,
which being cooled, he much repents to have named: committing that in his
sparkling fury, which his appeased soul will tremble to think of. Anger is the
fever of the soul, which makes the tongue talk idle: it puts a man into a
tumult, that he cannot hear what Counsel speaks: it is a raging Sea, a
troubled water, that cannot be wholesome for the use of any: and if it be true
which Hippocrates tells, that those diseases are the most dangerous, that alter
the habit of the patients countenance: this must needs be most perilous, that
voice, color, countenance, pace, so changes, as if fury dispossessing reason,
had set a new Garrison in the Citadell of man. This he knew that gave us that
precept, Make not friendship with an angry man. The other has no memory at
all: For the abounda^ce of wine, has drowned up that noble Recorder: and while
Bacchus is his chief god, Apollo never keeps him company: Friends and foes,
familiars, and strangers are then all of equal esteem: so he forgetfully
speaks of that in his cups, which if he were sober, should be buried in
silence. First he speaks he knows not what, nor after, can he remember what
that was he spoke. He speaks that he should forget, and forgets that, which
he did speak. Drunkenness is the funeral of all intelligible man, whom
only time and abstinence can resuscitate. A Drunkards mind and stomach are
alike; neither can retain, what they receive. I would be loath to admit of a
familiar so infectious as either; more unwilling to reveal my self to any so
open. What friend soever I make choice of, I will be sure he shall have these
two properties, Mildness, Temperance: otherwise it is better to want companions,
then to be annoyed with either a madman, or fool. Clitus was slain by a
Drunken Master: The Thessalonians massacred by an angry Emperor: and the
deaths of of either, lamented by the Agents.

XXXIIII.
I see, liberty makes licentious, and where the reins are given too loosely,
the affections run wildely on, without a guide, to ruin: For man's will without
discretion, that should add limits, is like a blind horse, without a bridle,
that should guide him aright: he may go fast, but runs to his own overthrow,
and while he mends his pace, he hastens to his own mischief. Nothing makes
us more wretched, then our own uncontrolled wills. A loose will fulfilled, is
the way to work out a woe. For besides this folly in beginning wrong, the
greatest danger is in continuance: when like a Bowl running down a hill, he is
ever most violent, when he grows nearest his Ce^ter and period of his aim.
These follies are prettily shaddowed in the sports of Acteon, that while he
suffered his eye to roue at pleasure, and beyond the pale of expedie^ce, his
Hounds, even his own affections, ceaze him, tear him, prove his decay. Let it
be my vigilance to curb my beginning desires, that they may not wander beyond
moderation; if my own will be a blind conductor, good precepts to an ingenious
nature, are bitts that restrain, but hurt not. I know, to follow a soothing
fancy, cannot be but ridiculously ill: and this inconvenience besides have I
seen; That he which may do more then is fit, will in time do more then is
lawful. He that now exceedes the measure, will ere long exceed the manner.
Vice is a Peripatetick, always in Progression.

XXXV.
Even between two faithful friends, I think it not convenient that all
secrets should be imparted: neither is it the part of a friend, to fish out
that, which were better concealed. yet I observe some, of such insinuating
dispositions, that there is nothing in their friends heart, that they would not
themselves know with him; and this, if I may speak freely, I count as a fault.
For many times by too far urging, they wring blood, from whence only milk
should flow: knowing that by their importunity, which not only breeds a
dislike in them to hear, but also when their conference is ended, begetes a
repenting sorrow in him that told it: and makes him wish, he had locked up his
lips in silence, rather then have powered out his heart with such indiscretion.
How many have bewailed the untimely disclosures of their tongue? how many have
screwed out secrets, that would have given thousands to have returned them
unknown? If I have a friend that I care not to lose, I will never engage my
self so much, as to be beholding to him to know all. If I have one that is
faithful, I will not wrong him so much, as to wrest that from him, should cause
him be sorrowful. If he reueales ought vn-vrged, my advice is faithful, and
free: otherwise, to press out a secret that may prove prejudicial, I esteem
as the beginning of the breach of Amity, and the primary breeder of a secret
dislike.

XXXVI.
We know it is sometimes better to sound a retrait, and so retire, then it is to
stay in the field, and conquer: because it may so fall out, that the prize we
win, cannot counteruaile the loss, that by this War we shall sustain: so
like the foolish Mariner, that seeing a Fish in the Sea, leapes into water to
catch that, which together with his life he loses. We often lose an eternal
Kingdom, for the gain of toys, and vanities. Who is there that hazzards not
his soul, for the pleasures, or the profits of sin? which when they have, what
have they got, but shadows, or vexations? The wealthy man is like a
powder-master, who has provision against an enemy, but is ever in danger of
being blown up. As for pleasure, it is at best but a hilded vessel; which
though it please the palate for a cup or two; yet the Lees are at hand, and
they mar it: a little disturbance turns it into distaste. What a fool were
I to cast away my soul on such transitory trifles? which when I have, I am
neither sure to enjoy, nor to find commodious: what I cannot keep without
danger, I will never earnestly seek: to lose a Crown of gold, for a
counterfeit, is more then a childish fondness. I had better sit still, and be
quiet in peace, then rise to conquer a petty Village, when my loss is a large
City.

XXXVII.
Christ healed diseases three manner of ways; with means, as the Leper in the
eighth of Matthew: without means, as the ten Lepers in the seventeenth of Luke:
against means, as the man borne blind, in the ninth of John. I will look to
means as being more ordinary, more revealed: but if my blind eye sees not
that present succor, my fear is not more, nor my grief. It Is as easy to God
to work without means, as with them: and against them, as by either: It Is all
one to him, Be clean, or Go wash. Yea, though every argument concludes
danger, let not my hopes fail me yet, his omnipotency is beyond that feeble
stay of the soul: nor yet will I so depend on his will hidden, as I neglect to
practice his will revealed. For as to dis-regard his appointed means, is a
supreme contempt: so to depend too much on things unsearchable, is rather a
badge of rash presuming, then any notable courage of faith. I must look to my
way, and let him alone in his.

XXXVIII.
It Is a Capital misery for a man to be at once both old, and Ignorant. If he
were only old, and had some knowledge, he might abate the tediousness of
decrepit age, by the divine raptures of Contemplation. If he were young, though
he knew nothing, yet his years would serve him, to labor, and learn: whereby
in the Winter of his time, he might beguile the weariness of his pillow and
chair. But now his body being withered by the stealing length of his days,
and his limbs wholly disabled, for either motion, or exercise: these together
with a mind unfurnished of those contenting speculations of admired Science,
cannot but delineate the pourtraicture of a man wretched. A gray head with a
wise mind, is a treasury of grave Precepts, experience, and judgment. But
foolish old age, is a barren Vine in Autumn: or an University to study folly
in: every action is a pattern of infirmity: while his body sits still, he
knows not how to find his mind action: and tell me if there be any life,
more irksome then idleness. I have numbered yet but a few days; and those I
know, I have neglected. I am not sure they shall be more, nor can I promise my
head, it shall have a snowy hair. What then? Knowledge is not hurtful, but
helps a good mind: any thing that is laudable, I desire to learn. If I dye
tomorrow, my life to day shall be somewhat the sweeter for knowledge: and if my
day prove a Summer one, it shall not be amiss, to have provided something,
that in the evening of my Age, may make my mind my Companion. Notable was the
answer that Antisthenes gave, when he was asked what fruit he had reaped of
all his studies? By them, says he, I have learned, both to live, and to talk
with my self.

XXXIX.
There is a twofold way to honor: Direct, when God calls: Indirect, when man
seeks it, without the Lords warrant. David went the first, and his Crown
departed not from his head, till nature had paid her debt, and his life
dissolved: And when he is gone, his Issue succeedes him. Absolon went the
other, but his sins pulled him down with vengeance; and only a dumb pillar
speaks his memory. God cannot endure the aspiring spirit, that would clime the
hill of preferment, without his leave. Thieves of honor, seldom find joy in
their purchases, stability, never. Besides, I observe the man that is fit for a
place of note, never seeks it so much, as he is sought for, for it: whereas
ever the Bramble, that is low, and worthless, cries out aloud, Make me a King:
it is incident to a weak mind, to ouer-value it self. How many would be
Magistrates, that know not how to be men? Moses objects much, when God himself
imposes a charge: For a man of understanding knows, that it is better to live
in the Valley, where the times tempests blow over him: then to have his seat on
the Mountains top, where every blast threatens both his ruin, and fall:
howsoever others measure him, he knows his own height; and will not exceed
it. Yet being placed by an Almighty hand, he that set him there, can keep him
secure. But he must then beware, that he makes not that his King, that should
he his Subject: that he gives not the reins, where he should vselthe check:
and that he plays not the Ape too much, either by too idle imitation, or by
doting too fondly, on his darling Honor. Thus cautelous, may he live safe:
When he that reaches promotion without Gods calling him, may flourish awhile,
but not thrive. In ascents, those are the safest, that are broadest, and least
sudden, and where the light is open: how soon is a fall caught in those stairs
that are dark, narrow, and quickly rising? I will as well look to the way, as
the thing: There is no path to happy preferment, but that which virtue treades:
which was well noted by the Heathen, when they built the Temple of honor so,
that none could enter it, but they must first pass through that of virtue. I
had rather live honestly, though meanly: then by unlawful practices vsurp a
Crow ne.

XL.
Nothing more disworthes a man, then Cowardice, and a base fear of danger: the
smooth way it makes difficult, the difficult inaccessible. The Coward is an
vnfinisht man; or else one which nature made less then others: If ever he did
any thing well, fortune was his guide, not wisdom. His fear in him begets
delay, and delay breeds that he fears, danger: the soldier that dares not
fight, affoords the Enemy too much advantage for his preparement; both for
directing his soldiers, plotting his Stratagems, strengthening his files,
ordering his Camp, or doing any thing may turn disadvantage upon his foe:
when as the valorous warrior gives most discomfiture, in his sodainest onset,
where he takes away the time for fortification. If it be by speech a man is
to act his part, fear puts an ague in his tongue, and often leaves him, either
in an amazed distractio^, or quite elingued. For the too serious apprehension
of a possible shame, makes him forget that, should help him a against it: I
mean a plain boldness, bequeathing a dilated freedom to all his faculties,
and senses: which now with a cold fear, are frozen and congealed. If not this,
out of an unmeasured care to do well, it drives a man into affectation: and
that like misshapen apparel, spoils the beauty of a well limbed body: For
nature will not endure the rack; when you set her too high, she proves
untuneable, and in stead of a sweet cloze, yeeldes a crack: she ever goes best
in her own free pace: I will neither stay her solong, as to meet delay: nor
run her so far, as to do ought affectedly. I had rather be confidently bold,
then foolishly timorous; he that in every thing fears to do well, will at
length do ill in all.

XLI.
Many have much lamented the loss of trifles, when they might have gained by
such damages, had they not with them, lost themselves: I mean, their quiet
minds, and patience. Unwise so to debar themselves of rest, when their
vexation cannot yield them profit; if tears could either recover a loss, or
recall time, then to weep, were but to purpose; but things past, though with
prudence they may be corrected, yet with greatest grief, they cannot be
recalled: make them better we may, but for to make them not to be at all,
requires more then a humane strength, or a finite power. Actions once done,
admit a correction, not a nullity. Although I will endeavor to amend what is
gone by amiss, yet will I labor, never to grieve for any thing past, but
sin: and for that always. A small loss shall never trouble me: neither
shall the greatest hindrance, make my heart not mine own. He spoke well that
said, He which has himself, has lost nothing.

XLII.
Some men are of so noble, and free a disposition, that you cannot being a
friend, ask ought, to receive a denial: it being one part of their happiness,
to pleasure the man they love. Yet these in the end, and these times, are the
only unhappy men. For being exhausted by the necessities of others, and their
base working on a free nature; an vnwelcom want, at once undoes them, and the
goodness of their disposition. pity such willing courtesies should be cast
away in such ungrateful ground; that like an vnbottomed Gulf, swallows, but
returns not: or that a man's firm love should make him do that, should kill
himself in future. Contrary to these, you have another sort are fast, and
holding: and though sometimes they might pleasure a friend, without a self
prejudice: yet their inbred crabbednesse reserues all, with a close hand. And
while the other ruins with a fair affection; he thriues with a vulgar hate,
and curses; such as the first, are best to others: such as the last, to
themselves. I will so serve others, as I iniure not my self: so my self, as I
may help other.

XLIII.
As there is no feate of Actiuity so difficult, but being once done, a man
ventures on it more freely the second time: so there is no sin at first so
hateful, but being once committed willingly, a man is made more prone for a
reiteration. For there is more desire of a known pleasure, then of that which
only our ears have heard report of. The horse that has fed on prouender,
will look and long for it: but the jade that has only had hey, expects no
more then his rack. So far is ignorance good, that in a calm, it keeps the
mind from distraction; and knowledge, as it breeds desire in all things, so
in sin. Bootlesse therefore shall ever be that cunning fetch of Satan, when
he would induce me once to make a trial of sin, that I might thereby know
more, and be able to fill up my mouth with discourse, my mind with fruition;
bearing me in hand, I may at my pleasure give it the hand of parting, and a
final farewell. Too often (alas) have I bin deceived with this beguiling
persuasion, of a power to leave, and a will to return at my will. Henceforth
shall my care be to refrain from once. If I grant that, stronger persuasions
will plead for a second action: it is easier to deny a guest at first, then to
turn him out, having stayed a while. Thou know not, senseless man, what
joys thou losest, when thou fondly lashest into new offenses. The world cannot
repurchase thee, thy pristine integrity: thou have hereby lost such hold of
grace, as thou will never again be able to recover. A mind not conscious of
any foul enormities, is a fair temple in a durty street: at whose door, Sin,
like a throng of rude plebeians, knockes incessantly: while the door is shut,
it is easi to keep it so, and them out* open that, but to let in one, thousands
will rush in after him, and their tramplings will for ever soil that unstained
floor, while thy conscience is unspotted, thou have that can make the smile
upon the rack, and flames; it is like Homers Nepenthe, that can banish the
sadness of the mind. But when thou woundest that, thou buriest thy joys at
once: and throwest a Jewel from thee is richer then the wealth of worlds.
Fool that thou art, that wandering in a dark wilderness, do wilfully put
out thy candle; and think cold water can slake thy thirst, in the burning
fit of an Ague; when it only breeds in thee a desire to power in more. He
that never tasted the pleasures of sin, longs less, after those banefull
discontenting contents. What sweets of sin I know not, I desire still to be
vnexperienc't in. I had rather not know, then by knowledge be miserable. This
Ignorance will teach me Knowledge, of an unknown peace. Let me rather be
outwardly maimed, and want discourse: then be furnished of that, and possess a
wound, that bleedeth within.

XLIV.
It Is foolish, and sauors not of common policy, to purchase friends by large
gifts: because having once used them to rewards, they will still expect more:
and custom that pleases, is seldom omitted, without either discontent, or
danger. If then our loves tokens shall seem to diminish, friendship likewise
will decrease: and if not quite consume, yet easily be drawn to allow harbor
to base dis-respect: which what a thorn it is to an affectionate mind, I
desire rather to know by judicious observation, then by real experience: but
sure I am, it no way can be small: yet most true must it needs be, that
friendship won by large gifts, resembles but the straw fire; that having
matter to feed upon, burns brightly: but let new fuel be neglected; it dies,
consumes, and quite goes out. Nor further can this amity be ever approved, or
sure, or sincere. For he that loves me for my gifts sake, loves my gifts,
above my self: and if I should happen to light on adversity; I should not
find him then to appear: there being no hope of a gainefull requital. If I
give any thing, it shall be because he is my friend: not because I would have
him so: not so much that I may have his love; but that already, he has mine.
I will use them sometimes to continue friendship, never to begin it. I do not
hold him worthy thanks, that professes me a kindness for his own ends.

XLV.
Nothing more saddens the soul of a good man, then the serious apprehension of
a just shame. If it were false, his own cleerenesse would be a shield strong
enough, to repel the darts of slander. For man is never miserable, till
Conscience turns his enemy. If it were but the loss of riches, there were a
possibility of a recovery: if of friends, he might find more, or content
himself with the knowledge of their happiness, in that glorious Mansion of
the Saints: if of corporal anguish, a quiet mind might mitigate his pains,
or industry with time, take a truce with sorrows: but this misery is
immedicable. Credit once lost, is like water so diffusiuely spilt, that it is
not in humanity to recollect it. If it be, it has lost the purity, and will
for ever after, be full of soil: and by how much his honesty was more noted;
by so much will his shame be more, and his grief. For see what a horror he
has before him; all will be now ready to brand him with the odious, and
stigmaticall name of an Hypocrite. His Reputation (which though it be not
dearer then his soul, yet he prizeth above his life) will be blacked with an
eternal stain: which nor absence, time, endeavor, nor Death can wash away. If
he lives, and could in himself forget it: yet the envious world will keep it
upon record: and when he minds it not, rub it on his galled soul. If he
could fly from his Country, that would like a Bloud-hound follow him: if he
dies, that will survive him, and make his very grave contemptible: nay, so
far will it spread, as somewhat to infect his friends: and though happily in
himself he may be bettered, by so rash a fall: yet the cruel, and
uncharitable world will ever think him worse. In this I dare not follow it: in
doing that may cause this, I hope I shall not. I will first strive to be void
of the act might bring shame, next, not to cast it in the dish of the penitent.
If my sufferings be unjust, I am sure in the end I shall find them
comfortable. If God has pleased to remit offenses, why should I commemorate
them? A good life is a fortress against shame: and a good man's shame, is his
benefit: the one keeps it away; the other when it comes, makes it prove
profitable.

XLVI.
The will for the deed, is often with God accepted: and he that is a thankful
Debtor, restores a benefit. Many benefits, nay, all I possess, O Lord, from
thee I know I have received: requite them I cannot, return them I may not, and
to rest ungrateful, were a sin inexcusable. Since then I cannot retaliate thy
love, or retribute thy favors: yet Lord will I owe them, with a desire to pay.

XLVII.
There is not any thing eats out friendship, sooner then concealed grudges.
Though reason at first produces opinion, yet opinion after, seduceth Reason.
Conceits of unkindness harbored and believed, will work even a steady love,
to hatred. And therefore, reserved dispositions, as they are the best keepers
of secrets: so they are the worst increasers of love. Between friends it
cannot be, but discourtesies will appear: though not intended, by a willing
act, yet so taken by a wrong suspect: which smothered in silence, increase
daily, to a greater distaste: but revealed once, in a friendly manner, often meet
with that satisfaction, which does in the disclosure banish them. Sometimes ill
tongues, by false tales, sow Discord between two lovers. Sometimes mistakes,
set the mind in a false belief. Sometimes iealousies, that flow from love,
imprint suspicion in the thoughts. All which may find ease in the uttering: so
their discovery be in mildness; otherwise, choler casts a mist before the
eyes of the mind, and when it might see clearly, will not let it. If between
my friend, and my self, a private thought of unkindness arise; I will
presently tell it, and be reconciled: if he be clear, I shall like him the
better when I see his integrity: if faulty, confession gains my pardon, and
binds me to love him: and though we should in the discussion jar a little,
yet will I be sure to part friendly. Fire almost quenched, and laid abroad,
dies presently: put together, it will burn the better. Every such breach as
this, will unite affection faster: a little shaking prefers the growth of the
tree.

XLVIII.
I have sometimes wished my self in some high seat of honor: with what folly,
I have after seen, and been displeased, with my self, with my desires: so
unbefitting wisdom, so dissonant from Christianity. For what can a high
place confer unto me, that can make my life more truly happy? if it adds
to my joys, it increases my fear; if it augments my pleasure, my care is
more, and my trouble. But perhaps I shall have reverence, wear rich apparel,
and fare deliciously: alas! cold flames, wet rayme^t. Have I not known some
inioying all, and never found other fruit, but envy, beggary, and disease? so
have in the end, wished to change, for lower Honors, for meaner dignities,
accounting themselves as the flag, on the top of a shipmast, as more high, and
more visible; so more, and ever open, to the wind, and storms: being as a
worthy Judge once answered one, that gave him his title of Honor: True,
Honorable servants: to post through the toils of a circuit, and think on any
man's business but their own. Ah Tissue cover, to a straw Cushion! But I shall
have more means, so shall I do the more good: I grant; but may I not do as much
good, with less means? It Is a question who shall have more reward, of him
that does most in quantity, or most according to the proportion of his means;
If Christ may be admitted as arbitrator, the poor Widow gave more, then all the rich ones. I fear, if I had more, I should spend more in waste: sure I am,
I should have more to answer for. Besides, who knows what a change wealth
might work in me? what a snare has it proved to many, that like the Sun,
have in the morning of their time, mounted themselves to the highest pitch of
perspicuity, and brightness? which when they have once attained, they decline,
fall, vanish, and are gone; leaving nothing behind the^, but dark night,
black reputation. If not this, what can I tell, but that I might gather like a
sponge, to be squeezed out again, by some grinding oppressor? So be more
vexed with an unexpected loss, then pleased with my short inioyment. The
thief that meets with a full purse, takes away it, and returns a stabbe;
while the empty pocket makes the life secure: then perhaps we could wish to be
poor, but cannot: that so we might lessen our grief, by the sorrow for our
loss. Tell me then, O my soul! what should make thee wish to change? I live
in a rank, though not of the highest, yet affoording as much happiness, more
freedom: as being exempt from those suspicious cares, that prick the bosom
of the wealthy man: it is such as might content my better, and such as heaven
smiles on, with a gracious promise of blessing, if my carriage be fair and
honest; and without these who is well? I have necessaries, and what is decent;
and when I desire it, something for pleasure. Who has more that is needful?
If I be not so rich, as to sow alms by sackfulls, even my Mite, is beyond the
superfluity of wealth: and my pen, my tongue, and my life, shall (I hope) help
some to better treasure, then the earth affoords them. I have food convenient
for me: and I sometimes find exercise to keep my body healthful: when I do,
I make it my recreation, not my toil. My raiment is not worst, but good; and
then that, let me never have better. I can be as warm in a good Kersey, as a
Prince in a Skarlet robe. I live where is much means of true salvation: my
liberty is mine own, I can both frequent them, and desire to profit by them.
I have a mind can be pleased with the present; and if time turns the wheel,
can endure a change, without desiring it. I want nothing but abundance; and
this I need not, because want herein, I account much better then real
possession: if it had been fit for me, I know, my God would have bestowed it
on me. He never was so careless of a child of his, as to let him miss that, he
knew might make for his good. Seeing then, he sees it inconvenient, it shall
be my joy to live without it; and henceforth, will I not long any more to
change. He is not a complete Christian, that cannot be contented with that he
inioyes. I will rather settle my mind to a quiet rest, in that I find: then
let her wander, in a wearied solicitude, after vngotten plenty. That estate
that God guies me, ever will I esteem best: though I could not think it so,
I am sure it is so: and to think against knowledge, is a foolish suspicion.

XLIX.
It Is a precept from a perfidious mind, that bids us think all knaves we
deal with: so by distrusting, to hinder deceit. I dare not give my mind that
liberty, lest I iniure charity, and run into error. I will think all honest,
if strangers: for so I Am sure they should be; only let me remember, they are
but men: so may upon temptation, fall with the time; otherwise, though they
want religion, Nature has implanted a moral justice, which vnperuerted, will
deal square. Christ's precept was found in the mouths of Heathen. Do not to
another, what thou would not have done to thy self.

L.
Though the bodies excretions grow but insensibly, yet unless they be daily
taken away, we see, they make men monstrous: as Nabuchadnezzars hairs were
like Eagles feathers, and his nails like birds claws, in his seven years
bestialitie. So that those things which nature with due ordering, has made for
use and ornament: with a careless neglect, grow to mischief, and deformity.
In the soul I find it yet worse: and no Vice so soon steals on us, as the
abuse of things in themselves lawful: For Nature ever since her first
deprauation, without a corrigible hand to restrain her, runs into wide
extremities. I know, it is good the Vine should flourish, but let it alone, and
it ruins it self, in superfluous branches. Our pleasures we see, are
sometimes the enliuenings of a drooping soul: yet how easily do they steal
away our minds, and make us with a mad affection, dote upon them? none
suspecting in so fair a semblance, a Sinon, that should gull us, with such
dilusiue postures: but because we know them lawful, we boldly, and heedlessely
use them: and as Providence is the mother of happiness: so negligence is the
Parent of misery. I will ever be most circumspect, in things veiled with
either goodness, or sweetness. Nothing steals more souls from God, then
lewd courses that are outwardly glorious. Reason has not so dull an eye, but
she may see those things, that are apparently ill: but those that are so,
only by their accident, have power to blind her sight: so require more care,
more vigilance. I Will only use them, to make me better: when they leave that,
I Will leave them: and deal with'vm in a wise discretion, as the Emperor
Commodus did with his servants, in a wicked jest, banish them: not for the ill
they have done me; but for the harm they may do. Since all my goodness cannot
make one sin good: why should an accidental sin spoil that, which is good
in it self?

L I.
There is no man that lives well, but shall be suspected for selfe-conceited,
unless he can live like a Hermit, in a Cell: or like some Satyr, in an
unfrequented Desert. He cannot for his life so carry himself, but he shall
sometimes light on lewd company: such as he neither loves, nor cares for. If
he continues society with them, he endangers his soul: either by
participating of their bad actions, or else by conniuing at those offenses, he
sees they delight in: either of which, not only cast a present guilt on the
soul, but even work it to such a temper, as makes it apt to receive the
impression of any ill; So secretly insinuating, till it come from toleration,
to alowance, Action, Custom, Delight. Bad Companions are like Traitors, with
whom if we act, or conceal, we are guilty: this Pitch will defile a man. If
he shall out of an honest care of his souls welfare, and his love to Religion,
labor to avoid such bad associates: or being unhappily fallen among them,
seek for a present escape: Then pride, and a high conceit of himself, is
guessed the only motive of his bodies departure: when indeed it is only
goodness, that importunes his absence. But tell me now, is it not better I
leave them, and be thought proud wrongfully: then stay with them, and be known
bad certainly? He Is a fool that will sell his soul, for a few good words,
from a bad man's tongue. What is it to me, how others think me, when I know, my
intent is good, and my ways warrantable? A good conscience cares for no
witness: that is alone, as a thousand. Neither can the worlds Calumnies, work
a change in a mind resolved. Howsoever here my Reputation should be soiled
unworthily, yet the time is not far off, when a freedom from sin will be
more worth, then a perpetuated fame from Adam, till Doomes day. While heaven
and my Conscience see me Innocent, the worlds suppositions cannot make me
culpable. He that is good, and ill spoken of, shall rejoice, for the wrong is
done him by others. He that is bad, and well reported, shall grieve for the
injury he does himself. In the one, they would make me what I am not: in the
other, I make my self what I should not. Let me rather hear ill, and do
well: then do ill, and be flattered.

LII.
For injuries, my opinion is with Socrates: It Is better to suffer, then to
offer them. He may be good that bears them: he must be ill that proffers them.
Saul would slay David, when himself only is vicious, and ill. Vice, is
accompanied with injustice; Patience, is an attendant on Virtue.

LIII.
In all nations, two things are causes of a common prosperity: Good Government:
and good Obedience: A good Magistrate, over a perverse people, is a sound head,
on a surfetted body. A good Communaltie, and a bad Ruler, is a healthful body,
with a head aching: either are occasions of ruin: both sound, preservatives. A
good Governor is a skillful Shipmaster, that takes the shortest, and the
safest course: and continually so steeres, as the Rocks, and Shelues which
might shipwreck the state, be avoided: and the voyage ever made, with the
soonest speed, best profit, most ease. But a wicked Magistrate is a Wolf made
leader of the fold: that both satiates his cruelty, and betrays them to
danger. To whom if you add but ignorance, you may upon certain grounds,
prophecy destruction. The Judges insufficiency, is the Innocents calamity.
But if the Commonwealth be obedient, and the Ruler worthy: how durable is
their felicity, and joy? Solon might well say, That City was safe, whose
Citizens were obedient to the Magistrates, and Magistrates to the Laws. What
made the Mayor Scipio so victorious, but his wisdom in directing, and his
Soldiers willingness, in obeying, when he could show his troops, and say,
You see not a man among al these, but will, if I command him, from a Turret
throw himself into the Sea? The inconvenience of stubbornness, that Consul
knew, who meeting with an obstinate Youth, sold both him, and his goods,
saying, He had no need of that Citizen, that would not obey. As it is in the
larger, and more spacious world; so is it in the little world of Man. None if
they serve their true Prince, but have a Governor completely perfect.
Criticisme it self, cannot find in God to cavil at. He is both just, and
merciful, in the Concrete, and the Abstract, he is both of them. Who can tax
him with either cruelty, or partiality? though my obedience cannot answer
his perfection; yet will I endeavor it. If Christ be not my King to govern,
he will neither be my Prophet to forewarne, nor my Priest to expiate. If I
cannot come near it, in effect, as being impossible: I will in desire, as
being convenient: so though less, yet if sincere, I know, he will accept it:
not as meritorious, but respecting his promise.

LIIII.
It Is an Aphorism in Physic, that they which in the beginning of sickness
eat much, and mend not, fall at last to a general loathing of food. The
Moral is true in Divinity. He that has a sick conscience, and lives a hearer
under a fruitful Ministry, if he grows not sound, he will learn to despise
the word. Contemned blessings leave room for curses. He that neglects the
good he may have, shall find the evil he would not have. Justly he sits in
darkness, that would not light his Candle when the fire burned clearly. He
that needs counsel, and will not hear it, destines himself to misery, and
is the willing Author of his own woe. Continue at a stay he cannot long: if he
could, not to proceed, is backward. And this is as dangerous to the soul, as
the other to the body. Pitiful is his estate, that hates the thing should
help him: if ever you see a drowning man refuse help, conclude him a wilful
murderer. When God affoords me plentiful means, woe be to me if they
prove not profitable: I had better have a deaf ear, then hear to neglect, or
hate: to the burying of such treasures there belongs a curse, to their
misspending, Judgments.

LV.
God gives three kinds of gifts, Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal;
Temporal, as Wealth, Pleasure, Honor, and such like. Spiritual, as Saving
Faith, Peace of Conscience, and assurance of Salvation. Eternal, as Glory and
happiness in heaven for ever. The first is common to the wicked, as well as the
godly, and they mostly flourish in these terrene beauties. For who so great in
favor with the world as they? They live, become old, and are mighty in power,
as Job speaks in his 21. yet all these sweetes pass away like a vapor, and
though they revel out their days in mirth, yet in a moment they go down to
the grave. The two other God bestows only upon his Elect: all that here he
often gives them, is only one of these: some spiritual favors he bestows
upon them, the other he reserues for them, when Earth cannot call them her
Children. One he gives them not, till they be gone from hence; the other when
they have it, the world sees it not. What difference can a blind man perceive,
between a sparkling Diamond, and a worthless peble? Or what can a natural
man spy, in an humble Christian, that ever he thinks may make him be happy?
Afflictions here are the Lot of the righteous, and they dim those splendid
beauties, that speak them fair in the eye of the Almighty: they are sports of
the privy Chamber, that these Kings joy in: the uncivil vulgar see not the
pleasures of their Crown: Whereas the wicked, and Godforsaken man spreads out
his plumes, and seems even to check the Sun in his glory. Vice loves to
seem glorious, yea more to seem, then to be. What a Luster these Glowwormes
cast in darkness, which yet but touched, are extinct? a poor reckoning alas
in the end! when all these counterfeit Jewels shall be snatched from him, and he
answer for all strictly, at the unavoidable bar of the last Judgment. They
had need have some pleasure here, that can have nothing but woe hereafter.
Flesh, rebellious flesh, would sometime set me to murmur at their prosperity;
but when my mind in her Closet reuolues their fickle estate, and finds all
their good in present, and outward, I see nothing may be a midwife to the least
repining envy. When my soul solaceth her self in those rauishing delights
that exhilarate a Christians mind, how poorly can I think of those lamentable
joys? the spiritual man looks on the flourishes of this life with pity, not
desire. If God gives the wicked one, and me two, why should I complain? but
when the least of mine, is infinitely better then his all, let me never grudge
him, so poor, and so short a heaven. If God affoords me his childrens
favors, (though oppressed with poverty) I am richer, then all their gaudy
Adulations can make me: because I have already the earnest of a World of Joy,
which the wicked shall never obtain.

LVI.
I wonder what spirit they are endued withal, that can basely libell at a man
that is fallen! If they were heavenly, then would they with him condole his
disasters, and drop some tears in pity of his folly, and wretchedness: If
but humane, yet nature never gave them a mind so cruel, as to add weight to
an ouercharged beam. When I hear of any that fall into public disgrace, I
have a mind to commiserate his mis-hap, not to make him more disconsolate. To
inuenome a name by libells, that already is openly tainted, is to add stripes
with an Iron rod, to one that is flayed with whipping: and is sure in a mind
well-tempered, thought inhumane, diabolical.

LVII.
Our years at full are fourscore and ten: much time compared to a day; but
not a minute in respect of eternity: yet how few live to tell so large a
succession of time? One dies in the bud, another in the bloome, some in the
fruit, few like the sheafe, that come to the barn in a full age; and though a
man lives to enjoy all, see but how little he may call as his own. He is first
Puer, then Iuuenis, next Vir, and after Senex; the first he rattles away in
toys and fooleries, ere he knows where he is, spends a great part of his
precious time: he plays as if there were no sorrow, and sleeps as if there
would never be joy. The next, pleasures and luxury shorten and hasten away:
vnchecked heat makes his nimble spirits boil; he dares then do that, which
after he dares not think of: he does not then live, but revel; and cares not
so much for life, as for that which steals it away, Pleasure. He has then a
soul that thinks not of it self, but studies only to content the body:
which with her best indulgence, is but a piece of active earth: when she leaves
it, a lump of nastinesse. The third, Cares of the world, and posterity,
debar of a sollid content: and now when he mounted to the height of his way,
he finds more misery, then the beginning told him of. What iarres, what toils,
what cares, what discontentments, and what unexpected distractions, shall he
light upon? if poor, he is miserable, and ridiculous: if rich, fearful and
solicitous: this being all the difference between them, the first labors how
to live, the other studies how to continue living. In the last, nature grows
weak and irksome to her self, venting her distaste with Solomon, and mournes
that now she finds her days, that be unpleasing. He that lives long has
only the happiness, to take a larger taste of misery: what before he thought
hurled about with more then a sphericall swiftness, he now thinks more
tedious, then a tired Hackney in foul ways: Time, that before he has wooed
to stay for him, now he could on his knee sue to, to haste him away. But if
(that honey of all humanity) Learning, has taught him a way to cooze^ his
sorrows, he could then with old Themistocles, find in his heart to weep, that
he must then leave life, when he begins to learn wit. Thus all man's ages are
so full of troubles, that they filch away his time of living. The first is full
of folly: the second of sin: the third of labor: the last of grief. In all,
he is in the Court of this world, as a ball bandyed between 2. rackets, Joy,
and sorrow: If either of the^ strike him over, he may then rest: otherwise, his
time is nothing, but a constant motion in calamity. I have only yet run
through the first, and passed my Puerilia; whether my life, or my youth shall
be ended first, I neither know, nor care. I shall never be sorrowful, for
leaving too soon, the tempests of this tumbling Sea. But if I see my Summer
past, I hope in Autumn God will ripen me for himself, and gather me; if my
Maker, and master saw it fit, I could be content neither to see it, nor
winter, I mean the winter of age: but if he shall appoint me so large a time,
I shall willingly pray as my Savior has taught me, His will be done: though
I wish not the full fruition of all, yet do I desire to borrow a letter from
each: So in stead of Puer, Iuuenis, Vir, and Senex; give me the four first
letters, which will make me PIUS.

LVIII.
Two things in my apparel, I will only aim at; Commodiousnes, Decency:
beyond these I know not, how ought may be commendable; yet I hate an
effeminate sprucenesse, as much as a phantasticke disorder. A neglectiue
comeliness is a man's best becoming ornament. Sardanapalus was as base in his
Feminine vestures, as Heliogabalus was mad, when he wore Shoes of Gold, and
Rings of Leather: the one showed much pride, the other more wantonness: let
me have both these excluded, and I am pleased in my Garments.

LIX.
Though an enemy be not a thing necessary; yet is there much good use to be
made of him: yea, sometimes he does a man a greater pleasure, then a dearer
friend. For whereas a friend, out of a fear to displease, and a kind of
conniuing partiality, speaks only Placentia, and such as he thinks, may not
give a distaste, an enemy vtters his opinion boldly, and if any act,
misbeseeming virtue, spring from a man, he will be sure to find it, and blow
it abroad. So that if a man cannot know by his friends, wherein he offends; his
enemy will be so much his friend, as to show him his folly, and how he
fayles. 'Twas a good speech of Diogenes, We have need of faithful friends, or
sharp enemies. Every man has use of a monitor: yet I see in all, such a
natural and wilful blindness through self-love, that every man is angry
when his enemy reuiles him, though justly: and all pleased, when a friend
commends, though his Encomion be false, and desertlesse. I will entertain both
with an equal vvelcome: neither, without some meditation, and good use. If one
praise me for the thing I have not, my first following endeavor shall be to
get what he commends me for; lest when the time comes that I should show it,
he reap disgrace, by reporting untruths, and I lose my credit, by wanting
that, I am supposed to possess. If for that I have: I will strive to attain
it, in a measure more large: so shall his words be truth, and my deeds prove
them. If my enemy vpbraids me, let me see if it be justly. It was an argument
of much worth, in that renowned Macedonian, which made him (when he was told
Nicanor rayled on him) say, I believe he is honest, and fear I have deserved
it. If it be so, I will labor to shake off that corruption, and be glad I
have so discovered it. But if injuriously he reports foul, it shall be my
joy to bear contentedly, the unjust aspersions of malicious Censure: who ever
was, that was not slandered? Though he should be believed awhile: yet at last,
my actions would outweigh his words, and the disgrace rest, with the intender
of the ill. So that web of scandal, they would iniect upon me, my life shall
make a garment, for themselves to wear. That stone that injury casts, ever in
the end, lights on her self.

LX.
Two things a man ought to respect while he lives here; his inward
integrity, and his outward uprightness: his piety toward God, and his
reputation among men. The one is by performance of religious duties; the other
by obedience to the laws public; the one makes his life famous; the other,
his death happy: so both together, bring credit to the name, and felicity to
the soul. I will so be alone, as I may be with God: so with company, as I may
please the godly; that, report from good men, may speak me virtuous. Thus
whenever my breath shall be made but air, they shall believe, and I know,
my self to be blessed. The death of a good man, is like the putting out of a
wax perfumed Candle; he recompenses the loss of light, with the sweet odor
he leaves behind him.

LXI.
As it fares between two friends, that have been ancient familiars, yet
dwelling asunder, the one out of a careless neglect, forgets and omits his
usual duty of visitation; and that so long, that at last he forbeares to go
at all: so their loves decay, and diminish: not proceeding from any Jar, but
only out of a stealing neglect, of renewing their loves: Even so it falls out
between God, and the careless Christian: who when he has long omitted the
duty of Prayer, and perhaps has some small motives of a happy return; the
Devil asks him with what face he can now repair unto him, having been so
long a stranger, both to him, and that holy duty. Dis-respect is the way to
lose a friend: He that would not continue a friend, may neglect him, and have
his aim. Experience has taught me how dangerous neglience has been, how
prejudicial: how soon it breeds custom; how easily, and insensibly, custom
creepes into Nature; which much labor, and long endeavor cannot alter, or
extirpate. In this cause there is no remedy but violence, and the seasonable
acceptance of opportunity: The vigilant Mariner sails with the first wind,
and though the gale blow somewhat aduersely, yet once lanched forth, he may
either find the blast, to womb out his sails more fully, or else help
himself, by the advantage of Sea-roome: whereas he, that rides still anchored
in the River, and will sail with none, but a wind fair, may either lie till
he lose his voyage, or else rot his Bark in the Harbor. If a supine neglect
run me on these sands, a violent blast must set me afloat again. In things
that must be, it is good to be resolute. I know not whether I shall have a
second call, or whether my first motion shall die Issuelesse. I am sure I must
return, or perish: and therefore necessity shall add a foot to my weak
desires; yet I will strive more to prevent this, by frequent familiarity; then
being an estranged friend, to renew old loves: not that after error, I would
not return; but that I would not stray at all.

LXII.
The good man has many sorrows, that the wicked man never knows of: his
Offenses, the sins of the Time, the dishonor of God, the daily increasing of
Satan's kingdom, and the present misery of his fathers children: So that many
times, when the profane man is belching out his blasphemies, he inwardly
drops a tear in his soul, and is then petitioning heaven for his pardon. But
to strengthen him under the burden of all these, he has one joy (that were
all his sorrows doubled) could make him lightly bear them: and this is the
truth of Gods promises. If I have more troubles then another, I care not; so I
have more joys. God is no tyrant, to give me more then my load. I am well in
the amidst of all, while I have that, which can uphold me in all. Who deserves
most honor of the sluggard that has kept his bed warm, or the man that has
combated a monster, and mastered him? Job was not so miserable in his
afflictions, as he was happy in his patience.

LXIII.
The envious man is a squint-eyed fool; and must needs want, both wit and
honesty: for as the wise man has always his mind fixed most on his own
affairs: so on the contrary, he observes other men's; while those that are
propper and pertaining to himself, enjoy the least of his counsel and care.
He sees others, and is blind at home; he looks upon others as if they were
his, and neglects his own as if they were another. Again, that which he
intends for mischief, and a secret disgrace; ever adds some splendor to the
brightness of his worth, he does so unjustly malign: as if wishing him
infamous, he would labor to make him famous: or desiring to kill him, would
prescribe him a Cordial. Envy, like the worm, never runs but to the fairest
and the ripest fruit: as a cunning Bloud-hound, it singles out the fattest
Dear of the Herd: it is a pitchy smoke, which wheresoever we find, we may be
sure there is a fire of virtue. Abraham's riches were the Philistims envy.
Jacobs blessing bred Esaus hate. He Is a man of a strange constitution, whose
sickness is bred by another health; as if nature had made him an Antipathite to
virtue; If he were good, or meritorious, he would never grieve to have a
companion: but being bad, and shallow himself, he would damme up the stream,
that is sweet and silent: so by envying another, for his radiant luster, he
gives the world notice, how dark and obscure he is in himself. Yet to all
these blurres, if it were a vice, that could add but a dram of content,
there might something be spoken in way of Apology; But whereas all other vices
are retained, either for pleasure or profit; this only like a barren field,
brings forth nothing, but briars, and thorns: nothing but a meager leanenesse
to the pined corpse, accompanied with grief, vexation, madness. If another
excel me in goodness, I Will make him my example to imitate: not my block to
stumble on. If in wealth, I shall with him bless God for his plenty, never
grudge at those fair favors of heaven, God has enough, both for me, and him:
but if he deserves better, let me applaud the divine Justice, not tax it. If
the vice it self shall not cause me to shun it; yet the folly of it shall
awe me so much, as not to shake hands with a Serpent so foul: it is only the
weakesighted, that cannot endure the light. A strong eye can unhurt gaze the
Sun.

LXIIII.
The Council the Philosopher gave the young men of Athens, may with much
profit, be applied by a Christian: viz. That they should often view themselves
in a glass, that if they were fair, and well featured, they should do such
things, as should be beseeming their amiable shape: but if foul, and ill
favored, that then they should labor to salve the bodies blemishes, by the
beauties of a mind, accoutred with the ornaments of virtue, and good
literature. The Law is the Christians looking glass; which will show all,
without either flattery, or partiality. It Is a globe hung in the amidst of the
room, which will show thee every durty corner of thy soul. If thou have
wandered in a dark way, this will tell thee thy aberrations: and put thee
again into true path. In it will I often behold my self: that if I be free
from the outward, actual violation of it, any thing fair, or have some
beauties, I may study daily, how to maintain them, how to increase them. But
if I find my self like a Leopard in his spots, or an Ethiopian in his hiew
natural, black and deformed (as I cannot be otherwise in my self) it shall
yet make me see my defects, and strive to mend them. Known deformities incite
us to search for remedy: The knowledge of the disease, is half the cure.

LXV.
There is no man so badly inclined, but would gladly be thought good: no man
so good already, but would be accounted somewhat better: Which has often made me
sit down with vvonder, at the choice excellency of religious virtue; that even
those which in heart contemn this Princess; yet cannot but think it an
honor, to be counted as attendants to her. Such a divine, and amazing Majesty
there is in Goodness, that all desire to wear her Livery, though few care to
perform her service: Like proud Courtiers, they would feign be Favorites, but
scorn to attend. If then they cannot but affect her, that are her enemies; how
should they love her that joy to be friends? If I be bad, let my care be to
be good indeed, not thought so. If any good parts already shine in me; I had
rather in silence know my self better, then have the unconstant world deem
me, either rare or excellent.

LXVI.
It was well said of David, The wicked man shall not live out half his days:
for by his intemperancy, he pulls on himself either diseases, or judgments;
which cut him down, before he be fully grown. And though his days be
multiplied, he makes the^ seem much shorter, then indeed they are. For besides
the being taken away by untimely accidents, there be two things that seem to
contract time, in a more compendious scope. Either excessive and secure joy: or
else a sure expectation of ill. One of these in every wicked man has
residence: The former is too ordinary: the latter not so common, nor fully so
dangerous. The first has his conscience so cast in a sleep, that it feels
not those privy and perilous wounds, that sin impaires it withal. All is
frolic, iocund, merry: and he swimmes in the fullest delights invention can
procure him: his eye's enchanted with lascivious objects; his ear charmed with
scurrilous talk; his taste glutted with luxurious ryots; his smell filled with
artificial perfumes; and his arms heated with the wanton embraces of lust:
every sense has his several subject of solace: and while in all these, his
affections are wholly taken up in the present apprehension of pleasure; how can
he count of the precipitate pace of time, that like an Arrow, from a strong
bent Bow, sings with the speed of his course? If his delights would give him
leisure, to meditate a little on this, he might be so much himself, as to know
how his time posteth: But letting it pass, as a thing unthought of, his end
steals on him, unlooked for, unwelcome, unawares: and all those voluptuous
merriments, wherein in his lifetime, he imbathed himself: now seem as a day
that is past, whose Sun declined at noone. But if otherwise, this sensuality
blinds him not, or that his conscience be awake already: then alas! how
timorous and terrified he is, with the expectation of his doom, and final
confusion? wishing that he were either some senseless stone, that the bitter
throes and pangs of despair might not feelingly pierce him; or else that he
had such wings, as could procure his escape from death, and marrowsearching
Judgment. So like a condemned man, that knows the date of his days, he lies
telling the clock, and counting the hour; which he spends, in wishing every
day a year, every hour a day, every minute an hour, that still he might
awhile enjoy the sweet possession of his dear and beloved life. Thus either
while his soul cleaues to the amidst of his mirth, his way beguiles him: or
else while he quiuers with the consideration of the shame that attends him, he
sails with such fear, that he minds not his voyage; so is sucked into Gulf,
e're ever he be aware. A full swinge in pleasure, is the way to make man
senseless: A confident persuasion of unavoidable misery is a ready path to
despair. These potions that are good but tasted, are mortal ingurgitated.
Pleasure taken as Physic, is like a cordial to a weakened body: and an
expedient thought of our dissolution, may be as a corrosiue plaster to eat
away the deadness of the flesh. Both are commendably useful. I will neither
be so Iouiall, as to forget the end; nor so sad, as not to remember the
beginning of life, God.

XLVII.
Though Prayer should be the key of the day, and the lock of the night: yet I
hold it more needful in the morning, then when our bodies do take their
repose. For howsoever sleep be the Image, or shadow of death, and when the
shadow is so near, the substance cannot be far: yet a man at rest in his
chamber, is like a sheep impenn'd in the fold; subject only to the
unavoidable, and more immediate hand of GOD: whereas in the day, when he roues
abroad in the open and wide pastures, he is then exposed to many more unthought
of accidents, that contingently and casually occur in the way: Retiredness
is more safe then business: who believes not a ship securer in the Bay, then
in the midst of the boiling Ocean? Besides, the morning to the day, is as
youth to the life of a man: if that be begun well, commonly his age is
virtuous: otherwise, God accepts not the latter service, when his enemy joys
in the first dish. He that loves chastity, will never marry her, that has
lived a Harlot in youth. Why should God take thy dry bones, when the devil
has sucked the marrow out?

LXVIII.
GOD has left three books to the world, in each of which he may easily be
found: The Book of the Creatures, the book of Conscience, and his written
Word. The first shows his omnipotency. The second his Justice: the third his
mercy, and goodness. So though there be none of them so barren of the
rudiments of knowledge, but is sufficient to leave all without excuse,
apologies: yet in them all, I find all the good, that ever either the Heathen,
or the Christian has published abroad. In the first, is all Natural
Philosophy: in the second, all Moral Philosophy: in the third, all true
Divinity. To those admirable Pillars of all humane learning, (the
Philosophers) God showed himself in his omnipotency and justice, but seemed as
it wete to conceal his mercy: to us Christians he shines in that which
out-shines all his works, his Mercy: Oh! how should we regratulate his favors
for so immense a benefit, wherein secluding himself from others, he has
wholly imparted himself to us? In the first of these I will admire his works,
by a serious meditation of the wonders in the Creatures. In the second, I will
reverence his justice, by the secret and inmost checks of the conscience. In
the third embrace his love, by laying hold on those promises, wherein he has
not only left me means to know him, but to love him, rest in him, and enjoy
him for ever.

LXIX.
If the fault be not in the misapplication, then is it true that Diogenes spoke
of Learning; That, It makes young men sober, old men happy, poor men rich, and
rich men honorable. Yet in any, without grace, it proves a double mischief;
there is nothing more pestilent, the^ a ripe wit applied to lewdness. Because
he that knows himself to be quick and acute, relyes on his own brain, for
evasion from all his villainies; and is drawn to the practice of much vice, by
the too much presuming on his own dexterity. Ability and a wicked will, is
fuel to burn the world with; wit and wantonness are able to entice a chaste
one. Resolution and policy can cast broils in Christendom, and put civil men
into civil wars; if you believe not this, examine the Jesuit. On the
contrary, where grace guides knowledge, and Religion has the reins of Art:
there, though on earth, the man is made heavenly; and his life is truly
Angelical, He does good by the instinct of Grace, and that good he does well,
by the skillful direction of Learning. Religion is as Grammar, that shows him
the word, and the ground: while knowledge, like Rhetoric, does pollish it
with beseeming ornaments. He that gives alms, does good, but he that gives
willingly to the needy, and in season does better. I will set my self to
attain both: for as he can never be a good Orator, that wants either Grammar,
or Rhetoric: So there is no man can be a complete Christian, without Grace,
and some knowledge. Vzzah intended well, but did not know so; and want of
goodness spoiled Achitophels Council. How can we either desire or love him
that we do nor know? since affectus motus est Cordis, a notitia and
cognitione obiecti, ex^citatus.

LXX.
The covetous man cannot be a true or faithful friend to any: for while he
loves his money better the^ his friend, what expectation can there be of the
extent of his liberality? In adversity, and the time of tempest, when he should
be a haven to rest in, and an Alter Idem; he will either like the Crocodile
ceaze on him in the fall, and take the advantage of his necessities: or else
out of a lothnesse to lose any thing by his disbursement, rather see him
macerated by a consuming want, then any way send him a salve for distress.
Words from a dead man, and deeds of charity from a man covetous, are both alike
rare, and hard to come by. It Is a miracle if he speaks at all; but if he does
break silence, it is not without terror and amazement to the hearers. A
covetous man's kindness, is like the fowlers shrap wherein he casts meat, not
out of charity, to relieve them; but treachery to ensnare the^. He reaches thee
bread in one hand and shows it; but keeps a stone in the other and hides it.
If yet his courtesies were without danger, I would rather endure some
extremity, then be beholding to the alms of Avarice. He that ouer-values his
benefit, never thinks he has thanks sufficient. I had better shift hardly,
then owe to an insatiable Creditor.

LXXI.
I have seen some high minded roysters, scornfully contemn the lowly poor of
Christ; as if they were out of the reach of the shattering wind of Judgment,
or thought it an impossibility, ever to stand in need of the help of such
humble shrubbes. Fools so to contemn those, whose aid they may after want:
it is no badge of Nobility to despise an inferior. Magnanimity and humility are
Cohabitants: Courtesy is one of the fairest Iems in a Crown; 'twas Caesar's
glory, to save his Countrymen, which lives still in that speech, which says,
he pardoned more, then he overcame: True Honor is like the Sun, that shines
as well to the Peasant in the field, as the Monarch in his throne: he that
withholds his clemency, because the subject is base, denies a remedy to his
wounded foot; because it is an inferior part so he may justly after complain
and want it: when the Lion was catched in a snare, 'twas not the spacious
Elephant, but the little Mouse, that restored him his wonted liberty: though
the head guides the hand, the hand defends the head.

LXXII.
As sudden passions are most violent; so sudden occasions of sin are most
dangerous: for while the senses are set upon by unthought of objects, reason
wants time to call a Counsel to determine how to resist the assault: it is a
fair booty makes many a thief, that if he had missed of this accident, would
perhaps have lived honestly. Opportunity is a wooer, that none but heaven can
conquer. Humanity is too weak a spell for so powerful a charm: she casts a
fury into the blood, that will tear out a way, though the soul be lost by
it. The rack is easier then her importunity; flames are snowbals to it: sure
if the Devil would change his properties, he would put himself into this
subtle thing: she pulls us with a thousand chains; at every nerve she hangs a
poize, to draw us to her sorcery: and many times in our gain, we are lost for
ever. What, tortures cannot force us to, she will smoothly persuade: she
breaks all bonds, laws, resolutions, oaths. Wise was the abstinence of
Alexander, from the sight of Darius his daughters; lest their beauty should
incite him to folly: she runs us into forbidden errors, and makes us so
desperate, as to dare any thing: If she offer me her service to ill, I Will
either kick her as a bawd to vice, or else vvinke, when she shows me her
painting. Occasion is a witch, and I Will be as heedfull in avoiding her; as I
will be wary to eschew a sin. But if I be constrained to hear the Siren
sing, Ulysses was wise, when he tied himself to the mast.

LXXIII.
My hatred to my enemy shall be but in part, my love to my friend, whole and
entire: for howsoever I may hate my enemies vices, and his ill conditions; yet
will I love his person, both as he is a man, and my brother. His detestation is
too deep, that will burn his linen, because it is foul; they may both
return to their former purity, and then to hate, is sinful. But as for my
friend, I will love both his person, and his qualities: his qualities first,
and for them his person. Yet in neither will I so hate, as to be a foe to
goodness; nor so love, as to foster Iniquity: It Is a question which is the
worst of the two, to be vices friend, or virtues enemy.

LXXIV.
Next God, the good man is the only friend; for when all other slinke out of
the way, he only is a secure harbor for a shipwrackt soul to ride in; If he
be upright that be fallen in distress, he then relieues him, as a brother, as a
member: If lewd, yet necessity induces a commiseration, and seeing the
glorious Impresse of the Almighties image in him, he can not, but for his
Fathers sake, affect him. If he be poor, of God's making, by the unavoidable
designement of a supreme providence, nature incites a relief: For he knows
not how soon, a like lot may fall in his own ground. The same sun saw Job
both rich, and poor to a Proverb. If his own ill courses have brought his
decay; he is not so obdurate, and flinty, but that he can afford him a hand
of compassion, to strengthen him a little, in the amidst of disasters: hoping
that his charity may either work his return, or stay him from speedy ruin.
If he be ill, he is a Magistrate, to correct and reclaim him: if good, he is a
father, to uphold, and love him: if rich, he reads him a lecture of
moderation, and discreet disposure; tells him, not possession, but use,
diuitiates a man more truly: if poor, he sets him to School with Paul there
to learn, Content is plenty; tel's how that Pagan Cynick could laugh at
riches, when he called them nothing but fortunes vomit; if wise, he is his
delight, and solace; even the Granar, where he leaves his load, and locks his
store: if ignorant, he instructs him with the Oracles of God, dictitates
sentences unto him, and speaks all, tanquam ex tripode. Every way I find him
so beneficial, that the pious will not live, but with him: and the badde man
cannot live without him. Who had salu'd the offending Israelites, had not Moses
stood up for to intercede? it shall more joy me to live with Christians, then
men.

LXXV.
The hard-hearted man has misery almost in perfection: and there is none more
wretched, then a man with a conscience feared. Other sinners march in the
highway to ruin; but he as he goes, builds a wall at his back, that he
cannot retire to the tent. Neither Mercies, nor Judgments, win him at all.
Not mercies: those his pride makes him think but his due, and while they are
but common ones, they pass away with his common thoughts. Benefits seldom
sink deep in obdurate minds: it is the soft nature that is soonest taken with
a courtesy. Not Judgments; for either he reuerberates them back, before they
pierce, as a wall of steel does a bluntheaded arrow: or if they do perhaps
find entrance, like the Elephant, with the convulsion of his nerves, and his
bodies contraction; he casts out the shaft that sticks within him: so still he
rests vnmollified, for all this rain, and hail. Warnings to perverse
dispositions, are the means to make them worse: Those plagues, and wonders
that would have melted a milder soul, only reduced Pharaoh's to a more hard,
and desperate temper. Strange! that he should lock out of his own good, with
so strong a key, so sure a Ward; when every vice that defiles the mind, finds
both ready and free welcome. If I live in sin, God's first call is mercy; I
had better go willingly, then be led by constraint: it is fit he should know
the smart of torture, that nothing will cause to confess but the Rack: if I
find God whips me with any sensible stroke, I will search the cause, then
seek the cure: such blows are the physic of a bleeding soul: but
neglected, my sin will be more, and my punishment: it is in vain to be
stubborn with God: he that can crush us to nothing, can turn us to any
thing: let me rather return speedily, and prevent Judgments, then stay
obstinately and pull down more: as it is a happy fear, which preuents the
offense, and the rod: so that is a miserable valor; which is bold to dare the
Almighty.

LXXVI.
Some men's Censures are like the blasts of Rams Horns, before the walls of
Jericho: all the strength of a man's virtue they lay level at one utterance:
when all their ground is only a conceited fancy, without any certain basis
to build on. What religious mind will not with amazement shudder, at the
peremptory conclusions, where they have set their period? Wondering, Man that
knows so little, should yet so speak, as if he were privy to all. I confess,
a man may roue by the outward lineaments, what common inclinations rule within:
yet that Philosopher did more wisely, that seeing a fair face, with a tongue
silent, bade him speak that he might see him. For the cheek may be dimpled
with a pleasing smile, while the heart throbs with undiscerned dolors: and as a
clear face shows not always a sound body: no more is an ingenuous look,
always the ensign of a mind virtuous I will only walk in Christ's path, and
learn by their fruits to know them: where I want experience, charity bids me
think the best, and leave what I know not, to the Searcher of heart's.
Mistakes, Suspect, and Envy, often iniure a clear fame, there is least danger
in a charitable construction; In part he is guilty of the wrong that is done,
Which does believe those false reports, that run.


I will neither believe all I hear, nor speak all I believe; A man's good name
is like a milke-white ball, that will infinitely gather soil in tossing. The
act of Alexander in this cause, merits an eternal memory: that having read a
Letter with his Favorite Hephaestion, wherein his mother calumniated Antipater,
took his Signet from his finger, and appressed his lips with it: Coniuring as
it were, the strict silence of another disgrace: Oh Alexander! this very
action was enough to make thee famous, who should not in this admire, and
imitate thee? A desire to disgrace another, cannot spring from a good root:
Malice and baseness ever dwell with calumny. I will judge well of every man,
whom his own bad life speaks not ill of: if he be bad, I Will hope well; what
know I show his end may prosper? I had better labor to amend him to himself,
then by publishing his vices, make him odious to others. If he be good, and
belongs to God, how can I choose but offend much, when I speak ill of a child
that is indeared to such a fathers affection? God loves his own tenderly; and
whosoever offers a disgrace to them, shall be sure to pay for it, either by
tears, or torment.

LXXVII.
There are three things especially that a Christian should know: His own
Misery: Gods Love: his own thankful Obedience. His misery, how just; Gods
love, how free, how undeserved; his own thankfulness, how due, how necessary.
Consideration of one, successively begets the apprehension of all: Our misery
shows us his Love: his Love calls for our acknowledgement. Want makes a bounty
weightier: if we think on our needs, we cannot but admire his mercies: how
dull were we, if we should not value the relief of our necessities? he cannot
but esteem the benefit, that unexpectedly helps him in his deepest distress:
That Love is most to be prized, whose only motive is goodness. The thought of
this, will form a disposition grateful: who can meditate so vnbottomed a
love, and not study for a thankful demeanor? His mind is cross to Nature,
that requites not affection with gratitude. All favors have this success, if
they light on good ground, they bring forth thanks. Let me first think my
misery, without my Saviors mercy: next, his mercy, without my merits: and from
the meditation of these two, my sincerer thanks will spring. Though I cannot
conceive of the former as they are; Infinite, and beyond my thought: yet will I
so ponder them, as they may enkindle the fire of my unfeigned, and zealous
thanksgiving. That time is well spent, wherein we study thankfulness.

LXXVIII.
Though the fools of the world think outward beauty the only Jewel that
deserves wearing; yet the wise man counts it but an accident; that can neither
add, nor diminish, to the worth of virtue, as she is in her self: so as he
never esteems her more, or less, but as he finds her accomplished with
discretion, honesty, and good parts. If my friend be virtuous, and
nobly-minded, my soul shall love him, howsoever his body be framed: and if
beauty make him amiable, I needs must like him much the better: the Sun is
more glorious in a clear sky, then when the Horizon is clouded. Beauty is the
wit of Nature put into the frontispice. If there be any humane thing may teach
faith reason, this is it: in other things, we imagine more then we see: in
this we see more then we can imagine. I have seen (and yet not with a
partial eye) such features, and such mixtures, as I have thought impossible
for either Nature to frame, or Art to counterfeit; yet in the same face, I have
seen that, which has out-gone them both, the Countenance. Oh! if such glory
can dwell with corruption, what celestial excellencies are in the Saints
above? who would not gaze himself into admiration, when he shall see so rich a
treasure, in so pure a Cabinet, unmatched virtue, in matchless beauty? But if
my friends body has more comeliness, then his soul goodness; I like him the
worse, for being but outwardly fair. Wickedness in beauty, is a traitor of
the Bedchamber; poison in sweet meats. A vicious soul, in a beautiful body,
I account as a Jesuit in the Roabes of a Courtier; or somewhat more fitly, a
Papist, that will go to Church.

LXXIX.
As I think there are many, worse then they seem; so I suppose there are
some, better then they show: and these are like the growing Chestnut, that
keeps a sweet, and nutrimentall kernel, included in a rough, and prickely
husk. The other, as the Peach, hold a rugged and craggy stone, under the cover
of a Velvet Coat. I would not deceive a good man either way: both offer a wrong
to virtue: The one shows her worse then she is; dulling her beauty with dim
colors, and presenting her, with a harder favor then her own: The other does
varnish over the rottenness of Vice, and makes goodness but the vizor for
hypocrisy. Either are condemnable: painting the face, is not much worse, then
wilful soiling it. He is as well a murderer, that accuses himself falsely,
as he that did the act, and denies it. One would obscure goodness, with Vice;
the other would palliate Vice, with goodness. Fraud is in both: and I am sure
no Plea can make deceit allowable. I will therefore strive to avoid both; and
with Chrysostom either seem as I am, or be as I seem. But if I should err
on one side, I had rather resemble a plain Countryman, that goes in russet,
and is rich in revenues; then a riotous Courtier, that wears glorious
apparel, without money in's purse.

LXXX.
A Christians voyage to heaven, is a sentence of three stops; Comma, Colon,
Periodus. He that repents, is come to the Comma, and begins to speak sweetly,
the language of salvation; but if he leaves there, God understands not such
abrupt speeches: sorrow alone, cannot expiate a Pirates robberies; he must both
leave his theft, and serve his Country, ere his Prince will receive him to
favor. It Is he that confesses and forsakes his sin, that shall find mercy:
it is his leaving his wickedness, that is as his Colon, and carries him half
way to heaven. Yet here also is the Clause imperfect, unless he goes on to the
practice of righteousness, which as a Period knits up all, and makes the
sentence full. Return, and penitence is not sufficient for him, that has fled
from his Sovereigns banner; he must first do some valiant act, before by the
law of Arms, he can be restored to his former bearing. I will not content my
self with a Comma; Repentance helps not, when sin is renewed; nor dare I make
my stay at a Colon; not to do good, is to commit evil, at least by omission
of what I ought to do: before I come to a Period, the constant practice of
piety, I am sure, I cannot be sure of complete glory. If I did all strictly, I
were yet unprofitable; and if God had not appointed my faith to perfect me,
miserable. If he were not full of mercies, how unhappy a creature were man?

LXXXI.
Even from natural reason, is the wicked man proved to be son unto Satan,
and heir of hell, and torments. For not to speak of heaven, (where the
blessed are happy, and al things beyond apprehension excellent,) even in the
Firmament, we see how all things are preserved by a glorions order: the Sun
has his appointed circuit, the Moon her constant change, and every Planet and
Star their proper course and place. For as they are called fixed Stars, not
because they move not at all, but because their motion is insensible, and their
distances ever the same, by reason of the slow motion of the eighth sphere, in
which they are: So they are not called wandering Planets, for that they move in
an uncertain irregularitie; but because those seven inferior Orbs, wherein
they are set, are diversely carried about; which makes them appear sometimes in
one place, sometimes in another, yet ever in the settled place of their own
Orb, whose Reuolutions also, are in most strict, and ever certain times* The
earth likewise has her unstirred Station; the Sea is confined in limits; and
in his ebbings, and flowings, dances as it were after the influence, and aspect
of the Moon; whereby it is both kept from putrefaction, and by struggling with
it self, from ouer-flowing the land. In this world, Order is the life of
Kingdoms, Honors, Arts: and by the excellency of it, all things flourish, and
thrive. Only in hell is confusion, horror, and amazing disorder. From whence
the wicked man shows himself sprung, for there is nothing that like him, lives
so irregular, and out of compass. Disorder is a bird of the Devils hatching: I
fear lest those that rent the Church for Ceremony, have some affinity with
that prince of mis-rule: we often find the parents disposition, though not
propagated to the child, yet followed by him. I do not censure, but doubt. We
have seldom known him good, that refuses to obey good orders. Who can expect
a fruitful crop, when the field is sometimes blasted with Lightning, sometime
drenched with inundations, but never cherished with a kindly Sun? things
incapable of a true form, are ever mending: yet ever imperfect: when the
ranks are broken, the victory is in hazard. One bad voice, can put twenty
good ones out of tune. I will first order my mind by good resolution; then
keep it so, by a strong constancy. Those Soldiers dyed bravely, that where
they stood to fight, they fell to death.

LXXXII.
In every man there be three things that encounter our Consideration; The
Mind, the Behavior, the Person. A gross blemish in any of which, stick some
disgrace on the unhappy owner. If the Mind be vicious, though the carriage be
fair, and Person comely; Honesty esteems not outward parts, where inward
Grace is wanting. If his mind be good, and carriage clownish, his outward bad
demeanor makes his inward worth ridiculous: and admit he has both deserving
applause; yet a surfeited and diseased body, makes al disregarded; while the
approach of his presence may prove prejudicial, infectious, noisome. To remedy
the defects of all these, I find three noble Sciences: Divinity, Philosophy,
Physic: Divinity, for the Soul; to preserve that unstained, and; holy; as
also to indue it with understanding; for God with his Graces, instills
Knowledge: it was the keeping of his Law, made David wiser then those that
taught him. Divine knowledge is not without humane; when God gives the first,
in some measure he gives both: and therefore we seldom find the ignorant man
honest; if he be mentally, yet he fails expressiuely. Philosophy, for his
manners and demeanor, in the many contingent things of this life; to fit him
both with decent Complements, and sufficicient stayednes: neither sauouring of
Curiosity, nor rusticity: nor was ever Religion found a foe to good manners;
For she shines brightest in a brave behavior, so it be still free from
affectation, flattery. Philosophy is the salt of life; that can dry up the
crude humors of a nouice, and correct those pestilent qualities wherewith
nature has infested us: which was ingenuously confessed by Socrates, when
Zopyrus by his Phisiognomy, pronounced him foully vicious. Physic, to know the
state of the body; both to avoid distempers in health, and to recover health,
in wearying diseases; it is the restitution of decaying nature: when she is
falling, this gives her a hand of sustenance: it puts away our blemishes,
restores our strength, and rids us of that, which would rid us of our lives. In
all these though a man be not so learned, as to teach them to others; yet in
all I would know so much, as might serve to direct me, in mine own occasions.
It Is commendable to know any thing that may bear the title of Good; but for
these so pleasing Sciences, I will rather study with some pains, then want
experience in things so necessary. Thus shall I fit my mind for God, my body to
my mind, my behavior to both, and my friends.

LXXXIII.
The distempers of these times, would make a wise man both merry, and mad:
merry, to see how vice flourishes but a while, and being at last frustrate of
all her fair hopes, dies in a dejected scorn; which meets with nothing in
the end, but beggary, baseness, and contempt. To see how the world is mistaken
in opinion, to suppose those best, that are wealthiest. To see how the world
thinks to appall the mind of nobleness with misery; while true resolution
laughs at their poor impotency, and slights even the utmost spite of tyranny.
To see how men buy Offices at high rates, which when they have, prove gins to
catch their souls in, and snare their estates, and reputations. To see how
foolishly men coozen themselves of their souls, while they think they gain,
by their cunning defrauding another. To see how the proiectors of the world,
like the spoke of the Wheel of SESOSTRIS Chariot, are tumbled up and down,
from beggary, to worship; from worship, to honor; from honor, to baseness
again. To see what idle complements are current among some that affect the
Phantasticke garb: as if friendship were nothing but an apish salute, glossed
over with the varnish of a smooth tongue. To see a strutting prodigal
ouer-looke a region, with his wauing plume; as if he could as easily shake
that, as his feather; yet in private creep like a crouching Spaniell, to his
base muddy prostitute. To see how pot-valour thunders in a Tavern, and
appoints a Duel, but goes away, and gives money to have the quarrel taken up
underhand. Mad on the other side, to see how Vice goes trapperd with rich
furniture, while poor Virtue has nothing but a bridle and saddle, which only
serve to increase her bondage. To see Machiauel's tenants held as Oracles;
honesty reputed shallowness; Justice bought and sold; as if the world went
about to disprooue Zorobabel, and would make him confess, money to be stronger
then Truth. To see how flattery creepes into favor with Greatness, while
plain dealing is thought the enemy of state, and honor. To see how the
Papists (for promotion of their own Religion) invent lies, and print them;
that they may not only cozen the present age, but gull posterity, with forged
actions. To see how well-meaning simplicity is foot-ball'd. To see how
Religion is made a Politicians vizor; which having helped him to his purpose,
he casts by, like Sunday apparel, not thought on all the week after. And
which would mad a man more then all, to know all this, yet not know how to
help it. These would almost distract a man in himself. But since I find they
are incurable; I Will often pray for their amendment in private, never declaime,
but when I am called to it. He loses much of his comfort, that without a just
deputation, thrusts himself into danger. Let me have that once, and it shall
never grieve me, to die in a warrantable War.

LXXXIV.
To revenge a wrong, is both easy, and usual; and as the world thinks,
savors of some nobleness: but Religion says the contrary, and tells us it is
better to neglect it, then requite it. If any man shall willingly offer me an
injury, he shall know, I can see it; but withal, he shall see, I scorn it:
unless it be such, as the bearing is an offense. What need I do that, which
his own mind will do for me? If he has done ill, my revenge is within him:
if not, I am too blame in seeseeking it. If unwillingly he wrongs me, I am as
ready to forgive, as he to submit: for I know, a good mind will be more
sorrowful, then I shall be offended: With his own hand he rebateth his
honor, that kills a prisoner humbly yielding: Who but a Devil, or a Pope,
could trample on a prostrate Emperor?

LXXXV.
I observe none more liable to the world's false censure, then the upright
nature, that is honest, and free. For many times, while he thinks no ill, he
cares not though the world sees the worst of his actions; supposing he shall
not be judged worse, then he knows himself: but the world being bad it
self, guesses at others by his own: so concludes bad, of those that are not.
Some have I known thus injured; that out of a mind not acquainted with ill,
have by a free demeanor, had infinite scandals cast upon them; when I know, the
ignorant and ill world is much mistaken, and conjectures false. I will never
censure till I see grounds apparent: he that thinks ill without this, I dare
pawn my soul, is either bad, or would be so, if opportunity but served him.
In things uncertain, a badde construction must needs flow from a badde mind:
who could imagine private vice which they do not see, by a harmless
carriage, which they do see, unless either their own ill practice, or
desires, had prompted them? Vice as it is the Devils issue; so in part it
retains his qualities; and desiring others bad, believes them so. But virtue
had a more heavenly breeding: she is wary, lest she censure rashly: and had
rather strain to save, then err to condemn. If my life be free from
villainy, and base designs, I know, the good will speak no worse then they
see: as for those that are lewd, their black tongues can never spot the fair
of virtue: only I could sometimes grieve, to see how they wrong themselves, by
wronging others.

LXXXVI.
Every man either is rich, or may be so; though not all in one and the same
wealth. Some have abundance, and rejoice in it: Some a competency, and are
content: some having nothing, have a mind desiring nothing. He that has
most, wants something: he that has least, is in something supplied; wherein
the mind, which makes rich, may well possess him with the thought of store.
Who whistles out more content, then the low-fortun'd Plowman, or sings more
merrily, then the abject Coblar, that sits under the stall? Content dwells with
those, that are out of the eye of the world, whom she has never trained with
her gawds, her toys, her lures. Wealth is like learning, wherein our greater
knowledge, is only a larger sight of our wants. Desires fulfilled, teach us to
desire more: so we that at first were pleased, by removing from that, are now
grown insatiable. Wishes have neither end; nor End. So in the amidst of
affluencie, we complain of penury; which not finding, we make. For to
possess the whole world with a grumbling mind, is but a little more specious
poverty. If I be not outwardly rich, I will labor to be poor in craving
desires; but in the virtues of the mind, (the best riches) I would not have a
man exceed me. He that has a mind contentedly good, inioyeth in it boundless
possessions. If I be pleased in my self, who can add to my happiness? as no
man lives so happy, but to some his life would be burdensome: so we shall find
none so miserable, but we shall hear of another, that would change calamities.

LXXXVII.
To have been happy, is wretched; to be happy, momentany; to may be happy,
doubtful. All that the world yields, is either uncertainly good, or
certainly ill. Even his best cordials, have some bitter ingredients in them;
lest foolish sensuality should catch them with too greedy a hand. We should
surfeit with their honey, if there were not gall intermingled. The reason of
defect I find in the object, which being earthly, must be brittle, fading,
vain, imperfect: so though it may please, it cannot satisfy. Earth can give
us but a taste of pleasure, not fill us. What she affoords, let me lawfully
use; trust to, never. He only, that has been, is, and shall be for ever,
can make my past happiness present, my future certain, and my present
continue, if not as it is, better, and then for ever.

LXXXVIII.
A good name is among all externals, both the best, and most brittle blessing.
If it be true, that Difficilia quae pulchra, this is a fair beatitude. It Is
the hardest both to get, and keep: like a glass of most curious workmanship,
long a making, and broke in a moment. That which is not gained but by a
continued habit of many virtues, is by one short vicious action, lost for ever.
Nay, if it could only vanish in this sort, it would then by many be kept
untainted: If it could not be lost but upon certainties; If it were in our own
keeping; or if not in our own, in the hands of the wise and honest; how
possible were it to preserve it pure? But alas! this is the misery, that it
rests upon probabilities, which as they are hard to disprove, so they are
ready to persuade: That it is in the hands of others, not our selves: in the
custody not of the discreet, and good only; but also of Fools, Knaves,
Villains: Who though they cannot make us worse to ourselves; yet how vile may
they render us to others? To vindicate it from the tongues of these, there is
no remedy but a constant careful discretion. I must not only be good, but
not seem ill: Appearance alone, which in good is too little, is in evil too
much. He is a wilful murderer of his own fame, that willingly appears, in
the ill action he did not. It Is not enough to be well lived, but well
reported. When we know good fame a blessing, we may easily in the contrary,
discern a curse: whereof we are justly seized, while we labor not to avoid
it. I will care as well to be thought honest, as to be so: my friends know me
by the actions they see, strangers, by the things they hear: the agreement of
both, is the confirming my goodness. The one is a good complexion; the other a
good countenance: I deny not but they may be several; but they are then most
graceful, when both are seated together. It had been well spoken of Caesar,
if he had not put her away, when after trial, and the crime cleared, he
said, Caesar's wife should not only be free from sin, but from suspicion. An
ill name may be free from dishonestie, but not from some folly. Though
slanders rise from others, we our selves often give the occasion. The first best
way to a good name, is a good life: the next, is a good behavior.

LXXXIX.
All earthly delights I find sweeter in the expectation, then the inioyment:
All spiritual pleasures, more in fruition, then expectation. Those carnal
contentments that here we joy in, the Devil shows us through a prospectiue
glass; which makes them seem both greater, and nearer hand: when he took
Christ to the Mountain, he showed him all the Kingdoms, and the glory of
them; but never mentions the troubles, dangers, cares, fears, vigilancies,
which are as it were the thorns, wherewith a Crown is lined. Oh! what
mountains of joy do we cast up, while we think on our earthly Canaan?
whatsoever temporal felicity we apprehend, we cull out the pleasures, and
ouerprize them; the perils and molestations we either not see, or not think
of: like the foolish man, that at a dear rate buys a Monopoly, wherein he
counts the gains, and ouer-casts them; but never weighs the charges, nor the
casualtie, in making of him liable both to the hateful curse of the people;
and the severe censure of a Parliament. Herein we are all fools, that seeing
these Bladders, we will blow them beyond their compass. It Is Satan's craft, to
show us the enticing spots of this Panther, concealing the toruitie of her
countenance. But when again we look at heavenly things, like a cunning
Iuggler, he turns the glass; so detracts from those fair proportions, the
chief of their beauty, and worth: those, we believe both less, and more
remote; as if he would carry us in Winter, to see the pleasures of a Garden.
Thus the heart informed by abused senses, is content to sail as they steer;
so either tombs her self in the bosom of the waves; or cuts through the way
to her enemies Country; where she is quickly taken, ransack't, and rifl'd of
all. If this were not, how could we be so heartlesse in pursuit of celestial
prizes, or what could breed so soon a loathing of that, which most we have
coueted, and sweat to obtain? If my mind grow enamoured on any sublunarie
happiness, I will cool it with this knowledge: and withal tell her, she is
happier in apprehending the taste, without the Lees; then in drinking the Wine,
that is yet vnfined. That felicity which experience finds lame, and halting,
Thought and supposition give a perfect shape. But if the motions of my soul
wheel toward any divine sweet, my strongest arguments shall persuade a
proceeding. Here imaginations dark eye is too dim, to fix upon this Sun.
When I come to it, I am sure I shall find it transcending my thoughts: Till
then, my faith shall be above my reason, and persuade me to more then I know.
Though fruition excludes faith, yet belief makes blessed. So I will believe,
what yet I cannot enjoy.

XC.
Every man's actions are according to his mind, tedious or delightful. For be
it never so laborious and painful, if the mind entertaines it with delight,
the body gladly undergoes the trouble, and is so far at the minds service,
as not to complain of the burden. And though it be never so full of pleasure,
that might smooth the senses; yet if the mind distastes it, the content turns
to vexation, toil. Desire is a ^ind that against the tide can carry us
merrily; with it, make us fly. How pleasant would our life be, if we had not
cross gales to thwart us, various tides to check us? With these, how full of
distress? yet in them, we often increase our sorrows, by vainly striving
against unconquerable fate; when if we could but persuade our mind, we might
much ease both it, and our body. That which is bad, though never so
pleasureable, I Will strive to make my mind dislike; that my body also may be
willing to forgo that, which my mind hates. That which is good, and should be
done, I Will learn to affect, and love; howsoever my body refuse. As my mind is
better then it; so my care shall be more to content it: but most to make it
content with goodness, otherwise I had better cross it, then let it settle to
unlawful solaces. I prefer this unquietness, before the other peace. That
which is easy, I Will easily do; that which is not, my mind shall make so. My
life as it is full enough of travail; why should I by my minds loathing, make
it seem more difficult?

XCI.
I cannot know God as he is; if I could, I were unhappy, and he not God. For
then must that eternal omnipotency of his be finite, and comprehensible;
else, how could the fleet dimensions of the mind of man contain it? I admire
the definition of Empedocles, who said, God was a Sphere, whose Center was
every where, and Circumference no where. Though his full light be
inaccessible, yet from this ignorance springs all my happiness, and strongest
comfort. When I am so ingulfed in misery, as I know no way to escape; God, that
is so infinite above me, can send a deliverance, when I can neither see, nor
hope it. He needs never despair, that knows he has a friend, which at all
assayes, can help him.

XCII.
If I were so punished as to live here perpetually, I would wish to have always
such a mind, as I find after the conquest of a strong temptation: then have I
as much happiness, as can be found in this life's moueables. The trial first
bewrayes the danger, then the escape vshers in succeeding joy: and all know,
the Sun appears more lustrous to a prisoner that comes out of a Dungeon, then
to him that daily beholds his brightness. When is wine so pleasant as after a
long thirst? Besides, the soul withdrawn from GOD, returns in the end with
comfort, and again sweetly closes with her Maker; whose goodness she knows it
is, to make her so bravely victorious. We are never so glad of our friends
company, as when he returns after tedious absence. All the pleasures that we
have, relish better when we come from miseries; then, what a glory is it to a
noble spirit, to have endured and conquered? there being more sweetness in a
hard victory, where we come off fair; then in the neglected pleasures of a
continual peace. Those Fowls taste best, that we kill our selves in birding:
what bread eats so well, as that which we earne with labor? And indeed it is
the way to make us perfect; for as he can never be a good Soldier, that has
not felt the toil of a battle: so he can never be a sound Christian, that
has not felt temptations buffets. Every fire refines this gold. If I did find
none, I should fear I were vices too much: or else that God saw me so weak,
as I could not hold out the encounter: but seeing I do, the pleasantness of
the fruit, shall furnish me with patience, to abide the precedent bitterness;
This gone, I shall find it a felicity to say, I have been wretched.

XCIII.
Earth has not any thing more glorious then ancient Nobility, when it is found
with virtue. What barbarous mind will not reverence that blood, which has
untainted run through so large a succession of generations? Besides, virtue
adds a new splendour, which together with the honor of his house, challenges
a respect from all. But bad greatness, is nothing but the vigor of vice;
having both mind and means to be vncontrollably lewd. A debauched son of a
Noble Family, is one of the intolerable burdens of the earth, and as
hateful a thing as hell: for all know, he has had both example, and precept,
flowing in his education; both which, are powerful enough to obliterate a
native illness: yet these in him, are but auxiliaries to his shame, that with
the brightness of his Ancestors, make his own darkness more palpable. Vice
in the Son of an Ancient Family, is like a clownish Actor in a stately Play,
he is not only ridiculous in himself; but disgraces both the plot, and the
Poet: whereas virtue in a man of obscure Parents, is like an vnpollish't
Diamond, lying in the way among pebbles; which howsoever it be neglected of
the uncivil vulgar; yet the wise Lapidary takes it up, as a Jewel invaluable;
it being so much the more glorious, by how much the other were baser. He that
is good and great, I would sell my life to serve him nobly; otherwise, being
good, I love him better, whose father expired a Clown; then he that being
vicious, is in a lineall descent from him, that was knighted with Tubal-Cain's
fauchion which he made before the Flood.

XCIIII.
I find some men extremely passionate: and these, as they are more taken with a
joy; so, they taste a disaster more heavily. Others are free from being
affected; and as they never joy excessiuely; so they never sorrow immoderately:
but have together, less mirth, and less mourning: like patient gamesters,
winning, and losing, are one. The latter I will most labor for. I shall not
lose more contentment in apprehending joys, then I shall grief in finding
troubles. For we are more sensible of pain, then delight; the one contracting
the spirits, the other dilating the^. Though it were not so, living here,
vexations are more ordinary: Joy is a thing for hereafter. Heaven cannot be
found upon earth. Many great joys are not so pleasant, as one torment proves
tedious. The father sighs more at the death of one son, then he smiles at
the birth of many.

XCV.
In weighty affairs, we can never do well, unless we know both our selves,
and the thing we intend. Truth falls into hazard, when it finds either a weak
Defender, or one that knows not her worth. How can he guide a business, that
needs a guide for himself? Have we not known many, taking their abilities
at too high a pitch, rush upon matters that have proou'd their overthrow? Rash
presumption is a ladder that will break our necks. If we think too well of
our selves, we ouershoot the mark; If not well enough, we are short of it.
And though we know our selves, yet if ignorant in the thing, we expose our
selves to the same mischief. Who is so unwise as to wade through the river he
has not sounded, unless he can either swim well, or have help at hand? He
that takes upon him what he cannot do, rides a horse which he cannot rule; he
can neither sit in safety, nor alight when he would. In whatsoever I undertake,
I will first study my self; next the thing that I go about: being to seek
in the former, I cannot proceed well; understanding that, I shall know the
other the better; if not the particulars, I may cast it in the general;
something unseen, we must leave to a sudden discretion, either to order, or
avoid. It Is not for man to see the events, further then nature and
probabilities of reason lead him. Though we know not what will be, it is good
we prepare for that which may be: we shall brook a check the easier, while
we thought on it, though we did not expect it. But if knowing both aright, I
find my self unable to perform it; I will rather desist from beginnings,
then run upon shame in the sequel. I had better keep my self and ship at
home; then carry her to sea, and not know how to guide her.

XCVI.
What an elated Meteor would man grow to, did prosperity always cast
sweetening dewes in his face? Sure he would once more with Ouids Giants, fling
Mountains on heaps, to pull down God from his throne of Majesty; forgetting
all felicity, but that aerie happiness he is blinded with. Nothing feeds
pride so much, as a prosperous abundance: it is a wonder to see a Favorite
study for ought, but additions to his greatness: If I could be so
uncharitable, as to wish an enemies soul lost, this were the only way: Let
him live in the height of the worlds blandishments. For how can he love a
second Mistress, that never saw but one beauty, and still continues deeply
enamoured on it? Every man has his desires intending to some peculiar thing:
GOD should be the end we aim at; yet we often see, nothing carries us so
far from him, as those favors he has imparted us: it is dangerous to be
outwardly blessed. If plenty and prosperity were not hazardous, what a short
cut should some have to heaven, over others? It Is the misery of the poor, to
be neglected of men: it is the misery of the rich, to neglect their God. It Is no
small abatement to the bitterness of adversities, that they teach us the way
to heaven. Though I would not inhabit Hell, if I could, I would sometimes see
it; not out of an itching desire to behold wonders; but by viewing such
horrors, I might value heaven more dearly. He that has experienced the Seas
tumultuous perils, will ever after, commend the Lands security. Let me swim
a river of boiling Brimstone, to live eternally happy; rather then dwell in a
Paradise, to be damned after death.

XCVII.
Every Vice makes the owner odious; but Pride and Cruelty more then any beside.
Pride has no friend: His thoughts set his worth above himself, all others
under it. He thinks nothing so disgraceful, as want of reverence, and
familiarity. There is a kind of disdaining scorn writ in his brow, and
gesture; wherein all may read, I am too good for thy company. So it is just all
should despise him, because he contemns all. He that has first ouerprized
himself, shall after be vnder-valued by others; which his arrogancy thinking
unjust, shall swell him to anger, so make him more hateful. Pride is ever
discontentiue: It both occasions more then any, and makes more, then it does
occasion. As Humility is the way to get love and quietness: so is Pride the
cause both of Hatred, and War. He has angered others, and others will vex
him. No man shall hear more ill of himself, then he that thinks he deserves
most good. It was a just quip of that wise King, to that proud Physician, who
writing thus, Menecrates Jupiter, Regi Agesilao salutem; was answered thus, Rex
Agesilaus, Menecrati sanitatem indeed he might well wish his wits to him, that
was so unwise as to think himself God. Aristotle, when he saw a youth
proudly surueying himself, did justly wish to be as he thought himself; but
to have his enemies such, as he was. I dare boldly say, never proud person was
well beloved. For as nothing unites more, then a reciprocal exchange of
affection: so there is nothing hinders the knot of friendship more, then
apparent neglect of courtesies. Cruelty is a Curre of the same litter. It Is
natures good care of her self, that warnes us from the den of this Monster.
Who will ever converse with him, that he has seen devour another before him?
A Tyrant may rule while he has power to compel; but when he has lost that,
the hatred he has got, shall slay him. Who wonders to hear young Cato ask
his Schoolmaster, how Silla lived so long, when he was so hated for his
cruelty? it was a devilish speech, that Caligula borrowed of the Poet,
Oderint dum metuant: I am content if they fear me, that they should hate me.
And sure if any man took the course for it, he did; when he bade his
executioners so strike, as they might feel that they were a dying. He that
makes cruelty his delight, shall be sure to have hate his best recompense.
Detestation waits upon unmercifulness: who would not help to kill the Beast,
that sucks the blood of the Fould? What has made some Nations so odious as
these two; Pride, and Cruelty? The proud man will have no friend; and the
cruel man shall have none. Who are more miserable then they that want company?
I pity their estate, but love it not. Were I Lord of the whole Globe, and must
live alone, I had unhappiness enough to make my commands my trouble. The one
turned Angels out of Heaven; the other, Monarks from their thrones: both, I am
sure, are able to turn us to hell: it is better being a beast, then a dying
man, with either unpardoned.

XCVIII.
I know not whether is more true, That, likeness is the cause of Love: or,
Love the cause of likeness. In agreeing dispositions, the first is certain;
in those that are not, the latter is evident. The first is the easier love; the
other the more worthy. The one has a lure to draw it; the other without
respect, is voluntary. Men love us for the similitude we have with themselves;
GOD, merely from his goodness, when yet we are contrary to him. Since he
has loved me, when I was not like him, I will strive to be like him,
because he has loved me. I would be like him being my friend, that loved
me, when I was his enemy. Then only is love powerful, when it frames us to
the will of the loved. Lord, though I cannot serve thee as I ought, let me love
thee as I ought. Grant this, and I know, I shall serve thee the better.

XCIX.
What we either desire, or fear, we are easily drawn to believe. Tell the
prodigal, his Kinsman's dead should leave him an estate to swagger with, he will
quickly give credit to 't. The mother of a sick infant, if she but hears
death whispered, she is confident her child is gone: either of them transport
the mind beyond her self, and leave her open to inconueniencies. How many
have shortened their days, by sudden false apprehensions, that have been
helped forward, by one of these two; or else so discovered their minds, as
they have made way for themselves, to be wrought upon by flattery, by
seducement? In the one, Nature is covetous for her own good; so dilates her
self, and as it were stretches out the arms of her soul, to embrace that,
which she has an opinion may pleasure her: and this is in all sensitive
creatures; though I know the desire of only rational, and intelligible
things, is peculiar to Man: who by virtue of his intellectual soul, is made
desirous of things incorporeall, and immortal. Thus he that would be well
spoken of, believes him, that falsely tells him so. In the other, Nature is
provident for her own safety; so all the spirits shrink in to guard the
heart, as the most noble part: whereby the exterior parts, being left without
moisture, the hair is sometimes suddenly turned gray: the heart thus
contracted, and wrought upon, by it self; more easily then, admits any thing,
that is brought her by the outward senses. Thus if the miserable Man hears a
fire has been in the town where his house is, he cries undone, though his
own were never in danger. In either of these, how might persuasion work, and
betray us? What nature has infused, I cannot cast out; correct I may. If I
must desire, and fear, I will do it so moderately, as my judgment, and
reason may be still clear. If unawares I be overtaken, I will yet be careful
to conceal my self: so though my own passions be ouer-strong; others shall
not see them, to take me at advantages. As many have been spoiled by being
soothed, in their plausible desires: so have many been abused, by being
malleated, in their troublesome fear.

C.
Resolutions may often change; sometimes for the better; and the last ever
stands firmest. But vows well made; should know no variance: For the first
should be sure, without alteration. He that violates their performance,
fails in his duty: and every breach is a wound to the soul. I will resolve
often, before I vow once; never resolve to vow, but what I may keep; never vow,
but what I both can, and will keep.

FINIS.
When thou view'st this, mend faults,
that here are shown;
And when thou view'st thy self,
then mend thine own.
In the 12. line of the third page to the Reader, for noting, read, notifying:
in line 13. for tells me a fault, read, tells me of a fault, page 60. line 5. for
I imagine, read, imagine: page 294. lin. 16. for mind, read wind.


