The Conspiracy of Catiline, written by Constancius, Felicius, Durantinus, and
translated by Thomas Paynell: with the historye of Iugurth, written by the
famous Roman Salust, and translated into English by Alexander Barcklaye.

()



To the most mighty, most excellent, our most gracious sovereign lord
Henry the eight, the very King of England, Ireland, and of France, the true
defender of christ's faith, and in earth supreme head immediately under
Christ of the church of England, his most humble servant and chaplain
Thomas Paynell desires most high honor and perfect felicity.
WHen I consider how we are bound by the law of god, to be faithful and
obedient unto our governor, which is so many ways careful for our welthes,
surely I think that all that we can do, to aid and help him, both with
body, counsel, goods and prayer, is but our duty: than most gracious
sovereign lord, what manne is he? nay what monstrous beast, that would once
think to rebel against, or wylfully dysobey your regal power, laws,
ordinances, and express commandments? yet notwithstanding, we have seen
some in our days, so slyppe from god, that they attempted great things
against your high majesty, which by his just judgment and will, received
condign punyshemente. The which examples without farther authority and
knoweledge, either of holy scripture, or other profane histories (as me
seems) should abaundauntlye suffice, to teach men to be ever obediente unto
their lyege lord: for it is a thing of all other most euidente and clear,
that god will not suffer so unkind caytiues, so desperate wretches, any
thing to prevail against his image in earth, a king. Where shall we read
in all histories, that ravenous rebels could obtain against the sovereign
governors? Surely if ever any possible might, Lucius Catiline the Roman
should have done, for he was in a common weal that had many rulers, of
whom some the chiefeste favored his faccion, he had on his side, that
conspired with him, the nobleste of the Senators: he had an army ready at
his hand abroad, in the city such aidours confederate with him, that in
manner, no wisdom, power or policye could repress: he was therewithal so
wyttie, so wylye, so subtle, so full of craft and deceit, so diligente
and watchefull, so bold and hardy, so expert and polytike in war, that
he seemed invincible: yet by the wisdom, prudence, and diligence of a few
good and virtuous men, that then ruled the common weal, he and all his
confederates weere overthrown and clean subdued, as it shall appear to the
readers of this Catilynes conspiracy, which I have translated out of latin
into English specially for this intent, that all that be unlearned may se, if
God among the gentiles, would not suffer riottous rebels to ouerrunne rulers
and distroye commonweals: how much less then will he suffer them to
prevail ageynste a christen prince, his very image in earth? Therefore let al
me^ learn by this exaumple of Catiline what the end of them is, that rise
against their rulers and evermore hatefully abhor to here speak of this
cursed monster, this deadelye poison in a common weal, Rebellion: but with all
wit, industry, power, cunning, riches, wyshe for, labor for, love,
favor, and maynteyne Obedience: whereof I would write much more, ne were it,
that I speak to your highness, which has given unto us so manyfolde occasyons
to be most feythfullye beloved, and most entierlye obeyed. For whose
magnificente mayestie, we are most derelye bound, daily on our knees to
pray god to preserve, over us to reyne as many years as Nestor lived. Amen.

The table.
THE wit, manners, deeds, and affections of Catiline cap. i. fol. primo. The
first conspiracy of L. Catiline and P. Antronius. cap. ii. fol. ii. Of the
other conspyracy far greater and more greuouse. cap. iii. fol. iii. The
conditions, the deeds and manners of them that were fellows of the conspyracye,
which were in the city, ca. iiii. fol. iiii. The oration of L Catiline to his
fellows of the conspiracye. cap. v, fol. vii The confederacye concluded and
knytte up with man's blond, cap, vi. fol. x Of seven that desired the
consulshyp, among whom Cicero prevailed. cap. vii, fo. eodem Power that had been given to the Decemuiri by the law Agraria, if Cicero had not resysted, ca,
viii, fol. xii Cicero comes by knowledge of the conspyracy, ca, ix, fol.
xiiii. Cicero gave over the busynes of France to C, Antonius, and reconciled
the chiualry of Rome to the favor of the Senators cap, x. fol, eodem
Catylynes endeavor and dylygence, in augmentynge the conspyracy cap, xi. fol.
xv How Cicero opened the conspyracy before the Senators, ca, xii, fo. xvi The
decree of the Senate, that the common weal should take none harm, cap, xiii,
fol, xviii How Manlyus and other Catylynes companyons prepared war abroad,
cap, xiiii, fol, xix. The oration of Manlyus ambassadors to Q, Martius, ca,
xv, fol. xx The furye and fyercenes of Catilyne, cap, xvi, fol. xxii Cicero and
Catylyne in the Senate, cap, xvii. fo, xxiii The oration of M. T. Cicero
against L. Sergyus Catilyne, cap. xviii fol. xxiiii Catilynes answer to
Cicero in the Senate, cap, xix, fol, xxxiii Catilyne in great wrath departs
out of the court, exhorts his companyons to stycke to their enterprise, he
voydeth the city prepares war. cap, xx fol. xl Catilyne sent diverse
letters into the city against Cicero, in which he feyned him self to be
exiled, cap. xxi fol xli Many in the city blamed the softenes of Cicero, that
he sufferrd their enemy to go his way, cap. xxii. fol. xlii Catilyne and
Manlyus are proclaimed enemies, unto whom fled very many hopelostes cap. xxiii
fol xliii. Ambassadoures are sent from the Senate into diverse prouynces of
Italy, to wythstande the rebellyon. cap. xxiiii, fol. xliiii The preparation of
the rebels in the city, and their councelles with ambassadors of
Delphinois, cap, xxv. fol. xlv. Ciceros watcheful dilygence, and his monicions
to the French ambassadors, which uttered secrets of the conspiracy. ca.
xxvi. fo. eode^ The vain bragging of Lentulus, and cruel council of the
conspyratours in the city. cap, xxvii. fol. xlvii The night appointed to
crueltye, the fury and wrath of Cethegus, the deceyte of Lentulus, cap.
xxviii. fol. xlvi. L. Vulturtius with letters of Lentulus to Catylyne, and the
French ambassadors be taken in their journey, cap, xxix. fol. xlix The
conspyratours are by Cicero brought into the Senate, and witnesses against
them, and accusers are examyned. cap. xxx. fol, eodem The thanks and most
ample preyses given of the Senate to Cicero for detection of the conspiracy,
cap, xxxi. fol. li The sentence of the Senate concerning the conspirators, cap,
xxxii fo. eodem. Why in civil war triumph after vyctory is to none granted,
cap, xxxiii fol. lii L. Tarquinius caused M. Crassus to be suspecte of the
conspiracye, cap. xxxiiii. fol. lii The oration defensive made for M. Crassus
by his fryndes, cap. xxxv fol. eodem The decree of the Senate for M. Crassus,
the suspicion against Cicero and his purgation, cap, xxxvi. fol. lv Of
Lentulus and his fellows sedicious servants bond and free, and a wonderful
token showed to Cicero, cap, xxxvii. fol. lvi The sentence of D. Sylianus and
other noble men given against the conspiratours cap, xxxviii. fol, eodem The
oration of C. Caser, wherein he contendeth that the conspyratours should not
be put to death, but kept contynuallye in prison, cap. xxxix, fol. lvii The
oration and sentence of Caeser, pleased very much even the fryndes of Cicero,
cap. xl, fol, lix The oration of the consul against the conspyratours, ca,
xii, fol, lx The oration of M. Cato taken out of Saluste, cap xlii, fol. lxviii
The contention of C. Caeser, and Cato in the Senate, and of the love letters
sent to Caeser, cap, xiiii, fol, lxx L. Vectius accuses C. Caesar as culpable
of the conspiracy, Caeser clereth and reuengeth him self, cap, xliiii. fol,
lxxi The execucion done on Lentulus and his fellows. cap. xlv fo. lxxii After
the conspiratours were dead, the people with great glory brought Cicero
home to his house, cap, xlvi. fol. eodem Ciceros oath in the end of his
consulshyp, cap, xlvii. fol. lxxiii The contencion between Cicero, and Q.
Metellus Nepos, cap, xlviii. fol. eodem M. Catos request to Metellus, cap.
xlix, fol. lxxiiii. The contencion of Cato and Metellus, ca. l. fol. eodem. Q.
Metellus and C. Ceasar are removed from their offices. cap. li. fol, lxxv.
Ceasar with commendacion is restored to his office. cap. lii fol. lxxvi
Catilynes army, his labors and his journey toward France. cap. liii. fol
eodem. Catiline enclosed between two armies, determined to fight. cap. liiii.
fol lxxvii. The oration of Catiline to his souldydurs, in which he exhorts
them to fight manfullye, cap. lv. fol. lxxviii How Catiline ordered his
battles, cap, lvi. fol. lxxix The oracion of M. Petteius to his soldiers
cap, lvii. fol. lxxx How valiant a captain Catiline was, cap, lix. fol.
lxxxiii The war that C. Promptinius made with the Delphinoyes cap, lx fol,
lxxxv The other conspiratours condemned at Rome, cap, lxi fo, eode^,
FINIS TABVLE.
The wit, manners, deeds, and affections of Catiline.
Cap. primo.
LUCIUS Sergius Catiline, a noble man borne, had many virtues, dusked and
defaced with exceadynge great vices. He was ingenious and bold, he had a
good memory, and was well learned. To do any great enterprise, his counsel
was not to seek, and to goo thoroughe therewythall, he wanted neither tongue
nor hand. He was an expert man of war: he could suffer and endure labor,
watch, cold, thryste, and honger, far beyond that any man would believe. But
at these his qualities men most merueiled: he could win and obtain the
love and friendshyp of every man, and with seruiseable lowlines keep and
mainteyne the same: all that he had was at his friends commandment, and he
denied to no man desiringe any thing that he could give. But exceeding great
vices surmounted these virtues: his audacitie was incredible, his
unshamefastness very singular, his inconstancy wonderful, fierce of mind,
dishonest, disceytefull, and lecherous: ne there was never man more unfaithful
or more cruel then he. Ne there was never man in this world, I think, that
had his desires and inclinacions so contrary, so diverse, and so repugnante to
nature. In rapinge and catchinge he was auaricious, in rewardynge prodigal: he
kept company with many lewd and dishonest persons: and yet feyned him self
to esteem none but men most virtuous and honorable. He hyghly hated all good
men: and was most famyliar with men most noble. With men of sadness he lived
soberly, with pleasant fellows merilye, with old men saddely, with youth
youthely, with misdoers boldly, with lecherous lecherously. This man from his
child hade led his life in all unlawful lewdenes: many things after his lust
and pleasure, and many things crucily, he did to the citizens of Rome and
their alies: and many deeds of sacrilege and wickedness he committed both
against the gods and men. For he taking Syllas part, slew with his own
hand Q. Cecilius, M. Voluminous, and L. Tantasius, most noble cityzens of
Rome: because they were of the contrary part. Also after that he had with
beatynges all to haled and torn through the city of Rome M. Marius
Grandianus (the which was of the common people singularly beloved, and which
had been twice Praetor, and to whom for honor the people had erected images in
eueri street of Rome) he struck of the head from his shulders, the people
lookinge upon him: and he with his own hands bare the head not yet fullye
dead, from the little town, not far from Rome, called Ianiculum, unto
Sylla to the temple of Appollo. There be also, which say that Catiline
defiled him self with slaughter of his own brother: and afterward dredyng
therefore to be punyshed, he besoughte Sylla that his brother that he had kylde,
might be entitled among the nombre of them that were condemned. He slew also
Catullus, his systers husband, a right worshypfull knight of Rome. Catiline
was had in suspicion of incest, committed with his own sister. Farthermore
being Praetor in Africa, he so vexed and afflicted the country, that the
ambassadoures of Affrike (he yet gouernynge the Province) made a grievous
complaynte upon him in the Senate house, and sharp sentences were of the
fathers given against him in the senate house: for some Senators would he
should have been delivered to the Ambassadors, And as soon as he was returned
from Affryca, the young man Pub. Clodius accused him or extorcion and brybery.
Cicero in Toga ca^dida, and Lucretius in the orations that he worte against
Catiline, objected against him, that he had married his own daughter, the
which he begat on a gentell woman, whose company he haunted very much: And
it was reported for so certain, that he had committed fornicacyon with Fabia,
Ciceros wyfes sister, and a nonne, that being accused thereof, uneath he
escaped through favor of Catulus. Finally Catiline caught with the love of
Aurely Orestilla, that had (as the fame went) a fair and a beautiful face,
slew his own wife. After that he desired Aurelia to his wife, but she not
fearing his house that run of blood of his first wife, but that she was
adredde of his son in law a young man, therefore she said she durst, not
marye with him. But Catiline to the end he might have Aurelia, heaped
myschyefe upon mischyefe: for when he had poisoned his son in law, he
married Aurelia. Nor Catiline defiled him self no more with the filthy love of
women, then he did of boys. Thus Catiline being spotted with so many wicked
cursed, and shameful deeds burned always with an incredyble desire to oppress
the common welthe. For he coueted honors, the imperial roumes, prouynces,
triumphs, and things out of his reach: the which he had no hope to obtain,
so long as the common weal was in quiet: but being troubled, he believed
verily to have them. Lastely trusting in his great route of unthrifts and
hopelostes, he took counsel to enuade the common weal.

But for because L. Catiline conspired twice against the common weal, ones
when Lepidus and Vulcatius weere consuls, and again when Cicero was consul it
is requisite, before we come to the things that were done in the time of
Ciceros consulshyp, somewhat to recite of the former Conspiracy.

The first Conspiracy of L. Catiline and P. Antronius. Cap. ii
WHEN P. Antronius and P. Sylla were chosen to be consuls: (L. Tullus, M.
Lepidus being consuls) they were accused of ambition, and spoiled of honor
and fame: Antronius (as he was a man, which in prosperity was accustomed to
despise al men, and in adversity to strive ageynste those that were good men)
would neither give place to time, nor yet to Fortune her self, but thought in
his mind by force to recover the consulship, which he had forgone by justice.
Wherefore he disclosed his intent to L. Catiline, and L. Vargunteius, and Gn.
Piso, an vnthriftye, riottous, and hasty young man, and very desirous to
disturb the common weal. The which supposing they could not easily bring
this thing to pass, without the help of some great man, they got to
associate and help them L. Licinius Crassus, a man that flourished in great
favor, richesse, and honor. Him they made their chief captain in this
matter? because he was not frendely but enemy to Gn. Pompei, and sore agreued
that he grew so great in the common weal. These men conspired about the vij.
day of December, and purposed with a great nombre of bondmen and sword
players, gathered together the first day Ianuarye folowinge, to slay L.
Cotta, and L. Torquatus the consuls, and to besiege the Palaice: and after they
had murdered many of the Senatoures, Crassus should invade the
dictatourshyppe: Catiline and Antronius, catchynge up the ornaments of
consulshyp with the sergiantes, should descend into the field: and the common
weal ordered after their divise, Piso with an army should be sent to
conquer both Spaynes. But Crassus, when the day of this murder was come,
repentinge him self, would not be there. Wherefore the other conspiratoures
were so discoraged, by reason of his absence, that they could not perform
their enterprise. Some report otherwise, and they written, that these noble men
were not slain, by reason that Catiline gave token to the rebels, before they
were ready. C. Caesar, and P. Sylla, most noble citezens were named to be in
this conspiracy. And farther theye say, it was so appointed, Caesar should
have been master of the horsemen. But Caesar's virtue, nobleness, and
magnyficente mind defendethe him not to be in this conspiracy: And the most
noble orator, Q. Hortentus defendethe Sylla. Of this conspiracye Cicero
speaks in his eplstoll, which he sent to Pompei, of his deeds, and of
chastity of the common weal writing, that two years befoore, there was an
incredyble foroure, and brought to light in his consulshyppe, But hitherto we
have spoken of the first conspiracye.

Of the other conspirary far greatter and more grievous. Cap. iii.
AL though the first conspyracye came shamefullye to pass, yet Catiline
changed not his purpose, nor would desyste from his wicked and cursed
perswasyon to oppress the common weal: But was more feruente and desirous by
reason that he supposed, some mishap let, that the first conspiracy went not
luckely forward: and again because there were many citizens of Rome, which
to live in lust and liking, were so far endetted, that they could not come,
out without selling of their lands. But they loved so much their
possessions, that rather then they should be spoiled of them, Catiline wiste
very well they would venture to do what soever he desired them. Also the hope
that he had, to obtain the consulshep, kendeled much his courage, and,
namely, because he hoped to have to be his fellow in office C. Antonius his
special friend. Farthermore his decay in substance, and his beastely, cruel,
and importunate nature stered him, which desired neither rest nor yet war:
except it were among them self. There was also a greatter cause which
stablyshed Catiline (a man of his own courage bent to disturb the common
weal) in his hardynes and desire: For after that L. Sylla had by conquest
taken on him to rule the common weal, puttinge out the old inhabitaunce of
Fesules, appointed his men of war (to whom he had given right great prays)
to dwell there. These men of nedy persons being suddenly enryched with other
men's goods, began, to build right sumptous and statelye manor places
and houses, and to make costly feasts and great expenses. And while they thus
lived after the manner and arraye of kings, the great abundaunce of goods,
that they by spillynge of blood and slaughter of citizens had heaped together,
were sone wasted and spente. For ill gotten goods are soon brought to
naught. Ill gotten goods.
And after ward in that nedynes, the ryottous and sumptouse facion, that they
used in abundaunde remaynyng still, it is incredible to speak, how greatly
they fell in det. And for this cause all their hole desire was to have sedicion,
discord, and war among them selfs. And to the great setting forward of
their matter, Gn. Pyso a stout stomaked and valyant young man, of whom we
spoke before, was in the hither Spain with an army. But he was endued and
brought up in condition like Catiline, covetous a foo to rest and quietness,
ennemy to good men, a waster of his own goods, and a catcher of other men's,
a standarde bearer of sedicion and sterer to strife of chapemem. Fartherfore P.
Siccinius Nucerius ruled then the prouynce of Maurytayne, which was a man
beyond al measure desirous of a new alteracion in the common weal: those
were Catilines greattest friends. For lykenes of nature and manners has great
strength in knittyng fast frindshyp. Likeness of manners
With these two Catiline had often before time a counsayl as concerning to move
war, and hoped now at this time, that the conspyracye should be right greatly
forthered by their aid and power, Into this deuellysshe desire he was drawn
with a certain vehemence and fury because he saw al things went as Gn.
Pompei, and a few other would have it. For while L. Tullus, and M. Lepidus
were consuls, it was long debated in the Senate house, who should be chosen
captain ageynste the king Mithridates: Catiline labored all that he could
with frendshippe, favor, and ambition, to be captain of that war: but all
the Senatoures styfely withstode him, and appointed Gn. Pompey, to be in that
high room, namely by the means of Cicero, then being Praetor. Fierce
Catiline touched with this rebuke, being ennemie to good men, and sore
displeased with the Senatoures, determined him self to disturb the common
weal. Calling also to mind, how many citizens he had slain, the manyfolde
cursed and wicked fornications, and aduoutryes, and the infinite vengeable
deeds, that he had committed and done ageynste his country, the gods and
men, and thought every hour either to be put in prison or to be banished For
the misdoers fere always to be punished. Fear follows misdoers.
And this seemed to Catiline to make highly for his purpose, that there was none
army in Italye, and that every place was full of desperate, unthrifty, and
naughty persons. Wherefore Catiline surely trusted by so many and so great
oportunities, easily to oppress the common weal, got unto him very many
friends and alies of al sorts of men.

The conditions. the deeds, and manners of them that were fellows of the
conspyracy, which were in the city. Cap. iiii.
THERE WAS neither at Rome, nor yet in no corner of Italy, any poysoner, sword
plaier, thief, murderer, parents sleer, forger of false testamentes,
horemonger, riottoure, or aduouterer, but that he was somewhat familiarlye
acqueynted with Catiline. And who so ever at Rome had prodigally spent away
his lands, and ryottouisy consumed his goods, such were Catilines most nere
and dereste friends. And look whom he knew folehardye, him most gladlye would
he reteyne into his frendeship. For he said they that must be called to be
assocyate in a ciuyll war, should in no wise be fearful and coward caytyues.
Farthermore he intyced to him many noble young men, to some promising bodilye
lust and pleasure, to some the death of their parents, some he wan with
money, some with favor, some with bodily labor, ye with the help of a
myscheuous deed, if need required: and as he saw in them diverse inclinacions,
so with diverse reasons he allured them to be his friends. Also he enterteyned
certain men of great power and honestye by dissimulacion and cloked virtue.
For (as we said) he was adourned with many noble qualities, the which I
would to god he had turned and applied to a better intent and purpose.

Thus when Catiline had got together a huge multitude of ryottous hopelostes,
and vnthriftye caytyues about the first day of June, L. Julius Caesar, and C.
Marius Fygulus being consuls, first he began to prove every man's courage
aparte secretly, and to declare what great aduauncementes they should have by
reason of the conspiracy, to some that were covetous he said, their time was
come to have inoughe: to some desirous thereof he behighte room and auctorite:
some he put in remembrance of great spoil, pillage, and robberye. And so
after he perceived they were redye and prompt to the matter, all the most
noble, and most valiante and hardye enterprisers, and them, with whom he was
most familiar and nerest alied, he assembled together into the house of M.
Lecca. This house Catiline chose out for him, because it stood far from the
frequence and resort of people: for he demed an out corner or a solytary
place most conueniente for his purpose. So thither resorted to this assembly
of the most noble lineage of the Cornelians, P. Lentulus Sura, a man lykelye
to be consul, and was nephewe to that most noble and worthy Lentulus, which
being armed, pursued Gracchus into the hill Auentine. This Lentulus in
feruente desire of room and auctorite was egall to Catiline: but touching the
great diligence, wit, and polyce used in war, he was nothing comparable to
him. Ne the less he was a man of goodlye person, and right eloquente in
words, and being induced by diuinacion, he believed, that his name was
predestinate to destroy the common weal. For he said, that by the books of
Sybill, and answers of the southesayers, there should be three of that name
Cornelius, that should be sovereign governors: and that he him self was the
third Cornelius, to whom the empire and kingdom of the Romans ought of
necessity to come. For he said, that Sinna and Sylla had been before him.

Miserable and wretched ar those men that put trust in such southsaiers, to
whom the punishment of Lentulus ought to be a good example, on how many rough
rocks and perils they make men to run

In this lentulus naught remained of the noble blood of his ancestoures, ne
nothing of their glorious and famous deeds: but all things contrary to them,
for instead of their honesty, temperaunce, manliness, and prudence, he was
indewed with fylthynesse, lechery sluggishe slouthe and foolehardynesse. But
yet he was twyse Senator, and twice accused in judgment, and escaped.

Also thither came C. Cethegus, this man passed Catiline in lewd enterprises,
and foolehardynesse, but in feats of war, nobility, and strength of body,
he was in manner egall to him. For he being but a souldioure in the wars, did
many great and notable deeds, full often his ennemy in arms he ouerthrewe: he
was a right good horseman, and a perfect man of arms. And there was no
business so weyghty, nor none so hard and difficile, but that it seemed to him
light and easy: So great so large, and so immoderate was his heart and courage.
This man had before time fore wounded the most noble and worthy man Q.
Metelius Pius. And had an other time, as it was said, conspired against the
common weal

Also of this band was P. Cimber Gabinius, a great man of birthe: but he was
dishoneste, cruel, a poller, proud, deceitful, unshamefast, and given to
bodily lust.

Also of this confideraci were L, Crassus Longinus and P. Antronius, both
noble men, both eloquente, boothe had in great honor and estimacion, and
both were consuls at diverse times: those two were like in carnal lust, in
cruelnes, in shamefastenes, and their audacitie double: of the which the tone
by force and violence thruste men out of their possessions, slew and
murdered, and robbed churches and chapels, the the other committed many
abuoutries and fornications. It were to long for me to diseriue every man's
life and manners, namely sithe I haste me to declare the things that are more
necessary to be spoken.

So there assembled together in this house, beside those that are before
rehearsed, L. Vargunteius a Senator, P. Seruius Silla, Q. Curious, Q. Annius, P.
and M. Lecca, L. Calphurmus Bestia, M. Fuluius Nobilior, P. Satilius, P.
Furius, Manlius Chilo, and P. Tongillus: And more over strangers borne and
inhabitants of towns that were under the dominion of the Romans, such as
were chiefest and of most estimacion, they made of counsel with them.

Also there were some, that would not come at this assemble, but they were
priuelye parteners to this myscheuous deed, and secretly did aid and help
Catiline. Among the which some said, that M. Crassus, and C. Caesar, had
knowledge of this conspiracy, and were both helpers and furtherers of the
same. They said, that Crassus was driven thereto by reason that he was sore
grieved in his mind to se G. Pompei his enemy to be of al men (for the noble
deeds and conquestes that he had done, both by land and sea) demed and esteemed
as chief and sovereign of the city: and for that cause Crassus trusted, if
the conspiratours did vanquishe and overcome, that he him self might
easelye be the prince and sovereign of all the world. They said Caesar was
driven thereto, by reason that through his great and large liberality, he owed
above, DCCC.xxx. talentes. Some say that all these things were feyned and
blown abroad by their enemies: and should in no wise be believed, that so
noble men should confederate them selves with Lentulus Catiline, and Cethegus,
desperate caitiues. What certain knowledge I have of either of them, I will
after in place convenient declare. But when these men that I have rehearsed were
there assembled together, Catiline took them a part, and thus he said.

The oracion of L Catiline to his fellows of the conspiracy. Cap. v.
YOVRE incredible faythefulnes, and the great fortitude and manhood that I have
always perceived in you, does encourage my heart, yea and puts me in great
hope, not only to recover liberty, but also to enlarge and augmente our old
dignity. For when I look and well behold each of you, I se no man in this
company, that has not done some noble and worthy act: ne no man, but that
he derely te^dereth my wealth, ne no man but either he has done me pleasure, or
else I him, ne no man but that I am bound to remember for ever more his goodness
toward me. And therefore now I have no fear to disclose and open unto you, what
I purpose and intend: nor I have no dread nor mistruste, but that each of you
will endeavor him to the vttermoste of your power, to accomplysshe and bring to
effect, that that I shall show you. For the old law of just and true
amity, that of a long time has been between us, is, that friends should
always will one thing: nor there is no bond of frendshyppe more certain and
sure, then the consent and society of counsayll and will. And therefore in this
cause most specially your wyls and mine ought to be one, for so much as ye
shall well perceive, that those things, that my heart so sore desires to
bring to pass, are egally good and evil, both for you and me. Oftentimes by
my self thinking on the miseries, that we many years have benne wrapped in,
and (as me seems, shall be still, unless your most prudente wysedomes woll
provide remedy: I am wont to call to remembrance, what a wretched life we
shall lead in time to come, without we set our self at liberty. For I need
not to rehearse to you, your self bear it well inoughe in in remembrance,
how many and diverse hurtes and griefs we have endured sith the most common
well through the cruelty of certain ungracious persons, was permitted and
let slip to be under the rule, order, and power of a few, and such as began
to take more, upon them, then all the rest beside. For I, lettinge pass to
rehearse the mishappe and chance that each of us has had, you may with one
regard behold all us that be here: noble, strong, and valiante men, which
often times for the common weal have not eschewed perils most great and
grievous) and having neither land nor rent, left as wretches, nedy,
sorrowful, and out castes, have as much as we can do, to defend our lives,
fame, city and goods, But they, which violate, vex, and trouble all
together, both the law of god and man, not only walowinge in riches and
welthe, pleasantlye pass away their time where they lust: but also every
thing being done at their commandment and will, seek ways and means to
attrappe and destroy the most noble and valiant men of our city: and they
them self are in doubt of nothing: finallye theye have and exercise a regal
power. I have no word more grievous when I name this royal power: but surely
their power is greatter than a kings. What kingdom was there ever, that had
mo kings at one time, what king was there ever so mighty and so strong,
the which had a power to constitute and make kings? But these men have full
power to rule all provinces, and deprive free nations of their lands, and to
give and dispose other men's royalmes and kyngedomes. To these men all the
whole world, kings, princes, and strange nations have been always tributours.
And so they have all the power, favor, riches, worship, and honor. To the
satisfiynge of the whole couetousenes, surely it seems all the whole world
is to little and over strait. But now, if they would seek only to have the
power, riches and honor, they should be to us grievous, but yet they might be
suffered and borne. But what is he that can endure and suffer, that they
having abundance of cattle, gold, silver, iuorie, rich array, costlye
howsholde stuff, and other things, should daily lie in awaite to catch us
in some snare, that are nedy and want al these things, and that are with their
boastynges and bragges, greuouslye wronged: ye and beside that, to goo about
still to deprive us of this our sorrowful and most wretched life? We are sore
thretened, and are in perpetual peril and dreede of them, our judgments
and putting from all roumes and offices are prepared. Which things how
long will you most valiaunte and noble men, patiently bear and suffer? Were
it not better for a man a thousand times to dye, then to live in that city
where he is an abiecte, contemned, and despised of all other, desperate and
forsaken, trembling and quakynge, mistrustinge his own affairs, not so
hardye to speak, without liberty, without auctorite, and without any shappe of
free man? Yea and to be subject to those, the which if we had a common
weal, would be in fear and dreede of us. Wherefore most hardy and valiant
men, let us at last shake of our stuggishenesse, and let us take such heart
and courage as besemeth noble Romans borne. Our forefathers could not suffer
the proud king Tarquimus: and can we suffer not one king, but many most
cruel tyrants? Surely I will never leave you, I will monishe you, I will
teach and instruct you, I will always declare to you, what I think best to
be done: there shall no time escape me neither night nor day, but that I woll
mind and imagine, what so ever concerning our liberty, ought to be thought
on, that thing, that ought to be entreprised and done, will not I make
courtsye to do, but shall desire and pray you to have the doing thereof,
finally I will do that that becomes a worthy Romayne to do: that is, for our
liberty I will put my life in ieoperdy: But I protest before god and man, that
the victory is in our hands, if we will play the men. We have here at hand
Syllas soldiers, with all their favor, strength, and one assente, redye to
aid us: by whose sodeyne coming, we shall shortelye have a strong and sure
host of men, With like diligence, favor and love to recover liberty, the
most bold and valiante men, Gn. Piso, and P. Siccinius Nucerius, have
conspired with us: of the which the tone is in the hither Spain with a great
army, the the other is capytayne and rules Mauritaine. Those two shall we have as
fellows in counsaylynge, and most trusty and sure helpers in our needs and
business. But other men, good lord what routes, and with what favor, and
hardy courage they agree with us to recover liberte? I let pass here to speak
of the noble citizens, the which having neither land nor rent left, and
being wrapped in great wretchedness and need, can uneath suffer and endure,
that this so noble and mighty a city should be subject to the will and power
of a few persons. For who is the most noble and valiante men, the whose
riches, worship, honor, prouynces, roumes, offices, and high auctorities, are
not dear and pleasante? Whereto should I rehearse to you the good wylles of
poor men, which unfortunate fellows, being oppressed with exceeding great
debt, and trouble with infinite wrongs, can not be safe and sure by none
other mean than by civil war, But what nedethe me to remember to you these
men, the which very need, the which private injuries, the which fear of
iugementes, and the which necessity compellethe unto war? I swear to you my
faith, there is no citizen, without this dominacion of the mighty men, the
which would not with all his heart resist and withstand these cruel tyrants.
There are but over many ready to recover liberti, the market place is full of
those men, all the towns of Italye are full, all Italy is raised up, men of al
states and condition, and finally men of every age agree and consent all on
this one thing. And it does not a little help forward, that the riches of
these men is spited among strong nations their, might hated, the consuls
power, with which (at the next election) I trust you shall se me adourned. Do
you than doubt, I being your consul and captain, the souldioures minds
styrred and kendeled herto and all Italy conspiring with us to recover again
your liberty? For gods sake most strong and valiant men, let not slyppe,
but take sure hold on this occasion offered unto you, and at last call to your
remembrance, that you be Roman princes. We have such a time, as never man
had before us. And if you let this escape, you shall never have such an
other time again. I am long in exhortinge you: There is nothing else that,
I will monishe you: for there is no man so foolyshe, but that he perceives,
that we can be none other way in saftie. Wherefore necessity, peril, the large
rewards that shall arise by this war, should much more stere and provoke
you thereto, then mine ooracion. You shall have me to be your captain or else
your companion, or rather both twain: Neither my mind nor body shall ever
fail you. And although my mind and courage has ever ben prompte and ready: yet
the time has failed us: but always as soon as oportunite appeared, I was my
self the chief and principal that would have recovered again your liberty.
So that I being consul and prince and you the auctoures and capitaines (the
gods being, helpers) surely in short time we shall be free, and out of al
bondage: except we had rather be in thraldom, then like men by feate of arms
and dente of sw^rde, to try the matter.

When he had said, every man most highlye lauded Catiline, they gave him
great thanks, and approved his counsel. And unto many of them, that asked
him what the condition of this war should be and what rewards and winninges
should ensue and follow of this conspiracye. Catiline first promised them, the
death of great rich men, new proscriptions, provinces, offices, and
honors, Than he discriued unto them all the hole manner of this war. And
lastly he exhorted them that they should most favorably stick to him in the
request of the consulshyp. And after they had embraced and taken each other
by the hand, he let them depart,

The confederacy concluded and knytte up with man^^s blood. Cap. vi.
I WILL NOT in this place omytte, that Linius and Saluste have left in writing.
After Catiline had ended his oration, and had with all kind of assurances and
oaths knytte unto him fellows of his fury, to go forth with their wicked and
vengeable enterprise, he powered wine and man's blood together in a cup, and
first he began: and after gave it to his fellows to drink. Some other
writers have added hereunto, that this confideracie was not only concluded
with man's blood, but also it was stablyshed and con^yrmed with the
fasting of the flesh of a certain man, that Catiline had slain. And they
say, he did it for this consideracion, that through such a cruel deed they
should be the more faithful one to an other. Some other consideringe the great
cruelnesse of the deed, think it is but a feyned matter, and incredible. But I
am not only sone persuaded, to think that it was so done, but also I deem him
not to have done that, to the entente that they should be the more faithful
among them self But I believe, he did it, to reach the conspiratoures by
example, the manner and use of wild beasts, of which there are none more
cruel and mortal then they (as men say) which have ones tasted man's flesh.
So likewise, when they had ones take a taste of man's blood, there should be no
enterprise so fierce and fell, nor no deed so cruel, that they ought to fear
and abhor to do. And to believe this thing, that I learned of a certain
great auctour induces me: how Catiline was borne in hand by southesayers,
that a certain Egle or standarde of Silver, that C. Maryus had in the wars
against the Cimbrians, was predestinate to be the destruction and ruin of the
common weal: to the which, as we read, he erected aulters, and ordained and
oratorye at home in his house, and was wont to worship it is a godly thing,
when he went in hand with any enterprise. O cruelty that never was hard of
before those days, that there should be than some found, the which under the
shappe of men, were in heart fierce and cruel wild beasts.

Of.vii. that desired the consulshyppe, among^ whom Cicero prevailed. Cap. vii.
IN THE MEAN while, when they went to elect new consuls, there came
forth.vij. that desired to be consulles, of the which, twoe were descended
of noble lineage, L. Catiline, and P. Galba: Four were meaner persons, of the
which, two were moore noble. C. Antonius, the son of the most wittye and
eloquent Orator M. Antonius, L. Cassus Longinus, that was among them at the
foresaid ungracious assemblye: Q, Cornificius C. Licinius sacerdos: and oone
of them a knights son borne, M. Tullius Cicero, the which in noble birthes
was inferioure to the other, but in wit, counsel, eloquence, and
stoutness of stomach, he far passed them all. When this man through the
great fouour, good will, and love of the people, had been Tresourer, Guardian of
the temples, and Mayre, as his age served him, though he were a new
gentylman, yet having truge in his virtuous demeanoure, began to require the
consulshyp. For before that time the nobility kept that dignity with
strength and wisdom to them self. Nor there was no new gentleman consul of
a long season before. But of these.vij. Cassius, Galba, Cornificius, and
Licinius were slower in requiring the consulshyp then they made for. But
Catiline having great hope to be consul, ran from tribe to tribe, and
called upon and went in hand with all those that used at eleccion of the high
officers to deal money, and give rewards on the behalf of the noble men, and
he despised M. Tully Cicero, and denied that a stranger might strive with him
before an egall judge: he took Antonius as his fellow in office, and not as
one that strove with him to be consul. For they two were agreed together to
shyfte Cicero beside the consulshyp, through the assured help of M. Crassus
and C. Ceaser. Ambicion was extremely in ure in those days. For Catiline and
Antonius did all that they could with exceadinge great gifts and rewards,
too come to the consulshyppe. Wherefore through the persuasion that Cicero
made there upon in the senate house, the Senatoures decreed that a new law
should be made against ambicion, and the penalte thereof augmented. And
because Q. Mutius Oressinus the profectour of the commontie would have let
this decree to go forth, to the sore and greuouse displeasure of the
Senatoures: Cicero rose up and right sharpelye rebuked Q. Mutius: and
vehementlye inuehed against L. Catiline and C. Antonius, with many and
favorable murmuracions of the hole senate thereunto. And in that same oracion,
speaking unto Catiline (the which a few days before, was by preuaricacion
and falsehod quite of pelye theft) he prophesied and said: O thou wretch,
that doste not perceive that thou were not clearly quite and delivered by that
judgment, but reserved to suffer a sharper and more grievous punishment. And
at the very same time of eleccion, a rumoure was spredde abroad among the
commons, that certain citizens were confederate and agreed together, to
oppress the common weal, and to murder and slay the Senators. The ground
and begynner of this rumoure was Q. Curious, fellow and partener of all their
counsaylynges, the which kept paramoure one Fuluia, not only a right noble
but also a notable woman. This man being hollye given to bodily pleasure,
ydlenes, and vanities, to the intent he might through hope of the conspiracy
allure her the better to love and favor him, he told to her all the
counsayles of the conspiratoures. Now as the nature of women is, the which can
neither keep in secret things, nor hyde priuities, and rather will a womanne
quench flame in a burning mouth, than keep counsel. So this Fuluia told
unto many and diverse, all that ever she herd of Curious, without namynge any
of the conspiratoures. This thing help and greatly furthered Cicero to be
consul. For all that desired to save and defend the common weal from that
myschief, incontinent went and stacke to Cicero as to a man that naturally was
inclined to rest and peace, and that had the knoweledge of warfare, and
experience in all other kind of business. Thus than when it came to the
election Cicero was chosen consul with such savor and affection of all the
people, as few of the nobility had been, but never no new gentlemanne before
him. Antonius had a few mo Centurians than Catiline. And all be it that he had
an ill name, for in Sillas victory he behaved him self cruellye, and spoiled
and pilled the country of Achaia, and being accused thereof, refused to come
and make answer, and was greatly indetted to diverse men, and finallye for his
dishonestie was by the senators removed and put out of the Senate: yet partly
because the other desirers of the consulshyp waxed slack, as I said before,
and partelye for the noble remembrance and worthy renown of his father, he
was better favored and had clearly moo hands then Catiline Also the plays
and enterludes furthered greatly Antonius toward the opteynyng of the
consulship, the which he, first of all the Romans, made most magnificently
and richely on silver stages: whom. L Murena ensued, the which the next
year folowinge caused the plays to be made before the people with most gay and
gorgiouse apparayle, and also with silver stages. Those plays maruaylously
delyted the people. And although Cicero, that most excellent learned man was
far distant from the opinion of the common people (which also made three plays
in the time of his edileship) yet he said, that he alsoo had a silver stage,
that required to have the consulshyp. But the furye of Catyline although his
peticion took no place dimynished not, but daily made great preparation he
assayed and solicited many things, he appointed armoure in diverse parts of
Italye that were oportune for his purpose. He sent C. Manlius a braynsycke
bold man of his band into Hetruria, to stir up Sillas soludiours and to
prepare (...) army, and he commanded him to be ready in arms (...) day of
Nouembre. And said, that for as much as fortune did often greatly help in
chosinge of the consuls, he would yet ones again the next year desire and
make labor to be consul: and in the mean time to lay awayt to attrappe,
Cicero, and to prepare to murder and sle the noble men of Rome. And within a
few months after L. Lucullus, that most noble man, and that to speak in his
cause was most prompt and redye, accused him among the murderers, but
through the help of many noble men, and by the sentence and judgment of a
great nombre, he was quite This is he the noble and mighty man Lucullus, that
warred against the most puissante king Mithridates: from the which war he
returninge home as conqueroure, through detraction of his ennemies was let
from his triumph by the space of three years, but by the worthy aid and
diligence of Cicero in his consulshyp, he sitting in a chare most noble and
rich, was tryumphantly conveyed into the Capytoll. And he was afterward
most special aid and help to Cicero, to quench this ferefull firebrande
of conspiracye. But after that Cicero had the first day of Ienuary taken on
him the rule and goueraaunce of the common weal, (the which through suspicion
of the law Agraria, was full of trouble and fear) he delivered the Senatoures
and all other good honest men from dread.

Power that had been given of the Decemuiri by the law Agraria. if Cicero had
not resisted. Cap. viii.
THERE were certain of the Protectours of the commontie, which endeavored
them to have the law Agraria; of ^reatinge the Decemuiri with imperial
authority, The ^ower of Decemuiri.
to be publyshed: to whom by that law it was permitted, to goo through the
hole world with most high and sovereign authority, to deprive fre nations
of their lands, to take kyngedomes from whom they would, and to make and
call kings whom they pleased, to know and to hear the causes of al manner of
people, to tax men without counsel, to punyshe men without any appellacion,
and it was permitted to them for the space of five years, to judge the consuls
and protectoures of the comontie, and no man might judge them. They might
remain at Rome when they would, and might be absent when it was to them
commodious. Also it was laufull for them to divide and sell all the fields that
weere common in the country of Campana, Stellata, Bithinia, and the common
fields that were in Paphlagonia in Ponto, Capadocia, in Macedonia, in
Alexandria, in Africa, and in Hispania. Further they might send men to
inhabit certain places, or renew the old inhabitours: and infinite power
was given to them to make money innumerable. And truly they had the name of
Decemuiri, but in very deed they should have constituted ten Lords over all
the hole world. The Senatoures were of these laws sore in dread, and the
people had thereby great hope of large liberality and rewards, and of new
businesses for their profit. These perturbacions and troubles of the city,
weere very meet and oportune for Catiline, and should most specially have
helped forward the conspiracy, that began to grow apace, if the most prudente
policy of the consul had not provided remedy for the matter. For Cicero
calling the protectours of the commontie to parliamente before the Senators,
with such grievous and sharp words rebuked them, that Rullus a man full of
audacitie and words, was sore afraid, and durst not ones speak. After all,
this Cicero perceyuinge that they craked and bosted them self vehemently
among the people, and that the people most highly lauded and praised them, he
made an oration of such gravity that although the people had greatly allowed
the soresayde law, yet in so turned men's minds, and playnelye declared the
said law to be contrary to the profit of the commontie, that nothing was
so plausyble to the people as persuasion against the law Agraria, Then the
people forth with reproved the law, and forsook, contemned, and despised them
that went about to have the law estahlyshed. Thus the law Agraria that had
be^ always so acceptable to the commons, and that had caused so many and so
great troubles and busynesses was all hole through the counsel and
eloquence of Cicero, repudiate and cast away, So pleasant and sweet, of so
great strength, and so copius ware Ciceros words, that with telling his
tale he could bring to pass what so ever he would.

Elas what a time be we in? For now a days only the schole masters in a
manner do give and learn us the precepts of Eloquence: and every man for desire
of luker and money, gothe in hand to study the law. Whereof it folowethe,
that all we be but as baabes, and can not declare and express, that we have
conceived in our minds. But now let us return again to our purpose.

Cicero comes by knowledge of the conspiracy. Cap. ix.
THE law Agraria being rejected, the consul intended fullye to take pain to
redress and amend many things that were amiss in the common weal: And
when he hard that many troublous cou^sayles against the state and quiet of
the common weal were taken partly before and partly si^he he was chosed
consul, he took pain both day an^ night, to the end to know what fellows
they were, that enterprysed and went about such matters. Thus most diligently
searching and inquiringe out the ground of this rumor, he found, that it
came out first by Fuliua and privily he sent for her to come and speak with
him, to thentente she should inform him what she knew of the conspiracye: he
promised her great rewards and also other while he thretned her: that without
she did open and confess to him the truth by fair means, he would
constrayne her thereto by torturs and peynes. After that Fuluya had told him,
that she herd it of Curious, incontinent he sent for Curious. And with much
fair intreatinge, monisshinge, with many fair promyses, and often
threteninge, be brought to pass that D. Curious opened unto him all the
fashion and order of the conspiracy. Then Cicero exhorted Curious to disse^ble
the matter as much as he might, and so sent him away in great hope and trust
to be well rewarded But the consul perceiving that Catiline was chief and
principal of the conspiracye, and dredynge lest Antonius his companyon in
office, a troublous man, and most familiar friend to Ca^iline, should to him
consent and with him conspyre (for he understood now, that Catiline had
attempted him thereto, and that it was no thing displesant to him to hear
speak of the conspiracy) he left not to accuse him, to stere him to eschew
infamy, and provoked and exhorted him to follow that course, wherein is got
honor and laud, and to agree and conform him self to them that were in deed
good and honorable, and to hold on that way, that he saw his noble
auncestoures had gone. At length with wisdom and lowely diligence he removed
him from the counsayles of the conspyracy, and brought him to follow his mind.

Cicero gave over his business of France to C. Antonius, and reconciled the
chiualrye of Rome to the favor of the Senators. Cap. x.
THAN BY auctorytie of the Senatoures, the province of France was decreed too
Cicero, the cause and matter of triumphs, with an army and money appointed
and furnyshed at the full. But he deemed it far better for the common weal,
if he could deliver it from the snares and deceytes at home, than if he
should subdue that province to the public weal, for the virtue is no greatter
to enlarge the marches of the empire, than to defend them that were al ready
won. Nor the praises of war are no greatter then the civil policies, for
these consiste in counsel and wisdom, the other stand in the hands of
fortune. Wherefore the consul, assembled a great multitude together, said

Because the time and need of the comman weal so required it, he would not
take on him the busynes of France. And lest that his companyon should hyndre
him in defending the common weal, by his wisdom brought about, that the
busynes of France was appyonted to Antonius. For if Cicero had not at that
time by some honorable means removed Antonius from counsaylynge with Catiline,
and from the city, I shall say as I think, of troth the conspiracy had not
ben quenched without great effusion of blood. And because he saw, that Catiline
lay daily in awayte to attrappe him: he went always well and strongely
accompanied with his friends and used also and had about him the safegarde of
his life a pyked sort of lustye young men of Aretta. Furthermore he made
agreement between the knights of Rome, and the Senatoures, with concord being
at al times much necessary, was in that troublous season of the common weal,
most nedeful and expedient. For before that time, the seperatinge of the
chivalry or gentylmen, from the senators, caused many years most greuouse
contencion and strife between them. For where as is division and part taking in
a common weal, there must needs follow not only sedicion, but also most
pestilent wars among them selves. Nor I marvel not at all that Catiline
went about to trouble the common weal, saying he was of nature inclyned, and
with so many occasions styrred and inflamed thereto. This also made for him,
that eue^ the same time, their children that were banished came forth and
required the honorable roumes and offices: which if they had opteyned, it was
thought of truth they would have conspired with Catiline. And therefore the
Consul, upon his own hatred, without promise of reward, kept them from
election.

When all this was done, the consul thought it yet no time to disclose and
open the conspiracy before the Senatoures. Therefore he not with the public
aid and strength, but with his private diligence, defend^d and kept him
self from Catilines wyses and snares: and daily wythstode and fordyd his
driftes, abated his boldenes and courage, and resisted his mischeuous purp^^e,
without publyke ruffelinge or steryng of the people. But the more provision
that the consul made, the more conspiracy grew and increased.

Catilines endeavor and dilygence, in augmentyng the conspyracie. Cap. xi.
TRVELY there was no street, no corner in all the city, but Catiline
instanted, provoked, tempted and stered. And to opteyne his desire, he suffered
cold, thryste, hunger and travail. But specially he entyced the youth.
Some of them he him self loved: and to somes love he was right seruiseable,
for some he prepared and got harlottes, and for some horses: he taught some
the feats of arms, some he wanne with money, but many mo with his fair
flattering words. And if he perceived any of them to be a man of stout and
valiant courage: him first would he win by virtue: but afterward by
diligence and costume, he would by littell and little draw him headlonge into
all unlawful lust. For the manners and conditions of men proceed neither of
nature her self (as many falsely do suppose) nor yet of lynage, but are
oftetymes planted in us by those, with whom we live and be conversant.
Catiline (as said is) was maruaylous subtyle and crafty, to styre young men to
lust and pleasure: wherewith not only that age, which is slipperye and
uncertain, but also grave men of auncientie, are attached, with this his
varyable nature, he daily augmented the nombre of the conspiratours.

And I am well assured, that Catiline at that time did not only allure men to
that myscheuouse deed, but also he made of counsel with him, certain noble
women which had lived wantonly, prodigallye, voluptously, and horishelye. For
by the^ he hoped, he moughte either get their husbands to take his part, or
else to murder those that would not agree thereto, Besides all this, he did
many things privily: he had h^s assembes by night and ever laid snares to
attrap the co^sul.

Nor Catiline let not for all these so great busynsses to set his mind and
courage to require the consullshyp: but being glad and merry, accompanied with
a lusty hand of young men, made often time lowlye suite to the people, and
submyttynge him self to the tribunes made many great promyses, he humblye
beseched he wyllyngty off^rynge him self prayed his fathers friends he sued
and sought to, he repaired often to the houses of some noble men, by these
crafts making his way to come to the consulshyp.

How Cicero opened the conspiracy before the Senators Cap. xii.
THAN the consul consideringe these two myschiefes, that he could no
longer by his private diligence defend the common weal, and how peryllous it
were for the common weal of Catiline should be consul: determined to inform
the Senatoures of the matter, to prorogue the election of officers, and to make
Catiline hated for his conspiracy whereby he should be hyndered in his request
of consulshyp. For rumors, yea though they be false, and a feyned tale
troubles all to gether and changes holy the opinion of the electoures. Thus
when they were assembled in parliament, he instructed them, how Catiline and
other, assocyate with him in that mischief and mad deed, were secretly
agreed to oppress the common weal, to slay the Senators and murder the
citizens. Than was it decreed, that on the morrow should be none election to
the end they might in parliament treat of these matters.

On the morrow, the consul opened in the parlyamente house many things of
the conspiracye: and demanded Catiline, if he would ought say, touching
those matters, that were laid to his charge. But Catiline, although he were
full of all fraud and lyinge, and which with great diligence and craft
augmented those vices, unto which he was naturally inclined: yet being
pricked with his conscience, did not so much clear and purge, as he opened
and showed him self fauty. Catiline opens himself to the Senate.
For he said than, The common weal had two bodies, one weak with a sick
feeble head: the other strong without a head. To this body, sith it had of him
well deserved it, he would be head as long as he lived. The weak body with
a sick feeble head, he called the consent and agreement of good men together,
the which he would they should understand, might easily be broken and overcome
of the other sort (leude and naught) sith he was their captain.

But the Senate at that time used great myldnes, or rather patience, that would
not, concerning those matters decre any thing against Catiline: namelye
sithe he a few days before when Cato (the perpetual ennemie of dishonest and
naughty persons) thretned him to be punyshed, answered and said: If there
weere any fire prepared to burn his goods, he would not quench it with water,
but with ruin. But therefore they were not hard to him, partly because they
dradde nothing, partly because they dradde, and partelye because some favored
him. Yet I hard say that this rumor spread abroad in the city, did greatelye
hinder Catiline in request of the consulshyppe, although many supposed it to
be false.

In the mean while, the time instantynge to choose the consuls, Catiline
having prepared a great company (as it seemed) determined if he weere not
elected consul, to make a slaughter in the field, and to slay his
Competitors, Competitor is he that desires like office.
Seruius Sulpice Postumus, L. Murena, D. Syllanus, but namelye M. Tully the
consul. But the consul, when the day of election was come, descended into
the field, environed about with a great route of his friends, and with a
large and bryghte habergion, not which might defend him. (For Catiline used
not to stryke at the sides or bealye, but at the head and neck) but that al
good men should take heed, and when they saw the consul in dread and peril
(which chanced afterward) to run to succoure and help him. Thus the
consul being defended with strength and power of his frindes, wythstode the
vengeable purpose of Catiline. But D. Syllanus, and L. Murena weere chosen
consuls, the which Murena was after accused of ambicio^, by Service Sulpice.
and M. Cato: Whom Cicero the consul defended, whose most goodlye oracion,
inti^uled Pro L. Murena, remains to this day.

After Catiline perceived he could not be consul to trouble and vex the
common weal, Catiline prepares al things for war.
being a private person, determined to make war. And so all the money that
he could heap together, he caused to be carried to Manlius being at Fesulas:
and to him he sent before axes, rods, horns, trumpettes, armoure, bannars,
and stremars for war, and also that same silver Egle, to the worship whereof
he at home in his house had made an oratorie. Moreover he sent L. Septimius
into the country Picenium, and C. Julius into Apulia, an other into the
countreye Camertes, an other into the dominion of France, to stir up those
countries: For into these parts as it were an infection, this myschiefe was
entered. And he at home in Rome attemted many things. At the last the.xxvi.
day of October he determined with a strong power violently to enter into the
court, The court was the place where the Senators late
and after he had slain the consul, and a great part of the Senators, to go
to Manlius where his army lay. But M. Cicero watching night and day and knowing
these matters, about the.xix. day of October, called a great counsel. He
began with a proeme far fetched, to declare the vengeable driftes and
mischeuous imaginacions of Catiline, he showed them what strength and power
he had prepared to slay the Senators, and how he had sent C. Manlius into
Hetruria to reyse an army, and that he would be in harneys err the.xxiiij.
day of October, and how he sent C. Julius into Apulia, to stir up the
shepeherdes. He said, he feared not Manlius nor Julius, but he was in dread
of those whom he dayelye saw brag up and down in places of most assemblye,
yea whom he saw come into the Senate house among them: by whom the
slaughter, burninges, and destruction of the common weal, was prepared

More over he diligently admonished the Senatoures to be ware of such perils
that were iminent, to provide for the safegarde of their country, to defend
and maintain the common weal, For if they made not good provision, it was not
the publycacyon of the law Agraria, nor a common sedition, or such a hurt as
being some time hard spokenne of, is lamented but those fellows have
secretelye concluded, te burn this city, to mourder and slay che citizens,
and to ex^incte the Romans names, He said, there was no nation, no king,
that was able to make war to the Romans: there was not outward danger to
be dredde: within the city were the snares laid, within was the pestilence
shut within was the Troyan horse, of which so long as he was consul, they
should never be oppressed slepynge: he said their enemies were not at the
gates (which were a thing most grievous) but in the city, in the markette
place in the palace. After this he showed how this great mischief might be
remedyed. Finallye he admonished the conspiratoures to leave their
furyousnesse, to lay no mo snares for his destruction, and no more to mind
murders, burninges, robberyes: and to persuade them self that the consuls were
right vigilante about the common weal, and that there were many noble
officers, many valyent and worthy men, and such as most heartily loved the
common weal, which would more sharply do their endeavor for the profyt
public, then they would for the d^struction thereof: and that they should trust
no more upon the slaughterr of rich men, so long as he was consul, For
saying that al consuls should be careful and diligent to defend the common
weal yet ought they most specially which by the only favor of the people of
Rome and not for any noble acts images or commendacion of their auncetours
were made consuls. He said, they did nothing, that went about nothing, nor
imagined any thing, that could be hyd from him, I know (quod he) whom ye
have sent into Hetrurya to reyse war, whom into Apulia, who in to the
countreye of Pice, and who is sent into France. He said, they were far
wide, if they supposed, that he would use them always gentelly. He said he had
not told all, and how he had suffered much. And that now it was needful to
do sharp punishemente: And that he might so do, he had examples of his
predecessoures: which oftentimes upon their own minds did put such
mischeuous and ungracious persons to death. He said more over, he marueyled
greatelye, if they could not live honestly, why they would rather die
shamefully. Finally he said, that not only men, but also all the gods
would resist and withstand such and so great cruelty.

The decree of the Senate, that the common weal should take none harm. Cap.
xiii.
AL be it that there were many, that gave no credence to the consulles words
for the greatness of the crime, and many through foolyshenesse could not
think it to be so, and many of the leude and naughtye sort favored the
matter: yet the Senate persuaded by certain noble and valiant men, made a
decree, that the consuls should take heed, that the common weal took none
harm. This decree was not wont to be made, but against detestable laws,
when the people was moved to depart and leave the city, when the city was in
great trouble and busynes or in fear of sedicion. And by that one verse or
decree the greattest power of all Rome was given to the consuls as to reyse an
army: to make war, and to be the most high judges in all causes, as well
at home as forth in warfare.

When the.xxvj. day of Octobre came, by reason that the consul had laid a
garrison of men a boute the Palaice Catiline could not accomplish his purpose.
He quickelye bethoughte him to do an other feate. The town preneste standing
not far from Rome is by natural situacion of the place very strong: the
same, for many oportunities of the war, Catiline purposed the first day of
Nouembre, to take with assaut in the night. But the consul, forseinge that in
his mind, furnysshed that fortress strongely with men of arms Wherefore
Catiline enterprysed that feate in vain. But before that there chanced a
thing (I think, even by the goodness of god) the which some what troubled
Catlines mind. For G. Piso (of whom we spoke before) in whom Catilyne had
greatest confidence and hope of victory: was slain of certain Spanyarde
horse men or, as some other say he was killed by Pompeys horse men. And hard it
was to judge whether his death was more joyful and pleasant to good men, or
heavy and sorrowful to the conspiratours.

How Manlius and other Catilins companyons prepare^ war abroad. Cap. xiiii.
IN THE mean while, Manlius with fair promises raised the commons in
Hetruria, that were brought low with the calamity of Syllas time, and very
desirous of a comotion. Farther he allured into this hope of robbery and spoil
theus, shepeherdes, and al sorts of men that he thuoghte mete for the war,
Of the multitude that gathered to him from Aretia and Fesules, he made a great
army, which remembringe Syllas victory, and being accustomed to rob and
spoil desired greatelye civil war. They also, that Catiline had sent into
diverse places, imagined in my things For cloustringe to gether in companyes by
night, they prepared weapons, they styred up servants and slaves, they
provoked unthrifts to violente deeds, to slaughter and robery: places mete
for their purpose they besieged with armed men, and did put men in greter
fear than ieoperdy.

When those news were hard at Rome, all the city was troubled, full of
heaviness, full of fear. There was none evil, none adversity but good men
feared it, and the leude and evil sort looked for it. The thretnynge words of
Catiline were borne and spoken of al about his looks, his runninge up and
down, his riottous route about him, his cloustringe together of most lewd and
naughty persons, caused great dread and sedition in the city. The civil
dessentions, that had been in times paste, were fresh in every man's syghte, the
miserable behedinges, the spoil and robbing of honest men the market place
heaped full of dead bodies, and over flowen with blood, the memory of those
things made the city sorrowful, and to live in great fear. The prodigies,
and wonderful tokens that fell, augmented the fear of the people. For it was
reported, that M. Herennius, a free man of Rome made by Pompey, was in a fair
clear day slain with thonder. In the night times flames of fire and
marvelous burninge of the air: there was hard noise and clatteringe of
harnyes thunder clappes, and horyble erthequakes, with manyeny other terryble
and wonderful things. For the moon failed in clerenesse, and the son shone
much brighter and hotter than he was wont to do. Thus writerh Cycero in the
second of his consulshyppe. More over he writes in the same book that the
apperinge of blasinge sterres, and diverse terrible shapes seen bye night, and
the hedy motion of the plants, and the vehemente runnynge together of the
stars did pronostycate and sygnyfie this conspyracye. But yet the southsayers
answer troubled most men's minds. For L. Cotta, and L. Torquatus being
consuls, many toures of the Capytoll were smytenne down with thunder, the
images of the gods immortal, and of the aunciente noble Romans were
overthrown with lightninge, and also the image of Romulus with his nurse Lupa
were stricken from heaven, and the brazen tables of the law mostenne: the
Southesayers answered, that all those things betokened burning, slaughters,
robbinges spoylynges of temples, most bloudye war among them selfs, and
most bitter bondage and thraldom of the Romans. And so they commanded a
right great image of Jupiter, to be made, and the same to be set on the top
of a toure of the capitol, Eastewarde, to look toward the market place and the
palace: which image being set up they trusted, the Jupiter, lustringe and
beholdinge all things, would discover the counsels and intentes of those
ungracious hopelostes. Therefore every man fearinge, and hastinge (as in peril
it is often wont to be) they prayed to their gods, and worshipped them, the
matrones in devout wise ran to the aulters, they made vows, they lamented,
and bewailed their lyttel young children, what soever noise or rushe they hard,
they fered it was Catiline and Manlius

Then it was Decreed, that who so ever would detect the conspiracye, that was
made against the common weal, if he were a bandman, he should have his
freedom, and an hundred sexters: if he were a free manne, beside perdone of
punishment for the matters, he should have two hundred thousand sexters. Also
it was decreed by the senate, that al places should be fortified with men of
arms, and that the inferior officers to se that good watch and ward were
kept through out all the city, Furthermoore theye decreed, that Q. Martius
should be sent to Fesulas, Q. Metellus Creticus into Apulia, the Pretours, Q.
Pompeius to Capua, Q. Metellus Celer, into the country Picenum and France And
to these men it was permitted to reyse an army, and to do all other things
for the profit and need of the common weal.

The oration of Manlius ambassadors of Q. Martius. Ca. xv
WHen Q. Martius was come in to Hetruria Manlius sent ambassadors to him,
whose words were in manner after this sort.

We take both god and man to witness, that we did not arm us to make war on
our country, or to do any man wrong or iniurye: but to keep and defend our
bodies from the cruelty: of the pretors and usurers. Whose nature is so
fierce and fell, that not with standing they have taken and spoiled us of our
goodly manours, lands, and possessions, and fynallye of all our goods, and
raymente to our backs, and have left us nothing, but calamity and
nedynesse: yet not being satisfied with these our myseryes. they would have us
in continual darkness, in perpetual bands. and closed in strong prysons,
to end our lives. Their avarice which they can not satysfie with huge sommes
of money, they covet to content with miseries and blood of us citezens. And
saying we have delivered up all that ever we had, save our lives, ne have
reserved to our selves nothing that was left us for a monumente or
remembrance of our ancestors, we humbly pray, that being spoiled of honor,
fame, and goods, it may be lefull for us to use the benefyte of the law,
which permytteth, that after a man has lost his patrimony, his body should
be fre out of durance, and that this benefit should not be taken from us, we
lowely beseech ye Senate and people of Room, Our predecessoures (quod they)
oftentimes contented and paid men's dettes of the common treasure. Money of
the common treasure has been many a time dealed and distrybuted among the
people. The commons very often have armed them selfs and taken part
together against the nobles for honors, riches, and power. We will no riches
nor power have, we desire not so much as that, that is taken from us. Let
other take the honors, the riches, the provinces, the lordshyppes, the
tryumphes. The usurers, worthy Captain, do possess our manoures, our houses
are open to them, and shut against us: our great housholdes and famylie are
at their commandment, we have not one servant: we be bare and have nothing
to help our self with: and are content to suffer and take patience. What
will they more? why do they pursue us? why do they so sharpelye assail us? O
good lord, what beastlye crueltye is this? They will not suffer us most
wretched caytiues to peryshe in our lamentable myseries, they will bereue us of
our lives, the which we lead forth in greateste turment and sorrow: and
seeing they be of all other most cruel, me think it should be greatter
pleasure for them to suffer us to live thus wretchedly, than to slay us. We
beseech the noble captain that it may be lefull for us to live in
nedynesse, that it may be lefull for us, seeing our goods be gone, after the
manner of our forefathers, to have our bodies at liberty, that the usurers
being content with our goods, shall not desire our lives and blood to be
spylte: that seeing they have berefte us of all that ever we had, that they
also take not from us this light, common to us all. Which thing worthy
captain, if we can not opteyne, we have determined, rather to dye with
many, then to peryshe alone.

Q. Marcius answered the ambassadors and said that they had done both
folyshelye and proudelye, that they of their own minds, against the laws,
and manners of their forefathers, had armed them selfs. It behooved them, if
they would have had any thing, to have asked it of the Senate, and not to have
run to harneys: The Senate and the people of Rome have always ben found
merciful, and that now also, if they would require any thing, they should
first lay away their harneys: lest it should seem, that they either by
vyolence, or else for dread would opteyne their purpose. And so than in lowly
and humble wise, to go unto the Senate, and ask forgyuenesse for their
offenses: and that he doubted not, but they should obtain what so ever they
desired of the senate. For the Senate has always used such justice and
gentilnes, that they never denied any man their help, that justly desired it.
And that their parlyament house had always ben for all nations, and namely for
such as were in misery and wanted succor, a castle and refuge: The
ambassadors: with that answer, returned again to Manlius.

The fury and fiersenesse of Catiline. Cap. xvi.
AND all be it fierce Catiline saw the city strongelye kept and defended
with good watch and ward, and the consul very circumspecte and diligente
to make provision to withstand him: yet he prepared and attempted his purpose,
his cruel mind was still occupied thervppon, But he did nothing, he pursued
nothing, he went about or pretended nothing, but M. Cicero knew it, and did
let it: yet for all that he would not cesse to follow his wicked will and
purpose. Such a great fury, the companion of mischief and audacitie, had
embraced his unbridled mind and importune nature, that no dreede, no reason,
no peril, none adversity, nor all things that went ageinste him, could make
him revoke his vehemente desire. Therefore when he, this hopeloste, saw that
none of his attemptates went forward, he thought now to prove what he could do
apertlye and by open war: for those things, that he had attempted privily,
came foul and crokedlye to pass. He determined to take his journey to Manlyus
and to augmente the army, before the Pretours had gathered their strength
togther: and with baners displayed to haste them to the city.

And so in the dead time of the night he assembled together in the house of
M. Lecca, all the chief of the conspiracy, to council with them, how this
war should be maynteyned, This night of all times was most sharp and
bitter. Than all the parts and provinces of Italy were distributed, than the
day that Catiline should take his iourneie to the army, was appointed, than
they ordered, in what state all other should stand that remained behynd, than
they constituted a description through all the city of slaughter and burninge.
But those things were after this manner and form divided among them: that
Catiline should take his journey to the army. That Antonius should take and
posses Tuscayne Marcus Ceparius Apulia, C. Marcellus Capua, and other should
have other places of Italy Lentulus should remain in the city Cassius and
Statilius should set fire on.xij, parts of the city, Cetegus, and with him
Gabinius should have the procurement of the murder and slaughter that should
be done, The night that they intended to accomplisshe these things they
ordained also that when Catiline with his army should approach the city. L.
Beastia should make an oracion to stere the people to the envy and hatred of
Cicero, because he had worthfully provoked Catiline to reyse war, and by
that token, the same night folowinge, every man should go about his business.
These things thus ordained and done, Catiline said, one thing let him
much, that Cicero lived: and that his mind and will was, before he took his
iourneye to the army, to oppress him: for with his wit and counsel he
would be a great let and hynderaunce to them. Than C. Cornelius, and L.
Vargunteius, knights of Rome desired that they might have the doing thereof,
and promised that they would go erelye in the morning to salute him, and so for
good love and amity being let in, they would sle him in his bed But the
consul, having knowledge of this thing by Q. Curious, fortified and fenced
his house with great strength of men: and kept his gates shut against
them that came to slay him in the morninge. Some write that it was not L.
Vargunteyus, but C. Cethegus with C. Cornelius, that undertook to slay the
consul. But it appears in Saluste and Cicero, that they err in this, as they
do in many other things

When the conspiratoures had orneyned, instituted, and prepared those things,
the consulles minds was troubled with want great and grievous thoughts whithe
would not suffer him to take rest neither night nor day. First he was very
careful how he might defend the common weal, which was at that time a great
thing and right diffieile saying he had to do with a man so valiante, so
vehement, so cruel, so wylye and so watchful about myschiefe. Secondly he was
careful for the treason and snares, that were daily so dyuysed and laid for
him, that it seemed they could by no means be eschewed for the secret and hid
hatreds Hid hatered.
are more peryllous, than the manifest and open. For he that is an open
enemy, in taking good head may easily be eschewed, but the cloked enemies
often times oppressen before it can be perceived what it is. Wherefore saying
that all the conspiratours desired much to destroy the consul, and who they
were, was very hard to know, he must needs mistruste some of his friends.
This also was an other cause which much moved the mind of the right worthy
consul, that he could with no diligence, with no defense, with no means
turn Catilines courage. Wherefore the consul being vered and troubled weth
these so many and so great difficulteis, and that at one self time determined
to dysclose the matter to the sanete, for so much as those matters which he
would declare and seemed unto some incredithe great heynousenes of the
mischief, in the often and many things opening to the Senate, his words
should be the better believed.

Cicero and Catiline in the Senate. Cap. xvii.
SO THE next day after that he was almooste slain at home in his house, he
assembled the Senatoures in the temple of Jupiter Stator: and dysclosed to
them all the matter: whether when Catiline was come, whether it were to avoid
suspicion, or eiles to clear him self, no man saluted him, And more over many
of the Senators, on that side that he came, forsook their seats, and left
them void and bare. Than M. Tullius thought it best with an oration (wherein
he waas excelent) to fear and abashe him, and to command him to depart out
of the cite: thinking this in his mind, that if all the conspiratours with
Catiline would departout of the city, they might be easily subdued abroad: or
if they tarried behind, without Catiline, they should be but weak and feeble.
For Catiline alone in the city was dredefull. He serched out all things, he
most diligently provided all things: he knew how to preuente, to begyle, to
deceive, to dissemble, to attempt, to sollicyetate, to persuade, to move, to
watch, to labor, to trouble, for the while, and to wreste and bow hither and
thither. He appointed every one of the conspiratoures certain busynes to do:
but yet when he had commanded any thing to be done, he thought it was not
accomplysshed, except he him self ouersawe all thyngsges, he ran about he
made prouysyon. So that if the consul had not driven him out of the city,
surely the common weal had suffered great calamyty. Some may w^ll say: Wherefore
than did not the consul apprehend and take him? why did he not put him to
death? I answer. Because he thought it not profitable. For except it were a
few good men, all would say, that Cicero had not done nobly but cruellye: and
also he well percyued, that by his death the conspiracy should be a little
while repressed, but not extincted for ever: for being oppressed with envy, he
could not pursue the other conspiratours. Therefore for these causes, coveting
to drive Catiliine out of the city he rose up, and with this most godly
oration he inuehed against L. Sergius Catiline

The oration of M.T. Cicero ageynste L. Sergius Catiline.
HOw long will thou o Catiline, abuse our patience? How long shall this thy
fury delude us? To what end shall the brag of thine unbridled boldness come?
Do not the nightelye defenses of the Palaice, the watchynge of the city, the
fear of the people, the concourse and agreement of good men, this most strong
place of the Senate, the regard and countenance of these men nothing move
the? Do thou not perceive that thy counsel is bewrayed? Do thou not se,
that thy conspiracye is openly known to all the Senators? Do thou think,
that any of us is ignorante what thou dydst the last night, and the night
before, where thou waste, whom thou dydst assemble together or what counsel
thou tokeste? Oh what a world is this? Oh what manners be these? The Senate
does understand this thing, the consul does se it, and yet he lives.
Lives he? Ye verylye, he comes also into the parlyamente house, and is part
taker of the common counsel. He does make, and with his eyes does appoynte
every on of us that shall be slain. And we seem to play the men for the
common weal, if we eschew the fury and violence of this man. Thou ought
Catiline long sense to have been put to death by the commandment of the
consul, This pestilence and myschiefe, which long ago thou dydst imagine
against us should have be laid upon thine own neck. If the noble man P.
Scipio, the high bishop, and a private man, slew Tiberius Gracchus,
meanelye troublynge the state of the common weal, shall we the Consulles
suffer Catiline, which desires with fire and slaughter to destroy the hole
world? I ouerpasse the old historyes, how Q. Tiberius Hala slew with his own
hand Sp. Aelius that went about to alter the common weal. Such virtue and
power in old time was in this common weal, that the worthy men would punish a
pernicious and a naughty cytizen more sharply, than a cruel ennemie. We have
against thee Catiline a vehement and grievous decre, we lack no counsel,
we lack none authority of this high court, concerning the state of the
common weal: But we the consuls, we the consuls (I speak it openly) be to
slack in this matter. In time paste the Senate decreed, that L. Opimius the
consul should take heed that the common weal took no damage: and the self
same day the noble borne man C. Gracchus was slain, for certain suspicions of
a sedicion. And M. Fuluius, which had been consul was slain with his
children. And by such another decree, the common weal was committed to C.
Marius and L. Valerius the consuls. Did death and the punyshement of the
common weal stay L. Saturnius the procectour of the commontie, and C.
Seruilius one day? But this is the.xx. day that we have suffered the sharp
authority of these worthy Senators to wax dull and blunte. For we have a
like decree, but it is closed up in tables, and as it were put up in the
shethe: by the which decree of the Senators, thou Catiline should forth
with have been put to death. But thou art a live, and doste live, not to cease
and leave of, but to confyrme and increase thy boldenes. My desire chosen
fathers is to be courteise and mylde, but it is not my desire in so great
ieopardi of the common weal, to be seen dissolute or neglygente. Surely I do
now condemn my self of folly and wickedness. There is an army in Italy
raised up against the common weal, they have pytched at Fesulas in Hetruria.
The noumbre of our enemies does increase daily more and more. But the chief
of that army, and captain of our ennemies, ye se here within the walls: yea
in the senate, daily imagining some great myschiefe against the common
weal. If I (o Catilyne) should command the to be taken and put to death, I
need not to doubt, but that all good men would say, that I were rather to
slow than to cruel in this deed. Nevertheless, it that ought to have been
done long sense, I am not yet (for certain skyll) determined to do. But I
wolle then at length put the to death, when there shall no man be found so
lewd, so far past all hope, nor so like thee in conditions, the which will
not plainlye affirm that I have done it ryghteouslye. As long as there is
any man that dare defend the, thou shall live: and so thou shall live as thou
lyuest now, beset about with my manifold and sure defenses, that thou shall not
once move or stir ageinste the common weal. Also many eyes and ears shall (as
they have done still hitherto) warelye watch and harken what thou do and
sayeste, and thou not perceiving it. For what should thou Catiline yet look
for? if neither the obscurity and darkness of the night can hyde thy
detestable assembles, nor no private house with his walls keep in the voice of
thy conspiracy? If every thing come to light, if every thing burste out,
change now this thy mind, give credence to me, forgette the murder and
burning, that thou intendeste. We understand and know all thy secret
workings and imaginacions. If thou haste forgot, I wol put thee in mind of
them. Do thou not remember that I said in the senate the.xij. kalendes of
November, that by a certain day (which should be the.ix. kalendes of
November) C. Manlius the manne of guard and chief dooer in thy bold
enterprise, would be in harneys? Was I deceived Catiline, either in the thing,
which is so great, so cruel, and so incredible or else in the day? I said
farthermore in the senate, that thou hadste determined to murder the noble men
the.v. kalendas of Nouembre, even than when many of the chief rulers were fled
from Rome, not so much for their own sauegarde, as to repress and withstand
thy detestable enterprise. Canste thou deny, but that (through my strength,
provision, and diligence) thou were so beset on all sides, that thou coudeste
not ones stir or move against the common weal, when thou saydst, thou waste
yet well content (though the other were fled) with the slaughter of us that
tarried still? what, hopedst not thou the first day of Nouembre, to have taken
Preneste by assault in the night? Dyddest not thou perceive that the town
was strongely fortified, defended, and kept by my commandment, by my
garryson, ward and watches? Thou doste nothing, thou purposeste nothing thou
imagenest nothing which I not only here of, but also see it, and plainly
pecceyue it. Aknowledge now with me that other night: and thou shalt
understand, that I am more vigilant sharp and quick for sauegarde and
defense of the common weal, than thou art to destroy it. I say, thou came
the other night among the falcarios (I will be plain with the (Thou and many
other, He calls the co^spiratours falcarios, for as with s^^hes they purposed
with the sword and fire to overcome at the city,
fellows of thy madness and mischief, assembled together the last night in
the house of M. Lecea. Dare thou deny this? why spekest not? If thou woldeste
deny it, I can prove it. For I se here in the Senate some of the^: that were
there together with the. O good lord where be we? what a common weal have we?
In what city live we? There are here, even here among us, of our sort most
honorable fathers, in this most grave and constant counsel of all the world
the which imagine to destroy us, this city yea and the whole world I the
consul do see them, and desire to know your minds concerning the common
weal. For those which I ought to have dispatched with the sword I have not
yet wounded with my word. Than thou Catline, wast that night in Leccas house,
there thou dydst distribute and divide the provinces and shyres of Italye, thou
dydst appoynte whither every man should goo: thou chosest out those that thou
woldeste leave at Rome, and those that should go with the: thou dydste
lymitte what parts of the city should be set on fire: and that thou woldeste
than depart out of the city, Thou saydst, that there was now none other let
of thy iourneye, but that I lived. There weere two knights of Rome stepte
forth to ryd thee of this care which promised the same night, that they a
littell before day, would slay me in my bed. I was scarsely departed fro
you, when we sat in counsel, but that I had knowledge of all these matters, I
fortyfyed mine house more strongely than it was before, with men of arms and
other provision: when the self same men came, which thou dydst send to
salute me in the morninge I shut them out, of whose coming at the same
time, I informed many noble men before. Saying thou Catiline that this that I
have said is true, get the forward thither: as thou haste appointed: depart
ones out of the city, the gates are open, trudge forth. Thy soldiers that
Manlius has raised desire the, their captain, over long taryenge from
them. Take all thy fellows with the, or at the least wise the most part of
them. Make clean the city of them, Thou shalt rydde me from great dread so
that the wall be between me and the. Thou canste now no longer be
conuersaunte with us: I can not bear it, I can not endure it, I may not suffer
it. We ought highly to thank the gods immortal, and Jupiter Stator the
most ancient defender of this city, that we have so often times escaped this
so cruel, so horrible and so greuouse pestylence to the common weal. The good
estate of the common weal should not so often stand in danger in (me) one man.
As long as thou Catiline dydst lie in away for me elected to be consul not
with the public aid of the city, but with mine own pryuate diligence I
defended my self. But at the last election of the consuls, when thou woldeste
have slain me the consul, and thy competytours in the field. I with the help
and strength of my friends, withstode thy detestable enterprise without any
uproar or publyke rusfelynge among the people. And as often as thou wentest
about to hurt me, I my self withstode the, not withstandinge that I saw, that
my destruction would redound to the great calamyty of the common weal. But now
it is manyfeste that thou ghost about to destroy the common weal, the temples
the gods immortal, the edifices of the city, to slay all the good citizens
and finally thou call al Italy to utter ruin and desolacion. Wherefore
because I dare not do it that best as and most agreeable with the discipline of
our forefathers I wol do that yt is most easy touching seuerite and most
profitable for the common weal. For if I should command the to be put to death:
the other conspiratours, which is a strong band, should remain still in a
common weal. But if thou (whereunto I exhorted the while ere) would go thy
way, the great and stinking pomp of thy companyons, so hurtefull to the
common weal, should be drawn out of the city. What meaneste thou Catiline?
Doubtest thou Catiline, to do that thing at my commandment, which thou were
willinge to do of thy self? The consul commands the enemy to depart
out of the city. Doste thou ask me. What into exile? No, that is not my
commandment: but if thou wolt do by my counsayl. I advise the so. For what
is it Catiline, that may now delight the in this City? In the which there is
no man, except the hopelosses of this conspiracy, but the fears the, no man
but he hatethe the. What blotte of domistical filthynes is there wherewith thy
life is not defiled? what private dishonestie or shame is there, wherewith thou
art not defamed what lust of the eyes, what lewd act of the hands what
ungracious deed of all the body, has escaped the? what young man is there, to
whom, being snared with thy corrupt entiementes, thou haste not mynistred
either weapons to do mischief, or an harlotte for bodily lust? And now of
late, when with death of thy first wife, madeste thy house void for thy new
marriage: dydst thou not also with an incredible offense augment that mischeuous
deed? Sleynge his first wives son.
Which thing I let pass, and am well content it be not spoken of: to the
end that it should not be noted that so abominable a deed was either committed
within this city, or else not punisshed, I over pass thine unlucky chance of
poverty, the which thou shalt well feel and perceive at the next sessyon of
parlyament.

I come now to those things, which do not apperteyne to the private shame of
thy vices, not to thy scarsitie, need, and filthynesse, but unto the high
estate of the common weal, and unto the lives and welfare of us all. Can the
light of this life Catiline, Can breathynge of air be pleasant unto the?
saying thou art certain, that all these men do know, that the last day of
December, Lepidus and Tullus being consulles, Than and there it was not leful
to bear a weapon.
thou stodest where the consuls be chosen with a darte in thy hand, and a
company of men prepared to slay the consuls, and chiefest rulers of the city?
and another any wisdom, or the dread that thou had, but the good chance
and fortune of the common weal withstode thy myscheuous purpose and fury. But
I let pass those things (for they be not unknown, nor it was not long
after, ere they were done) How often would thou have slain me, elected
consul? how often being Consul? How many thine assautys, so pretended, that
it seemed they could not be avoided, have I eschewed with a little declynynge
or bowynge of my body? Thou do nothing, thou preuayleste nothing, thou
go about nothing, but that I know it in time conuenyent: and yet thine
endeavor and will to mischief cesseth not. How often has this thy dagger ben
wrong out of thy hands. Thy dagger.i. thine enterprise.
How often has it fallen out of thy hand by some chance? Yet coudest thou
not be long without it. How thou haste hallowed and vowed it I can not tell,
thou think it necessary to be sticked in the consuls body. But now what a
life leadest thou? For I will talk with the, as I seemed not to be moved with
hatred as I ought to be, but with mercy, whereof thou art unworthy. Thou came
while ere in to the Senate, which of this so great an assembly, of so many thy
friends and kinsmen did salute the? If this thing never chanced to any man,
as far as men can remember, doste thou look for rebukefull words, being
condemned with the most grievous judgment of silence. How is it, that at thy
coming those seats be left void? What means it that all those that have
been consuls, which thou haste often appointed to be slain, as soon as thou
sateste down by them, forsook that side, and left the seats void and
emptye? With what heart can thou suffer it? Surely if my serauuntes should on
such wise dread me as al thy good citizens fear the, I would think it
convenient to forsake mine house. Do thou not deem it good for the to void
the city? And if I saw my self for injury so grievously suspected and hated
of my citizens, I would rather be out of their sight, than they all with their
hateful eyes, should se me. And saying thy conscience causes the to
aknowledge, that for thine offenses they all justly bear the, the hatred,
which now of a long season has been to the due. Dooste thou doubt to
eschew the sight and presence of them, whose minds and senses thou do vex
and trouble? If thy parents should be afraid of the, and thy friends hate the
nor by no mean thou coudest please them: as I think, thou would go some
whither out of their sight. Now thy country, (which is as a mother to us al)
hates and dredeth the, and has a long season judged the, to imagine nothing
else but her destrucuyon: will thou neither stand in dread of her auctority
nor follow her judgment, nor fear her power? Which reasons with the
Catiline, spekinge as it were on this wise. There has these many years none
ill deed benne done but by the, nor no heinous offense without the. Thou
alone for sleinge of many citezens vexing, and spoylynge of our frindes and
alies, have escaped freely without punyshement. Thou not only dydst boldly
neglecte and despise laws and judgments, but also overthrow and break
them. Those things aforesaid, although they were not to be suffered, yet as I
might, I have borne them. But now it can not be suffered, that I should be all
in dreede of the alone, nor that Catiline for every crack should be feared,
nor no counsel taken against me, that should abhor thy wicked deed.
Wherefore get the hence and deliver me from this fear. If it be true, that I be
not opressed: if it be false, that at the last I may cease to be afraid.

If thy countreye (as I have said) should reason with thee those things,
ought she not to opteyne, although she weere not able by strength to do
it? what meante it that thou yeldest thy self to be in ward? To what intent
saidest, that to avoid suspicion thou would dwell with M. Lepidus? And when
he would not receive the, thou camste boldlye to me: and desiredst that thou
myghteste be kept at home in mine house. And when thou had of me also
received this answer, that I could in no wise be in safeguard with the in one
house together, that am in great peril, because we be both within one
city: thou camst to Q. Metellus the maire, and being rejected of him, thou
wentest to thy companion, that most worthy man M. Marcellus, whom thou
thoughteste would most diligently keep the, most sagely entreat for the: and
most boldelye give judgment for the. But how far out of prison and bands
should he seem to be, the which already judges himself worthy to be in ward?
Then seeing it is so Catiline, doutest thou (if thou canste not here remain
in quyete) to go into some other countreye, and commyt this thy lyte escaped
from many just and due punyshmentes* to flight and wilderness? Thou sayeste:
Put it to the Senate. Do thou desire me? And if it please the Senate to
decree that thou be banyshed, sayeste thou that thou will obey? Nay, I will
not refer it to them: for that is contrary and ageinste my nature: but yet I
will cause the to understand, what they deem of the. Get the out of the city
Catiline: deliver the common weal from fear: go into exile, if thou look to
hear this word spoken. What is the matter Catiline? Why dooeste thou tarry?
what, doeste thou not mark the silence of those? They suffer, they hold their
peace. Why doeste thou look for the authority of them, speaking, when by
keepinge of silence, thou knoweste their will and mind? But if I should have
said as much to this noble young manne P. Sextius, or to the most myghtie
man M. Marcellus: the senators would (and that lawfully) have laid violent
hands upon me the consul, yea being in this temple. But as touching thee
Catiline, when they be in quiet, they approve, when the suffer, they decerne:
when they hold their peace, they cry aloude. Nor they only whose autorite is
so noble, or whose life most profitable, but also those right worshypfull
knights and honest gentlemen of Rome, yea and other most valiant cityzens,
which enuiron and stand about the Senate, whose often and great resort hither,
whose favor and affections, and whose words thou myghteste a little while
err have seen, perceived, and playnelye herd: whose hands and weapons I can
scasely keep from thee: the same can easelye enduce, that they shall follow
after thee even to the gates, if thou will leave those things, which a while a
go thou dydest imagine to destroy. But what do I say? that any thing can
break thee of thy purpose? that thou will ever correct thy self? that thou
wolt mind any flight? that thou wolte think on any exile? Oh that the
gods immortal would send thee this mind. And though I see how grievous a
tempest of hatered, if not at this present time, by reason of the fresh
remembrance of thy detestable deeds, in time to come thine exile induced by
mine oracion, shall stir up ageinste me: yet I care little for it, so that
this be thy private calamity, and the common weal clean delivered from
peril. But it is not to be required, that thou should be removed from thy
vices, that thou shuldeste dreede the punishementes of the laws, that thou
should apply thy self to the common weal according as the time requires.
For thou Catiline art not the man, whom either shame can ever withdraw from
fylthy living, or fear from peril, or reason from furye and madness.
Wherefore (as I have often said) get the away And if thou wylt cause me (as thou
say) thine ennemie to be hated, get the straight way into exile. I shall
with great difficulty bear men's words, if thou wolte this do, I shall
scasely be able to sustain the burden of this evil will, if thou at the
consuls commandment will go into exile. But if thou had rather do that
that may be for mine honor and praise: trudge hence with thy cruel company of
evil doers, get thee to Manlius, styre up naughtye citizens, separate thy self
from the good, make war upon thy country, rejoice in wicked robrie, that
men may see that thou art not by me driven hence, to dwell among strangers:
but called to come to thine own men. And yet whereto should I bydde the go:
saying I know, thou haste sent for the certain, which armed tarry thy
coming at Forum Aurelium: saying I know, what day thou haste appointed and
promised to be with Manlyus: and allsoo saying that I know, thou have sent
thither before that silver Eigle, the which I trust shall be the destruction
and death of the and all thine, to the which thou made an oratorie of thy
detestable deeds at home in thine house. How can thou long be without that
Eigle, to the which thou were wont to do sacrifice, when thou dydste intend
any manslaugter: from whose altar thou haste oftentimes retired thy wicked
hand to the sleinge of some citezen? At the last thou will get the thither
as thine unbridled lust and fury has long a go violently drawn the, for
this to do is no grief too the, but an incredible pleasure. Unto this madness
Nature h^th borne the, will has exercised the, and Fortune has kept the. Thou
dydst never desire quietness, nor yet war, except it were detestable. Thou
have gotten to the a company of such as are ill and dishonest, men drowned in
naughtynesse, utterly set on mischief, beggarly hopelostes. Here, what
gladness, can the glad? what joy can the rejoice? what pleasure can the
please, when in this wise so great a nombre thou shall neither here nor se one
good man. To this sort and fascion of life, those thy labors, that are
commonly spoken of, have been exercisid: To lie upon the ground, not only to
lay siege to some harlotte, but also to do some other mysdede. To watch, not
only till men were a sleep, that thou myghteste have their wives at thy
pleasure, but also to murder and spoil. Thou have, wherein thou may make a
show of thy noble suffraunce, of hunger, cold, and extreme poverty, with the
which thou shall shortly perceive thy self confounded. I so much prevailed,
when I put the by the consulshyp, that thou being banyshed should rather
attempt it, than being consul myghtest vex and trouble the common weal.
And that thy detestable enterprise should rather be called a robbery than a
war. Now most honorable fathers, as I do detest and eschew in manner a just
complaynte of my countreye, so I beseech you, mark dilygently the things that
I shall tell you, and prynt them inwardly in your minds.

For if my country, which is much derer to me than my life, if al Italye, if
the hole commonwealth should say thus to me: Marcus Tully, what doste thou?
will thou suffer him to go his way, whom thou have found an open enemy,
whom thou seeste, must be the capytayn of the war, whom thou perceiuest our
ennemies look for to be their chief leader, the auctour of this mischief the
principal of the conspiracye, the reys^^ up of band men and naughtye
citizens? Does it (...), that thou rather bryngest him into the city, than
send him out of the city, will thou not command this fellow to prison, to
be violentely handeled, and with most cruel turment to be put to death? What
thing lets the. The custom of our forefathers? They being out of
auctority have full often in this common weal, punysshed with death the
naughty detestable citezens Do the laws, which were stablished to punisshe
cityzens found culpable, let thee? But theye in this city which do ageynste
the common weal enjoy not the privilege of the citizens. Doste thou not fear
the enuyered of those that are to come? Surely thou shall give the people of
Rome right high thanks, the which have auanced the, being a man of small
reputacion, without commendacion of thine ancestors, from one honorable
office to an other, even to the most high room of al, and that in thy
flourishing age: if thou for hatred, or for dread of any other peril, doste not
neglecte the sauegarde and wealth of thy citizens. But if there be any fear
of hatred, the envy of severity and fortitude is not more vehementlye to be
dradde, then slouthe and negligence in punysheing evil deeds. When Italye
shall be wasted with war, when the cities shall be vexed and troubled when
the buildings shall be burnt, do thou not suppose, thou shall be burned
with the flame of envy? To those most constant words of the common weal, and
to those men's minds that agree to the same, I will in few words make
answer. If I had demed it best, most honorable fathers, to put Catiline to
death, I would not have given this gladiatour one hour space to live,
Gladiatores were men that fought with swords unarmed.
For if the most excellent and noble citizens, not only did not defile them
selves by sleyng of Saturninus, both the Gracchus and Flaccus, and many other
before time but also gat thereby great worship: surely I ought not to dread
envy here after, for puttinge to death this murderer of citizens. And all be
it most grievous envy is like to follow, yet I have always been of this mind,
that envy gotten by fortitude, Fortitude valyaunte courage. fering nothing
but shame, ma^fully beatynge and sufferynge prosperity and aduersite
I have reputed glory, not envy. Not withstandinge there be here some
Senatoures, the which either see not those things that are iminent, or else
they discemble as though they did not se them. The which with their soft
sentences, have nourished Catilines hope, and not beleeuinge it, have
corroborate and made strong the conspiracy, beginning to spring: whose
authority many following not only such as are dishonest, but also ignoraunte
and without knowledge, would say, if I should punish this man that I had not
done nobly but cruelly. Now I perceive well, if this man be once come to
Manlius army, whither he intends to go, that there is no man so folyshe,
which shall not see the conspiracy plainlye disclosed, no man so leude and
dishonest, which will not confess the same. This man alone being put to
death, I perceive that this tribulacion of the common weal may be a little
while repressed, but not for ever extyncted. But if he woll ariue at Manlius
army, and thither gather to gether from al places the other his fellows of
shypwracke, this ripe myschiefe and pestilence of the common weal should not
only be extincted and clean quenched, but also the stalk and sede of all
evils and incommodities. For we most prudent fathers, have been long in danger
of this conspiracy and snares laid for us: but I can not tell you by what
means, this sore of all detestable deeds, old fury, and brainesicke
boldness, did wax ripe, and brast out in the time of my consulshyp. If that
of so great a number of rebels and robbers this one man alone should have been
put to death, we should paraduenture for a little while seem to be releued from
care and dread: but the peril should remain still, closed within the veins and
bowels of the common weal. As men oftentimes sick of a grievous disease, and
vexed with a burninge ague, if they drink cold water, seem at the first to
be well refreshed, and yet afterward are more grievously handeled: So this
disease, which is in the common welthe, reliued with the punyshement of this
man, should more vehementlye grieve the residue of the citizens. wherefore let
those that be naught depart, let them separate them selfs from the good, let
them be gathered together into one place, finally let the walls (as I said
before) sever them from the good men, let them leave lying in awayte about
the consuls house let them leave standing about the pretors judgment place, to
besiege the palayce with swords, to prepare mallettes and torches to set fire
on the city, finally let it be written in every one of their forehedes,
Wallettes were like arrows, which were cast burning.
what good will and mind they bare to the common weal. I promise you most
honorable fathers, that in us the consuls shall be found so great diligence,
in you such authority, such power and strength in the knights and
gentylmen of Rome, and such consent and agreement of all good men, that ye
shall see by Catilines departing every thing opened, plainly dysclosed,
oppressed, revenged, with all these things Catiline, the high preservation
of the common weal, with thine own myschyefe and confusyon, and with the
destruction of them, which have benne confederate with the in all damnable
deeds and murders, trudge hence to thy wicked and detestable war. And thou o
Jupiter, whom we name the stablysher of this city and empire, with the same
favorable aspecte that this city was builded by Romulus, Inuocacio^
drive and expulse this man and his felows from thine aulters and other
temples: from the edifices of the city and walls, from the life and goods of
all the citizens: and punysshe with eternal peynes in this world and in an
other, all the enemies to good men, and fooes to their country, the robbers
of Italye and such as are confederate with them in a detestable fellowship to
do mischief.

When the consul hadd ended his words, Catiline was so confounded and
troubled with his oracion, that not only his great wit and exercise in
pleading, wherein always he was very excellent, but also his unshamefastness,
wherein he passed all other, sodaynelye failed him. With so great contencion
of mind, wit, voice sides, and grave gesture of the body spoke the consul.
His words flashed in Catilines face as it were the leam of a bright burning
torche, that the most unshamefast man, and to speak most ready, durst not
open his mouth, or speak one word for him self: but sodeinelye did flee out
of the Senate, with certain manassynge and cruel thretninges. Wherefore
Cicero writing to Brutus, most soberlye praysinge that his singular faculty
of pleadinge, and reckoning up certain of his right noble oracions, among
other things what confounded Catiline, he for good cause glories. Of me
(says he) the most hardy and bold man Catiline was accused in the Senate,
and held his peace. But there be other that say otherwise: they write that
Catiline answered the consul. And there remains and is commonly in men's
hands a right fair oracion, which is written in Catilines name. The which
oracion I do not so much believe to be his, as of some great and old author
of such feyned oracions. The example of which oracion I have therefore set in
this place, that when I had showed mine, and other men's minds, I might leave
it to be judged of other hereafter. Then Catiline (as I say) although he were
terriblye feared with the consuls oracion, yet because he was prompte in
speech, and ready to dissemble al things, took courage, and in this wise
answered to the consuls oracion.

Catilines answer to Cicero in the Senate. Cap. xix.
IT besemeth all men, which be in most high office and authority, or
that consulte of matters public or private, principally to take heed, that
they rashely incline not to any affeccions, nor that they cast down under foot
with fury or anger, the wit, that should be at liberty: But with all
diligence they must endeavor them selves, that their minds remain incorrupt
that they egallie examen and try every man's reason, and that they lean to no
part, until the matter be clearly opened, and sufficiently debated. For it
is a hard thing, the mind being disquieted, and the wit troubled, to
persuade any man to the truth. Such is oftentimes the strength and power of an
oracion. If you, most discrete fathers, had had this consideracion with you,
when our consul with so sharp bytyng words, wrongefully spoke of my manners,
when he with his pernicious and insolent eloquence incensed and kendled your
minds against me: I dare boldelye say, mine innocente life should this day
clean have quailed, his proud crakinge words. But now I see, that ye by the
consulles suggestion, prepare sentence against me, and that ye can scaselie
suffer to here me, to give credence to his authority, mistrusting mine
honesty. Wherefore I may well fear lest the defense of mine health be greatly
hindered. For innocents through the unjust envy or injury of a few, are
often times trodden under foot. The which thing surely besemeth neither the
constancy of noble men, nor the manners of the Romans, nor the dignity and
office of the Senators. Therefore most honorable fathers, I beseech you for
the gods sakes immortal, and for your humanity, that in so great and
weighty matters ye lightelye give not judgment: reduce again your minds,
mollified and overcome with Ciceros eloquence, to your old integrity, and so
restore you them, that at length you may understand the words of Catiline a
Roman, descended of noble lynage. If I worthy citizens, have done any
offense against my country, I neither desire favor nor mercy. Then ryd me
out of this life, put this body to cruel death, and tear these shameful
members in pieces, for mine oracion tends not, that ye should have mercy on
Catiline. For why? suddenly to put to cruel death him that entendeth to
destroy his country, is most high mercy. But the clemenry of this city I
desire most honorable fathers, that in no manner wise ye forsake not
innocence, lest while ye defend liberty, through the iniquity of a few,
you should go about to destroy many gyltles persons. I will show you and
clearly open unto you, that the grievous and sharp enmity that our consul
bears me, is not for the sauegarde of the comman weal: nor for any desire
that he has to maintain liberetie, but to vex and trouble the common weal.
For how many and how immoderate discordes did first in times past kindle and
provoke him ageinste me, nor what strife and contencion has not ben between us
sense. I need not to declare: For they are to you honorable fathers
sufficiently known. But I woll rather tell you those things, which he at the
last eleccion, when he was chosen consul, shamefully, yea and rashely
blasted out, how he desired the consulshyp for nothing more, than for the
destruction of Catiline. These two most noble men C. Antonius, and C. Caesar
are witnesses of the same: by whose authority, that his thretnynge was at the
same time reproved as indiscreet. Goo to now most prudente fathers, give
your high dignities and offices to such minded men, the which woll more
dylygently pursue private ennimities, than the profit and sauegarde of all
this common weal. Cicero desired not the consulshyp to succor the miserable,
or to restrain the power and might of the evil doers, to defend the city,
to provide for the common weal, but specialli that he might quayle Catiline
and banyshe him. Are these the duetyes of a man called to the consulshyp?
Prefer such men in geuynge them high roumes, before the noble men, whose
hole mind is to extincte the nobility. For that that is thretned me of this
man, shall return unto you all. Believe me most prudente fathers, believe me,
the consent of benevolence and love is rare between minds so unlike. He being
a stranger of the town Arpinate, a new geast planted into this city,
thinks upon his natural rage and hatered, the which his manners have not
only prepared against new and strange citizens, but also nature by old
custom. First at the beginning of his consulshyp, his country was cast in
his tethe, and sometime his new gentlemanshyp was objected against him:
think ye that the manne most impatient, could take so great rebuke
pacientelye? At that time his wit being kendled with a froward spirit, and
as it were a viperous serpente, his fierce and cruel mind, with an inflamed
and venomed stomach, was all to tossed. This man that names him self the
father of the countreye, that is wont to say that this common weal was
ornated with his nobleness in living, he that by his manners makes him self
not only egall to the kynredes of all the most noble and excellent men, but
also to excel in virtue al our forefathers When he saw his new
gentlemanshyppe objected against him, how think you did he take it? He than
gnashed his tethe together, and against you all he was stricken prittelye with
a woodenes, and began to whet his anger: the which ye may not think woll
assuage in time to come, by opteyning of the consulshyppe, seeing that he
judges, that not by your favors, but for his most greatest virtues he
worthily is advanced to so high a dignity. And so uowe he does execute
those his former affections, now with those crafts he intends to trouble
the city: now with such inuencions he woll revenge him self, and bring the
nobility in such case, that they shall never obiecte against him his new
gentlemanshyp. He shall do it most honorable fathers, he shall do it, unless
your most prudente wysedomes at length provide both for the health of us
all and for the common weal. For now our city by this ryngeleader of
myschiefe and artificer of damnable deeds is so be spotted with a vengeable and
pestilent blemysh, he so sows abroad his detestable seed upon our country,
that if it once take root, and grow to any forwardness, this publyke weal
shall be clean extincted, and this most floryshyng empire shall be utterly
brought to naught. For there is nothing more perilous unto cities, than when
the chief and principal citizens be at strife among them self. For
Discord is greatteste fooe to floryshynge commonweals. Discord alone
disparpleth and turns up set down, things strong and mighty. Truly
discord has brought this busynes into our city, it has cast us into this
calamity: the which if it be not provided for in time, I see that this most
floryshing common weal is in great danger, I see the weapons in your
hands, the oone of you to withstand the other, this man banyshed, and that
man murdered. Would to god that innocent Catiline might be the end of all
tribulacions, like as he is the beginning: there is no peril that should grieve
me to take in hand for the common weal, I could be content to be
proscribed, to be banyshed, to suffer death for my country. But every man is
not at all times of oone self mind. An other shall be more impatient, the
which had rather be avenged, then to suffer the injuries of naughtye persons.
Then the matter must needs be tried by cyuile war, then shall our country
stand in danger to be lost, and will shortelye fall into doubtefull
chances, and sure destruction of the city: than shall he greatelye rejoice
and glory, that he has opteined his purpose: When he shall see this
countreye glyster and shine in bryghte armoure, and this city set on fire give
light: Than shall he preyse his inuencions and driftes, and extol his
invincible mind, and think he has sufficientlye revenged him self, and his
fore fathers, for the contumelies and rebukes done to him. For he is wont
sometime to say, that he is of the family and kindred of Tullius Hostilius
king of the Volscians, special ennemie to the people of Rome: the which
thing is the only known occasion, why vniuersallre the name of Romans is
hateful unto him, and he shall always abhor this common weal, by whose
dominion the house and family of his ancestors is dymmed, and their empiere
clean subdued and overthrown, which thing, how great cares it carries into
men's minds, judge ye your own selves. This I may only esteem of Cicero,
that as long as that envy of his fore fathers, and those old enmities of
impatient mind, shall turmoile and vex his brain, he wolle never cesse from
his violence and madness. So great is his vnmoderate lust and mind to destroy
this empiere. And even now truly, the hole world being in peace, so many
kings, people, and strange nations subdued, all men both by land and see
obeyinge unto us, and now that there is no superior enemy of the people of
Rome, but do approve our great puisance and noble acts. And therefore he has
no hope to bring this empiere to destruction by outward hostility. All
things are in sure quiet under us, all men wyllinglye obey unto us. But for
as much as he greatly desires to revenge him self and his ancestors, and
that his hard and cruel mind will never cesse from that opinion, he flies
to those perturbacions, with the which private enmities first with me, lastly
he intends to grieve the hole common weal. And so first he accuses Catline
his ennemie, and many other fellows with him in his conspiracy, that they
intend to invade the common weal, over run their countreye, deface the
city, to burn houses, temples, aultares, to rauyshe virgins, to murder and
slay the ancient men, the people, and the nobles, ne never stinte from wrath,
ne spare the sword, until they have utterly destroyed this most beautiful
city, the sovereign princess over all the world. But I swear by the immortal
gods, I wot not to what end this vain estimacion of men wol come, that any
mortal man should believe, that there were any so utterly an hopelost, or so
ignorante of reason, that does not pereriue a certain zeal and tender love
toward his cuntreye planted in him, the which always through a certain
secret and vehemente power of nature, is powered in to men's breasts. Than
what Roman mind would desire to bring the common weal to so great
calamity? For what most cruel enemy of the Romans, yea the very
Captain of Carthage Anniball, could inuente and imagine greatter, or the
like hurtes to us? Would I invade the common weal, which have for the common
weal enterprised and sustained so exceeding great perilles? Should I be so
bold, to deface the Senate and city, which have adorned my lynage with so
many most large benefits? Should I burn the temples of Rome, the which show
forth so many graven images and tables of mine ancestoures? Should I murder
the noble men of blood or Senatoures, that am now in honor and dignity
among them? Should I wearyng the honorable robe defile the city with other
mischeuous deeds, yt which with all diligence have withstand, that other
should not defile it? What hope? what mind? what occasion should drive me to
do such a deed? Should the lust and desire of dominion and rule, whereof a
little while ere Cicero reasoned? have I not quietely opteyned the dignite above
all? have not I as good hoope left me to excuse other dignities, as it is
lawful for any mortal man to require? for I am both of the blood of noble
Senators, and have opteined the dignity of a Senator, and here after, I may
be consul or dictatour. The which dignities are such and so great, that not
only in this most noble city, but also they far excel the empiers and
principalities of all people, of all nations, that are in all the world. What
needs it then to seek that thing in hard war, which willingelye in peace
is prepared for me? But peradventure as Cicero said, envy styrred me, great
debt, poverty, immoderate boldness to bear a rule. But this should be
esteemed of a man that is wylful rash, and brainesicke, or of any other, the
which in hope to win and get goods, may vnwyselye make so great a
sedicion among the people of Rome: and not of a man of the noblest blood
borne, and in a city aboundynge in welthe. For should he that is honestly
furnished with riches, doubt that he should at ^nye time want? for so much
lucre and wynning does even offer it self, and such profit comes of the
common treasure: that if a man should a little decay, and in no wise obey unto
honesty, it is incredible, how easelye he may be laded with abundance of
riches. And to let pass other things, thou Cicero, art an example unto me,
which in a manner the other day entredst into this city, bare and nedy of al
things, after thou gottest thee once in office, thou gatheredst sodeinly
together so great a heap of riches, that all the towns belonginge to Rome as
it seemed were scasely sufficient for thy factoures. Wherefore thou doste but
folyshely, to lay couetousenes, poverty, and great det unto my charge. All
which things I could by a more sure may appease, then to disturb the
common weal, to take the uncertain for certain, for a little commodity to
enterprise exceadynge great peryls. Neither I (as touching such things as I
am accused of) would for any private debate have goone in hand with so
horrible a deed. There is no man in this common weal, that I reken to be mine
ennemie, only Cicero is agreued with me, because I could not cloak his vices,
which he did secretlye: whose folyshe and trifling toys if I should have
exchewed and put from me, I had many ways to revenge my self, without
public peril. Nor I neded no refuge to the hurt of the common weal, seeing
there was neither dread nor ieopardy to withstand or let me, for if he were
rydde out of this life, there should remain no man that would not only
revenge him, but also mourn at his funeral. But god forbydde, that I should
dishoneste my self for his fool hardynes. For it is no laud for noble men to
be revenged on abiecte persons, yet perchance if I would have desired it, it
should not be imputed worthy citizens, but that I (if I had gone about it at
that time) might have had much more opportunity, than he should have had.
Surely if I fortified mine house with strength of men of arms, brought in my
companions, and made good watch, for I will not deny any of these things, I
did it most prudent fathers not to do any man wrong but to resyste the violence
of the consul. I dradde his wit, I know his eloquence, I was not ignorant
of his malice, I understood he had instructed this conspiracy. And so I was in
fear, left that by his eloquence ye should sodeinly disdain me in your
minds, and that ye (the dangers once declared) clean ageinste my question,
would greuouselye punyshe me. For if I had been once delivered in to his
hands, in vain afterward should I have found place for my defense. And so
I have with great labor prolonged my life unto this day. And in all this
great trouble, by means of thy persuasion, I have scaselye escaped, that I was
not of all men condemned as gyltie. But now Cicero, when thou had less
need, otherwise tha^ thou hopedst, I am come into the Senate: and as much as
seemed to me sufficient, I have opened a few of thy least fautes: the which
by that time they be known, thou woldeste rather they should be forgotten,
then that so great crimes should come to light and be known. I was nothing
afraied of thy mischeuous deeds, nor thine oracion at that time, nor thy
mocions coniected willingly against me, made me not afraied. For what fear in
so great assemblye of Senators, in so great a company of noble cityzens,
could trouble any innocent mind? Therefore I have the day, which I most
specially desired, which assuredly thou dydst least look for. I have a Senate
which can understand mine innocence, before whom thy damnable offenses shall
be opened. I have therefore with good peril provided against my peryls, if at
any time with strength of men of arms I defended thy fury, if at any season
without dread I stood styffe in the common weal, while by all means thou
dydst persuade me to flee, I contrary wise minded to tarry. But o good lord
where be we? Who sees not a mighty false accusacion? what other thing did all
thy oracion mean, but that I should flee? But if (as thou saieste) all my
deeds be well known, if mine imaginacio^s be more clerer then the light: why
do thou now persuade me to flee? Here I am, having no power or defense of
mine own about me. The Senate is present, which will prohibit and let the
from harm, Show forth these mischeuous deeds: open plainly the sedicion, do
punyshemente. For it besemeth the not to be merciful in so great perils.
Delay, and to be without help, may be hurtful: If thou have the principal of
the conspiracy, if the captain of the ennimies be in thy hands, why do
thou tarry? Why doste thou covet to cast him out? For it is more profitable,
that the army want a captain: for so they shall be the more slack to make
war. But I see (as it is wont to chance) in the mids of euyls, thou for
fear of punyshement, beginnest to wax cold, for thou seeste the myschaunce
that thou preparest either for me, or for the common weal, shall light upon
thy self. This thing now to thy great danger is far otherwise handled
than thou thoughtest. Doubtest not now, that I woll obiecte against the thy
goods? Dyddest thou think, that I would come into the Senate? Therefore when
I came, thou forthwith were sore afraied. Thynkest thou now to make me afraied
with thy threatninges? Knoweste thou not how free, and how bold the stomach
of an innocente is? Will thou Cicero that I flee? Surely I will not flee, but
abide and overcome thy proud bragges? I must needs reprove thy mischeuous
deeds and inuencions. Let thy witnesses come in to this place, of whom thou
say thou have so great plenty, that nothing of my deeds can be covered or
hid from thee. Whom bring thou forth? Q. Curious? surely a man of a good
opinion, and of an honest life: or such one as has nobly with his lewd and
naughty deeds dishonested this order, and therefore was abiected. Or will thou
bring forth Fuluia his mate in bodily lust, which was never priuye to no
murder, nor is not the nurce child of aduoutrye and fornicacion, nor of none
other unlawful copulacion: or else she has so lived, that as an example of
abominable vice, she her self alone can excel all the crafts and deceites
of hoores. These are the most noble men, that suspect the trouble and
unquietness of the city, and that are brought in as witnesses ageinste me. But
I swear by the gods immortal, that now thou Cicero, do show by thy
manners, that thou do very shamefullye abuse thy farye? For if thy mind was
to ryd me out of the way, thou should not have sought witness of them that
are open conspiratoures. Thou ought to have chosen them, whose life is more
unknown, and their robberies a little more secret. Many men for that money,
would more profitably have plied to thine ambicion. For no good citizen ought
to be a frayed of their ill and malicious words. They may easily be reproved,
seeing that their fortune, their fidelity and deeds are sufficient, which
if they would favor me, I would rather they should be mine injurious
adversaries, lest their familiarity should bring my life likewise in a
contempt. And so now most honorable fathers, all the deeds and imaginacions of
the consul I have opened plainelye unto you: now also mine innocence may
appear unto you. Ye see what thing caused that he would destroy Catiline,
and disturb the common weal. He is styrred and strives with me for private
enmities. For castinge in the tethe^ of his new gentlemanshyp, he hates all
the nobility after the manner of his fore fathers. For he abhors this
country, and therefore he goes about to make sedicion, to sow discord, his
vnpaciente stomach will never be in quiet, till he bring us to destruction.
First he accuses me, being borne of the noble blood of Rome, and a Senator,
to be a murderer: where as the noble acts and deeds, high dominions, offices
and dygnities, and great and large benefits done to this common weal by
mine ancestors, do most honorably glyster and shine. He obiecteth nedynes
(...) me, the which in this most plentiful city could never be an
hynderaunce to them that are in low and mean offices. He obiecteth enmities
against me, the which seem unto me, not to be sufficient, to disturb the
common weal. Ye see what witnesses he brings forth the which are such,
that they exceed the wits of all mischeuous caytiues. Which attemptates,
after he saw came not to pass, as he hoped they would, nor has no great
trust in the senate, he is forthwith overthrown with fear. He commands me
to flee, when if I had been fautie, to revenge so heinous an offense, the
greatest punyshemente that is, could not be sufficient. Than if you most
honorable fathers see mine innocencye, if ye perceive his fierce cruel mind,
if ye ponder the peryls of the common weal, than at the last look up, take
pity, and save from ruin the empire of Rome. Ye have even among you a
slipper serpente, ye have in this order included, the calamlitie of the common
weal which is right watchefull, to bring to confusion the people of Rome.
You have advanced him to most high honor. Beware, lest at length that part
of pestilence, by to much liberty, infecte all the body, and as a contagious
disease grow up among you. Go to quickelie, avoid this stinkynge pomp of
vengeance and myschiefe, depose this man from his consulshyp, lest that his
foul shameful deeds defyle this most high and honorable dignity: cast him
out of this common weal lest that here after he should be seen within the
walls of this our most noble city, by him brought to great ruin and
decay. If the monumentes of this city be derely beloved unto you, if the
syghte of your children be pleasant unto you, if it delight you to have chaste
virgins, if the temples, if the power, priestehode, company, houses, riches,
servants, clyentes, all goods of fortune, and the commodities of all our
countreye, be acceptable unto you: Now, now rote out of this common weal
this seed of all euyls, rydde him out of the citizens syghte, the which
thinks utterly to destroy you and all your goods, which has determined
with privy hatered and discord, to disturb the honorable estate of the
Roman empire. Succor and help in this peril. Resist this calamity: then
all suspicion shall cease, then this gyle shall incontinently be removed from
the hands of men of war. In this one man rests al their hoope. For who
could have moved or styrred up the minds of a few ungracious persons against
this most greateste empire, the chief and sovereign of all the world, but
he? What citizen in this common weal could have imagined so cruel a
myschiefe? This, this new gentleman Cicero of Arpinas, of the kinrede of
Tullians, priueli strueth snares for our destruction. He accuses Catiline of
conspiracy whereby he might have the better opportunity for his purpose. He
brings many of us to examinacion, that he, by gatherynge together of
strength of men by the mean of us, might thereby the easier invade the common
weal. O most prudente fathers, do you not se your own perils? Hold up the
miserable common weal, staggerynge and ready to fall: help your country: se
mercifullye to the sauegarde of your parents, and of us all, and ryd me a
noble man borne, and the people of Rome out of the cruel hands of the
malicious consul. And restore me humbly besechynge and instantynge you to my
former nobility, favor and benevolence of all the citizens.

Catiline in great wrath, departs out of the court exhorts his companions
to stycke to their enterprise, he voydeth the city, and prepares war. Cap.
xx.
VNeathe Catiline had ended his words, but that many senators began to
murmr, and to call him manqueller and enemy. Than Catiline full of furye,
said: For as much as I am beset about with ennemies, and am overthrown
hedlynge I will not quench the burning of mine anger with water, but with
your ruin. After that, all pale and chafed, he sodeinly rushed out of the
court, and gatte him home, with many great and cruel manassinges, there
minding many things, he determined to take his journey to Manlyus army:
fearinge, if he should tarry any longer, lest the people stomaked against him
with the consuls oracion, should run upon him. Therefore assemblynge to
gether Lentulus, Cethegus, and other the chief of the conspiracy, he showed
to them his counsel, exhortyng them to be always ready, and of good courage, and
not to be afraied for any labor and peril, and that they should diligently
execute the things, that they had appointed the other night: and that they
should allure as many as they could to join with them in that war. In the
mean while he warned them that they should sprede a rumor about the city,
that he an innocent was banyshed to Massula: that by reason thereof Cicero
might run in hatred, and that thereby he might unawares invade the city. When
he had said these, and other like things, about midnyght with a few, or (as
some other say) with.iij. C. men of arms, he departed out of the city: nor
he went not by the way called Flaminia (as some falselye write) but by the
way aurelia: The morrow after that Catiline was fled out of the city, M.
Cicero made an oracion to the people: which because it is written among Ciceros
oracions, I ouerpas here what then was said of the consul to them.

Catiline sent diverse letters into the city against Cicero, in which he
feyned him self to be exiled. Cap. xxi.
But Catiline as he was in his iournei, wrote letters to many that had been
consulles, and sent them to all such as were chief and principal: to whom
he said that he was circumuented with false accusacions, and separate from
the Senate: and because he could not resist the consul, he gave place for
the time, and as a banished man went unto Massilia, not that he knew him
self coulpable in any offense, but to the end the common weal should be in
quiet, and that the consul, coveting to destroy the nobility, should not by
feyninge of Catilines conspiracy, bring to destruction many good and
innocente men: And that he would rather forsake his country, than that for his
sake any dissencion of ciuyle war should arise. This thing caused Cicero to
be greatly hated: for there were many that said, that Catiline was not
astonished and afraied for the consuls diligence, nor put from his hope or
enterprise, but by the consuls violence and thretnynges, he uncondemned and an
innocente was banyshed, nor they disproued not him, but said that Cicero was
to tymerous, and a consul not diligent, but a tyranne most cruel. But when
Catiline, with the ornaments of a consul, and like a sovereign Captain was
come into the country of Fesuls, and had received the army of Manlius, he
determined not to make war, before he had augmented the army, and till he had
a few days exercised and accustumed his soldiers, after the discipline of
the ancient Romans, to endure labor and warfare. Then Catiline watchinge,
laboring, setting his men in array, calling his souldioures by name,
monyshinge, exhorting, daily more and more he reduced and brought them again
to the knowledge and discipline of warfare While Catiline in marciall feats
instructed his army, Q. Catulus, a man in most high estimacion and authority,
which sometime was Catilines familiar friend, read the letters in the Senate,
which he said Catiline sent to him, the tenoure of which letters hereafter
follows.

L. Catiline to Q. Catulus gretynge. Thy great fidelity approved in deed, to
me in peril right much beneficial, gives a sure trust to my commendacion.
Wherefore I purpose not in new council to prepare defense, nor for any
conscience of offense to make satisfaccion: the which not withstandinge in very
deed ye shall know to be true. Yet for as much as I provoked with rebukes and
injuries, and deprived of the fruit of my labor and diligence, opteyned not
the state of dignity, as my custom is, took upon me to defend the cause of
such as are miserable, not that I want or have not sufficient possessions to
pay mine own dettes, seeing that the liberality of my wife Horistilla, with
her own and her daughters goods, has paid other men's dettes, but because I
saw men unworthy, auaunced to honor: and my self, through false suspicion,
alienated and put from honor. And for this cause I have, for the case that I
am in, gotten metely good hope to conserve such dignity, as hereafter shall
chance me. As I would have written mo things, it was showed me, violence was
prepared against me. Now I commend and deliver Horistilla to your fidelity,
prayinge you for the love that ye bear to your children, defend her from
injuries. Farewell.

Many in the city blamed the softnes of Cicero, that he suffered their enemy
to go his way. Cap. xxii.
BUT when it was known at Rome, by many men's letters, and often messages,
that Catiline was admitted capytaine over the army, and that he intended too
make war upon his countreye: there were very many that greatelye blamed the
consul, because he had not taken so grievous an enemy to the common weal,
and that he had let escape the principal and chief of the conspiracy. For at
that time, the people reasoned and commoned among them selfs, on this manner:
Catiline longer this time, ought to have been put to death by the consulles
commandment, and with most cruel and sharp tourmentes to have been
punished. This mischief, which he has craftly imagined against us, ought to
have been laid upon his own neck. For if the consul had put him to death,
(as he has deserved) we had been now without war, the straytes of Hetruria
had not ben filled with the tents of our enemies, the common welthe had been
now in quiet and rest. It was no need at that time to have used mercy, it had been a very merciful deed, most sharply to have punyshed our ennemie, and by
the death of one wicked person, to have preserved the whole common wealth.
Some other vsinge the aunciente examples showed, how that Sp. Elius desiringe
to reign alone was slain of P. Seruilius Hala. And likewise Tiberius Gracchus
of P. Scipio, and also how that C. Marius, slew L. Saturnius protector of the
commonaltie, and C Seruilius Glaucia the mayre, for certain suspicions of
sedicion: But Cicero has commanded him (whom he knew to be an enemy most
grievous whom also he perceived to be looked for of their enemies to be their
cap^taine and governor) to go unto his army, and so to make war ageynste
his countreye.

O the miserable estate of them that governed such common welthes, in the
which he that is dilige^te, is called wayward and hard to please: He that is
negligente, dyshoneste: where he that is constante and just, is called cruel
and ungentle: and he that is merciful, fearful, and dissolute: wherein is
given no pardon to them that do amysse, and small praise to them that do well.
Or ever it was spoken that L. Catiline was gone in exile, it was said, that he
was not by Cicero spoiled of his armours of boldenes, that he was not
circumuented and weakened by the diligente labor and council of Cicero and
that he had altered his intent, not because that he did greatly fear: but
that he uncondemned and an innocent was exiled only by the words and power of
the consul. He was not then called unhappy, but fearful: Contrary wise, the
consul not diligente, but cruel. But seeing there were men, that spoke these
things, what would they have said if Catiline had been put to death? Now for
as much as Catiline lives, and is unpunished, they call Cicero a man of no
great counsel, but ignoraunte, fearful, and dissolute. Certes there is
nothing more ignorant and unwise, than the vulgar people, which without any
difference or wisdom judges and only pondreth the chance of the thing,
and to whom any thing well happens, him they say to be very provident and
circumspecte, and to whom otherwise, he to perceive and know nothing. But
let us omytte these things.

Catiline and Manlius be proclaimed ennemies, unto whom fled very many hope^
ostes. Cap. xxiii.
BUT when it was surely known at Rome, that Catiline was admitted captain
over the army, and intended to make war upon his country, there was an act
of parliament made, in the which Catiline and Manlius were judged to be utter
enemies to the common welthe. And to all other there was a day appointed
(saving to those that were already condemned) that it should be lawful for them
to depart from the army unpunished. And if any man after that time should go
unto Catiline, the senate to take him as a traytoure against the common weal,
and against all men's safegarde and profit. The senate also decreed, that
the consuls should muster, and that C. Antonius with such aid as he might
gather, should pursue Catiline both by land and sea, and Cicero to defend
the city from al deceites and mischaunces. Nevertheless the minds of
desperate persons were nothing refrained by these sharp decrees. For there
was none out of so great a company of conspiratours that departed from
Catiline except it were either to spy, or to do some myschiefe: but contrary
wise there were many that drew to him, both out of the country, and out of
the city. But of all those that drew to him, he refused bond servants, of
who^ an innumerable multitude fled to him, he esteemed it a thing unseemly,
that runnagates should have to do in citizens matters: and thynkinge this also,
which in deed should have come to pass, (if his companions at Rome had
performed their enterprise) that huge routes of snaphances and hope lostes,
from all parts of Italy would resort to him. For not only they that were
confederate in the conspiracye, coueted that Catiline should victoriousely
overcome, but also whosoever were greatly indetted, who so ever had sold
away their lands, who so ever were in time paste condemned or atteinted: Many
also by troublynge of the common weal, looked to be advanced to honors and
most high ronmes, many desired war by reason that of such ruffeling and
dissencions, they opteyned power. Farthermore in a great city are always many
naughty ill doers, hope lostes, malaperte, troublous, sedicious and nedye
fellows, which with a beck are ready to disturb the quiet and rest of a city.
But most specially the delycate youth, and little bearded young men, or
Catilines flock without beardes, which smelling all of musk, their hears
featelye comed, wearinge veyles and not gowns, allowed Catilines counsayles.
And of these, many got them to catilines army. And of that number was one
Fuluius, the son of Aulus a Snatour, the which if he could have exchewed
Catilines company and amytie, he had nothing gone out of kind from his
forefathers. He was excellently learned in greek and latin: he had a ioly
quick wit, he was a goodly young manne and a toward. But he with Catilines
company and amity made unlike to him self, in a folyshe brayde, fled unto
Catilines camp: Whom his hard father returning him back again from his
journey, when he had with spytefull rebukes rated, he afterward
commanded him to be slain. Also there was an opinion that P. Clodius, the
son of Appius, departed out of the city, to thentente to go to Catiline.
After that changing his purpose, he returned to the city, and so Cicero
obiecteth against him in many places, that he was companion of the
conspiracy, the which crime although it were^ objected of an enemy, yet I
believe it to be true, for the life and manners of Clodius approve that he
boldly enterprised all things. Also there were some that said that C.
Antonius the consul was one that conspired with Catiline, whoose opinion was
approved by this one argument, that Antonius never endeavored him self to
avoid that suspicion of familiarity with Catiline, which men than had of him,
neither by denyinge, nor yet by dissimulacion. Nor this furious infeccion, did
not only invade the city, but in a manner all Italy, and was now spread
privily through many provinces. And except the conspiracy had been
discovered in the city, surely Catiline in short time had gathered an infinite
army, and the commocions in all places had been exceeding great. In Apulia, in
Brutiis, in Pelignis, in Capua, in a country of Pise, and specially among the
Pisaurians, and Camercians, in Tuschayne, in France, the hither, and further,
the bands of men of arms romed abrod some priuelye, and some openly.

Ambassadors are sent from the senate, into diverse provinces of Italy, to
wythstande the rebellion. Cap. xxiiii.
BUT the huge mocion of this cursed conspiracy raised up by Marcellus the
father and the son, disclosed by L. Vectius, was appealed and brought down
by Bibulus in pelignis and by Cicero in Brutus, and by them they were both
punyshed. But in the further France, C. Murena the legate, brother unto Murena
that was appointed to be consul: In the countreye of Pyse, and the one part
of France, the noble maire Q. Metellus, did withstand and let the myscheuous
fury and ententes of the conspiratours. And many of these did Metellus cast in
prison. Albeit (through the fault of the writers as I suppose) it is falsely
red in Saluste, that this C. Murena should be the ruler of the hither France.
For Cicero does affirm, that he was at that time in the further France, with
all his power. And by the same author we have showed before, that Q. Metellus
Celer, was sent from the senate into the country of Pise and a part of
France. Furthermore Cicero the consul commanded, that all the inhabitants
and dwellers there about, should strongly fortify their towns with garrisons
of men of arms, and to defend their borders and cities from the invasion of
Catiline. Also he sent P. Sestius the treasourer with an army to Capua,
because he herd say that the rebels went about to take it. Than when he was
come to Capua, he banyshed from thence C. Meulanus, a man given to riot, and
C. Marcellus endeuoryng him self to win the city by force, and to reyse up
a servile war, and entendynge to do many other leude deeds, and delivered
that city from most greuouse peril. Wherefore the chief rulers of Capua,
for that the wealth of their city was preserved, they in honor of M. Tullius,
set up a golden image, and called him their patron, and to P. Sestius they
openly gave great thanks.

The preparacion of the rebels in the city, and their councelles with the
ambassadors of Dolphinois. Cap. xx.v.
AT THE same season the capitaines left by Catiline in the city, entised unto
war the citizens, the strangers, the noble men, the mean, and men of low
degree, of what sort so ever they were, which they saw desirous of new
alteracions, that were mete for war: further they prepared mallettes to set
fire on the city, and sent secretlye unto Catiline both armoure and money.

There were than at Rome ambassatours of France sent from a city somewhat in
trouble, desiryng of the senate to deliver their town which was greatly
indetted. Wherefore Le^tulus supposed lightly to allure those men to aid them
in their wars, for as much as the french men are of nature inclined to war,
and always intentive to new business, and hated the present estate of the
people of Rome. In this confederacy were many commodities. First, France had
great plenty of horsemen. of whom the conspiratoures saw them selfs to have
great need. Second, because the people of Dolpiny were next adioynynge to
Italye, and by the reason that France should be in an uproar and ruffelinge,
they thought no man could resist the conspiracy. And so because P. Vmbrenus
was aqueinted with the frenchemen, they gave him charge, that he should require
the said ambassadoures, to take their parts, and showed him by what reason it
might be done. Vmbrenus sent for the ambassadors, and diligently accomplyshed
the matter.

Ciceros watchefull diligence, and his monicions to the french ambassadors,
which uttered the secrets of the conspiracy. Cap. xxvi.
BUT M. Cicero being always watcheful and provident, to see and perceive, what
the conspiratours went about and intended, used the help and counsel of L.
Torquatus, P. Lentulus Spinter, Q. Catulus, M. Lucullus, P. Seruilius, M. Cato,
Q. Sanga, and of many other most noble and worthy men. They hyghly favoring
the common weal, inquered and serched out al thing, and what so ever came to
their knowledge, they forthwith made relacion thereof to the consul. Than as
fortune would, the ambassadoures communed of these matters with Q. Fabius
Sanga, a right noble manne, which was the French men's patron. He being a a
counsel with Cicero in all things, spedely showed the matter to the consul.
Than the consul thynkinge that he had now good occasion, openly to
convince the conspiratours, which thing he always desired, commanded the
ambassadors to come secretelye unto him: and admonyshed them that they should
not be enemies to the people of Rome without a cause: Nor that they should
join their welthy state, with the wretched condition of Catiline, Lentulus,
and other miserable persons: nor that it behooved them to enteprise things
uncertain for certain, or for a small commoditee to adventure upon exceeding
great perils. All war is easelye begone, but it is not in his power to
make an end, that began it. He said Catiline by my counsels, by my great
labor and travail, and with mi strength of men of arms is so be set about
on al sides febled, yt my fellow Antonius with an army may easily subdue him.
Within the city al things are abundantly foreseen and provided for, that no
man can once stir against the common weal. And that if it were known that
they had done, begone, or intended to do any thing against the common weal,
the Senate and people of Rome will as they are accostumed, most sharpelye
revenge it: Therefore he advised them to take good head to them selves and their
city. But in case they would be ruled and do as he would advise them, they
should stand in possibility to obtain of the people of Rome all things what
so ever they would require. The ambassadors full gently answered to those
things and said: It is true, they were required by Le^tulus to be fellows
with them in war, but they weere not in so miserable state, nor of so
wylfull a mind, that they would sodeinly spyl and cast away the amity that
they had with the people of Room, opteined with so great labor and
business, and that their desire was to accomplish all things what so ever
he would command them. Than the consul gave them in charge, that they should
make as though they vehementely favored the conspiracy, and labor to get
letters of their hand writing, and sealed with each of the conspiratours
seals: and diligently to search out all their intentes and purposes. The
ambassadors promisynge to do their endeuoire, slepte not the matter, by
Gabinius (for to him Vmbrenus first brought the french men) they spoke with
Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius, and Cassius: and required of them an oath, their
letters and seals, to the entente they might bring home to their nation some
sure knowledge of the matter. For otherwise they said their citizens could
not be persuaded to take in hand so great an enterprise. Than they
suspectynge nothing, sent unto the rulers and people of Delphinois, an oath
and their letters. (Surely there is nothing more perilous, than to put in
writing that thing that a man would have kept secret.) Farther they gave
them in commandment, that they as shortly as could be, should come into
Italye, with a strong bend of horsemenne, for they said they had soldiers
inoughe. But Cassius, that he might the more easily stere the barbarous men to
war, knowing that outward nations are much moved with nobility, named
certain of the nobles, and said, they had agreed and were consented with
them.

The vain braggyng of Lentulus, and cruel council of the conspiratours in the
city. Cap. xxvii.
ALSO Lentulus, to encorage the french men said, that by the books of Sibilla,
and the diuiuours answers the kingdom of the Romans should be given to the
Cornelians: Cinna and Sillia have had already the regal power, and he him self
was the third Cornelius, to whom the high imperial power should fall. He said
also, that the same was the predestinate year, in which the common weal
should peryshe and finallye decay. For it was.xx. year sithe the Capitol was
burned, and the tenth year sens the virgins Vestales absolucio^. The which
year (as the diuinours have often times given answer) should be to the people
of Room unlucky and unfortunate. After all this the conspiratours descriued
unto the frenchemen, the manner and fashion of all the hole war. But those
things which they appointed to be done at Rome, was afterward found to be
devised and distributed among the conspiratours: that when L. Sergius Catiline
should come with an army in to the field Fesulan, L. Bestia protector of the
commonaltie, should make an oracion, to bring Cicero in hatred, because that
by his prouocacion Catiline had raised up a ciuyle war. And by that token,
the next night following, L. Cassius, and P. Statilius should set fire on.xij.
parts of the city. Which was done for this consideracion, that by that uproar
and ruffelyng, they might more easily murder the citizens. Notwithstanding there
is a certain author that says that they had chosen out an hundred men, which
should set fire on an hundred places of the city: and certain were appointed
to defend and stop the ways to the cundites, and to sley al such as
endeavored them selves to quench the fire. Also they chose out a certain,
which should besiege Pompeys house, and take his children a live, and keep
them as it were in hostage, thereby to win and retain the friendshyppe of Gu.
Pompeius, which at that season led a mighty great host in Asia: and it was
now reported for a surety, that he had accomplyshed many very great wars,
and would shortly return into Italy. Further it was appointed that C. Cethegus
should assail Ciceros house with the sword and fire, and had the charge to
sley him: and he being slain, he had other two, that had been consulles,
and.iiij. that had been pretors, to sley. The other citizens should be numbered
by the band of yongemen, led by Gabinius. And among them also was lymitted
who should take and defend the Capitol, who the market place, who the ports,
and who the gates of the city. Moreover they ordained (it that is wont to
chance in the conqueste of the city of ennemies) to spoil the city, to
burn the temples, to rauyshe the honest wives, noble men's children, virgins,
and nuns, and fill all places with lamentacion, dead bodies, and blood. And
when the city were all set on fire, robrie, and slaughter, Catiline should be
ready with his army to take such as would fle, and join him self with these
capitaines that were in the city. Here I marueyle, seeing Cicero says these
things were thus appointed, wherefore Salust should declare them to be other
wise devised among the conspiratours. For he writes that Gabinius took
upon him the business of burning, and that Cassius should go into France:
when contrary wise Gabinius was appointed captain of the slaughter, and
Cassius of burning. But yet in this thing, I suppose more credence should be
given to Cicero, which disclosed the conspiracy, than to Salustre. But I woll
return again to their communicacion.

The night appointed to crueltye, the fury and wrath of Cethegus, the deceit
of Lentulus. Cap. xxviii.
THAN said the frenchemen: Al these things Lentulus are right well and
politikely appointed, but when shall that wysshed night be? When shall our
Bestia make that desired oracion? It shall be but a short time (said Lentulus)
these things must be done at the feast of Saturn. Then said Cethegus: What
speak ye Lentulus of the feast of Saturn? What short time mean ye? Ye should
not tarry one hour. Very great perturbacions are often times done in a littell
momente. For seeing speed is nedeful in eueri business, the^ specially in war,
namely among citizens. For slowyng and delay may surely do great hurt, but no
profit. Wherefore take heed Lentulus, lest this thy short and little time be
over much, yea and more then over long. Then when all the other answered, it
behooved those things to be done at the feast of Saturnus, Cethegus was so
inflamed, and so wrothefullye ran here and there, that without any doubt he
seemed to wax rauinge mad: he smote him self on the forehead, he could rest
in no place, oftentimes he laid hand on his sword: Why do I tarry said he?
his countenance was full of furye, his words arrogant and proud, he fomed at
the mouth, his eyes glowed, his cruelty appeared in his look. Than said
Cassius: Why doste thou Cethegus trouble our joys? Why do thou (said he)
delay our joys? And he swear an oath, that if a few would follow him, the
other making delay, he him self would assaute the palayce. After these
words, they kept a little while silence. Than spoke Lentulus to the
frenchmen on this wise: What think you our Cethegus woll do that night,
when even now he thinks to come to hand strokes? Think you that the
consul, though he have an army about him, can withstand this most valiaunte
man? Ye say trothe quod they: for we never saw a bolder man. After this
Lentulus said, it pleased him, that the Frenchemennne, in the same journey
before they went home in to their countreye, should go unto Catiline, that
they might confirm the leage and bond of friendeshyppe with him? And he
appointed one Tytus Vulturcius to accompany and conduite them unto Catiline. To
this Vulturcius he gave letters to carry to Catiline, without any name
subscribed: but after this manner. Who I am, ye shall know of him that I have
sent to you. Look that ye play the man: and think in what state ye be: and se
what is now behoueful for you. Take heed that ye refuse no man's help, be he
never so poor. Fare well. Furthermore he sent him word by mouth, that seeing
he was judged of the Senate as an enemy, he should use the aid and help of
bond men, and that he should set forward, and without delay draw toward the
city. For in the city al things were diligently prepared and ready according
to his appointement. Lastly when they had determined, that the french
ambassadoures should the.iij. nonas decembris depart out of the city, they
sent them away with Vulturcius in their company. About the same time M.
Crassus came by night to Cicros house with letters of L. Catiline, in the
which Catiline exhorted him, as one privy to the conspiracye, to strength and
aid them. Cicero thanked him, and greatly praised the good will and love that
he bare to his country. But for what intent Crassus did it, whether because
he would not be reputed a fellow of the conspiracy, if by chance it happed to
be disclosed, or else that he meant well and truly, we do not certainly know.
Nevertheless Cicero in a certain oracion which after Crassus death came to
light, writes that M. Crassus was companion of the co^spiracie. But Cethegus
always blamed his fellows, because they tarying for the feast of Saturn, let
slyp a great occasion of victory. He said, the thing should be done forth
with, with out any delay which while they tarried, ye co^spiracy might come to
light

L. Vulturcius with letters of Lentulus to Catiline, and the french
Ambassadors be taken in their journey. Cap. xxix.
BUT Marcus Cicero, knowing what night the Ambassadoures and Vultureius would
take their iourneye, with a very friendely courage commanded L. Flaccus, and
C. Promptinius the Pretours, that in the evening they should beset the bridge
Milnius with men of arms on both sides, and this to accomplish, he
lycenced that they should take with them certain pyked young men of Rhetia,
which he had often used to have about him for the safegarde of his life. He
dysclosed to them all the hole matter, and committed the wealth of the city
to their fidelity. They atcheued the matter diligently, like as the consul
had commanded. Behold, after midnyght the french ambassadors, and with them
Vulturcius, with a great company, came to the bridge Miluius. Then sodeinelye
on the one side of the bridge L. Flaccus, on the other side C. Promtinius with
their swords drawn set upon them. The frenchemen at the first drew out
their swords: after that knowing their intencion, they lightly yielded them
selves to the pretors. But Vulturcius, when he had long defended him self,
waxing feynt with bledyng, and often beseching Promptinius to save his life, he
yielded him self to them. Than the pretors took from the frenchemen, and from
Vulturcius their letters, and sendynge spedelye tydinges to the consul, when
the day began to break, they brought then those that they had taken unto the
consul.

The conspiratores are by Cicero brought in to the Senate, and witnesses
against them, and accusers are examined. Cap. xxx.
BUT the consul commanded Gabinius, Lentulus, Cethegus, Satilius, and M.
Ceparius to come forthwyth unto him, not doubtyng for the safegarde of the
common weal, to sustain the hatered and malice of so many noble men. All the
other suspectynge nothing, came without delay, Ceparius hearing of the
matter, fled out of the city: but within a while after he was taken in his
journey, and committed to the ward and keeping of C. Terencius. But Cassius
was departed out of the city alytell before the ambassado^res, as though he
would have returned shortly again. When the french men had informed the
consul, that Cethegus house was full of armor and weapons, he sent thither P.
Sulpicius the Praetor, which brought out of Cethegus house a huge great
number of harneyses. And when the consul had inquired him whether he
intended to lead an army in to any province, because he had gathered together
so much multitude of harnes? No truly said he, but I have always had a
desire to be well furnyshed with good harnesses. Than after that the Senate was
quickelye assembled, he commanded the conspiratours and their detectours to
come forth, being accompanied for sauegarde of his body, with a mighty
strong band of knights and gentlemen of Rome. And when Vulturtius was
brought in to the Senate, he appointed.iiii. Senators: C. Cosconius the
praetor, M. Messala, P. Nigidius, App. Claudius, the which should write all the
detectours sayings interrogatories and answers: the which men he knew to be
not only virtuous and faithefull, but also of excellent memory and knowledge,
and that could with great cele^itie easily regester those things that should
be spoken. He demanded of Vulturcius, what business he had with the french
men, whither he was going, to whom, and whoo delivered to him those letters
that were found about him. At the first Vulturtius began to feine and
dissemble many things concerning his journey and the lettres: but after that
by commandment of the Senate, the consul had warraunted him, he said, he
had commendations and letters of P. Lentulus; and that a few days past he
was allured to the fellowship of this Co^spiracy by Gabinius and Caparius, and
thus he hard say, that P. Antronius. Seruius. Sylla. C. Cornelius. L.
Vergunteius, and many other were of the same conspiracy: and that they had
consented and agred to burn the cyty, to murder the citesens, to wast and
destroy Italy, and clearly extinct the common weal. When the french men were
brought in, they said, they had an oath and letters delivered them to bear to
their nation: and that they herd L. Cassius say, that all they, which
Vulturtius had before named were bent with them, And in manner they told yt self
same that Vulturtius had showed of burning sleing, and murdering of the
citesins. And they showed what a great strife was between Cethegus and the
other, because Lentulus and the other would do this feate at the feast of
Saturn, and Cethegus said, this war required great speed. Furthermore they
declared all that Lentulus had spoken unto them of Sibils prophecy, and of
other matters, by whose means, and how often they had been with him. Then M.
Tullius caused sodeinlye the letters to be brought forth, and commanded to open
them. First he showed them to Cethegus: he knowledged his hand and his seal,
the letters were read openly, the sentence or effect of which was this: They
intended surely to accomplish those things that they had confirmed to
their ambassadoures, desiringe that they would perform those things that
their ambass^dours undertook. Statilius letters were read, the effect of
which was like the other. After that the consul showed the letters to Lentulus,
saying: Know not thou this seal Lentulus? He granted to be his, This is
(said the consul) the image of that most noble manne, thy graund father,
which only loved his country and cityzens, the which domme Image ought to have
revoked thy mind from so horrible a deed. And he inquired of him whether he
had not talked with the frenchemen of Sibyls prophecy? And sodeinly he
confessed it, which no man thought he would have done. Than he had license
to speak in his defense what he would. But Lentulus, although he were a good
orator, yet convicted of his own conscience, he was clean discouraged, out
of countinaunce, changed color, and had not a word to speak. To be brief.
They confessed truth. And not withstanding that Gabinius at the first
began styffely to deny, yet at the last he disproued nothing. But beside
their letters, seals, their own hands, and every man's confession, the
fear disturbance in them self, suspensed and wauerynge countenance, and often
changing of color condemned them.

The thanks and most ample praises given of the Senate to Cicero for deteccion
of the conspiracye. Cap. xxxi.
AFter the deteccions openly publyshed, the Consul consulted with the Senate,
what their pleasure was, to be done concerning the safegarde of the common
weal. Than first the Senate gave him most high thanks, that by his power,
council, labor, and diligence, (with the danger of his own life) without
uproar, without bludshedynge, without an army, without contencion in
battle.iiij. men being taken, the city from burning, the citizens from
murder, Italy from wastyng, and spoylyng, and the common weal from utter
destruction was delivered. And they so adorned him with lauds and preisinges,
as never man before at any time with so many and so synguler words was in the
Senate lauded. Q. Catulus, the prince and chief of the Senators, and M. Cato
that most worthy man, and that most derely loved the common weal, in the
gretest assembly of the senators called him Pater patrie, the father of the
country. L. Gellius, a man full of honor and bountifulnes, said. The common
weal, for his reward ought to give him a ciuyle garland. A civil garland of
oken leaves was used to be given to him that had saved a citizen in battle.
Finally all that had been or were meet to be consulles, and pretours so
lauded him, that there was no man, which did not give like thanks as he had been their father, which thought not that by his means the common weal, their
goods, their children and their lives were saved. And also they forget not to
laud and praise L. Flaccus and C. Promptinius, for that the consul had
found them so valiant, so diligent, and so faithful in that his business.
(...) fore him never chanced to man) supplicacion was decreed. At rysinge and
departing of the senate, Lentulus was committed to the custody and keeping of
P. Lentulus Spinter, which was then in the office Edilis: P. Statilius, in C.
Caesar ye praetor, C. Cethegus to Q. Cornificius, and Gabinius to M. Crassus. But
the common people of Rome, which before being desirous of new business and
ruffelinge, favored Catilines enterprise, it is incredible, the conspiracy
being detected, with what heart and courage they weere kendled to defend their
liberty. They strove with the Senators, which of them loved the common weal
best. They esteemed Cicero to be a great and an excellent manne: they called
him the keeper of their liberty, the preserver of their city, and the father
of the country. Whose magnitude of mind, whose counsels, they with praises
extolled as high as heaven.

The next day, the Senate gave to the french ambassadors, and to Titus
Vulturcius, approving their deteccion, right great and ample rewards.

Cicero writes, that at the same season there were many, the which no man
accusing or reproving them, were forced with prickyng of their conscience, to
disclose them selves to be of the conspiracy. The violence of their conscience
is great: Violence of conscience.
The which constrayneth men, that have done any wicked or damnable deed,
though it were secretelye, many times yet to bewraye and disclose them
selves. For the conscience for the misdeeds, and pain of the laws, suffers
the transgressors, not only never careless to take rest, but also not once
to draw their breath without fear.

L. Tarquinius caused M. Crassus to be suspects of the conspiracy. Cap. xxxiiii.
AT THE same time one of the conspiratours, called L. Tarquinius (upon a
safeconducte) was brought before the Senate, to open and show what he knew of
the conspiracy: and he declared to them the same things that the french
ambassadoures and T. Vulturcius told, of the burning of the city, of the
murtherynge of the cityzens, and of all those that were confederate to do this
myschiefe. Moreover he said, that M. Crassus was companion and partener of the
conspiracy: and how he had certain messages from him to Catiline, that he
should not be discouraged, although the captains of the war in the city were
taken and in hold, but that he should with all celeritie and speed haste him
with his army to the city, to deliver the conspiratours out of prison, and to
accomplish all other things among them ordained and appointed: In the city
all things was full of fear. But when Tarquinius named Crassus, many of his
familiar friends, of whom he had a great nombre, said with a loud voice: The
detectour is false and corrupted with meede.

The oracion defensive made for M. Crassus by his friends. Cap. xxxv.
IN ALL things honorable fathers (said they) which are most grievous and
cruel, what any manne woll do or imagine, should not be pondered after the
voice and speech of the people, but according to his life and manners, which
is accused. For if M. Crassus (prudente fathers) should therefore be demed
culpable, because Tarquinius accuses him among the conspyratours, what
should it profit him, to have led ever more hitherto a life most pure
without blame or shame? What dyfference than shall there be between the good
men and the yuell? What man most innocente or virtuous can assure him self
from deceytes, if it behooves to give credence to the yuel saying of every
lewede and ungracious person? But if we shall examine the life of M. Crassus,
what bodyly lust lurketh, what mischeuous deed lies hid, what crueltye, or
what braynsicke boldenes: there shall be neither error nor obscurity in the
cause: So great is the greatness of this mischief, that without fylthy youth,
without many yuel deeds before committed, with out a life defiled with all
damnable acts, with out prodigal expense with disworship and shame, without
unbridled boldness be showed, and not only braynsyke boldness, but very furor
and madness, no man will believe, that ever he would entreprise so heinous, so
cruel, and so bitter a deed. Furthermore we must lay here unto, a lust to
rule, the hate of peace and good men, dread of punishment, dishonest friends,
debt, poverty, time meet and convenient. All which things except they be
manifest, truly (as we say) so ungracious a deed so cruel, and so far
against all reason, will not be believed. What thing, what hope, what lewd
lust could enforce Crassus to do such a deed? Could need or scarsitie compel
him, which is so rich, that there are few or none in this great multitude of
men, that have more abundance of riches? Could ambition, which often times
makes many men naught? For both good and badde desire glory, honor, rule,
gouernaunces of provinces, dignities of the church, and triumphs. The good
men by virtue: the ille men mistrustyng their unworthiness, by naughty and
crafty menes crepe up: and the honors which they, things being in quiet and
good order, despeyre to win: by rufflynge and troubling of the common weal,
they think to opteyne. Than thus has not Crassus in peace and rest atteyned
unto the most ample and high honors of the City without repulce? But
peradventure his vngentyl manners fierce cruelty, unbridled boldness enforced
Crassus unto this. Who is more courteyse then he? Who is more mylde? What deed
did we ever se him do, over boldly, or without good aduisement and
consideracion? We omit now the weal public, which has ever ben to Crassus
most derely beloved. We speak nothing of his estate, of his manner of lyuinge,
of his nature, of his most gentyl conditions, of his incredible love toward
good men, of his study and diligence to conserve the common quiet rest and
peace. Nor we do not omit those things, as though they were not of most
weyghty importance but because they are to you notably known. Is it than
credible, than in this most honest mind, in this life, so abominable a deed
could take place? Look well unto him, and behold those other, lay the crime
and his life together. Whold Crassus burn the cyty, sle the senators wast
Italy, destroy the weal publyke, and bring the name of the people of Rome to
naught? This suspicion honorable fathers, takes no hold on this pure honest
mind, on this life, on this man. They were savage beasts, wild and cruel,
in the shape of men, that went about to destroy those things. And what meant
it? when Traquinius named Antronius, Vargunteius, Lecca, Seruius, Sylla,
Cornelius, and many other, that ye all attentively gave ear? For those, if no man would accuse them, yet their conditions and life would convince them.
But when he began to name M. Crassus, did not every man vehementlye cry
out against him? For no man demed that the life of any man could so
suddenly be changed, or nature altered: that he which a little before was the
best and most honest man, would anon after in cruelty pass the wild
beasts. Consider a little in your minds honorable fathers (for so ye shall
understand how far of, Crassus is from suspicion of this heinous deed)
consider I say, Catiline, Antronius, Cassius, Cethegus, Le^tulus, Gabinius,
and other men which are alied to this detestable deed, what murders, what
aduoutries, what robryes, how many and what great unheard of and singular
deeds of myschiefe, of brainesicke boldness, of voluptuous pleasure, of
falsehoode, of promise breaking, of crueltye, of avarice shall ye find in
these men? Who does marvel, that Catiline has conspired against the weal
public? being of all men (sithe man was first formed) the most muscheuest,
ye most cruel, and the most fylthy. Which has defiled so many worshypful
wives, so many noble young men, whom L. Sylla appointed to sley the knights
of Room: among the which he slew Catullus his systers husband, and M.
Marius most derely beloved of the people of Rome. Which in Africa destroyed
many houses, spoiled many towns, and all the temples, and so vexed and wasted
that province, that (as it seemed) it could scaselye be restored again in
many years after. In whose life there can be found no hour void from
aduoutrye, from mourder, from mischief, from cruelty, from doing ill deeds, whom
we saw afterward accused of petye briberye, and incest: and whom always al
men thought to be borne to make discord and variance in the common weal. Who
wondereth that Lentulus was familierly acqueinted with him, saying he was
nedye, sumptuous, bold, proud, lecherous? Whereto should we rehearse the
furious brainesyckenes of Cethegus? or how he wounded Pius Metellus? Who was
ever more stubborn, more fierce, or more cruel than he? And who could be
found more voluptuous, more lecherous, more deceiteful tha^ Antronius? Whom
we knew was condemned for ambicion, whom we knew committed murder, and
spoiled the temples of our confederate friends. It were an infinite business,
to declare to you all their deeds. But it is your part honorable fathers,
though we rehearse them not, keeping silence inwardly to mind all those, which
are known to have conspired. For ye shall well perceive each of them to be
sooner condemned of his own life, then by our suspicion. Dyddest thou than
think Tarquinius with those deteccions to bring Crassus from this dignity of
familiars, in to this flock, in to this nombre of wicked caytiues and parent
sleyers? Is it not now apparent, honorable fathers, that those crimes are
feyned? Do ye not se that thing, that the detector has said of Crassus,
corrupted either with meede or hope, or with dread depraved, or else to
proceed of ennemies? Wherefore let not this gappe lie open to ennemies, that who
so ever a man does hate, him by some detectour in false crimes appealed, he
may rydde out of life. Suffer yt in most greatest crimes, the life of every man
may be his witness. Reteyne still this most worthy cityzen, this most valyant
man, that most derely loved this honorable Senate, and that is so prompte and
ready with heart and mind to all things, that should be provided for the
common weal. Finally look well to, that this most noble and most mighty man by
your cruelty should not seem to be violently entreated.

The decree of the Senate for M. Crassus, the suspicion agenst Cicero, and his
purgation. Cap. xxxvi.
FOR as much as sum thought this thing incredible, and some other though they
believed it, yet knowing the manne to be so mighty puissaunt and rich, in
such a troublous time, demed it better by all ways and means to reteyne his
favor, than stere him to displeasure, the Senate decreed, Tarquinius detection
to be false, he to be committed to prison, and clean to be put to silence,
except he would show, who instanted him to feyne so great a thing. There
were sum the same season that thought this detector had been subornated by P.
Antronius, to thend that Crassus, for the danger of their fellowship, should
with his riches help the conspiratours. Other there were among the which also
was Crassus him self, which believed, that this man was craftily brought in
by Cicero, to the end that Crassus for this suspicion, should not take upon him
the defense of those that were in prison. Whereupon there arose exceeding great
hatred between Crassus and Cicero. But the young man P. Crassus, the preisar,
the follower, and lover of Cicero, did let Crassus to pursue Cicero openly. But
by whose counsel Tarquynius was craftylye brought in, as yet we know not the
certaynety. We believe not, that it was Ciceros drifte. For this is plain, that
Q. Catulus and C. Piso, Cesars enemies, could for no favor opteyne of him,
that C. Ceser either by the french ambassadoures, or by any other detectour,
should be named to be in the conspiracy of Catiline. And I find that Cicero in
this business bare him self very vpryghtly with out any parcialyte. He neither
accused any man as culpable of this mischiuous deed with out a clear probation,
or kept secret for friendship, or for mede conceled any man.

Of Lentulus and his fellows sedition servants bond and fre, and wonderful
token showed to Cicero. Cap. xxxvii,
WHILE these things were in doing all Lentulus and Cethegus servants bond
and free, ran about from tavern to tavern, from shop to shope to stur up
the minds with mede of such as were nedy and naught. And when they had raised
up a great rout of craftis men, they by diverse ways prepared to invade the
Pretors houses. But the Consul having knowledge thereof had in his mind many
imaginations, what should be done with the conspiratours that were take. and in
hold, if he should do punishemente on them, the conspiracy were extyncte: but
being mild and merciful in all his life, he dradde the name of cruelty: and
right well forsawe, that for this matter he should in time to come be in danger
of great hatred and envy. While he mused on this matter, sum write, that
this wonderful token was showed to him, as they were doing sacrifice in his
house for the people, on the alter, the fire being almost quenched, suddenly
out of the ashes and imbers, a long and a pure flame burned up bright, and
answer was made by the diuinours, that Cicero should not doubt to accomplish
those things for the common weal, wherabout he in his mind so much mused, and
that thereby to him of the gods immortal was sygnified great fame and glory.
I dare not affirm, whether this be true or no, because we read that such
sacrifice for the people was not wont to be done in ye consuls house, but
always in the high bishops. Furthermore Cicero was nothing moved with such
wonderful signs and tokens.

The sentence of D. Syllanus and other noble men given against the
conspiratours. Cap. xxxviii.
THAN the consul strongelye fortifyed the city, and with all celeritie and
speed assembled the Senate, and required their advise what should be done with
those that were in hold. Than D. Sillanus, elected to be consul, was first
desired to say his mind, whose sentence was, that those that were in ward,
also L. Cassius, which desired to be charged with the burning of the city.
P. Furius, Manlius Chilo, Q. Annius, P. Vmbrenus, which were always occupied in
solicitynge the french ambassadors (if they might be taken) should be put to
death. To this agreed the other that had been or like to be consuls, and namely
Q. Catulus, in an oracion full of severity, said that the conspiratours ought
not to live and enjoy this light one momente of an hour. But when it came to
C. Caesar, and T. Nero, to say their minds, they began to reason the
contrary, and said. They ought not to be put to death, because the laws
did it prohibyte, but their judgment was that the conspiratours, their goods
being confiscate, should be sundred and surely kept in diverse holds until
that Catilyne were by war vanquised. This matter Salust writes as follows.

The oration of C. Caesar, wherein he contendeth, that the conspiratours should
not be put to de^h, but kept continually in prison. Cap. xxxix.
IT becomes all men, honorable fathers, which shall give counsel and
say their advise in matters doubtful, to be clean without hatred, friendship,
wrath, and mercy. The mind can not easily forese the truth, where those
affections bear a stroke, nor no man at one time follows his ill affection,
and the profit of the weal publyke, where unto a man applies his wit, there
it avails. If affection possess the wit, she rules, reason avails
nothing. I could abundantly recyte unto you honorable fathers. what kings
and people moved with wrath or mercy, have ylle and hurtfully ordered them
selfs in consultation, but I will rather rehearse to you, what our forefathers
have done well and ordinatly against their natural inclination.

In the war of Macedony, which we made against the king of Persy, the great
and mighty cyty of Rhodes (which increased in great riches by the goods of
the people of Rome) was unto us contrary and unfaithful. But after the war was
finished, they counceled what should be done of the Rhodians: Our forefathers
let them go unpunished, lest any man should say, that the war was begun
ageynste them, more for wynnyng of riches than to revenge iniurye.

Also in all the wars Punycke, when the Carthaginois, often times both in time
of peace and truce did many detestable deeds ageynste all right, yet our
forefathers having accasyon, never did such things, they sought more, what
became them, then what they might laufully do against their enemies. This thing
also, honorable fathers should of you be foresene, lest the detestable deed of
P Lentulus, and the other conspiratours, should more enforce you to reueng, than
besemeth your dygnyty, or rather incline to your wrath, than to your honorable
fame. For if worthy punyshmente for their deeds be found, I approve new
council. But if ye gretnes of ye mischeuous deed both pass all men's wyts my
mind is to use those punishments which are ordained by the laws: Many of them
yt before me have said their minds, discretely and magnificently have bewailed
the decay of the common weal, and have full eloque^tly reckened up, how cruel
a thing war is, what yuels chances to them that are conquered, the virgins
ravished the young babes and children vyolently pulled out of the fathers and
mothers arms, the honest wives must suffer what so ever please the subduers,
the temples and houses are spoiled, slaughter, and burnynges are done, finally
all things filled with armor, carcases, blood, and lamentations. But tell me
I pray you, whereto serves that oration? was it to stomach you against the
conspiracy? If so great and so cruel a deed will not move a man's spirits,
shall an oration kendell him? It is not lykely. Nor there is no mortal
creature that thinkethe his wrongs littell: many have taken these their
injuries more greuousely than right required. But some thing honorable fathers
may better be suffered in some men than in other some. If the private persons,
that live obscurely unknown, commit through anger any dishoneste deed: Few
know it. Their fame and fortune are egal. The great rulars and high
governors, all men know their acts. So in highest felycitie, is least
liberty to do a mysse. It besemeth such men not to be spiteful, not to
bear hatred, but in no wise to be angry. The affection which in other is
called anger in the high rulars is named Pride and cruelty. Surely, honorable
fathers, I deem all turmentes less than their detestable deeds. But many men
remembering the last punishementes, and forgettinge the mischeuous deed of the
transgressors, they reason of the pain, whether it be more cruel than it
should be. I surely know, that what so ever the honorable and most valiant
man. D. Syllanus has said, he spoke it for the great affection that he
bears to the common weal. Neither has he in so weyghty a cause, said any
thing for favor, nor yet for hatred, I know his manners and sobrenes to be
such. Truly his sentence to me seems not cruel (for what cruelty can be done
to such men, but yet not all thing agreeable to the common weal. For
certeynely either dread or injury has constreyned you Syllanus, chosen
consul for the year to come, to adiudge the conspiratours to suffer a new
kind of punishment. As touching fear, to reason thereof it were but in vain,
namely since the great dyligence of the noble consul has so strongly warded
and defended the cyty with men of arms. As concerning their punishment, I may
speak as the truth is, that death to those that be in heaviness and misery is
not a tourmente, but rather a quiet and rest from all woeful wretchedness. For
death fynishethe all griefs and euyls that mortal creatures endure. But I
pray you Syllane, why did you not add, that they should be first beaten? was
it because the law Portia, or some other laws do prohibit it? Likewise the
laws forbid that citezins condemned should be put to death, but they command
to banishe them. Left ye that unspoken, because it is more grievous to be
beaten, than to be put to death? And yet what punyshemente is to cruel or
grievous to men conuicte of so great and detestable a deed? But if you spoke
not of beatynge, because it is easier? how inconvenient is it to fear the
law in the less business, and to neglecte it in the greater? For who shall
reprehend that that is decreed against traitors to the common weal? Time,
day, fortune, after whose lust nations are ruled. To them what so ever evil
happens, chances according to their deseruinges. But consider honorable
fathers, what laws ye ordeyne for other. All evil examples take their
beginning of good things for after imperial governance instituted by good
me^, came to ye handling of those that were evil: ye new example was
transferred from the worthy and mete, to the unworthy and vnmet persons. When
the Lacedaemonians had subdued ye Athemenses, they ordained.xxx. men to rule
ye common weal. They at the first put no man to death but such as for their
offenses were justly condemned. The people was right glade of this law, and
said, it was very well done. But after, this license increasinge by littell
and littel, they slew for their pleasure as well good men as bad, and put the
other in fear, and so the city being oppressed with bondage and thraldom,
they grievously repented their former folyshe gladness.

We remember, Sylla having the upper hand, commanded Dasippus and such
other hope lostes, that were grown rich, to the great hurt of the common
weeale, to be put to death. Who did not preyse his deed? They said, ungracious
and detestable persons, and such as with sedi^ions troubled the common weal,
were well and justly put to death. But that thing was the beginning of a
great mischefe. For if any of Syllas soldiers coueted to have any man's house
in the city, manor in the country, jewel, or garmente, A man proscripted,
was in case that the first that mete him might laufully sle him.
they did their endeavor, that he, whose good they desired, might be among
the nombre of them that were proscripted. So that they, which reioysed at the
death of Damasippus, were sone after brought to the same end. Neither was there
any end of slaughter until that Sylla had abundantly satisfied his soldiers
with riches. But I neither fear this thing in M. Tullius, nor at this time,
but in a great city, many and diverse are the wits. An other time, an other
being consul, and having an army at his commandment, some thing false may
be believed to be true: when such a consul after this example, by decree of
the senate, shall draw out his sword, who shall make him put it up? or who
shall moderate him? Our ancestors, honorable fathers, wanted at any time
neither council, nor boldness, neither pride let them to follow the laws
and manners of other nations, if they were allowable. Armur and weapons of
war, they took of the Sainnites, many ornaments belonging to the great
officers and rulars, they received of the Tuscayns. Finally, where so ever they
saw any mete or convenient thing among their friends or foes, the same with
great dilygence they used at home. They would rather follow, than envy those
that were good. But our ancestors following the manners of the Greeks,
punished their citizins with beatynges, and put to death such as were
condemned. After the public weal increased, and that partakenge among the
people began to grow, by reason of the multitude: the innocents began to be
circumuented, and other such like mischifes to be practiced, than the law
Portia and other laws were ordained, by the which exyle was granted to them
that were condemned. Therefore I think this cause, most honorable fathers, to
be very great, whereby we shall not need to take any new council. Verily, there
was more virtue and wisdom in them that of so small riches brought this impire
to so great wealth and renoume, than in us, which can scasely maynteyne and
keep things well won. Is it therefore my mind that they should be let go, and
increase Catilines army? No truly. But my judgment is that their goods be
forfete, and they to remain in prison in such towns belonging to Rome, as
be most welthy. Nor that none from hensforthe should sue to the senate, or
labor to the people for them, And he that would so do, the senate to esteem
him to do ageynste the weal public, and sauegarde of us all.

The oracion and sentence of Ceaser, pleased very much even the friends of
Cicero. Cap. xl,
WITH this oracio^ of Ceasar, so much altered were men's minds quickly, and
such dred of false accusatyo^ and cruelty took them: yt D. Sillanus greatly
repented him of his sentence, that he was the principal and chief that judged
the conspiratoures to death: and was glad aftewardes with interpretacion to
myttigate his sentence (for shame it was to change it) and so to follow the
judgment of Tiberius Nero. And some other there were, that would rather seem
more bolder in giving sentence, which said: They minded nothing their own
perilles, but feared lest the consul should not be strong enough to
accomplish their ordinances. But the friends and kinsefolke of the consul
were most specially moved with this oracion. They consideringe what great
envy and hatered of the commune people might here after arise against Cicero,
if the senate breaking the law Portia, should without the consent of the
people, put noble citezins to death, they all agreed to the sentence of
Caesar, and prayed the consul that he would look to his own saluegard and
profit, neither cold they in the mean while absteyne from tears. Caesar, by
his oration drawing so many to him, among whom was also Qu. Cicero, had
obtained his purpose, if the oration of the most prudent consul, and Cato, had
not encouraged the senators minds, that began to quayle. The consul was of
nature mylde and merciful, but except he should than have showed sharpenes, he
saw the weal publyke like to be brought in to great danger. For if they
showed them self more soft and gentle, they deemed that the conspiratours
should be the bolder and more encouraged, and in the mean time, some
commocion might rise in the city. But if they showed them selves very
vehemente against those that were taken, he foresawe that all the puissaunce,
all the hoope, all the riches of the conspiratours, these perils of the city
being put away, should sodeinelye quail. And though he understood, that
this thing could not be brought to pass without great daungeir of his own
life, yet so derely loved he the common weal that he more esteemed the wealth
publyke, than his own life. Than when he saw the senate inclinynge to Caesar's
sentence, coveting to slaye them beginnynge to waver, rose up and said as
hereafter follows.

The oration of the consul against the conspiratours. Cap. xli.
ISE, honorable fathers, all your vysages and eyes turned toward me, I see
you not only for your own peril, and for the publyke weal, but also (if
that weere put away) very heavy and thoughteful for the daungeire that I am
in. Your good will toward me, is to me in adversity joyful, and in sorrow
acceptable: But I beseech you for the gods sakes immortal, set aside that
good will, and forgetting my sauegarde, think upon your self, and your
children. If this condition of consulshyppe be given me, that I should suffer
all bitter adversities, all sorrows and torments, I will bear them not only
stoutely, but also wyllynglie: so that by my travails to you and the people of
Rome, honorable fathers, dignity and prosperity may be procured. I am that
consul honorable senatoures, for whose sake neither the common place of
judgment, wherein al equity is contained: nor the field, consecrate for
choosing of high officers: nor this court of senators, the special aid of
all nations: nor my house, the common refuge of all men: nor my bed ordained
for rest, nor finallye this honorable place, this seat appointed for the
most high governors, was never void from peril of death, and disceytes.
Many things have I kept secret, many things have I endured, many things
have I granted, many things to my great sorrow, being in dreede for you,
have I help. Now if the gods immortal will this to be the end of my
consulshyppe, that I should deliver you honorable fathers, and the citizens of
Rome from miserable slaughter, your wives and children and the vyrginnes
Vestalles, from utter vexacion, the temples and holy places, this our most
goodlye country from most cruel bournynge, al Italy from war and
destruction, what so ever fortune is appointed to me only, I will adventure
it. For if P. Lentulus, induced by the southesayers, thought that his name was
predestinate to destroy the publyke weal, why should not I rejoice that my
consulshyppe is ordained for the conseruacion of the same common weal?
Wherefore honorable fathers, provide for your selves, see too the sauegarde of
your country, save your selves, your wives, your children, and your goods,
and defend the name and wealth of the people of Room: take ye no care nor
thought for me. For first my special trust is, that all the gods which
preserve this city, will reward me, according to my deseruinges. Secondelye
if any thing chance, I will with an vpryghte mind and a good courage, dye.
For unto a valiaunte manne death is not shameful, nor unto a Consul, it
comes not to sone, ne unto a wise man it is not wretched. And yet have I not
so iron a stomach, but that I am moved with the sorrow of my most dear and
loving brother here present, and with the tears of all those, which ye se
inuiron me about: also my wife that is half dead, oftentimes reuoketh my
mind homewardes, and my daughter well nere dead for fear, and my litell
son, the which seems to me, does embrace the common weal, as a pledge of
my consulshyppe, nor my son in law, that stands here awaytinge the end of
this day all these things do move me, but yet in suchewyse, that all should be
in sauetie with us, yea rather I would some vyolence should oppress me, than
they, and we with the common weal should perysshe together. Wherefore
honorable fathers, stycke to the sauegarde of the common weal, provide
surely for all storms that may fall. Without ye take good head, not T.
Gracchus, which would ones again be made protector of the comminaltie, nor
C. Gracchus, that went about to reuyue the laws Agrarie, nor L. Saturninus,
which slew C. Memmius, is brought to any ieopardy, or to your sharp
judgment: but they are in hold, that tarried still in Rome, to bourne the
city, to mourder you al, and so to receive in Catilin. We have their letters,
their seals, their own hand writings and finally each of their own
confessions. The french ambassatours are solicited, the slaves and servants
are styrred up, Catilyne is sent for. This council have they taken, that all
being slain, no man should be left, to bewail the name of the common weal,
and to lament the calamity of so great an empire. All these things the
detectours have declared, the accused have confessed. You have judged it by
many tokens so to be: First in that ye have given me high thanks in special
words, and have affirmed, that by mine industry and diligence, the conspiracy
of these hope lostes, is openly known: further in that ye have compellyd
Lentulus to yield up his office of Pretorshyp. And in that ye have given
sentence, that he and the other should be committed to ward, and specially
that ye have decreed procession to be made in my name, which honor was never
done to any man in time of peace before me. Finally, in that ye rewarded
yesterday so magnyficently the french ambassatours and T. Vulturtius. All
which things are of such forte, that they which by name ar put in hold,
without doubt seem of you to be condemned. But I determined to refer holly
unto you honorable fathers, both what you will judge of the deed, and what you
will determyne touching the punishment. I will show you before, what
pertayneth to the consul.

I beheld not long sense, great furye waltrynge in the weal publyke, and
some new myschefes a brewing. But I never thought this so great and so mortal
a co^spiracy to be enterprised of the citesens. Now, what soever it be, whither
so ever your minds and sentences inclyne, it must be determined er night.
You see unto how great a danger we be brought, whereunto if ye think, a few
are confederate, you are far wide. This myschiefe is sprawled abroad further
than you think: For it has not only overflowed Italy, but is also run over
the mountayns Alps, preuily crepyng forth, has now invaded many provinces.
This thing in no wise can be oppressed by sustaynyng and prolongyng thereof.
What so ever way it pleases you to take, you must spedily determyne there
upon. I se there are two sundry sentences, one of Syllanus, whose judgment
was, that they, which were bent on this great mischief should be put to
death. The other of C. Caesar the which dysalowyng the punishment of death, would
they should suffer all grievous pain, and tourmente. Either of them, according
to his dignity, and weight of the cause, with great gravity handlyd the
matter. The one thought, that they which endeavored them self, to slay us
all, and the people of Rome, which would distroye the empire, that would
extincte the name of Romans, were not worthy to live the mynute of an hour.
And that kind of punyshmente oftentimes executed upon such naughty citesens
in this common weal, remaneth or record. The other vnderstandethe that death
is not ordained of the goddis immortal, as a punishmente, but as necessity of
nature, or else a rest from travail and myseries. Therefore wise men never
grutched against it, yea oftentimes they with a hardy courage, and wyllyngly
desired death. And to lie in yrons perpetually in prison, is a syngular
punyshmente invented for heinous offenses. He wyllethe, that they should be
severed into sundry towns, which thing if he would have commanded, stands
but little with equity, if he would desire it, it seems a hard thing to be
done: yet if it please you, let it be so decreed. For I will take it upon me,
and I trust to find them, that will not think it to be against their
dignity and honor, to do that ye shall ordeyne for the wealth of us all. He
charge the townsmen with a great penalty, if any of them break prison, and
would they should be surely kept and has appointed peynes mete for such
grievous offenders, and that there shall no man labor, neither by the senate,
nor by the people, to mitigate the punysshementes that they are condemned to
suffer. Also he takes away the hope, which only is wont to be a man's comfort
in misery: and moreover he wylleth their goods to be confiscate. The life
only he leaves to those wicked offenders, which if he would have taken
away: with one grief he should have dispatched them of many tribulations of
mind and body, and of all peynes of transgressions. And because the ill doers
in their life should stand in some dreede, our forefathers said, that such
peynes as be in hell were ordained for wicked lyuers, meaning thereby, that if
the fear of such infernal peynes were taken away, men would no whyt be
arfayde of death.

Now honorable fathers, I see how this thing touches me, if you should
follow Ceasars mind, because he leaves to the way of the common weal, that
is acceptable to the people, peradventure I shall not need greatly to fear the
furius rage of the people, he being the author of this sentence, but if you
will follow the other sentence, I doubt whether it shall turn me to more
business yea or nay. But yet the profit of the common weal wayeth more with
me, than all mine own perils. We have also Ceasars mind and sentence
(according to his honorable estate, and as it be seems a man descended of so
noble a lineage) as a pledge of his contynuall good will to the common weal.
And we understand, what dyfference is between the myldnes of orators, and him
that truly loves the people, and tendreth their wealth. I se that some of them,
which would be seen to favor the people, be absente, because they will not give
sentence of death against the citizens of Rome. This man not three days past,
committed toward Cethegus, and P. Lentulus citesens of Rome, and decreed unto
me porcession, and yesterday he gave great rewards to the detectours of the
conspiracy. Now there is no manne that doubts, what his mind and
judgment is concerning all this busynes, which committed the offenders to
ward, that so greatly thanked the Questor, and decreed the detector to be so
highly rewarded. But C. Caesar understands the law Sempronia to be
constituted and made for the citesens of Rome: but he that is an enemy to the
common welthe, can in no wise be a citisyn, and farther the self maker of the
law Sempronie, was by commandment of the people grievously punyshed. He also
demeth Lentulus to be lyberall and not prodygall: and that he, that so sharply,
so cruelly imagened, by that means he might destroy his common weal, and
confound this city, may be called a fouourer of the people. And so this
most mylde and courteys man doubts not to command, that Lentulus should
live perpetually fettred in dark prison. Also he has establyshed, that no
man hereafter booste him self, that he mytigated his pain, and that no man,
offending ageinste the common weal, be rekned a favorer of the people. He
wylleth furthermore, their goods should be confiscate, that beside all their
torments of mind and body, they would be oppressed with need and pouertye.
Wherefore whether ye will determine this, ye must cause the people to here me
with love and favor: Or if ye will rather follow the sentence of Sillanus, ye
shall easylie defend both you and me from blame of cruelty. And yet
honorable fathers, what cruelty can there be, in punyshyng so great and so
cruel a deed? Truly I speak according to my mind: for so mote I with you
enjoy the common weal, as I, that in this cause am right vehemente, am not
moved with any crueltye of mind. For who is more milder than I? but yet after
a certain singular humanity and mercy. For why me thinks that I see this
city, the lantern of the hole world, and the fortres of defense for all
nations, sodeinely burninge fall in desolacion. I see in my mind our
countreye clean destroyed, and the miserable heaps of cityzens lie unburied.
The furious look of Cethegus frantike mad in the slaughter of you, is never
out of my syghte. When I call to remembrance Lentulus, reigninge like a
king, like as he confessed to have seen him self by predestinacion: Gabinius
arrayed in a purple weed: and Catiline come with his army: O how I than
abhor to see the lamentacion of the honest wives, the flyghte of young
maids and childrene, and the trouble of the virginnes Vestalles. And because
these things seem to me vehementely miserable and to be pitied: therefore I
show my self sharp and vehemente against those, that would have performed
them. I ask you, whether that householder which does most sharply and
greuouselye punish his servant that sleyeth his childrene, kylleth his wife,
and burns his house, is to be counted mild and merciful, or else fierce and
cruel? I judge him importunate and of an iron courage, that would not assuage
his sorrow with the turmenting of such a servant: In like manner we shall be
rekened merciful, if we show our selves most sharp and vehemente against
those that would murder us, our wives, our children, that with all their
endeavor go about to destroy every man's house, and this universal common
weal, which have done their best to have stablyshed the nation of
Delphinois in the steps of this city, and in the ashes of this empiere,
distroied with fire: but if we will be seen to be remiss and negligente, we
shall be utterly defamed of cruelty, for sufferynge our country and citesens
to be distroyed. Except any man will think L? Caesar that noble and valyant
man, and that most derely loves this common weal, was the other day very
cruel, what he said, that his sisters husband, that most honorable lady, being
present, and heryng him, was worthy to dye. When he said, Flaccus was slain by
the consuls commandment: and his son, not.xiiii. year of age, bound and
cast into prison to be slain Was any of their deeds like this? What counsel
took they to destroy the common weal? Largess was than used in the common
weal, to come to honor, and some contencion and part taking. And even at
that time this Le^tulus grandfather, that most noble man being armed, pursued
Gracchus, and was tha^ sore wounded, to the end the high dignity of the
common weal should nothing be blemyshed. This Lentulus has styrred up the
Frenchemen to turn vpset down this common weal: he has raised slaves and
bondemen, he has called forth Catiline, he has allotted us to Cethegus, the
other cityzens to be slain by Gabinius, the city to be burned by Cassius,
all Italy to be wasted and spoiled by Catilyne. I deem, you dreede lest that
in this so cruel and cursed a deed, ye should be seen to determine any
thing over sharp and rigorous: When it is much more to be feared, lest by
negligence of punyshement, we shall seem rather cruel to our country, than by
sharpenes of punyshemente over vehemente against our most cruel ennemies.

But honorable fathers, I can not dissemble, that I have herd spoken. For
words ar blowe^ abroad, which are come to my hearing, of them, that seem to
fear, lest I shall not be strong enough to execute those things, that ye
shall this day determyne to be done. All things prudent fathers, ar foresene,
prepared, and in a redynesse by my no little care and dilygence, but much
more by the good courage that the commynaltie has to maynteyne and defend
this most high empire, and their own goods. They be all, of every state and
degree, and of every age, bent here upon. The market place is full, so be all
the ways and passages to this place and temple. This cause, since the buyldinge
of the city, is found to be alone, in the which al agree on one self
thing: except those which, seeing they must needs end their wretched life,
they had rather die with all other, than peryshe alone. Those men I except, and
gladly sever them from us. Nor I account not them among the number of honest
citesins, but from henseforth to be taken for our most cruel ennemies. But
good lord, with how great multitude, with what favor and affection, with
what wood heart and courage do all other consent and agree to the dignite and
welthe of us all? Whereto should I here rehearse the gentle men of Rome, which
so gives place to you in degree and consultation, that they will contend
with us in love of the common weal? the which this day and this cause has
retired from long dissentyon and debate, had with this order, and knytte you
fast friends together: which knote of frendshype confyrmed in my consuls
ship, if we contynually keep in the common weal, I assure you after this no
civil harm among our self, shall endomage the common weal on no side.
With like favor to defend the common weal, I see the treasourers, (men woste
hardy and valyante) assemble them selves together. Also all the notaries and
scrybes, which in great number chance this day has brought to the
treasoure house, I perceive they, lokynge to what end this business will come,
ar fully bent on the commonwealth. Here is also the holle multitude of the
mean sort of freemen. For who is he, to whom those temples, the aspecte of
this city, the possession of liberty, and finally this light, and this our
native country, is not dear, sweet, and pleasante. It is a joyful thing
honorable fathers, to see the favor and affection of the lybertines, which
chauncynge to enjoy the franches of this city, account it to be their own
country: which city some that be here borne, and comme of noble lynage,
judge not their country, but take it as a town of their enemies. But whereto
shall I recyte unto you those men and degrees, whom their own private
commodity, the common profit, fredome and liberty, of all things the most
swetest, has a waked and styred to defend the welthe of their country? There
is no slave, whose servile condition is any thing tolerable, which does
not utterly abhore the saucy and malapert boldness of our citisens, that would
not have the^ bridled, that does not, as much as he dare and as much as he
can, apply his good will for the common weal? Wherefore if haplye any of you
be moved with this, that a rumoure is blown abroad, that a certain ruffyan,
longing to Lentulus runs about from shope to shope, hoping with mede to
stere and reyse up routes of such as be nedy and ignorant what things mean:
Surely this was begun and attempted: but yet there was none found so poor
nor so wretched but that wylleth and desires, that his shop and place, where
he gets his lyuinge, his chamber for his bed, and the quiet course of his
life, might be in safegarde. And the most part of those, that live by their
handye craft, yea I should say, this universal kind of people, do love to
live in quiet and rest. For all their instruments, their works and
wynninges are maynteyned by concurse and resort of the people, and nourisshed
with peace and concord, whose gaynes and wynnynges, if by shutting in of
their shoppes, is wont to be mynyshed, what shall they get, when they be
bourned. These things being thus, honorable fathers, you can lack no
help to defend the common weal: Take ye good head, that ye fail not the
commonwealth you have the Consul, escaped from many perils and disceytes,
and from the very point of death, not only for his own life, but for your
welthe reserved: all states and degrees with one mind, one will, one favor,
oone force, with oone voice, content to save and defend the commune weal.
This our country besette about with fire brondes and weapons of this wyicked
conspyracye, mekelye holds up her hands to you. To you she commends the
life of all her cytesyns, the castle and Capytoll, the aulteres and images,
the perpetualle bournynge fire of the gods Vesta, the Temples and Chapelles
of the goddis, the walls and buyldynges of the City.

Furthermore, you must this day give a Judgment, concerning your own life,
your wives and childerns lives, and that touches all your goods, possessions
and howses. Ye have a capytatne myndefull of you, and forgetful of him self,
which ability is not always given, that a man forgetting him self, should be
myndfull of other. Ye have all estates and degrees all men, the holle publyque
weal, it that in a cyuylle cause, we shall this day first see, agreynge all
as one. Call to mind, that one night shall utterly confound and bring to
naught, this impyre, founded with so great labors, our liberty stablysshed
with so greatte prowess, our goods so greatly incresed and augmented by the
benignity of the goddis. You must this day so provide, that never hereafter
this thing be not only done, but that no manne ymagine to do such a deed:
And those things I have not spoken to encourage you, which in favor and
good zeal, far pass me, but to the end, that my voice, which ought to be
chief in the common weal, should be seen to supplye the duty of a consul.
Now before that I return to the sentence, I will some what speak of my self.

Me thinks. I have got as great a multitude of enemies, as there is in
noumbre of conspiratours, which ye se is very great, but this great route I
judge to be shameful, weak, not to be regarded, and very abiectes. But if
hereafter this multitude, provoked by any man's furye or myschiefe, does more
prevail than yours, and the common welthes dignity: yet honorable fathers, I
will never repent me of those deeds that I have done, or of the councels that
I have given. For death, wherewith perchance, they threten me, no man can
escape. More greatter praise than ye have given me in my life, by your decrees
never man obtained. For always unto other, for well gouernynge of the common
weal, but unto me for the conservation thereof, ye have decreed right high
thanks.

Let the noble Scipio have his renonme, by whose council, prowes and polycy,
Hanniball was constrained to return into Aphrike, and to depart out of
Italy. Let Aphricanus be adourned with most high laud, which distroyed two
great cities, Carthage, and Numantia most grievous enemies to this impire. Let
him. L. Paulus be counted for a man most excellent whose chariot, Perses
sometime a king most mighty and most noble did greatly honor. Let Marius have
eternal glory, which twyse delivered Italy from invasion and dread of
servitude and thraldom. Let Pompeius be preferred above all other, whose
conquestes and knightly acts ar known through all the world. And surely
among the honorable renoume and praises of these men, our glory must take some
place, except peradventure it be a greater feate to conquer to us provinces,
by which we might have passage than it is warely to provide, that they that
are absente, may have a place, whither as conquerors they may return again.
Not withstanding the state of outward vyctorye is in one thing better, tha^
the domestical because strange enemies subdued, do either serve us, or
received as friends, do think them self bound unto us. But if any of our
cytesyns, through some madness waxynge lewd and naught, begyne ones to be
enmyes to their country, when we go about to wythstande, that they endomage
not the common weal, we can neither by violence restrain them, nor with
benefittes pacify them. Wherefore I see well, I have entered into continual
war with these hope lost citesyns, the which I trust through the aid of you
and all such other as ar good and virtuous, remembering so great perils of the
which not only we, that are reserved and kept, but all nations shall speak and
bear in mind easily to repel from me and mine. Nor assuredly there can not be
found so great force and violence, that can break and quayle your unity and
the gentilmen of Rome, and so great consent and agremente of all good men.
Saying honorable fathers, yt these things ar thus, for mine impire, for mine
army, for my prouynce, which I neglected, for my triumph, and other notable
things of laud and preyse, which for your cities sake and safegarde of your
welthes, I forsake, for my clientes, for the men of my prouynce, for the right
of hospitalite: for all these things, and for my singular favor and
affection to you, for that diligence which you see in me to preserve the
weal public, I ask nothing else of you, but the remembrance of my Consuls
ship all this time. Which being fast fixed in your minds, I judge my self
surely fenced about with a wall most strong. But if my hope be dispointed
and quayled by the power of the lewd and naughty, I commend to you my littell
son: to whom surely it shall be a sufficient garrison of defense, not only
for his sauegarde, but also for his high advancement if ye will vouchesafe to
remember him to be his son, which with his peril alone preserved all these
things. Wherefore most prudente fathers, ordeyne and provide diligentely and
boldelye: as ye began, for your own wealth: your wives and children: for
your aultars and oratories: for your Chapelles and temples: for the buyldynges
and sytuacions of all this city, for this empire, for your lybertye, for the
wealth of Italye, and for the universal weal publyke. For ye have a consul,
that doubts not to obey your decrees, and as long as life is in him, and to
the vttermoste of his power, to defend those ordynau^ces that ye shall decree.

When the Consul had ended his oration, turnynge him to Marcus Cato, whom he
knew loved his contrye most entierly, of a stout stomach, a prudente
cou^sayllour, and exceeding constaunte, desired him to say his mind. Than. M.
Cato rose up, and spoke in this manner:

The oration of M. Cato taken out of Saluste. Capitulo.xlii.
WHEN I consider, honorable fathers, our busynes, and the great danger that
we stand in, when I often think on some men's ^entences: my mind is far from
their opynion. They seem to me to have reasoned, what peynes they should
suffer, that have prepared to make war against their country, their
parents, the altar and oratories. But the matter warns us rather to take heed and beware of them, that to consulte, what we should decree against them.
Other misdeeds may be punished after they be done: but if it be not looked well
to, that this euel deed be not done, it will be to late to execute justice. The
cite being got, the subdued can nothing do. But I require you by the goddis
immortal say the troth, that you have more esteemed your houses in the city,
and manors in the country, your graven images and peinted tables, tha^ the
common weal, if ye will retain stylle these, such as they be, delectations,
that you so derely love, if ye woll have time and space to use your pleasures:
at the last awake, and enbrace the common weal. For now the reasonyng is not
of our tributes, nor of the wrongs done to our confederates. Our liberty
and life is in danger. I have very often honorable fathers, spoken many
things among you here, I have often complained of the excess and avarice of
our citesins: And for that cause I have many men against me. For I that never
forgave my self any offense, could not lyghtely forgive other men's misdeeds.
And though ye little regarded my words, yet was the weal publyke in good
case, for the welthynes thereof supported your negligence. But now it is not
in debatynge, after what manners, good or badde we should live, or how great or
how magnificient the Romayne empire should be: but whether these things, how
so ever they be shall be ours alone, or enjoyed together with us of our enemies.
Will any man in this matter ones name myldenesse, and mercy? Surely we have of
late lost the true names of things. For to give away othermens goods is
called Liberalyte. Boldness to do yuell deeds is called Fortitude, therefore
the weal publyke is at the last cast. Let them for me, seeing the manner and
fascion is so, be lyberall of other men's goods, let them be merciful to
stealers of the common treasure: so that they give not to them our blood, and
sparynge a few lewd and naught, they undo all that be good and honest. C.
Caesar while ear reasoned well and substancially before you of life and death,
supposing I believe, that those things be false, which are reported of hell,
that the yuell doers are sondred a way from the good, dwelling in places
obscure, vile, stynkyng, unclean, and fearful. And so he judged, that their
goods should be forfayted, and they them selves to be kept in ward in diverse
towns, fearing twis, lest if they were still in Rome, they should by strong
hand be set again at liberty, either by the favorers of the conspiracy, or
else by the multitude of hopelostes hired there unto: As though naughty and
ungracious persons were only in Rome, and not through out all Italy: or as
though braynsicke boldness could not more prevail there, where as is less power
to make de^ence. Wherefore this counsel is surely of none effect, if he
stand in dread of them: but if he alone in so great fear to all men, is not
afraid: so much the more it behooves me to be fearful both for my self
and you. Therefore when ye give judgment against P. Lentulus and other that be
taken: Know for a surety, that ye give judgment against Catiline, his army,
and all the conspiratours. And the more diligence ye use in this matter, the
less courage shall they have. If they may perceive, that you wax faint hearted:
they all full fierce will soon be here. Think not, that our forefathers have
of a very lyttel, made a great common weal by feats of arms: if it so were,
we should have it far more goodly. For our abundance of confederate friends,
citesyns, armor, and horses, is greatter than ever our auncetours had. But
there were other things that made them mighty, which we want: At home they
were studyous and dilygente, in their dealing with strangers, just and true,
in consultation their minds were free from all affections, they neglected not
their duty, nor inclyned to bodilye lust. Instead of these virtues we have
prodigal expense and covetousness, the co^minaltie poor, and many privately
rich and welthy: We preyse riches, and follow sleuth and ydelnesse. There is
no difference between the good men and the badde: Ambition has all the rewards
of virtue. And no meruell, sith each of you seeks for his own private
co^modite: sith ye at home give your selfs to volupties and pleasures, and
here in the senate study how to win money and frendshyp. Whereby the weal
publyke, void, exhauste, and deserte, is invaded. But I let pass these
matters. Noble cytesins have conspired to burn their country, they have
styred up the Frenchemen, most grievous enemies to Romans, unto war. The
capitayn Catilyne with his army is in our necks. Ye make delay, yea in so
weyghty a busynes, and stand in doubt, what ye should do with our enmies taken
within the walls. I think good, ye take pity on them, they being yongemenne
through ambition have done amiss, give them leave, yea being armed, to
depart away. I fear, lest this mildenes and mercy, if they begin to arm
them, will turn us to great misery. It is eth to know, how sharp and grievous a
conspiracy is, but ye fear it not, yes ywys do you, and that very soore, but
through negligence and faint courage ye drive forth the time, one lokyng what
an other will do, as it were trusting to the goodis immortal, which full often
have saved this weal public, in most greatest peryls. The aid and help of
the goddis is not gotten with vows and womanlye prayers: but by watchful
diligence, well doing and good counsailynge, all things done prospere. When a
man gives him self to sluggishnes and discourage, he shall call upon the goddis
in vain: for they be displeased and grieved with such one. In old time in the
wars of France, A. Manlius Torquatus, commanded his own sone to be put to
death, because he fought with his enmy contrary to his imperial commandment.
And so he ye noble young man, full derely bought with death his exceeding ma^ly
enterprise, and ye stand musinge what you should determine against most cruel
traitors to their country. Verily their good living in times past lettith this
mischeuous deed to be punished. But spare you Lentulus dignity, if he ever
spared to live filthily, if he ever cared for his good name and fame, if he
ever regarded god or man. Forgive Cethegus youth, if this be not the second
time that he makes war aginst his country. For what should I speak of
Gabinius, Statilius Ceparyus? if they had been men of any consideration, they
would never have take such cou^sellinges against the common weal. Finally, if
this offense, honorable fathers were not intolerable, so god help me, I could
be content ye were punyshed by this euel chance, because ye regard not good
monition: but we are beset round about, Catiline with his army stands gaping
to devour Italy, other our enemies ar within the walls, in the very heart of
the city, neither can we make any provision or take concell secretly: Wherefore
it behooves us to use the more celeritie and speed. Therefore my mind is, saying
the common weal, through the cursed counsel of mischiefull cytesyns, is
brought into so great danger, and saying they by the detection of Vulturtius,
and the French ambassabours are conuycted, and have confessed, that they
intended to murdere and burn, and to do other cursed and cruel deeds to their
own citisins and country, that such as have a knowleged their treson, we
should after the manner of our forefathers, put to death.

The contention of C. Caesar, and M. Cato in the Senate, and of the love letters
sent to Caesar, Cap. xliii.
WHEN Cato was set down, well nere all the Senators, one calling an other
fearful, approved his sentence, they most hyghly extollyd his valyante
courage, his constancy and manly heart. Finally they decreed according to
Catos sentence. But Caesar for all that still wythstode it, so long until a
great band of the gentylmen of Rome, which all armed stood about the temple
of Concord, for safegarde and defense of the Senate, came with their swords
drawn to have slain him, either because they believed he was confederate with
the co^spirators, for that he would not have them put to death: or else being
moved with the peril that the weal publyke was in. Than Curio, as it is said
imbracyng him, and castyng his gown between them, defended him. Farthermore
Cicero with sharp rebukes, feared them from sleynge of Caesar. It is also said,
that while Caesar and Cato were in contention for the punishment of the
offenders, there chanced a thing not very honest to be told.

Seruilia Catos sister sore wounded with the love of Caesar, delivered certain
letters, louyngly written, to an indiscreet man, to bear unto him: which when
he came to Cesars house, and was informed by the porter, that Caesar was in the
senate, streyghte way this rude fellow came into the Senate, and delivered the
letters to Caesar. Which when Cato saw, he began to say with a loud voice,
these are the conspiratours letters, and would in any wise that they should be
openly read. Than Caesar dredynge lest they should be openly read, took them
unto Cato. Which when Cato had red, he threw them again to Caesar, and in the
Senate called him Drunkarde, that naturally was very sobre. This is the
propertye of love and such delectations, that oftentimes they cause a man most
noble to fyle him self with some blotte of fylthynes or shame.

L Vectius accuses C. Caesar as culpable of the conspiracye, Caesar clereth and
reuengeth him self. Cap. xliiii.
BUT SONE after happened a thing that more troubled Cesars mind. For L.
Vectius accused him before Nouius the Questor, as culpable of the conspiracy,
and Q, Curious brought him in great hatred, because he named him in the Senate
a part taker with the conspiratours. Vectius promised to bring forth Catilyns
own handewritynge: Curious said, he knew it by Catilyne, Caesar taking
greuousely, that he should be spotted with so shameful a blotte came into the
Senate to purge him self. But the Senate syttyng longer than was accustomed,
and exceeding multitude of the common people, ran thither in great haste.
For the troublous people, which demed that the Senate would decre some grievous
thing against Caesar, inflamed with his love and sturred with his peril,
began to make a great shout, and seditiousely required the Senate to let
Caesar go. M. Cato, to withdraw from Caesar all occasion of sedition, persuaded
the Senate to diuyde among the common people of Rome, great quantity of
wheat, by which liberality, the hartis, of the poor co^minaltie were
meruelously reconciled to Cato and the Senate. For the commons hate nigardes,
they favor the plentyfull and liberal, they love largess, they are led
with great feasts, moved with plays, and bowed with gifts. And with gifts
men's minds are blinded.

After this, Caesar made an oration, in which oration he declared, not only
that he was none of the conspiratours, but also that he had opened to the
consul certain things of the co^speracy. And wha^ he had lamentablye d^^^red
Cicero to witness the same, Cicero clered him from all suspicion. Thus did the
consul, either because he knew nothing certainly to charge Caesar with, or else
because he thought it best to wynke at the matter. For though Caesar and Crassus
might both have been manifestly convicted, yet could they not have been
punyshed, seeing the tone of them was surely fenced with exceeding greatte
richesse, the the other with favor of the people.

But afterward Caesar vehemently inuehed ageinste L. Vectius, when he had in
his oration torn him with most sharp words, spoylinge him of his householde
stouffe, and taking pledges and sureties he greuousely punyshed him: and he
cast Nouius the Questor in prison, because he suffered the Praetor) above him in
auttoritie to plede before him. For the higher officers may not be commanded
of their inferiors or equalles. Ceaser not being content herewyth brought to
pass, that to Curious should not be given the rewards, which unto him
because he first detected the conspyracye, were decreed in most ample wise.
But to return again where I left, when I nede^ully speak of Caesar.

The execucion done on Lentulus and his fellows. Cap. xlv.
IT was than the fifte day of December, and drew toward evening, after
long consultacion had in the Senate, at length they decreed, as is
aforesaid, according to Catos sentence, that execucion should be done on
them that were found gyltie. Wherefore the consul thought best, to prevent the
night that was at hand, lest in the mean space, some myschefull and cursed
part might be plaide by those that thought by force and violence to deliver
and set them at large. Out of the senate house he came accompanied with all
the Senatoures, the knights of Rome, and the young men of noble bloudde armed.
And from thence he went to their house that had the custodye of them that
were cast. First he brought Lentulus, that was in the keepynge of Lentulus
Spynther, from the Palayce, by the way called Sacra uia, and through the
mids of the markette place, unto the prysone, and delivered him to the
executioner, commaundynge, that he forth with should strangle him with an
halter. But to the end there should be no sedytion, the Consulle set the
foresaid knights of Rome, with their tergates and swerdes drawn, in the
pytche of the hill Capytolyne. The same execution was done on Statilius,
Cethegus, Gabinius, and Ceparius. For they being brought to the prison be the
Pretours, were all strangled. After they were all put to death, the Consul
to debylitate and cut asunder their endeuoir and hope, which prepared in the
night to do some feate, turned about to the multitude, and said with a loud
voice, that all might here him, They were alive, sygnifienge by that light
saying, they were dead. When he had said these words night was come.

After the conspiratours were dead, the people with great glory brought
Cicero home to his house. Cap. xlvi.
THan the co^sul taking his way homeward was accompanied with a meruaylous
multitud of the people, most joyfully thanking him, what way soever he went,
through all the streets of the city laumpes, lynkes torches, and cressettes,
burned bryghte, the wyndowes and doors were all full of men and women: they
callid Cicero, the defender of the cite, the preserver of their lybertye, the
father of the country, that they were citysens, that they were fre, that they
lived was al through his wisdom, policy, and dilygence. This great company
and pomp honored him home to his house. I omytte here the great joy and
gladness that was made afterward through all Italy, I pass over the most
excellent and most honorable preyses of other good towns and cities. I
speak not of the great thanks that all good men tha^ gave unto. M. Tullius.
L. Flaccus, and C. Promptinius. In the mean while Cicero commanded P.
Sestius, countremanded by letters from Capua, with the army that he than had
with him, and with all speed to haste him after Antonius. These things done,
the city, which before trembled for dred, was now delivered from fear, and
the remnant of the conspiracy, that was so hot and hastye, begane to wax
cold and slow. And Cicero in his gown got an exceeding and an immortal
glory, foldyd up in the envy and yuell will of many men. For all the young
men, given to bodily lust and wantonness, and al such as were dishonest and
naught he made his foes. The which did hate Cicero not only by cause he
repressed their horrible violence and cursed enterprises, but also because they
thought as long as he lived, they should never bring such a thing to pass
again. And so very many among the which was alsoo. C, Caesar, but namely. L.
Bestia, and Q Metellus Nepos, began to reprehende, toss, and detracte the
acts and deeds that Cicero had done.

Ciceros oath in the end of his consullshyp. Cap. xlvii.
Wherefore when Cicero the last day of Decembre, leauyng up his consulshype
would as the manner was, have declared in an oration, what acts he had done in
his office. Q. Metellus protector of the comminaltie, forbode and would not
suffer him to speak, saying, It was right unseemly, to give him leave to speak,
that had done punishment on other, the cause not herd or known. Which
thing was to Cicero more honorable tha^ if he had suffered him to make his
oration. For wha^ Metellus permytted, that he should only make an oath, Cicero
swear, that by his labor and diligence alone, the weal public and the city
was saved. Which oath so large and so great, all the people of Rome with one
voice and one consent swear, that he had sworn trewely.

The contencion between Cicero and Q. Metellus Nepos. Ca. xlviii.
THis his glory, the people of Rome did augme^t with an other glory. For the
self same day, the people in most honorable wise, with greattest joy and
gladness, and as thyck as they could go in the streets, brought him from the
market place home to his house. But yet the first day of Ianuarye he with so
manly a courage spoke of the common weal, that every man might well perceive,
that the acts which he did in his consulship were done by his wisdom,
prudence, and policy, and not by chance. And Q. Metellus disputing with him of
the common weal, he quayled in the Senate with an oration all full of
gravity: and Cicero boldly showed him, that he should have to do with a man
that wa^teth no stomach, or that is to seek in any thing that he shall say.
Whereby his adversaries were the more kendlid against him: because they saw him
chief in the senate, they fled al to the commons. Than Metellus, associate and
aided with C. Caesar, desired of the people that Pompeius with his army, might
be countermanded home, to subdue Catiline: and to commit the common weal unto
him, that he should se that it took none harm. Their words were, that Pompeius
should be cou^trema^ded home to subdue Catilin: but in very deed their pretense
was, that the common weal should come to the rule and governance of Pompei: and
by that mean the authority consular of M. Tullius, and the power of the
Senators might be fordoone: and in process the glory of so great a man, for
preserving of the common weal, might be dymynyshed

M. Catos request to Metellus. Cap. xlix.
When this cursed publication was spoken in the senate. M. Cato rose up, and
with many words desired Metellus for his co^stancy, troth and honorable
estate, to desyste from that purpose: besechynge him for his dead fathers sake,
for that Metellus Numidius sake, the which would rather be driven out of the
city, than to be forsworn: and for all the Metellus those most noble citise^s
sakes, which always withstode seditious persons, which evermore in all
things followed the auctorytie of the senate, and consent of good me^. And he
declared that it neded not, that Pompeius should be countermaunded home with
his army. For so much as C. Antonius had a greatte host, and Q. Metellus
Celer, his brother had prepared a strong power against Catiline. And their
enemies at home being subdewed (of whom was most need to beware) the
conspyracy was so enfeblyd and weaked, that the common weal could not be
hurt, or indomaged by the importunate sworder Catilyne.

The contention of Cato and Metleius, Cap. l.
But when the equite of his oration, nor the authority of M. Cato could move
Metellus, and when the other Senatoures neither by entreating nor monisshing
could incline him, but that he thretenyd to do all things by force of arms:
Cato eftesoones tournynge his tale, shamefully rebuked him, and with an oration
all full of gravity, with commendation and approbation of the hole Senate, he
accused him as gyltie, and finally he said, he would never while he lived
suffer, that Pompeus with his army should return home to the city. But when
the day of Rogation was come, and that Metellus and Caesar being Praetor, had
the night before furnyshed the temple of Castor with men of arms, good men
began greatly to mystruste, lest the law should pass. For armed men kept
the market place and other places of assemblees. And the common people of the
city, always desirous to se novelties, favored Metellus in publyshinge the
law. And therefore very many councelled Cato to beware and take good head to
him self. But he being ennewed with an incredible and strange manlynesse of
stomach, grauytie, and fortitude, which (thought him self borne for his
countries sake, and not for his own) would rather put him self in ioperdy,
than not to succoure the common weal being at the point to perish. And so
earlye in the morning, not only without any power and strength of men, but
also with a few of his friends, he descended into the market place, all men so
fearinge that he should nto escape with his life, that the tears ran down
the chekes of some of Catos nere friends. And neither the continuallye weepynge
of his wife, nor the mourning garments, nor the tears of his systers, and
incredible sorrow and heuines of his friends, could keep him at home. So than
Cato being allonely accompanied with Munatius Thermus, his fellow in office
(for all other that came with him were put back by those that kept the entry
of the temple) came into the temple Metellus satte in the place, where matters
were publyshed or declared to the people, and next to Mettellus Caesar: than
Cato interrupte their communication, sat him down in the mids between them
both, many being thereof exceeding joyful, and much wondering at his most
manly mind. Catos deed was than very notable, and his fellows Thermus act
right noble. For Cato prohibitynge Metellus secretarye to read the rogation:
Metellus him self taking it in his own hands began to read. But Cato by and
by took the law out of his hands. And when Metellus would have recited the
law without writing (for he could it by heart) Thermus laying his hand upon
his mouth would not suffer him to speak. Metellus taking this grievously, and
a token being given, his swords made a great shoute, and began to make an
assaute: With this sudden fraye, all the multitude of people greatly
complayninge, voyded out of the markete place. Cato thrown out of the
publication place, and well nere left a lone in the market, still fyghtyng and
stryuinge with his voice and crienge, and many sekinge to slay him with stones
and other weapons, was by the aid of L. Murena the consul saved. Than
Metellus thynkyng that he had overcome Cato, commanded them that were
harneysed to avoid, and turnynge again to the place of publication began to
declare the law. But they that before were fled away, chaungynge their
minds came again and with great clamoure, vile words and murmuration cried
out on Metellus, and with joyful countenance favored Cato retourninge again
to the place. Wherefore Metellus being soore troubled and abashed, he and his
departed out of the market place. But Cato after he had in a long oration
preised the great love and zele that the people of Rome bare him, and had
exorted them to resyst the law, that pretended so much the destrurtion of the
common weal, and sturrynge up of a civil war, with meruaylouse reioysynge
of the people, and with great glory gatte him home.

Q Metellus and C. Caesar ar removed from their offices. Capitulo. li.
AFter when they had long debated in the Senate house touching the skyrmysshe
that Metellus men of arms made, of the castinge of stones, and of the fear
and flyghte of good men, and that men, had sharply spoken against Caesar,
and reprochfully rebuked Metellus: the senate decreed, that Metellus should
leave up his trybuneshype, and Caesar his pretorshyp, and both should absteyne
from ministration of the common weal. Nor the Senate being content with this
manner punyshement, and purposynge to put Metellus to open shame. M. Cato would
in no wise agree thereto and dissuaded the senate that they should not do it.
Than was his mekenes preysed of the people of Rome, and his counsel allowed,
because those things which he did, and which he took upon him, he did them
not for the hatred, that he bare to any man, but for the love that he had to
the common weal.

So Metellus being deprived from mynistration of the common weal, and
forsaken of the people: He purposed to take his journey into Asia, as though
he would go and inform Pompeius of all these matters. But ere he went he made
certain orations, in the which he spoke very reprochefully against the
Senate, he said: He could not suffere Cicero to reygne like a king, nor the
tyranny of Cato: and that the time should come, that the people of Rome should
sore repent them that they had done so many injuries to the most noble man
Pompeius. But afterward Pompeius was not only contented and pleased with
Cato, and M. Tullius, but also gave each of them high thanks. Yea (as Cicero
in secunda Philippica, and.i. lib. officioru^ says) as soon as Pompeius
departing out of Syria, saw Cicero imbracyng and thanking him, say in the
presence of many that were by: He should in vain have gotten his third
triumph, if that through Ciceros benefyte to the common weal, he had not
had a place to tryumphe in. And afterward it is said he, should say in a
certain oration that the common weal ought of right to give thanks to the
town Arpynas, for from thens came two defenders, C. Marius, and M. Cicero, of
the which two, the tone delivered the common weal from domestical peril,
and the other from outward danger.

Caesar with commendation is restoryd to his office. Capitulo.lii.
ANd now I will return again to Caesar, which contempning the most grave
decree of the Senate, and contynuing stylle in his office, the Senate gave in
commandment to certain, to prohybite him parforce. Tha^ Caesar changinge his
apparel, and layeng away the ornaments of pretorship, heuily shut him self
in his house, gyuynge place to time. Upon a two days after when this thing was
known, an huge multitude gathered unto Caesar, and seditiousely offered their
endeuoir, to restore him a gain to his dignity. Caesar preisynge and approuyng
their loving affection, with an oration, wherein he was greatly renoumed)
appeased the commons, that were excedingly amoued against the Senators. Which
Modesty or temperance so much pleased the senate (whose intention was always
either with dread or with pain to fear men from leude and naughtye
attemptates, or with rewards, to allure men to good deeds) that by the
chiefest of the city they gave high thanks unto Caesar, and calling him to
the court, and restorynge him to his pretorshyp, they magnified him with most
ample preyses.

Catilines army his labors, and journey toward France. Capitulo.liii.
PVrposynge to speak many things, Catiline, from whom we are now far
digressed, calls me back again to him. Which while those things were
gested and done at Rome, had now (as some report) gathered together about
twenty thousand men. But I suppose he had assembled together a greatter
noumbre of cruel caytyues. But of all these there was not paste the fourth
part arrayed and instructed like men of war, the other had not armor
warrelyke, but such as men use to bear iorneyinge by the way

With this multitude he Catilyne iournayed upon the sharp mountains:
oftentimes he removed his, army, and the same most strongely did fortifye
about with a trenche and a bulwark: sometime he made toward the city,
sometime toward France: now he besegeth the mountayns, whithin a while after
he passethe over those hills: now on horseback, now on foot. Also he caused
dylygent watches to be kept, and he him self would be the first, that should
goo about it: he would be among them in their labors, and in their battayles,
he would benignely call, admonysshe, and exhort his souldyours, he would very
often take his rest and lie upon the ground, to thentent that other should the
more wyllyngly endure labor and travail. Finally he would never give battle
to Antony: because that he, in prolonging of the time, might augmente his army
with the great multitude of hopelostes, robbers, and thieves, that daily drew
to him from all parts of Italy: which trusting to spoil and rob, and
coveting war, had given over their husbandry, and daily wynnyng. And also
because Catiline thought it more surer to abide tylle the time his fellows at
Rome had atcheued their enterprises, and rather to draw toward the city than
to assay the hasard of battle. And as he now hasted with all his power to
invade his country: a messanger came and told to him, how the conspiracy was
openly known at Rome, and that they (of whom we spoke before) were put to
death. Than Catylyne being soore troubled with these tydinges, altering his
counsel, left the city, and took his journey toward France transalpine,
hopyng that the nation of Frenchmen, utter ennemies to the Romans, and always
given to newefanglenes, would soon be induced to take their parts in this
war. He thought to bring outward nations armed to the city, and to make a
mighty strong army of men. He had the better hope, because the Delphinoys,
which are the nereste borderers unto Italy, were by certain of the
conspirators, with great promyess already enticed, and the french men wyllingly
harkened unto them.

Catyline enclosed betwne two armies, determined to fight. Capitulo.liii.
But Q. Metellus the praetor (which led an army of.iii. legions in the country
of Picene) being enfourmed by the^ that fled to hi^, what way Catiline took
spedilye dislodged, and pitched under the very fot of ye mountain with his
three legions, by the which way Catilyne purposed to pass into France, and
with a great number of horsemen, and light harneysed, he lay priuilye in
awayte in a places mete and convenient. Which thing when Catilyne, being
entered into the country of Pystoria, knew, he determined for many causes to
make no longer delay, but as soon as ever he could, to give battle to
Antonius. Of all which this was the most special cause, for that he saw
before him his enemy Metellus, with three legio^s, ready to encounter with him:
and Antonius at his back with a great host, which did pursue him in his
flyghte: one every side were the mountayns, which did let, that he could not
save him self by flight, and therefore he thought it was no maystry for his
enmies: stoppyng the ways, that no vytayles should come to him: to opteine the
vyctorye without any stroke strikinge, if he should abide till the two hostis
had enclosed him between them. Also he feared, lest by long delayeng, his
army would slyppe from him. For many fled from him, when tydinges came, that
the matter went ill on their side at Rome: and many hastinge to come to him,
returned back home again. And also because the number of his enemies daily
increased. Also the need of corn soore grieved him, for the ways being stopped,
with great peine any vitailes could be brought to him. Than Catilyne, all
these things considered and saying he had no hoope (either to escape by flight,
or that any succors should come to him) but only in battle, determined to
assaye fortune, and to prove the vttermoste aid. Wherefore assemblynge his
counsel together, and calling to the same counsel soldiers of all sorts
and degrees, he made to them an oration, the which though it be found in
Salust, yet because it can not be so properly Salustis as Catilins, I have
therefore vnderwriten here the copy thereof. For Justinius writes, that Pompeius
Trogus, the great writer of hystories, reproves Liuius and Saluste, because
that they in many places of their books, put other men's orations for their
own. And so undoubtedly the oration that Salust has planted in the
conspiracye of Catiline, under the person of Caesar and Cato being at
altercation together touching the pain and punishment of the conspirators
(which we have sowed to this our work) were every word Cesars and Catos,
Plutarchus says it: which writes in the life of Cato, that M. Cicero
appointed certain writers in the Senate, which by their seleritie and
spedynesse in wrytinge, should most easilye regester the sentences of the
Senators: and by that mean the same oration of Cato was kept. But whether
this oration following, were Salustes, (as I believe it was) or else Catilyns, I
for certain consyderations, would rathere have it put pere, than mine own.
Now than let us here Catyline exhorting his soldiers to battle.

The oration of Catilyne to his souldyours, in which he exhorts them to
fight manfully. Cap. lv.
I Know very well good soldiers, that words can not make men courageous,
nor a cowarde and a fearful army, can not be made strong and valyaunte by
the capitaynes oration: but look what audacitie every man has by nature or
custom, such is it wont to appear in battle. For in vain thou shalt
exhort him, whom neither* glory nor peril can encorage, fear of the mind
an^oyeth the herynge. But I have told you together, to declare unto you a few
things, and also to kreake and open my mind unto you. Ye know my soldiers,
to what affliction and myschefe the feynt courage and cowardyse of Lentulus,
has brought him self and us: and now that I taryeng for succors to come
from the city can not now pass into France. Now you all perceive as well
as I, in what case we stand. Our enemies have two hosts, the tone will not
suffer us to draw to the city, the the other does let us to enter into France,
to tarry longer in these places, though we would never so feign, need and lack
of vytayle and other things will not suffer us: whither so ever it pleases
you to goo the way must be opened with your wepons. Wherefore I warn you, be
of good courage, and when ye shall fight, remember, that if ye fight manfullye,
you shall win with your hands not only riches, glory, and worship, but
also liberty and your country. If we overcome, all things shall surely be
ours, we shall have abundance of vitayles, cities and towns alyed to the
Romans shall be opened unto us. If fear make us to shrynke, the self same
things shall be against us: for neither place, nor friend shall succor him,
whom his armor could not defend. Furthermore my soldiers their necessity
and ours is not alyke: we fight for our country, for our liberty, and our
lives, it is no need for them to fight, that a few may be mighty and strong.
Wherefore set upon them the more boldly, remembrynge what noble acts ye have
done in time past. Ye might have led forth your lives in exile with great
shame and reproach: and some of you, having none your selves, might have
gaped long enough at Rome upon the goods and riches of other: But because
that facion seemed unto you, being men, shameful and intolerable: ye
determyne to take this way. If ye will relynquishe those things, it behooves
you to be bold. For no man except a conqueror, changes war for peace. For
to hope to save your self by flyghte (when ye return your backs, or throw
away your armor, wherewith your bodies are defended) that is a very
madness. For evermore in battle they are in greatest peril, that be most
fearful. Boldness is instead of a strong wall. When I consider you my
souldyours, and when I ponder your deeds, a greatte hope of vyctory enbraceth
me: your lustye stomachs, your youth, your strength encourages me,
farther, our extreme need, the which makes the fearful strong and hardy.
The multitude of our enemies can not compass us about, the straytnes of the
place will not suffer them. But in case that Fortune would not favor your
valyante deeds take heed that ye dye not unrevenged, or be taken and murdered
as beastis, but rather fighting like men, leave to our ennemies a blouddy and
lamentable victory.

How Catilyne ordered his battayles. Cap. lvi.
When he hade said these words, he led out of their lodgingis all his
army, and first he covered his own horse, and after all the other men's
horses out of syghte, to the end the souldyours being every manne in egall
danger, should with the better stomach enter into battle, and also that no
man should hope to save him self by flyghte. This done, he ordered his batayl
on this wise. In the vawarde he ordained, viii. cohortes, and among them he
appointed the best of the petycaptayns, and of the co^mone soudiours such as
were best harneysed. In the myddelle battle were Syllas soldiers, which
though they were but a few, yet for their valiantness, Catilyne had great
hope by them to get the victory. Those, whose deed in battle he little
trusted, which either for lack of knowledge in warefare, or that were but ill
harneysed, he set aparte, as it were to aid the othere battayles, and to
make a show and a brag of fyghtinge men to the dread of their ennemies. But
to be captain in the left wynge he appointed a certain Fesulane, in the
right wyng. C. Manlius him self stood in the myddel battle next to the
standerde, the Egle, which he thought predestinate to distroy the common
weal. Wha^ Catiline had thus ordered his battayles, he went forth a lyttel from
his camp, that if Antonius would fight, he might have opportunity. Which
thing, when Antonius army beheld, they said aloude: An occasion so good for
the atcheuyng of their business, should not be omitted, it was time to set upon
the^. But C. Antonius not withstandinge he esteemed him self a great deal to
strong for his enmies, both for the multitude of his and fewnes of theirs, and
for the ancient glory wone in war yet he would not co^tende in battle,
overmuch dreding the common hasarde, and uncertain chances of war.

Thus Antonius doubting and resystynge their desire, and saying aloude, it
pleased him not to fight: suddenly his treasourer, P. Sestius, a valyante
manne began to entreat and pray him, that he should have no doubt to give
battle: and othere while he accused him, that by delayeng he would let
slyppe so good and so great opportunity. The goddis immortal (said he) do
sygnifye to us the vyctorye. For like as we always desired our soldiers
alredye encouraged to fight, hereafter we shall not have no such occasyon. For
if Catilyne may get into France, we shall not win the vyctorye without
great effusion of bloudde, and destruction of all Italy. Whith many like
persuasions. at the last he brought Antonius in the mind, that he would give
battle to Catiline. Wherefore Antonius, committynge the army to M. Petreius
(a right noble and valiant man, and in high aucthorytie among the soldiers,
and wondrrfullye expert in chyualrye) him self, because he was syckelye,
abode stylle in his tente. Than M. Petrius bringing the army out of their
Camp, though he saw them desirous to fight, yet he judged it for the best to
exhort them, he called them together, and with these words stomaked them.

The oration of M. Petreius to the soldiers. Cap. lvii.
AL though I perceived good soldiers, that in this case is was no need to
exhort you to do laubable: for why there is no man so ignorante of things, or
so folyshe, which understands not, that if Catiline should at this time
(which god forbyde) over come us, we should endure not only a cruel and
proud domination, but also an infamous, and full of all myschiefe, nor should
dare refuse any manner of sharp punyshement, you know Catilyns cruelty: you
know there is nothing in him but braynsyke boldness, pride, sensuality,
viciousnesse^, and self will, you know his friends, ye know all his kynrede,
and that universally they are dycers, drunkardes, murderers of their parents,
and of all other most mischefull. He promised to give this city to his thieves
to spoil, and now they appoynte out and dyuide among them selfs, our goods
manours and houses. Nor they do not only desire our goods, but also being
angry, they covet our bloudde. There is no pastyme moore pleasant to them,
than effusion of bloudde, than hanging, beatinge, and to see the citesyns
tourmented before their faces. And they that for their solace, were wont to
drink men's bloudde: whose bloudde trow ye now in so greatte thryste and
hatred of good men, wolle they spare to spyll? Therefore he that will not be
sturred with these so horrible and cruel deeds: what man's oration can any
thing do or prevail with him? yet worthy souldyours, I woll do as good
maryners are wont, which though the ship having wind at will, sayleth
swyftly: yet for the more speed they row with they oores: And as good horsemen
do, which though they se their horses gallop lustily, yet the with voice and
spurs courage the^. So likewise I exhort you being kendled, and with those
things vehemently starred to defend your liberty, and (as it is said)
prick you forwards that rounne all redye. Wherefore I beseech you,
dilygentely, take heed what I shall say, an prynte my words well in your
minds. The matter now good soldiers, that we have in hand, is not how
large or how magnifycent the Romayne bounds shall be: but how we shall this
day with our swerdes manyteyne and defend those things, that our forefathers
by their many fold labors, vyctories, and in many years space conquered and
got. Ye shall not now fight for glory, for trybutes, or to revenge iniuryes
done to our friends (for which the Romanye army is always wont to enter in
to battle) but for your common weal, for the temples for the gods
immortal, for all your goods, for your aultars and oratories, for the lives
of your wives and chyldern, for your liberty, and fynallye for the health of
all the world. We must contend with an horrible and a cruel beast, which
because he is fallen into the dyche, let him be overwhelmed. Behind, before,
and on every side he is hard hold, opppressed, and grieved. If he escape our
hands, this cruel pestylence shall suddenly fly into the fields about the
subburbes, than shall our fields be wasted and distroyed, our manours robbed
and spoiled, the goodly edifyces of the city bourned, the honest wives and
noble men's chylderne shall be taken away, and delivered to the souldyours.
In the senate shall be fear in the markette place conspyracye, in the field
an army: but in every other seat and place, the sword and fire shall bear
the rule. If the common weal did ever lamentablye desire the prowess,
help, and fortitude for her soldiers, at ^^is time I say, she requires it:
which being be(...) with fire and weapons of this wicked conspy^^^ye, shows
her self, and in manner speaks thus to you.

I have endured many things, the which in a city of freedom were not to be
suffered. For what time, what day, or what night has there ben, in which those
caytiues have not wrought me some myscheuous dyspleasure? What murder has been
done these many years without them? What ungracious or abhomynable deed
without them? And though these things aforesaid were intolerable, yet (as I
could) I bare them. But now who can endure, that I all together for this one
man's sake, should stand in dread and in most greattest danger? Wherefore
most valiant soldiers, I beseech and pray you, suffer not that I being
delivered by divine counsel, and the consuls prudence, from the snares and
deceytes of Lentulus and other inward enemies, be oppressed by the cursed theft
of this man. Moreover I commend unto you the castle and capitol, the walls
of the city, your auters the sepulcres of your forefathers, the laws,
customs, liberty. Your forfathers contended in battle not only to be out
of bondage, but also to rule and co^mande. And than what ought you to do, to
escape the horrible and most cruel dominion of this unclean thief? Wherefore
most valiant souldyours, seeing the matter is brought to so great a ieoperdy,
either ye must this day reteyne still by feate of arms, the propper liberty
of the Romans, and of your name, or else ye must prefer death above
bondage. For they, these yuell doers, which victoriousely ye shall vanquyshe,
shall also for their parents sleing be punyshed in hell. But if any of you
hap to be slain in the battle, ye shall opteyne and come to the place of
good blessed men. These words my country speaks unto you. Now harken unto
me.

Seeing good souldyours, that many and diverse kinds of death hang over men:
it seems we ought rather to rejoice than to be sorye, if that sort of death
which is most goodly (to dye for our countreye) should chance unto us:
and that by our death the liberty of the city might be retained stylle. For
the life is short, but the course of glory is eternal. And seeing that every
manne must dye, we should desire most specially to dye for our country.
For though we live not here bodylye, yet we shall live in perpetual glory.
But now trewely, that that should be repelled by death, we may eschew
without shedynge of any of our bloudde. Which thing that ye may the better
understand, I will declare to you, of what sorts of people, this noble army
of Catilins is gathered together. I here say they be conflate or gathered
together of three kinds of men. The first kind is of those that Sylla sent
to inhabyte the town of Fesules. These men, because they have wasted away
their own goods, look that Catylyne should give them new tables, and
prescriptions of rich men. For they have not forgotte, how sodeynely in
Syllas time of poor men, they were made rich. And not with standing I here
say they be good bold men, yet I think them in no wise to be doubted, for
either that their old strength is by ydelnesse or bodyly pleasure clean
quayled, or if it remain and continue, they both in manlynesse and number are
unable to match with you. The second kind is of those cytesyns (if they may
be called citesens and not rather beasts) which while they gaped for our
goods, wasted a way their own. These men, over whelmed with wine, glutted
with meat, and febled with aduoutry, look to be Consulles, Pretours, or
Trybunes. Among this sort are they, with which Catiline being propt up, walked
stately up and down at Rome, wiche he would never suffer to go from him the
which never exercysed their youth in riding, shotyng, or other good feats
of arms, in watchyng, in endurynge warrelyke labor: but for those things
they learned to love and to be loved, to dance, sing, to make bankettes, and to
play at dice. Wherefore they are nothing to be cared for: for they shall rather
curse and wysshe us yuell, than be able, by feate of arms to grieve us. The
third kind is diverse, myngled together of many sorts of people. For in this
route are all dycers, aduouterers, swordplayers, shepards, robbers,
parentsleers, finally all ungracious knaves, and most pestilent of all Italy.
I judge verily all those to be gathered here together, that now this day they
may for their myschieuous deeds receive punyshemente, dew unto them many
years agone. And of all this greatte route, scarce the fourth part is well
harneysed. All othere gave no targettes, helmettes, moryspykes, nor harneys:
But for these things they have hedginge bylles, iauelyns, or pyked stakes. Oh
battle very much to be feared, when men unarmed, shall fight with armed
men, foolyshe loutes with men most polytyke, drounkarddes with sobre men,
lyther luskes, with men most strong and hardy, sluggysshe slepers with men
vigilaunt and watchefull: When finally iniquity, myschiefe, lechery,
nedynesse, cowardyse, foolehardynesse, all vices shall contend with equytie,
goodness: temperaunce, strength, prudence, and with all other virtues. Also
we must needs trust, that in this battle, the very goddis immortal woll
favorable prospere us. Wherefore, except we wolle needs be slaves, the
vyctorie is surely ours. Which things being thus good souldyours. I
admonyshe you for the common whealthes sake (than which nothing ought to be
derer unto any manne) I exhort you for my great dylygence, which ye know I
have practysed in war faare, and I beseech you for the greatness of the
peril that we stand in, think that all the aid and succoure of the
commone wealle, all the state of the City, the wealth and liberty of all the
Citisens, is laid and fast fyxed to your swords poynted in this one
battle. Other nations can suffer seruytude and bondage, Romans can not
away therewith. Therefore either it behouethe us to conquer, or else let us,
the princes of all the world, and of all nations, rather dye with glory,
thanne to live in servitude with reproach.

How Petreius ordered his battayles. Cap. lxiii.
WHEN this oracion was done, the soldiers minds were merueilouselie kendled
and so lusty a courage and desire to fight took them that vneathe they would
abide the sound of the trumpet. Petreius orderinge his army in two batailes,
the aunciente cohortes of warriors in the vawarde, and the resydue of his
host behind, to aid and souccoure them, and all things diligentelye advised
and marked, his soldiers instantelie requiringe and feruentelye desirynge it,
he blewe up his trumpet. At the sound of the trumpet, they on both parts so
fierselye showed their violence, and so sodainelye and so hastelye ran
together, that they left no space to cast darts at their ennemies, but
fought hand to hand with their swords. Catilines men being in extreme
hoope of health, stacke fyerselye to it: The aunciente warrioures inflamed
with Petreius words, and compelled with the glory of their old warrefare,
strongelye received the fierce brounte of their ennemies. They fought long on
both sides most mannefullye, and with a fierce courage: the clamoure and
noise, and the dynne of swords, myngled with gronynge was great and hydeous.
Dysdaine and the glory of warrefare encouraged the tone part, necessity and
desperacion stomacked the other.

How valiant a capytayne Catilyne was.
CATILINE in the mean while sent succors to such of his men as weere in
daungier, and their places that were wounded and weary, he furnyshed with
fresh and lusty soldiers, he often struck his enemy, and exhorted them
that weere slow to battle, he returned back them that fled, and
rounynge hither and thither, he so dilygently provided for all things, that
it were hard to judge, whither he played the part of a soldier most
valyant, or of a capytayne most politic. But at the self same time, he did
both. Would to god Catilyn had had as good a mind to govern the common
weal, as he had a body to make war, and would to god he had not consumed his
excellent wit in myschiefe. Assuredly few citesynes would have governed the
common weal better than he. But when the immoderate lust to rule and have the
souerayntie, had swalowed him up, all these ornaments, which in him were
exceeding great, with this myschief were obscured. And while he coueted to be
like L. Sylla, and C. Marius, he was found to be most unlike to his
ancestors. For Catilyne (I will omytte his father and grandfather) was the
sons son of that M. Sergius, whose prowess so many warrelyke preyses
wytnessen. Not withstanding I read of late certain authors, that say, that
Catilynes lynage came out of the house of the Scipions: But nothing can be
spoken more contrary to lernyng. But now let us return again to the battle.
Than Catilynes souldyours by his knyghtely deeds being put in good hope, and
freshely encouraged, fought so egerly, that Antonius soldiers a little
reculyd. When Petreius perceived that, he sent the second battle to aid
them that were in peril: so when they that were fresshe and lustye were in
the places of them that were werye and wounded, Catilynes men could not
sustain their vyolence. Than the Fesulane in goinge about to succor his
souldyours is slain. Manlius oppressed with great multitude of ennemies,
most manfullye fighting is slain, with the most part of the soldiers.

When Catilyne saw the mattier at such a mischief and that there was no
succors that might be sent to help them, remembryng the lynage that he came
of, and minding also that an honest death oftentimes does exornate a
shameful life, despeyryng to escape, got him a monge the thyckest of his
ennemies, there sleinge many of them, he compellyd the resydue a little to
recule. And while he fiercely preased upon them, all the multitude turned
against him, there fought he egerly hand to hand. At length being oppressed
with multitude of enemies, and receyuyng many grievous wounds, that he could
scarsely stand, making a great slaughter about him, with high laud (if he
had dyed for the common weal) he was slain. But the other ennemies, being
paste all hope to escape alive, showed such manlynesse, that when they that
stood before were overthrown, they that were next defended them valiantly:
and look what place any of them took being alive, they covered it being dead:
few saved them selves by flyghte, whom no man folowinge, they escaped
easelie.

The war that C. Promptinius made with the Delphinois. Cap. lx.
THE same season certain of the conspiratoures, with great promyses sturred
the Delphinois to make war to the Romans, which thing I marvel that
Saluste (which wrote this conspiracy) spoke nothing of. Than to repress
their violence, an army was sent forth, led by C. Promptinius, which
being Praetor with L. Flaccus, took the deteccions of the conspiracy: who
fought with them many times prosperouselie. And when he had with many batailes
weried the Delphinois, and the common weal deliuerid from dread, being in
rest, he determined to go no farther. For always till that time the Roman
capitaines thought better to resyst the french men by war, than to provoke
them to it: Nor there was none other nation thought able to make war to the
Romans. All other businesses both by land and sea, for the most part by the
prowes only of Gn. Pompeius, were surely pacified.

The other conspiratours condemned at Rome. Cap. lxi.
AFter this at Rome great and greuouse Judgments were given against the
conspyratoures, L. Vergunteius a Senator P. Antronius, Seruius Sylla, C.
Cornelyus, Marcus Lecca, M. Fuluius nobilior, and many other weere condemned.
Yet many of the partenars of the conspiracy escaped. For when the city, and
almost all Italy was infected with this myschiefe, the Senate thought, that
by the punishment of a few, the minds of the other might be cured. But this
thing I will not leave unspoken: for though the laws will not, that servants
should be rackte to accuse their masters, yet concerning this myscheful
conspiracy, they rackte them to disclose their masters. And no wrong. For the
most prudente Senators decreed, that they that had enterprised so great a
mischief, ought to be bare and destitute of al help both of law and man.
Thus Catilynes war, the most terrible and most perilous that man can
remember, was by Cicero in his robe and by Antonius armed capitaynes and
Consulles, stinted and brought to an end.

()

Thus ends the conspiracy of Catiline Imprinted at Loddon in Foster lane by
John Waley.

Here begins the famous Cronicle of war, which the Romans had against
Iugurth usurper of the kyngedome of Numidie: which Cronicle is compiled in
Laten by the renowned Romayne Saluste: and translated into english by sir
alexander Barklaye priest. And now perused and corrected by Thomas Paynell.

()

Newely Imprinted in the year of our Lord God M.D.L vij.

()

To the right honorable Lord Antonye Vycounte Mountegue, knight of the
right honorable order of the garter, and one of the King and Queens
magesties pryuie counsel: Thomas Paynel wishhonoure and perfect felicity.
A Friend of mine (most honorable Lord) being much desirous to have the
Conspiracy of Catiline, that noble and learned Citizen of Rome, and the
history of Iugurth king of Numidie, most valiant and politic in feats of
war, in one volume comprised, instantly desired me: for as much as I had
already translated the one, to peruse the other. Whose translator was now
departed, but yet not out of fresh memory: such are his diverse works very
ingeniouslie invented, and right eloquently translated. But yet here and there
(thorough unlearned correctors) somewhat mangled and corrupted. I, to do my
friend a pleasure, and the gentle readers of these two excellent histories no
disprofite, have accomplyshed my friends request: trusting the matters of
these histories to be so cherefull and pleasant, the oracions so ingenious and
wyttie, the stratagemes so close and crafty, the inuencions of things so
diverse and subtle, the answers of the prudent and polytike Romans so
ingenious and ready, the feats of Iugurth with his Numidians so worthy and
manly, the Romans resistance and enterprises so warlyke and coragious, the
acts of the whole war between them so variable and diverse, and Lady fortune
(which in these things has rule and dominion) now smylinge upon the one
and the other most flatteringly and cloked lie, that no man (except envy do
rule him) can myslyke the history or the translacion of the same: The which
because the reader should most readily and plainly understand and perceive
the thing, does paraphrastical lie so open the hole matter, that no scruple
remains to be douted upon. For Saluste the noble historiographe, does in the
laten tongue so compendiouselie and briefly, but yet most eloquently and
truly, knyt up the whole history of Iugurth, that the reader in diverse places
(except he be very ripe and perfect in the eloquence and figures of the laten
tongue, and phrases of the same) shall stumble and stagger in the conueyaunce and
understanding of the true meaning and sense thereof. But now to turn my pen
somewhat unto your lordeshyp: What thing is there so obscure or intricate in
sense, be it in laten, Italian, French, or English, that your fine and
subtle wit can not perce and perceive? What politic feat of war, what
instrument or warlyke engine is there that ye most finelye and exactlye can
not handle? Yea what title or point of nobility, or of any other thing
perteinynge to a noble man, is unknown to your lordshyp, or yet to many other
of this most noble realm? But I at this present will not speak of your
knoweledge and litterature, of your comely and decent civility and manners, nor
how ye favor and maintain learning and learned men, nor yet how your
lordeshyp to to your great renown and eternal fame, has at all times, and
against all the rablemente of heretykes sustained, and most constantly and
christianly auaunced the catholyke faith of our Savior and redemer Jesus
Christ. And truly to say, such a another was that excellent and noble man
your father, faithful I mean to his liege lord and king, and to our lord
his God, most faithful. But of his constante faith, and other his famous
acts, prudente counselles, and wyttye inuencions, at more leisure. In the
mean season I most humblye desire your good Lordeshyp fauorablye to accept
this history with my rude preamble, and mutually with favor to love me, for
to my slender power I am youres to command.

The Prologue of this present Cronicle compiled in laten by the famous Romayne
Salust: and translated into English, by Alexander Barcley Priest.
Mankind wrongfully complayneth of his natural dysposicion: saying, that his
feeble and frail life of short co^tinuaunce of time is rather ruled by
chances of fortune: than by provision of strength or virtue: But if man will
consider his natural inclination: contrary to such opinion: he shall find
that nothing longing to mankind, may be found and proved greater, better, or
more preeminent than his natural inclination: and that his own diligence and
exercise, rather fails him than outher might or long continuance of life
time. But in this opinion to judge indifferently: let man understand that the
mind is ordained, guyder, ruler and captain of man's life: which mind:
when it valyantly intends to attain, to worship and dignity, by way of
virtue: it needs not to force of fortune, nor to care for her uncertain
gifts: but to dyspise her as not able to give to any man honesty, diligence or
other good and virtuous exercises: nor able to deprive man again of the same
gifts: after he has obtained the same. But on the other part if this mind
of man, taken and blinded with froward pleasurs be subdued unto sloth and
bodyly lusts: after it has exercised and occupied such ieoperdous pleasure
by a little season: and after that by cowardous sloth, both the strength, the
time and she wit are vanysshed away and decayed: than anon the infirmity and
febilnes of nature is accused and put in blame. And thus all such slothful
doers transpose and lay away the fault which in them self is culpable, unto
the difficulte of such besinesse, as they have omitted by negligence. But if it
were so: that men had as great cure and affection of things good and
profitable, as they have desire and pleasure in seeking and following things
contrary unto them, and nothing profitable, ye: and also much perylous and
hurtful: than should not they be more ruled by the chau^ces of fortune than
they should rule the said chances. And thus should they attain and proceed unto
so great excellence: that where they be mortal of nature they should be made
immortal by glory and renowned fame. For in likewise as man is composed and
made of.ii. things (that is to say of the body and soul) right so all
things, all besinesses and exercises, to mankind belongyng, follows some the
nature of the body: to decay brefely and to be mortal: as it is, which thing
forther to prove by example, we daly se that the goodly beauty of the visage
and shape of mankind, great abondaunce of riches, and also the strength of the
body, with all other such things and semblable, decays and vanyssheth away
within short time. But contrarely the excellent and worthy acts: belonging
to man's wit: be immortal and everlasting: as the soul is immortal. And
finally in likewise as the beginning of the gifts corporal or natural, and
of the gifts of fortune is caduke, vain, and uncertain: right so is the end
of the same mutable and transitory. And all things which be borne and
springyng: again decays and approaches to death: and when these same be
growe^ and increased to the high of their perfection: again they begyne to
decay and consume by age and debilite. But the mind and soul being
incorrupte, eternal and gouernoure of mankind, rules and weldeth al things:
but it self can not be violently ruled nor compelled by any thing erthly,
consyderyng the frewyll, which it optayneth of his creator. For which
consyderation the froward iniquite of them is more to be maruayled: which
subdued to the joys and pleasures of the body, pass forth the time of their
life in carnal lusts and ydelnes. But towchyng their wit (which is the best
gift and grettest treasure granted to mankind) that suffer they to slomber
and to sleep without exercise, in slouthe and ydelnes: whose dulnes surely is
somoch more to be blamed: namely since so many and diverse noble exercises and
occupacions of the mind be: by whom most clear nobles and fame undefiled may be
optayned. But of such diverse exercises concerning the mind some are better
refused: tha^ procured in troublous times and inquiet. And namely in this time
turbulent and season unquiet: great offices, lordeshyppes, rowmes to command
and rule, and brefely to speak. All manner cure concerning the administracion of
things appartenyninge to the commen well: seems unto me not at all to be
coueted or desired of any wise man. For neither is honor given unto virtue, as
condign reward and worthy thereto belonging another such as have gotten
jurisdiction and honor, by fraud and unlawful means (in like case) can not
be moore sure nor more honest, by mean of such honor so vnryghtwysly
obtained. For certainly a man to rule his country and kynred by might and
violence: all if he have power so to do and also though he right wysly correct
the crimes of the transgressors and misdoers. Nevertheless: so to do it is
vnbehouefull and vnexpediente. And often at conclusion more perylous and
dangerous: than it is sure or profitable, and namelye, sith all mutacions of
things, and chaunges of governors pretend and threten slaughter, of some
exile or wylfull flyghte, imprisonmente with othere like crueltyes, more
belongyng to ennemies of a commen well, than to defenders of the same. Than
forthermore: a man to labor to the uttermost of his power, and all in vain.
And in weryenge him self to get naught else but evil will and hatred: it is a
point of extreme and utter madness, except parchaunce it be such one, which
has a disshonest, a foul and perelous pleasur to cast away for naught his
own worship and liberty, for pleasure of a few mighty men usurpers of
dominion and lordshyp. But among all other besinesse, which are exercised by
man's wit the redyng of hystories and the reducing of the same to memory: is
much more necessary and profitable to al degrees beryng rule of a commen well,
but most namely unto princes. Of power, profet, and commodite whereof I purpose
at this time to pass over with silence, because many other authors have written
of ye same before my time. And also yt no man should suppose my self by pride or
insole^ce, to bost mine own study vainly laudi^g ye same. But meche contrary
I believe rather yt some envious malygners shall be hereafter, which shall object
and ascribe a name of sloth and negligence to this my labor. Now great and
profitable so ever it be: and that because I have determined to lead my life
solitarely: fre from medlyng with the commen well. Certainly (as I suppose)
they only shall impute and ascribe such name to me, and to this my labor:
which thinks it a most great and singular craft or practiced wisdom to win beniuolence, by salutyng the commen people, and by dyssimulate reverence
done to every man passing by them or else to get favor by feastynge and
flateryng the commenty. Which envious maligners: if they would consider both
in what manner seasons and in what ieopardous times I have obtained offices and
rownes of auctorite, and what men would gladly, and yet might not obtain such
rowmes. Moreover if they call to mind what manner of men afterward came into
the order of senatoures. For certain if my wyllers consider indifferently
these premises: than shall they think that I have changed the purpose of my
mind: more for cause reasonable: and by good aduisement, tha^ for sloth and
cowardice, and they shall find, that more profete shall come to the commen
well by this my study (which they count but ydelnes and time mysspente) than of
the labor and besynes which other men take upon them fayntly and iniustlye
administrynge the common well. And they shall find that my writing shall prove
it self more laudable and profitable to the comentie, tha^ their indiscreet
governance. For often have I hard of the famous princes Quintus Maximus, and
Publius Scipio, and beside these of many other right famous and worthy men of
the city of Rome, which wha^ they beheld the images of their forefathers
made of stone of wax, or of metal, and erecte into hye trones in memorial of
the valiaunte and magnificente acts by them done for the commen well: the
said princes in aduisinge such images weere wont to say unto such as stood
nere by them: that their minds were gretlye kyndeled to virtue and nobles in
contemplynge of the same. The case is plain: that such figures of metal
stone, or wax had not such operation nor might within them self. But such
high courage and flame was kindeled and increased in the hardye hertes of such
noble men and valiante warrious, by remembrance of the glorious deeds of their
forefathers in their life time done and represented to their memory by such
images in so much that this flame kyndled in their hertes to virtue could
never be slaked nor saciate in the^, till time that they were equal with their
forefathers in virtue, fame, and glory. Than how much more ought the clear
description of hystores to kyndell unto boldness and virtue the minds of noble
men by redyng of the same. But much contrary, if we aduert the world as it is
now among all men which live, and conform them self to the manners used
now adays, where shall we find one: but that will strive and contend with
their forefathers to overcome them, other in couetise and superfluous riches,
or else in prodigalite and wastfull expenses, and not in honest and laudable
life, good excercises and diligence? And moreover genty line^ of the first head
which were wont to preuente ancient noble men and ascend unto virtue and
nobles, by virtuous manners: such labor now to lordeshyp, honor and
authorite by fraud and falshode: rather then by very virtue or good means and
laudable. After such manner as if the office of a hye Juge, of a Tresourer, a
Co^sull, a Provost, and all such other great offices, were noble and
excellent of them self. And not in manners as if such offices should be
counted of worthiness and dignite: after as the virtue and honor is, of such as
rule in the same offices and by rowmes. But plainly affirmynge the treuth: the
man makes the office noble and worsshypefull: if his manners shine by virtue.
But if his conversation be contrary, no office, no rowme, can make him noble
nor worshypfull. But this omittyng I have proceeded in this prologue with over
far circumstaunce, and also with somewhat to much liberty of words, more
than in a preface is requisite: for that it pyteeth me of these tedious manners
of this our city of Rome. But now will I come to my matter purposed, and first
interpryse begone.

Of what matter Salust intends to treat in process of his book and what
causes moves him of such matter to write. The first Chapter.
IN this warke I purpose to write of the war, which the Romans had an
executed against the tyranny Iugurthe, wronfully vsurpyng the name of a king
over the land of Numidy. Many causes moves me by writing to commend this
war to perpetual memory. First for that in the same was foughten at many
times with great multitude of men on either party, with much cruel murdre
and variable victory: the Romans sometime, sometime the Iugurthius
preuaylyng in victory. Forthermore because that first at this battle: and from
thens forward the commen people of Rome matched with the princes, resistynge
their pride. For where as before this time the noble men of Rome oppressed and
subdued the commens with unreasonable rigor, the commens elect one named
Marius a man of basse birth to be co^sul of Rome and captain in this battle:
which after he had obtained victory over Iugurth with great glory, triumph
and favor of the commentie, he supported the^ in such wise against the noble
men: that of the same rose a cyuile bataile and grievous discord, between the
noble men and commens of Rome: Marius maintenyng the commens party, and Silla
susteyninge that party of the noble men. In somoch that finallye between these
two parts and captayns of the same was foughten an unkind, unnatural, and
cruel batell: to the grievous ruin of the Roman empire, and subuercion of
the common well. which contention and variaunce confounded both the laws of
god and man, and by the same were all good ordinances disordred. And this same
furious debate and folly proceeded at last to so unreasonable madness and
excecate fury, that it never desisted, nor this varyaunce and discencion
between the noble men and commens never ceased: till time that cruel and
mortal battle foughten between both parties, and till time that also
distructio^ of the land of Italy compelled both parties at last to consider
their own blind folly and cruel furor: and so finallye to mittigate and
fynishe their debate and unreasonable dyssencion. But first or I begin to write
of this batell I shall repeat and declare a few things done before this war
began: to thentent that al things most chief, worthy and expedient to be
known may be more evident, open and clear, to the reders.

How the king Massinissa came into the favor of the Romans, and how the
land of Numydy was committed unto him. The second Chapter.
THe Romans had three notable and famous batayls against the Carthaginences,
in which the same Romans had great damage. How be it in conclusion of every
battle they wanne victory of their enemies: in the second of these batailes
what time Haniball duke and captain of the Carthaginences wasted the wealth and
riches of Italy more tha^ any other enemy had ever done before, after the
Romans began to have any great name and to delate their dominion: A famous
prince named Massinissa king of the land of Numydy was received into
frindshippe and favor of the Romans: by one Publius Scipio captain of the
said Romans, which Scipio afterward for his manhood was named Scipio
affrycan, because he over came and subdued the land of Affrike. This
Massinissa so received into favor of the Romans in the foresaid battle did
many noble and famous acts of chyualry, with high valiantise and courage. For
which deeds: after the Romans had overcome the Carthaginences and their
city, and after they had taken prisoner the king Sciphax, which had in Affrik
a worthy, great and large impire the people of Rome gave freely unto the same
king Massinissa, all such cities and lands as they had taken and wone in
battle. For which benefits so magnificent and ample Massinissa continued
unto them in profitable and faithful frendshyp his life enduring but at last
his life ended, and the wealth of his empire decayed also with him. This king
departing left behynd him three sons, whose names were Macipsa, Manastaball,
and Galussa, of whom Micipsa suceded his father, and alone obtained the
kyngedome after that the other two brethern Manastabal and Galussa, were
departed from this life by sickness. This Micipsa had two sons named
Adherball and Hiempsall. But Manastaball his brother which departed (as said
is) left behynd him one son not lauflly borne, but a bastard, begoten of his
co^cubine: wherefore departing he left him orbate without land or lyuelode.
This consyderinge Micipsa suffered him not to fault nor decay: but forasmoche
as he was his brothers son, received him into his court, and him cherished in
like wise as he did his own sons, Adherbal and Hiemsal. This Iugurth after
yt he was a little grown up to age: was mighty in strength comely, and fair of
face: but most of all, excellent of wit and wisdom. Nor he gave not him
self to be corrupt with lust nor incraftye slouthe: but as is the custom and
manner of the people of Numidi himself he exercised, sometime in rydyng, sometime
in castyng the dart and iustyng, and sometime in ronnyng and wrestlynge with his
companyons of like age. And not with standing, that in laud and praise he
passed al his peers yet none envied him but he was derely beloved, cheryshed,
and lauded of al men. Moreover he passed much of his time in hunting of wyld
bestes which in that land habounded: he was the first, or one among the
first which durst assail and stryke the lion, and other cruel and wild
bestes: he did much: and little said or bosted of himself. For such
demeanor his uncle Micipsa at first beginning was glad and ioyefull:
supposing that in time to come the manly behauour and strength of Iugurth
should be glory and honor to al his kingdom But afterward in process of time
when he co^sydred and understood his life approchinge fast to end, his
natural sons young, and vnexperte. And this young man Iugurth in honor and
favor daily increasing more and more he reueyled many things in mind greatly
moved with such solicitude and busenesse. Forthermore he consydred that, all
men of kind be naturally inclyned to desire to rule, and command by
lordeshyppe, rather than to be ruled and subject. And how man is prove and
hedlyng inclined to fulfill the desyers of his mind dredynge no dangers: nor
suspectynge no peril while he is excecate by ambicion and desire of lordship.
Moreover aduisyng the oportunite of his own age, and of the age of his
children which for youth were not able to resyst any power or violence: which
oportunite is wont to be not small confort, audacite and courage, not only
to bold hertes, but also to mean men and cowardes, intendyng to conspyre
against their princes in hope of pray and promocions. Such consyderacyons
feared sore the mind of Micipsa, beside these, his dread and doloure was
augmented, when he beheld the favor and hertes of all his subjects of the
land of Numidy utterly inclyned to Iugurth: wherefore to put to death the same
Iugurth by any gyle (as his purpose was to to) he dread most of all:
dowtynge lest thereof might succeed between him and his subjects some
insurrexion or battle. Micipsa compased on every side with these
dyfficultyes, was soore troubled in mind. And wha^, he saw ye another by
strength nor gyle he might destroy a man so well beloved of the commens (as was
Iugurth) at last he devised an other way to ride him, and that without danger
or suspeccion, wherefore wherefore Micipsa aduertynge that Iugurth was ready of
hand to strike, auenterous and much desirous of honor and laud of chiualry,
he concluded with himself to object him to danger and peril of war, and by
that mean to assay the fortune of battle.

Now at the same season the Romans warred against a cite of Hispayne named
Numaunce, unto which war diverse kings to the commens associate sent unto them
succors against the same cite. Among whom Micipsa also sent a fair company
of horsemen and fotemen, over whom he made Iugurth captain, and sent him forth
with them into Hispayne, trusting that there he lyghtlye should be overthrown
and slain in battle, other in showing his manhod and strength, or else by
fyersnes and crueltye of his enemies. But this thing fortuned much contrary
to his opinion. For Iugurth was of mind and courage valiant and bold, and of
wit quick and redye, so that after he had parceyued the disposision,
behauour and manners of Publius Scipio, at that time captain of the Romans,
and wha^ he had consydred also the manners of his enemies, he behaved himself
in such wise with much labor, besines and cure, in obeynge his captain with
so good manner and often times countryng his enemies without dred of peril. In
somoch that within short time he came to so great fame and worship, that
unto the Romans he was marvelous dear and well beloved, and of the Numantines
dread as death: and certainly, among the chefyst he was worthy and valiaunte in
battle: and also good of counsel, of wisdom pregnaunt and circumspect.
Which two things be much hard to be in one man both together, for wisdom
is often wont to make men aferde and to dread many peryls because of
providence. But boldness and audacite causes men to be rasshe and folehardy,
because of stout courage. But his wisdom directed his strength, and his
strength was obediente to wisdom. Wherefore Scipio the captain did almost
every ieopardous and whyghty thing by hand and counsel of Iugurth, him
countynge among his chief friends and daily cherysshed him more and more, and
no marueyle, for there was no counsel, nor interprise begone of Iugurth
frustrate or in vain but all came to good effect. Beside these gifts above
said he was curtes of mind, lyberal, and of wit right discreate and prudent:
by which gifts he adjoined unto him many of the Romans in familier
frendshype. At that same season in the army of Rome were right many new, and
also ancient gentylmen, which set more by riches than goodness or honest.
At home in Rome were they sowers of dyscord and debatful, great in fame among
the friends of the Romans. But more famous by worship and rowme, than by
honest conversation. These kyndled the mind of Iugurth not a lytell-promising
often times and saying to set his courage on fire, that if the king Micipsa
discessed the time should come that Iugurth alone should enjoy the hole
kingdom of Numidy without any partiner. For in him (they said) was great
virtue, great manhood, strength, and audacite with wisdom, able to govern
such a kingdom, and nothing was so iniust and false but that might be
justified at Rome for gold, and all things were there to be sold by couetyse
of noble men.

How Publius Scipio counseled Iugurth at his departing after the cite of
Numance was dystroyed. The third Chapter.
THus continued Iugurth in the Romans army in Hispayne with great favor of
the Romans and namely of Scipio the captain, till at last the army of Rome
had distroyed the said city of Numance. Tha^ Publius Scipio concluded to
return again to Rome and to congye and license such socours as were sent
unto him from other kings: among all other he called Iugurth unto him, and
before the multitude of all the army assembled, lauded and commended him
magnificently recitynge his glorious acts and manly deeds of chyualry. And
after that worthily and rychelye rewarded him for his labors. This done, he
conveyed him into the captains tente, and there secretly warned him that he
should continue and worship ye frindeship of the people of Rome rather hole
together and comenly, tha^ privately leanyng to any singular rulers. Moreover
adding these monicions, that he should not rather reward and be liberal to a
few privately: than to a hole commente, saying that it was a perilous thing to
bye that, of a few persons, which belong unto many in commen. If he would
persevere and continue in so noble conditions as he had begone, he should
shortly come to great honor, glory and dignite royal, more than he would
desire. But if he would proceed and labor to ascend over hastily, than should
both he and his riches fall heedlynge to ruin and decay. After Scipio had
said these words with such like, he licensed Iugurth to depart, and sent him
unto his uncle Mycipsa again into the land of Numidy with letters direct
unto the same king Micipsa, of which letters the tenure and sentence
hereafter ensues, and was such.

The sentence of the letter dyrect from Publius Scipio captain of the Romayne
army in Hyspayne unto Micipsa king of Numidy. The fourth Chapter.
PVblius Scipio Captain of the Romayne army in Hispayne sends health and
salutacion to Micipsa king of Numidy friend and fellow of the empire of Rome.
The virtue strength and noblenes of your neuewe Iugurth whom ye sent unto our
socours has been proved in this war of Numance, far excellent above any
other warrior of our retynue, which thing I know for certain is to your
great pleasure and gladness. For his worthy merytes he is right dear and well
beloved unto us. And we shall deuoyr us to the best of our power that he may
be like dear and well beloved of all the senators and people of Rome. I am
surely right ioyefull on your behalf of this your treasoure Iugurth,
thauncient amyte between you and me, byndeth me to be glad of this your
commodite. For certaynely lo here have ye a man of Iugurth wrrthy to discende
of such noble stock as ye are and as his grandefather Massinissa was in his
days whom he follows in all points of virtue and magnanimite.

How the king Micipsa adopted Iugurth unto his son. The fyfte. Chapter.
WIth these letters of Scipio Iugurth returned unto Numidy unto his uncle
Mycipsa, where he was worthily and ioyefully received of the co^mentie. But
after that the king Micipsa understood by these letters of commendacion of the
captain Scipio: that the valiaunte and noble acts of Iugurth were true,
which long before he had hard by report of the common fame, tha^ what for
the nobles of Iugurth and favor both of his deeds and commendacion of Scipio
he moved his mind changed from his foresaid purpose, and not forther intended
to oppress Iugurthe by malice nor envy. But concluded to attempt to overcome
him with benefits and kindness, to thentent that he so overcome, should not
in time to come find in his heart for pity to indommage him nor his heirs. And
sone after this purpose the same Micipsa adopted Iugurth unto his son: and
farthermore decreed and ordained in his testament that Iugurth should be one of
his heirs, and partener in possession of his kingdom together with his two
natural sons, Adherbal and Hiempsall. But a few years after this ordinance
Micipsa what by age, what by sykenesse, drew nere unto his end of life, and was
consumed by age and disease: wherefore considering his death so fast approchynge
it is said that he called Iugurth before him and than before many of his
friends and kynsmen, also in presence of his two natural sons Adherbal and
Hiempsal, he had to the same Iugurth such words as he herafter ensue and
follow.

The exortacion which the king Micipsa a little before his death had to Iugurth.
The.vi. Chapter.
MI dear son Iugurth, I know it is not out of your remembrance, how after
that ye had lost your father my brother I charitably and lovingly received you
young and of tender age into my kingdom: what time ye war without riches,
without conforte, and without any hope of comferte or riches: but very lykely
to have been cast away. This did I thinkyng that for these my benefytes and
kyndnesse I should be unto you not less intyerly beloved than of mine own
natural children with my body begotten. Nor certainly this thing has not
disceiued me. For why to ouerpasse your other great, magnificente and
excellent deeds of you valyauntly done before, specially now last of all
coming from the war of Numa^ce ye greatly adourned and inhaunced to honor
and glory both of mine own person and this my kingdom. And where as the
Romans in fore times were friends unto us, by your virtue and manlye acts,
ye have establyshed that amity: and of friends made the^ much moore friends.
So that in Hispayne the name and glory of our householde by your manhood is
renouate and renewed. Thus finally, ye have overcome the envy of your ill
willers only by your glorious acts and valiant interprises, which is one of
the most difficulty, wherefore now my son Iugurth, sith it is so that
nature has nere concluded the end of my life, I admonish, charge and exhort
you by the faith of your right hand, and by the faith and fidelite which ye owe
to this my kingdom I obtest and require you, that ye love, meintaine and
cherishe these my two sons, Adherbal and Hiempsall: which of kinnered be
nere to you, and by my benefit and kindness are bretherene unto you.
Forthremore I exhort you that ye count not better and moore pleasure to
acquainte and conioine unto you forayns or strangers, rather than to ret^yne
such as be joined to you by natural blood and kynred. For neither is a great
army of men nor habundance of treasours: ye chief socours or defense of a
kingdom: but ^oche rather trusty and faithful friends: whom a man can
neither compelled by force of arms: nor yet bye with gold nor silver to
parseuer in steadfast amyte: but they be optayned and kept by kyndnesse, good
deeds, fidelite and faythfulnes. But among all friends: who can be more
frendlye and steadfast in amyte than brother to brother. Certainly none ought
to be more loving of natural inclination. Or what stranger shall ye find
faithful and trusty to you: if ye show your self ennemy to your own kynsmen.
Forsothe if ye continue together honest good and loving in agreeable concord
between your self thanne this kingdom which I commit and gave unto you
shall continue sure and steadfast: as it is now. But co^trarely if ye be ill
and disagreynge among your self ye shall in short season make it right poor,
feeble and incertayne. For by love peace and concord: small riches, small
lordshyppes, and generally al small things increase and multiply: by discord
the grettest things of the world decay and fall utterly to ruin. But you my
son Iugurthe by cause ye pass these mine other two natural sons in age
and wisdom, therefore it seems you much more than them: to make such wise
provision both for your self and for them also that nothing happen other wise
than well. For in every stryffe and debate how be it which is mightyer and
rycher often suffers injury. Nevertheless it seems more that he does wrong
thanne his feeble adversary. But ye my dear sons Adherball and Hiempsall se
that ye worshipe and love this Iugurth your worthy uncle. And bewar that ye not
offend nor dysplease him: but follow his virtue and manly behauour And do your
deuoir to the best of your power after his example behauynge your self, so
discretly and so wisely that it be not hereafter reported by me, that I have
taken unto me by adoption, better children than I have begotten. Thus concluded
the king Micipsa his words How be it Iugurth well perceived the kings words,
but feigned and spoken against his heart, if any other remedy might have been
found: nevertheless he answered benygnely for the time, all if he thought and
reuoulued in his mind much otherwise, and contrary to his humble and mylde
answer.

How the king Mycipsa departed from life and of the first cause of dissencion
and discord between Iugurth, A^herball and Hiempsall. The.vii. Chapter.
NOt long after the king Micipsa decessed whose death was dolourous and sore
bewailed of all his subjects: but most of all to his natural sons it was to
be lamented, and not without great cause as the process of this history
shall afterward declare. But after the kings funeral exequies were
magnificentlye ended as appertayned to his state royal. The three princes that
is to say Adherball, Hiempsall, and Iugurth anon assembled to the intent to
commen and treat of busynesses of the royalme, concerning particion and
separation of the same: and all other things convenient. But when they should
sytte and take their places in order: Hiempsal youngest of the three was somewhat
fires of nature, and disposed to statelynesse. And in mind long before this
time he disdained the ignobilitie of Iugurth for asmoche as he was unlike unto
them of birth towchinge his mothers side, and a bastard borne, as is said
before, wherefore he disdained that the same Iugurthe should have the place of
most honor among them, which were natural sons of a king, and also
laufully borne: and so in contempt of Iugurth he set him self down on the
right hand his brother Adherball: to the intent that Iugurth should not sit in
the mids, between them: which rowme the Numidiens count of most honor. And
afterward how be it his brother Adherball required him often to give place to
Iugurth because of his age: yet uneaths could he with much pain induce him
thereto, but at last fatygate by requests of his brother and of other noble men
of the realm, he changed his place and set him upon the other side with
countenance declarynge his mind not contented. And thus at last satte Iugurth
for his age in the mids bitwene them both, as in place of most honor.
When the three princes were thus set and had communed of many things
concerning the administracion of the kingdom, among many and diverse other
things Iugurth said, that all the statutes and ordinances which the king
Micipsa had made five years before his death, ought of congruence to be adnulled
as of none effect. For in that season (as said he) his wit what for age,
what for syckenesse was feeble, dull and of small valor. And therefore such
things as he had in that space enacted were done without wisdom or reason.
When Hiempsall herd Iugurth thus speak he answered saying that it pleased him
right well that it should so be done. For within the same three years (said he)
our father Micipsa has adopted you to his son, and in his testament ordained
you to be partiner of his ki^gdome, which was the worst and most unadvised
deed that ever he did young or old, wherefore Iugurthe according to your own
ordinance this must first af al be adnulled and broken, which done, my
brother and I shall not greatly contend for the remenaunt. These words of
Hiempsal pearsed the heart of Iugurth more profou^dely than any man there
thought or suspected. Wherefore from that time forward, what for wrath of
these words, and for dread of loss of his porcyon of the kingdom, his mind
was in great trouble and anguyshe. In somoche that from thens forth he went
about, ymagyned, ordained, and only reuoulued in his mind, by what gile or
treason Hiempsal might be caught in his danger. But when his purpose proceeded
but slowly forward, considering that the froward desire and unreasonable
appetite of his mind coud not be mytigated nor pacified, he concluded to bring
his enterprise to effect by any manner means other by preuye treason and gyle,
or else by euydent and open violence and force of arms. But to return again
where I left In this first assemble of the three princes of which I spoke
before, it pleased them all that the treasours of king Micipsa should be
divided among them because of this dissencion. And also that the marches and
bounds of each of their dominions, severally should be assigned to each of
them his portion, wherefore the time was appointed and prefixed when both
should be done but the time to depart the treasoures was sooner assigned than
to deuyde and limitte the bounds of their dominions. This appointement made:
the princes departed company: the mind of Iugurth not a little inquieted for
the said check of Hiempsall, for which cause he awayted his time to revenge
him.

How Iugurth by reason murdered Hiempsall the younger son of ^ynge Micipsa.
The.viii. Chapter,
When the three princes were departed in so^der, as I have said before they
soiourned in sondrye places, and that nere to the tower where the treasure
lay. Hiempsall drew him to a town named Thirmida not far distant, In which
town he had a dwelling place: tha^ as happened in the same town was a man of
the guard longing to Iugurth of his lord right derele beloved, and with him
greatly in favor. This servant of Iugurth was much conuersaunte and familyer
in ye house of Hiempsall, when Iugurth by chance remembered this oportunite to
his myscheuous purpose, he called secretly unto him his said servant. And
after many words spoken to search his mind: at last by promise of large
rewards he induced him to consent to go as if it were to visit the house of
Hiempsall: as he had often done before time, and by some means and craft to
counterfayte the kayes of the gates and bring them unto him. For the right
kayes (after the gates were locked) nyghtly were delivered unto Hiempsall him
self: so might they not be vnmyssed the space of a night, when Iugurth had
induced the Numidian to consent to this deed: he promised him self win short
time after to come to the said lodgyng of Hiempsal what time ye case should
require: with great power of armed men. The Numydyan in short time performed
the commandment of Iugurth, in somoche that he brought unto him the
counterfayted keys: as he had appointed. Iugurth here of was glad in mind:
and anon prepared secretly a great company of armed men: whom he commanded
to bring unto him the heed of Hiempsal trenched from the body and in
executynge of this deed he commanded them al to be ruled by the Numidyan which
had counterfayted the keys. This done the said Numidian connayed these armed
men preuyly by night into the house of Hiempsall, like as he was infourmed by
Iugurth. When this tratoure satellyte was entered with his company and had
broken into the in ward edifices: diverse of them serched for the prince
Hiempsal: some murdered his servants as they lay slepenge in their beddys
suspectynge no such treason: some other a wakened with the dynne, stert up and
met their enemies defending them self but al in vain: for they had no
leyser to arm themself And therefore were they slain anon unarmed, of men
armed and appointed to myschefe: when the treatours had long sought Hiempsall
and might not find him than serched they more nerely every hyd corner, and
secret close places they braste open: all was full of dynne mengled with noise
and clamor: So much they sought and so nerely: that at last they found out
Hiempsal hyd in the cotage of a poor serving woman to which place he had
fled at begynnyg of this affraye: as a man astonyed for dread and ignorant of
the place. Anon as the Numidians had found him they slew him without any
mecri. And as they were commanded cut of his head and brought the same to
Iugurth; but shortly after ye fame of this cruel and tyrannous deed was
diuulgate and over spread all the lands of Affrike: Adherball and all they
which were under subieccion of Micipsa while he lived: were sore troubled and
abashed with fere for this tyrannous cruelty of Iugurth. The Numidians anon
duyded themself into two parties. The most part drew and leaned to
Adherball, but such as were most manly and best to battle drew them to the
other part: and leaned to Iugurth. Wherefore he made ready as great an army as
he might ioininge unto him and bringing under his subieccion the towns and
cities of Numidi: some by violence, and some other by their own volu^tary
will. Insomoch that finally he kept under his subieccion and bondage the hole
land of Numidy. But notwithstanding that Adherbal had sent ambassadors to
Rome: to certify the senators of ye death of his brother how cowardly he was
murdered, and also to inform the^ of his own miserable fortune and in what case
he was never thelesse he made himself ready to fight with Iugurth as he which
had trust and confidence in multitude of his souldyours assembled ready to
battle.

How Iugurth overcame Adherball in battayl and put him to flight how
Adherball fled to Rome to complain to the senators: and how Iugurth
accloyed with rewards many of the rulers of Rome: by whose favor his cruelty
was defended. The.ix. Chapter.
Now had Iugurth assembled his host ready unto battle, not like in multitude
of the company of Adharbal: but as I said before much bolder better expert
and exercised in war. On the other party Adherball had his people ready
appointed, and both the armies approached togider. But when they joined battle,
and when it came to byckerynge: that the matter must be tried with strokes.
Anon Adherball was vanquished: and to save his life fled from the battle
into a province marchynge on the land of Numidi: and from thens with all have
sped him unto Rome to complain his miserable fortune, and to require socours,
as I shall after ward declare. But tha^ Iugurth when he had all the land of
Numidy at his pleasure, counseled with his friends of many things At
conclusion: when he considred himself that he had slain Hiempsall and chased
Adherball out of his kingdom when he was idle and at rest: he often secretly
reuolued in mind his own cruelty: sore dredyng what punisshme^t ye Romans
would ordeine against ye same. Nor against the ire and displeasure of the
Romans had he none other hope nor conforte, save in the couetyse of the noble
men of Rome, and in thabundaunce of his treasoure: wherewith he trusted to
corrupt the rulers of Rome to be favorable to him. This consydred within few
days after he sent to Rome ambassadors with much gold and silver to whom
he gave in commandment: that first of al they should satisfy his old friends
with rewards and money, and tha^ to spare no gifts to get unto him mo new
friends. And brefely that they should not spare nor tarry to procure unto him
favorers and mainteiners of his part: and all things for his advantage by
gifts and promises. But after these ambassadors were come to Rome: according
to the commandment of their king they gave and sent to his acquayntaunce and
friends, and to such as among the senators: at that time had most authorite:
large and great rewards. In somoche that anon among the^ was so great a
change that the marvelous envy, hatred and evil will: which they had against
Iugurth was al changed into favor and grace among the noble men. Of whom
some were so induced by gifts received: and some other by hope of brybes in
time to come: that they went about among the senators from one to one
labourynge and intreatyng that at that season nothing should be extremely nor
grievously determined against Iugurth. Thus after the ambassadors of Iugurth
had confidence and trust enough in their cause they labored to have a day
appointed to apere in court. The day of apearaunce was granted as well to them
as to Adherball: to Adherball as playntife, and to the ambassadors as
defendentes for Iugurth: when the day assigned was come both the parties
appeared in court before the senators, than after audience granted Adherball
began to speak under form following, for complainte and declaracion of his
injuries and oppression,

Here insueth the oration of Adherball, devised in form deliberatiue: in
which he exhorts the senators to command socours and aid to be assigned
unto him, proving the same to be profitable honest and easy to the Romans to
do: profitable: that he might continue a friend unto the empire of Rome:
honest, for his father and graunfather had so deserved: easy to be done, for
the Romans at that time had no other war else where. The.x. Chapter.
Most discrete chosen fathers and noble senators, Micipsa my father at hour
of his death commanded me that I should think naught else of the land of
Numidie to apertaine to me, save only the rule and admynistracion of the same,
affirmynge that the title of possession and empire of the same belonged to you
and to the people of Rome. Moreover he gave me in commau^demente to do my
devour, to be unto you seruisable above all things, both in place and war.
And that I should count you unto me in place of kynsmen: and nerest friends of
alyaunce. Saienge that if I so did: tha^ by your amite and frendshyppe, I should
find socoure riches and defense of the kingdom of Numidy, and of me and mine
all times of need, which precepts of my father: while I cast in mind to
observe: sodaynlye Iugurthe the most cruel and cursed of all men whom the
ground susteyneth: dyspisynge your empire: has driven me from your
kingdom and from all my other goods of fortune: nothing regarding that I
am neuewe of Massiniss^, and by mine auncestry a fellow and friend of the
empire and people of Room. But certaynlye worthy and chosen fathers: sithe I
am come to that myserye that necessytye constrayneth me to desire your aid
and succoures: I would much rather that I might call for your help: for
mine own merytes against you done: than for the merytes of my forefathers:
and that by such means of mine own deseruynge: your benefytes and socours
were due unto me, which would God that I neded not at all: but if this your
socoures might so of you be desired by my merytes and deseruynge, than should
I call boldlye to you: and use your socours of duetye as mine auncestrye have
done in times passed. But now sithe it is so, that honest life and
innocencye: in this world fyndeth little surenesse by them self without
protection of some other. Moreover sith it was not in my power to mitigate nor
to withstand this tyrannous iniurye of Iugurthe. Therefore chosen fathers I am
now flede unto you as to my chief refuge, coarted to necessity to require
your socours and constrained to put you to besynes and charge: before I have
done any pleasure or profete unto you: which thing grieved me most of all,
and is one of my gretest myseryes. Right worthy senators other kings have been
received into your frindshyp and favor after ye have ouerco^ them in
battle, or else perceyuinge them self in danger and in doubtefull chances of
fortune, they have coueited and desired your feloweshype and favor, rather for
their own well than for yours. But much co^contrarely: our forefathers and
rote of our lineage. Massinissa confederated himself with the people of Rome in
the second bataile of Carthage, what time was more faythfulnes to be trusted in
the^ and their good will, the^ of wealth or riches to be optained of the Romans,
being at that time assailed with war on every side, their riches and
treasours consumed by often batayles. Thus it is evident that our auncestry
confederat not themself to your fellowship for their own defense, in hope of
dominion: nor for any other private profet, but only for favor and love
which they had unto your empire, wherefore noble senators suffer not the
progeny and branches of his stock to be distroied. Suffer not me which am
neuew of your trusty fre^d Massinissa to ask of you help and socoure in
vain. But prudent fathers, if it were so that I had none other cause to
demand socours of you, save only this miserable fortune wherewith I am
oppressed, that I which was lately a king by lyneall descent: mighty of
auncestry: excellent and clear of fame, habundaunte in riches, and of men of
arms: and and now disformed by miserable calamite, poor and nedy, so that I
am constrained to seek help and socours of other men: if I had none other
matter whereof to complain, save this miserable fortune only. Nevertheless it
longs and is conueniente to the magesty of the people of Room, to prohibit
and to withstand iniurye, not to suffer the kyngedome or dominion of any man
to rise and increase by falshode and mischeuous tyranny. And the right heirs
against right, against justice and against reason, to be excluded from their
true heritage. But verily I am excluded and cast forth of that country, which
the Romans in time passed gave unto my forefathers: out of the which country
my father and grandfather accompayned with your army and help have chased the
king Siphax, and also the Carthaginences, both most violente enmyes to the
empire of Rome. Your benefits be spoiled fro me: In this mine iniurye be ye
dispysed: Woe is me miserable exulate: Alas my dear father, Micipsa, are your
good deeds and kyndnesses against Jugurth come to this point and conclusion:
that he before all other should namelye be dystroyer of your lynage and
children: whom ye have made fellow with your own sons: and also partiner of
your kyngedome: alas than shall our stock and household never be quiet? Shall
we always be tossed and turned in effusion of blood, and, in battle, in exyle
and in chasing from our country.

While the Carthaginences reigned in prosperity, we suffered and that
patiently, and not undeserved al cruelte and vexation. For then were our
enemies on every side of us: our friends in whom we should have found socoure
at time of need were far disioyned and separate from us. Thus all our hope:
all our trust was in our strength and armoure. But now after that pestilente
dystruction of the Carthaginences is chased and casten out of affrike we
continued a time joyful and quiet: passinge our life in peace and
tranquilite, for why we had no ennemy: except paraduenture for any injury done
against you ye would command us to take your enmy for ours also as reason
and right required. But now suddenly and unawarely to us: this Jugurth exaltyng
him self by his intolerable audacite, by cruelte and pride has first slain
my brother and his own nere kinsman Hiempsall: and in augmenting his mischefe
has usurped to him as in pray my brothers part and portion of the kingdom of
Numidy, and after: seeing that he might not take me like manner of train as he
had done my brother, what time I douted nothing less than any violence or
bataile in the kingdom which I hold of you, he has chased me (as ye may se)
out of your kingdom and has made me as an abject outlaw: chased from my
country: and dwelling place, oppressed with pouertye, and laded with miseries.
In so much that I may be i^ more surety and save guard in any place of the
world, than in own native country and kingdom, which I hold of you.
Forsooth worthy senators: I have ever thought in like manner as I have
oftentimes herd my father Micipsa openly report with sadness: saying ye they
which should dyligentlye continue in your friendship by their merits must
take great labors at many times upon themself in your causes: but of all men
they were most sure from injury of any man. And sothely all my lineage has done
asmouche as in them was at your desires: And ever has been ready in all batails
and needs to assyst you. Wherefore if ye follow the precepts of gratitude, if ye
bear in remembrance these merits of mine auncestry, it is both right and
honesty yt in this mine extreme necessite, ye aid and socoure me and restore
me again to quietness, while ye have none othere business in hand, which
may be to you inpedimente in this enterprise. Most discrete fathers: more
brefely and clerly to declare unto you my complaint and my myseries. And also
to certify your excellence moore plainly of mine unnatural and unkind
kynseman Jugurth: and of his cruelte. It is not unknown unto your majesty:
that my father Micipsa after his departing: left behind him us two brethern
his natural and lauful sons: supposing that by his benefits and merits
Iugurth should be joined with us, as third brother. But alas: much contrary
the one of us is murdered by this cruel Iugurthe, blinded by insaciable
ambicion and desire of dominion. And I my self the second brother scarselye
and with great difficulte have escaped his cruel and unmerciful hands, what
may I do? or whether shall I rathest flee for conforte unhappy exulate thus
desolate and unfortunate as I am? All the socours all the comfort, of my
stock and kindred is extincte by death, my grandfather Massinissa, and my
father Micipsa: as necessite has constrained them: have paid the general
tribute of nature: delivered from these mundayne vexacions by natural death.
My nere kynsman Iugurth: much otherwise tha^ it be came him to do: has
cursedlye berefte my brother of his life by tyranny and myscheuous couetise of
dominion: mine other kinsmen by consanguinite and affinite: with mine other
friends by his cruelte been also oppressed or put to death, some by one means
and some by other: some of them be taken captive: some put to shameful death of
gybet, galous, or cross, with most cruel tourme^t: some be casten to wild and
ravenous beasts to be devoured of the^. A few which are left with their lives
ar closed i^ dongions and darkness: passi^g their miserable lives with mourni^g
and wayling more grievous tha^ death. Thus am I environed with anguish on every
side. But if it were so that all these socours which I have lost by cruelty
of Jugurth: or if all things which be turned to me, from prosperity to
aduersite, remained to this hour hole with out detriment or damage like as
they were in my best estate, yet certainly noble senators: if any ill or
misfortune provided should happen to me: I durst be bold to call your aid and
conforte. Because it seems you to have cure of right and wrong belongyng to
every man consydryng the excellent magnitude and gretnes of your empire, and to
suffer no virtue unrewarded, or vice unpunished, and finally no wretch
oppressed to continue undefended. But now most of all sith I am exulate from
my native country, from the kingdom which my father ruled under you, and
from my own house and dwelling place: also nedy and poor of all things
belonging to mine estate and alone without company or defense, to whom or to
what place may I resort, or in whom may I call: for aid or conforte in these
my manifold miseries. Shall I resort or call for socours of nations, or of
kings adjacent and about the land of Numidy, alas I should little prevail
or naught at al. Since al they for your amite joined with you, be mortal
ennemies to us and so our lineage: may I resort to any country about us: but
that I should find there many tokens of cruelte of war, which my fathers
have don in their times passed in your causes. Whether shall any of them which
have been old ennemies, have mercy or compassion on us now in this extremite.
But finally most noble senators, my father Micipsa thus ordered us at his
departinge: and gave us in commandment that we should observe nor mentayne
the frendeshyppe of none other king nor people, save only of the people of
Rome: and that we should seek no new felowshype, nor new confederacions or
bonds of concord, saying that in your frendshyp and help: we should find
great-socours and aid and that largely. But if it should fortune that the
wealth of this your empire should fall into ruin or change from this excellence
(which the gods defend) than: said he that we and our kingdom of necessite
should also decay together with you. But now landed be the gods by whose
help and favor and by your own strength and virtue: ye be at this time
mighty and rich: al thing to you is prosperous and to your commandment
obeyng. Wherefore it is so much more laufull easy and conueniente to you to
take cure and charge in redressynge thiniuries done to your friends and
fellows. I am only in dread and dout of this one thing, lest the frendshipe
and singular favor of Iugurth: not parfetly known as he is worthy: do induce
the minds of some so parcialite against Justice and right I here and
understand that such labor with all their might for favor of Iugurth
going about from man to man, praing and entreating with much solicitude many
of you aparte by one and one, desirynge and requyring you to determine nothing
against Iugurth while he is absent, and the matter and cause not known
perfetly: I here such persons corrupt with parcialitie and favor obiectinge
secretly against me, and saying that I feign and ymagine these words to accuse
Iugurth vndeseruyngly, and that I feign to be chased forth of my land by him:
where as I might surely enough have remained within ye kingdom of Numidy.
That would god I might se once the cursed and unkind kinsman of mine Iugurth, by
whose unmerciful and cruel deeds I am caste^ in these miseries, in such case:
yt he were faining ye same things under like manner as I feign the^ at this
time: and would god I might ones se hi^ as truly without fayning driven out the
land of Numidy, as I am now chased from the same by his cruelty: and would god
yt at last other ye or else ye immortal gods would so care for ye businesses
and troubles of us miserable me^ in earth; yt the same Iugurth which now bears
himself proud of his si^full deeds shewinge himself and cou^ting hi^ noble
only because he escapes unpunished for his sin and cruelte: might therefore
suffer grievous punishment with all my miseries and other mischeues and yls,
according to his deserving: for his unmerciful cruelte showed against our
father Micipsa i^ murdri^g of my dear brother Hiempsal, and chasi^g me forth of
my native country: thus oppressed with al miseries i^ extreme necessite. O my
brother my brother Hie^psal most dear to my heart of al creatures: how be it
now thy life is berefte yt in thy flouri^g youth, long before thy natural hour
of death and yt by cruelte of him, who^ it seemed not of al me^, so to have done:
nevertheless me thi^keth i^ my mind this chance of thy death, more to be ioyed
of: tha^ to be sorowed. For you have not only lost thy life and thy kingdom but
also you have escaped this chasi^g, this flight, this exile this ned, this
poverty, with al other wretchednesses and miseries, which oppresses me without
confort or socours. But I unhappy and miserable exulate thus throwe^ down from
my fathers kingdom into so many yls and so great myseries; may well be an
example and spectacle to al ye world of the mutable courses wherein fortune
turns mankind. O my dear brother uncertain am I what I do: whyther I thus
distitute of socour and aid: may persecute and revenge thy injuries and thy
death: or else whether I may provide and seek socours for recoueringe of the land
of Numidy. I am in that case: that my life and death depends in the socour of
other men, would god I were dead out of hand: if death might be an honest
conclusion of these my miserable misfortunes: rather than to be counted as
content and pleased to live in rebuke, and shame, as an exulate weryed and
overcome with iniures: and giuenge place to the iniust cruelte of tyrannous
persecucion, and not able nor bold to resist the same. But now certainly it
is against my will that I live, for in my life I have no likinge nor pleasure,
and yet can I not dye without disshonour. Wherefore most prudente fathers and
noble senators: these premises considered: I obtest and humbly require you:
in honor of the gods immortal: for the aunciente amite between you and my
forefathers: for the natural love which ye have against your children and
parents, and by the magestie of the people of Rome, and this your most
excellent empire, have pite of my manifold calamites and socour this my
misery. Resist this tira^nous dealyng and injury of Iugurth committed not
only against my wretched person, but also against you and your empire. Suffer
not ye kingdom of Numidy, which is your own, to decay and be destroyed by
cruel tira^ny of Iugurth, and by the effusio^ of blod and murdre of ye lineage
of Massinissa, sometime most faithful and constant friend of this your empire.

How the ambassadors of Iugurth replied against these words of Adherbal, and
what direccion was taken for both parts of the Senators of Rome. The.xi.
Chapter
AFter yt Adherbal in form above written had ended his complaint, anon ye
ambassadors of Iugurth arose and answered brefely in few words as they which
had more trust and confidence in their great gifts given befoore to many of
the rulers of Rome: than in any right of their cause and thus they replied in
effect: saying before the senators that Hiempsall was slain of the Numidians
for his own hastynes and cruelte, and not by knowledge of Iugurth: and as
touching Adherba^: he began war against Iugurth of his own froward mind
without any occasion: but after he was overcome in battle, because he was not
able to revenge him self, nor to make his party good, he fled unto Rome to
complain him to the senators of Iugurth: where al ye fault was in himself
and in none other, concerning the party of Iugurth: they required the
senators in his behalf in his absence to count him none other, than he was
proved and known in the war of Numance: and that they would not set more by
the words of his ennemy, than by his deeds magnificently proved. This said:
anon after: both parties departed in sonder from the court. Immediately the
Senators took counsel what best was to be done in the cause. The favorers of
Iugurth and of his ambassadors, and more over a great part of the Senators
were corrupt before by parcialite, favor, and rewards of Iugurth, and so
deprauat: that they contemned and set at naught ye words of Adherball,
exaltyng and co^mendynge the manhood of Iugurth: with laud, favor,
countenance, voice, and all other signs: And so finally they labored by all
manner of means for an other myscheuous vice and cruel crime to defend the
same: as if it had been in defense of their own honor, worship, and honest.
But on the other part were a few other, which set more by justice and
honest, than by false gotten riches: these counseled to socour Adherbal and
sharply to punisshe and revenge the death of Hie^psall. But among al other of
this opinion: was one named Emilius Scaurus a man of noble birth ready to
disturb every busynes, debatfull and besye: desirous of power, of authorite,
of honor and of riches: but crafty in cloking of these his fautes. After this
Emilius Scaurus saw his gyueng of brybes of Iugurth so shamfully and openly
known: he fered lest ye corrupcion of the Senators and head rulers of Rome
might ingendre envy, debate and slaughter between them and the commons, like
as in such cases often had fortuned in times before. Wherefore in this
consideracion, he refrained his mind at this time from his accostumed unlawful
lusts. Nevertheless among the Senators in this counsel the worste part
prevailed: and that part which set more by favor and rewards, then by right
and equity, overcame the other part, which labored to sustain the right
without any favor or parcialitie. And so the favorers of Iugurthe optayned
their purpose, and his cruelty had no punyshement. Nevertheless it was
concluded and decreed that.x. ambassadors should be sent into Numidie to
divide the kingdom which longed to Micipsa between Iugurth and Adherbal. The
principal of this ambassad was one named Lucius Opimus a man of noble fame, of
great authority and power among the Senators in those days: what time
Caius Gracchus and Marcus Fuluius great favorers of the co^mens: were slain of
the noble men of Rome for the same cause. After victory of the noble men
against the commons and the same two princes: this L. Opimus enraged grievously
with rigorous and sharp inquisicions and examinacions against the pore
comontie: and was one of the chief oppressors of them. What time this L.
Opimus with his company was come to Numidye: Iugurth (...) deuouringe all
things which they may overcome. But this omitting I will now brefelye
declare what manner people first of all inhabited this country of Affrike and
what people thither resorted to inhabit next after the^. And how ye same
peoples were mingled together. How be it that which I shall write is much
diverse from the commen fame and opinion of many men: nevertheless, I shall
follow the books written in Affrike langage which) as it is said) belonged to ye
young prince Hiempsall: whom Iugurth murdered, of the same books I shall follow
the true interpretacion in this matter, and like as the inhabitauntes of the
same country affirm to be true. But touching the very credence of the truth
of the matter I report that to the authors.

The first people which inhabited the country of Affrike weere named Getulians
and Libians, a people hard, sharp and vnmanerd. These lived of flesh of
wild beasts, and fed upon the ground as beasts unreasonable. And were not
ruled by any manners, but lived without lords or laws, as vagabundes and
rouers. They had no certain bydinge place, but where as the night took the^
there they rested for the time. But after that Hercules died in Hispain as the
Affricans say, his army which was assembled of diverse nations, when their
captain and heed was lost: dispersed the^ abroad anon after his death, and
came to diverse places of the world to seek their fortune, where they might
optaine any habitacion or lordshyppe. Of which company the Medeans, Perseans,
and Armenians arrived with their ships in that coost of Affrike, which was
nerest to the empire of Rome, and long time after occupied those costs. But
ye Persians inhabited the^ self more inward in ye cuntrei toward the ocean sea,
and instead of houses they turned their ships botoms upward and dwelled under
the same. And no marueil, for in yt cuntrei about the^ grew no timber nor other
stuff mete for building, nor of ye Spaniards which inhabited next to the^
might they nether bie nor borowe. For ye sea was so great and te^pesteous between
the^, and their la^gages so diverse and unknown to either people, yt by
these.ij. i^pedimentes they were let from ye course of marcha^dise or
exchanges between the^. These Persie^s by mean of marriages by little and little
mi^gled ye Getulia^s with the^, and because they proved oftentimes ye
commodity of their ground and fildes, by often co^mutacio^s and changings one
with other, at last they named the^ self Numidia^s, that is to say herdme^
divided. And to this present day ye cotages or tylmens houses be made long with
crooked sides or couerturs bowing i^ward as if they were belies of ships
tra^suersed or turned up set down. Touching ye Medea^s and Armeniens they
joined the^ self with the Libie^s. For ye Medeans and Armeniens dwelled before
more nere to ye sea of Affrike. The Getulia^s i^habited more nere to ye sun
rising: not far from the fervent country of Inde, and this people anon had
roumes and dwelling places, for ye sea bitwene the^ and Spain was but narow,
wherefore they agreed with the Spaniards to make excha^ges and bargins of
mercha^dise with the^. The Libie^s corrupted their name by little and little
changing ye same, and at last in sted of Medea^s, named the^ self Maurie^s by
barbarike pronu^ciacion of their la^gage. But the wealth and riches of the
Persie^s in short time increased and multiplied. In somoch yt after they had
named the^ self Numidia^s, they i^creased in so great multitude: that their
first country was not able to noryshe the^ al. So yt after ward many of ye
young and lusty people departed in sonder from their frindes and left their
country, resorting to a cuntry nere ye city of Carthage, vaca^t at yt time. In
which cu^trey they i^habited the^ self and named it Numidy after their name.
Shortly after this: both they which remained still in their first cu^trei and
these which removed thence assisted one an other with all manner help and socour.
In so much yt what by strength and what by fear they brought under their
subieccio^ and dominion such other nations as marched nere the^: so yt within
short time they much inhau^ced and augmented their name and glory, but namely
they which inhabited ye part of Affrike, which is over against Italy and nere
ye Italian sea, these most i^creased in wealth and honor. For ye Libiens were
not so good men of war as ye Getulia^s or Numidia^s. And so all the inward part
of Affrike was for ye most part in possession of the Numidians, and so much
did they: yt all the nations of the^ subdued, were called Numidians after ye name
of ouercomers. Now have we declared how ye Getulians and Libie^s were first
inhabita^tes of Affrike: and how the Perseans, Medea^s, and Armeniens came
afterward and joined with the^. How the Perseans named themself Numidians. And
ye Medea^s and Armeniens by corrupcio^ of langage were called Mauriens. And now
consequently I shall declare what other people came afterward and inhabited the
same land of Affrike. After al these nations before rehearsed, out of ye land of
Phenice came much people to inhabit the^ self in Affrike. Some because their
own country was not sufficient to sustain so great a multitude as werof
the^. And other some great men of birth and desirous of lordship raised up and
assembled ye nedy common people and left their own cu^trey: in hope to find
some other greter dominion else where, and in process of time arrived at ye land
of Affrike: and there builded three cities upon the sea cost named Hippona,
Abrumentu^ and Leptis: with other diverse cities, but not so great and famous as
these were. These cities in short time were so augme^ted and incresed yt some of
the^ were honor, and some socour and aid to their original cu^tries. But of the
city of Carthage which also by the^ was bylded: and afterward became ye head
city of Affrike, I think it is better to pas over with silence, tha^ of it to
speak a litel and tha^ to leave ye matter in the myds vnperfet and also this my
business proceeds to an other purpose. Nevertheless some what shall I touch the
first foundacio^ of this city of Carthage, not following mine author Salust:
which wrteth nothing thereof: but following the opinion of Virgil as he writes
in ye first book of Eneas.

The queen Dido daughter of Belus king of ye land of Cipre and wife to Sicheus
king of Phenice, fled with her shyps laded with gold and other riches out of her
own cu^trey: dreding the cruelte of her brother Pigmalio^ which blinded by
couetise and ambicion had slain her husband Sicheus by treso^. This Dido at
last arrived with her shyps and co^pani at the coast of Affrike, where reigned a
king named Hierbas: which moved with beauty of Dido, desired her to wife. But for
love which she had to her first husband Sicheus she would not consent thereto by
any means: but desired to bie of ye same king as much ground as might be
co^pased about with the hide of a bull. And after yt it was granted, she cut the
hide of small that with the same she co^pased.iij. mile of ground about. In
which space she builded a city, which first was named Birsa, after in process
of time it was called Tiros, and last of al Carthage. Under which name by long
co^tinuau^ce so amply it increased in fame and wealth, that it contained xxiiij.
miles in compass. But wha^ it was in most excellence it was utterly distroied
by the Romans, Publius Scipio Affrican^ ye time being captain of ye Roman
army. Touching ye foundation of this famous city of Carthage, so much have I
written more than mine author Salust. But now will I return to mine institute
and purpose concerning ye description of Affrike, and brefely bring it to
conclusion. The valey of who^ I spoke before named in Affricke langage
Cathahathmo^, divided the country of Affrike from Egypt on ye side, save that
an arm of ye see is bitwene ye first city or habitacio^ of Affrik toward this
valey, and is called Cirene. And nere to the same be other two cities, ye one
named Tolonia ye other Therco^: beiond these three cities be two quicksa^des and
bytwen both ye sa^des a cite named Leptis. Beyond this cite of Leptis is a
place named of ye Romans Phylenoru^, in english, ye auters of two brethern
called Philenis because these two brethern suffered the^ self to be quick
buried in ye same place for ye comme^ well of their country whereof thistory
herafter shall be written at more oportunite. This place divides ye dominion of
Carthage from Egypt on ye side. After this place on ye side costs be other
cities belonging to ye dominion of Punike. All the places from thens forth to
Mauritany or land of the Mauriens, be under subieccio^ of ye Numidians. The
Mauriens have their habitacion nere to Hispaine. But as we read, ye Getulians
have their habitacio^ beiond ye Numidia^s: some in pore lodgis: and some other
more vilely without habitacio^ wandering as vagabu^des. Beyond these Getulia^s is
ye land of Ethiope: and from thens forth be countries so brent with fervor of
the son yt they be inhabitable. But duri^g this war bitwene ye Romai^s and
Iugurth the Romans had i^ their possession many towns of Punike and much of
the costs of the^pire of Carthage: and ruled ye same by officers under the^
thereto assigned. A great part of Numidy and of the Getulians unto a flode named
Mulucha^: was under the dominion of Iugurth. Over al ye Mauria^s reigned one
king named Bocchus of who^ the Romai^s had no knowledge save of his name only.
And before this bataile, he was another in peace nor in war acquainted nor
known of the Romans. Of Affrik and of thinhabitau^tes of the same, enough is
spoken, and as much as is requisite of necessite to the process of this
hystory. Now will I make regression and prosecute my first purposed matter
ensuing mine author Salust.

How Iugurth invaded the kingdom of Adherball yet ones again and how
Adherball again was overcome in battle: and put to flight. The.xiii. Chapter,
AFter the ambassadors of Rome: of whom I have spoken before, had divided ye
realm of Numidy between Adherbal and Iugurth, and were departed out of Affricke
toward Rome: anon Iugurth reuoulued in mind how he had escaped unpunished for
his cruelty otherwise tha^ his mind feared before: And how i^ sted of
punisheme^t for his sine: he was rewarded with the better part of the land of
Numidy. Now he considred yt al was true which his fre^des had told him before
while he was in Hispaine with the Romayne army in the war of Numa^ce: yt is to
say. That nothing was so false and iniust: but yt might be justified at Rome
for money, for all thing might be bought there for money. This co^sideracio^
inhau^ced his mind unto esperau^ce and yt not a litel. Forthermore he was
inflamed with the large promesses of the^, whom he had acloied before with gifts
and rewards at Rome, In somoch yt again of new, he fixed his mind to invade
and usurp the kingdom of Adherbal, and by some point of prodicio^ to take him
in trape as he had done Hie^psal his brother. Thus Iugurth was fierce: sharp,
and apt to war, well inured with the same, and expert in feats thereof, but
co^trarely Adherbal: who^ he assaied and pursued, was a mete man and oportune
to take in iurye: more fereful and dreding other, tha^ to be dread of other.
Wherefore suddenly. and without any provision on party of Adherbal: Iugurth
invaded the marches of his kingdom, with a great power and multitud of me^ of
arms many of thinhabita^tes he murdered: and many took he prisoners with bestes
and al other manner of prays: robbi^g and spoiling every where: as for as his
army dispersed, towns, castles, and other edifices he burnt and beat down,
and many other places he assailed and invaded more inwardly i^ the country by
excourses of his horsemen. This done he returned into his country with all his
multitude, prays and prisoners: supposing ye Adherbal moved with anger and
displeasure would revenge these iniuryes, and ye thing should be cause and
occasion of open war between the^. But Adherbal advised him self well: by
remembrance of his first bataile had with Iugurth yt he was not able to contend
with him in bataile nor with force of arms: and more over he had more
confidence and trust in friendship of the Romans: tha^ in the inco^stant
Numidya^: which leaned more to his ennemy tha^ to him. These things
co^sidred: he send ambassadors to Iugurth to compain of these iniures. But
these ambassadors had naught else of him, but co^tumelious proud, and hastye
words. And so disposed of Iugurth returned again to their lord Adherbal:
though such answers might have moved any coragious heart: nevertheless,
Adherbal determined in mind: to suffer al things: and to take many in iures
pacie^tly, rather tha^ again to begin bataile with Iugurthe. For (as said is)
the bataile foughte^ befoore between the^ was both disshonour and also great
damage. But for all this sufferau^ce of Adherbal: the mind of Iugurth was not
more pacified, nor lessed of his cruelte. The patience of Adherbal abated not
ye ire of Iugurth but it augme^ted. For all ready he had concluded in mind to
invade ye hole kingdom of Numidy. Therefore he began again of new, not as
before with a company of rouers, but with a mighty and great army assembled
together demeaning open war, and chala^ging openly the hole empire of Numidy,
and with such power proceeded into the land of Adherball: wasting the towns and
fyldes on every side, driving away prays of catel and other riches: and
increasing courage to his men and dred to his ennemis. When Adherbal saw it was
come to yt point yt he must needs other abando^ and give over his kingdom, or
else maintain it with force of arms, as he which was constrained by extreme
necessite, he assembled and empareiled an army as well as he might, and with the
same proceeded forth to mete Iugurth. At last the two hosts of Adherbal and of
Iugurth approached and rested nere together, beside a town named Cirtha not fer
distant from the sea coost and for asmoch as ye day drew nere to night: the
bataile was not anon begone, but either remained in their tents. Anon after
much of the night was ouerpassed, and the star light some what dimmed with
obscurite of clouds. The soudiours of Iugurth raised by the sound of
trumpettes unwarily, and suddenly invaded and assailed the tents and field of
Adherbal, some they murdr^^ half slepinge: and some other they slew while
they were in hand to arm them self. On the part of Adherball was pityful
murdre, and on Iugurthes side no mercy, but obstinate persecucio^ and
vengeance and so fiersly fought, Iugurth and his company ye shortly Adherball
fled to the town of Cirtha, acompaned with a few horsemen. But Iugurth pursued
him so nerely yt if the inhabita^tes of the town of Cirtha in have and with
great multitude had not received Adherbal, and with force of arms defended the
walls, and kept forth ye soudiours of Iugurth, which persued Adherbal, the
bataile bitwene the^ both should have bego^ and ended yt same day, and ye to
destruction of Adherbal, But Iugurth perceiuinge the enter into ye town denied
to him, a none beseged it on every side with al manner ingines inuasiue to his
ennemies and defe^siue to his company: he caused hastily to be framed large
pauaises and towers of timbre to be driven upon whelis toward ye walls of the
town. And with these and al manner other ingins went in hand fiersly to assail
the town, and somoch more hastily he sped him to thinte^t to bring his purpose
to effect, before any ambassadors should come from Rome to resist his
enterprise. For asmoch as before this bataile he herd yt Adherbal had se^d
ambassadors to Rome to certify ye senators of his miserable state.

How ye favorers of Iugurth at Rome labored so in his cause yt three young me
inexperte and without policy were send ambassadors into Aff^ike to cesse this
strife bitwene ye two kings: and how these ambassadors returned to Rome
without any thing done. The.xiiii. Chap.
But after and Senators at Rome herd tidinges of this battle, they send into
Affrike three young gentilme^ embassad commanding them to go to both the
kings, and to command the^ in behalf of the Senators and of the hole people
of Rome to cesse their war, and to show them that the senate and Romans
wylled and utterly commanded them so to do. And so doing, they should do as it
seemed them: and as of congruence they ought to do both for pleasure of the
Romans and for their own honor and profit. The ambassadors with such
commandment hasted them and came unto Affrike, the Senators had commanded
them to make somoche more expedicio^ in their journey because tidinges were
brought to Rome: wha^ these ambassadors prepared themself forward: how the
battle was done between Adherball and Iugurth, and how Iugurth kept Adherball
beseged straightly within the town of Cirtha. But this rumor was somewhat
alayed and kept by favorers of Iugurth, after these ambassadors were come to
Numidy: they expressed to Iugurth the effect of their embassad, in form as the
Senators had commanded them, wha^ Iugurth understood the pleasur of the
Senators by their words and embassade: he answered benignely, saying that he
counted no erthly thing more great, nor excellent, nor more dear unto him
than the authorite of the senators and people of Rome, and that from his youth
to that time he had ever so endeavored to order himself, yt every good and
worshypfull man commended and allowed him for his virtue and manhood, and not
for malice nor mysdemenour. And for the same manlyues, and not for malicious
deeds, nor for disordred manners his company and conversation was accept and
pleasure unto the right high and worthy Captain Publius Scipio. Moreover:
for the fame, conuersacio^ and good manners and not for fault of children
naturell, his uncle Micipsa had adopted him for his son: and made him
inheritour of his kingdom, partner with his own natural sons: and for as much
as he had demeaned him self right well and worthily, in executynge of many high
and glorious interprises: so much the less could he suffer injury done unto him
unrevenged. As touching Adherbal Iugurth alleged for himself that this
Adherball by gyle and treason lay in wayt to flee him: which thing perceived:
he made resystence against the same to the best of his power, as any man was
bound to do for sauegard of his own life. And if the Romans would prohybit
and deny that unto him, which Justice permytted to every man (that is, with
violence to resyst and repel violence) than should they neither do well nor
ryghtwysely in that behalf. When Iugurth had answered the ambassadors after
this manner: than said he for conclusion that shortly after he would send
ambassadors to certify the Senators of all other things concerning this
busynes: and on this point Iugurth and the ambassadors departed in sonder.
Thus Adherball had no confort nor license to reply against the words of
Iugurth, nor sight or co^municacion with ye ambassadors: all only was it
granted unto him to appeal to ye court of Rome, for of these ambassadors
could he have no justice, nor dyreccion, in his injuries and persecucion. When
Iugurth thought that thembasssadours were passed forth of Affrike, toward Rome,
and when he saw yt with force of arms he coud not win the town of Cirtha,
because of natural sytuacion and difficulte of the place. Anon he besiged the
town again of new, and all difficultes not wtsta^dyng, he made a profounde and
deep trench round about the town with sharp stakes and pales sticked on the
hygheste part of the same trenches with sharp pykes at the upper ends. This
did Iugurth for many consideracions: first to the intent that the inhabitants
should not break forth of of the town suddenly at any side upon any part of
his soldiers which besieged them. Secondly to the intent that on no part any
vitailes should be brought in to the^. Thirdlye that the men of war within the
town should not thruste forth without the town the multitude of poor
commons in time of famine and scarsitie of vytayles. And fourthlye, that no
succors should enter in to them to rescue the town, nor to supplye their
garyson. When this trenche was made and fynyshed, Iugurth moreover made strong
bulwarks and towers of timber without the town, and strengthed the same with
a garrison of wyghte and bold men of arms. Beside all these ordinances he
left nothing unassayed, neither spared he to attempt any thing by strength, or
by treason and gyle. Sometime he proved the watch men and defenders of the
walls with gifts exciting them to betraye the town. When his rewards
auayled naught, than he threatened them with fyerce and sharp words, he
inhaunced by exhortacions the minds and courages of his own men to
manlynesse and audacitye. And so he applied his business that nothing he
omitted wont or possible to be done in such a case, nor no engynne of war
left he unprovided, which in those days was contryued or found: but rather
beside all old inuencions he imagyned and devised new enginnes and
ordinances of war not seen before that time, and al for destruccio^ of the
town of Cirtha, and of Adherball whom he besieged within the same. But what
time Adherball consydred his fortune come to extremyte on all parts, he cast
many things in mind. On the one side he pereciued his ennemy Iugurth
violente against him, and no trust of comfort or socours. On the other side he
consydred well that for penury and want of soudiours and other things
necessary he was not able another to fight with his ennemie, nor to drive forth
or prolong the battle: and for fault of vytaile he might not long defend ye
town. These things with many mo well reuoulued in mind: he chose for the two
which were most diligent and trusty of that company which had fled with him
into Cirtha. To them he woefully bewailed his misfortune: and made so large
promises of rewards unto them: that at last he induced them to go forth of
the town by night privily, and if they might escape their ennemies, to resort
to the next haven town: and from thens to haste them to Rome with letters
which he had devised and written to be delivered to the senators. These
messa^gers were trusty and faithful, within few days without any disturbance:
they fulfilled the commandment of their sovereign, and delivered the letters
of Adherball unto the Senators, which letters anon were read in the
counselhous before the senators of Rome of which letters ye sentence hereafter
insueth and was such.

The sentence of the letters sent from Adherball unto the senators, what time
he lay beseged by Iugurth within the town of C^rtha. The.xv. Chapter.
Most worthy fathers, it is not through my fault yt I send so often to you
requiring your socours, and complaining mine iniures, but the violence and
rigor of Iugurth, compels thereto, whose mind is filled with so great a
lust and desire to bereue my life: yt neither has he in mind the dred of
gods punishment, nor fear of your displeasure. My blood he coueiteth more
than all things: Insomoch that now is the.v. month since I am kept closed and
besiged with armed men, by tyranny of Iugurth. He nothing regardi^g that I am
confederate fellow and friend of the people of Rome. Neither can prevail nor
help ye great benefits of my father Micipsa done to this Iugurth, nor your
authorite nor ordynaunces or decres. I am uncertain whyther I am constrained
and oppressed more grievously by force of arms or by hunger, for both
involueth me on all sides, I would write unto you much more touching the
tirannous cruelte of Iugurth but my miserable fortune moves me contrary: and
moreover I have often perceived before this time: that small credence is given
to such as ar oppressed with misery. Save this I perceive clearly that the mind
of Iugurth coueteth a greater thing tha^ my death or kingdom. And if by your
suffera^ce: he shall subdue me and bereue me of my kingdom: at last he shall rise
and rebel agynst your empire. Wherefore if ye list not to defend and socour my
life: at leest defend your kingdom of Numidy, and preuente the usurper of
your empire. Suffer not this tyran to enjoy the kyngedome of Numidye, and
your good will wythall. But truly ye may well perceive that he looks not
after your favor: after he shall have usurped the realm of Numidy. But whyther
he sets less by loss of your frendshyppe and favor, or of the domynion
of Numidy, none is so blind but that may euydentlye perceive the troth. For
his deeds declare: that he counts less grievous to have your high
displeasur, than to lose his fires purpose to sle me, and than to ocupy the
hole land of Numidy. For this has he proved and made manifest by his
unnatural and cruel deeds, first of all he has slain my brother Hiempsall:
which deed he durst not have done if he had feared your displeasure, next that,
he drove me forth of my country and fathers kyngedome. But these iniures for
certain were done against my brother and me, and nothing they longed to you.
But now he conspyred hyer inuadinge, vsurpinge, and wasting the hole land of
Numidy with force of arms. And where as ye set me as your leuetenaunte under
you to govern a part of Numidy. This Iugurth now has driven me from my
liberty into the town of Cirtha, and besegeth me with men of arms closed
on all sides with outward dread and inward famine: So that my peryls may
plainly declare how little he sets by the words of your ambassadors.
Certainly I can se nothing remayninge able to remove his violence: nor that
cane socoure this my misery, save only your power and violence. I would right
gladly: that these things which now I write to you: and all those things
which I have complained before in the counsel house were but feigned and false
rather than this my euidente myserye should prove them true and credible unto
you. But since I was borne in that hour, and my destiny is such that Iugurth
most manifests his coursed crueltye by me: therefore now my request nor
prayer is not that I may escape the sharpenes and cruelte of death which I
behold instant and inevitable but only my prayer is yt I may escape the long
subjection and bondage of my ennemie and prolonged tourmentes of my miserable
body. But worthy fathers: touching the kingdom of Numidy, which apertayneth
to you: provide you for the same as it likethe you, and if it be your
pleasure: rid and deliver me from the cruel and unmercifully hands of Iugurth
my mortal ennemy for the honor and mageste of your empire, and for the
fidelite of all frenshyp if any remembrance of my grandfather Massinissa
remains yet among you.

How the senators send new ambassadors to Iugurth commaundynge him to
desyst from his persecucion of Adherbal, and how they preualed nothing: how
the town of Cyrtha was yielded to Iugurth, and how he slew adherball.
The.xvi. Chapter.
AFter these foresaid letters were openly red and recited before the
senators: many of them were, which counseled to send an army into Affrike,
and in all have conueniente to socour and help Adherball. And in the mean
time they would take counsel and advise touching Iugurth what should be done
to him: because he had not obeyed their ambassadors. When the favorers of
Iugurth herd of this they labored withal their might: that no such decre
should be made nor proceed to effect. And thus the commen well was over come
and subdued by pryuate profete and parciall favor, as in many other businesses
is daily wont to happen, Not withstanding this parcialite: at last it was so
determined: that other new ambassadors were sent yet ones again to Affrike, not
young men and inexpert as before but well aged men of grauite and discress^on
which were of great dignite: and had borne great and worshypfull offices i^
time past in the cite of Rome. Among which ambassadors was one named Marcus
Emilius, Scaurus, of whom we have made mention before. This Scaurus was a man
by riches and fame counted able to be cou^seller of Rome: and also at that time
a mighty prince and great doer among the Senators, and in manner ruler of them
all. For as much as all men for the most part were displeased with Iugurth and
sore murmured against his cruelte and against ye parciall favor showed to him
at Rome: and also for that ye messa^gers of Iugurth besought the ambassadors
to have them to Numidy, therefore ye third day after their commission they
departed from Italy, and took shypping and in short time after aryued in
Affrike, at a city named Vtica in a province subject to ye Romans: As Soon as
they were arrived they send letters unto Iugurth chargyng him in all have to
come to the said province to know the pleasure of the Senators to Rome which
had send them therefore the nones with certain commandments dyrect unto him.
When Iugurth understood that such noble me^ famous, and of preeminent authorite
at Rome were come to prohybit his interprise, at first beginning he was somewhat
troubled with dread, on the other part his lust was much kyndled to win the
town of Cirtha, and to get Adherbal into his hands, and so was his mind
diversely distract with dread and desire: with dread of the ambassadors, and
with desire to bring his purpose to effect. Greatly he feared the anger and
displeasur of the Senators if he did not obey their ambassadors: but his
mind on the other part was utterly blinded by lust of dominion, which desire
drew him violently to perform that he had begone. And so at conclusion in such
mind desirous of lordshyp, the worst counsel overcome the best. And couetise
excluded fear: and thus he determined in mind to win the town (if he might)
before he would go to common with the ambassadors This thing determined and
fixed in mind he compased the ^owne about with his army: and with great
violence assailed it contendyng to break in thereto: this did he: trustyng that
namely: by diuidynge of his army on all sides of the town, and compellyng his
ennemeis within the town to break their hole company for to defend the walls
assailed on all parties, he might at last by such means wyn victory over the^.
But after many and sharp assautes at last when he saw his purpose proceeded not
to effect and that he was not of power to have his pleasure of the town and of
Adherball before he should common with the ambassadors, he was right pensive in
mind. And lest his prolongyng might anger Scaurus ye chief of the ambassadors
whom he greatli drad: at last he came into the province with a small company of
horsemen. As Soon as he was come the ambassadors showed unto him many grievous
manaces and words of displeasure in name of all the senate because he cessed
not for all their commandments from beseging of the town of Cirtha but at
conclusion after much communication spent in vain: the ambassadors departed
again to Rome: without any dyreccion or apoyntme^t made. When tidings hereof came
to Cirtha such as defended the town were much abashed, but Adherball most of
all. At last the Italyans, of whom many were within ye town: and by whose
strength the walls were chefly defended, began to think among them self yt if
the town were yielded up to Iugurth, he durst not be so bold to show any
violence against them for the honor and mageste of the name of Romans. For
as much as ye same Italians were counted as Romans. In such dyuises they came
to Adherball and him advised to yield him self and the town to Iugurth upon
apointment and condition, that the same Iugurth only would promise to grant
him his life: and as touching all other injuries which Iugurth had done to him,
the Senators when they should se time oportune and convenient would se a
dyreccion and remedy: Adherbal heryng this counsel, anon considred in his
mind that nothing could be more unstable nor more incertayne, than was the
promise of Iugurth. Again he called to mind that if he accorded not to their
counsel it was in their power to compel him thereto. And so according to their
aduisment he yielded up the town to Iugurth upon promise only to have his life
saved. But anon Iugurth contrary to his promise put Adherbal to death first of
al with manyfolde tourme^tes. After that he slew all the young and lusty men
of the town both Numidyans and Italyans merchants indyfferently: sparyng
none namely if they were found in harness.

How the Senators certyfied of this cruelty of Iugurth prepared on army
against him: how the ambassadors of Iugurth were not received into Rome: and
how Calphurnius the Roman captain was acloyed with brybes. The.xvii. Chapter.
When this cruelte of Iugurth was known at Rome the Senators began to take
counsel what thing was best to be done in the case But they whose favor
Iugurth had bought before sore distourbed the counsel, and prolonged the time
with fair words and prayer sometime: sometime with ^auorable promise made to other
lords: And other while with braulyng and thretnyng covertly. In so much yt by
such means at last they alayed the dispeasur taken against Iugurth and
mitigated the cruelte of his deeds. And certainly all the ill will and hatred
which was taken against Iugurth should utterly have been let fall and quenched by
dryuyng forth the time in counsellyng: had not ben the resystence and
repugnaunce of one named Caius Menmius: So great was the power of the favor
and treasur of Iugurth. This M^nmius was elect and assigned to be protector of
the co^mens for the year next insuyng and was a man sharp and fires of
co^dicions, and against the power of the noble men of Rome with all his might:
and therefore when he saw this unreasonable favor and parcialite among the
Senators he informed the commen people that ye Senators were about to pardon
the cruelte of Iugurth, by couetyse and corrupcion of a few debateful lords.
The commenty understanding this, was sore moved against the Senators and
counsel. And the Senators again sore feared the co^mens because of the
offenses both of Iugurth and of them in favoring him were openly known:
therefore they dradde lest all the co^mens joined together might make
insurrection against the^: wherefore they thought it necessary to pacify and
alay the commens. Now it was so that long before this time a noble man of Rome
named Sempronius while he was in authorite made a statute and law that if it
fortuned at any time: that the Romans stood in doubt and fear lest any war
or battle might come upon them suddenly, new co^suls than should be chosen and
assigned for the next year to come, and send into such prouynces where the
battle or war was feared. These consuls were thus chosen before the year of
the old consuls was fully expyred to the intent that in mean time they might
have more time and leyser to make convenient provision for the war: And this
act so decreed was called the law of Sempronius, because he first inacted the
same. By this law of Sempronius: the two provinces of Numidy and Italy were
decreed to the two co^suls for the year to come. The province of Italy to be
defended and conserved: and the province of Numidy to be recouerd (Scipio
Nasica) (and Calphurnius Bestia) were proclaimed Co^suls for the next year
coming. The land of Numidy came by lot to Calphurnius that he should do his
dilgence to recover the same, and the country of Italy fell to Scipio to
defend the same. After this an army was assembled to be send into Affirke,
and so forth to Numidy: wages, and vitayles for the soudyours with other
things needful to war, were decreed of the Senators, and: provided of the
co^sull Calphurnius. But when Iugurth herd tidyng from his friends at Rome of
this ordinance, and perceived that the matter went forward, other wise tha^ he
trusted it should have done. For his mind was fixed that al thing right and
wrong might be bought and sold at Rome: now went he in hand again with his
old crafts, and send his son with other two of his most familyer and
trusty friends ambassadors unto the Senators. And like as he had commanded
these ambassadors whom he had send to Rome after he had murdered Hiempsall:
right so he commanded these that they should go in hand to stop every man's
mouth with money. For in his great treasour and in couetyse of the rulers of
Rome was al his confidence. O cursed hunger of gold most execrable thou driuest
blind minds to yls innumerable. When these ambassadors of Iugurth were come
nere Rome: the consul Calphurnius demanded advise and counsel of the
Senators whyther it pleased them that the said ambassadors should be received
within the wales of Rome or not. But the Senators decreed, yt except they came
to yield both Iugurth and kingdom of Numidy unto the Romans: upon a great
pain they should depart out of the country of Italy within x. days next
after. Calphurnius commanded this ordinance and decree of the Senators to be
brone and declared to the Numidya^s by one named Decius. And so thembassadours
departed home again without any thing done, wherefore they came. In the mean
time Calphurnius prepared his army: and chose to him noble men, debateful, and
having mani clyentes and servants retained with them. This did he, to thinte^t
that if he did any thing amysse in his viage: he might trust to be supported by
their authorite. Among whom was named Scaurus: of whose co^dicions and
behauour I have spoken before. But in this consul Calphurnius, weere mani good
propertis and virtuous conditions, both of mind and body: but the cursed vice
of couetyse which was in him: blinded and over came all those virtues: so yt he
put the^ not in execucion: he might well endure labor, his wit was quick and
pregna^t, he was puident and ware enough. In batail he was so expert yt in
gretest peril, he was boldest and stro^gst against ye gile of his enmies But to
our purpose, this Calphurnius wha^ he had elect and assembled such compani as
him thought competent for an army, he divided all his host into legyous,
contaynyng in every legion.vi.M.vi.C.lx. and sir men. And so send forth his
men by legio^s by ye country of Italy to a town called Regium, which town is
in the marches between Italy and Cycil: from this town of Regiu^ they were
conuayed into Cycile, and so into Affrike, and there they mustred and were set
in array, and so proceeded by land till they attained unto Numidie. Anon
Calphurnius prepared vitailes and all manner ordinances requisite, and proceeded
forward, assaylyng fierselye the land of Numidy, as a hardy captain,
pretending great valyantise at the first brunt. Many men took he prisoners, and
a few towns he subdued unto him such as resysted his power he brent them, to
the ground to increase fere to their neighbors. Iugurth aduertyng this
sharpnes of Calphurnius send ambassadors to him with great plenty of gold to
attempt his mind, and showed unto him ye hardness and difficulte of the war
which he had begone. Wha^ Calphurnius felt the wight and valor of the glystryng
gold, his corrupt and unstable mind by contagion of couetyse, anon was
perverted to receive the money, and induced to favor and assist the part of
Iugurth. But Scaurus (of whom I have spoken before) was received unto the^ for
partiner and fellow of al their counsels and busynesses. And howbeit at
beginning this same Scaurus strongly resisted the party of Iugurth: what time
many other of his sect were corrupt and accloyed with bribes long before this
nevertheless now at last his mind was abstract like other mo from the defense
of goodness and honesty unto his old vice of insaciable and execrable couetyse
by mean of haboundaunce of gold and great rewards of Iugurth. But at first
beginning, this Iugurth redeemed of Calphurnius, but only delayinge and
deferring of of the war: trusting that in the mean time he should bring
about somewhat of his purpose at Rome, other by price, prayer, or favor. But
now after he had wone Scaurus to be partener of his business, and fauorer of
his cause also with Calphurnius: he was brought in to a very great trust
fullye to recover his peace at Room: and concluded while both Calphurnius and
Scaurus weere present together, to take aduisemente and treat presently with
them of all apoyntmente and things necessary to be done for performing of his
purpose. How be it he trusted not Calphurnius so much that he would come to
his army, except some hostages of the Romans were left within some strong
town of his, and in ward of his people whereby he might trust without damage
safely to be remitted again to his army. Calphurnius to avoid this dout of
Iugurth, and to put him in more assurance, send the treasourer of the Roman
army named Sertius, unto one of the chief towns belongyng to Iugurth called
Vacca, fayninge among the army that he sent the treasourer thither for
provision of wheat and other vytayles necessary to his hooste. And the same
commandment to prouyd vytayles the captain Calphurnius gave to his
tresourer openly in commen audience: to the intent that no man should
suspecte his false purpose: saying to his tresourer that he neded not to be in
doubt of Iugurth, for as much as truce was taken between both parties till a
certain day prefyxed. The tresourer Sextius went to the said cite of Vacca at
commandment of Calphurnius his captain. Wherefore anon after Iugurth (like
as he appointed before) came to the army of Calphurnius, and there in presence
of the rulers and counsel of the Romans, spoke little of his purgacion,
concerning the displeasure, envy, and hatredde, which the senate and commens of
Rome had taken against him for his deeds saying that he had naught done but
provoked of his ennemies, and for his own defense: with violence to resyst
violence. How beit he said that he was contented to yield and submit him self
unto the Romans clemency and mercy. So Much spoke he openly before all the
chief counsel of the army. But all the remenaunt he concluded and did secretly
with Calphurnius and Scaurus at more leisure, and thus ended ye communication
of this day. On the next day after insuynge the captain and the counsel of the
army, and also Iugurth assembled together again to common of the same matter
concerning peace to be granted to Iugurth. Now it was so that at Rome was
decreed an ordinance long before this time named among the Romans the Satyr
law, which law commanded that the captain of every army should ask
advise of all wise counsel of his host wha^ he went about any wheyghty matter
concerning the common well. Wherefore Calphurnius thought so to order himself
that he should not be counted a brekar of this law: And desired counsel and
advise of all the noble and wise men of his host. This did he to thynte^t that
if the peace granted to Iugurth should be afterward dysalowed at Rome (as it
was) he might avoid the fault from him self into the common counsel. But at
conclusion, when Calphurnius acordyng to the said law had required advise of
the common counsel, every man consented that peace should be granted to
Iugurth upon condition and conuenaunt that he should deliver unto the Romans
thirty Elyphantes with much other catel and many horses with a great some of
gold. To which ordinance Iugurth acorded and soon after delivered the same
Eliphantes, catell, and horses and gold unto the tresourer of the Romayne
host. This done the consul Calphurnius departed to Rome to require the
senators and other rulers to confirm this peace and concord which they had
made with Iugurth. In mean time over all Numidy and also in the Romayne army was
peace and concord in abiding the answer of the senate and rulers at Rome.

How the rulers of Rome for the most part were grievously displeased for
grauntyng of this peace, and disalowed the same. And how Memmius inflamed the
commen people against the favorers of Iugurth. The.xviii. Chapter.
But after it was known at Rome in what manner the consul had behaved him
self in Affrike with Iugurth: in every place about Rome, and among every
company within Rome it was commined of the deed of Calphurnius. In somoche
that among the comme^ty was raised grievous hatered and displeasure against him.
The senators were sore troubled and were in doubt whyther they might confirm
and allow this foul and shameful deed of the consul, or else abrogate and
annull the same. In this perplexite they were long time uncertain. And most
of all the might and power of Scaurus (because he was a doer and fellow with
the consul in the said deed) let them from discussing of the right. But while
the senators in such wise prolonged the time. In this dubitacion Memmius (of
whose conditions, promptnes of wit, and hatered: which he had against ye
power of the estates and noble men we have written before) at diverse times he
assembled the common people, exhortyng and inflamyng them to revenge the
cruelte of Iugurth, and parcialite of his favorers and warning them not to
forsake the defense of their commen weal and lybertye of their cite. He
rehearsed unto them the pride the cruelte, and manyfolde unlawful deeds of the
senators and of other estates at many times done to disworshyp and oppression
of the commen well. And utterly at conclusion so he behaved himself that he
kyndled the minds of the universal commentie to resyst the parcialyte of the
estates, and to se the cruelte of Iugurth extremely punyshed. But because the
eloquence of this Memmius at that season was at Rome notable and much set by,
dyscrete and of great authoryte. I have intended of so many exortacions as he
had to the people to commyt one to remembrance by wrytinge. And specially
before all other I will write that exortacion which after returning of
Calphurnius from Affrike the said Memmius spoke before the commen people in
form following.

The oracion of Memmius had before the comme^ people of Rome. In which oracion
he induces them to defend their lyberte, And to express and persecute with
hatered the no^le men of Rome. The.xix. Chapter.
RIght worthu cetizins many things would with draw me from defense of you and
from charge and meddling with your businesses were not ye great love and favor
which I have to the commen well: yt causes me to set a side al such
impedimentes, and utterly to take upon me the defense of your liberte against
these corrupt estates. More plainly to ascertaine you: ye things which might
withdraw me from defense of your cause be these. F^rst the power of them
which are beginers of this variau^ce, yt is to say of Calphurnius and Scaurus.
Secondly your patience which is easy to be subdued of cruelte: sith ye be
disposed to endure this wrong. Aid thyrdly ye infeccio^ of Justice which is
no where here among us, but clean exyled from our city. And principally this
lets me for that I se you so innocent, so feeble minded, and so simple, yt in
eueri place ye ar sure of al ye peril, of all the labor: and of all the pain,
but these estates which do naught yt is commendable have al ye honor:
auantage, and worship. And sothely, it greueth me to speak to you of ye injury
yt now of late has be^ don to you: how much ye have been had in skorne,
derision and in disdain: to ye power and pride of a few estates. And al so it
greueth to recount how unrevenged many of your defe^ders by the^ have shamfully
be put to death for your sake within these fiftene years. And to se how your
minds be corrupt with cowardice and negligence yt ye would never socoure them
which in your quarrel and defense have suddued the^ self to death. What intend
ye? will ye still be subject unto these estates your enemies. It is surely time
at the last to arise and defend your liberty, ye do dred them, whom if seems
to doubt and to dread you, considering your true quarrel, and their ungodly
misdemeanour. But not wythstandynge that ye be thus dysposed to lose your
lybertye and in myserye to pass forth the resydue of your lives, nevertheless
the good will, which I have to you and to the comme^ well causes and dryueth
my mind to resyste this false favor and parcialyte of these proud and
unjust lords. Certesse I shall assay and prove how I can defend the lyberte
which my father left me, but whyther I shall so do to advantage or else in
vain that lies hole in your hands and power. Surely worthy citezins I do not
exorte you to withstand these wrongs and oppressions with force of arms as
our forefathers have often done. To resyst and repel this wrong needs no
violence no deuydynge of you from the senators as your elders have done
before time. It must needs be yt these great men confederate in malice at last
shall come to decay by their own conditions and insolente behauoure.

Were not sharp inquisicions and grievous examinacio^s had against the commen
people of Rome, after that Tiberius Graccus was slain for the defense of the
laws belonging to the commentie: whom his evil wyllers accused as usurper of
kingdom over the commen people. And moreover after yt Caius Graccus and Marcus
Fuluius, were put to death for defending of your lyberte, were not many of your
order and behauour that is to say of the commentie put to death or murdered in
prison: And at both the seasons the estates made no end of their cruelty
against you after the law, but after their immoderate pleasur. Well forsothe I
grant that it be reputed for treason and usurpation of a kingdom to defend
the laws and the right of the comme^tie, and I grant also that what thing can
not be condygnely punished without effusion of blood of many citezins, that the
same punisheme^t be executed according to law and right upon a few such as
were begynners of the trespass, within these few years passed ye disdained
and murmured secretly among your self that the said lords spoiled the
commen treasoure without your consent. And that kings and nations
contrybutory to Rome, paid their trybutes to a few private estates, and not
general to the universal city in commen: and ye grutched that these estates
had all the most dignite and all the richesse and treasoure, also in their
hands. Nevertheless they counted but a small thing to escape unpunished for
these so great offenses. Wherefore now are they become so bold, so fires, and
proud: by your sufferance that at last they have betrayed and put in hands
of your enemies, your laws, your dignite, your majesty, with all other
things both humayne and divine to your liberty belongyng. So that in
pardoninge of these inhumayne and cruel offenses of Iugurth they have polluted
and betrayed the laws both of god and man. And how be it that such is their
demeanor it nothing repents them: nor they be naught asshamede thereof. But
daily iette before your faces solemly and pompouslye bostynge them self: Some
of their dignities, their lordshyppes, and offices. And other some craking of
their triumphs and victories, as who says that they attained the same by
honor, and not by falsehoode and robbery. Have ye not daily experience
seeing that simple bondmen bought and sold for money will not suffer nor endure
the unjust commandments of their lords or masters. But contrary wise ye
gentylmen: fre borne cetezyns, are contented to suffer with meke minds this
bondage wherein ye are holden subject by the power of these lords. But I pray
you what manner of men be these which thus subdue you, and presume thus long
to occupy the commen weal at this season? Forsothe they be men most vicious*
with bloddy hands infected, with the blood of innocents. Men of immoderate
and insaciable couetyse: noysom and grievous to every good man. Whose pride
incredible no man can comprehend, which for money have sold and daily are ready
for to sell for lucre: their fidelite, their worship, their devotion, and
good name: And brefely all things honest and dishonest are they ready to do for
auantage. Whereby it apereth evidently that all their joy and felicite rests
in couetyse. Some of them count himself more assured because they have slain
the protectours of the commentie to the intent that other may dread the^ so
much more And other some of them in wrong examinacions and inquisicions had
against you rejoice and count them self hardy and surer thereby: And many other
thinks their defense and auauncement in murdring of you, bostyng them self
of the same: and thus how much wors that each of them does: ye more sure he
is and more set by. In so much yt where they ought to fere you for their
misdeeds they transpose that fear unto you, and cause you by your cowardyse to
fear and dread them: which are conjoined al together against you in one manner
desire of ill, in one manner couetyse, i^ one hateredde of good, and in one manner
fere of your auauncemet, but among good men to be al of one mind under this
manner one not withstanding an other it is to be counted for amyte and
frendshyppe. Among ill men such agreynge of manners is but a knot of discord and
causes sedicion, variaunce, and debate. But verily if ye had so great desire
and care to recover your lybertye (which is lost) as they have to increase
their lordeshyppe: than should not the commen well be oppressed and wasted as
it is now: and than should the offices, maiestershyppes, and dignitees of
Rome, (which are your benefits to give where lykethe you) be in hands of
good and virtuous men, and not in the hands of bold bosters and iniust men
confederate in myschefe. The comentie of Rome your forefathers before this
time have armed themself and forsaken the senators two sondrye times and
kept them self together upon the hill of Aduentyue, only because they would
have a law decreed and inacted of them. And masters or officers elect for
them which should be their protectours against the injury and extorcyon of
the estates when need shuld^ ^^quyre, which thing at last was granted to
them and many other lyberties also. Than should not ^e labor mouche more
with all your might for co^seruacion of the same lyberties, which they have
l^^te unto you as hole as ever they had them. And special for this cause ought
ye to defend your privileges for that it is more shame and rebuke to lose the
privilege and liberty gotten than never to have optayned them: And specially
what shame is it to you nothing to augmente nor increase that authorite,
which your elders and forefathers have left to you: but to suffer the same
by your cowardice by little and little to decay, and at last utterly to be
lost and come to naught. But any of you may than require of me what is
your mind what will ye that we do. I will forsouthe and counsel that
punyshemente be taken upon them which have betrayed the honor of the common
well unto your enemy Iugurth without advise of the Senators or of the
commenty: but this my counsel is not to punyssh them violenly with your power in
battle, for certes that were more dyshonoure unto you to do, than to them to
suffer the same. Not withstanding that they be worthy so to be dealt withal
But this thing may be best done by inquysition examinacion and confession of
Iugurth himself, and by his accusacion of these treatours, which Iugurth
surely will be obedient to come hither to Rome at your commandment if it be
true that he has yielded himself. But if he dyspise your commandments than
may ye well think and consider what peace or yeldinge he has made by the which
yeldyng he is unpunished and pardoned of his detestable and shameful deeds and
these estates laded with richesse and treasure. But our cite and welthe of the
commenty is come to loss, damage, and utter shame and disworshyp. Thus must
ye do, such examinacions must ye make without ye think that these great men
have not yet sufficient lordshyppe and power in their hands or else without ye
show outward that ye were better pleased and content with that season when
kingdoms, provinces, justices laws, iugementes, battle, peace finally every
thing both divine and human were in hands of a few estates. Than ye be now
pleased with the season and time that now is when your liberty is given to you
which ye are able to maintain if ye so be disposed. But in that season passed,
how beit ye were vnouercome of your ennemies, masters, and emperors, over
the most part of the world: yet had ye enough to do to defend your own life
from the cruelty of these few mighty men. For of you al who was so bold to
withstand their subieccion and bondage. Wherefore if ye entend to endure and
suffer the destruction of your liberty as ye begin than truly the time which
is to come shall be much more cruel to you than the time passed. But as for me
not withstandyng that I understand the great offense and abominable of this
wicked Iugurth is suffered unpunished: yet would I suffer patiently that ye
should forgive and pardon the wicked doers of this deed as men most ungracious
because they be citezins. If it were not so, that such mercy and forgyuenes
should turn to our dystruction and ruin of our empire. For ye may se how
great oportunite and sufferance they have in somoch that they count but a small
thing to do unhappily without punishment. Wherefore they now daily increase
their cruelty against you, if ye do not herafter take from them the power and
authorite thereof. And specially co^tynual busynes without end shall remain unto
you when ye se plainly that outher ye must be servants or bondemen: or else ye
must retaygne and defend your liberty by strength of your hands. For what
hope or trust is there of faithfulness or of concord between you and them? None
surely. For their mind is utterly set to be lords over you: and ye on the
other part will needs be fre and at liberty. They be extremely inclined and
disposed to do wrong and injury unto you. And ye labor to withstand them
utterly. And brefely to speak they take the friends and fellows of our empire
for ennemies. But our mortal ennemies they take for their fellows and friends.
But ye would withstand this cursed and unkind behauour. Wherefore can ye suppose
that peace, love, or friendshyp can be among people so contrary of minds and
disposicion For these consyderacions I warn and exhort you that ye suffer not
so great myschefe to escape unpunished. This offense is nothing like to the
robbyng of the common treasure, nor to the spoylinge of money by extorcion from
the fellows and friends of our empire. Which deeds (how be it they be grievous
and in manner intolerable) nevertheless by custom and use of the same they are
repu^ed for small fautes and for naught. But this deed is much more grievous and
utterly intolerable. For the authorite of the senate is betrayed to our most
cruel and fires ennemy Iugurth, your empire is falsely betrayed to other
men's hands and possession. The commen well has been put to sale to Iugurth
by the senators both at home in our city, and also in our army by
Calphurnius the consul: In so much that if examinacion be not made hereof:
and if they be not punished which be culpable and fautie her in. What thing
shall remain unto us but that we must pass our life under obedience and
bondage of the^ which thus have done, and us shall they keep in subjection as
if they were kings? For what thing longs to a king save to parfourme his
will and pleasure be it good or ill without any resiste^ce or punishment of any
man. Do not these estates without any contradictio^, notwythstanding yt it is
in your power to withstand the^ if ye will. Nor certes worthi citezins I do not
thus exhort you to coueyte rather that your citezins should do ill than well.
But I speak to thintente, that ye should not so favor and: forbere a few
iniust and ill disposed me^ that the utter destruction of all good men should
proceed of such indiscrete favor. And also namelye in a city or a commen
weal it is much better and more tolerable to forgette the reward of good
deeds, than the punishment of ill deeds. For a good man seeing his goodness not
rewarded nor set by, he does but only withdraw his own kyndnes: but an ill
man not punished, is the more bold and cursed: And moreover if such as be
misdoers be punished: at ye last their nombre shall be abated and decresed, and
if there be few unjust men, the less wrong is done. And he to whom no wrong
is done needs not to call for socoure nor help. Thus is it better to leave a
good deed unrewarded, than an ill deed unpunished.

How Memmius induced the people of Rome by the said oracion: so yt Cassius was
sent for Iugurth to bring him to Rome to declare and accuse the supporter of
his deeds. The.xx. Chapter.
MEmmius cou^sellynge and inducynge often times by these words and other like
at last did so much that Lucius Cassius one of ye chief.x. judges of Rome
should be send to Iugurth and assure him of his life, and to come and return
in save guard upon promise and faith of all the hole commenty of Rome. And upon
this promise to bring him to Rome to the intent that by his own words and
confession of the treuth, the falshode and couetyse of Calphurnius the consul,
of Scaurus and of other which had been corrupted by him before by money and
rewards might be euydently proved and known.

Of the behauour of the Soudyours and other which were lafte in Numidy while
Scaurus the consul was at Rome. The.xxi. Chapter.
While these things were in hand and done at Rome, in mean time the chief of
ye soudiours, which Calphurnius had left behind him, in Numidy followed the
manners and behauoure of their captain and did many ungodly and myscheuous
deeds. Some of them were so corrupt with gold that they delivered again to
Iugurth the olyphantes, which he had given to Calphurnius what time the peace
was granted and truce, first taken between them. Some other sold to Iugurth
the traitors which had fled from him unto the Romans army. And other some
spoiled and robbed the people of Numidy, which had al ready peace with the
Romans, and had yielded themself. So great and shameful was the violence of
couetyse which had infected their mind, as if it had been an universal
contagion of pestilence. But now will I return to my matter where I left before
concerning Cassius the judge and his viage to Numidy for to bring Iugurth unto
Rome.

How Iugurth came to Rome with Cassius and how he behaved him self there.
The.xxii. Chapter.
CAyus Memmius in name of all the commens gave commandment to Cassius,
(according to the ordinance inacted) to speed him toward Numidye, and to
bid Iugurth come to Rome under suerte and condition before rehearsed. Wha^ the
estates which knew them self cul^able understood of this were maruelusly
abashed. But when Cassius was come to Iugurth not wythstandynge that he was
ferefull of his part, and had no confidence in his cause for asmoche as he
knew himself fauty in his own conscience, yet Cassius advised him: and
induced him, because he had yielded him self to come unto Rome: without he would
rather prove the Romans strength and violence than their mercy and pity: and
moreover the said Cassius promised also his own faith and troth that if he
would come to Rome and answer truly to all such things as there should be
demanded of him, he should safely go and come without any impediment. Cassius
had so good a name at that time that Iugurth had asmoche confidence in his
faith and promise alone as in the promise or assurance of the hole cite: And so
at last Iugurth consented to go to Rome with Cassius. Wherefore to enduce the
Romans to the more pity he arrayed himself in rude aparell against his honor
royal much vile and miserable, and, so with Cassius came to Rome not as a
king, but poorly and with a small company. And not wythstandyng that his mind
was much confirmed, assured, and bolded: by the conforte of them which he had
corrupted with rewards before, whose defense and supportacion he had committed
so much cruelty, yet he behaved him so with his gifts of new as soon as he
was come to Rome, that by his great reward be induced a lord of Rome named
Caius Bebius, one of the protectours of the commenty to be supporter and
mayntener of his cause among the other mo. By whose dyshonest and unmeasurable
couetise he trusted assuredlye to be defended, astaynst law, from all
punyshmentes due unto his demerites. But the commentye of Rome was violently
and sore wrath against Iugurth, some commanded to have him to prison, and
there to keep him in bands: And other some would that acordyng to the law
punishment of death should be taken of the^ as of their mortal enemy, if he
would not shortly confess and discover the fellows, partiners, and supporters
of his cruel deeds. Caius Me^mius heryng hereof called together the co^menty and
alayed the mocyon and wrath of their minds apeasing their vnauised rancour.
And requiringe them to keep the faith and troth of city (which they had
promised to Iugurth) clear, inuiolate and undefiled. Thus did Memmius exhort
them as he which more regarded and set more by the conseruacion of the dignite
of Rome, than by the parfourminge and satisfyeng the wrath and ire of the rude
co^mens. But when silence was made among all the assemble: anon Iugurth was
brought forth before them al. Memmius than began to speak to him demurely
rehersing and openli recounting how he had corrupt the estates of Rome with his
treasur, and cruelli against right had done mani abominable deeds at Rome, and
also in Numidi against the king Micipsa and his sons, as slain Adherball and
Hiempsall falsely dysceiued the king Micipsa: and wasted the kingdom of Numidi.
And how beit (said Memmius) that the Romans knew well his supporters yet
they would most of all that Iugurth should openly discover and accuse them
himself. Wherefore he desired him truly to confess the names of the^ by whose
supportacion he was so bold to commit so many inmoderate and cruel deeds.
Sayng that if he would so do and confess and disclose the troth than might he
have great trust and confydence in the favor clemency, and mercy of the people
of Rome But if he would not so do, he should do no profit by his silence to
the noble men of Rome which had supported him. And also he should be
dystruction and undoing of himself, and of his riches also. On this point
Memmins ceased his words and held him still. Anon Iugurth was commanded of
the commente to make answer. But when he was ready to have spoken Caius Bebius
whom he had corrupted with treasure (as I have made mention before) commanded
him to hold his peace. In somoche that how be it the people sore moved with
displeasure put him in fear with exclamacion against him with angry
countenances and often violentlye rennynge upon him, and with other tokens of
ire and dyspleasure. Nevertheless for all this the froward counsel of Bebius
overcame their threatnyng, in somuche that Iugurth would nothing speak nor
dysclose. And thus the people had in derision and abused, departed from the
congregation and assemble. So the minds of Iugurthe of Calphurnius, and of
other their partyners were tha^ inhansed and increased in boldness: which were
troubled and much ferefull before, when Iugurth was first send for and
brought to be examined.

How Iugurth increased his cruelty at Rome and renewed his murdre in sleyng an
other noble man of the stock of Micipsa by occasion whereof he was constrained
to depart from Rome, and the battle renewed again of hole. The.xxiii.
Chapyter.
AT the same season was a gentelman at Rome named Massiua, borne of the
country of Numidy, which was the son of Galussa, and neuewe to the good
king Massinissa. This Massyua was against Iugurth in the strife and
discencion between Adherball and him, when the town of Cirtha was yielded and
Adherball slain. Wherefore he trusted not Iugurth, but to save himself fled
from Numidy unto Rome. Now was a lord at Rome named Albinus, which was creat
consul with an other partayninge fellow named. Minucius, the next year after
Calphurnius. This Albinus came to Massiua and counsayled him (because he was of
ye stock of Massinissa) to grieve Iugurth, asmoche as he could, with envy,
fear, and displeasure for his offenses and cruelte: And by peticion to desire
of the Senators the administracion of the kingdom of Numidy. Albinus gave to
him this counsel, for as much as he himself was desirous of bataile wherefore
he would much rather that every thing were moved with trouble, than pacified or
at rest. Tha^ was a custom at Rome, that the consul should have a partynge
fellow, and between them the provinces belonging to Rome should be divided.
Thus in departing of the provinces, the country of Numidy fell to Albinus and
the country of Macidony to his fellow Minutus. Shortly after Massiua began to
move the matter to the senators touching administracion of the kingdom of
Numidy. Iugurth heringe of this had not so great trust in his matter not to his
friends as he had before: For some of them with drew their self for knowledge
of their fautes, and other some for fear of ill name and fame or rumor of the
people. Wherefore Iugurth considering this, required Bomilchar, one of his
most nere and trusty friends to provide and to hyer by gifts and rewards a
company to sle the said Massiua: and that as pryuely as could be done. But if
it could not privily be done, tha^ to sle him openly by one mean or other
Bomilchar shortly went about ye commandment of Iugurth, and anon provided
men and hired such as were mete for such a deed: and commanded the^ to espy
and search his ways, his goynges and commnigs and to wait a season and place
convenient to parforme their enterprise. But afterward when he saw his time he
prepared to execute this treason. Wherefore one of the^ which were ordained and
assigned to this murdre, assailed Massiua rashely, with small prouisyon or
auisement and slew him unware. But he which did the deed anon was taken and
brought before the judges. The people in great nombre desired and at last
constrained him to tell by whose counsel he did that myscheuous deed, and
specially Albinus the consul coarted him thereto. The murderer anon confessed
the treuth and declared how he had done it at the instigacion and counsel of
Bomilchar: And not withstanding that the same Bomilchar came to Rome, under
sauegarde and assurance of the faith of the commente as did Iugurth, yet he was
judged gyltie of the deed, considering that he was counselloure thereto, and not
according to the common law, but after very equite and good conscience. But
Iugurth consyderyng himself culpable in the same fault, ye would by no mean
confess nor knowledge himself fautie, till time that he understood and saw
that the envy and displeasure which was taken against this deed passed al his
favor and rewards which he had given at Rome, so that at last in his gifts
he found no socour nor aid. But how be it in the first accion or accuseme^t
which was laid against him, he had brought in and laid.l. suerties of his
friends for him and all other of his retynue that he should purge himself of
every thing which was or should be laid against him, yet thought he better to
provide for the proteccion for his pledges or suerties. And this co^sydring he
privily sent Bomilchar a way from Rome unto Numidy, dredinge that if condyng
and worthy punyshement were taken of Bomylchar at Rome, lest the other
commentie of his realm at home would dread to be obedient to him. And anon
after Bomilchar was departed Iugurth himself fled also from Rome after him,
commanded of the Senators to depart from Italy as enemy to the Romans and
their empire. But when he was departed a little without Rome: it is said that
he looked often backewarde behind spekyng secretly to himself, but at the last
he spoke plainly in audience that they which were assistent might here him and
said. O noble and famous city corrupt and accloyed with infect citezins, whose
couetyse is so insaciable that they will profer the forth to sale, and shortly
thou should be sold and peryshe, if thy rulers could find any man that would
bye the, and give money for thee.

How Albynus consul of Rome renew^d the war of Iugurth, and at last
returned again to Rome, leauyng his brother Aulus in Numidye, with the army in
his room. The.xxiiii. Chapyter.
IN the mean season Albinus which was create consul next Calphurnius renewed
the war against Iugurth and without ^aryeng: causes vitayls, wages and all
other things necessary, expedient, and belonginge to soudyours: to be conveyed
spedely into Affrike. And he anon himself in all haste took his vyage
thytherwarde also, and so forth to Numidy. In which vyage he made more hasty
expedicion to the intent to fynishe the war with Iugurth, other by force of
arms, or else constrayning him to yield himself, or by some other means what
so ever might be found namely before the time of election of new cosuls,
which time was not long to come. But contrary wise Iugurth prolonged every
thing by one cause or other. As fast as Albinus went forward, so fast Iugurth
found impedimentes, sometime he promised to yield himself, and sometime fained
himself afraid. One while he fled from the army of Albinus when it was nere
hand to him: And anon after lest his men should mistrust by disconfort or
despair, he boldly withstode and defended himself manly. And thus in
prolonging the time: sometime with war and sometime with peace, he abused and
mocked the consul, wherefore some were which suspected that Albinus was not
ignorant of the counsel of Iugurth, but consentyng to him by favor: And for
as much as at the beginning he was so fires, hasty, and diligent: it was
suspected that he drove forth the time now rather by craft than cowardice. But
after the time was passed and the day of election of new consuls aproched and
come fast on. The consul Albinus ordained his brother named Aulus, to remain
in his steed as capytayne and ruler in the army: and he himself departed
toward Rome, to be at election of the new consuls, as the law required.

How Aulus and the Romayne army were discomfyted of Iugurth: and how peace
was granted to him by Aulus: and to what shame the Romans were (...) ra^^e
folly of the same capytayne Aulus. The.xxv. Chapter.
IN the same season was the commen weal at Rome much troubled with variaunce
and debate, between the protectours of the commenti. For of the^ one named
Lucullus and an other Annius labored to continue and keep still their office
and against the ordinance of the law to continue more than one year. Wherefore
the other which were partyng fellows in office with them labored with all
their might the contrary to resyst them and to maintain ye old constitucion,
ordinance and custom. This dyscencion and debate let the election of the
new consuls all that year. Aulus whom Albinus had left with the army in Numidy
as his lyefetenant herd of this prolongyng of the time and was brought in great
hope to win great honor or treasour. Wherefore in the cold month of January
he called the souldyours forth of their tents to execute the battle with
Iugurth without more delay. Outher did he thus shortly to make an end of the
battle in his time, and thereby to win honor or else with his army to put
Iugurth in fear (so that to have peace) he should redeem the same of Aulus
with great treasoure. Aulus concludynge on this purpose, spedde him so fast
with his soudyours making daily great iournayes (notwithstanding the
sharpness of winter) that at last he came to a town in Numidy, named Suthull:
in which town the treasurs of Iugurth were laid. This town with walls,
waters, and mountaygnes of nature was strongly defended: for without the walls
builded on the heyght of a mountaygne broken on the forefronte was a great
plain fenne, or marrayse ground: al over covered with mudde, and standing
winter water. In somoche that what for the sharpness of the winter season: and
what for natural defense of the place, this town could by no means be well
besyged nor taken: yet this notwithstanding Aulus to increase fere to Iugurth,
and for the blind desire which he had to win ye town in manner of dissimulacion
assailed the same and made pauasies about the walls of shieldes conjoined like
vines, where under his men might fight with less damage or peril Than made he
a dyche or trench round about the town with great hepes of earth casten upon the
sides of the same, to the intent that no socour should enter into them, nor they
escape forth at their pleasurs. And finally he made ready every thing which
belonged or was necessary to besegyng of such a town. But Iugurth anon
perceived the vain and folyshe behauoure of Aulus, and craftily increased by
polycy the madness of him, sending often ambassadors unto him to require in
derysion that he would desyst and leave besyging of the town and intreatyng him
of peace mekely. But in the mean time Iugurth himself in manner as if he would
not intermel with Aulus, led his army by wodes, forests by streyte passages,
by hyls and dales, and by bywaies causinge Aulus to suspect that he was a
dradde of him: And finallye he enduced Aulus to trust after some
appointemente. And thus Iugurth with his men fleyng always into deserts and
hid places gave confort to Aulus and increased his courage by such avoiding.
In somuche that at last Aulus gave up the segynge of the town of Suthul: And
with his hole power hastily pursued Iugurth as sleynge from him for dread into
places unknown to him and his men. Thus was the treason of Iugurth more hid
from Aulus, wherefore he made the les provision therefore. In the mean sea^on
Iugurth by subtyl messangers attempted the Roman army day and night inducyng
them to consent to betray their fellows, the capytayns, and vndercaptayns: anon
for lucre consented to him. Some in time of battle to forsake and betray their
own company and to fight on the part of Iugurth. And other which would not
grant to so foul a deed, as to fight against their own compani, he exhorted
and induced the^ wha^ the trumpettes should blow to battle to leave their
places and array: And depart from their company without stroke on one side or
other. When every thing was brought to his purpose and accorded to his
requests: Than about midnight he stale privily toward the tents of the
Romans and suddenly with a great compani of Numidians, compassed them about on
every side and assailed them fiersly. The Romayne soudyours which were with
Aulus, thus unwarily invaded: were meruelously abashed and amassed, for the
vnwonte and sudden fear of this treason. Some of the most noble hertes: with
great courage drew to them their harnes, and resysted their enemies valyantly:
fully assured and prefyxed to dye like men: if fortune should grant them none
other means to escape that instant danger. Some other as cowardes hid them
self in caves and other secret places, if they might any find. The boldest
and most used to such chances conforted their fellows which were ferefull
and inexpert of such chances of war. How beit none of them al was so bold
nor so well assured of himself, but that he was both in great dread and
danger. And no maruayle, for in every place and on all sides about them they
were environed in compass with great violence and plenteous noumber of their
enemies hid under the darkness of the night and clouds, which utterly
obscured the stars light. Their peril was indifferente and doubtefull
whether they fled or abode the battle. For death was instante and depended
over their heads every way, and either hope or esperaunce was none, save
death inevitable. So that fynallye it was uncertain unto them whether it was
better or more sure to flee, or to abide their adventure. But of that company
which Iugurth had corrupted with rewards, as we have said before, one
bend or cohorte of Lumbardes and two turmes, that is to say three score
Thraciens, and a few rude and commen souldioures betrayed the Romans, and
went over to Iugurth. Also the Centurion which was assygned to be captain
over them, which were committed to fight about the first standarde of the
third legion drew him and his company a side, and suffered their ennemies
to enter in to the mids of the hooste on that side which they had taken to
defend. Thus all the Numidians brake in on that side without any resystence.
And at conclusion the Romans had a foul flyghte and a shameful
discounfiture, in so much that they trusted more to their feet, than to
their hands and armoure. And many of them to ren lyghter, threw away their
harness, and took the top of an hill which was near thereby, and there
tarried. The company of Jugurthe, what for spoylynge of the Romans tents,
and darkness of the night had less honor of vyctorie, and suffered many
of the Romans to escape. On the next day after Jugurth and Aulus came to
communication together. Than said Jugurth to Aulus that not withstandinge that
he had him and his army which were left a live sure enough compased and
environed with wepen and hunger so that they cold not escape him: and how be
it it was in his power to oppres him and all his. Nevertheless he remembered well
enough the incertaine chances of man's business and would not be to him cruel
nor vncurtes so that he would make with him a bond of peace and no more contend
against him in battle, on this condition that all the soudyours of Aulus should
do obesance unto him and pass under a spear in token of subiectyon and so
without more damage depart out of the country of Numidy within the space of.x.
days next after. But how be it this composision and conditions were hard,
and grievous, and full of shame and misery, and worthy to be punished of the
Senators if Aulus agreed to them. Nevertheless their minds so wauered for
dred of death that at last the composicion and agreement was concluded and agreed
at the will and pleasure of Jugurth upon the said conditions.

What sorrow and heuines was at Rome, and how they demeaned them self in the
City after that tidings were brought thither. The.xxvi. Chapter.
When the Romans understood of this at Rome, all the cite was filled with
dread, ^^rowe, lamentacion and mourning. Some bewalyng the worship of thempire
as lost, by that shameful composicion. And other uncustomed to such business
of battle and not knowing nor considering the variable mutabilite of chau^ces
of war fered the loss of their liberty, of their cite, and of al their
empire. They al were wroth and utterly displeased with Auius cause of this
subjection and shameful composicion. But namely they which had been good
warriors in their days were displeased with him most of al: when they
considred that he being armed and well appointed to batail rather sought means
to escape from death by such shameful and bond co^posicion than manly abiding
the e^tremite of bataile to have delivered him self and his co^pani: or else
valyantly to have died with honor. But the consul Albinus, himself dreded
sore for this thing considring that for his brothers fault in time to come he
should not avoid the displeasure of the Senators and commens of Rome. For as
he coniectured all his brothers deeds should redounde to his dishonor and
paryll, because he had lymitted him in Numidy in his stead to be captain of
the army in his absence. Wherefore (these things duly advised) he went to the
Senators desyringe them to take counsel and aduiseme^t whether they would
approbate and allow the said co^posicion between his brother Aulus and Jugurth
or else not. But he knew right well that the Senators would not confirm the
same. Wherefore (in mean time while they were counselling) he elect soudyours
for suppleme^t to fulffyl and parforme again the army which was in Affrike, and
sore diminished. For many of them were slain by Iugurth and his company.
Wherefore Albinus raised up socours of such as were nere to the costs of Rome,
and friends to thempire: as Latinians and Italians with other nations. Of these
he raised as many as he might, and assembled them together by all means which
he could deuyse to fournishe and augmente his army. At conclusion the Senators
decreed in their counsel that no bond of peace nor composicion might be
confirmed without their consent and without the advise and commandment of the
commen people also as right and reason required. And thus was the said
composicion of Aulus abrogate, as a thing presumed without consent or
commandment of the Senators or commens. But when the consul Albinus had
ordained and prepared suppleme^t of his army (as said is (he was prohybet and
let by the protectours of the commenty: In somuche that he was not suffered
by them to convey such company as he had raised into Affrike, with him as he
intended to repair and fornyshe the army which there remained. Wherefore he
spedde himself forth into Affrike disapoynted of his purpose with a small
company of men, of his own retinue. The army of the Romans which he before
had committed to Aulus his brother: according to the apoyntment with Jugurth,
was departed forth of Numidy. And to pass forth the winter, tarried in a
province of Affrike which was subject to thempire of Rome. When Albinus the
consul was arrived and come thither: his mind ardently was kyndled with desire
to pursue Iugurth, and to remedy the ill will and displeasure which the commens
at Rome had against Aulus his brother. Nevertheless when he knew the manners and
ill behauour of the soudyours: of whom some were fled treyterously to Iugurth
(as is said before) and some by sufferaunce of their captain were infected and
corrupted with overmuch pleasure, dissolute liberty, and voluptuous living this
consydring he concluded (as the case required) to do nothing for a season: and
to attempt no maistry but to pass forth the winter with his army without
remouynge or puttyng himself in ieopardy or paryll.

In the mean season while Albinus and his army soiourned in the province of
Affrike till the winter were ouerpassed. At Rome was one named Caius Manlius
elect and lymitted protectoure of the commen people which anon after he was
set in authorite: assembled the commens: and desired and counsayled them that
inquisicion might be made of all such whose supportacion and counsel Jugurth
had dyspised and set at naught the ordinances decreed of the Senators. And
against them which had restored again to Iugurth the elyphantes which Iugurth
had delyuerd to Calphurnius at the first composicion and apoyntment which was
made with him. And also against them which had received any money or other
reward of Iugurth while they were ambassadors or captains of armies against
him: send forth by the Romans. And finally the same inquisicion also was
extended against all such as had made any pactions, apointmentes, or promises
of peace or of war with enemies of thempire without general consent of the
Senators or commens.

When this inquire was moved, many of the Senators and noble men of Rome knew
them self culpable in the forsaide articles. And other some douted sore of
peryls for to come because of the ill will and malice which the party of the
commens confederate had against them. Wherefore sith the same noble men might
not well resyste the examinacion of these artycles openly, but of necessitye
they must agree thereto, either else knoweledge them self (by their
resystence) gyltie in the same: th^rfore they prepared impediment privily
against such inquisicions by their friends, but specially by the fellows of
thempire which were confederate with the Romans, as Italyans and Latinians.
The princes of these nations and such other like gave counsel to the
senators which were not fauty in the premises, and also to the commenty:
that in such a troublous, besy, and peryllous season no such examinatio^s
should be made nor proceed forward to effect: for dread of many inconveniences
which of the same might rise between the noble men and the co^mens. But (this
not wythstandynge) it is a merueylous thing and in manner incredible to speak
of, how besy and diligent the co^mens were to have the same inquisicion to
proceed, and to be brought to effect: and that rather for hatred which they had
against the noble men (against whom the said inquisicion was ordained) than for
any good will or favor, which they had to the commen well. So great pleasure
and desire of variance was among the^. Wherefore while the remenant of the noble
me^ were sore troubled with fere and dred. Marcus Scaurus which was before
sent into Affrike with Calphurnius (as I have said) provided for him self in
craftye manner as I shall now declare. While the commentie was merye and
ioyeouse of this examinacion, and many of the company of Scaurus that knew
them self faultye fled for fear. And the hole city was in much dreede and
Manlius obtained his peticion and will of the commentye. In so much that anon
were ordained three noble men commissioners to examine the three articles
before rehearsed and here insuynge, of whom the first was of them which
counseled Jugurthe to despise the decreis of the senators and that took money
or rewards of him. The second was of them that sold again to Iugurth the
foresaid elyphantes and the Numidiens that lest Iugurth coming on the
Romans said. And the third examination was of them which had made any
appointmente of peace or war with the enemies of Rome as was Iugurth. But not
withstanding that Calphurnius was culpable in the same asmoche as any other of
the noble men. Nevertheless he shyfted so for himself that he was elect to
be one of the examinours or commyssioners to make inquisicion of these three
points rehearsed. The inquisicion proceeded to effect and was handled and put
in execucion with much violence and sharply after the commen rumor and
pleasure of the commenty. Thus the people seeing their pleasure fulfilled, at
time began to be proud and stately thereof in likewise as the estates had been
in foretyme of their power and lordshyp. But here will I make a small
dygression for my purpose and tell whereof this variance and discord between the
commens and noble men first proceeded.

Whereof the discord and taking of parties between the noble men and commens of
Rome had first beginning The.xxvii. Chapter.
THis manner of deuisyon of the commente from the estates of Rome: This discord
and taking of parties between them: and this inordinate custom of al other
inconuenyences began among them but a few years before this time by mean of
over much rest and ydlenes: by superfluous habundance of richesse,
voluptuosite, and of other worldely delectacions: which many count and repute
for most chief pleasures of this life. For before the dystruction of Carthage,
the Senators and commenty of Rome treated and governed the commen well between
them peasably in love and concord. So that among the citezins was no strife
nor debate, for laud, excellence, for diginte, nor for great dominion. The
dread which they had of their enemis made them ware and kept them in good
manners causyng them to govern their city with good and virtues institutes,
without variance, without robbery, without oppression, without slaughter nor
other like cruel tyrannies. But when Carthage was overcome anon was expulsed
fere from their minds: and voluptuosite, wantonness, and pride (which are
greatly loved in wealth and prosperitye) anon entered their minds: so that they
desired peace when they had war. But when the war was ended: and that they
had peace and ydlenes after their own desire: their peace and rest was more
sharp, more bitter, more intolerable, and more perilous to them than the war
was before. For the estates bgan to tourn their dignite and worship, into
immoderate affection of great lordshyppe and dominacion. And the commen people
began to turn their liberty into lust and pleasure. Every man provided and
drew to himself robbynge and reauynge without measure, from the common well.
Thus was the commentie abstract and divided from the lords. So was the city
divided into.ii. parts. And the common weal which was in the mids between
them on every side was pylled, robbed, and utterly wasted of them both: on both
sides. But the power of the noble men and of their party was more mighty tha^
the power of the commens. For all the estates were all together assembled,
conjoined, and united. But the commens were dispersed and spread abroad into
diverse places and companies gettyng their living with labor of their hands
and sweat of their bodies. So every thing was governed in peace and in war
at the pleasure and advise of a few private noble men. The commen treasure,
the provinces, mastershyps, offices, trybutes, worship, triumphs, and al other
things longing to honor or auantage, were only in the hands and possession of
the same few noble men. But the simple common people was weried and opressed
with pouertye, bataile, and warfare. Ever in ieopardie, and never in auantage
nor lucre. For the capitaynes with a few other noble men pulled such prays
as were taken in battle only to their singular auantage and behofe. But in the
mean season the parents and small children of the soldiers were driven from
their dwelling places and possessions by the said noble men, each one of them
by that lord unto whom they dwelled nereste. And so the might and power of
such noble men conjoined with immoderate couetise assailed, defiled, wasted,
and destroyed every thing without good manner, without measure or moderacion:
having no respect nor consideracion of any thing belonging to goodness or
virtue, till they had so farforth proceeded that at conclusion they were
destroyed and overthrown by their own obstinate pride and tyranni. But at
last as soon as ever some of the estates were found which remembering and
considering them self: set more by true and laudable glory, than by unjust
power and dignity. And were moved in mind by compassion to show merci, and pite
against ye co^mente and to socour their misery, tha^ began the city to be
troubled and moved grievously for the courage of ye co^mens was revived by
supportacion of such noble men: by means whereof discord and deuysion began to
rise in the cite, as it were dry dust of the ground raised in a great and
tempesteous wind. For after that Tiberius Gracchus, and Caius Gracchus (whose
progenitors much increased the common weal in many batayls, but namely in the
battle of Carthage) began to restore the comme^tie into their old liberty,
and to detect the cruel misdeeds of the few injurious estates. Than all the
lords co^federate: and after manner chafede with ire assembled their fellows,
as Latynians and some knights of Rome, which in hope of promocion left the
commens party and held with the nobel men. All these with such as were to
them lenyng of other nations began to withstand the accusementes of ye
co^menty: and first of al they slew Tiberius Graccus: And after that within a
few years the slew the other brother named Caius Graccus, while he was
protector of ye co^menty, because that he according to law and right divided
among ye pore co^mente such lands as they had won in battle of their
ennemies. And at the same season the estates put to death also a lord named
Marcus Flaccus, because he defended the commens liberte against their
extorcion. But touching the two bretherin Tiberius, and Caius Graccus: sothly
their minds were greatly immoderate and unmeasurable in their desire to
overcome thestates. Nevertheless it had be much better to thestates to have
suffered them in their ryghtwyse tytell, and somewhat to have inclyned to their
minds than to have overcome them so injuriously, how best that they were over
hasty and busy. But wha^ thestates had the victory of them after their desire
and pleasure than put they to death the commenty with out nombre, and many they
exiled and drove out of the cite. In so much that from thens forth they rather
encresed their cruelty and fear to the commens, than their own honor or
power. By which means many worthy cities have often times ben dystroyed while
the estates and commens contend the one, to overcome the other, by one mean or
other. And while the party vyctoure will punyshe over grievously that party
which is overcome. But if I would prepare to write of the besines and deeds of
both the parties seriatly and distinctly And if I should touch all the manners of
the cite acording to the gretnesse of the matter and as it requyrth: sothely the
time should fail me rather tha^ the matter. Wherefore I will omyt this
superfluous and infinite besynes, and return to my first matter and purpose
touching this cronycle of this tyranne Iugurth.

How Metellus was create consul and send by the Romans to war against
Iugurth, and of the wise and discrete behaueour of the same Metellus.
The.xxviii. Chapter.
AFter the truce and composicion of Aulus before said made with Iugurth, and
the foul and shameful flight of the Romayne army: Quintus Metellus, and Marcus
Sillanus, were create and proclaimed co^suls of Rome, which acordyng to the
old custom parted and divided the provinces belonging to Rome between them
both. The country of Numidi fell and happened to Metellus. This Metellus was a
fierce man and a noble and a worthy warrior. And how be it he favored the
party of the noble men and, was contrary to the party of the commens:
nevertheless he was of fame undefiled and vnuiolat and counted of good name
indiffere^ly on both parties. As Soon as ever this Metellus entered in his
office and dignite, he thought that every thing apartayning to his rowme and
charge belo^ged as well to his partynge fellow as to himself, save the war of
Numidy: which only belonged to himself and to his particular charge:
Wherefore he committed all other charges to Sillanus, and only set his mind
to make prouysion for the war against Iugurth. But because he mistrusted the
old army which was in Numidy with Albinus and Aulus, and had no confydence in
the minds of these soudyours corrupted with ydelnes and many other vices:
therefore he elected and assembled new soudyours. And of al such as were
fellows and friends confederate to the Romans, he called for help and
socours. He prepared and made ready armoure, wepyn, horse harnes, and all other
ordinance expedient to warfare. And also he ordained abundance of vytayls. And
shortly to speak all thing he ordained which are wont to be necessary and
profitable to the variable chances and incertayne accidents, and ieopardies
of war which requires reparacion of many things and chargeable. But such
as were fellows of the empire of Rome at instaunce and request of the
Senators: and by their authorite and by the Latinians many other strange
kings of their own frewil sent socours to Metellus to auaunce him in his
enterprise: And shortly to speak the hole city labored with all their might
to socoure and aid Metellus in his besines. Thus at last wha^ every thing was
provided and set in order after his pleasure and intent: than took he his
iournay in Numidi^, with great hope of all the citezins of Rome that for his
good manners: and specially for that his mind was vnouercome with riches or
couetise that he should do more honor to the empire then his predecessors had
in the war of Numidie. For before his departing the wealth of Numidie (by
couetyse of the officers of Room) was augmented: but the wealth of the Romans
wasted and diminyshed. When Metellus was come to Affrike, the army was
delivered to him by Albinus: which army was vncraftie, sluggishe and feeble,
neither able to endure peril nor labor: of tongue more ready, fierce and
hardy, then of hand: which was wont to pyll from fellows and frindes of the
empire. But it self endured by cowardice to be robbed and spoiled of ennemies
of the empire, as a laweles and disordred company of men ungoverned and without
authority or manners. Wherefore Metellus the new captain had much more
thought and busynes, for such corrupt and vicious manners of a company so far
out of order, than he had help or good hope of conforte in the multitude of
them. Thus how be it he saw the time of eleccion of new consuls draw nere,
and also though he understood that the Romans daily looked after some end
of the war. These causes not withstanding yet he concluded, not to begin
war, till he had exercised and used the souldyours with business and labor
after the instruccion and custume of old captains used before his time. For
why, Albinus was so astonyed with the adversity and myschaunce of his brother
Aulus, and for the murder of his host: yt after he purposed not to depart out
of the Romans province which was in Affrike he kept ye soldiers always idle in
their tents as long as somer lasted and as long as he was in authority, in so
much that they changed no place except the corrupt savor of the place, or
else necessity of vytaile constrained them to remove. Nor according to the
custom and manner of warriors among them was no watch: but every manne came
and went at his own pleasure, and absented them self from their standerds when
it lyked them. The scolions and pages wandered day and night mingled among
the horsemen and chief of the soldiers without any order. And many other as
rouers dispersed abroad destroyed the country, fyghtyng against the small
villages and not against cities nor towns. They carried a way from the said
vyllages prays of catell, and led away with them also the inhabitants as
prisoners with other prays, striving together who might have most and than
after changed the said robries with merchants for delicious and strong wynes
carried from other strange cuntreis, where better wine grew than in that
country, and for other such delicious things. They sold away the whete and
other vitayles which was deliuerd of their captains among them in comme^ and
daily they bought their bread. And finally what so ever shame or rebuke
longyng to couetise or lechery could either be said, done, or imagined of any
man, all was used in that host. And among some, more shameful deeds than
ought to be named. But Metellus behaved him self as a mighty and wise man, not
less in this difficulty and hardness, than if it had been in a bataile
foughten against his enemies, as he which in the mids of so great couetise,
voluptuositie, and crueltye, was singulerly induced with temperance: and he
used meruelouse good manner in coartyng the same faults. Wherefore at the first
beginning he withdrewe and avoided from the army at his commandment and
ordinance the occasions which stired the soudiours to such sloth, cowardice,
and voluptuositie. For he commanded under great pain that no person should be
so hardye to sell among the soldiers another bread nor other vitaile al ready
dressed save the common provision: that the pages, waterlaggers and scolions
should not come nere the army nor follow the same. That none of the commen and
simple soldiers should keep or maintain servant nor beast in their tents nor
vyage, while they moved fro place to place. These inconveniences first of all
he redressed and reformed. After these amended, al other fautes he mesured by
his wisdom, craft, and policy: reforming them by little and little. This done
(to have his soldiers occupied) he moved daily from place to place: and that
not in ways commen and used, but by hard and unoccupied ways. He caused them
daily to cast dyches and trenches about the army, to the intent that they
should not wax slouthful nor vicious, by overmuch rest and idleness. He
ordained ouermuche watch among the^ every night, and he him self accompanied
with his vndercaptains and head officers often serched if the watches were
truly kept co^passing about the army on every side. While they removed and
changed places, sometime he was in the forward and among the first, sometime
in the rereward or hinder part, and anon in the mids, ouerseyng their order
to the intent that none should pass out of order, array and place to them
assigned. But keep thick together every man and company about their own
sta^dards: and also he ordained that among them self they should convey and
carye their own vitailes and armoure. And thus in short time he confirmed and
set the army in good order rather with fair words, or rebukinge and
blaminge their faults, and prohibitinge their disordre: than in chastisinge
or punyshynge their offenses with rigor or crueltye.

Of the behaueour of Iugurth against Metellus, and how he send ambassadors to
Metellus requiryng unfeignedly to yield up the kyngedom of Numidy to the empire
of Rome: and how Metellus behaved himself against the same ambassadors.
The.xxix. Chapter.
IN the mean season when Iugurthe understood by messangers and espyes of this
behauour of Metellus: and also when he remembered that which was infourmed to
him at Rome of the integrite and undefiled name of Metellus, which would not
be corrupt with money nor accloyed with brybes like other before: he began to
mystruste his matters and to have less confydence in his cause, tha^ ever he
had before. In so much that tha^ he began to labor to yield himself unfeignedly
and to make a true composytion with Metellus and the Romans without any
fiction, gyle, or disceyt. Wherefore he send ambassadors with supplicacions
and peticions, requyring humbly of Metellus to grant to him his own life: and
the life of his children only: and concerning al other thing he would yield
the^ into ye hands of the Romans. But Metellus knew well enough long before
this time by often experience that the Numidians of natural disposicio^ were
unfaithful, mouable and unstable of mind: newfangled and much desirous of new
business and novelties. Wherefore he began with the emassadours of Iugurth,
tasting and proving the mind of each of them, by little and little, and
separatly one by one. And when he knew that they somewhat inclyned to his
purpose: he then promised to them great gifts and promocions so that they
would do some pleasure for him, and for the Senators and people of Rome.
Than at last he counseled and desired them to deliver Iugurthe to him a live,
specially if it might be brought a boute: And if they could not so, then to
deliver him either quick or dead. But when he had made this apointment
secretly with the ambassadors divided in sonder one by one, than openly that
every man might here, he showed to them all together as his pleasure was that
they should certify their king Iugurth concerning their ambassade.

After this within few days when he saw his host most ready, and contrary
to Iugurth he removed his tents, and so addressed him with his army ready in
array, and went forward into Numidye, where contrary to any similitude of
war the vyllages and cotages were full of men, the fields full of beasts
and tyllmen, and every where as much plentye of people young and old,
namelye rude people and tyllers of the ground, which had still fled
before the army in fore time for fear: but at last when they saw no defense
nor socoure, the kings liefetenauntes and all other left their towns,
villages, and lodges, and went forth to meet Metellus with all humility,
honor, and service submittynge them self to him, and ready to give to him
wheat and other corn such as they had. And to carry vitailes after his hooste
to ease the souldyours to do and parfourme all other things what ever they
were commanded. But for all this, Metellus was not less diligent nor
circumspect in ordering of his host but proceeded forward together with his army
in array ready in armor, and defended as if their enemies had been nere at hand
serchyng the country abroad on every side by his espyes doutynge treason and
thynking that all these tokens of subjection were but for a face or cloak to
cover the treason and gile of Iugurth. And so by such dysceyt to wayt a time
to execute his treason. Wherefore Metellus thus mysdemynge kept himself in the
forward of the host with an elect and chosen company of archers, slyngers,
and other like soudyours appointed in light harnes. His under captain Caius
Marius had rule and charge of the rereward among the horsemen and on both the
wings of his host he ordained horsemen and other soudyours for supplement,
subsidy, and socours of the forward if need should require, and among them to
expel their ennemies on what side so ever they should come, were mengled bowmen
and other light harnenised fotemen with darts, pikes, and iauelins to trouble
the horsemen of their enemies. For in Iugurth was so much gile so great
experience and knowledge of the country, and also so great practyse of
chyualrie: that a man could not well know whether he were more to be douted or
more grievous in peace or in ware or while he was absent or present.

Not far from that way which Metellus held with his army was a town of the
Numidians much acustomed and frequented of marchantes of Italy and other
strange cuntreis: and the princypal market town of all the kingdom of Numidi.
This town was named Vacca, Metellus drew him and his army thither, and set
garnyson into the same town. This did he to prove the inhabytantes: for if
they had kept forth the garnison than should they euydently have declared
themself ennemies of the Romans. And also he led a garnyson thither to
the intent to have taken the town by force of arms, if the inhabytauntes would
not have admytted the same garnyson. Also he commanded vytayls, and all other
things necessary or expedyent to war for to be brought thither thinkinge (as
the case required) that the concours of marchantes resortyng thither, and his
good provision of vytayls should be great defense and conseruacyon for him and
his army both in war and in peace. But when the citezins saw such
purneyance as he made of vitels considring that he should not hurt nor
disprouyde the^ while he had vttail enough of his own prouyson: anon they
opened the gates and suffered him to enter withal his garnyson and retynue. But
in the mean time Iugurth again send his ambassadors to Metellus more
diligently and instantly than he had done before, mekely beseching and
requyring him of peace And yeldynge to him every thing, only reserved his
own life: and the life of his children. Metellus send these ambassadors home
again attysed to the prodycio^ of their master Iugurth as he had done to the
other ambassadors which were sent before. But concerning the peace which they
desired in their masters name: neither he granted nor utterly denied it. And
in this prolongyng of time he looked always after parfourming of the promise of
the other ambassadors, which before had granted to the betrayeng of Iugurth.
But when Iugurth consydred and pondered together the words and deeds of
Metellus, and when he parceyued in mind himself assailed with his own
crafts of subtylte: and that Metellus used such crafts against him, as he
himself had used against other: than was his mind grieved most of all. For
Metellus feigned peace, but in very deed he showed sharp war. Iugurth thus
considred also: that his greattest town named Vacca, was alienate and lost
from him: his ennemies by long continuance and exercise knew the coostes of
his country of Numidy. The minds of his lords and commens were provoked and
moved against him. When he aduysed these dyfficulties with other mo contray to
him he concluded and fullye determined at last to resyste and withstand
Metellus in batayl, with strength and force of arms and no farther to meke nor
submit himself by peticion.

How Iugurth prepared and addressed him self to war, and what ordinance
and pollicye he used against the new consul Metel^us. The.xxx. Chapter.
Wherefore Iugurth thus determyninge to assail Metellus caused his ways to be
espied, having hope of victory by auauncement and advantage of some place:
where he intended of the place and country: and anon prepared the greattest
army that he could of all sorts of people. This done, he did so much that by
hills narowe passages and bypathes he prevented and ouerpassed the host of
Metellus.

In that part of Numidi which before in division of the kingdom was assigned
in possessyon to Adherbal was a flodde named Muthull, rennyng from the
meridyonall part of the country. A certain hill and long was nere to this
water, so that at any place the hill was about.xx. mile from the streme and of
equal dystance in length. The ground of this hill was of such nature that
ever it was barayne, wherefore it was not apt to men's habitacion but deserte.
About the mids and pendant of it was an other hill smaller of quantite: but
of an unmeasurable height covered and all ouergrowne with wyld olyue trees, with
myr trees, and other sorts of trees wont to grow naturally on dry and sandy
ground. The plain between the hills and the water was desert and uninhabitable
for lack of water: save such places of the plain as were nere to the flodde
of Muthul which part was grown with small trees, and occupied with men and
beasts. Iugurth came to the said small hill which descended from the pendante
of the greater hill ouerthwarte the valey. And there took place with his army
not together, but dispersed abroad among the trees by companies and bendes: he
made his frind Bomilchar captain and gouernoure of his olyphantes, and of
part of his army of fotemen, and informed him parfitely how he should behave
him self, and govern them whom he had committed to him both before the
battle, and also in the battle when it came to the point. But he him self
drew nerer to the great hill with all the horsemen and many of the footmen
which were elect and chosen men, and set them in order and in array with
much policy and wisdom. This done he him self w^nt about and compassed
every company, cohort, and bend singulerly, and one by one warninge and
requiring the^ to call to their minds their old strength, nobles and
victory: and thereby to defend themself and their country of Numidy from the
immoderate couetyse of the Romans, which were not content nor satisfied with
the possession of the most part of the world: saying fathermore that they
should fight but with such as they before had overcome and subdued. And how be
it they had changed their capytayne: the cowardice of their hertes was not
changed: Also he rehearsed and declared to them that he had made all provision
for the^ which a captain might or ought to make for his army. He declared
how he had taken for them the upper place: that they were crafty in battle
and many in nombre: and should fight with a few vncrafty cowardes. Wherefore he
desired and exhorted them when time should come that than they would be ready to
assail the Romans manly at sound of the trumpettes, for that one same day
said he should other establishe al their labors victories, and besynesses: or
else it should be the heed and beginning of their most great mischief, and
distruccion. Moreover through out all his army he put them in remembrance man
by man of the benefytes which he had done to them before for their manly deeds
of chyualry: as such as for their worthynes he had rewarded with dignite,
money offices, or other worship: and showed such unto other comen soudyours
saying that if they would so demean themself manly: so should they be
promoted and auanced to worship and riches. And thus he conforted the^ all
every man after his manners and conditions, some with gifts, some with
promise, some with thretnynges, and other like ways according to the
disposicion of their minds and nature.

While Iugurth thus exhorted his soudyours Metellus naught knowing of his
ennemies apered with his company dysce^dyng down the pendant of the great hyl
which at first seeing but few men much marueyled what it might signify, for he
suspected nothing less than bataile, but in beholding more intentifely toward
the top of the small hyl before him, he espied among the young trees both horses
and men which were not fully hyd, because of the lowenes of the trees: yet was
he incerteine what it might be. For what by secretnes of the place, and what by
gyle of Iugurth, their baners and the most part of the soldiers were
obscured and hydlyinge down upon the ground. But anon after when he perceived
this gyle and treason: by little and little, he set his army in array proceeding
forward still as he did before, fayninge him self ignorant of the treason. But
he changed the order of his soldiers, and on the right winge which was next
to the Numidiens his enemies, he ordained as it were a forward enforced with a
threfold subsidy or socour, that is to say with three bendes of proved
soldiers to rescue and help them when need should be. The archers, such as
with slings should cast against their enemies plu^mets of lead and iron, and al
other which were of light harnes: all these he divided amomge the standerdes of
other soldiers as the case required: where as after the right ordinance of
batail, such soldiers by them self divided should begin the battle: but in
this bataile the situacion of the place not so required. All the hole company
of his horsemen he ordered in the extremities and corners of the fore front of
the battle. This done as the brevity of the time suffered, he made a short
exhortacion unto his soldiers, and so proceeded forth with his host set in a
raye in manner beforesaid. But because Iugurth was on the small hill before him,
and by that mean on the hyer ground he thought to remedy that incommoditie,
and led forth his hooste on the side half, not toward Iugurth, but alonge on
the hill to ward the flodde Muthul, into ye plain which was between the hill
and the flod. But when he saw the Numidiens quiet and that they departed not
from the hill which they had taken, he considred the hete and feruentnes of
the somer season. And lest his army might perish for lack or scarcite of
water: he sent before one of his capitayns named Rutilius with a company of
light harnessed souldyours and part of his horsemen unto the flodde named
Muthul for to take up a place wherein they might set their tents in time of
need: thinking that his ennemies wyllyng to continue long in that place by
often assautes and scyrmishes should disturb the Romans while they resorted to
the water. And for as much as the Numidiens trusted not much in their strength
and armoure. He thought that they purposed and intended to trouble his
soldyours with werynes and thirst. When Rutilius was gone toward the water,
Metellus descended procedyng forth withal by little and little as the matter and
place required: he commanded one named Marius, with his company to keep in the
rerewarde. But Metellus himself with the horsemen kept him in the lift wyng
of the forward of the battle, which always removed forward first of all his
army.

Of the first battle foughten between Metellus and Iugurth. The.xxxi. Chapyter.
BUT when Iugurthe saw that the rerewarde of Metellus was passed his foreward:
he beset the hyl from which Metellus descended with two thousand fotemen by
which garniso^ if Metellus would again take socour of the same hill, he should be
prohibyted and driven bacwarde again into the hands of Iugurth. This done:
suddenly he did the trumpetes to be blown and anon withal, invaded and set
upon the company of Metellus on every side. The Numidyens assailed and beat
down the Romans, some on the rerewarde and other some did their deuoyre to
break the array on both sides: both on the right and lift wyng, withal their
might assaylyng the Romanys, and auauncing them self on every side to break
their array and ordinance: and after their power to trouble, disturb, and
divide them. The Romans which were most stable and bold of mind in metynge
their enemies were abused and deceived with the uncertain bataile. For their
ordinance and array was set and strengthed only but on one side. But their
ennemies assailed them on every side: so that sometime they were stricken and
wounded of their ennemies from far of, but by no means could they strike
their enemies again, nor join with them. For Iugurth had taught his Numidia^s
on horseback before the bataile, that when they should begin to assail the
Romans: they should not keep the^ self together, nor nere, but as much
dispersed as they could, and in diverse places: one company here, and an other
there. And where the soldiers of Iugurth could not avoid nor repel the Romans
which assailed the^, because they were mo in nombre: therefore they compassed
and trapped the^ behind or on the sides beaten of and disioyned from their
company. And where it fortuned any of the^ to flee, the Numydians had more
auantage then ye Romans. For where they fled into the fields, they assailed
the Romans on the back half or else on both sides in diverse companies. But
where they saw it was more avail and expedient to fle again to the hyl where
they set first their ordinance. They had also auantage thereby for their horses
were acustomed to mountains and combred ways, wherefore they mounted with less
difficulty, but in contrary wise the Romans for the sharpnes of the hills
and lack of use could not follow them in their asse^ding without much
difficulte, pain, and paryll. But not withstandyng that Iugurth and his men
had the most auantage of the country and ground, yet the battle on both
sides was variable, ungoodly, uncertain and miserable to behold: for the best
men sonest were slain and in most ieopardy. For the courage and valyant minds
and bold hertes of the Romans: was worth with the gyle and treson of ye
Iugurthyns: and so on both sides he which was boldest and most auaunced
himself was sonest overthrown Some which were divided from their own company
and in hand of their ennemies, gave place to them and yielded themself. And
again some followed and chased their ennemies fleyng: where they might make
their party good: there resysted either party manly. None of both parties
kept under their standerdes: nor followed not the order of battle: nor kept
none order nor array, but every man resysted and defended himself there where
most ieopardy and paril was laid to him: and endeavored himself to withstand
vyolence of his ennemis with hye valyantise. And so the armor defensyfe,
darts, me^ horse, Romans, Numidians, soudyours, and pages were all confounded
and mengled together: without order or ordinance observed. Nothing was done
with dyscression of the soudyours nor with counsel of the captayns: unadvised
fortune and chance governed all the bysynesse of that day: so unstable was the
battle. All was committed to rule of fortune, and thus passed forth much, of
the day in great murder and slaughter yet still was the end of the battle
uncertain and none knew whyther party should have the victory. At last
both parties with labor and heat began to languyshe and become weary. Metellus
understanding that the Numidians less resysted in fyghtyng than they did
before assembled and gathered together again his souldyours by little and
little, and without tarry restored the array and set them again in order.
And.iiii. cohorts taken forth of the legyons he set against the fotemen of
his ennemies. But before Metellus had thus assembled his company: a great part
of them oppressed with wounds and werynesse, withdrew themself to the hyl
before named and to the hyer places from the battle there to refreshe and rest
themself. But when Metellus (as said is) had reasembled them again: he began
in few words to pray and exhort them in such manner.

O worthy and trusty souldyours and companyons dyscourage not your self in
this battle, nor let not your old nobleness now fail you? suffer not
your ennemies wont to put their trust in flight, now to over come you by your
ferefull minds. Remember well: if ye be disposed cowardly to flee: ye have no
tents, no cities no towns, no castles, nor no manner places of defense: whereto
ye may ren for refuge and save your self: your health, your hope, and defense
is only in your armoure and strength: and specially in your bold heart.
Wherefore dear friends remember your old worship. and suffer not the hole
empire of Rome to suffer disworshyp by your temerous and cowarde minds.
Remember it worthyer to dye in batayl like men than to fle, and than to be
taken and murdered like bestes, or to dye in prison. With these words and such
like Metellus reco^forted the hertes of his soudyours. But in mean time
Iugurth for his part was not idle, quiet nor less prouide^t but compassed and
went about his men conforting and exhortyng the^ also and praysng their deeds.
He renewed the battle also for his part: and among the mids of elect
soudyours he fought and proved thextremite of every thing: and assaid al
means whereby any auantage might be won conforting and socouringe men with
words, deeds, and example. He boldly fought and assailed such of the Romans
as were in fear of dout: and such as he knew and proved bold and steadfast, he
kept them of with arowes, iauelyns, and darts that they could not approach to
their fellows to auaunce them nor to be socoured of the^. Thus two worthy men
noble and excellent captains fought and co^tended togeder between themself.
They themself like in strength, courage, wisdom, and policy: but of things
longing to chiualry unlike of provision. For Metellus had strength of soudiours
sufficiently: but the auantage of the country and place was much contrary to
him. But Iugurth had every thing necessary and expedient, save company of men
of arms which he wanted.

At last the Romans wha^ they understood that there was no sure place whereto
they might fle: and also that they could find no means to fight with their
enemies indifferently hand to hand. And that the night was come upon them: at
last they ascended upon the top of an hill which was over against them like
as Metellus their captain commanded them to do. For the Numidians had lost
that place and were fled and spread abroad dispersed, but few of them were
slain: for they were swyfte, and the country was not well known to the
Romans to pursue the^: whereby many of the Numidians were defended: and so by
flight escaped. But Iugurth with his horsemen of guard for his body: fled also
from the battle when he had long foughten and saw none avail nor advantage.

How Bomylchar under captain of Iugurth and his company were discomfyted by
Rutilius under captain of Metellus. The.xxxii. Chapter.
IN the mean season Bomylchar, whom Iugurth had made master of his
Oliphantes, and of a part of his foot men (as I have written before)
as soon as he saw that Rutilius (which Metellus had sent unto the flodde of
Muthull to provide a place for their tents) was ouerpassed his company, by
little and little he conuayed and led down his company into a plain. And
while this Rutilius hasted him toward the flodde as he was commanded of
Metellus. Bomylchar set his company in order and array still and quyetlye as
the matter and case required. And in the mean time he forgatte not to search
by espyes what Metellus did, and what way Rutilius took toward the said
flodde, and in what manner he behaved him self and guided his army. Wherefore
after he understood by his epyes that Rutilius with his company had taken their
place by the said flod where he would abide, and was void of business, quiet and
douting no peril. And on the other side when he understood yt the cry of the
bataile between Iugurth and Metellus encresed, he feared lest Rutilius (if he
understood thereof) would leave his place by the flodde: and return to the
battle to socour his fellows which were in ieopardy. In this consideracion
Bomilchar: where as before he had ordered his army nere together by craft and
that because he mystrusted the courage of his men: and in their boldness had no
great confidence. Therefore now again he divided them abroad much larger than
they were before: and so proceeded toward the tents of Rutilius to the intent to
let him and his company on every side, if they prepared toward rescous of
Metellus. Rutilyus and his company suspectynge no peril sodaynlie of unware
aduysed great vyolence of smoke and duste styred up and raised by mouyng of the
ground: but what it might be they could not parceiue by any mean because of
the thickness of young trees that grew on all the ground bytwen them which
let their sight. First of al they thought it had proceeded of drines of
ground by mouyng of the wind. But afterward when they saw the same smoke
and dust continue still after one manner: and that the same approached always
nerer and nerer likewise as the company of their ennemies moved and drew
toward them. Than they parceyued and knew the matter as it was: and in all have
every man took to him his harness: and stood ready before the defense of their
tents as their captain Rutilius had ordered and commanded them every man ready
at defense and in array. After when their enemies approached nerer with an
horrible noise and cry, they ran togidre on both parties. The Numidiens did
but only continue the skirmishe abidinge and loking after their eliphantes in
help of whom was al their trust. But when they saw that their eliphantes were
stopped and let with thyckenesse of the bows of the trees: and so tarried and
kept from their socours by the compassing of the Romans so that in them was no
trust of socours. Than all they took them to flight with all their power. But
many of them (leuing their armor behind them) escaped with out wound by
help of the hylls which were about the place: which they could better and
quicklier ascend than the Romans. And also by socour of the darkness of the
night (which than was at hand) many of them escaped hole and sound and saved
themself. Four of the elyphantes were taken and all the remenaunt (forty in
nombre) were slain. When this was done: the company of Rutilius,
notwithstanding that they were fatigate and weried with great iourneis before,
and also with much labor in ordering of their tents: and with the said
bataile or skyrmyshe: nevertheless when they saw that Metellus their chief
captain tarried longer than they thought he would have done, if all thing had
happened well with him, they ordered them self ready and dylygently went
backward again to mete him. For the falsehode and gyle of Iugurth and of the
Numidians caused them to be busye, diligent, and circumspect in every thing
for sauegard of their lives, and suffered them to do nothing slowely nor with
delaying. But when they were in their journey in ye darkness of the night the
companies on both parties were not far in sunder the one from the other: and
both parties approached together not knowing each other as if they had been
ennemies. The one against the other making noise and clamor each one
increasing fear to other as warriors are wont to do at beginning of batail.
In so much yt a miserable destruction and murdre had almost ben committed bytwen
them by their imprudent negligence, if the espyes and horsemen which were sent
between them on both sides had not with more diligence and wyselyer espied the
treuth of the matter. But when the parties knew each other, their sadness and
fear turned to great joy and gladness. The souldyours ioifully anon met
together one saluting and welcoming other. One showed to other their acts done
on both parties: and joyous they were to here on both sides every man
commending and exalting their own deeds, and also the deeds of other unto heaven
with mirthe and gladness. And that as well such as were worthy men as unworthy
cowardis ascribed to themself worthynesse. And certes in such business it
often happens, that on that side which has victory: such as be but
cowards, rude and vncrafty, exalts the^ enjoys, and may bost themself on
other men's deeds and worthynesse. But in contrary wise on that party which
is ouercom though many be good warryours, noble and worthy men: yet ar they
reputed for cowards without policye, because of other men's cowardyse and
aduersite of fortune. Thus farethe it in skirmisshes of bataile. But when
Metellus and Rutilius (as I have said before) were met together and rehearsed
their acts one to other Metellus hasted him with all his army to the flodde of
Muthull, and tarried in the places and tents which Rutilius had prepared and
soiourned there the space of four days. In this season he was besy in
refreshing and healing his souldyours which were wounded, such as manly had
behaved themself in the bataile he worthily rewarded them, he called them
together al into one company and greatly lauded and commended them: thanking and
much praising the^ for the great diligence, pain, and labors: which they had
taken in defense of the honor and dignite of their empire with such words.

O worthy soudyours ye se now that, the hardest of our labor is ouerpassed by
your boldness and manhod wherefore I exhort you: be ye of like courage in the
residue of our besinesse, which shall be but light and easy in comparison of
this which is ouerpassed. The beginning and first brunt of every besinesse is
hardest. Which shall be but light unto bold and circu^spect beginners and
constant folowers of their eneterprises. But this beginning ye have manly
overcome by constant labor as a thing most easy. Enough have we foughte^
already for ye glory of victory: for that have we optayned in the first
conflicte. If we labor or fight any more it shall be but only for prays and
robberies of our enemies whereby we shall be enryched in substance: like as we
now be inhaunced with glory of victory. Wherefore my dear fellows and most
constaunte friends of the commen wealth, now I exhort you for complement of
all your honorable fame, to remember your old accostomed worthynes: and suffer
not this excellent honor and glory which ye have now optayned by boldenes:
to be quenched and decay again by ignominious cowardyse.

With such words and many other like Metellus reco^forted his co^paynie, and
maruelousely kindled their courage to the desire of honor by valiant feats of
arms But in the mean season the known gyle of Iugurthe went not from his
mind: and therefore to exclude al danger of treso^, he fente certain of ye
Numidia^s, which betraying Iugurth had forsaken him and fled to the Romans:
and also with them he sent forth diverse other of his own company which
were expert of the country, and oportune to such business to search and epsy
among what people or in what place Iugurth held him self: and wherein he was
occupied. Whether he kept him with a small company, or whether he had an army
reassembled for a new battle, and how he behaved him self, and where about
he went sithe he was overcome. But Iugurth had conuaied him self into such
places as were full of dyches, valeis, hills, trees, bushes, and dales defended
of nature. And there had he assembled again a new army of men mo in number
than he had before. But they were but vncrafty, inexpert, and dull to bataile:
and could better till the ground and keep beasts, then exercise the deeds of
chivalry. For thereto had they never ben used before: but in the other seruyle
occupacions and businesses had they ben occupied al their life time without
intermixtion of other occupacion. It fortuned that Iugurth had non other
soldiers but such rural people about him at this time, namelye for this
cause. For when he fled from the bataile foughten before with Metellus, none of
all his soldiers followed him, except the horsemen of his guard. For all the
other soldiers departed where it lyked them best. Nor this is not counted nor
reputed for any fault or rebuke among the Numidian soldiers. For such is the
costume of the country: when the captain flees, the host forsakes him.

What waste and destruction Metellus made in the land of Numidye after this
first battle and flight of Iugurth: and of the gyle of Iugurth against
Metellus. The.xxvi. Chapter.
When Metellus understood by his espyes that the mind of Iugurth continued yet
still in his old fiersenes and cruelty, though he was lately overcome in
bataile. And when Metellus saw that Iugurth renewed the war again, and
prepared a new bataile: which could not be done but at the pleasure of
Iugurthe, because he had taken such a place to abide in that no man could
conveniently contend with him for difficulty thereof. Metellus this knowing
advised himself of many things. Namely he considred that they were not
indifferent and egall on both parties in executyng thereof. For all if that he
had the upper hand over Iugurth, and had put him to flight, yet lost he mo men,
and had more damage in ouercomyng him, then Iugurth had which was overcome. For
this co^sideracion Metellus purposed no more to contend with him in plain
fildes nor in ordered bataile, but by an other manner to execute war with him
from thence forth. This determined: Metellus with his hole host and ordinance
went forth into the most rich and plentefull places of all Numidye, and there
wasted and destroyed the fields and country on every side. He took without
any resistance castles and towns not strongly defended with walls, dyches,
nor garnyson. And burnt and beat them down to the ground. All such as came
in his way and were able to bear harness, full grown to age and apt to
battle he slew and rydde out of hand. Thinkyng that the mo he slew, the fewer
adversaries and ennemies should he have to contend against him. He commanded
his soldiers to spare no robbery nor prays, but gave all thing havoc
among his soldiers.

For fear of this cruelty many of the Numidyens yielded themself to the
Romans: and gave unto them hostages, vytaile, soldyours, and all other things
necessary abundauntly. In some towns which were taken: Metellus set defense
and garnison where need required and fortified them sufficiently. This
besinesse troubled the mind of Iugurth much more than the bataile that was
foughten before to his great damage and disconfort of his men. For he lost more
people by this way than by any other mean before. Thus Iugurth which before
put all his hope and trust in his flight: was now of necessite compelled to
follow and pursue his ennemies: and he which could not defend his own places
which still remianed in his possession was constrained now to war in those
coostes, which Metellus had won of him to recover them if fortune would
suffer him. Nevertheless of such poor shyft and counsel as he had he took the
best which could be taken by his advise in such extreme necessite. He
commanded his army for the most part to remain still in the same place where
they were. And he himself with a company of horsemen which were bold and
chosen men ensued Metellus privily, making his iourneis by night time by
biwaies and secret valeys. And at last sodeinly of unawares he fell upon a part
of the Romans which were dispersed abroad from the host in foraging and
spoiling. Many of the^ without armor were slain, and many taken. None of the^
al escaped clen nor fre without damage, but either were slain or else sore
wounded. When Iugurth had done this skirmy she anon he withdrue him self and
his company into the hyls and mountains next to the^: before any socours or
rescous might come from Metellus to revenge their treason and death of the
Romans.

Of the great joy that was demeaned at Rome for this worthy behave our of
Metellus, and how he guided him self and his army to continue and augment this
honor which he had gotten. The.xxxiiii. Chapter.
WHile Metellus and Iugurthe striued thus together: the one with manhood, wisdom
and strength, the other with treason craft and gyle: tidings were brought to
Rome of this noble behaueour of Metellus. Over all the city was demeaned great
joy and gladness for that Metellus behaved himself and gyded his army acordyng
to the manner and ordinance of old noble capitains of the Romans before his
days. And how be it he was in place adverse and contrary to him, yet had he ye
upper hand of his ennemies as victory over the^. And by his strength and
manhod he had in possession the country of his ennemies: and had driven the^
from place to place. Al these things co^sidred: they much rejoiced and greatly
commended Metellus: namely for yt he had caused Iugurth to put his trust of
health only in fleyng into the mountains and wilderness which before was
magnificent and proud by the fear and cowardice of Aulus predecessor of
Metellus. Wherefore for these fortunat and glorious deeds of Metellus, ye
Senators decreed and commanded over all the city sacrifices and suffrages to
be done to their ydolles. The citizens which before were fearful and sore
troubled douting the unsure chance and incertaine fortune of the end of this
war demeaned now among them mirth and gladness over all. The honor and
fame of Metellus was recounted very noble, excellent, and glorious in every
man's mouth. Wherefore he so much was the more diligent and labored more busely
toward the victory laboring and hastyng to finyshe the war by all means and
ways so it might be to his honor and confusion of Iugurth. But nevertheless
he was well ware from puttyng himself in danger of his ennemies: and was ware
exchuynge oportunite of their gile in every place where he went. He remembered
well and consydred that often after laud and glory follows enny and evil
will. And therefore how much more noble that he was reputed: the more besy and
dilygent he was to meyntayne his fame and honor, and in dread to lose this
worthy fame which he optayned. Nor after the foresaid gyle of Iugurth he
suffered not his host to divide nor to depart themself dispersed one from an
other: nor to make excourses to forage or spoil in diverse places far dystant
in sonder. But when they had need either of man's meat or horsemeate: all
the horsemen with great companyes of the fotemen, went forth and kept them nere
about such as were send forth to make provision to defend and socour them:
if need should require. Metellus himself divided his host in two parts: the
one part he kept with himself: and the other he committed to a noble warrior
of his host named Marius, between them both they distroied and wasted the
country on every side but rather with fire than with robbry or prays. Metellus
and Marius set their tents in places not farar distant in sondre. But when any
perilous or nedy besines was to be done with Iugurth or his company which
required great might: than anon Metellus and Marius were ready together; but
they kept themself thus in sonder in diverse places to trouble the Numidiens,
and increase their fear more largely in eueery coost: and to make them fle and
avoid fer abroad in co^pas for fear.

At his season Iugurth ensued by the hills and desert places sekyng and
espyeng a convenient season or place to make some skirmishe with the Romans
(that is to say) if he coudle espy any parcel of them sekyng forth fou^tayns
of water for the army of the which was much penury in those costs. If he might
any such espy than anon would he break down from the hills upon them. Sometime
he showed himself to Metellus sometime to Marius, sometime he would assemble his
company together in a bend as if he would fight with the Romans to attempt
them, and after would he return again unto the mountains. And afterward
suddenly appear again thretning now the one company of the Romans, and now
the other. Yet would he neither ane^ture battle nor suffer neither the Romans
to be idle or in rest, nor yet himself. His mind was only set to keep his
ennemies from their beginning and purpose of distroying of the country which
they intended.

How Metellus besieged Samam one of the strongest towns of Numidie and how
Marius vndercaptayne of Metellus escaped the danger of Iugurth. The.xxxv.
Chapyter.
When Metellus saw him self so weryed with the gyles and crafts of Iugurth
and that by no policy he coudle have faculty or time to fight with him in plain
battle: at last he concluded to besiege and assail a great town named zama^,
which was the most chife and stro^gest hold of all the realm of Numidy in
that part of the land where it was builded. And so sped him thither with all
his army and ordinance where the said hold was (thinkyng as the matter required)
that Iugurth would draw thither for defense of his chife town and for socour
and relefe of his people and so should the battle be there foughten between
the^. But wha^ Metellus was in his journey thither ward, anon were certain of
his army which fled to Iugurth and certified him of this provision and
interprise of Metellus. When Iugurth hereof was certified he hasted him by great
iourneis so yt he ouerpassed the co^payy of Metellus and came to the town of
zamam before him: and there exhorted the inhabita^tes boldly to defend ye
walls. And farthermore assigned to socour and help the^ all such as had fled
from the Romans, and had brought him those tidings. These traitors were the
surest men which Iugurth had. For they could not disceiue him, but if they would
yield them again to the Romans whom they had forsaken and betrayed which
thing was not sure to them to do. Wha^ Iugurth had joined these soldiers to
the garnison and socours of ye town and castle, and had ordered and appointed
all other things acording to his mind: tha^ he promised to be there again
with them with all his hole army in time of need. This done he departed from
the town into the most preuy and secret places which he knew in his cou^trei
there by. But wha^ Metellus was in his journey toward zaman, he send Marius for
provision of whete and other corn and vitayle for the army unto a town name
Sicca, which was ye first town yt forsook Iugurth and was yielded to Marius
after ye batel late foughten with Iugurth to his great damage. Wha^ Iugurth had
knowledge hereof he went thither by night privily with his elect soldiers so yt
wha^ Marius had sped his matters and was ready to depart forth of ye town:
Iugruth was ready at ye gates to assayl ye Romans cruelly crieng with a hye voice
to them of the town and exhorting the^ to assail ye Romans also on ye
backehalf: saing yt fortune had offered to the^ ye chance of a noble act of an
excellent and glorious deed: so that (if they would follow his desire) they
should restore him again into his kingdom, and the^ self into their liberty
and from thens forth pass their time without peril, without danger or dread.
And certeynly if Marius had not boldly and strongely broken out of the town
with his sta^dardes and men of arms through the thickest of his enemies which
were in ye gates. All they of the town or ye most part would have broken their
oath and promise which they had made before to Metellus when they first yielded
the^self and the city to him The minds of the Numidia^s be so unsteadfast and
mouable. But Iugurth so comforted his soldiers yt they resisted the Romans a
little season. But when Marius and his co^pani began to encrese their violence
against ye Iugurthius, and more fiersly to prease upon the^. Anon some were
slain, and the residue fled with their master Iugurth. This danger over
passed: Marius departed thens toward the town of zama^, and at the last came
thither safe with all his company and business sped wherefore he was sent.

This Samam was a town bylded in the plain ground without hills or waters
nere it defended rather by the warke of man's hand, than by nature of the
place. In it failed nothing necessary to battle. For it was well garnished both
with men, ordinance, vitails, and armoure. Anon wha^ Marius was come:
Metellus acordyng to the time and place made ready all things necessary and
compassed the walls on every side with his army: assigning to every one of his
vndercapitains a separate place of the town to assail and there to do his
deuoyre and show his manhood.

When every thing was thus ordered, Metellus commanded to sound to the
assault with trumpets and clarions. The Romans immediately assailed the
town on every side with horrible noise and clamor. The Numidians thereof were
not a dradde at all, but stood still and kept them self in silence as if they
had not ben displeased nor provoked to battle: how be it they kept the
walls every man on the part to him assigned, and all were ready to resyste and
to assail the Romans. Anon the battle was begone. The Romans exercised
and occupied them self every man with such wepin as he could best handle,
and was most expert in: some with slinges threw plummets of lead, and some
stones from a far into the city, and at them which defended the walls: some
assailed the town nerer inuading the same, and couetyng to have entrey and
vnderminynge the walls: some boldly scaled the walls, desiringe to come so
nere that they might fight hand to hand. On the other side thinhabitantes of
the town and garnyson resisted manly. Some rolled down and ouerturned great
and weighty stones on such as were nerest to them and that undermined the
walls. Some pytched down upon them darts, iauelins, pykes, firebrandes and
also great burning polles, faggots, and blocks ouercouered with pytche and
brimstone ardentlye flaming. Some boldly ouerturned the scalyng ladders, and
slew and ouerthrewe such as scaled the walls. But some other which were
farther from the town, and for prease could not approach nere to the walls
in the mean season were another fearful nor idle. For there was no manner
instrumente of battle which could be thrown with hand, or with any other
engine of batail but that they threw it into the town, wherewith they wounded
and slew many of the inhabita^tes and of the defenders of the walls. The
darts and crossebowes on both parties were not unoccupied. Artyllery nor
go^nes had they none. For at yt time was no mention of the^ nor they were not
yet invented. The Romans which were farthest of al from the walls escaped not
free: but with darts were overthrown in great nombre. How be it their
cowardous and fearful minds caused them to draw them self a loofe behynd al
other for to save the^ self, yet could they not avoid the peril. Thus were the
worthy and unworthy Romans in like ieopardy and peril: but their glory and
fame was much unlike.

How Iugurth assailed and invaded the rentes of the Romans in the mean time
while Metellus gave assault to the town of Samam. The.xxxvi. Chapter.
While the assault continued thus at zamam with great murdre and distruccion on
both parties: Iugurth sodeinlye and of unware stale down from the mountains
where he was hyd, and with a great power of men assailed and invaded the
Romans tents while the soldiers whom Metellus had assigned to the ward and
defense of them were within the same at their rest, and suspectyng nothing
less then any such assault. Wherefore Iugurth brake in upon the^ unprovided.
The Romans were sore abashed of that sodein fear. And eueman provided for him
self according to his manner and disposicion. Some which were cowardes fled
with all their might: some other valyant and bold herted men drew to their
harnes and manly withstode their enemies. Nevertheless the most part of them
all were, either wounded or slain. But among all the company and of all the
multitude of the^ were no more but.xl. men which abode. These.xl. acompanyed
themself together reme^bringe the worship of the empire of Rome, and took a
place a litel above their enemies: which place they defended so manly that they
could not be driven from it by much violence of their ennemies, against whom
they thrue darts from a far. And such darts as their ennemies thrue at the^:
they thrue they same again. So they being but a few against so many did
nothing in vain. For they could throw no dart, but that it lighted among the
thyckest of them. But so could not their ennemies do against them. For they
were so few: so nere together and on so sure a place that their enemies might
litel thing preuail against the^. But wha^ the Numidie^s approached nerer to
them: than specially these.xl. valiant Romans showed and bestowed their
manhood and strength with most excellent courage assayling their enemies:
ouerthrowyng and chasynge them backwarde by very force and strength.

In the mean time while Metellus was most of all ocupied and busyed in the
forsaide assault of zamam suddenly he herd behind him a great clamor and
noise of people. Anon he refrained his horse: and in tourning back parceiued
great companies of men renning toward him: whereby he well kenwe that they were
of his own people and company. But when he understood all the chance which
was be fallen. Anon in all have he sent all the hole company of his horsemen
unto his tents: and soon after he sent thither also his chief vndercaptayne
Caius Marius with his retynue and company to him assigned. And sore weeping he
obtested exhorted, and besought him for all love and frindshyp, and for the
honor of the commen weal, that the would not suffer any disworship or
contumely remain in the Romans that day which ever thytherto had been
victorious and ouercommers with great laud and honor: and that he would not
suffer their ennemie Iugurth and his company to depart away unrevenged.
Marius did the commandment of Metellus, and that shortly. But in the mean
season Iugurth perceived many of the kepers of the tents fallen into dyches
that were made about the same for defense: so that for haste to run away
they hurt them self more then he did. Iugurth aduysing their danger,
considered that him self was lykelye to be set under the same manner, if he
auentured over far. And therefore he departed betyme into the surest places
that he could devise nere by, leauyng many of his men behind, either dead or
mortally wounded. Thus was Marius frustrat of his labor: for Iugurth was fled
before he came to the tents. But Metellus (without any thing brought to end
at zamam) when the night drew near, returned with his host into his tents.
On the next morrow after, before he returned again to the assault of zamam:
he commanded all the company of his horse men to course up and down before
their tents on that side where they supposed Iugurth would come to socoure his
people. The entres into the tents and places near to them he committed and
divided to ward of his under captains. After that he returned again to the
town, and fiercely assailed the walls in like manner as he had done the day
before.

In the mean season Iugurth again suddenly stale upon the Romans: and
specially on them which coursed before the tents: they which were next him and
who^ he encountered first of al were a little time sore troubled and abashed: but
the remenant of the Romans lightly assembled their socoure. And so valiantly
behaved them self that the Numidiens should not long have continued the
skyrmyshe: if their footmen myngled with the Romans horsemen had not in the
mydell committed great myschefe and dystruction. For the horsemen of Iugurthe
trustyng to the help of these fotemen which were myngled among the^: did not
first proceed forward auau^cing themself and than return back again as the
use is in a bataile of speremen. But they ran in making incourses among the
thickest of the Romans overthwart and sydlinge: in foldynge and dowblyng their
courses: and co^tendyng to trouble and disorder the array and order of the
forward and wings of the Romayne host. In somuche that wha^ with the
Numidiens on horseback and with the^ on foot it lacked but little: but the
Romans were confounded and ouercom in that grievous conflict.

But here will I leave the horsemen of the Romans fightyng for their lives and
honor against Iugurth and his speremen. And now shall I declare how Metellus
the chief capitayn of the Romans behaved him self with his host in the
assaut of zammam.

How Metellus behaved him self for his part, and of the great conflict which
the Romans had agianst the Numidians: Metellus with his footmen assaylyng the
town of Samam for the one part, and Iugurth fierselye fyghtyng with the
Romans speremen on the other part. The.xxxvii. Chapyter.
IN the fame time while this skirmyshe continued bytwen the Romans horsemen
and the Numidiens, which were with Iugurth the assaut also against the town of
zamam endured with much strength, violence, and murder. And specially where as
Metellus had assigned his under captains on every side of the town (as I
have said before) there co^tynued the assaute most sharply. One of them put not
his trust nor hope in other: but every man in his own deeds and in himself.
Under the same manner did the garnyson and inhabitants of the town behave
themself: they fought manly again and also ordained all things convenient
for their defense in every place of the town. Both the parties were redier
and more besye one to strike and wound other, than to defend themself. The
clamoure and noise was myxt with exhortacio^ and confort of some, and the joy
of the quellars and murderers was mingled with the wayling of them which were
quelled and murdered. The sound of the armoure, and horrious strokes mounted to
the air The sky was darked with darts fleing on either side. And the walls
and dychesse were dyed with blood: and filled with deed corses pyteful to se.
But when the Numidiens were somewhat at laiser, and when the Romans a little
abated and remitted the assaut: than they which defended the walls of the
town looked out a far and intentifeley beheld the battle of the horsemen
which still continued. There might one have seen the^ sometime merry and joyous,
sometime full of dolor and heaviness after as they saw the case of the part of
Iugurth went forwade or bacwarde. And as well as they could be seen and herd of
their fellows which were with their king Iugurth: some warned them to audacite,
some exhorted them to courage, other they gave them signs with their hands or
with the iesture of their bodies and cou^tenances mouyng and excityng them to
boldness. If they saw a Roman strike a Numidian: they moved and withdrue their
bodies avoiding the stroke as if it had been themself which had been stricken.
And if they saw a Numidian cast a dart against a Romain: they moved their
bodies also as they had cast it themself. Thus took they so intentife head to
the bataile that they forgot themself where they were, and it seemed the^ that
they had been with their fellows in battle. When Marius which besyged the town
on that side: understood this manner and behauour of the inhabitauntes and
garyson: he abated his fiersnes for policy and was more slow in besyeging of
the town than before, faining that he had no trust nor confidence to win it
and suffered the Numidie^s within the town to behold the bataile of their
king, for a while without any resistance or besynes. But wha^ he saw the^
most intentifely beholding the battle, and most amassed for the besinesse of
their fellows and country men: than suddenly with all his power he gave assaut
to the walls, so that many of the Romans with ladders and other ingines, had
almost mounted unto the highest part of the^. Thinhabitantes saying this
expelled their amasednes remembryng themself: and ran manly against the^ with
resystence throwing upon them stones, fire, and all manner darts of bataile.
The Romans at byginning resisted valiantly, defendyng themself and auancyng
them to the walls. But wha^ thinhabitantes had first overthrown and broken
one ladder, and than ouerturned an other. They which abode last were maimed or
slain. Anon the remenant departed and gave over the walls under the best
manner that they could a few or none whole. For a great part of them
wythdrewe them self transfixed with mortal wounds. Anon after the night
fell upon them which caused both the parties to desyste, and leave of the
battle.

How Metellus removed the syege from zamam, and how Bomylchar so parswaded
Iugurth that he yielded him self, his kyngedome, and all other things to
mercy and grace of the Romans. And how Iugurth after loss of his men,
treasour, elephantes, armoure, and horse: changed his mind again.
The.xxxviii. Chapter.
But when Metellus saw his purpose and labor all in vain: and that he could
not win the town: and also that Iugurth did naught but by gyle and falsehod,
nor would not fight but if it were in places for his profit and great
^uauntage. And also when he perceived that the summer was passed, he departed
from the siege of zamam, and in such towns as he had won of Iugurth, which
were strongly defended with walls and water, he set garniso^ and soldiers of
his company to defend them. But the remenaunt of his army he conuayed and
ordered in the next province unto Numidye, which was subject to the Romans: to
remain there till the sharpnes of winter were passed. Nor in the mean time
suffered not them, nor him self to be corrupted with superfluous wealth,
rest, nor lecherye: after the manner of other before him. But because the war
proceeded forward but little with armoure or strength he began to prove and
prepare treison agynste a treytoure, deceyte against a deceyuer, and gyle
against gyle of Iugurth: and this thought he to prove by such as were most
chief frindes of Iugurth, and most familier about him. So that he purposed to
use the false hode and treason of them against their master: instead of armor
and battle. Wherefore first of all he began to prove the mind of Bomilchar
which had been before at Rome with Iugurth: and (as I have said before) fled
privily from thence for the death of Massiua, leauyng his sureties behind in
danger for his cause. Metellus considered that this Bomylchar (because of the
great frindshyp and familiarity which he had with Iugurth) sonest might
deceive and betray him. Wherefore (as I have said before) he began and went
in hand with him first of all by promisyng of great rewards. And first of
all he did so much that this Bomilchar came privily to Metellus and spoke with
him. Metellus anon promised him on faith and truth to do so for him that the
Senators should pardon him of all things past, and of his life and goods: so
that he would betray or deliver to him Iugurth either quick or dead. Lightlye
he persuaded the Numidian: for anon Bomilchar agreed there to. What for his
traitorous and false mind which he had of nature: and what for that he douted
if any peace or composicion after that should be made between Iugurth and the
Romans, him self should be delivered by condition to the Romans to be
punished for the death of Massiua whom he caused to be slain at Rome. This
Bomilchar when he saw his time took leave of Metellus on this apointment, and
soon after came to Iugurth whom he found doutfull in care and bewaylyng his
adverse and miserable fortune with profounde syghes and heaviness, and doutynge
what way was most expedient to be taken. Bomilchar after many words began
to counsel and warn him, praynge, and obtesting him piteously weeping and
waiting: and requyring that at last he would make some provision for the
sauegarde and socours of himself, of his children and friends: and for the
people of Numidi which well had deserved against him to be provided for and
better seen to. Bomilchar also objected to Iugurth how he and his men were
overcome in every bataile, and his people also diminished or alienate from him,
his feldes and towns wasted and distroied, or else in possession of his
enemies: his men some taken and in prison. Some slain: and many wounded and
maimed: the riches of his realm diminished and wasted. Bomilchar alleged also
to him that he had proved the strength of his souldyors and favor of fortune
sufficiently enough, wherefore it were better for him to se some remedy and
provision for all these ylles and other mo, and to be ware lest while he
prolonged the time douted: the people of the country should provide for
themself without his advise or counsel. With these words and other like
Bomilchar induced the kings mind to make some co^posicion, or else to yield him
self and al other things to mercy and grace of the Romans. Anon
ambassadors were send to Metellus to certify him that Iugurth was ready to do
what ever he would desire or command him: and that he would commyt and yield
both himself and his kingdom to the faith and grace of Metellus: and of the
Romans without any pactyon, conuenaunt, or exception: saving only as it
pleased them to deal with him. Metellus heryng of this mind of Iugurth was
very glad: and commanded all the most wise, noble, and worthy men of his army
a none to be called together unto him from their wyntring places. When they
were come tha^ took he counsel of them and of other such as he knew wysest and
most discrete touching the embassade of Iugurth. Anon it was concluded and
decreed among the counsel and declared to the ambassadors (acordinge to the
old custom of Rome) that they should command Iugurth to send to Metellus
and the Romans two hundred thousand pound weight of silver: al his elypha^tes
which he ocupyed in war: and a certain quantite of armor and a no^bre of his
chife horses. Al these things were fulfilled and done of Iugurth without any
tarry or delay. Wherefore anon after Metellus commanded again that al they
which had betrayed his host, forsaken him and fled to Iugurth should be bounden
and so brought to him again. The most part of them were brought as he
commanded but a few of the^ wha^ they herd first of this co^posicion (fering
the same matter) fled unto Bocchus king of the Moryens.

When Iugurthe after this manner was bereft of his armor of his horse, of his
men, and also of his treasour. Anon after he was called by Metellus to come to
atowne called Tysidium there to here what farthermore should be commanded to
him: and to yield himself to thempire of Rome acordynge to his embassade. But
he began than to change and to turn his mind again dredyng for the
knoleging of his cruel deeds that he should never escape condign punyshement
if he were ones in the Romans hands. Thus he continued many days in douting
what was best to be done Sometime he volued in mind rather to subdue himself to
any difficulty and to bide all pains than to begyne war again: considering
the adverse and unhappy fortune which he had before. Sometime again he
called to mind how grievous a fall it should be to descend from a kyngedome
into subieccion and bondage. But at conclusion when in vain and to none
effect he had lost such great ordinance and help of war as he had
lately delivered to Metellus, as a volage brained man he fullye determined
again to begin and continue the war with Metellus, rather then to yield
him self to death or captivity.

But duringe this season at Rome was a counsel among the Senators concerning
thassignement of rule and gouernauce of the provinces belonging to the empire
in which counsel it was decreed that the country and war of Numidy should be
committed to Metellus by prorogacion of his authority for another year more.

But here will I leave a while to speak of Metellus, and write of the ambicion
of Marius: and how he behaved him self in supplantinge the same Metellus for
his room and dignity.

How Marius by ambicion labored to be consul and to prosecute the war of
Numidy, and how he detracted and supplani^o the consul Metellus. The..xxix.
Chapter.
AT the same season the said Marius was in a town named Vtica, and there made
supp^cacion and oblacion to the ydols with much sacrifice to the intent that it
might be his fortune (by help) to have ye place of Metellus. A costome
damnable was among the people at those days, when they slew any beast in
sacrifice, to look within the intranes and bowels of the same beast so
sacrifised: where was showed unto them diverse tokens whither they should have
any hope to bring that matter to effect: for which they sacrifised or else not.
And often times the wicked spirits to cause the^ persevere in their ydolatry:
and to give crede^ce to that blind error showed many tokens to them in such
manner sacrifice: which tokens they often found true. But now to my purpose. The
priest of the ydolles which sacrifysed for Marius showed great and marvelous
tokens unto him: whereby he might greatly trust to come to his intent and
purpose, byddyng him prosecute that thing on which he had set his mind: and
have sure confidence in his gods. Sayng that if he would prove the extremite
of fortune diligently and often: than doutlesse every thing prosperously should
happen to him. But Maryus before that time a long season wonderouslye desired
in his mind the dignite of the consul. And to say truth he wanted nothing
which longed to him which should have such a dignite save only antiquite of
his progeny and ancient noblenes of birth. For though he were but a gentyl
man of the first heed: nevertheless his co^dicions were worthy and excellent. In
him was great experience of wisdom, much probite, honesty, and sadness. He
had great polycy and conning in chyualry: in battle his mind was excellent
and bold. But in peace it was low and moderate. He overcame couetise and
sensualite of his body. He desired nor coueyted nothing erthly save glory,
land, and worship. This Marius was borne and brought up by all his chyldhode
in the country of Champayne beionde France in a town named Arpine. But
as soon as he was increased, so that he might bear harness and bide the herdnes
of warfare he concluded to live on the wages of chyualrie. And in that study he
exarcysed himself: and not in eloquence of greek langage or in other study or
science: nor yet in the superfluous aparayle nor carnal lusts of citezins
unto which he never subdued his body. And thus was he endued with good manners:
and excercysed among honest ocupacions and so continued that his hole and
undefiled wit shortly increased and exalted himself growyng to honor and
virtue. First when this Marius desired of the commenty of Rome to have an
office: that is to say, to be ordained protector of the souldyours: many of
the citezins knew not his person: because he was always from the city in
war and battle: but his acts made his name well known. Wherefore after that
the co^mentye understood that he was Marius of whose nobles al Italy much
co^muned and talked: anon they granted his peticion, and proclaimed him
protector of the souldyours over all the provinces and tribes of Italy. In
that maistership and office he behaved himself so well and wisely that after
that he obtained an other office of more worship and authorite: and after that
again an other of hyer dignite. And shortly to speak: in every office and
dignite he so behaved himself that every man thought and counted him worthyer
of more dignite and honor than he had. How beit for all these co^dicions as
honorable as he was: he durst never before desire thoffice of consul of Rome
till this time when he had such comfort by his sacrifice. But when he was thus
warned and put in hope and confort, ever after he was hedlyng inclined to
ambicion and couetise of that dignite.

At this season the commenty of Rome had all other offices among them or at
their gift and dystribucion But the estates and noble men kept among them and
in their hands the consulship yearly one succedyng other by election. So that
of the commenty was none so noble nor excellent of deeds, but that was reputed
unworthy of that dignite, and as who says vile and polluted. But when Marius
saw and consydred that the words and counsel of the enchauntour and priest
which he held his sacrifice pretended to the same point and conclusion as
the desire of his mind moved him long before. Anon he came to his captiaine
Metellus besechyng him to be dyscharged of the battle till he might go to
Rome to thintente to desire the consulship of the Senators. But how beit that
in his Metellus was virtue, glory, worship, and al other things longing to a
good man plentifully enough. Nevertheless of his courage and mind was he
so^what proud, despisinge and dysdaynyng other: which were not come of so hye
lynage as he was. But specially he was statelye and proud of mind: which is
a commen vice and mischefe among estates and gentylmen. Wherefore Metellus
hering this interprise of Marius, first of al was moved with the nouelty of his
peticion. For at that time were none wont to speak for that dignite, but if
they were come of a noble stock. And so was not Marius. And thus Metellus
marueyled much at his enterprise: and who might counsel him thereto: warninge
him as under color of amyte and frendshyppe, not to presume upon so contrary
and unlikely a thing: nor to exalt his mind so hy above fortune convenient for
his state and condition Sayng also to him that every thing was not to be
coueyted or desired of every man. And that it became him well by reason to be
contented, pleased and satisfied with that honor which he had and that was
his own, and not to desire things unmeet for his degree. And finally he
exhorted and counseled him to beware to desire the thing of the Romans
which lawfullye might be denied unto him, considering and having regard to
his lynage and auncestrie.

After Metellus had counseiled Marius with these words and other like, and
that he could not turn nor apease his mind, he answered him at last, that
as soon as he could conuenyently (not lettynge the business of of the commen
weal) he would grant his desire and peticion. But after this when Marius
desired the same discharge importunely and often: he made him answer saying
that he should not make so great have to Rome for that purpose, for he should
come tymely enough to demand that dignity acompanied with the son of the
same Metellus, which son should also go to Rome in time to come to demand of
the Senators the same dignity with Marius. This son of Metellus was at that
time in the army of his father, continually exercising the feats of war,
notwythstandinge that he was but twenty years of age. This answer of Metellus
stirred* Marius against him with grievous ire and wrath, what for the honor
which he desired, and what for the license to depart, which he could not
obtain of him by no prayer nor request at his pleasure. In so much that he
enraged against Metellus moved by desire of that office, and provoked by ire,
which two vices ambicion and ire, counseled and impelled this Marius to much
evil against the said Metellus, sparyng neither word nor deed which might
endamage or hinder him, his honor and name. And that might help or auaunce
him self by ambicion to come to the dygnitie which he desired.

He governed the soldiers which passed forth the winter under his gouerna^ce
not as he ought to do, but suffered them to have their pleasure to the intent
thereby to optaine their favor and good will in his enterprise. Also he spoke
often in blaming Metellus, and proudly commending and exalting him self to the
marchantes of Rome: of whom was great resort and concours to the said city of
Vtica where Marius soiourned. And often times he boasted saying to them, that
if the one half of the army were granted and committed to him within few
days he would so behave him self that he would have Iugurthe in bonds and
subieccion. Furthermore he said to them in auauncinge him self that Metellus
prolo^ged the bataile for the nonce, for a craft because he was a man pompous
and desirous of glory and worship, utterly rejoicing in authority and given to
pride and affeccion of dygnitie: and because he knew well that while the
battle continued he should be reputed in manner as a king, therefore he did his
deuoyre the more to prolonge the war to the end that in the mean time he
might exalte and magnify him self. The words of Marius seemed to the said
marchantes certain and true, and also as they thought (by such informacion)
most expediente to the common weal that some new captain were chosen,
which shortly would fynyshe that war. For by long continuance of the same
war: many of the said merchants had wasted and spente much of their
said substance and richesse. And also to such desyrefull minds as they had,
nothing could to fast be hasted or brought to end.

Moreover at this season was in company of the Romayne army a certain
Numidian named Gauda, which was son of Manastaball, and neuewe unto
Massinissa. Micipsa in his testament ordained that this Gauda should be second
heir of Numidi after the death of his two sons and of Iugurthe. This Gauda
was sore enfebled with diseases and sickness, and for that cause his mind was a
little endulled and private of reason and memory. While this Gauda (as said is)
was in the Romans army: he required of Metellus to suffer him to have his
seat and siege next unto him after the use of kings of Numidye. Also after
that because of defense and guard of his body: he desired that a company of
soldiers of the Romans might be granted and assigned to him. But Metellus
extremely denied both his peticions, saying for the first, that such honor
longed only to them whom the Romans took and named for kings. And also for
the second peticion he said that it were unadvised and injurious ordinance if
the Roman soldiers were given or assigned to the guard and service of a
Numidian, which was no king but a soldier like many mo hired for stipend.
While Gauda was displeased and angry with Metellus for denying of these his
peticions: Marius came to him, and provoked him to revenge the displeasure and
iniurye which the captain had done to him with his help and auauncement.
This Gauda (as I have said before) was feeble and unstable mind, and the man's
wit was of little valor by means of diseases which long had holden him.
Wherefore Marius with his elegante, fair and flatteryng words at his own
pleasure induced him, and exalted his mind saying that he was a king, and an
excellent and great man: and also neuewe to the worthy and noble king
Massinissa. Wherefore (said he) if Iugurth were either slain or taken prisoner
it were lickely to come to that point: that the kingdom of Numidi should be
assigned and committed to him of the Senators without any tarry or resystence:
which thing should shortly be brought to pass if Marius himself were creat
consul in place of Metellus, and than assigned to execute and finyshe the
war with Iugurth. Under this manner Marius cou^selled and induced both the
said Gauda, the Romayne knights, the commen souldyours, and also the
merchants and occupyers which were in the town at that season with many
other who^ he impelled with his words so: that some of them for love which
they had to Marius: And other some for great hope and desire which they had to
have peace and concord wrote to Rome to their to kynsmen and friends of the
bataile of Numidy and that very sharply against Metellus desyring and
beseching them to labor at Rome with all their might yt Marius might be elect
consul and assigned to erecte the war of Numidi. And thus at Rome was the
consulshyp desired by many men with great favor and very honest peticio^s for
Marius. Also at that time had the said Marius this advantage. For the co^mentie
at that season deposed many of the states: and exalted such as were new
gentelmen after the law of one named Manlius which before had been protector
of the commentie. This Manlius ordained and inacted a law that if any thing
were ungoodly done and against right of the states being in any office or
dignity: than he which so had done should be deposed of his office: and in his
place some new gentle or actyue man of the co^mentie set and deputed and so
exalted.

This law in those days was kept in effect and executed at Rome: wherefore
every thing proceeded prosperousely to the purpose and profit of Marius. For
(as I have said before) in him was no nobleness of ancient lynage nor birth.

But here will I leave to speak of the ambicion of Marius, and return to
write of Iugurth: and how he behaved him self against Metellus.

How Jugurth renewed the war against Metellus, and how the Numidians
inhabiters of the town of Vacca by treason murdered the garnison of the Romans
which Metellus had set in the same town. The.^l. Chapter.
IN the mean time when Jugurthe had broken the composicion which he had
before made with Metellus by counsel of Bomilchar, and had concluded again to
begin the war: the^ anon he prepared al things necessary to war with great
diligence, and with great have he assembled an army. Moreover he daily troubled
with thretnings or fear, or else with great rewards: such cities and towns
as before had forsaken him and yielded the^ self to Metellus. So that he spared
no pollicye to make them render them self again to him. In such holds and
towns as were in his possession: he set garnison and defense of men of war. He
renewed and bought again armor and wepen, and set al other things which he
had lost before, or delivered to Metellus in hoope of peace. He attised to him
many of the Roman subjects and bondmen by promising to the^ their liberty.
He also proved and attempted with rewards the^, whom Metellus had set and
assigned in garniso^, guard and defense of such places as he had won in
Numidy: so that utterly he suffered nothing to be left quiet or unassayed but
by all manner means made prouysion for him self mouyng and puttyng in proof
every thing. But among al other thinhabitantes of the city called Vacca (in
which Metellus at beginning had set his garniso^: when Jugurth first sought his
peace of Metellus) were desired often of Jugurthe and with great and importune
instance exited to treason. In somuche that at last they assented to him to
conspire against the Romans. Thinhabitants of the cite did not yield themself
from Iugurth with their own good will: and namely thestates and rulers thereof
did never yield them to Metellus save fainedly. Wherefore specially they were
the first that conspired against him secretly among themself. For why as it
often happened the commentie, and specially of the Numidiens were unstable of
mind, utterly inclined to sedicion and discord covetous of new things: and
contrary to rest and quietness. But (as I have said before) when the chife of
this cite had secretly concluded and appointed their matter and treason among
the^ self: against the third day they ordained that the same third day next
after should be commanded solemn, holy, and worshipped over all the country
of Affrike, and Numidie. Which day showed and pretended by all similitude mirth,
game and sport: rather than any dread to the Romans wiche were in garnison of
the cite. But the Numidiens full of prodicion and treason when they saw their
time called unto their houses all the chief captains and master soldiers of
the Romans which were in town. And also one named Turpilius: whom Metellus
had ordained to be his lieuetenant, provost and chife capitain of the town:
they enuited and called as if it had been to there and feast them, one to one
house, an other to an other. But this chere was such as the Scorpio^ is wont to
make: which while she makes glad semblante with her mouth mortally stingeth
with the tail: so this feast was a cloak to mortal treason. For while the
Romans were in mids of their dainties unarmed suspectinge no parill. All the
Numidiens at a token given, and at one hour appointed before, slew each one
his geest which dined with him without favor: so that among the^ all escaped
not one, except the said Turpilius heed captain or lieutenant of the town.
This done: all the Numidiens together set upon the remenant of the commen
souldyours which wandered and straied abroad in the town and in the streets,
dispersed abroad without any armor: as is wont on such a dai without order,
feri^g nor douting no danger. Some of the co^mens when thestates had made them
privy of this treason came also to help them, and some other ignorant of the
matter saving that, that they had desire and pleasure in such murder invaded the
Romans also. For though they were ignorant of the counsel of this deed: yet
the noise or skirmyshe and nouelty of the matter pleased them enough. The
Romain souldyours were ignorant and incertaine of the unprovided fear and
cruel murder douting what was best to be done. Their enemies co^pasinge them on
every side let them to go to the castle of the town where their armor and
wepyn was: and the gates of the town were shut on every side before this
skirmishe began, whereby they were prohibyted to avoid the town. Moreover
women and children threw down upon them stones and other things that came
next to hand from the windows and hiest parts of their houses: striving who
might throw first and most. Thus this doutful and unprovided mischife could not
be eschued: nor they which were right worthy and strong soldiers were not able
to resyst the very cowardyse and feebleness of women and children, which thrue
down upon the^. Thus both good and ill worthy, and unworthy, strong, and
feeble: were all slain without difference. In this so great ieopardy: the
Numidiens being mad and cruel in murdre, and the gates shut on every side:
of all the Romans, or Italyens: only Turpilius the captain escaped without
hurt of his body. Whyther it so happed by the favor of his host which called
him to banquet: or by some apointment of treason: or else by some other chance:
it was not known for certain. But this was known that ever after as long as
he lived he was reputed for a vile and a wretched cowarde and without credence:
because that in so gerat loss and mischief he counted it better to escape: and
after to live, and dye in shame and rebuke: tha^ manly to have died in defense
of the town. And ever after to have had an honorable name of a worthy
captain.

How Metellus destroyed the town of Vacca, and slew all the inhabytants in
reuengyng their treason: and how Turpilius leuetenant or captayn of the town
was beheaded at commandment of Metellus. The.xli. Chapter.
When Metellus understood of this lamentable chance, and treason done at the
town of Vacca: his mind was meruaylously grieved, abashed, and sad withal.
But to the intent that none should parceyue his heuines he withdrue himself
from company a litell time: but after when he had satisfied his mind with
tears, and secret lamentacion. And when his dolor was myxed with wrath and
displeasure against that cruel deed, then hasted he him self with great
cure and diligence to go to revenge this injurious and cruel treason. Anon he
called forth a legyon of souldioures which passed forth the winter with him,
and with them also as many horsemen of the Numidians as he might assemble
which had forsaken Jugurthe and fled to him, whom he thought most trusty.
His legion he arrayed in light harness and easy armoure to the intent to
speed the way more redelye. And because he intended to go about this matter
secretly: therefore pryuely even with the sun going down, he took his
journey and proceeded forw^rde toward Vacca, and labored so that on the next
day after about the third hour he came with his company into a certain
plain a little closed or compassed about with small downs not much higher
then the extremities of the valey. There called he together his soldiers
which were weary for the great labor of their journey, and long way
which they had gone. In so much that they refused to proceed any farther. But
Metellus conforted them saying that the town was but one mile thence. Wherefore
he desired them to suffer and endure the remenante of their labor with
paciente minds, but only to revenge the death of the cityzens and their
fellows which were strong and worthy men: and very miserably murdered.
Moreover he showed to them benynglye the great pray which was ready for
them, if they would manly proceed. Thus weere their minds exalted, conforted,
and enboldened with his words. Metellus seeing that, was glad, anon commanded
the horsemen to proceed in the forward: these horsemen were Numidia^s. And the
fotemen he commanded to keep secret their standerdes, conysances, and badges:
and to go behynd under the shadow of the horsemen as nere together as they
might: and so proceeded he toward the town.

When the citezyns saw an army approach and move toward them: at the beginning
they thought it had been Metellus (as it was in deed) and anon shut the gates
of the town against him. But afterward when they aduysed them well: and saw
that the company which approached made no deuastacion nor destruction by the
feldes nor country as they went. And also when they parceiued that the horsemen
which were in the forward were Numidiens: again the thought that it was
Jugurth with his company. Wherefore with great joy they issued forth of that
town to mete him. Metellus anon parceiued their ignorance and gave a token to
his people to assail them. The horsemen and fotemen knowinge the will of their
captain by blaste of the tru^pettes assailed and ouerthrue the commentie which
came out of the cite against them dispersed over the feldes. Some of the
Romans ran to the gates of the town and entered without resistance: and some
took and invaded the towers of the walls maugre the kepars. Thus the
dispeasure and ire which the Romans had for death of their fellows: and the
hope of prays of the town overcame and excluded their werines which they had
in their iournay thyderwarde. Thus the inhabitants of Vacca enioied treson but
only two days. For only the space of two days continued their falshode and
cruelty unrevenged. For that great and rich cite was all given to havoc and
murdre utterly distroied of the Romans: so that no creature escaped a live
to bost of their treason before committed against the Romans whom they had
so traitorously slain within their cite. Turpilius lieftenant or captain of
the town which (as I have said before escaped only with his life: was called
before Metellus and commanded to answer for himself by what way or means he
escaped, whyther by treason done to the town, or by any other policy. But
because he could but simply excuse nor pourge himself of that which was laid
against him, he first was scourged and beaten and after that his heed stricken
of from his shulders, for that it was thought that if he had not be^raied the
cite he could not have escaped more than any other. Farthermore that great
dystruction of the Romans was ascribed to his negligence or treason. If this
Turpilius had been a Romain he should not have be^ put to death. For the law of
Porcius prohibyted any citezen of Rome to be slain: but if they committed any
great offense, the extreme punyshement by the law was to commyt them to exyle
But this Turpilius inioyed not the priuylege of this law: for as much as he
was no citezyne of Rome but an Italyan of the town of Collace.

How Bomylchar conspyred treason against Iugurth, and by what means this
treason was discovered, and Bomylchar with certain other put to death for the
same. The.xlii. Chapyter.
AT the same time Bomilchar (by whose counsel and mocyon Iugurth before had
begone the composicion with Metellus, which he omitted and brake again for
fear) was co^uersant with Iugurthe, which a little suspected this Bomilchar
of treason. Wherefore he suspectynge him again ymagyned new policy against
(...) deuyses entered his mind and much cure he had in musyng what was most
expedient to be done in the cause. But while he was in this study: suddenly he
fell in a slombre and his weary members desyring rest moved him to fall in
sleep. This Nabdalsa had a servant longyng to him whom he much loved and
trusted, in somuche that no business nor counsel he hid nor kept secret from
him, this counsel of betraynge of Iugurthe only except. When this servant
understood that the said letters were brought to his lord he thought that he
had need of his counsel as he was wont and acustomed to have in other matters:
anon entered in to the tent where his master lay. And seeing him fast in sleep
he took the letters which Nabdalsa had unwisely laid above his heed upon the
pyllowe: and seeing by the superscripcion that the letter came from Bomilchar he
read it to the end. But when he understood the treason: in all have he
addressed with the same letter to Iugurth. Nabdalsa not long after awaked and
missed the letter, wherefore anon he inquired who had been there in his tent.
But in short season came diverse of his lovers from Iugurth, which certifyed
him of all the matter as it was done. Nabdalsa first of al intended to pursue his
accuser: but when he perceived that it was but in vain so to do, consyderinge
that he was all ready in the company of Iugurthe: he went unto Iugurth himself
to the intent to pacify and mitigate his displeasure and wrath. And said unto him
that when the said letters were first deliuerd unto him he had fully purposed
not to keep them secret: but himself to have disclosed them to Iugurth. But
while he was sleping his false servant (in hope to be aduansed thereby had
prevented him his purpose and done the same thing which he himself had fully
purposed to do. Farthermore weeping he besought and required him for all amyte
and love which had been between them and for all the faithful service which
he had done to him in foretyme not to have him suspected in so cruel a deed.
Iugurth answered to these requests of Nabdalsa myldly and soberly lest any
gretter variance might rise thereof: but much contrary to the disposicion of
his mind. For he thought otherwise than he answered: how beit he had well
refrayned and alayed his wrath before with the death of Bomilchar, and of many
other whom he knew first deuisours and partynge fellows of that treason whom
he had caused to be put to death before the coming of Nabdalsa: lest some
battle or other insurrection should have porceded of that business if they had
lived and leuger.

From this day forward Iugurth was never quiet day nor night: so that he
trusted neither place, neither man, nor time: but suspected and mistrusted
every thing His ennemies and his own subjects he dreeded and suspected both
in like and after one manner. He searched and espied every place for dread of
treason douting and suspectyng every sound or noise that he herd. He rested
and lay some night in one place some night in an other, and that in abject and
secret places against the honor of his estate royal. Sometime he rose from
his bed in his sleep in mids of the night and armed himself cring enraging,
and violently smiting against the walls of the chamber: as if he had been in
bataile. So that for the great dread of treason which he had, he took no rest
another slepynge nor wakyng: but was violently vexed and fered like a mad man
without reason or discression.

How Metellus renewed the warte against Iugurth, and how Marius was creat
consul and assygned to execute the war of Numidy at the pleasure of the
comens against the will of all the noble men of Rome. The.xliii. Chapter.
When Metellus by such as sledde bitwene the two parties understood of the
chance of Bomilchar and of his treason disclosed, he began than again to
contend with Iugurth: with open war and thereto hasted all thing necessary
and expedient. And considryng that Marius was continually cryeng on him for the
said license and congy to depart to Rome and also grievous, hateful, and
contrary to him: aduysyng him not much necessary but little mete in so sharp a
besynes. And seeing him ill wyllyng to every thing he granted him lyce^ce at
last: to depart toward Rome as he before had often required and demanded by
peticion.

But as I have said long before, the letters which were send to Rome to the
commens by favorers of Marius were well accepted. For when the commentie had
ouersene them, and by them understood the praising of Marius, and the
dispraysyng of Metellus. They were al inclined utterly to the auau^cement of
Marius and detraccion of the other. The noblenes of Metellus the captain
which was before to his great worship and honor turned now to envy and
hatered against him. But the lownes and vnnoblenes of Marius increased to him
favor specially of the co^mentie which were come of unnoble blood, as he
was. But the diligente favor of both the parties (that is to say of the
states which held with Metellus: and of the commens that held with Marius)
did measure and gyde every thing rather than the good or ill disposcions of the
two adversaries Metellus or Marius. For the co^mens to dye for it concluded to
exalte Marius. And thestates in the same manner labored to keep him under
because he was unnoble borne, and to exalte none save the^ which were come of
noble progeny. Farthermore the masters and head officers of the co^menty which
loved debate at every assemble and congregation of the co^mens, sore blamed
Metellus and despised his deeds, desiring of the co^mens that Metellus might
lose his head: saying that he was so worthy for that he prolonged the war in
Numidy against Iugurth more than need was. But in despising and accusyng
Metellus, they forgot not to commend Marius and exalte him with words somewhat
to much, and more the^ he was worthy in many points. In so much that the
people were so greatly inclined to him with their favor, that all the crafts men
and laborers of the city, and also of the country which had no living save in
the labor of their hands, left their work and business and followed Marius,
freque^ting and resorting to his company. And set more by his auancement and
honor, then by their own profet or auantage, trusting that after if he
obtained the said honor, they should have their living by him. And thus shortly
to speak, the estates and noble men being sore astoined, the co^sulshyp was
committed to Marius a new gentleman whose predecessors before him to such
dignity could never attain, and were counted unworthy. Thus that thing which
many years before that time could never be done nor brought about, was now
brought to effect: that is to say the consulshyppe which was ye most
excellent dignity of Rome was now in hands of ye co^mense, and committed to a
man of base birth Shortly after this, the protector of the commenty named
Lucius. Maulius enquired and demanded of the people whom it would please them
to send into Numidy to fynyshe the war with Iugurth. The most part of the
commentie answered that Marius should have that office and business: how be it a
little before that time the Senatoures had assigned by their ordinance the
province of Numidie to Metellus for his worthy deeds: wherefore now this
ordinance was frustrat and void. For the co^me^ty would have their statuts
executed and fulfilled.

Of the second battle foughten between Metellus and Iugurth, and how Iugurth
lost the batayl and also one of his chief towns named Thala. The.xliiii.
Chapter.
IN the mean time while the enterprise of Marius proceeded thus forward at Rome
Iugurth was sore troubled in his mind for many co^sideracions. First he
considred the loss of many who^ he reputed for his friends till before he
knew their treason of who^ he had many put to death, and many other had fled
from him for fear, some to the Romans, and other some to Bochus king of the
Mauriens. He called also to his mind that without ministers and men of war,
he was not able to execute the war: and moreover he thought it ieoperdous
after so great falsehode and treason of his old friends to prove or assay the
fidelity of new. For these causes and mo like (as I have said before) his
mind was driven to and fro, variable and incerteine in diverse opinions, I so
much that there was no manner thing, no counsel nor no manner man that could
sufficiently satisfy nor please his mind. He changed his iourneys and ways
every day into sundry places for fear of treason. Sometime he addressed him
toward his enemies: and anon after returned into wodes and wildernesses.
Often times he had trust and cofidence in flight: and anon after put his trust
in armor and bataile. He douted whither he might less trust to strength or
truth of his me^ which were with him: so that what ever he purposed to do: or
whither so ever he intended, every thing was contrary to him. But while
Iugurth thus prolonged and tarried: suddenly Metellus with his army appeared in
his sight. Iugurth that parceiuing: set in order and array his Numidiens as well
as he might after the short time which he had thereto. And immidiatly the armies
approached: and the battle began. In that part of the battle where Iugurth
himself was: they strove and resysted a little space but all the other
Numidyens at the first bru^t, concourse or assaut were put to flight with
violence and driven backwarde. The Romans took some of their standeres and
armor, which they fleyng away left behind them: but of their ennemies they
took but few. For the Numidiens in that bataile and almoost in all other
defended themself better with their fete: than with their hands or armoure.
Iugurth at this time: mystrusted his case much more than at any other time
ever before, for the cowardous withdrawynge of his people. Wherefore he
acompanyed himself with the Romans which had forsaken and betrayed Metellus
and fled to him. With them, and with a part of his horsemen he fled in to the
wildernesses thereby: and from thens unto a town named Thala, which was a great
town and a rich: and much of his treasour and of the aparell longing to the
youth of his young children was in the same town. But when Metellus understood
that Iugurth was fled to so rich a town, how beit he knew that between the
town and the next flod thereto was.l. mile space of dry ground void and
without habitacion nevertheless he took in hand to overcome all sharpnes and
difficulty of places: and also to overcome nature, though it seemed impossible
to man's mind. This thing Metellus took in hand in hope to fynishe the
battle much sooner if he might win that town.

Wherefore he commanded that all the beestes which served for carriage, should be
unladen of al such baggage and burden as they carried longing to the
souldyours save only whete and vitayle for the space of.x. days. Also he
commanded some of the bestes to be laded with bottels full of water, and other
vessels mete to be carried with water. Moreover: over all the country he
gathered together as many tame bestes as he could get and them laded with empty
vessels of every sort. Many of them were treene vessel which he had done to be
gathered among the villages of the Numidiens. Farthermore he commanded
thinhabitantes of those marches which after the flight of Iugurth had yielded
them to him that they should make them ready to follow the host every man with
as much water as they might bear. And assigned them a day and place, where
they should be ready under pain of death. When Metellus was come to the said
flod which was fifty mile from the town of Thala, and nerest water thereto (as
I have said before) he did all the beestes to be laded of the same water. And
so went toward Thala, his host set in order and array: so that if any ieopardy
apered he was ever ready at defense but afterward when he was come to that
place where he had appointed the Numidiens to mete him with the water wherewith
they were laded and followed the host. And when his tents were pitched, set,
and defended about with tre^ches, cut tres, bows and stakes after the polycie
of war, sodeinlye from the heaven descended great violence and plenty of
rain water that it was more than sufficient to all the army, as well to men
as beasts. Moreover their vitayles were more plentefull then they trusted or
looked after. For the Numidians which newly were yielded, were so much the more
seruisable and ready to minister every thing necessary to the army. And no
marvel: for every thing is quick at the beginning, which often fades at the
end. But the soldiers and men of war, were more glad to occupye the rain
water for devotion, than such water which was brought to them in vessels by
carriage. For they supposed that their gods loved and favored them, which in
so dry a country, and in such a chance sent to them so great plenty of
water beside provision of their captain. This thing greatly conforted the
minds of them all: and encouraged them with boldness, strength, and
dilygence to overcome all difficulties which remained. This conforte
kyndelynge their minds: they sped them self so forward, that on the next
day after they came to the town of Thala, contrary unto the opinion or
knoweledge of Iugurthe. The inhabitauntes which thought them self surely
defended by the sharpness and difficulty of the place, were sodeinly abashed
and astonished for that great vnwonte and unprovided case. Nevertheless they made
provision to batail as quickly as they might by sufferance of the time. The
Romans addressed them in the same manner. But king Iugurth anon cast in his
mind yt to Metellus was nothing unprovided nor unable to be done: as he that
by his craft, diligence, and polycie: had overcome both wepen, armor, place,
and time. And also nature it self which rules other things longing unto men.
Iugurth this aduysing and reuoluyng in his mind fled privily by night forth
of the town with his children and agreat part of his treasour. Nor after this
time he never tarried in one place paste the space of a day or of a night
fayning that he fled so from one place to an other because of his present
business: but the right cause of his remouyng was for that he feared treason
which he thought best to avoid and eschew by continual chaungyng of places.
For such counsels of treason can not be taken without deliberacion and process
of time, and conueniens or oportunyte of places where princes does long
soiourne and continue.

But when Metellus saw that thinhabitantes were ready to battle, and also that
the town was strongly defended both by craft of man's hands and by nature
of the place. Anon he compased about the town on every side with profounde
dychesse, trenches, and herdels: of sharp stakes the points upward to
thentent that none of thinhabitantes should break out nor escape by night, as
Iugurth had done before: nor that no vitels should be conuayed into them,
whereby they might the longar resyst him and endure the sege. After ward he
commanded scaffoldes to be made about the walls specially in such places as
were most convenient and penteses of sheldes conjoined in manner of vynes to be
driven to the walls upon wheles. And about the said scaffoldes to be cast a
hepe of gravel and stones: and toures of tymbre and bulwarks set upon them
and: other soldiers he assigned to defend the work, and the^ also that
labored there upon. These scaffoldes, pentyses and pauasies were made to
thenteut that under the^ the Romans might undermine the walls without great
peril or damage. On the other side, the garnison and inhabitants hastily
labored to resist the Romans, and to defend them self and their town
manfully. So that on both parties was nothing forgotten, able to be done
touching their defense. But briefly to speak, the Romans weried with much
labor and battle.xl. days after they were come thither, at last wan the
town. But all the pray and riches of the town was destroyed by them which
were within the town in garnison of the Romans which had fled from Metellus
to Iugurth: which specially had assigned them to defend the town. These
traitors when they saw the walls undermined and bruised with diverse ingens
of battle: and their fortune was brought to extremite: and no socours nor hope
remained. Than they assembled and carried together all the treasour and riches
of the town, as gold, silver, with other precious ornaments or jewels into
the palace of Iugurth, and there filled themself with wine and other delycate
meats. And at conclusion when they were full saturate and ingorged: they set
fire on the palaice and wylfully burnt and destroyed the riches, the palayce,
and them self wythall. So that such punyshemente as they dreeded to suffer of
their enemies, they voluntarely suffered the same with their own hands to
avoid the subieccion and danger of their ennemies, by desperate folly and
presumptuous madness.

the custom of sydoni, which they maintained and kept still: somuche the more
easily: by cause they dwelled seperat in the extreme and utter parts of the
country far from the court and frequentacion of kings of Numidy For between
this cite of Leptis and the well inhabited parts of Numidy be many places
deserted and wide wyldernesses vnhabyted for dryenes of the country.

The descripcion of that place of Affryke which is named the Phele^ ^utres,
and for what cause the same place was first so named. The.xlvi. Chapter.
But for as much as by occasyon of this besynes of the cite of Leptis and their
embassadoures, I have made mencyon of their cite and partlye discrybed the
sytuacion of the same. Now me think it a thing convenient, and not unworthy
to recount an excellent and merueylous deed done in the same coostes by two
brethern borne at the cite of Carthage and namely because the place is called
the Phylen auters me thinks it requisyte to declare the cause of that
denominacion. For this place of our history so requires.

What time the Carthagine^ses had in possession and were lords over the most
part of Affryke: at the same season the Cirenenses also were great and famous
of name: and abundant of wealth and riches. Than between the costs of these two
cities was a great and large feld all over spread with sand without division,
perticion, or difference. But between them was neither flod nor mountain,
which might discern the bounds and marches of both their coostes: which
thing caused continual and long war often and great batayls between both
parties. But after that many armies on both sides were overcome, slain, or
put to flight both by land and by sea: and when both people had somewhat
wasted the one the other by spoylyng and murder: than began they to perceive
their own folly on both parts, fearing lest some other nation anon after
should assail them, both the ouercommers, and them that were over come, when
they were wasted and weried with batails and brought to extremity. Wherefore
this co^sidred, they took truce between them both, and to avoid that long
variaunce between them: they made agremente and covenant that messengers or
ambassadors of both parties should depart out of their cities at one certain
day and hour assigned. And that same place where the messengers of both the
cities should meet together, should be for ever after taken for the bowndes and
marches of the country, of both the nations and cities without more co^tencion
or variance. To bring this apointment to effect and conclusion, forth of the
city of Cyren were chosen.ij. for their part and send forth at the day and
hour appointed. And in likewise out of Charthage were send two brethern named
Phelen, which swyftely sped them in their journey. But the Cirenenses went
much more slowely, whether it so fortuned by negligence or chance I know but
little the truth. But this is known for certain, that about those costs
tempeste of wynd and wether is wont to let men and prolonge their journey in
likewise as upon the sea, and that for this cause. For when by those even
places wide and bare without any thing growyng on them: the wynd ryseth and
styrreth the small sand from the ground, the same sand moved by great
violence of the wind is wont to fill the faces, mouths and eyes of such as
pass that way with dust and sand. And thus often by lettyng of their sight
their iournay is prolonged and hyndred. But after when the Cyrenenses saw
themself some what over slow and late in their journey: they fered
punisheme^t at their retournynge home for their negligence. And blaming they
accused the Carthaginenses obiectyng and saying that they had come forth of
their city before the time assigned: and thus they troubled all the matter and
brake the ordynance. But shortly to speak these Cirenenses concluded rather to
suffer death and to do any thing possible than to return home again
overcome. Wherefore the Carthaginenses desired some other condition or
apointment to be made indifferent and equal between both the parties. The
Cirenenses consented thereto and put the Carthaginenses in choice whyther they
would be quick buried in that same place which they desired for their marches
and bounds: or else that the Cirenenses under the same condition should proceed
forward to that place which they desired for their marches and there to be
quick buried under the same manner. The.ii. brethren both named Phelene allowed
and granted the condition subduyng and abandonyng their bodies to death for
the profet and well of their country and cite of Carthage: and so were they
buried quick. Wherefore the Carthaginenses in the same place where they were
buried raised and hallowed.ii. auters in worship and remembrance of these two
brethern which set more by encrese of their country: than by their own lives.
These auters to this present day be called the Phylene auters after the name of
the.ii. brethern named Phylenis there under buried, as said is for well of their
country. Also beside this memorial within the cite of Carthage were many other
things ordained to the great honor of the^ and remembrance of their worthy
deed. But now I will leave this matter and return to my purpose.

How Iugurth assembled a new army of the rude Getulians against the Romans,
and how he associated to him Bocchus king of the Mauriens to strength him in
battle against Metellus. The.xlvii. Chapter.
When Iugurth had lost the city of Thala, one of the strongest cities of his
land (as said is before) then he considered well that in all his kingdom was no
place strong enough to resyst the might of Metellus. Wherefore he hasted him
with a small company through deserts and great wyldernesses flying from his
own country. And at last he came to the land of Getulia which is a manner of
people, rude, wyld, and without order or manners: and at that season naught
knowing of the preeminent honor and fame of the Romain empire. Of this people
Iugurth assembled a multitude together, and by little and little enduced and
taught them by costume and exercise to follow the order of chiualry, to keep
array, to ensue their standerds, to obaye the commandments of their
captains, to decerne and have knowledge of the signifiyng of ye soundes of
tru^pettes, and to observe al other points belonging to warfare and chiualry.
These things with other like necessary to bataile, Iugurthe ceased not to
prepare and ordain with all diligence.

Moreover he provoked to his favor and feloweshyp by great rewards and much
greater promises such as were most nere frindes to Bocchus king of the Mauriens,
by whose help he him self went to king Bocchus and desired him in his quarrel
with him to war against the Romans. To which request of Iugurth Bocchus
agreed so much the more for as much as at the first beginning of the same
war, this Bocchus sent unto Rome ambassadors to desire of the Romans
amity, and a bond of continual peace between him and them. But
notwithstanding that this peticion and peace was much expedient and necessary
to the Romans for diverse consideracions, and namely because of this war. Not
the less it was not granted by me me of a few such as at Rome blinded with
avarice, were wont to sell for money every thing both honest and dishonest. Also
before this time the daughter of Iugurth was spoused to the said Bocchus. But
this bond of friendshyp or affinity among the Numidiens and Mauriens, is
reputed but of little or none effect, because they are wont every man to have
diverse and mani wives according to their substance and riches. Some.x. and some
mo, after as they are of ability or power to meinteine. But ye kings, because
they are of most power and substance, therefore they have mo than other. Thus is
their mind and favor distracte and diversely divided from all their wives for
the multitude of the^, and because they have so many that they reserve none for
their special bedfelow. Wherefore they al ar reputed vile and little set by
after one manner. Thus the affinity between these.ij. kings, Iugurth and
Bocchus, was little set by and small auayled in this business. Not withstanding
both they and their hosts came together in one place appointed thereto: where
after they had given and taken faith and truth one to other of fidelity to be
observed between the^. Iugurth inhaunced and lifted up the mind of Bocchus
with his words: saying that the Romans were unjust, grounded in avarice
without suffisance or measure: and common enemies to every man and to every
country: and that they had as much quarrel against Bocchus as against him, and
one self cause to war against the^ both, and also against many other nations:
which cause was but only the pleasure of great lordshyp and riches. So that for
the same cause al kyngdoms to the^ were adverse and contrary, and that he him
self to the^ was enemy for ye same cause. And not long before that time the
Carthaginenses, and afterward Perses king of Macedony were subdued and undone
by the Romans without any just title or cause of bataile, save only ambicion
and envy which the Romans had against the^. And that in time to come every
nation which should have wealth and riches should become enemies to the Romans
for their inordinate pride and insaciable couetise.

With these words and other like, Iugurth moved the mind of Bocchus against
the Romans. In so much that anon a day was appointed between both the
kings to proceed forth together to the town of Cyrtha, and to assail the
same with both their powers conjoined. This town they purposed first of all
to besiege, because Metellus had left within the same town prays and
prisoners which he had taken of Iugurth. And also much of his own
ordinance had he left there to avoid impedimente in his voyage. Thus Iugurth
thought most expediente to do: For if he might win the town by assault
before the rescous of Metellus, he thought that should be most to his honor
and profit. Or else if the Romayne captain Metellus, and his army should
come to succor the town, than thought he that there both him self and
Bocchus should give battle to Metellus. Iugurthe for craft and subtyltie
hasted thereto so much the moare to tangle Bocchus in the war before any
place should be moved between him and the Romans. And lest the same Bocchus by
prolo^ging of the time might rather incline to peace than to war after he at
leasour should have taken better counsel and aduisement. For Iugurth suspected
at beginning that Metellus in process of time would desire this Bocchus not to
medyll in this war assistyng the part of Iugurth nor mentayning his cause

How Metellus used him self heryng that these two kings were confederate
against him, and how after he was certified that the province of Numidy was
assigned to Marius the new consul: he ceased the war for the nonce.
The.xlviii. Chapter.
When Metellus knew that the two kings were associate together: he thought
not to fight with them rashely without provision nor in every place for his
advantage or not as he was wont to do often times before after the first time
that he had overcome Iugurth. But within his feldes well and surely defended he
kept him self abydinge the coming of the two kings: and that not far from
the town of Cirtha. This did he thinking it best to know the might, manners,
and conditions of the Mauriens first or he would fight with them, because the
were but new enemies and therefore their manners unknown to him. And when he
saw his best auantage than thought he to give them bataile.

In the mean time while Metellus tarried the coming of the two kings:
letters were brought unto him from Rome: which certefied him that the province
of Numidi, was committed and given to Marius the new consul. For he had herd
long before this time that the said Marius was elect consul: but this was the
first time that he understood the province of Numidy committed to him. For
this cause was Metellus moved and displeased much more than longed to measure
or honesty. In somuche that he could neither refrain his eyes from weeping nor
measure his tongue from speking ill by Marius. This Metellus was a synguler noble
and worthy man in all other co^dicions: but the displeasure of his mind he
took over womanly and tenderly to his heart, and namely in this cause. Which
condition: some reputed to proceed of a proud heart of Metellus. And other some
thought it no marvel though his noble heart were moved and kindled with anger,
for this injury and wrong done to him. And many said that Metellus took so
great sorrow and displeasure: because the victory which he had almoost
optayned should be pulled out of his hands his self having the labor and
parill, and an other man the tryumphe and honor. But to be plain in the matter
and indifferently to write: it was not unknown to the wisest Romans, but that
the dignite, auancement, and honor of Marius grieved Metellus much more tha^
did his own injury. And that he would not have taken it so heuely if the
province of Numidy which was taken from him had been given to any other noble
man than to Marius. Wherefore Metellus was let from his first besines for the
said displeasure so that he purposed not to vex himself from thensforth with
out thank or profet. And also he thought it folly to take in hand the charge
of another man's matter to his own paryll, labor, and pain. Wherefore he
send messangers to the king Bocchus, desiring him not to become ennemy to the
Romans without occasion.

And saying that he was yet in such case that he might adioine with the
Romans fellowship love, and amity: which should be much better to him and
more profitable. And how beit he trusted greatly in his power, richesse, and
treasour: yet ought he not to change certain things, for things incertayne.
For every battle to begin is easy and light: but it is a very hard thing to
end the same when it is ones begone. The beginning and ending thereof: is not
always in the power of one same man. For war may be begone of a cowarde or of
any other wretch: but it can not be left of again, nor ceased but when it
pleases him which is strongest and is master having the upper hand. And
finally he had him better to provide for himself and for his kingdom than he
began to do: and not to adioyne nor myngle his goods, treasour, and fortune:
which were in estate royal florishyng with the goods and fortune of Iugurth
which were lost and distroyed to the uttermost. The ambassadors of Metellus
came to king Bocchus and showed him their capitains will: as is said before
under such sentence. To the which words of Metellus Bocchus answered again
benignely and mekely enough sayng that he desired nothing more than peace:
save, that he had pity and compassion of the aduers and miserable fortune of
Iugurth, but if the same Iugurth might be suffered also to have friendship and
amyte with the Romans and forgiveness: than said Bocchus that he would gladly
agree to every thing desired of Metellus, and every thing should be accorded
between them. The captain Metellus heryng this answer of Bocchus again sent
messangers to him replyeng against his requests and saying that some of his
peticions were against justice and reason: also Metellus by these ambassadors
desired many other things of Bocchus of whom Bocchus granted and allowed some,
and other some of them he denied. After this manner the time ouerpassed and
proceeded forth, massangers often going and coming between them both: so that
by such manner the war and battle remained untouched and depended not meddled
with: as Metellus did greatly coueyt and desire in mind because he would keep
sure that laud which he had won: and also for that to his own paryll and
damage he would not auantage nor auance Marius: in a thing which to him
belo^ged.

But here will I leave to speak of Metellus, and return to speak of Marius
which contrary to the will of the noble men of Rome was creat consul by favor
of the co^mens: likewise as I have written before.

Of the great ordinance and preparacion which Marius the new consul made
against Iugurth, and for the war of Numidy. The.xlix. Chapter.
But Marius (as I have said before) was elect consul, at great desire and
instaunce of the common people: which also committed to him the province of
Numidy. Marius seeing himself thus auanced: where he was ever against the noble
men of Rome before, now was he specially fires of mind, and stately. And besy
to displease and hurt the states: some time one by one, and other wyle
altogther. He often times boasted and said that he had gotten the consulshyp of
them maugre their will, as if it were a pray or spoylinge gotten of his
ennemies: and of men overcome. Many other boastynge words spoke he to his own
commendacion, and to great displeasure and anger unto the estates of Rome. But
in the mean time he forgot not to prepare every thing necessary to the war:
whereof the charge rested on him to execute the same against Iugurth from
thensforth. He demanded of the senators and co^mens new supplement of
soudyors to repare and restore the army which was in Numidy with Metellus. For
many of the^ were slain and many deed of sickness: thus was the army sore
deminished. He called also for socours of such nations as marched to thempire.
And of kings which were co^federate and had conjoined feloweshyp with the
Romans. Moreover he raised up in Italy and nere about Rome, as many as were
strongest and bold men's bodies. And namely such as he himself had proved
before in war: and such as in warfare were proved by deeds: and not such as
were boosted by fame. And namely old souldeours which had long haunted the
war and were pardoned there of. So that it was in the power of no man to
constrain them to war without their own fre assent: because that they had
continued still in war the season to them assigned of their captains. These
treated Marius with so fair flateryng and painted words, that thy were ready
to go with him in warfare. And how beit that the senators were contrary to him:
yet durst they nothing deny unto him belonging to his business: but gladly and
with good will they decreed that he should raise and choose souldyours to
fulfill the nombre of them which were lost in bataile in the country of Numidy.
But this did they for no great, love which they had to Marius: for they thought
that he should lose either the execucion of the battle which he intended with
Iugurth, or else the favor of the people which would refuse to go forth to
war. So that if Marius constrained them, their old love might turn into new
malice and hatered against him. But this thing was trusted but in vain of the
Senatoures, for the most part of the commons had an inestimable desire to go
to battle with Marius. For every man cast in his mind to be inryched by
prays and spoylynges of war. And that more is, to return home again
victoures with much honor and triumph. These things and other like they
considered, which caused them gladlye to follow Marius: and also Marius did
not a little enbolden and conforte their minds with his exhortacion. For when
every thing which he desired of the Senators was confirmed and decreed by
the^. And when Marius should assemble his soldiers, he thought to put them in
conforte by exhortacion, and also to trouble and displease the states of Rome
as he was wont to do, and to chafe their minds. Wherefore he assembled and
called together a great company of the common people, and spoke to them by
exhortacion and confortyng of them as hereafter ensues.

The oracion or exhortacion of the consul Marius had to the commen people of
Rome before his voyage into Numydye, which exhortacion is demonstratyue
contaynyng the laud and praise of Marius, and dispraise and blame of the noble
men of Rome. The.l. Chapter.
Right worthy citizens, I know well that many of these estates of ancient
name have not the^ self behaved after one manner of condition in desiryng of
you honoradle dignities and great offices, and in administracion and gouernyng
of them after they have optayned (...) before they optayned promocyo^, to
the intent to come thereby to honor and dignite. But where as I have passed all
my life in right good occupacions by continual custom it is roted in me to do
well: and this custom is turned with me into nature. Treuth it is: that ye
have commanded me to war against Iugurth: which thing these noble men
takes very grievously. I require you consider and dyscus in your minds and in
your inward consideracion ponder ye: whyther it be better, more necessary and
expedient to chanuge the same your commandment again: and to send forth
some other of that sort of ancient gentil men unto this business against
Iugurth or else to any other like. Send forth a noble man of old auncetry: in
honor and remembrance of who^ many images may be made and erecte or set up on
hye. But of polycie of chiualry or warfare is he utterly ignorant and inexpert.
Will ye change your purpose and send forth such one to warfare at pleasure of
these gentylmen, as who says: that is best to be done for this cause. To
the intent that in so great a matter and wighty business: such a captain more
ignorant and ferefull than any of all his souldyours, shall be chosen of you
which anon after shall choose forth again some one of the commen people to be
his master: to inform and teache him in such besynes as to his office and
charge belongs himself being ignorant of every thing necessary to be done.
By this mean it often fortuneth: that he whom ye ordain to be captain and
commander of your army: does chose an other to be captain and commander
over himself. In somuche that (if ye indifferently judge) he: whom ye chose
for captain is much more mete to be made a simple souldyoure, than a
captain over other. And also worthy citizens, I know somewhat of these
noble men so far out of order, that when they have been made consuls, then
have they given them self to reading of acts of their elders and
predecessors: and of the greeks precepts of chivalry: which doutles may well
be called men without order for this consideracion. For they should by due
order first learn to rule their office before they should take upon them the
charge thereof. But they do contrary. First they take charge of the office,
and than after learn to rule it by ways inordinate: how be it every wise man
will first learn to govern an office before he desire or take upon him the
rule thereof. But these estates contrarely demean them self. Thus worthy
citizens, compare me new gentlemen with their immoderate pride, and take
diligent consideracion which is best: to be not gentle of birth, and lowely
and gentle of manners: or else to be gentle of blood, and proud and ungentle
of manners. Of such things as they be wont to hear and to read, somewhat
have I seen, and some I my self have done. I have learned that by exercise of
chiualry, which they have learned by readyng. Now judge and consider ye whether
is better of deeds or works, of reading or doing. They dispyse my noueltye
of honor and unnoble lynage, and I despise the vncraftynesse and slouthe of
them. My happy fortune is objected of them against me as to rebuke, but shame
and dishoneste behaueour may be objected and laid against them in rebuke. Is
it not truth that every man is come of one like nature. I consider and know
well that one man is not better nor more noble the^ an other, but if it be by
his wisedo^, good manners, virtue and strength. (...) other men. And wherefore
think ye do they this? Planely I suppose because I have no images of my
progenitors exalted in remembrance of them as these gentylmen have: and
because my nobleness is but new and springyng. But theirs is ancient and by
their dysorder decaynge. But certainly I count it more better and honorable to
be root and begynner of nobleness unto all my progeny and to leave the same
unto my branches: than to corrupt and desyle noblenes received of my progeny as
many of these gentylmen do. Forsooth I am not ignorant but that if these estates
were now present and should answer to my words their speech should be
abunda^tly painted, ornate and elegant enough. But sith they cease not to blame
and reuyle with their lewd words in every place both you and me for this your
great office which ye have given unto me: it has not pleased me to be still
nor to keep secret their fautes: lest some might count me culpable and worthy
their rebukes: by reason of mine indyfcrete patience and silence. Nevertheless
sothely their words can not grieve nor hurt me: after the conscience of mine
own mind. For if they say truth they can naught say but good and worship by
me: but if they will nedesly on me my manners, my living, and co^uersacio^ is
such that I shall overcome their words and prove their iniust accusementes
feigned and false. But since your counsel is blamed of these noble men because
ye have committed to me this great honor and greater business: consider ye in
your minds diligently and often whether ye shall need to repent you of this
deed or not. To say truth I can not host mi self of the images of my
progenitors nor I can not recounte unto you the triumphs or consulshyps of
mine auncetry. But if the matter required: I could well show unto you spears,
standerdes, horse, trappers, harness, with many other rewards of chivalry:
some given to me of the Emperor, and some of other captains for mine acts
in battle. And other some which with mine hands I have won of the enemies
of the empire. I could also if it neded show you in the fore part of my body
manifold scarres of many and large wounds which I have taken in good worth
for defense of our country and common weal. These be my images which I can
show. This is my nobleness, not left to me by heritage (as theirs is to them)
but noblenes which I have won and gotten with great and sore labors of my
body, and peril of my life.

My words be not ordered in ornate langage, nor my speech painted with
rethoricke like theirs, for I set little thereby. My virtue shows it self
plainly enough without glosed or painted words. But these noble men must
of necessity have craft for to cover their shameful and vngoodlie deeds,
with these eloquente words their craftye and rethorike speech. Nor as for me,
I never learned the greek langage, which thing these estates obiecte against
me as a great fault. But to be plain: my pleasure was never much to learn
such things, which have little auayled unto the teachers or lerners of the
same, neither to acquisicion of virtue nor expulsion of vice. But I have
learned and am taught in other thygnes much better and more profitable to the
common weal, as to assail and strike mine enemies, to dispoyle their
ordinance and vytailes, to chafe their garniso^: nothing to dread nor fear
save an ill name, to endure and take in good worth ye pleasure of the somer and
the hardness of the winter both in like: to lie upon the ground, to endure
honger and labor both together. Therefore I shall exhort and inform my
soldiers with these precepts, which I my self have learned, used and
assaied. Nor I shall not handle or entreat them by craft to thintente they
may auaunce me with riches: nor use them sharply and my self plesantly: but
in every difficulty I shall be their example of labor: nor I shall not put the
labor to them and take the worship to me. This order is profitable. Thus ought
a captain demean him among his soldiers, and namely among worthy citizens.
For when a man lives delicatly him self, and drives his soldiers to the
peril of bataile by punishment or other rigor: he is not to be called a
captain or ruler of an army: but rather a proud lord or tira^nous opressor
of citezins. Our elders worthily behauing them self after this manner, have
made noble and excellent and enriched this common weal, and the^ self also.
But these states which now live, trusting to be honored by the worthiness of
their progenitors, they them self unlike of conditions despise us, and have us
in disdain which follow the manners of their progenitors. And every hye office,
and all honors they challenge and demand of you not by their merits, but as
it were of duty and heritage. But sothly the over proud men err much from the
truth. For though their progenitors and ancestrie have left to them every
thing which to them was possible to leave: as riches, patrimony, and their
images, for remembrance and example of them and of their worthy deeds.
Nevertheless their virtue have they not left unto them, nor they could not
keep it: for that only can neither be given unto them in reward, nor
received of any man. These gentelmen say that I am a man without manners and
vnclenlye of behaueour. And why? Forsoothe because that I prepare and dress
not curiousely many delicious bankets so superfluous and deinteous as they do:
and because I have no iougler nor dyzar with me to move sportes and dissolute
laughing: nor no more curious cook than one of the vilage longyng to rural
people, which things to have as these gentlemen have, it pleases me not to
knoweledge. For I never had pleasure in such things. For I have herd of my
father and of other incorrupte and well disposed men, that such deliciousenes
and curiosity, belongs unto women: and that labor and business belongs
unto men. Every good man thinks it more convenient to have plenty of worship
than of riches. And more honor it is to a good man to have the walls of his
house garnyshed and ouercouered with armoure wherewyth he may defend his
country, his friends, and him self, then with rich ornaments of curious
work of no profit save only the syghte and vain regard thereof. But sithe
these gentlemen thus obiecte such matters to me: let them continue always in
such vices which lyketh them, and that they have ever reputed so dear. Let
them inclyne to voluptuositie: as daunsyng, singyng, bankettynge, playing, to
lechery to glotonye, and dronkennes. For in such vices have they spend their
youth: in the same let them pass forth their age, utterly subdued to the
bealy, to sleep, to ydlenes, and subject to lusts of the vilest part of the
body. Let them leave the sweat of fyghtinge, the peril of death, the
blynding of duste in battle, and other like perilles unto us, to whom these
be more acceptable than their feestes and voluptuous bankettes or other vile
pleasurs. But they do not so, they be not contented. For after ye such ungoodly
and vile men have dishonested themself, by their foul deeds: than be they
ready to take away the rewards of good men unto them self. Thus (against
all right) lechery and sloth most cursed vices does no hurt to such as
occupyeth them: but they be utter destruction to the commen weal, and commens
which be innocent and vnculpable.

But sith I have made answer to these dysordred gentylmen: and that moderately
after my custom and condition and not so largely as their cursednesse and
vices ar worthy. I shall speak now a few things touching the commen well.
And first of al have ye good trust and esperance touching the besines of
Numidy. For ye have now moved and avoided every thing whereby Iugurth was
defended from beginning of the war unto this time: that is say the couetyse
of Calphurnius, and of Albinus: the vncraftynes and folly of Aulus: and the
pride of Metellus. By these found Iugurth socour hitherto but al these be
avoided now. Moreover ye have there an army which knows the country, but
verily it is more noble and manly than fortunate or happy. For agreat part there
of is wasted and spent (and that wors is infected and corrupted: what by the
avarice and by the vnboldnes and cowardyse of their captayns. Wherefore ye
which be of lusty age and mete to endure the hardness of war and battle:
now labor ye with me, and take ye in hand defense of the commen weal. Nor
let none of you be afraid nor abashed for misfortune of the other soldiers
which have foughten there before this time nor of the pride of their captayns.
For I my self as counselor of your besynes and fellow of your peryls shall
be present with you in every business both in your iournays and in your
battle also. So that I shall govern you and my self without difference, and
under one form in every point. And verily by help of the gods we shall
within short season obtain all auantages and commodities which any man may
wyn in battle, as prays, victory, with immortal laud and worship. And
certaynlie if these pleasours and auantages were in dout or hard to obtain
(as they be not). Nevertheless it were convenient to every good man) as ye be)
to socour and defend the commen weal of their country fro distruccion and
dishonor. For certaynlie there was never man which obtained immortal laud
nor everlasting name by cowardice or sleuth. Nor there was never wise father
which would wyshe his children or sons to live ever: but only that they might
live so long as they behaved them self worthelye in goodness and honesty: and
so to pass forth their life as natural course requires.

Worthy Romans: I would speak more unto you if I understood that strength
could be increased to feeble or fearful men by words: but it is not so.
Wherefore me seems that I have said enoughe and abundantly to noble and
bold hearted men, as my trust is to prove you.

How Marius after his exho^tacion ended, anon laded ships with ordinance
of war, and send forward with the same one Manlyus his embassadoure: and
how he him self anon after followed with all his company. And how he
behaved him self in Numydy at the first beginning. The.li. Chapter.
When Marius had vttred and ended his words under this form: and wha^ he
saw all the minds of the commens inclined to the war in trust of victory and
praise. Than anon without more delay he caused ships to be charged with
viteyls, and treasour for the souldyours wages, with armor, wepyn, and all
other things necessary to war. And commanded one named Aulus Manlius,
which was assigned ambassador to him, to depart forward with the same
ships so charged. In the mean season Marius himself remained at Rome a
little time: and chose forth souldyors such as him thought most expedient: and
not after the custom of the old Romans his predecessors nor after
institucion of the ancient captayns, which had ordered a certain manner of
people of whom souldyours should be chosen for warfare in time convenient. But
co^trarywyse Marius admytted every man indifferently which was any thing
lyckely and had pleasure to go with him. And many such he admitted also which
were poor and not suffered to go warfare before: lest their poverty might have
constrained them rather to fall to robbery than to deeds of chiualry. How beit,
it was inacted of the old Romans that such excused of war for cause above
said: should pay a certain sum of money pretaxed toward the wages of such as
laufully were admytted to war. Marius suffered none of these to pay any thing
at all: but elect many of them for his souldyours. Many of the Romans
surmysed that Marius elected unto war these abject persons: for want of other
good souldyours. Some other demed that he so did for favor, ambicion, and
parcialite: because this sort of people assisted and honored him by
auauncement at beginning of his promocion. And also men co^sidred that unto a
man desirous of dignity and power: the most nedy men be most mete and
behouable. For such nedy wretches he most auenturous: for they have naught to
lose and always trust in auauncement by auenturinge themself. And therefore they
judge every thing which they do: good, honest, and laudable: if any auantage
be thereto appendant. Thus dout they no peril so that they may come thereby to
promocion. At last Marius departed from Rome with somewhat gretter nombre than
was granted and decreed to him of the senators. Within few days after that:
he took shyppyng and arrived in the prou^nce next unto Affrike under the
Romans at a town named Vtica. The army which was there with Metellus, was
delivered to him by one Publius Rutilius, which was ambassador with the said
Metellus. For Metellus himself fled the sight of Marius b^ cause he would not
se that with his eyes, which he could not endure to here. But when Marius had
restored and fulfilled the legions of his souldyors and the cohortes for the
subsidyes and rescous. Than went he into a plentiful place of Numidy which
was full of prays. All that he took there: he gave freely in reward to his
souldyours. This done: he assailed such castles and towns which were but febly
defended with men and walls. He had many batayls and light skyrmishes: and
many other things he did in other place not with much difficulty. In the
mean time the new soldiers were ready manly fighting without fere: and seeing
that they which fled were other taken or slain: therefore they aduysed them well
that the strongest and boldest was most sure of all. They considred well that it
stood them in hand to defend with wepyn and armor their liberty, their
country, their friends, and all other things longing to their health and
honor. Thus labored they for glory, laud, and riches which they optained:
so that within short season the old soldiers and the new increased together
cherishing and infourmynge one an other till their virtue and boldness was like.
But when the two kings Iugurth and Bocchus understood of the coming of
Marius: they divided their hoostes and went in sonder into diverse places where
no man could attain to them for difficulty of the places. This was done by
counsel of Iugurth. For it pleased him so to do trustinge that within short
space the Romans would be spread abroad in spoilinge and than thought he to
assail them in every place when they were most without fear at liberty, at
large, and unprovided: as men ar want to be specially when their ennemies
behaueth them as if they were affraied. Than often be the victours improuident
and less circumspect.

How Metellus the old consul returned to Room, and of the worthy and
valyaunte behaueour of Maryu^ against Iugurth, and of his great acts at his
beginning. The.lii. Chapter.
IN the mean time Metellus returned to Rome: which contrary to his opinion was
received with glad minds of the Romans and after that the envy which
Marius had moved against him was assuaged and ouerpassed: he was like dear and
beloved both to the commens and Senators.

But Marius on his part applied and took heed to his own business and his
enemies also without sloth: but with great wisdom. He perceived well and
knew what was good and ill for auantage on both sides. He caused the ways and
iourneis of the two kings to be daily searched and espied. He prevented and
interrupted their counsels, provisions and guiles. He suffered nothing to be
unprovided and vnredie on his side: but on the other side and party of his
enemies, he suffered nothing to be sure or provided: for alwaie he prevented
their provisions and pursued them. Often while Iugurth and the Getulians
spoiled the Numidiens which had yielded them self to the Romans, Marius was
ready in their way and valiantly assailed them, and ouerthrewe many of the^
while they were dispersed abroad and flying away for fear. And also not far
from the town of Cirtha, he made Iugurth him self so trust in his flighte,
that for have to ren away: he left his armor behind him. But when Marius
considered that his acts were only glorious and excellent without any
auantage, and that he might not execute bataile with Iugurth for his
unsteadfastness. and mouinge from place to place, he considered in mind and
ordained him ready to besiege the cities of the contreys one after another. And
namelye such as either of men or of place were necessary and behouable to his
enemies, and contrary or hurtefull to him. This did he, thinking that if
Iugurthe without disturbaunce suffered him so to do, he should either be
spoiled and bereft of his cities, ordinance, socoures, and refuge: or else he
must abide the fortune of batail, and strive for ye mastry in plain field.
Bocchus the king of the Mauriens had often send messengers before unto
Marius: saying that he would gladly come into favor, amyte, and friendship of
the Romans: and bydding Marius not to dout him as an ennemy nor to fear any
thing longing to an enemy to be committed of him against the Romans. It is but
little known for truth whether Bocchus fained this thing to the intent that
his coming to battle unknown and unproven might be to Marius more grievous:
or else whether he was wont by unstableness of mind to change peace sometime for
war: and sometime war for peace. But Marius the consul (as he had purposed
before) dru him unto the castles and towns which were walled and defended:
and fiersly assailed the^. Anon he turned many of them from his ennemies to
him, some by strength and violence, some by fear: and other some by promising
and giueng of rewards and prodicion of their captains. But at first beginning
he meddled but with mean castles and towns thinking that Iugurth should come
to defend and socour his people and towns: and so come into danger of the
Romans. But when Marius herd that Iugurth was far thens and occupied in other
besinesses: than thought he not to lose his time: but to adventure on gretter
things wherein was more hard besinesse and labor and honor. Wherefore he
intended to besiege the cite of Capsa, which was a great cite, strong, and
rich.

How Marius wan the great and rich City named Capsa. and how he utterly
destroyed the same and gave all the riches thereof to hauock^ (...) his
soldiers. The.liii. Chapter.
AMong the most widest and thickest wyldernesses of Numidy was this great and
rich cite named Capsa: which (as men say) was first bylded by that Hercules
which was borne in the land of Libya and not by Hercules the son of Jupiter
and Alcumena Thinhabitours of this city were ruled by Iugurthe peasably and
easily put to no charges nor besinesse, and therefore were they most true and
faithful to him. They were defeneded against al ennemies: not only with
walls, armor, and men: but also with much stronger defense of the difficulty
and hardness of the place and country nere about them. So that it was in manner
impossible that any army could come nere the^ for want of water and scarcite
of vitels. For except the feldes and place nere to the city, all the other be
void and wast ground and desert without habitacion, vneyred, barayne and dry
without water. All full of serpents: which were somuche more violent and
fires for lack of meat and sustenance, as al other wild beasts be wont to
inrage for honger. And moreover the myscheuous and perilous nature of serpents
is more kindled to raging and vexed, with thyrst, tha^ with any other thing:
which thyrst they could not quench there for want of water. Wherefore neither
man nor beast might surely pass by the^. When Marius cast al these
difficulties in his mind his heart was persed with a merueylous desire to win
this cite, both for that it was much hurtful to him: and profitable to
Iugurth, and also because it was herd to do and much honor might be gotten
in wynninge thereof. And moreover because Metellus the other consul before him
had won the cite of Thala, with great honor and glory: which of sytuacion was
not valyke to this cite: neither unlike in defense. Save that not far from the
walls of Thala were a few fontaynes: but about this city of Capsa was no
water, well, no^ fontayne: save one and that was within the walls of the city
always full of water. All other which dwelled with out the walls, as in the
suburbs: occupied but rain water. The inhabitants of that country and of all
the remenant of Affrike, which were far from the sea and rude people could
much the better endure this scarsite of water and thirst: for this cause. For
the most part of them were fed with milk and venyson not loking after salt,
sauces, nor other such things as be norishinges or prouocatiues to glotony.
They took meat and drink only to slake their hunger, and to quench their
thirst: and not without measure to provoke themself to pleasure of the flesh,
as many christen men do now in our days: which make of their belly their god.
And eat not to live: but they live to eat contrary to man's life, and
utterly incline to bestialite. O cursed glotony let us christen men learn here
of panyms to eschew thee: which wastest the body and goods: damnest the
soul: and art mother and norice of all vices. But to return to my purpose:
this Marius after that he had serched every thing by his espyes, he proceeded
in his interprise and purpose (as men thought) helped of the gods. For
against so many and hard difficulties he could not have made sure provision by
counsel of man nor by his own private wit: as he which had impediment and was
let not only by sharpnes of the country: but also by lack and scarcite of
wheat and of al other corn. For the Numidiens intends more, to norishe
pasture for beasts than to labor or eire the ground for corn. And also they
had brought together all the seed and corn of the year before into strong
holds as their king Iugurth had commanded them and moreover at that season
the feldes on every side were dry and bare without corn: and no marvel. For
it was about the extremite or later end of somer. Not withstandyng all these
difficulties and sharpnesses Marius made provision enough as the matter
required. First he committed all the bestes which he had taken in pray in
foretyme unto the horsemen, which of their own will followed him to war: or
were send to him for help by friends of thempire. Marius commanded the^ to
take charge to drive forth these beasts. Than sent he Aulus Maulius
ambassador of the host to a town named Laris, and all the cohortes of his
souldyours with him which were fotemen and light harnysed for to keep the
treasour of the souldyours wages and vitayles: which he had left in the same
town. Marius kept his counsel of this interprise so secret that none of all
his company hye nor low knew of his purpose nor what he intended. But when
Manlius and his company should depart toward Laris Marius dissimuled with them
saying that he would stray abroad in Numidye in rouynge and afterward within
few days: he and his company would come also to the same town of Laris, laded
with prays of his enemies. This done he departed toward a flod named Tana: no
creature lively knowing of his purpose. And every day he distribued in his
iournayes among his host.xlii. heed of oxen for vitayle, which he commanded
to be divided by even portion among them by hunders and half hunders
together: deuidynge vitayls to every company after their nombre. And in the
mean season he charged bottels and bowges to the hydes of the same beast and
of other ledder in gerate nombre. Moreover he eased their scarcity of wheat
and other corn, by wise provision. And without knoweledge of al his company
he made good provision of every thing which might be necessary unto his army
in time of need. At conclusion the syxte day after when they were come to the
said flood of Thana, thither was brought a mighty multitude of bottels and
bowges made of leather. There pitched they their tents with easy labor and
small defense. Than refreshed they them self with meat and drink, and eased
them a certain space. This done, Marius commanded them that every man should
be ready to proceed forward even with the su^ne going down, and that every
man should only lade him self and his beasts with water in the said bowges
and bottels, leaving al other carriage, burdens and baggage there behind them
in their tents under the custody of other soldiers thereto assigned. After
this when he saw his time, he departed forth from his tents with his company,
and labored all the night long in his journey. The day after following he
rested in a secret and couerte place. In the same wise behaved he him self
the night next ensuing, and in the third night much before the day light, he
entered into a fair and large field full of small hills and downs, no more
but two mile space from Capsa. And there he tarried with all his host in the
most priuiest manner abidyng the day light. But as soon as the day light began
to appear, many Numidiens issued forth of the town: some to disport them
self, and some about their business, nothing fearinge nor suspecting of their
enemies. When Marius saw that, anon with all have he sent his horse men to the
town, and with them as many fotemen in light harness as were most swyft and
spedy. Whom he commanded to ren with all have and boldly and valiantly to
assail the town: and to besyege the gates. Than after he himself followed
spedely: but with good head and aduisement: not sufferynge his souldyours in
the assaut nor in the way thyderwarde to fall to robbing nor prays by spoiling
of their enemies. When thinhabitantes of the town k^ewe hereof: their case was
unsure, their fear great and horrible: for the sodeyne chance of them was
nothing suspected before, nor provided. Many of the cetezins which were
without the town and were taken and in power and captivity of the Romans
their ennemies sent unto them within the town desyring them for sauegard of
their lives to yield them self and the cite to Marius. So was it done a
conclusion. Howbeit this not withstanding Marius brent the cite. All the
Numidiens inhabytantes thereof which were of full age and able to bear wepen
were slain: and the remanent as women, children, and aged men were taken
prisoners and sold for their ransom. The pray and richesse was divided among
the souldyours. This deed against the law of arms was not thus done by
Marius: by couetyse nor any other cruelty of him: but because the town and
place was profitable, and necessary to Iugurth and to the Romans hard to
come to. And the manner of the people proved mouable and unlawful ever of nature
before: and neyhter refrained from their ill appetite by benefit or good deed:
nor yet with awe or fear of punyshement.

How Marius by fortune more then by strength won the strongest^ castle of
all Numidy, wherein were the treasoures of Iugurth. The.liiii. Chapter.
AFter that Marius had brought to end so great and hard an interprise
without any loss or damage to him or any of his people. Though he were
reputed noble, great and excellent before: than begane he to be counted more
famous and excellent. Every noble deed: was reputed to be done by strength and
wisdom of Marius: and ascribed to his strength and polycie. And that such
things as were done by good counsel and provision, and also such as hapened
by fortune or chance: and by negligence of ennemies. The soldiers were so
manerly treated without cruelty or fiersnesse of their captain, and also made
rich and abu^dant in treasour and jewels: that they exalted and praised his
name to the heaven. And loved him as themself. But in contrary wise the
Numidyens feared him more than any man living. Shortly to speak: both the
friends of thempire and ennemies also thought verily that either Marius had a
godly mind and was a god himself: or else that he was prive with the gods:
and did al his deeds and business by their advise, counsel, and provision:
which showed him before what should fortune after. But when this chance had
fortuned so well at Capsa: anon Marius drue him to other towns, and took as
many as he besyeged. In some town the Numidyens resysted him to their power:
but it could not avail. In many other towns the dwellers gave the^ over and
left them void and ran away fering so to be treated and dealt withal as they
of Capsa were: because their towns were like behouable to Iugurth, and
hurtefull to Marius. When Marius came to any such town: destitute and void of
dwellers he set fire in them and brent them ground smothe. The aged men,
women and children took them to woods and caves to hyde them self. The young
men and lusty which were taken, were slain down right. Thus was every place
filled with weeping and waylinge, brenninge and slaughter: one myngled with
another. Finally after that Marius had won in to his hands many towns and
castles, and some with out resystence or blood shedinge of his men, he went
in hand with an other mayslrie and difficultye not so sharp nor hard to come
to as was Capsa, but to be won or besieged it was not less hard nor of
less difficulty.

Not far from the flod of Mulucha (which water deuideth the kingdom of
Iugurth, from the kingedome of Bocchus) was a great rock or mountain of
stonne in the mids of a plain, open enough to be seen haueyng thereupon
builded a mean castle of quantity, but of a meruelouse altitude, and only one
strayte passage and narowe left to come thereto. But on every other side, the
rock of natural growyng was down right like a wall, as if it had been made
for the nonce with man's hands. Marius purposed with all his might to take
this castle: and namely because the treasures of Iugurth were within the same.
But this his purpose at last came to effect, rather by chance of fortune,
than by provision or counsel. For this castle was garnyshed and plenteouselye
instored with men, wepyn, vitayles, and with all other ordinance requisite and
necessary to defense of such a fortres. More over within the same a fountain
ple^teful of clear water. And beside this ye situacion thereof was such yt
without marvelous difficulty and unmeasurable labor no enemies might attain
or aproche nere thereto their ingines of bataile to frushe the walls or any
other part thereof. Beside al these defe^ces the double walls of this castle
were garnyshed with towers, bulwarks, and all other defenses and ingynes
which could be ymagined by man's mind: and that rownde about compass as well
within, as without. The way thereto: by which the inhabitants and garnison
used to go and come, was very strait and narowe. In so much that the Romans
entering by the same way with their ingines of bataile were constrained to cut
their pauases on both sides and to make them more narowe for straytenesse of
the passage. And in such manner they proceeded forward under the same in great
parill and with much difficulty: and at conclusion al in vain. For when they
were come nere to the walls and would have set up and adjoined the same
pauases to the walls to have under mined under them: all their labor was
frustrate. For what with stones and what with fire the defenders of the castle
brake and burnt them again down to the ground. Thus could not the
souldyours which under mined the walls continue together at their work and
besinesse: for starytenes and difficulty of the place and importune violence
of the^ within the castle. Nor other souldyours could not serve them which
made and repared the pauases without great paryll and danger. For continually
as fast as they raised the pauases to cover and defend them self: they were
broken and brent between their hands. In the mean time no souldyors was so
good, strong, nor bold: but that he was either wounded or beaten down to
death. The^ was fear encresed to other that were feeble and faint herted.

But after that many days and great labors in this manner were ouerpassed and
spente in vain. Marius was sore angered and vexed in his heart, reuoluing many
things in mind, but specially whether he might give over his purpose (seeing
his labor frustrate) or else abide the chance of fortune which at many times
before he had found favorable and friendly to him. While Marius chafed and
bre^ning in desire reuolued such things in his mind both day and night: it
happened by chance of fortune that a certain Lumbarde a simple souldioure, one
of the company which was last sent from Rome to Numidy to supply the army,
straied abroad from his company a little way, which Lumbard as he wandered found
among the stones many small snailes creping on the ground, not far from that
side of the castle which was over against the side that the Romans besieged
and assailed. Because this Lu^bard in his country was acostumed like other of
his country men to eat such snailes prepared after their manner: therefore he
gathered first one and than an other, and after that many: ascending up by
little and little, sometime creping, sometime clyming, for no other intent and
purpose save to gether such snailes: and so far he proceeded by little and
little till at last he came almost to the top of the mountain. But when he saw
all that side of the castle desolate, and no person steryng, anon he began
to have a pleasure and desire in his mind to work some mastrie, as the
property and condition is of every manne couetinge to win a name, laud and
riches, and to be spoken of. By chance of fortune in the same place where the
Lu^barde stood in this aduisemente among the stones grue a great and old oak
tree having the mids a little bowing down toward the ground, and the
remenant crokyng upward again with mighty arms and brannches ascendyng to
the hiest of the walls with the top erect and lyfted up as every herb and
tree of nature is wont to grow upward at the top. This lumbard well advised the
same and adventured to clime upward taking his hold sometime by the branches
and bows of this oak: and sometime taking hold and leanyng by the stones which
appeared forth in the wall, till at the last he attained unto the very top of the
wall. And when he saw no man styring on that part there stood he still espied
of no man and noted and consydred well at his pleasure all the inward part of
the castle and the plain within the walls about the tower. This lumbarde
had so much the more leasour to take so long aduisement vnespyed for all the
Numidiens defenders of the castle were on the other side attendyng and gyueng
head to the assaut and defendyng themself and the castle against the Romans.
When the lumbard had espied and consydred every thing which he thought might
be auantage to his after purpose: than he descended again downward by the
same way which he ascended: but not without head nor with so little aduisement
as he ascended upward: but prouyng every way, and lokyng about if it were
possible to bring into the castle any company of men by that side or not. This
well co^sydred: as soon as he descended: anon he went to Marius and informed him
of every thing as he had done exhortyng and requiring him to put in proof
whether the castle might be won on that side where he had been. Fartherhmore he
promised himself to be gyde unto such as would undertake that interprise
saying that in the matter was no danger. Marius heryng these words of the
lu^bard, send forth with him certain of his men of the^ which were there
present to understand and know the truth of the matter. When they had been there
and returned to Marius again: some brought him word that the matter was easy
to do: and some other said that it was very hard and perylous. The sentence
of every man was after as their minds gave them. The cowards thought it hard
but such as were of bold hertes and desirous of worship thought it easy and
without much peril. Nevertheless the mind of Marius was somewhat exalted to
comfort, and good hope: and therefore of all the company of trumpettes, and of
other such mynstrels as be wont to be in battle to give courage and signs to
the fighters, he chose forth five which were most swyfte and most light:
and four hundred men he assigned to assyste and defend the said trumpettes.
And al them he commanded to obey to the lumbard and to be ruled and ordered by
him in every thing. The day next following was assigned to them to proceed
forth in their business When the time assigned and prefexed by Marius was come
the lumbarde with his company had made ready and ordered every thing: and so went
to the place where he had been before. But when they were come thither: tho
lumbard their gyde caused the^ to change their armor, and to make bare their
heads and their fete: to the intent that they so bare heded the better might se
above them and on every side of them: and that they being bare foot might
labor so much the better and, take better hold in clymming up by the stones.
Their swerdes were fastened behynd at their backs and their buckelers withal
which were made after the fashion of the Numidie^s bucklers of lether: because
of lighter weight and burden. And also to thinntent that they should give les
sound or noise, if it happened any stone to smite against the^. This done: the
lumbard went up before them, and bound small cords to the stones and to the
old rotes which apered above the stones where he could espy any such whereby
the souldyours sustaining themself and taking hold might more lightly and with
more ease mount and clyme upward. And sometime he went before and helped them up
with his hands special such as for that uncustomed way were somewhat fereful.
Sometime when thascending or going up was over hard and sharp: he put each of
them up before him without armor: and than he himself followed with their
armor and wepyn. Such places where most dout was in: he specially proved and
assayd them most of al: and in going and coming often times up and down by the
same most dangerous passages: he increased audacite and boldness to the
remenant. Thus after they had been sore weryed, and with long and great labor
endeavored themself: at last they came into the castle, which on that side
they found desolate and without defense. For (as said is before) al they
which were with in the castle were occupied in fightyng, or ready to fight
against the Romans: as they were on other days before. But when Marius under
stood by messangers how the lumbard had done: how be it that all the day before
his men had been sore besied and occupied in fightyng: and assayling the castle.
Nevertheless specially at this time he exhorted and enbolded them: and he
himself departing forth from under his pauases caused his souldyours to
adioyne themself nere together, and to hold up their shyldes above their
heedes so that the co^ioyning of them seemed as it were the frame of a volt.
Marius kept him under the same for his defense, and so approached to the walls.
And both he and his company which were nere about him valiantly assailed the
castle: and also other of his company which stood a far of and could not come
nere the walls for prease: assailed the castle fiersly from a far and sore
vexed and put in fear their enemies within the castle throwyng against the^
plumettes of leed with slinges, arowes darts, and al other manner engyus of
battle wherewith any thing could strongely be thrown into the castle. But the
Numidiens within the castle had often before this time ouerturned and brent the
tents and pauases of the Romans and took thereby so great audacite and boldness
that they defended not themself within the castle walls but walked up and
down without the castle walls both day and night reuiling and reprouinge the
Romans and obiectyng cowardyse against Marius. And thretnynge that his
souldyours should be made subjects and bond me to Iugurthe in time to come,
whom they purposed at that time to make bond to them. Thus while they thought
themself sure and their matter in good case: they were hard and egar enough
reuylinge and thretnynge the Romans. In the mean space while the Romans and
their ennemies were besyest fighting withal their might: the Romans for
laud, glory, and lordshyp: and the Numidiens for their health and saving of
their lives. Anon suddenly the lumbard with his company which were within the
castle on the backsede blew their trumpettes. First of all the women and
children which went to the walls to se the bykeringe were al abashed and fled
inward to the castle: and after them all the soldiers which were without and
nerest to the walls and could escape in. And finally they all both armed and
unarmed fled inward. When the Romans saw this they assailed the castle more
fiersly: some they slew and overthrew: some they wounded ouerpassing or
standing upon the bodies of them which were slain. Al their desire was with
their hands to win glory and worship. They stryued to ascend unto the walls
every man couetyng to be before other. None of them al tarried nor was let with
spoylinge nor prays. Their great courage suffered them not to look there after,
till by manhood and strength they had won the castle. Thus was fortune favorable
to Marius: so that his first negligence and unwise boldness to assail a castle
inexpugnable was turned by chance from rebuke to glory and laud such was his
fortune. But when Marius had won his castle after estimacion of man not able to
be won: than was he lord of the most part of all the treasour of Iugurth: the
castle was given all to murder and havoc. And the soldiers of Marius
richely rewarded every man after his desert.

How in the mean time while this castle was in wynnyng, a noble man of Rome
named Lucius Sylla came from Rome to Marius with a great bend of horsemen, and
of the manners and behaueour of this Sylla. The.lv. Chapter.
IN mean time while this fires assault and victory was concluded at this
castle: a famous lord of Rome named Lucius Sylla, tresourer of the army came
from Rome to Marius with a great bend of horsemen. Whom the same Marius at his
departing from Rome had left there to raise and assemble socour to the war
among ye Italiens and other nations, fre^des and lovers of the^pire of rome.

But forasmuch as the matter moves us to make mention of so worthy a man and
of his disposicio^ and manners therefore it semth me convenient in this part
somewhat to write of his behauoure and conversation: and that as brefely as I
may conveniently: namely for two causes. The first for that I intend not to
make relacion of his behauour and manner in any other place of his cronycle save
here. Secondly for as much as none other author has written sufficiently of
him. For how beit that one historiograph named Lucius Sisenna: wrote most
dyligently and best of his acts of any other before: nevertheless me seems
that he spoke little acordyng to truth nor indyfferently. For his tongue nor pen
were not at lyeberte for as much as he was somewhat in danger to that said
Sylla: wherbi he was prohibited to say or to write acording to the truth. For
what by favor and what by fere he durst not touch plainly the vices which
were in him. But here I purpose (al favor and fere laid a part indifferenly to
write of him.

This Sylla of progeny, was descended of most noble stock of the Romans. How
be it the name of his auncestrie was almost lost and decayed by dulnes,
negligence and sloth of some of his lynage. In greek and laten he was of like
conning, and excellently seen in both the langages, his mind was great and
bold of courage. Of voluptuous pleasures he was desirous, but much more
desirous of glory and laud. In vacant leisure he was much inclined to ye
lusts of his body. But such pleasure or voluptuousnes did never let nor with
hold him from any business or occupacion necessary: how be it such pleasure
blinded him yt he took no wife of birth, manars, and honesty convenient for his
estate. He was much eloquent of speech crafty and subtle enough. He had the
ways easily to get frendshyp, and it was also no maistry to get fre^dshyp of
him: in faining dissimulyng, and countrefaytinge of besynesses: his wit was
very hye and excellent. He was a marvelous and incredyble gyuer of many
things, but specially of money: and before the war and victory which the
noble men of Rome: had against the commen people: He was so noble and worthy
reputed that it is in manner incredible nor his good fortune never passed the
policy of his wit: in so much that many men were in dout whyther he was more
fortunate than strong. But after the victory of this war: so ungoodly was
his demeanor and so cruel, that verily I know not whyther I may more be
ashamed or grieved to write or to speak thereof. For after that this war of
Numidy was ended: and both Marius and this Sylla were returned to Rome: a
great discord fell between the lords and commens. Marius took part with the
commons: but Sylla took with the lords and at last drove Marius forth of the
city. After that: an other man of great power called Cynna which had been five
times consul of Rome gathered an host of men and took part with Marius
against this Sylla. But at conclusion Sylla overcame him in bataile: and slew
him. After this: Sylla cruelly murdered an other noble man of Rome named Caius
Carbo: and with him young Marius, sone of this Marius which warred in Numidi.
Last of al when this Sylla had won victory over Marius and his favorers: than
became he most cruel of al other: in so much that he filled all the city with
blod of the citezins. But here will I leave to speak farther of this Sylla, or
of his behauour in cruelty, and return to write of his behaueoure in this
war of Numidie under Marius.

After that this Sylla (as I have said before) was come to Affrike, and to the
host of Marius with his company of horsemen, within short season he became
most expert in chivalry and crafty above all other: how be it before this
time he was but rude and ignorante in deeds of chivalry. And moreover he
treated and governed his soldiers with manners and meekenes. And gave rewards
to many: to some which desired him and to some other of his own pleasure not
desired thereto. But he would take no rewards nor gifts again, without it
were against his will. And if he so did at any time against his will: than was
he more ready to give again that which was given to him, than to pay that
money which he had borrowed of other. He demanded nothing again of any man,
though it were due and det to him: but rather he labored and endeavored him self
that many might be in his det, and by such means to have them bound to him.
And how be it that he was one of the greatest of Rome, yet disdained he not the
company of the most simple soldiers of the host: but co^muned and acompanied
with them both in sportes and in sadness. In labors he was always ready. In
bataile and watching, with other business of war he suffered no man to be before
him. Nor in the mean season he neither hurt the good name of the consul, nor
of none other good man: which thing men desirous of worship and honor be often
wont to do: for in dispraysinge of other, they think to obtain great laud
to the^ self. He only lobored that none might pass him neither in counsel,
nor in might, or manhod of his hands: But he passed many. By which manners
and conditions in short time he became very dear and well-beloved, not only
to Marius: but also to all the hooste.

How Marius prevailed in batayl against the.ii. kings, Jugurth and Bocchus.
The.lvi. Chapter.
But when Iugurth had lost the town of Capsa, as is said before: and diverse
other fortresses and other places defensyues which to him were profitable. And
also a great quantite of his treasour, wherein he most trusted: Anon he sent
messangers to king Bocchus requiring him in all have to come to Numidy and to
bring his army with him: saing that it was hye time to make bataile with
Marius. But when he understood that Bocchus prolonged the time in ouerlong
tarieng, haueyng diverse considerations and war, as he that was in dout of the
chance and fortune of the end thereof. Jugurth again corrupted the next of
his counsel with gifts in likewse as he had done before: and promised unto the
king Bocchus himself, the third part of the kingdom of Numidy: if the Romans
were driven out of Affrike, or if the war should be brought to end with out
loss or diminishing of his kingdom and marches thereof. The king Bocchus
induced with hope of this reward: with a great multitude of people came to
Iugurth, and adjoined both their armies together in one.

At this time Marius with his company was in his iournay toward a province
which was in the coost of Affrike and apartained to thempire: where the said
Marius purposed to rest with his company, till the winter were paste. But when
he was in his journey and in least doubt: Jugurth and Bocchus both together
invaded and set upon him and his men when the tenth part of the day scarsely
remained. This did they, thinking that the night which was nere come, should to
them be great socour and defense if they were overcome: and if they did
overcome the Romans, it should be to them no damage nor impediment, because
they knew the country and place better then the Romans. But on the other
side both these chances in darkness, were hard and contrary to the Romans:
for they knew not the coasts of that country. Marius anon had understanding
of the coming of his enemies by many of his espyes, but it was over late. For
as soon as he had word, his enemies were even at hand: In so much that
before the army could be set in order or array, and or they could remove or
gather together their baggage which at that time was abroad: and before they
could take any commandment of their captain by word or sound of trumpets:
The horsemen of the Mauriens and of the Getulians ran together upon them, not
in order or array of batayl: but by companies and bendes together, as it
fortuned them to come togther in heaps and clusters. The Romans for the most
part were all amassed and greuousely abashed for that sudden and unprovided
fear. Nevertheless they forgot not their old manhod and strength: Some drew
them to their armoure, and other some which were armed already defended their
fellows till they armed them self. Other some mounted on horseback and boldly
rode against their enemies, and encountered them valiauntly. The fight on both
parties was more like a skyrmishe among brygandes and rouers, then to any
appointed or ordered battle. For the horsemen and fotemen were myngled
together without standerdes, cognisances, or any ordinance, array or order.
The Mauriens and Numidians were fierce on their side. Some of the Romans they
beat down and overthrew. Some they wounded mortally: And many they berefte
utterly of their lives, and slew them in that place. The remenant which
sharplye and manlye resisted, they compased them about on every side, and as
well behynd as before assailed them: so that neither manhod, strength nor
armor, was able sufficiently to defend them: And no marvel, for their enemies
were mo in number than they: and compassed them about on every side of them.
But finally the Romayne soldiers which were both of old and new, and
therefore both strong, bold, and crafty in battle: gathered them as nere
together as they might. And where it fortuned any number of them to meet
together, they turned back to back, and joined them round one with another
in manner of a compass or cyrcle: and so they saved and defended them self
together that on the back half no man could assail them, but if he brake in
through the mids of them, which was in manner impossible. By this manner they
sustained the might of their enemies, and also saved them self. Nor their
captain Marius in this ieoperdous and sharp busynes was not afraid at all,
nor of less courage and boldenes then he was before: but styrred about every
where in the battle. And his men of guard about him, whom he had chosen rather
of the strongest and boldest men of the host, than of such as were most
familiar with him. For he set more by the audacitie of them, than by the
familiarity of the other: and namely in such a ieopardous case. Sometime he
socoured his soldiers in their need or such as he saw in paryl. And sometime
he ran in among his enemies: where they were thickest. And notwithstanding their
resistance he assailed the^ valiantly: and wounded, slew, and ouerthrue them
on every side his weapen in the red blood of the black Mauriens and Getuliens.
And because that in so hard a case: and in so great and troublous noise and
rumor, he could not counsel nor comfort his souldyours with his tongue,
therefore he thought to counsel, incorage, and confort them with his hand,
giving them example surely to bestow their strokes. Many of his enemies send he
to hell crieng in vain upon their ydolles of help. The darts, iauelyns pikes
plumettes of leed, stones, with other such instruments of bataile were cast so
thick on both parties, that the air therewith was dimmed. The strokes were so
coursly charged on the bright helmes and harness, that the fire sprang out on
every side: so that it seemed to be the lyghtning: the cry of the men dieng: the
neieng of the horses: and the din of the strokes, with the sound of the
trumpettes: was horrybe and tedious to here. Thus continued they till the day
light was passed, and the night come. The Numidians, getulians, and maurians
desysted nor ceased nothing for that. But as both Jugurth and Bocchus before
had warned and commanded them: they continued more sharply than before,
thinking that the darkness of the night should be for their advantage Marius
this understanding took counsel and made best provision for himself and his
men: which he might in such case: and as the matter required. And to thentent
that his people might have some place to resort unto, for refuge and socours:
he provided before and ocupyed two hills nere together of whom the one was
over narowe, and of little ground to receive his hole army and tents: but in
the top thereof was a fair fountain of pure water much necesseary. The other
hyl sufficiently large to receive his hole host and tents: and also very
defensive, for it was of a great altitude and down right on every side. In
somuche that they which should take that hill were sure enough without great
defense of them self, for nature had it sufficiently defended. This well
considred: Marius commanded Sylla his vndercapten to take with him all the
horsemen, and to tarry that night about the smaller hyl where the fountain was.
This done: he himself gathered together by litel and litel the remanent of his
souldyours dispersed abroad: their ennemies being not less troubled than were
they. Wha^ Marius had thus assembled again his men together he led them all
with full course up unto the larger hyl. Thus the two kings Iugurth and Bocchus
seeing it in vain to fight with them which were on the hyer ground, and also
on so sure a place: were constrained to leave the fight: for difficulty of the
place which the Romans had taken. But nevertheless in the mean time they
suffered not their men to depart far thens: but compased both the hills round
about with their hole multitude and there tarried and rested, shed abroad upon
the ground. When they had taken their place in this manner: they made great
fires here and there in many places of their host: and the barbarians after
their custom passed forth the most part of the night in mirth, pleasure, and
gladness rejoicing, daunsyng: and making great noise and din: rennyng and going
from place to place: and loudly crieng synging and reuellyng. The kings
themself were also not a little proud and fierce because they had not fled
from the battle, and counted the^ self as ouercomers seeing that they held
the Romans so besieged, which as they thought durst not abide the^. On the
other part the Romans intentifely gave aduertens to the demeanor of their
enemies. And for that the Romans were on the heygth of the hill and without
light: therefore more easy from darkness of hyer places they perceived all the
deeds and behaueoure of their enemies which were beneath them: and much more
evidently by light of the fyers. This unwise behaueour of the Numidyans put
the Romans in great confort, and was great courage to them. And specially
Marius was greatly confirmed in hope seeing their negligence, their folly, and
vncraftines: Wherefore he commanded his folk to keep silence as still as might
be possible without any noise. In so much that he suffered not the trumpets to
sound the watch as warriors are wont against night. Afterward when the day
began to apeare, the Numidians were all wearyed with their cryinge, over late
watcheyng, and revel: and had given them self to rest a little before as men
without fear or dout of the Romans. But certainly it is a true proverb which
is often said, that after fair wether succedeth te^pesteous clouds, and
after mirth and joy often comes sadness and sorrow. So it happened to the
Numidyans. For while they ingorged and filled with wynes lay sleepynge on the
ground as beasts without fear and without provision: Marius commanded
suddenly al his trumpets, clarionistes with other minstrels to sound their
instruments as shirle as they could altogether, and that al his soldiers
should set up a shout or cry as horribly as they might: and with that invade
and break into the tents of the Numidiens. This was shortly done: wherefore the
Numidiens, Mauriens, and Getuliens astonished and abashed with that unknown and
horrible noise: were suddenly a wakened of sleep: and seeing the^ thus compased
with their ennemies: what for fear of death and the noise, they were so amassed
that they had no power neither to fle nor draw to them their armor, nor
utterly to do or provide any manner socour for themself. Thus they stood
astonyed for this horrible noise and cry as if madness had entered them: none
able to socour himself nor other. The Romans always increased to them their
noise and fear assailing, murdring, and wounding them without any resistance.
Finally al they were other overthrown, slain, or wounded: or else fled, their
armor, standerdes and weapen left behind them: and mo were in this battle
slain: than in all the batayls before. For among them al none was taken
prisoner: for with fere and sleep so amassed were they, that few escaped by
flight.

Of the great provision and wisdom of Marius after his victory, and of the
second battle which he had against the two kings, in which also he had great
victory with laud and honor. The.lvii. Chapter.
When Marius had gloriously thus overcome the most part of his ennemeies
except the two kings: he drue him than toward his wyntring place as he had
purposed before. And ordered himself and his men specially in haven towns
because of more easy provision of vitels: but nevertheless: in his iournay
thiderwarde: for all his victory: he became not negligent, unware, nor proud:
as captains often ar wont after victory gotten of their ennemies: but he
provided and went forward with his army quadrate and divided into four
parts ordered and appointed as if his enemies had been in his sight. Sylla was
assigned to take charge of the right winge of the army, and all the spear
men with him. And Aulus Manlius of the lift winge: and with him the
slyngers, archars, and the cohortes of Lumbardes The pety captains with
fotemen of light harnes, were distributed and divided in the van^gard and
rereward. Of the treytours which had forsaken Iugurth and came to the Romans,
such as were best labored, and knew best the country were chosen forth and
sent out to espy the country and ways of Iugurth and Bocchus. But
notwithstanding Marius him self was as provident, circumsptet, and diligente
withal, as if he had committed the charge to none other. He was mouinge
continually from place to place over all the army: lauding, commending and
rewarding the good soldiers: and blaming and rebuking the bad: he him self
armed, and diligently providing and ministering unto them every thing
necessary and expedient: and compelled them that were froward and ill wyllinge
to labor. In every place where he set his tents in his journey, he ordered
defense with deep dyches and trenches round about his host. And in the entres
of the tents he assigned soldiers elect there to, to keep watch, and some to
keep scout watch about the tents in compass. Moreover some other he ordered on
the casting of the dyches and on outward bulwarks to defend the remenant if
any sudden peril apeared. He him self armed myghtely went about and searched
the watch. Not specially for any fear nor mystruste of any peril to come,
nor for fear that his souldioures would not obey his commandment. But
chiefly to the intent that the souldyours seeing their captain not resusing
labor nor paryl: should be also more wylling to follow the same and take pain
upon themself as ashamed if they did not as much as their captayn. And
certainly at this time and at many other during this war (as I read) Marius
constrained his souldyours to labor rather for shame than with sharpnes or
punishment. For shame it is to the servant to be idle when the master sore
laboreth. Howbeit some said that Marius took this labor upon him for the
desire of commendacion and worship: because that from his youth he was ever
wont with hardness, hunger, thirst, and labor: and many other things which
the delycate gentylmen of our time count for miseries. But to Marius were these
hardnesses much pleasure and delight for affection which he had against the
commen weal, as equal persons supposed. But to what ever intent Marius:
treated his army in his wise: it was known that his deeds did as much profet
and worship to the commen weal of Rome: as if he had more rigorously and
sharply treated his souldyours. For all things were ordered well and worthily
for the honor and profet of the commen weal as he had more rigorously treated
his army.

But to return to my purpose: when Marius with such dyligence as said is:
was come not far from the town of Cirtha, at the last the fourth day after the
foresaid battle: the espyes of their ennemies appeared on every side. The
Romans understood anon thereby that their ennemies were at hand. The espyes of
the Romans also which were send sorth: brought the same tidings from every
coost of the country. Marius perceived that his ennemies were in diverse
companyes and divided: wherefore he was uncertain how he might best order his
host to receive them: And therefore perceiving it unsure: how to order the
forfront of his battle as it ought: he abode his enemies in the same place no
order changed with his host divided in.iiii. parts (as said is) as he which
was ready and provided for every chance. Thus was Iugurth disceyued and
frustrate of his purpose. For he had divided his host into four parts
trusting to invade some of the Romans on the backehalfe with part of his
army: and with an other part to encounter with them, and with the other two
parts to enclose them on both the sides and so to enuyron them round about.
In the mean time Sylla which first encou^tred with Iugurth exhorted and
comforted his men as well as he might for brevity of the time. That done: anon
he proceeded with his company by bendes and clusters together, their horses
conjoined in the most thickest manner: and so fiersly assailed the Maurians.
The remanent of the fotemen which were under Sylla: remained and kept themself
still in their first place, and defended their bodies from the darts which
their ennemies threw against them from far. But if it chaunsed any of their
enemies to come between their hands, they hewed them down to decrease the
number.

While Sylla and his horsemen thus fierselye were fyghtyng on the right wyng of
the battle: The king Bocchus assembled together the footmen whom his son
named Volux, had brought thither with him. These footmen had such
impedimente in their iournaye thytherwarde that they came over late to the
other battle which was last foughten before this. Wherefore Bocchus: when he
had assembled and inbolded with his words these fresh fotemen: with the^ he
assailed fiersly the rere ward of the Romans.

In the mean time Marius himself was occupied in the fore ward of his host
and there employed his wisdom and strength, as a valyant and worthy captain:
and so stood it him in hand. For in the forward Iugurth himself with his
grettest power and strongest company of men inbatayled with him.

But after that Iugurth knew of the coming of Bocchus to the field: anon he
turned him with a small company about him privily unto the fotemen of the
Romans: and there with an hye voyse he cried unto them, sayng that they fought
but in vain. For a litel before he had slain Marius with his own hands. And
in cryeng these words he lyfted up withal, and showed his sword all
ouersprincled and dyed with blood: which he had so colored in the battle
fiersly enough in murdring the fotemen of the Romans. These words Iugurth
cried in latin tongue. For he had learned to speak lattyn long before in the
bataile of Numaunce. When the Romans herd these words they were affrayed,
but more for cruelty of the noise: than for any confidence or trust which they
had to the messanger. But on the other side the minds of the barbariens were
bolded and exalted by these words: by reason whereof more sharply they
invaded the Romans, saying them abashed and astonished. And now were the
Romans of the forward at that point that they were ready to give them self to
flight: as men discouraged for the said tidinges.

When they were at this point: it fortuned so at the same time that Sylla had
beaten and overthrown the Mauriens which invaded and assailed him on the
right wynge of the battle: Wherefore he returned to his company and fiercely
assailed the fresh footmen which were with Bocchus, and at one side brake in
among the thyckest of them. But Bocchus anon turned his back and gave him
self to flight.

On the other syd^ Iugurth which in his part of the batail almost had optained
victory did his diligence to encourage and support his company, and to
maintain that auantage which he had won. And at conclusion al in vain. For
while he labored there about as a worthy captain, the spereme^ of the Romans
so compassed him and his company about both on the right side and on the lift:
that all his guard and other which were about him at conclusion were slain. But
he him self glad to save his life, brake forth alone from among the mids of
his enemies, and from wepons and darts with great difficulty.

But in the mean time Marius had overcome and driven away the horsemen which
assailed him. Wherefore anon he returned fiercely to help and socour his
company whom he understood somewhat put back by violence of their enemies. But
he by his policy and valiant deeds anon so reconforted his men that none of
his ennemies were able to withstand their vyolence in any part of that battle.

Thus finally the Romans after great labor and many grievous wounds
disconfited their enemies on every side. But wha^ the batail was ended, and the
Romans began to pursue the chase, then verelye it was a pytefull and horrible
sight to behold in the open fields, and to consider the cruel spectacle of
bataile. How some fled, some pursued, some enraged murdring, some rored dieng,
some slain, some taken prisoners. The horse and men myngled together: laboring
in the panges of death. The ground ouerspred with dead corpses mangled,
mutulate, and horribly hewn: inuolued in blud congeled. The horses wounded: as
mad drew after the^ the dead carcases of their masters, their legs hanging
in the stiropes, and their spears half through their bodies trailing after
in the dust. The coursers wounded and fleinge cast up with their fete the dust
tempered with blod renning over the dead bodies of their lords. Many of the
Numidiens which were sore wounded could neither fle: nor be suffered to take
rest on the ground. Sometime they labored to rise and avoid: and anon after
for feebleness fell down to the ground again: each rolling and turning in
others blod. And finalli: as far as any man's sight might extend, all the ground
was ouerspred and covered with armor, wepen, and dead carions rennyng of
blood. And all the ground infect with the same, horrible to behold.

How Bocchus after that he was thus twyse overcome in battle purposed to make
peace with the Romans, and how at his request Marius send unto him Sylla and
Manlius to know his mind in that behalf. The.lviii. Chapter.
AFter that this batel was thus ended to the utter damage and destruction of
the Numidyans: and to the land and honor of the Romans. Marius was now
without dout ouercomer and victour and went unto the town of Cirtha as his
iournay and purpose was at first beginning, before these two batayls. Wha^
Marius had soiorned there five days after this battle: there came unto him
ambassadors from king Bocchus. Which in their kings behalf desired of
Marius to send unto him two of the most trusty men which he had: saying that
he would common and treat with the^ of diverse businesses, both for his own
profit, and for profet and auantage of the Romans also. Marius without tarry
send forth Sylla for one, and Aulus Ma^lius for an other. When they were come
to king Bocchus: how be it he had send for them to commen with them in his
matters: Nevertheless it was concluded between them to speak to him first, to
thentent to kyndle and inflame his mind more against Iugurth: or else seeing
him somewhat desirous and willing to have peace, to provoke him with more desire
thereto. Wherefore Sylla (to whom Manlius gave place, not for his age, but for
his eloquence) began and spoke to Bocchus in manner as follows.

Of the words of Sylla treasourer of the Romayne army had before king
Bocchus. The.lix. Chapter.
King Bocchus, we have great gladness and joy sith it is so that the gods
have thus admonished and enspired you so noble a man, that at last ye have
reputed peace better and more acceptable than war: lest ye might dishonest
and defile your worthiness by associatyng your self to the most unhappy
tyranne Iugurth. And also we are glad that ye have avoided the occasion and
necessity whereby we were moved to pursue in battle you, being ignorant of
our quarrel, and in the company of the said most cursed Iugurth, tyran and
enemy to thempire of Rome. And certainly the people of Rome ever since their
poor, simple and small beginning have thought it better to win frinds, the^
servants or bondmen: and also they have thought it a much surer thing to have
under their empire such as willingly and of their own mocion would yield
themself: than such as they have constrained thereto against their will. But
verily no friendship is more necessary to you tha^ our amite or friendship. At
first of al: because we and ye be far in sonder: whereby we shall have les
power to grieve you, or to put you to any charge: by reason of our friendship.
But our favor and thanks may be as ready to you: as if we were nere together:
considering the many and great friends which we have not far from your
marches And also unto thempire of Rome be obeyers, subjects and servants
abundantly. But as touching lovers and friends we nor none other can have
sufficiently enough For this consideracion king Bocchus your friendship shall be
more acceptable unto us. And would god it had pleased you thus to have done at
the beginning to this war. Forsooth if ye had so done: than should ye before
this time have received of the Romans mo co^modites auantages, and good deeds
than ye have now suffered loss, damages, or hurtes. But while it is so that
man's deeds and besinesses (for the most part) be ruled by fortune to which
fortune it has plesed that ye should both prove and assay our might and
violence in bataile: and also our love and favor in peace: Therefore now sith
amytie is proferred to you by suffraunce of fortune: and sith it is laufull to
you to take it: be not slow from hens forward, but hastily proced as ye have
begone: that ye may prove the Romans friends to you like as ye have proved them
enemies before this time. Ye have many expedient oportunites and necessary
commodites by whom ye may make amends with your good deeds for that ye have
offended against the Romans and ouerpasse your old fames with new
kindnesses and benefits: and finally fix this in your heart that ye or any
other shall never overcome the people of Rome with kyndnes or good deeds. And as
touching their hatered, and of what might they are in batail: ye your self know
that by proof and experience. Wherefore proceed in acquiring of their frendshyp:
which gladly shall be granted unto you, if your merits shall so deserve.

Of the answer of Bocchus made to Sylla, and of the unstableness of mind of
the same Bocchus. The.lx. Chapter.
TO these words of Sylla answered Bocchus mildely and soberly: and a few words
he spoke in excusing his offense done again the Romans, saying that he had not
taken armor nor begone war against them as ennemy to do injury or wrong unto
them: but to defend his own kingdom. And that the third part of Numidy
belonged unto him by law of arms: of the which the Romans labored to expel
Iugurth. And in that doing they destroyed his part of the country: which he
could not suffer unrevenged. Moreover Bocchus said for himself that he had
send unto Rome before to require, amite and frendshyp of the Romans: which
thing unto him was denied. But at conclusion he said that he would omyt and lay
a part al old malice and that al thing should be done and agreed between them:
if Marius would grant him that his ambassadors might be send to Rome: for the
said friendship to be confederate with the Romans. Upon this answer Sylla and
his fellow returned to Marius which anon agreed that the same ambassadors
should be sent to Rome. But shortly after: what time Iugurthe understood of
the coming of Sylla and Manlius he feared the same thing, which was ordened
and in hand. And anon with rewards so he corrupted the friends of Bocchus:
that again they changed his mind with their counsel: so mutable and variable
was he of mind.

How Bocchus changed his purpose yet once again, and send new ambassadors
to Marius to treat of peace, and how Sylla received them and treated them in
absence of Marius. The.lxi. Chapter.
IN the mean time Marius set and ordered his host in their wintring places and
took with him such men as were of light harnes and also a part of his horsemen:
and with them went into a desert not far thens, to besige a certain tower
belongyng to Iugurth: into which tower the said Iugurth had put for garnyson
and defense: all the treatours which had forsaken and fled from the Romans to
Iugurth. But in the mean while Bocchus of new again consydred in mind the
misfortune which had hapened to him in the two batayls before. Or else by
counsel of some other of his friends: whom Iugurth had not corrupted with
rewards: he chose forth among al.v. men whose fidelite and truth he had well
known and often proved before: and whose wisdom was most expert and ready.
Them send he to Marius: and commanded them afterward if the matter required as
ambassadors to take their way to Rome: and committed to them his full
authorite in every thing which was to be done: and to conclude the war by what
ever manner should seem best, and most expedeient to their discrecio^. These
ambassadors took leave and spedely took their iournay to the places where the
Romans soiourned the winter season. But while they were in their iournaye
thytherwarde: they weere assailed of thieves of the getulians, and robbed and
spoiled of all that they had about the^. Thus at last without worship or
aparell all affrayed and abashed they fled unto Sylla for refuge. This Sylla
was left by Marius in the wynterynge places: to be ruler of the Roman army in
his absence. What time these ambassadors: thus spoiled were come to Sylla for
refuge, he received them not fayntly as ennemies as they deserved: but
curteysly with much gentylnes and liberalite, treating them in all points
honorably. By this means these barbaria^s and rude people counted and supposed
that the name of couetyse, which was imputed unto the Romans by common fame
was but false and feigned of their ennemis, to distayne their honor. And also
for the much liberalite of Sylla they counted him as their special friend. For
yet unto that time: the accloyeng of gifts given for rewards for policy and
falshode to overcome covetous or simple minds, was vnkowen unto mani. No man
was liberal in gifts: but that he was thought and counted to be faithful of
heart withal. Thus the barbarians reputed the liberte and rewards of Silla to
be a great and evident token of love which he had to the^ as they deemed. But
to our purpose: thembassadours anon opened and declared to Sylla the will and
commandment of Bocchus their king, given to them to be executed. And also
they required him to be to the^ a frindly fauorer and counselor in their
business. Furthermore with their words and spech they commended and exalted the
army, the truth, the greatness and excellence of their king, and all other
things which they thought might avail the^ to obtain beneuole^ce of the
Romans. After they remained with Sylla about the space of.xl. days which
granted them al his help and socour and also in the mean space enfourmed them
in what manner they should order their words when they should speak with Marius,
and also before the Senators at Rome.

How Marius hard the ambassadors of Bocchus and send them to Rome, and how
they were answered of the Senators The.lxii. Chapter.
IN the mean time Marius which was in assant of ye kings tower could not
perform his enterprise. Wherefore he returned again to Cirtha: anon was he
certified of coming of the imbassadours of Bocchus. Wherefore he commanded
them and Sylla also to come before him: and also he called together all the most
worthy men of his hole host from every place. Before them al presently he
commanded the imbassadours of Bocchus to rehearse the petycion of their king
(which rehearsed and herd) it was granted unto them to go to Rome for the same
points. And of Marius was truce required in the mean time between Bocchus and
him. Sylla with many other noble men were pleased withal. A few other fiersly
and sharply counseled otherwise: as men with out pity and ignorant of others
hard fortune which wha^ it begins to be froward and contrary: it turns
every thing to aduersyte.

But when the Mauriens had obtained of Marius al their desire.iij. of the^ went
to Rome with one named Octanyus Rufo: whom Marius had assigned to co^uey the^
thider This Octauyus Rufo was send before from Rome into Affrike to Marius with
wages for the souldyours. The other two imbassadours of Bocchus returned home
again to their king, which of the^ gladly hard of the good report which
they made of the Romans in every point: and specially of the good will,
liberality and courtesy of Sylla.

But when the other three imbassadours were come to Rome they apered before the
Senators and in the humblest wise yt they coud devise, did their message
excusing their king: and confessyng that he had offended against the empire
not by his own seking: but by ye cursed faut prouocacion, and instygation of
Iugurth: whereof their king sore repented. Wherefore in his behalf at
conclusion they besought the Romans of pardon, amite, and peace. Than was it
brefely answered to the^ in this manner.

The Senators and people of Rome: is wont to remember both the kindness and
benifytes of their friends: and also the^r iniuryes of their enemies. But since
it repe^teh and forthynketh Bocchus of his trespass: grace and pardon of his
offense is granted unto him. Peace and amite shall be also granted unto him
hereafter, when he shall so deserve.

How Marius sent Sylla again to Bocchus at his desire, and what danger the
same Sylla escaped by help of Volu^ son of king Bocchus. The.lxiii. Chapter.
When Bocchus understood al these things: he desired Marius by his letters to
send unto him Sylla: to thentent that after his advise and discression counsel
might be had of the commen busynes to both parties belonginge. Sylla anon was
send forth with a great retynue of fotemen and horsemen: with diverse weapen
and strong defense as archars, slingars with other like. And to thintente to
speed their iournay more hastelye they were all armed with lightest harnes
which could be provided but for all the lightness of their armor it was
defensife enough against the weapins of the Mauryans: for their wepyns be light
in likewise. But finally when Sylla had passed five days of his iournay:
suddenly Volux the son of Bocchus apered and showed him self to the Romans in
the open feldes: with no mo but M. men which went scatered and dispersed
abroad neglygently: so that they seemed to Sylla: and al other greatter nombre
than they were in deed. Sylla and al his company feared them, thinking them
ennemies: wherefore the Romans made them ready with armor and weapen: to
defend themself, and to resist their ennemies: if need should so require. A
litel fear was among them, but their hope and confort ouerpassed their fear.
For why? they had the upper hand before: and considred that they should
bicker with them, whom they had often overthrown and ouercomme before. In
the mean time the horsemen which were sent before of both parties to espy the
truth of the matter, certified each of them that al thing was quiet and sure
enough: as it was in deed: without treason or paryl. Volux in his metinge
called Sylla by name: and welcomed him beningely, saying that he was sent from
his father Bocchus to mete the said Sylla for his honor, socour, and defense.
And so proceeded they forthewarde all that day and the next day after in company
together without fear or danger. But after that it was night and their tents
pitched: suddenly the Maurian Volux came renninge to Sylla al pale and quaking:
and said that he was infourmed of the espyes, that Iugurthe was not far thens.
And with that prayed and exhorted him to fle away with him privily by night.
Sylla denied that utterly as fierce and bold of courage, saying that he feared
not a coward Numidian which so often had been overcome before. And that he
trusted well enough to the strength and courage of his men: and finally he gave
Volux this answer. If I knew without dout that our sure distru^tion were
instant: and that I and mine should be slain in the field, yet would I not fle
for any dread: but rather abide and dye manfully than cowardely to flee and
shame my people of whom I have charge in sparynge our lives, which be so
incertaine and unsure: and para uenture shortly after this shall finishe with
some sickness or disease. Is it not better dye in a noble quarrel manly, than to
live in shame cowardly: Wha^ Sylla had thus answered: than Volux counseled him
to depart from that place and to remove forward by night. Thereto Sylla
consented: and anon commanded his soldiers to refreshe them in their tents
with such vitels as they had, and to make plenty of fires over all the place to
the intent that if their ennemies were nere: in beholding the fires they should
think that they would not remove thens that night. But in the first hour of the
night Sylla commanded al his souldyours to leave their fires brenning and so
to depart forward in their iournay with silence: so they did. And went all the
night long: and even with the son rysinge they al being weryed: Sylla pytched
his tents again. With that certain horsemen of the Mauriens brought word
that Iugurth had taken place to his tents: and rested about the distance
of.ij. mile before them. When these tidings were hard among the Romans: a
marvelous and great fear entered the minds of them all. For they thought
themself betrayed of Volux. And so environed with falsehode and treason. Many
advised to take punyshemente of Volux: saying that it was a thing unworthy to
suffer him to escape unpunished for so great a myschiefe and treason against
them committed. But how beit that Sylla was inwardely of the same opinion,
nevertheless he defended the Maurien from damage: And exhorted his men to be of
strong and bold minds: saying that often before that time it had been seen
that a few worthy men had won victory of a much multitude of cowards. And how
much the less that they spared their bodies in batayl fro fightinge, so much
the surer should they be: and that it seemed no man to whom god and nature had
given hands to defend his body, to seek defense is his feet unarmed by
runninge away: And that in such a ieopardy a noble soldier ought not to
turn away his body from his enemy though he were naked and unarmed.

Wha^ Sylla had exhorted his men with such words, he called unto him Volux: and
called into wytnes Jupiter and all his ydols to record the falsehod and
treason of Bocchus, father of Volux, which had so betrayed him. Tha^ for as
much as Sylla supposed that Volux had brought him by treason into the hands of
Iugurth by counsel and commandment of his father Bocchus he commanded Volux
anon to depart from his company and sight. Volux pyteousely weeping,
besoughte Sylla not to believe such things in him: and said that certainly by
gyle nor by treason was nothing done of him nor of his father, but rather by
Iugurth, which by his subtlety had espied and searched their iournay and ways
by his espies, and so known the same. But at conclusion said Volux, sith it is
so that Iugurth has no great company, and that his hope, his trust and
conforte for the most part depends on my father, I think that he shall not be
so bold to do any damage to you openly while I am in your company, which
may record his deeds to my father. Wherefore Sylla to thentent that ye may
perceive that no treason is in me, I shall openly go with you alone by the
mids of the tents of Iugurth, and so safely convey you: and either send my
folk before, or else leave the^ here with your company, whether of both shall
please you best. This counsel was allowed of Sylla: and anon without tarry he
proceeded forward with all his company through the mids of the tents of
Iugurth. And because this was suddenly done Iugurthe not knowinge thereof
before, he marueyled much thereat, and douted long what was to be done. But at
last he suffered the Romans to pass and escape safe and sound for love of
Volux, and dread of Bocchus his father. And within a few days after, Volux
and Sylla with their company came to Bocchus where they intended.

Of the metyng and secret apoyntmentes between Bocchus and Sylla, and how
between them they both abused Asper the imbassadour of Iugurth. The.lxiiii.
Chapyter.
AT the same season was with Bocchus a certain young Numidian named Asper,
send before Bocchus from Iugurth by craft and subtyltie, to epsy his counsel,
as soon as it was heard that Bocchus had send for Silla. This Numidian was
much and familiarly co^uersant with Bocchus at that time. Moreover there was
an other named Dabar the son of Massagrade, which of his fathers side was of
the stock of Massinissa: but of his mothers side unlike of birth, for his
mother was borne of a co^cubine. This Dabar (as I have said) was at this season
also in the company of Bocchus: and to him dear and well-beloved for subtel wit
and great arts which he had done before: and namely because that Bocchus had
found and proved him trusty and faithful many times before. Anon Bocchus
send this Dabar to Sylla commanding Dabar to show him that he was ready to do
every thing which the Romans to him would command or assign. And that
Silla himself should apoint, and chose a time and place where they might
commen together of their matters: and that he should not fere nor dout though
the embassadoure of Iugurthe were there with him. For he had reserved al things
touching their counsel hole till coming of Silla: and of nothing had
appointed, communed, nor concluded with the same imbassadour of Iugurth. Which
imbassadour was called thider to the intent that their common besinesses might be
done more at liberty and with less suspection of Iugurth: for by other means
they could not resyste nor make provision against his giles. Such words
send Bocchus to Silla: by his trusty secuant Dabar. But not withstanding al
these fair promises of Bocchus it was understand that he prolonged the
Romans and the Numidians in hope of peace, rather for falshod and treason
after the credence of affricans: than for profet to the Romans or troth of
such things as he promised to Silla. And often times he cast in his mind and
douted whether he might betray Iugurth to the Romans: or else Silla to
Iugurthe: the pleasure and desire of his mind advised, moved, and counseled
him against the Romans: but the dread which he had of punishment in time to
come: moved him with the Romans. But to our purpose: Sylla answered to Dabar
the messanger of Bocchus that he would come thither, and first speak a litel of
the peace and of such other things in presence of Asper the imbassadour of
Iugurth: but concerning the remenant of the besinesse: he would differ that to
commen secretly with Bocchus, few or none called to counsel And also he taught
Dabar what words Bocchus should answer unto him again, when they should come
to communicacion: and so departed Dabar. But when Silla saw his time he went
to Bocchus, and said that he was sent from Marius the consul to enquire if he
would lever peace or war: and whereon he would conclude Than Bocchus (as Dabar had
warned him before) commanded Silla to return again after.x. days and than
should an answer be given unto him. For at that time nothing was concluded.
That answer well noted and hard Asper the embassadoure of Iugurth, which was
sent to espy the intreatement: and so thought he that nothing should be treated
nor concluded without his knowledge. And thus after this answer Bocchus and
Silla departed: each to their tents.

Of the second coming together of Bocchus and Sylla, and the words of Bocchus
head to Sylla, and replicacion and answer of Sylla again to him. And how
Bocchus granted and concluded to betraye Iugurth to the Romans. The.lxv.
Chapter.
BUt after that much of the night was ouerpassed, Bocchus priuelye send for
Sylla, none being in their company, save such as on both parts might truly
interpret and declare the sentence and understanding of their words. And also
Dabar the said messanger was present, which solemply swore and promised to be
a faithful interpreter of both their sayings and sentences. Tha^ Bocchus anon
began his words in this sentence

I have thought forsooth: that it should never have fortuned that I the
greattest king of al the^ in these lands and rychest of al them that I know:
should have been bound to a mean and private person. And forsooth Sylla or ever
I hard of you: I have given help and socours to many other men. To some of
mine own voluntary and frewil. And to some other: required of the^: my self
not neding help of any man. But now since I have known you: I have need of
your help and frendshyp of which I am glad: notwithstanding other men ar wont
to be sorry of such fortune. And certainly this need which I have of your
friendship is not of me counted damage nor loss: but much profet and pleasure.
For inwardly in my mind nothing is derer, nor more acceptable: which ye may
conveniently prove if it please you: demand and take of me armor, men,
treasour: and use and occupy the same as your own. And think ye for certain
that while ye live and I together: I can never render worthy thanks to your
kindness: nor condignly recompense your great humanite: but ever my good will and
mind shall be hole and new against you. And certainly if I may know your mind
and will: ye shall not need to desire of me: I shall prevent your requests with
mi benefits: so that ye shall coueyt nothing in vain. Verily as I think it
is less reprouable and less dishonor a king to be over come with armor:
than with liberalite. Wherefore I have concluded in mind that a man shall rather
over come me in battle with weapen and force of arms: than with liberalite.

But touching your commen weal (for whose besines ye be send hither as
procuratour of the same) this is my sentence and mind in few words. Against
the Romans, nor against their empire: I never moved nor made war: nor to make
bataile against them: it was never in my mind by my will. But the bounds of my
marchesse have I endeavored me to defend against the violence of your armed
men. But this I leave and set a side: sith I se that pleases you to do the
same: execute and continue ye battle with Iugurth as ye will. And as touching
me: I shall not ouerpasse the water of Mulucha, which was bounds between my
marches and Micipsa while he lived. Nor into my country I shall not suffer
Iugurth from hens forth to enter for socours, as he has done in time passed.
Farthermore if ye desire any thing of me conveniently: which I may worthily
grant, my royalte not distayned: it shall not be denied to you. Thus concluded
Bocchus his words.

Unto these words Sylla answered for his own part but moderately and with
few words. But touching the peace and business concerning the commen weal:
he spoke many words, whereof the conclusion was such.

King Bocchus I insure and promise you: that the Romans shall not be unkind
to you if ye do some pleasure to them: which may rather long to them all
holly in comen: than in me alone. And think ye for certain: that they which
have overcome you in battle: shall likewise overcome you with liberalite,
kyndnesse, and good deeds: if ye so contend with them: which thing is now
ready in your power to do: consyderinge that ye have Iugurth ready at your will
and pleasure. Therefore among all benefits or pleasurs: ye can do none more
acceptable unto the Romans: than to deliver unto the^ Iugurth. By this means
shall they be much beholden to you: and think ye steadfastly: it shall not be
unrewarded on our behalf. For tha^ shall the Senate grant to you amyte and
peace: and also a part of Numidy which ye do now claim: shall than be granted
to you unrequired.

Bocchus heryng these words of Sylla: first excused himself by the affinyte
which was between him and Iugurth: and by the long familyarite and
aquaintance which they had together: saying also yt a bond of peace was
confederate and sworn between them. And also that he fered and suspected that
if he so did: his own subjects should hate him therefore, which much loved
Iugurth: and greatly hated the Romans. But not withstandyng these words of
Bocchus: Sylla desysted not to attyse and counsel him: till at last he agreed
and consented to his desire, promysinge to do every thing as Sylla required
him. But to thyntent to feign a treaty of peace (of which Iugurth weryed in war
was much desirous) they ordained such craft: as to their purpose seemed most
expedient. But when they had ymagined and devised al things after their
minds: than both they departed in sonder: and returned again to their rest.

How Bocchus betrayed Iugurth and delivered him bound to Sylla. The.lxvi.
Chapter.
ON the morrow after Bocchus called to him Asper the imbassadour of Iugurth, and
said to him that he understood of Sylla by the ^ntrepretacio^ of Dabar that
the war might be finished upon certain conditions. Wherefore he bad him go and
inquire the mind and pleasure of his king in that behalf. Asper of these
tidings was glade and took his leave of Bocchus: and departed to the tents of
Iugurth: and certyfied him of ye same. Iugurth showed to Asper: al his mind
and pleasure concerning the premises. And within.viii. days after send him
again to Bocchus. When Asper was returned again to Bocchus: he showed to him
the will of Iugurth saying that he coueted to do al thing which should be
commanded to him of Bocchus: but he had but small confydence in Marius. For
as much as the peace which often before had been conuented and appointed of the
Roman captayns had anon after ben frustrate: and broken of them again. But
if ye will (said Asper to Bocchus that peace shall be confirmed of the Romans
with Iugurth and you also: Iugurthe desires and requires you to labor so:
that Sylla, Iugurth, and ye may come together to communycation: as if it were to
treat of peace and that ye will there betraye and deliver Sylla to him. For if
ye may ones bring such a man into power and hands of Iugurth: anon after it
shall fortune without dowte that peace shall be made and granted to him by comen
assent of the Senators: and commens of Rome also. And that: to thyntent to
recover Sylla again out of the hands of Iugurthe. For without dout the
Romans will not suffer so noble a man to be left in hands and danger of their
enemies. And namely: when they shall understand him taken, not by his own
folly nor cowardice: but in besines belonging to the common weal.

Bocchus hering these words, reuolued and cast in his mind what he might answer
to the^: but at last he granted thereto. But whether he douted so long before
he granted for subtilty or very truth, it is hard to decern^. But this is
plainly known yt for the most part like as the wylles and minds of kings be
vehement unmoderat and hastye: right so be they mouinge, unsteadfast and
variable: and often aduers and contrary to their own self: and with themself
repugnant. But to our matter: Bocchus assigned to Asper a place and time: where
Sylla and they should commen together of the peace. And in the mean while
sometime he co^muned secretly with Sylla sometime with Asper ambassador of
Iugurth, treating them both mekely and curtesly: and promisyng one self thing
unto the^ both, Wherefore they both were glad: and also each of the^ both had
good hope in the promysses of Bocchus.

But the night before that day: which was assigned to intreatment of the peace:
Bocchus called unto him diverse of his friends, as if he would have taken
counsel of them: and than immediately he changed that mind, commaundyng them
again to avoid from him. And so (none of his counsel about him) he stood
all alone reuoluyng and tourning in mind many things by him self, changing
oftentimes in countenance, and color variable and diverse: aperyng forthwarde
by tokens of fear conceived in his mind and expressed by outward tokens of
his body. In so much: that all if he expressed not his mind by words:
nevertheless this often changing of countenance, declared the secrets of his
heart. But at conclusion: after long conflyct had within himself: at last he
commanded Sylla to be called unto him. And than after his advise and counsel
he devised and prepared al things concerning the prodicion of Iugurth.

After this counsel concluded: as soon as the day light apered: tidings were
brought to Bocchus, that Iugurth was not far thens: and coming toward him.
Bocchus this herynge: anon prepared himself and proceeded forth against him
accompanied with a few of his friends, and also with Sylla: fayning that he
went so forth to mete with Iugurth and to receive him, by cause of honor. And
thus they proceeded forward: till at last they came to an open heath, where
they might easily se the coming of Iugurthe: which place was appointed
before to their treason. For in diverse valeys of the same heath: were armed
men lyeng in wayt ready and appointed before by Bocchus: for to assail Iugurth
and his company, when signs should be given to them: to issue forth of their
lurking places. Anon Iugurth with many of his men about him came to the same
place all unarmed: as apointement was made before. For it was ordained that
Bocchus, Iugurth, and Sylla: should come together to communicacion: each one
with a small company, and all unarmed.

Anon as Iugurth was come thider: king Bocchus gave a toke^ to his men, which
lay in wait for Iugurth. Anon as they hard the toke^: suddenly they brake
forth and invaded Iugurth and his company: compasinge them about on every
side. Without great labor all the company of Iugurth were murdered: and he
himself taken and bound hand and foot, and so delivered unto Sylla: which
without tarry led him forth and delivered him unto Marius: whose heart was
replenyshed and environed, with joy inestimable.

How Marius was received into Rome with tryumphe, and how Iugurth was cast
into prison where he continued in miserable captivity till he dyed. The.lxvii.
Chapter
AFfter that Iugurth thus bound was delivered by Bocchus to Sylla, and tha^ to
Marius: anon all the Numidians submitted and yielded themself to the Romans.
Marius with great wisdom set an order among the people, and garnyshed and
fortified the towns, and with the remenaunt of his army took his journey
again to Rome, leadinge Iugurth and his two sons bound with him, with
innumerable other prisoners, great treasure, olipha^tes and armor which he had
won in the war of Iugurth. But after ye tydinges were brought to Rome how the
war was ended in Numidy: and how Iugurth was led thitherward bound and prisoner
anon the Senate and commons assembled to counsel, and Marius was creat co^sul
again for the next year in his absence. And by decre and ordinance, the
province of France was committed to him to be recovered.

For the same time while Marius warred in Numidy, and took Iugurth prisoner:
that country of France (whose people that time were named Cimbrians) rebelled
against thempire of Rome. Against whom the Romans send forth to repress their
rebellion a great army with.ii. captains: one named Q. Scipio, the other M.
Manlius: which at last with froward fortune had a great and grievous batail
with the same frenchmen Cimbrians: in which both these Roman capteines were
overcome, and twice lost the field. Of the Roman men of war were slain.lxxx.
M: of tylmen and pages, xl. thousand. Thus was this batel foughte^ with so ill
fortune to the Romans, that the city of Rome, and all the country of Italy
tre^bled for fear thereof. In so much that both the Romans which lived at
that time, and al their progeny which succeeded them counted al other nations
ready to their obeisance, and to win honor by the^: but they thought never to
contend in batel with this nation of Frenchmen, to win glory and honor by
the^, but rather to defend the^ self and their liberty: which thing if they
might do, they counted the^ self fortunate. Wherefore (as I have before
recounted) the Senate and commons of Rome decreed this province of France to
Marius for to revenge the death of their men, and to recover the country.

But to our purpose: when Marius should enter into Rome, he was joyfully
received with great glory and triumph, whereof the order was such. Marius him
self was set on hye in a golden chair, which was drawn of four white
palfreis. Iugurth and his two sons, with many other noble men who^ he brought
captive from Numidi, proceeded before his chariot, their hands and arms bound
as prisoners. Farther, for more ample oste^tacion of his glory, and to declare
how much he had enriched the common weal of Rome, all the elephants, armor,
jewels, tresure and riches which he had won in Numidy of Iugurth, were led
and borne before him. Tha^ all the Senators, all the officers and noble men of
Rome, with an unmeasurable multitude of commons received him with all honor and
joy: and conveyed him to the principal palace of Rome, named the Capitol: where
he made sacrifice with a bull to Jupiter, for his victory after the custume of
that time. His sacrifice ended: then was he conuaied to the Senate house in his
robe triumphall as never co^sul was brought before his time. Marius was
received at Rome with such triumph at the kalendes of January. From thens
forth all the hope of comfort health, socoure, and wealth of Rome rested in
Marius.

Iugurth was cast in prison, where he ended his wretched life in miserable
captivity, and manifold calamities, as to such a murderer unnatural, and
tyranne inhumaine was convenient.

FINIS.
Thus ends the famous Cronicle of the war which the Romans had against
Iugurth usurper of the kyngedome of Numydie which Cronicle is compyled in
laten by the renowned Romayne Saluste: And translated into English by sir
Alexander Barkeley priest, at commandment of the right high and mighty
Prince Thomas duke of Northfolke. And imprinted at London in Foster lane by
Ihon Waley.


