A form of Christian policy drawn out of French by Geffray Fenton.

A work very necessary to al sorts of people generally, as wherein is
contained doctrine, both universal, and special touching the institution of al
Christian profession: and also convenient perticularly for all Magistrates and
governors of commonweals, for their more happy Regiment according to God.

Mon heur viendra. Jmprinted at London by H. Middelton for Rafe Newbery,
dwelling in Fleetestreat a little above the Conduit.

Anno. 1574.

To the right Honorable Sir William Cecill Knight, Baron of Burghley, Knight of
the Honorable order of the Garter, one of the Lords of her Majesty's privy
Council and Lord high Treasurer of England, Ieffray FENTON wishes long life.
THERE IS nothing in this world more worthy then to hold soueraintie over
people and nations, nor any thing more happy then where a whole common weal
is disposed in conversation of justice and piety: which, yet if they be not
joined with true Religion, can hold no long continuance, for that changing
according to the perplexities of times happening daily in Realms and Countries,
they suffer alteration by little and little, and in the end slide into vices
and imperfections, which breed the reuolucions and ruins of all estates.
Religion can not be entertained, if it be not backed with civil Justice,
which, reciprocallie has need of a devout piety: for that as Religion is
just, and justice of it self, is holy and religious: so they are the two
estates which the scripture names the true foundacions and pillors of commonweals. They embrace and kiss one another, and (as Hipocrates twyns) they are
sick together, and well together, they laugh together and weep together, and
suffer in common eue^ like and self affections: There is nothing necessary to
the one, which is not profitable to the other, nor any thing meet for the one
which is not made worthy of both, yea they concur in the same sociable union
which we see observed in the parts and members of an entier body, who, albeit
they suffer distinction in their several office and function, yet they aspire
and travel to one common end, which is to entertain security in the whole.
Many ancient Magistrates therefore, foreseeing the necessity of Monarchies to
be erected upon these two pillors, consulted to raise ordonances for the
perpetual continuance of the Church and common weal in one indissoluble
unity: of those some followed Moses, who as he was inspired of God, and
persuaded the people of Israel to be obedient to him: so that eternal Lord
sent them holy commandments to establish the actions of their minds: and
rates of policy to rule the residue appertaining to the necessity of life:
wherein as by a divine fear and reverence those people durst not attempt any
thing contrary to those holy laws, so the statuts pollitike, and substitutes
of justice, so supplied the residue, that their commonweals, so long as
Religion was maintained and justice observed, and either one subsisting equally
in the administration of affairs: seldom suffered other change then from
good to better, and never from ill to worsse. Much is required in the Magistrate
to support these two pillors which hold up the whole: which then he does
best perform, when, both in the council, and action of things, he bringes
the one to consult with the other, as upon whose unity dependes the safety
of all, and without whose conformity and full agreement, much less that there
can be any surety of policy, seeing of the contrary, things can not but
diuolue to revolt, even as in a temple or other building, whose foundacio^
being divided, the whole work can not but shake, having no stay to keep him
in integrity. For this cause (right honorable) have I ben bold to put out this
discourse of Christian policy, qualified according to the rule of the
infallible truth, which is the Scripture, which only shows to man the true
and right way for his assured government in the vocation he ought to follow,
whether it be particular or publik, and wherein he ca^ no more err, then the
skillful Architector, following the line, rule, and compass of his art. Many
and great are the commandments in the Bible recommended straightly to
Governors, as well Ecclesiastike as civil, to hold always in their hand
that holy book, learning not only that belonges to the office of their own
estates, but also what they ought to prescribe for the policy of others, for
whom they are to render account in the judgment of God: wherein as to
travailing Councillors, subject to the service of sundry great causes, is
reserved slender opportunity to study the Bible at large, either to find out
the duty of their private charges or to limite statutes to the multitude: and
much less that the popular sort (for want of instruction) has means to
understand how far their office stretches by the doctrine of that book:
eue^ so I judged it appertayning to my duty, as well for the ease of the one,
as advertisement of the other, and common benefit of both, but specially for
the dutiful affection I have always borne to your Honor, to offer to the same
particularly these Christian memorials, representing the very course and
purtraite of the present government under her most Gracious Majesty, by the
careful direction of a most grave and wise counsel, amongst whom it seems
God has dispersed the very virtues and spirit of Moses, leading this Realm
in such reverence to God, and obedience to her Highness, that al nations
confess that here the mighty holy one of Israel has chosen his Sanctuary,
and here has he raised her right excellent Majesty to that estate of power
and virtue, that only she has in her hands the atonement of most part of
the nations in this circuit of the earth which we call Christendom: Amongst
some of whose Princes and chiefest Potentates, as I have heard much attributed
to the grauetie and providence of this worthy Senate for the quiet regiment of
her Majesty's Realms in these co^spiring seasons: so, God grant that as they
have happily begone, they may also long continue (under her Highness) careful
watchmen in the watch tower of this Church and common weal of England,
laboring still to maintain peace, first with God, which he will the^
perpetually assure and ratify, when he finds him self sought to and served
with one only true Religion: and then to bring so many infinite souls and
people (the natural subjects of these dominions) to bear to her Majesty but
one unfeigned heart and obedience: which cannot but happen, if there be suffered
no divorce, nor controversy in faith, and that in the church and common weal,
remain but one constant consent and will touching the regiment and disposing of
all affairs.

J humbly beseech your Honor, receive this poor testimony of my good will,
not with any judgment of the merit or worthiness of the work, but as a simple
interpretor of the duty I owe to your rare and reverent virtues: in which, I
am bold to repose much for the protection of this my small labor, and
therwithall (according to my long profession) I humbly dedicate my self and
service to your Honor, on whom J doubt not, but God will suffer still to
attend that good Angel which he appointed to be the guide of Tobias, and to
accomplish all his virtuous and just desires. At my chamber in the Black
Friars, this xvj. of May. 1574.

Your Honors in assured and faithful service, Geffray Fenton.

A Table of the particular Chapters through the whole treatise.
The first Book.
WHat is first requisite in the well governing of a common weal: how Civil
pollecie ought to be conformable to the celestial government: what good
comes of good pollecie: what manner of governors and judges ought to be chosen
to direct public estates. Chap. 1. fol. 1. What governors God has chosen,
and how he has declared them by miracles: they ought all to be instructed at
the entrey of the tabernacle, and why: the great benefit coming of good
Judges, and why god does ordeine some wicked. Chap. 2. fol. 6. Governors
chosen according to GOD, make present proof of their election to the profit of
the common weal: Let them know how to command, and subjects how to obey, the
better to make their common weal flourish, as inferior members obey the more
worthy: Magistrates ought to be as Fathers: the law must be inviolable: but
specially one true amity between the governor and the subject. Chap. 3. fol.
11. There be two principalities or pollecies which ought to be knit together in
unity of friendship, as the soul and the body without difference: they ought
to aid one another with perpetual succors. Chap. 4. fol. 16 The faults of
the Clergy ought to be corrected: governors ought above al things to provide
good Preachers, that the rude and plain sort may be taught in familiar
doctrine: All sorts ought to be constrained to be at the sermon: such
constraint is authorized by ye scripture, and is both profitable to ye common
weal, and wholesome to such as are constrained, Chap. 5. fol. 20. The wise
worldlings now a days would not willingly have sermons, as also certain
pastors desire nothing less the^ to preach, laying the blame of the misery of
this time upon Sermons. Chap. 6. fol. 25 A refutation of such as hold that
people are not bound to hear so many sermons: wherefore are the Pastors if
they feed not the flock with the food of the Scriptures. Chap. 7. fol. 30 In
how much good Physicians are necessary to commonweals, by so much such as be
evil are hurtful and dangerous: who ought to be chosen Physicians in a
town. Chap. 8. fol. 35 Abuses happening in the world by the supposed name of
Physicians, Apothicaries, and Chirurgions Chap. 9. fol. 42 God has erected
Physic, and wills that the Physician be honored. Chap. 10. fol. 48
The second Book.
JVdges and governors have of God many severe commandments in the Scripture
to exhibit justice by rightful laws. Chapter. 1. fol. 52 Judges are warned
not to be credulous, nor to judge by reports to take heed of affections, and
not to judge by particular opinion. etc. Chap. 2. 62 In humane things
Magistrates ought to follow the law natural: and in causes divine, the
doctrine of faith, and the love of God. etc. Chap. 3. fol. 68. Men may use the
moral laws of the old testament, but not the ceremonial and judicial
applied to the times and manners of the Jews, which Jesus Christ and also S
Paul does confirm these were natural, and therefore ought to be eternal. etc,
Cha. 4. fol. 72 The law natural grounded upon reason was two thousand years
in use without other ordenances saving the Sabbath and Circumcision. etc. Chap.
5. fol. 78 Governors ought to punish by death such as God condemns to
eternal and temporal death. etc. Chap. 6. fol. 83 Sins committed against
the second Table are worthy of death, even so deserve they eternal damnation.
etc. Chap. 7. fol. 89 Diverse punishments of whoredom according to the
diversity of kinds of the same sin, Chap. 8. fol, 94 Continuance of the
punishment of this sin according to his other kinds. Chap. 9. fol. 98 Theft
was not punished in the law but by restitution of double, treble, and four
fold, but now for just causes, it is punnished by death: theft by necessity in
some sort excusable. Chap. 10 fol. 102 There is a double lust or vrlawfull
covetousness forbidden us. etc. Chap. 11. fol. 108
The third Book.
ENumeration of sins whereof men make no conscience, and are oftentimes in the
condition of grievous sins: their quality and grauetie do vary. etc. Chap.
1. fol. 115 Flattery is declared very hurtful to commonweals and families: it
makes young people rise into great pride etc. Chap. 2. fol. 119 Let none
glorify himself but in his poverty, necessity and affliction. etc. Chap. 3.
fol. 123 Scoffers, and men of pleasant conceit pretending none other end but to
increase pleasure, are rebukeable: but more, if their testing torn to the
reproach of any: so do they offend God. Chap. 4. fo. 129 Plays, which of
themselves bear no vice are not disalowable, in respect of their ends and
lawful causes: unlawful games at Dice, are causes of much evil. Chap. 5.
fol. 133 Daunces, with their wanton songs, at this day are vain and unchaste.
Chap. 6. fol. 137 Minstrels are unworthy of the state and fellowship of towns
men, as also puppet players etc. Chap. 7 fol. 141. Idleness is a vice most
common, bringing with it most other offenses, and yet no conscience made of it.
Chap. 8 fol 147 The rich sort have more to travel then the poor, and in
what: such as labor in mind, travel more then the painful laborer. Chap. 9.
fol. 152 Governors ought not to suffer any idle men in their commonweals,
etc Chap. 10. fol 156 In all creatures is seen a perpetual labor, whet^^^ in
heaven, in earth, or in the sea, etc. Chap. 11. fol 161 There be diverse sorts
of idle men, some work certain hours etc. Chap 12. 1^5 Loy^e e^s accustomed
to beg, will be applied to no other trade etc. Chap. 13. fol. 169
The fourth Book.
THe simple, impotent, and true needy poor, we ought to hold in singular and
dear care. Chap. 1. fol. 172 Many have given all that they have to the poor
to follow Jesus Christ, in hope to be happy, etc. Chap. 2. fol. 176 Compassion
ought chiefly to be showed to poor maids for the infirmity of the kind, etc.
Chap. 3. fol. 180 Hospitality and alms in all times have been in singular
estimation, etc. Chap 4. fol. 183 We must not fear that by giving Alms we
shall be poor, for God, etc Chap. 5. fo. 185 Still touching the recommendation
of hospitality and alms. Chap. 6. fo. 187 General and special
recommendation for prisoners, and that for debtes, we ought not lightly to
emprison one an other. fo. 189
The fifth Book.
OF the institution of youth, with a praise of free schools, etc. Chap. 1.
fol. 191 What Principal and Regents ought to be called to institute a
College, etc. Chap. 2 fol. 190 A continuance of the discourse of Colleges by
other comparisons. Chap. 3. fol. 193 Wisdom, science, virtue, diligence, and
fervent zeal to their disciples, are very necessary for scholemaisters. Chap.
4. fol. 197 Instructions to know, by the way of contrary oppositions by the
comparisons of the other chapters, the miseries happening by lewd
scholemaisters. Chap. 5. fol. 202 Amplifications of the said comparisons
touching wicked masters, etc. Chap. 6. fol 206 Continuance of the said
comparisons. Chap. 7. fol. 211 Masters ought to instruct their disciples, etc.
Chap. 8. 214 A continuance of the praise of science, etc. Chap. 9. fo. 219
Examples of commodities which science brings to the learned, etc. Chap. 10.
fol. 223 It is necessary for many reasons, that all scholars remain in one
College. Chap. 11. folio 227 In a College or school there ought to be
statutes authorized by the Universities, etc. Chap. 12. fo. 215 Refutation of
the false judgments of some proud worldlings, touching the profession of
school masters. Chap. 13. fol. 235 An exhortation to young children to
study. Chap. 14. fol. 241
The sixth Book.
OF the office of every estate, and first of the duty of the husband to his
wife. Chap. 1. 247 A continuance of the matter of marriage, and the duty of
etc. Chap. 2. fo. 255 Still touching the duty of the wife. Chap. 3. fol. 263
The office of fathers and mothers, and the duty of children. Chapter 4 folio
273 Still touching the education of young children Chap. 5. fo: 280 In what
duty children are bound to their fathers and mothers Chap. 6. fol. 289 The
duty of masters toward their servant. Cha. 7. 398 How men have been made
noble, and of their duty toward their subieetes or tenantes. Chap. 8. fol.
307 The duty of Advocates or Counselors at law. Cha. 9. 315 The duty of
Merchants. Chap. 10. fo. 321 How the Merchant may perform his lawful trades
and gain justly his estate. Chap. 11. fol. 328
The seventh Book.
AL other estates are comprehended in those that have been already debated:
the explication of the qualities of persons. Chap. 1. fo. 339 Still touching
the qualities of persons. Chap. 2. fol. 345 Of Christian amity, and how many
sorts of friendship there be. Chap. fo. 350 How a common weal is governed,
and wherein it erreth. Chap. 4. fol. 359 Council of the remedies to cure and
preserve commonweals from misery. Chap. 5. fol. 366 How God some times
punishes a whole people for a secret sin, etc. Chapter 6. fol. 375 To remedy
all evils, the causes must be taken away, the discretion and wisdom requisite
thereunto. Chapter 8. fol 440 Confutation of human philosophy touching the
affairs of faith, wherein, and in things serious, men ought not to decyde but
according to the scripture. Chap. 9. folio 345
FINIS.
What is first requisite in the well governing of a common weal: how Cyuil
policy ought to be conformable to the celestial government: what good
comes of good policy: what manner of governors and Judges ought to be
chosen to direct public states. The first Chapter.
TO dyrect a true and Christian policy, it is necessary in the first
consyderation, that such as are chief disposers of the same, be chosen
according to the will and ordinance of God, of whom (in respect of their
institution) they are to be favored and assisted in their Counsels, actions,
Romans 13.
and gouernements, as also for that all power and rule belonging to him, the
administration thereof depends likewise upon him: wherein he has ordained for
us in earth a form to rule, guide, and govern this inferior Hierarchy, by
the example of that supreme and celestial estate of Angels and happy souls
above in all good order and perfect pollecie: So that (by thimitation of the
same) it is requisite that we be directed by wise Magistrates, who having power
to command, may use simplicity in the measure and rate of their Authority,
and we in our common life expressing an immovable zeal to obedience, may
concur with them, Ephe. 4. 1. Pet. 3.
and agree altogether in one law and doctrine, one will and judgment: And to
be short, (the better to exercise one universal and holy conversation,
standing upon puretie of affection and will, with one true religion in God) we
must observe one unity in Justice, one integrity of life and manners,
fulfillyng always our duty to our neighbor, the better to prepare us with
community of heart, voice, and example to love and fear God, and with one
mouth to praise, honor, and serve him with ready obedience and humility to
his commandments, together with sincere and mutual Love one to another,
expressed in Acts of perfect charity: And this, as it is the mark and end
of the Law, the Magistrate, and Christian government, being directed
according to the form celestial, and example above: So, in it we declare our
selves to be common members of one body (for a common Weal is a body Civil)
so knit together with indissoluble unity in friendship, that we suffer one
self zeal and affection, and give one common aid and succor to all our
affairs, releeuing every particular necessitye with one constant and
perpetual rate and measure of compassion: in this sort are we reduced into
one body pollitike, and by this policy, drawn into one Spirit, as being but
one in God, led and guided by his Spirit inwardly, and outwardly by wise
governors, even as God has planted in our natural body, members more
sovereign and perfect in nature to govern the others more inferior, the same
being more deuinelye resembled in the celestial Hierarchy, where the Spirits
endued with more grace and greater perfection, have by heavenly election, power
over the others: To this ought to be referred the example of electing
governors to public states, as both co^curring with the order of nature,
(with whom things of most perfection bear most rule) and also resembling the
Supreme government, from whence Moses had commandment to draw the plot of
his terrestrial pollecie, calling unto him such as were most wise and perfect
above others, wherein God gives him advertisement by Iethro his Father inlaw,
to provide such governors by ye counsel which he gives him in this sort:
Provide says he to be Judges over others, wise men, whom thou shall chose
amongst the people fearing God, true, and lovers of truth, and such as hate
Covetousness: of them make some Tribunes, who may stand as general Judges over
all: Create others Centeniers to rule over an hundred: Cinquanteniers, to bear
aucthoritye over Fiftye, and Disiniers to command over ten: Let these Judge
the people in all seasons according to their order and charge, and bringing to
thee, the causes of greatest importance, specially such as concern God, let
them judge the rest: So shall thou be discharged of that great burden of
labor where in vain thou dyddest consume thy self before. In this advise of
God to Moses, we see is expressed what ought to be the office, nature, and
state, of such as are chosen to lead and judge others according to God, and
that not only in high and stately Courts, but in places of right mean
sort, who, notwithstanding as in degrees, so also in knowledge and virtue,
Romans 1.
ought to aspire to excellency: Such then be wise men, who with the sense of
divine and human learning, be principally instructed in the knowledge of
God, and understand his will and judgment, with contemplacion of the causes,
effects, and nature of all things: And being wise in this sort, as their
exact knowledge will lead them to give a perfect judgment of al things, so
being ignorant in the least, much less that they can judge in integretye,
seeing they can not merit the name of wise men: But because (according to
Saint Paul) men may have knowledge, and yet in their doings be void of
integritye, Iethro adds the fear of God, that is, that knowing God, they do
also fear and serve him: For such men would not willingly fear God, who
know his judgments to be no less horrible to them that displease him, then
terrible to such as execute false Judgment, whereby truth is perverted,
wrong pronounced to the multitude, and their proper conscience defiled: And
therefore, as he would have them to be firm in simplicitye of word, Ioh.
8.14.
Doctrine, and judgment, without instabilytye in cases of truth, which by
their wisdom they know to be so agreeable to God, as he is called the
self truth: so it is a breach of their duty, if they be subject to the
error of mutacion. They must also hate Covetousness, Ephe. 5. Colos. 3. 1. Tim.
6.
as in which is laid up the root of al evils: A vice of more damnable perril
then all the rest, and of a nature so wicked, that it leads men to Idolatrye,
by preferring Gold and glorious dross of the world before the living God,
drawing from them in the end all fear, Religion, Reverence, and knowledge of
God, and translate their hearts to infidelity both toward Heaven and earth.
Like as by lamentable experience, we see that oftentimes the greedines of a
wretched present, leads the covetous Judge into such blind and reprobate
sense, that to pervert Justice, he sticks not to commit his soul to sale,
Loving rather the base Earth, then the majesty of heaven, to handle Gold then
behold the Son, to be ritche then honest, and lastly, seeks to lay up his
felicity in his transitory presence of wealth, rather then to lift up his mind
to aspire to the life everlasting. So that in such as are chosen to the
regiment of pollecie, ought to be no note of avarice, and much less, any
proof of corruption for doing any act of injustice: seeing that of all other
there is this peril in that vice, that being once made ritche by covetousness,
there is no limit or measure of their extorcion, even as to a small flame, if
you add increase of wod, you raise it easily to a greater blase: For, by how
much more there is offer and mean of gain, even by so much more does the
raging zeal of aua^ice grow great, yea, euent^^ i^ be unquenchable in the
Ritche covetous man: it takes continual increase, not only with the poison of
riches, but also with the years of their age, where other vices carye this
common property to diminishe with time: Eccles. 12.^4.
the same being the cause why the Scripture says, There is nothing more
wicked then a covetous man: for he is not only wicked to others by bringing
poverty upon them in rauishing their goods, but also he is the confounder of
him self, as touching his soul, which he bequeathes to the Devil for
nothing, and oftentimes sells it for a bare hope of a base profit, executing
the like iniurye upon his body, from the which he oftentimes restraines
natural and necessary nourishment, and becomes a nigarde to his health by
sparing his purse, makes his mind and body subject to passions and perpetual
labors, shorteneth his temporal life, and which worse is, loses everlasting
felicitye: So that, as Jesus Christ, and after him Saint Paul, not without
cause, 1. Cor 6. Ephesians. 5. Luke 12. Romans 15. 1. Cor. 5 8.
do exhort in great affection to flee covetousness, as the nurse of infidelity,
the mother of perdition, and lastly the infectious root of al evils to such as
follow it: so, if this vice bring such damnable miseries to all mankind, as in
respect of his continual wretchedness, it ought chiefly to be avoided of the
Judge in whom ought not to appear so much as a suspicion of such evil,
insomuch that besides the extreme peril of his Soul, infinite are the temporal
iniquityes which flow from a covetous Judge, in whom (for gainesake) is seldom
found any difficulty to offer to hassard, the goods, honor, and life, of
many persons, the same being the cause why the Sons of Samuel were deposed
from their judgment seat, and why Cambises caused one of his Judges to be
slain quick, and with his skin covered his chair, the better to advertise the
son and successors of the said Judge, that they were subject to the same
justice, if for gain they pronounced corrupt judgment.

What governors God has chosen, and how he has declared them by miracles:
they ought all to be instructed at the entree of the Tabernacle, and why: the
great benefit which comes of good Judges: and why God does ordain some
wicked. The.2. Chapter.
TO resort eftsoon to the matter of election of governors to commonweals,
who are Judges by their institution: with the counsel of Iethro, we will
join the example of God when he elected rulers over his people, Numb 11.
as Moses for the most perfect, and Joshua: and for his Tabernacle, Aaron and
Phineus: and then examine what commandment God gave to Moses for the
calling of seventy Elders or Senators, whom he ordained as soueraygne Judges
and governors over the Towns of Israel. Deute. 1.
Moses in his complaint to be insufficient to sustain so great a charge and
burden of affairs, was heard of God, and by him commanded to assemble at the
Gate of the Tabernacle Seventy of the most Ancient of Israel, such as were
most wise, and best experienced amongst the people, causing them to assist and
stay with him to impart with them graces requisite to the estate and office of
good governors: which graces he calls part and communion of the spirit of
Moses (whose perfect knowledge of things, exact judgment, Holy zeal, and
integritye of Faith, Doctrine, and life, such as were in him) so they are al
comprehended in the grace and gift of Prophecy which they had received of God,
Prophesying always miraculouslye, whereby they could not err in judgment,
because prophesye is without error, and much less suffer impunity of sin, for
that to Prophets is a propertye of singular zeal to execute the will and
judgment of God: 3. King 19. Romans 1.
neither would they be reproved in the action of those faults which they
condemned in others. By this we see what governors God choseth, and by his
example (standing as a precedent to us so far as we have power to Imitate
him) we see what godly respects we ought to observe in the choice of our
governors: So that chosing them ancient, and such as already have been
invested in the office of Masters and Leaders of the people, 3. Tim 5.
he prescribes further that they be wise, grave, constant, and of good
judgment, and such as doubt not to commit their life to peril for the duty of
their office, no more then old Age fears death which nature tells them is
not far of: and lastly that they have already exercised the state of
Masters, the better to furnishe their counsels with experience and examples.
Then where he wills that they assemble at the Tabernacle to institute them
and impart graces, he declares how they ought al to concur and agree in one
knowledge, fear, and service of God, without scisme or faction, observing
devout prayers to implore the inspiration, power, and grace of heaven to direct
this estate of governors, who being in this sort chosen and offered to God by
the people, and presenting them selves unto him in this holy preparation, there
is no doubt but God will give them part of the spirit of Moses, which is, such
perfection as is requisite to weelde an estate in sort as he exercised his:
wherein by the spirit of Moises, being made al one with theirs, is meant that
al governors and Judges ought to consent with the Law signified by Moses, and
agree with their Prince in all Law and spiritual doctrine. The people must
assemble at the Tabernacle after the Election, to pray to God for the
institucion of these Magistrates: for as it is one of the greatest benefits
that can happen to the world, when men of honestye, wisdom, ^ro. 11.
and good counsel are called to public government, so, to raise evil men to
rule, and principallye, is to prepare misery to kingdoms, and over whelme the
world with all iniquity: So that we see that by how much God does ordain,
inspire, and distribute power and will to Magistrates to execute offices, by so
much is it necessary to pray to him to institute them such as were the.70.
Ancients to rule over the pollecie of Israel. God created Moses a supreme
Judge, whose properties Saint Paul dyscribes to us in this sort: Heb. 11.
Moses (says he) being become great in the house of Pharao, was at times
provoked to deny him self to be the son of the kings daughter, by whom he
had been nourished and raised to honor: that is to say, to renounce al
vanities of courts and worldly delites, desiryng rather to be afflicted with
the people of God, then to take his pleasure in sin for a time, as also
esteeming more a reproach for Christ, (that is, to be partaker of the
afflictions of his savior,) then to take reckoning of all the receites,
treasures, and delights of the Egiptians: Deu. 31. Hebr 11. 2. King. 7.
Being then such one both fearing and loving God, and an embraser of the truth,
and very wise, he was chosen of God. Like as also such judges and governors
of Israel were chosen by divine inspiration, as Joshua, Gedeon, Sampson, Ieptha,
and Samuel, yea, God said he had chosen them to the estate Royal: We know
that Moses had Children which he might have made governors after him, if he
had would: But he preferred before them his servant Joshua, who had always
assisted him in his affairs, communicated with him in the perplexity of al his
troubles, and requited the trust and friendship of his Master, with faith and
obedience, yea, he was the servant of God in simplicitye and truth of heart:
And therefore knowing him to be more perfect in conscience, and better
exercised in the regiment of people then any other, he gave him dignity above
the rest, reserving no pre-eminence in public business, either to his flesh,
blood, friends, or great Lords, but distributed offices to the most virtuous
and best instructed in such charge: No man of good judgment will call his
kinseman or friend to govern a ship wherein he means to pass the Seas in
presence, unless he be more assured of his knowledge then of any other: much
more ought we to prove the skyll of him whom we call to guide this pollitike
ship. If this advise had stand before the eyes of Hely the great
sacrificator and governor of Israel, he had not chosen his Children to the
regiment of the people, wherein was wrought the confusion of him self, common
also to them and the common Weal: Yea the great Judge recompensed their
execrable Royats and offenses with sharp justice, and because he abused his
estate in chosing such to judge the people in whom was merit of death, both
he and they by the just resolution of God dyed miserablye, the poor people
for their offenses were overthrown in War by the Philistines, 1. Kin. 3.4.
and the Arc of alliance which was the glory of Israel (for their sins) was
taken and transported into the land of Infidels: here we see how much the
divine election of governors serves to a common weal, whereunto may be
applied the reason of the wise man, that such as is the Judge of the people,
Eccle. 10.
such is his minister: and in the conversation of the ruler, is expressed a
form of behavior to the multitude, the same being confirmed by examples in
the Scripture, and therefore of more necessitye to be considered by such as
are chosers of governors: it is said in the book of Judges, Judge. 1.
that whilst he and his Elders or senators, being governors of Israel and
men of integrity, lived, the people served God and prospered, but when by their
death, there was no further restraint, Judge. 17.
but a common liberty of will, being void of good readers, and no fear or
respect to any good governor, that people fell into Idolatry and extreme
wretchedness. Solomon is of opinion, that where is no governor, or where is
any, and he subject to negligence or vices, the people run headlong into
impiety. But when the merciful eyes of God, saw his people in miserable
desolation, Judge. 2.
he sent them a good governor, during whose time they lived under good rule
and obeyed the Law of God, who suffered them eftsoon with the death of their
Judge to reuert to their ancient impietye: So long as Rome, Lacedemonie, and
Athens lived under good rulers, they, with their siegniories and Towns
depending upon them, flourished, but after they admitted favor, ambition, and
covetousness, and that knowledge and virtue were deprived of dominion, they
declined and suffered extreme ruin. And albeit it is no marvel, if such as
aspire to regimentes by indirect means, bring forth wicked and imperfect
government, seeing that al ends depend consequently upon their beginninges,
and buildinges having no firm foundation, can hold no long continuance: yet
when any such attain to the direction of policy, there is no occasion to
condemn them rashelie, for that it may be that such scourges are due to the
offenses of the people, neither do they them selves think them condemned in
the ertreame judgment, seeing they follow not their beginning, but recompense
all faults by their virtue and wisdom, as did young Scipio, who, contrary
to the judgment of Cato and diverse grave Romans, being called to be
Captain general of the army which had been long in Spain, expressed in his
behavior such heroical virtues, that his election descending to him by
favor, was approved for lawful, even by those wise men, who beholding more
the follies of his youth passed, then hoping in his toward virtues, impugned
his advancement at the first. The Scripture says, that as it is one special
sign of Gods love to a Nation, when he indueth them with good governors, so
when he restraines them to rulers inclined to impietye, it is then that he
geues warning of his fury, and that he is entered into displeasure for their
offenses, as is said in Job, Esaie, and Osie, Job. 34. Esai. 3. Osia. 13.
which god has also oftentimes confirmed by examples, but specially in the
book of Judges, which I bring in but by the way, the better to make us enter
into our selves, when we are not blessed with such governors as we wish.

Governors chosen according to God, do make present proof of their election
to the profit of the common weal. Let them know how to command, and
subjects how to obey, the better to make their common weal florishe, as
inferior members obey the more worthy: Magistrates ought to be as Fathers.
Let the law be inviolable, and specially one true amity betvveene the
governor and the subject. The.3. Chapter.
Governors, being thus chosen by the rule of the Scripture, know that it
belongs to their christian duetye to consecrate them selves whollye to the
benefit, profit, honor, and quiet of that public state wherein they are
instituted: And not sparing any labor, care, expenses, or perplexity of mind
or body, no not the sacrifice of their life, to raise their common weal into
flourishing felicitye, they give always more ready furtherance to common
affairs, then ordinary favor to their own, not sparing to restrain them
selves from all private pleasure and profit, to consult in all necessary
means to raise t'haduauncement of the Public weal: And as in good
magistrates does work a continual care to erect and execute a sound
aucthority, so in all Citizens, subjects, and public multitudes, is great
necessitye of resolute obedience and duty: Amongst whom if there be any, in
whom is no suretye of allegeaunce, but suspicion of rebellious practice or
sedicious behavior, let all the rest join in common aid to commit him to the
censure of civil justice: For it is said of ancient wise men and justified
in common experience, that by well commanding and ready obeying, a common
weal is happily governed, as who say, where the Magistrate erectes wholesome
laws, and the subject yeldes duty in simplicity, it happens that to such
regimentes belongs happy success, and long continuance, even as in a natural
body is figured a form of perfect government, because the inferior members
obey such as be more principal, which is the head and heart. A private house
is replenished with good order, when servants yield obedience to their
masters, and children humility to their parents, as also a ship is well
guided when the mariners acknowledge power in the master that moves the
Helm: even so is it in a common weal which being a body pollitike (as is
said) ought according to God to hold comformetie with the quality mistical of
the natural body: It is also as a general family or household wherein good
governors do put on the same careful affection to the advancement of their
subjects, which wise and dear fathers use to their entierely beloved
Children. And being lastly as a true and Spiritual ship, seated in the
midst of the storms of this waspishe and moveable world, the two
preservatives to keep it from perishing, are the wholesome commandments of
the governor, and willing obedience of the inferior: Let then the wisdom,
love, and zeal of magistrates to the common weal surmount their aucthoritye
in commanding. And let humilitye, frank obedience, and perfect love be
greater in the subjects, the^ their ciuyl subjection: For if Fathers give to
their children doctrines and good lessons to eschew vice, and learn to aspire
to virtue, and by good examples as well of them selves, as other their parents
and predecessors (true pattornes of virtue) do stir them up to t'himitacion
of goodness, and in respect of zeal, do study to enritche and advance
them: much more belonges it to magistrates, as Fathers pollitike of the
people, to express a zeal and fatherlye duty in erecting good statutes,
orders and Customs, hollye, happy, and profitable, whereunto they must give the
first honorable obedience, serving as reverent examples to the rest to observe
the Laws without violence, either for favor, friendship, parentage, respect
of Person, or fear of corruption: such good Laws and just judgments
(says Solomon) are the strong Bars and boltes to the Gates of Cities, Prou.
18.
and inuinsible Trenches and Walls to the Vines of Esau, yea, they are the
ways of life, and the very Souls of commonweals. For even as to the Gates
of Cities and Towns, great and massiue Bars of iron are as defenses to
withstand Violence and iniurye, which else might happen with the perryll of
Sacking, if also there were no countergarde by governors: even so where
wholesome and holy Constitutions be seuerelye observed, there is the Gate
closed against al vices, sclaunders, sedicions, and factions, to enter into
Cities and Kingdoms. But where is a negligent or partial countenance given
to the laws and aucthority, as enclining sinisterly either for gossop, kindred,
friend, fear, or gain, or that they be but as spider webbes, wherein the
small flies are taken and suck the blood, and great waspes do pearse and pass
through at pleasure: of such a vain and weak justice, there can be no other
expectation, but an universal reuersement of all pollecye, even as when as
vineyarde or garden being strongly fensed with hedge or ditche, there is great
seueritye, that neither the night thief, nor the hungrye beast, can have power
to enter and commit it to pray, where, if there be neither wall nor closure,
the negligence of the owner offers occasion to the thief or Beast, to invade
his ground, to the spoil of his commoditye and fruictes: The same resembling
the complaint of David, al passingers (says he) at their pleasure have power
to havoc the Vine, and the wild Boore launsing out of the Forest, is entered
to waste it: meaning that when there is sufferaunce to any one to break the
Laws and statutes, it geues great peril of common ruin to all the common
weal by an unbridled liberty, for that the multitude, aspiring to
maistership, either the most strong, or the most Ritche, or the most subtle,
Prou. 13.
or the most bold, will get the principality: where the wise man in the like
sense resembles the Laws to a fountain or way of life, he speaks under
the construction, that as the law administreth and enterteyneth a life civil
without debate, deuerse or danger, so where the statutes are not well
enterteined and justified, there is laid the occasion of strife, quarrel,
grudge, percialities, questions, murders, and general license to do al evil:
So that in the discipline of the Law is wrought, the conversation of quiet
life, ciuyll securitye, and common conversation: neither was it without reason
that we resembled the Laws to the Soul of the common weal, for even as the
Soul of man vniformelye rules his body, guides it, susteines it, entertaines
it in being, instructes it in what is good for every one of his members,
bringes provision for his necessities, teaches it touching the function of his
natural office in all his members, enterteyning and reteyning them together,
by such conjunction, that much less there is amongst them any passion of
envy, hatered or debate, seeing of the contrary, she makes the grief of ^ne
to be felt of them all, and to complain it no less, then if every one did
perticipate in it, as if the foot be grieved, we see the tongue speaks for
it and expresses sorrow, the eye is ready to look to it, the hand to
touch it, to be short they communicate all in common with the good and evil
that happens, every one imparting with another, and all with one, and one
with all: Even so, the law is a perfect union of all the parts and estates of
public weals, equal to all without exception of persons, and instructing
them in their general and particular duty, defendes them all things contrary
to the same, comprehending under her, as well the great as the small, the noble
men as the paisaunt, men of knowledge, as the ignorant, and mean artificer.
Beside this, it makes the magistrate feel as his own, the displeasure which
happens even to the meanest of the City, as before we have said, the head
has his part in the hurt of the foot, enclining to help it as if it were to
him self. And greeuing thus in the evil of another, with no less compassion
then if it were proper to him self, and seeing it common to all the body
polletike, which ought to complain and demand remedy of him being his head,
if he give that cure which is expedient, much more, the head being grieved
wherein restes the universal government and providence of the whole body of the
common weal, is required a common and dutyfull diligence of all the members to
do severe justice of him that had committed so dangerous a fault: for the
which all ancient commonweals have well provided by good statutes, and not
forgot remedies for civil maladies, supplying every of the same with
convenient cure according to the qualitye of the hurt, wherein they observed a
form of equal provision, both to heal the party grieved, and preserve the
rest of the body in his perfect integrity, sometimes applying the cold and
sharpedged iron, and in an extreme remedy would cut of that part that would
be incurable, least the other near parts, and consequentlye the whole body
might fall into the infection of that contagious plague.

There be two principalities or pollecies, which ought to be knit together in
unity of friendship, as the soul and the body without difference, they ought
to aid one another with mutual and perpetual succor, for so shall not one
of them pass an other. The.4. Chap.
AND as in Man be two parts, the one spiritual and the other corporal, so
in one common weal be two principalityes, that is to say, the state
Ecclesiastical, and civil, they both notwithstanding united and conjoined (as
the mind and the body) concurring in the perfect action of man: And albeit
they have been always concordant for two ends, yet, as touching the Subject,
they are different and unlike: Priesthood and temporal principalitye, were
conceived at the first in the law of nature, and in the law written, in two
brethren Moses and Aaron, representing that they have in all times consented in
unity and brotherly concord the one not undertaking over the other, but
either one contented with his particular charge and duty: The clergy directed
specially the regiment of Souls, by spiritual doctrines, sacrifices,
Sacraments, prayers, and other acts and exercises of Divine and Spiritual
qualitye, whose jurisdiction in like sort tended not but to spiritual ends,
without any meddling or managing of temporal affairs: as when they prescribed
exercise of fasting, penance, and other disciplines to acknowledge sins, or
for Canonical satisfaction of offenses enjoined by penance, with suertye, and
tranquilitye of conscience: where the secular magistrate has the weelding of
the sword, to give correction to offenders, rebels, mutinors, and such, as
refusing the Spiritual Doctrine which the Church administreth, do contemn
and persecute it, and commit transgressions against the Laws Civil, deserving
punishment: Aaron, and the ancient sacrificatours, meddled only with
ceremonies, sacrifices and interpretation of the Law: Jesus Christ likewise
and his Apostles made not but Spiritual profession, as apeareth by the
answer of our savior when he was solicited to judge a controversy between
two Brethren touching the particion of their goods: what is he says he
that has instituted me a Judge or deuider of heritages between you? as who
say, you are wrong arrived to me for such a business: For I am come only to
preach and make spiritual exercise: I will help you only in that which I
ought, which is in Doctrine: keep you from all Covetousness, for by the
abundaunce of Riches which man possesses, his life is not sustained, and much
less prolonged, yea, they can not make it any way happy: 2. Tim. 2.
it is for that cause that Saint Paul wills that he that is militant to God
and given whollye to his service, should have no community with secular
affairs, either in traffike or any temporal profession. The judgment of this
estate, (as we began to rehearse before) is not specially established, but over
consciences, that is to absolve them when they are known to repent Sin and
whollye abandon it: where, if repentance be not expressed, 2. Cor. 16.
they must stand restrained to their offenses, that is, not to admit them to
absolution. And where the offenses be public, and no due penance done, then
to punish them by exco^municatio^, which notwithstanding is rather a medicine
then a pain: and yet spiritual also, as be all the Ecclesiastical corrections:
their sword, is Gods word, their practices are Prayers, Fastinges, Tears,
Holy Meditacions, continual study of the Scriptures, and perpetual
Conflictes against vices: So that their office stands only upon these, that
they Preach sincerelye and Catholikelye, and administer the Sacraments
Holylye: if they be Pastors, let them feed the Sheep of Jesus Christ with
good Doctrine and holy example, not regarding more the fleese then the flock:
1. Tim. 5.
Let them admonish privately secreete Sinners to do penance: Rebuke such as
be Public seuerelye, committing the impenitent to punishment: Let them suffer
no scabbed Sheep in their Flock, and yet travail to heal them as all other
maledyes: Let them sustain such as be weak, and above all let them so
provide that no Woolues enter into their Sheep fooldes, and if they be
entered, let them search by all means to hunt them out with good Dogs, I
mean good Preachers, whose zeal will not suffer them to spare to bark not
only against Heresies, but also against sins and al abuses, the only
causes of the greatest part of Schisms and conspiracies in all parts of the
world: Let them well consider of the Text of Ezechiel, Ezech. 3.33.
If they have failed (says he) to instruct well such over whom they have
charge, and that by their default any be lost, they can not be saved: But if
they use Faith and diligence in the execution of their charge, being aided with
the travail of good Scolemaisters for the instituction of Youth in good
learning and manners, besides the reverend commendation and felycitye that will
grow to them selves by their industry and duty Ecclesiastical, the secular
estate also shall be discharged of great care and travail in the correction of
many dissolute and hurfull men to Commonweals, who, for want of good
instruction shall nourishe hurtful members to the perril of their common ruin
and miserye, until this estate of the Church bring forth true effects of
their function and duty, and that young children be diligently trained in
Doctrine and virtue.

For even as our body material, replenished with humors corrupt, if it be
not pourged by some inward Medicine, will always throw out to the utter
parts, Blaines, Apostumes and Ulcers, or at least engender Catars, that the
Surgeon (sometime in vain) is driven to apply outward remedies, where in
deed there was this one convenient remedy, to make clean the body within:
even so the body Polletike, corrupted by innumerable Vices, ought to be made
clean by inward Doctrines, (the true Medicines of Souls) administered by
Priests and Wise Pastors: otherwise it will be perpetuallye covered with a
Scorfe of infinite factions, Sedicions, Heresies, and other sins. So that it
is necessary that this estate Ecclesiastical agree with the other, not only
in diligence and duty to administer good Doctrine, but also to shine by
liuelye examples and Acts of good life, making clean men's consciences by
holy documents and wholesome exhortacions: So shall it be easy to the
Magistrate of the Pollecy Civil, to correct and cut of all Wheales and other
outward Impostumes, I mean all enormities offending their commonweals. This
is in effect, the brotherly concord and dear conjunction which ought to stand
indissoluble between these two estates for the government of this Christian
man, as well touching the health of his Soul, as his assured tranquilitye in
Civil societye, with the preservation of his life and goods.

The Faults of the Clargie ought to be corrected: Governors ought above al
things to provide good Preachers, that the rude and plain sort should be
taught in familiar doctrine: all sorts ought to be constrained to be at the
Sermon: such constraint is aucthorised by the Scripture, and is both profitable
to the common weal and wholsome to such as are constrained. The.5. Chapter.
WHen the Clargie or estate Ecclesiastical shall fail in their duty, I mean,
if the pastors be careless to execute their vocation, or negligent in the
function of their charge and office wherein they are many ways advertised by
the Scripture, and being solicited thereunto by the Magistrate: they ought to
be constrained by justice as the ancient Canons and last counsel have
ordained, if in them selves be no habilitye to preach, at least let them
substitute in their places men of sufficient faculty, knowledge, and will to
do it, wherein the magistrate has power to join with them, to find out men
expedient for that use, as Preachers in whose grauitye of life is expressed the
Doctrine which they ought to pronounce to the people: Let them read certain
days in the week, and spend the Sabbath day in Preaching publikelye in
Churches: In the morning let them propound to the simple and rude multitude a
familiar instruction in the principles of Christian profession, expounding to
them first of all the Doctrine of the Articles of Faith, the commandments of
the Law, and statutes of the Church, the misterye of Sacraments, and their
use, together with the Lords prayer, interpreting al things by sincere order,
and in such popular sense and Doctrine, that even little Children may easilye
comprehend it, the same to be continued from year to year with such
necessary repeticion, as nothing be omitted by him to whom the exposition
belongs. At public Service, where is commonly a presence of the principal
of the Parish, let the Epistle be expounded, and at after noone the Gospel
interpreted: the scripture geues commandment that if the Preacher be learned
and holy, all the inhabitauntes ought to congregate in audience, as was
commanded to the people of the old Law, to assist the Lecture of
Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 31.
yea, even the little Children of all Judea: And because many men either by a
Vice in nature, or corruption of manners, carrye this frowardnes that without
compulsion they will not be drawn to do or be good: it belonges to the
Magistrate, who is to answer before the Judgment seat of God, if in his
common weal he nourishe by negligence, or by conniuencye dissemble any vice,
to draw them to the hearing of the word by persuasions and al easy means,
and where they find no willing conformetye in any, let there be constraynt by
fine, and afterward according to the nature and continuance of their
resistaunce to Gods word (which can not be but a kind of infidelity) to
proceed by seueritye and rigor of Justice.

And as these Lords, Governors, and Magistrates, are as fathers to their
commonweals, so they ^ught in their regiment to express no less affection
of fatherly will and aucthoritye, to their Citizens and subjects, then in a
natural Father, nature demaundes to his proper Children, whom (by the
propertye of his zeal and love) he has power to constrain them to do what
he thinks meet for their advancement when he finds them void of will to do
it frankely: oftentimes he makes his Son take a bitter medicine to cure his
sickness, and (as occasion requires) makes incision in his ulcer which
could not be healed but by fire: much more ought the father pollitike, to
constrain him to receive a spiritual medicine, for whom he is exercised in
great care to cure his soul, which, without such medicine stands in danger of
eternal death: his vlcere is so perilous, that if there be not applied to him
a sharp correction, and that to pearse even to the Boanes, for the purging of
all putrefaction of his manners, it will remain incurable: Is it then a good
zeal in the Civil Father, to leave to perdicion his poor perplexed Child,
whose cure can not come but by these remedies? Psalm. 106.
so that by how much it is most certain according to David and the book of
wisdom, that there can not be found a medicine more wholesome and effectual
to purge the sins of the soul then the Doctrine of God: Sapie. 16.
by so much is it a duty necessary and commendable in the Magistrate to use
compulsion by pains and punishment for the hearing of Gods word: the same
being declared to us in the meaning of the Parrable which Jesus Christ put
forth of the Father of a household, Mat. 22. Luke 14.
who commaundes his Servants to goo forth and constrain to come to the
Banquet general which he had made ready, all such as they found in the
Streets, in the Ways, Hedges, and in the Bushes. What other thing is this
Banquet, but a preparation of all spiritual meats contained in the Scripture,
and set upon the Table, which is propounded by familiar explication in the
Church for the norriture of our Souls with all inward delites: wherein, as the
ministers of this great Father of household be his Apostles and Disciples,
which are the Bishopps and Curates to teach and instruct the people, and
sommon them (as it were) by their Sermons to receive the Graces which are
presented to them by Jesus Christ: so it appertains also to the Civil
Magistrate to constrain the negligent and idle people by the Streets, and
others lurking in Hedges and Bushes, or hid in Tauernes or Tabling houses,
sporting in dissolute Gluttonye, whilst this Heavenly Banquet is made ready
in the Church, where is concorse of good men to refreshe them selves with it:
this policy bringes forth these three special benefits.

The first is the healthful instruction of the Soul by the hearing of the
word of God, which can not be preached in any place without some fruit, Esai.
55.
according to the similitude of the Rain, which falls not in vain upon the
Earth: No more says God shall my word return to me again without profiting
of some: For such as are foreordained to the eternal life, by hearing the
word, are in the end converted, how lewd and wicked so ever they be:
Acts. 13.
For this cause it is called the word of health and everlasting life, as being
the instrumental cause or mean by the which God has ordained that we shall be
instructed in Faith, converted to him and be saved, and knowing by it his
will, we are sturred up to embrase and accomplish it.

The second is, yt there is no man what vice and iniquity so ever he has
professed in his life, who although in respect of his reprobat obstinacy will
not be converted altogether yet, either by force of this word, or for fear of
the judgments of God, or for shame of men, seeing others reformed of their
faults, will not at least withdraw him self from the multitude of sins, as
did Herod, who albeit was so reprobate as the Scripture witnesses, yet, by
the exhortacion of Saint John, and the Doctrine which he preached, Mark. 6.
he both did much good, and was corrected of many vices: even in like manner
the infamies and dissolutions daily committed, but chiefelye on the Holy
days, may by little and little be brought to reformation, and cease in the
end altogether either by the one or other profit of hearing the word of God.

The third fruit depending of the two others with equal and necessary
conjunction, is the unity of all sorts of people assembled at the Sermon,
instructed by one self teacher in Faith, the Law, Religion, in one Doctrine,
judgment, and one consent of will and opinion. Enemies shall be reconciled by
this word, which propoundes nothing but charity, Love, and unity. The
adversaries of the Faith, and Schismatikes, shall be made one with the Catholics
by the continuance of hearing this Doctrine, which reprooueth schisms,
abhors Heresies, and condemns them to perpetual curse: So that all people
assembled together every Holydaye, specially, to hear Gods word in the
Sermon, can not but be nourished, entertained, and preserved by this
continual conversation in Preaching places, and by this union of Doctrine, in
true Love and mutual Charity, to the rooting up of all inimities and grudges.

The wise worldelinges now a days would not willinglye have Sermons, as also
certain Pastors desire nothing less then to preach, laying the blame of the
miserye of this time upon sermons: but such people are overthrown by the
word of God, and by this reason that to all sorts of people, Preaching is
necessary. The.6. Chap.
THere be many men too deeply drowned in worldly wisdom, who resist my
counsel, affirming that it is enough to the simple and popular sort to
understand the Paternoster, the Creed, and the commandments: and yet
oftentimes they make no mention of the commandments of God, seeing that few
learn them, and fewer observe and accomplish them: They say that since
Sermons were so ryfe in the world, and that men were so familiar with the
Gospel and the Bible, there has been nothing but varyetye of Heresy: Such
people are angrye belike, for that either they know nothing (and yet ought to
be wise) touching the well directing of their estate, or else be fleshelye
wise, whose propertye is to desire no Sermons, because they would give nothing
to the Preacher but by force, and less to the Poor but for shame: their
custom is always to take, and return nothing but for their own norriture,
yea, there be some of them so envious of the advancement of their knowledge
of God in the world, that they grieve that the people should come to
understand any thing touching the matter of their salvation. But it is with
them, as happened to Balaam, whose Ass reproved him of his ignorance and
fault, which ought gently to have guided her, and when he neither could or
would do it, God made her teach him, and gave her power to speak against her
nature, Numb. 22. 2. Peert 2.
correcting and reproving her Pastor, of whom she should have been well
taught and instructed.

Such people me think have no reason, to lay the event of heresy to Sermons,
and much less to the declaration of the holy Scriptures, (yea it is a spice
of blasphemy to think it only) because that that word of God has power to
illuminate the poor, dark, and and ignorant spirits, and geues intelligence
of God, and of salvation to the little and simple ones, to whom could not be
given such wholesome and necessary knowledge, but by this holy and heavenly
doctrine, by the which all vice is eschewed and purged, as a disease by the
medicine, all error eschewed and corrected, as the light has power over
darkness, and death, the devil, and hell vanquished and overcome: For it is
the victory, our assurance of life, and puts us lastly in the possession of
the kingdom of the eternal God. And as there is also one commandment as
well to men as women, great as small, learned as ignorant, to hear it, and
make continual exercise of it, as is commanded in Joshua: Joshua. 1. Osee. 4.
So for the ignorance of this law of God, Osee says, that the people of
Israel were past into captivity and havoc by the Assyrians and Babylonians:
to be short, by hearing of this word, are known such as be of God, and belong
to Jesus Christ.

And now that Pastors are bound to preach the Gospel, and the people ought
to hear it, it is without question, as well by the commandment of Jesus
Christ, as by his Apostles and instruction of his Church, not needing further
to allege infinite Textes of the old Testament, containing the same
doctrine. The last commandment which Jesus Christ gave to his Apostles, when
he ordained his Testament and last will, was, that they should go forth and
preach throughout all the world, using this speech: Go into the world
whither I send you, teach all sorts of people (or preach to all creatures,
whether Jews or Paynims) instructing them first in Faith and Baptism: which
is, who believes and will be baptized, shall be saved, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: and who does not believe,
shall be damned: Teach them in like sort to observe and keep all those things
which I have given you in charge to do and to say to others. Be not amazed nor
grieved because visibly I go to heaven, for I assure you, (for the great love I
bear you) that I am always with you even to the consummation of the heavens:
the same meaning as if he had said unto them, Fear not that I do abandon you:
For besides that I will send you the holy ghost as a Comfortour, an Advocate
and teacher, yet I my self will be with you even with that presence and power
which replenisheth the heaven and the earth: For it is given to me euerywhere.
And I will not only remain with you as touching the time of your persons,
(for the Apostles and Disciples remained but a time after him, as Saint James
the elder, but two or three years at the most) but also with your successors
in that estate, meaning the successors in the estate of the Church, which is
not but one body in him: Yea the last and most base members have as great
interest in the promise of the presence of Jesus Christ, as the first and
highest, according to their measure and quantity proportioned to them, as we
see the members of a natural body partake by equal proportion with the
presence of the soul, by her vegetation, sense, and moving. And deliueryng to
his Apostles and Disciples, their charge in these words, Go and preach. etc.
He spoke also to Bishops, succeedyng his Apostles, and Curates having place and
office of his Disciples, geuyng them that commandment even until the end of
the world, for they are but of one body, governed by one spirit, under one
head Jesus Christ. And as it is matter true in our common experience, that the
last speech and Lesson which a wise Father geues to his children, and a Lord
to his friends, is to recommende unto them those things which they hold most
dear, and be of greatest importance: Even so when he geues them charge to
preach the Gospel, and teach all sorts of people, he means that every
Pastor instruct diligently all such as are given to him in charge by the
world: as having nothing in more dear affection then the care to feed his
flock.

By the Gospel he understands all doctrine of health, of grace, and of
promise for remission of sins, whereof Jesus Christ is the aucthour: where he
says, Happy are they that hear the word of God, he adds this text, and do
keep it: wherein be comprehended the statutes and ordinances which the
Apostles have taught, which we call traditions, as being recommended unto them
by the holy spirit of Jesus Christ to his Church.

By the administration of Baptism, we understand likewise the other
Sacraments, seeing that as he has instituted them as well as it, so they
follow it afterward according to their institution, wherein seeing he
admittes the doctrine, and geues it such dignity, it is necessary that we
teach the benefits and graces which we receive by the Sacraments before we
administer them. I know not how such can have excuse before God, who intruding
them selves into the company of Jesus Christ, I mean Prelates, and Curates,
successors to the Apostles and Disciples, Math. 28.
and being commanded by him to teach and preach, either will not or can not
accomplish such charge, seeing that Christ called none but such as both could
and would: I may boldly affirm and mainteyne in truth, that according to the
law divine, the office of the Preacher is annexed to the Bishop and benefice,
as by natural union, the soul is conjoined to the body, therefore let such as
have charge of Souls, consider better the state and nature of their duty, as
being not able of them selves, let them at least supply it by others that both
can and will, with whom let them impart the profits and revenues, wherein in
true justice and merit they have nothing, because they do nothing. Recompense
is due to labor, the hiered man ought to be nourished with the benefit of
the Vine, and eat of the fruit: he that fights in war, ought to receive
his pay: he that feeds the flock, ought to take the Milk and the Fleese:
and he that trauayles in the Temple, and the Gospel, deserves to live by it.
Presidentes and Counselors receive not their wages if they do not their
office: then by what color of right in conscience or common reason, can he
demand any reward, which bringes forth nothing but a show, yea he is but an
impediment to others in whom is more ability and better merit. But if there
be such Maskers in the Church (as I fear there are to many) let them be paid
their right, due to their estate according to God, and to avoid slander, and
let them not of their own private authority, do justice of themselves
against all pollitike order (for it is not for the Sheep to rise against his
Shephearde) but if they continue to be as unprofitable Dranes in the Hiue of
the Church, eating the Honey and Wax of diligent and painful Bees, Let their
process be exactly pursued by such as bear rule in the Church, and so to cut
of the example of such disorder, confusion, and sacrilege, more foul then
theft, reasoning that an estate so excellent, should not suffer so foul a
stain, to the contempt and blasphemy of Christian religion.

Such are refuted, as hold that people are not bound to hear so many
Sermons: wherefore are they Pastors If they feed not their flock with the
food of the Scripture? If the Pastors had done their duties, the Wolves had
not entered the fold. The.7. Chapter.
IF to understand the Paternoster, were enough, why did Jesus christ preach
three years and an half many and diverse doctrines, being always for the
most part preaching in the Temple to the common People more then to others? By
what reason did the Apostles teach so long time, as Saint Paul.xxxvi. years,
Saint John more then fiftye, and others so long as they lived, as well Apostles,
as Disciples, Martyrs, and infinite holy Bishops, distributing sometimes
three Sermons a day? To what end has been written so many Gospels, so many
Epistles, and Sermons, and all rather to the common people then to others?
Homelies also be familiar and popular Sermons, such Saint Ciprian, Saint
Ambrose, Saint Chrysostom, Saint Augustine, with many others have written. S.
Paul commanded his Epistles to be read in the Churches, and writing them
general, he willed that all the Church should understand them: he wrote to
the common people of Colosse, commanding them to advertise their minister
named Archyppus, of the word of God, and to discharge well his ministry and
office. And writing to others, we find that he spoke to the common sort,
wherein though some times he spoke of Bishops and Deacons, yet he always
preferred the people, as an estate most need of instruction, because the
Clargie either be, or by reason ought to be, best instructed. Therefore, O
adversary of Jesus Christ, and enemy to truth, why art thou so full of
iniquity, as not to grant that common people may enjoy the doctrine which
Christ him self preached, and caused to be taught, inducing by his holy
spirit, that it was written by the Evangelists, Apostles, and Prophets? Wylt
thou take from the children the bread which their father has put in their
hand, and commanded thee to see distribution of it? Let it like thee that the
people read the Scriptures, though every one have not liberty to enterprete
them after his own sense. For what cause says S. Paul has God put into his
Church, Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, and Doctors, but to give
edifiyng to his people? So that as it is their office to teach, interpret,
and preach: So God has annexed to this word, Pastor, Doctor, as who say,
he is a Pastor but by name and usurpation, if he have not ability to teach,
and do it. In how many places does the Scripture call the Pastors to teach
their flock? Acttes. 20. 1. Tim. 5. 1. Pet. 5.
and wylt thou be a Priest worthy of double honor, and wylt not use a simple
travail in the word and doctrine? Saint Peter wylleth the Pastors to
nourishe the flock of Jesus Christ, with the food of the Scripture, aduising
them to do it diligently and liberallye, without constraint or covetousness.
And yet thou who speak not but for the benefit of thy Purse, wilt neither
bestow travail nor food on thy Cure, nor impart so much as a third part
with the good Preacher, to whom in common equity the whole belongs, for
that according to God, there is nothing due but to the labourer. Learn then
and give thy self to study more and more, to make thee worthy to be a
Pastor, make restitucion of that which thou have taken for doing nothing, yea,
that which was due to the merit of him that has taken pains.

But now touching the constitucion and use of all the Church concerning
Doctrine, we read in the Canons of the Apostles, that no man must go out of
the Temple on the holy days, before he has heard the Doctrine of the
Apostles and Prophets, and communicated: If he do, let him be marked as if
he were an Infidel and worthy to be excommunicated, much more if the Pastor
preach not, he is reprehendible and more worthy of excommunication: of this
institution Apostol^cal, there remains yet to us, the Epistle and the Gospel
of the Divine service, which we must not hear as did the Ass of Socrates,
the daily wise Lessons of his Master, and gather no fruicte by them, no, we
must understand them by the explication which ought to be given to the
assistauntes, wherein as it is commanded to the Pastors to preach, so are
the common people enjoined also to hear the Sermons every holydaye with
reverence: And therefore, (according to our advise before) it belonges to the
governors Polletike, to assemble on the Festival days all the Congregation
to be taught, and not suffer any to be absent: Otherwise such as have
aucthority of God to make him to be honored and obeyed in all his
commandments, stand in hazard of his Judgment, not only al those sins
which the people commit for want of being well instructed, but also for that
they supported the negligence of pastors, who do nothing but suck the Milk
and sheare the poor sheep: For end, if Moses (I mean the Law and the
Prophets) was read in the synagogue of the Jews every Sabbath which were
their lawful Feasts, why should that synagogue be more happy then the church
of Jesus Christ? or why should not there be exercise of his Doctrine in it at
ye least every holyday, in the which seeing it is forbidden to travail or
occupy the mind in profane and secular causes? what should the poor man do,
in whom is no habilitye to read and understand, and much less may not
meddle to interpret the Scriptures being so obscure? in what exercise should
he employ the day, spending but one hour at Public Service? should he join
his time (which ought to be dear to him) to drinking and eating, with other
actions unlawful and damnable? is that the keeping of the Sabbath, which is a
time to repose altogether in God, and to sanctify him with good works? So
that it is a thing no less holy then necessary, to annexe to the divine
service of the Holydaye, familiar sermons to the multitude, by the which they
may truly reappose in tranquilitye of conscience in God, in purging such
wicked affections and sins as travail perpetuallye the minds of sinners.
The people will think all the week on the Sermons they heard on the Sundaye:
Fathers will appose their Children, and masters examine their servants, who by
this mean, will take heed to offend God on work days.

Touching our worldly Philosophers, who say that since sermons have been so
rife and common, all has been marred: I say on the contrary, that if there
had been diligence and plenty of Preachers in all Churches, that the Chaires and
Pulpets had never been void of Pastors, as they have been these fiftye
years: men had not now known what heresy is. If the foolde had been well
kept, the Wolf had not entered, yea, he had been chased away, if the Pastor
and his voice had been heard: But when there was no Sermons, but of the Wallet,
and such fabulous Trashe of begging Friars, wherein was more matter of Scoff,
then serious Doctrine. And when some begone to preach the Gospel according
to the simple letter, all the world for the newnes run to it with great
affection: wherein this evil is happened, that such as would undertake to
preach and teach, were men of passions, enuiors of the Clergy, Apostats, and
of a will depraved: they in some sort adultered and corrupted by color of
Religion, and with their intising eloquence, the truth of the Gospel, and
under Honey, they have caused poison to be found good: Whereunto must be
applied an Antidot by Preaching of sincere Doctrine, and reforming their
dissolute and infamous lives: which if it had been done, there is no doubt
but truth had easily supplanted falshod, (corruption of manners being so
annexed to the sinceritye of Doctrine.) Let therefore such Curates as will not
allow Sermons, give place to these reasons and change judgment: And let them
not tarry the assaults of the enemies, but provide in oportunitye, and prepare
their parishoners (by the means which Saint Paul advises Titus to fight with
Heretics), Titus. 1.
giving them such courage and constancye as they can not be shaked. If they
say they ought not to hear Heretics, nor dispute with them, I say with Saint
Paul, that if I had aucthoritye to command, Titus. 3.
I would do it: But they have reason to say so, for men be curious of nature,
and as Solomon says, the eye is never content with seeing, nor the ear with
hearing new things, specially when men think they are not ill. By this it
happens that the Catholics hearing no doctrine before, receive easily false
Prophets when they begin to Preach, the rather when they pronounce that they
are the messengers of health and everlasting life: Where, if the simple
multitude had been taught by their Curates, and defended with good disciplines,
they had not received the imaginations of light brains, nor been allured with
their dreams: And being drouned in this Sugared poison, in which they dye
sweetly and yet feel not their wretched death, they will not easily take
cure, but Scoffing at their Curates, they fall also to hate them as enemies when
they seek to give them purging and wholesome Medicines. But in this case, it is
no office of the Pastor or Priest to cry out of them with imputations of
Heresy, thinking they are well revenged when they have discharged their collar
against them: No let them rather study and practice the means to convert them,
and praying to God for them, let them take heed that others that yet do
stand, fall not into such errors.

In how much good Physicians are necessary to common weals, by so much such
as be evil, are hurtful and dangerous: Who ought to be chosen Physicians
in a Town. The.8. Chapter.
Having already deduced at large, that the two estates, Ecclesiastike, and
civil, be as necessary for the government of the world, as the soul and body
in man, to execute his human and natural actions. And that Religion and the
Law, the Priest and the Prince, the Preacher and the Magistrate, can not be
disioygned without perrill of disorder, confusion, and present ruin: It falls
now to convenient purpose, that we add to these two estates, two others, as
subsisting them, and in nature very necessary accessaries to Public estates:
I mean the Masters of Schools with their Vshers, and Physicians with their
Surgeons and Pothicaries, even as under the Title of Pastors, we comprehend
also Priests, and other orders, and with the name of governors, we signifye
Judges and all such as are incident to them in the action of Justice.

Touching Scholemaisters, who be as Liefetenaunts to the Pastors and
polletike rulers in the regiment of Youth, we will forbear to speak of them
for this time, referring them to the treatise of Colleges appointed to the.v.
Book, where we mean to hold special discourse, as of a matter not least
necessary in a common weal. Concerning Physicians, learned, Faithful, Wise and
experienced, to whom is ascribed the special government of diseased bodies,
with the disposing of preservative remedies for all infirmityes, by whose means
may be brought to commonweals no small commodities: It belongs to wise
governors to entertain such wholesome members for their commonweals,
honorably, induing the^ with competent estate according to the merit of their
profession, which ought to stand upon learning, trust, and grave experience,
for as in such men (their art being wiselye administered) is laid the occasion
and ground of many commodityes in a world, whom antiquity has not stuck to
Canonyze and honor as Gods (as Apollo and his son Esculapius) even so by the
ignorant and prentise Phisytions, in whom is more rashness then gravity of
judgment or practice, commonweals are subject to many perrillous accidents:
And where good Physicians are called the Coadiutour ministers, Tutors, and
Conseruers of Nature, and (as it were) deliuerers of men from sorrow and
unnatural death: So to the others by good reason is given the name of
deceyuors, Abusers, Robbers, Poisoners, and Murderers of men: And therefore if
the common Iugler or Abuser of the people, be whipped through streets, if
thieves be hanged, if poysoners be brunt, and murderers executed upon the
wheel, or at least suffer Justice by the sword: What punishments are due to
such Blood spillers, not Physicians but by usurpation of name and place: ought
not they at the least to make restitucion of the Riches stolen with such
iniquity? And either causing or hastening the death of a poor diseased man,
both by want of skill in his art, and application of Medicines contrary to the
state of his disease, Is there not good merit of death? This miserye has
happened by this abuse in maney worlds, according to the Testimony of Pliny
in his time, that he no sooner geues out his name in the City and country to
be a Physician, Showing him self to the foolish multitude, Araied in a
Physic gown, with Ringes on his fingers, Ietting up and down the Streets
with a Potticarye who has his share in the spoil: But he shall be saluted with
the reverent name of Master Physician, where perhaps he never saluted the
knowledge of Physic but a far of, or at least, lacks ten years study in
the art. If he have once made a receipte of Catholicon or Rubarb, or stolen
it out of the practice of some good Physician, or beguiled some Pothicaries
shop: Or (which is more) if he take into cure any patient, who has lien long
languishing in bed (as there be diseases of great continuance) in respect of
humors corrupt, abounding, Cold, Raw, and Liquide, and of such contumacie,
that they will not give place to remedies: yea, if it happen that this patient
recover in the hands of this reverent Doctor, which ministered nothing but some
old Iulep or drink: Lastly, if this pretended Physician chance to minister
to the patient (which experienced men, for good cause dare not do) some sirope
of Rosewater, and then he rise to health, they will forthwith pronounce
miracles upon him, as healing desperate Cures, and such as other Physicians
forbear to meddle withal, getting by this means, full power and liberty to
make the sound, sick, and to give death to such as are but little diseased,
the same being more familiar with him, then to cure one only Ephemerides, or
an Ague of one fit. Such one shall bear more renoune, then ever did Hipocrates,
or his interpretour Galien, and his name so plawsible, that in it is drowned
the estimation of others in whom is more knowledge, judgment, Honesty, and Sad
experience. So that these counterfeites, in whom is none other experience then
in common Herbs or receiptes, or have the faculty to make Distillations,
applying them to all diseases, without judgment, of the reason, or observation
of Ages, complexions, Times, Places, and other Circumstaunces, shall draw more
Dignitye and Credit with their masking behavior, then other Physicians, whose
skill is approved by authority of the Universities: Wherein if these deceivers
deserve rebuke and severity of pain, the common people is no less
reprehendible for their hasty credulity. Therefore it behooves the Magistrate to
be so much the more provident in these cases, by how much the life of man is
precious, being committed to the hazard of such men.

Who so ever has any process of det, House, or land, he will recommend his
cause to the best Lawier he can find: Much more does the case of life
require care and providence, specially where is more perril of death, then
proof of knowledge. And now touching the service of good Physicians in commonweals, this is to be observed in their election, that they be learned,
faithful, wise, and well experienced: it is a good argument that they are
learned, if they have diligently studied Philosophy, and been three years at
the least resolute practisors in Physic, and ten years in the medicine
Theorical, employing two of the last years in Anathomie, in the knowledge of
Herbs, and in Pharmacopole, to understand the composition of al medicines:
those three things are to be learned by the eye.

To the wisdom of a Physician, is required an exquisyte judgment, which is
made perfect by experience, wherein, by necessary reason they ought to have good
understanding, seeing they have the life of al sorts of men in judgment, with
power to dispose without appeal to any higher Judges but to God: where to all
other inferior Courts belonges this prorogatiue: That albeit the Judges be
never so wise, yet there is liberty to appeal to higher places.

And if in a common consult and assembly of Physicians to debate upon a
disease, there can be no good resolution, where is no grauety of learning and
experience, much less ought a young physician to be received, whose want of
practice takes from him the estimation of judgment and experience: So that it
is highly necessary to the credit of a Physician, to study the time appointed,
and duly run over the three things aforesaid. Then let him have
conversation certain years with learned Physicians, practicing in Cities and
good Tounes: A custom which certain physicians use to their learned
disciples, carrying them with them, when they visit their pacie^ts, explaning
by palpable demonstration of the eye and hand, the true practice of the Art:
Which sort and time of exercise, will bring unto them hability of practice,
wherein they need not fail for want of experience: the like is observed
amongst Lawiers, who having ouercom the discourse of the laws, take not upon
them forthwith ye state of pleaders (for so might many causes suffer hazard)
but observing two or three years the examples of ye most famous counselors of
a court, and haunting the bar, rather to hear then plead: they search out
the Counsels, writings, and memoryes of excellent Advocates, and so gooe out
perfect Masters, having as good habilitye to plead at the first, as if they
had had, no other exercise during their life: Even so it is not for young
Physicians to practice their prentise cunning upon fat monks which bear no
importance in the world, and much less in Hospitalities, or Vplandish
Tounes, before they come to the chief Cities, the same being as much as if
they should be counseled to goo kill the world, or at least to learn the
means thereunto. Let them honor their beginnings with the presence and
testimony of the best Cities, drawing their practice from the example of the
most excellent in that art. And making proof of their learning, by public
disputes and aucthority of ancient professors, let them show Certificate of
the continuance of their study, and time of their Degrees: Herein it may be
said, that in regard of the time of this Study, it is necessary that such
as Aspire to the Art, be either very Ritche, or at least furnished to bear
out so chargeable a Cost: I must in deed confess that, that common weal
suffers great inconueneience, wherein the poor sort make profession of
Physic: For, as poverty being void of power to releue the time of so long
study, has less mean to furnishe other necessary charges, as Books,
whereof they must have great stoore for the due searching out of the secreetes
of that Art: So it is for the most part greedye of Gain, aspiring to wealth,
whersoeuer they may find it: And being never satisfied, they fall, by increase
of new and fresh profit, into extreme avarice. It is written that the first
professors of this Art, were Ritche men, and great Lords, as (amongst
others) Apollo, Esculapius, and Hipocrates: Whose truth and manner of
adiuration, as I wish might stand always before the eyes of such covetous
people as seek to enter into the study of Physic: So, I would also that
the example of that Pagan him might keep our Christian Physicians from
periurye by impietye, as abusing this Art either by ignorance, avarice,
rashness, infidelity, or perverse affection. They were at the first
Arboristes, Pothicaries, and Surgeons as appears by the last Chapter of
Genesis, where the Physicians had charge to embaume the body of Jacob, the
same being also expressed in the.xxi. chap. of Exodus, and by all the ancient
books. But since the world began to multiply, and Ambition and Covetousness
bear rule over the hearts of men: of one Estate they have made three, yea, a
fourth, which be Arboristes, whereof there be companies in diverse places:
notwithstanding, Physicians hold the most honorable, most gainefull, and
least painful Estate, being as masters to judge and command the others, using
the service of the Arboristes and Pothicaries jointly, to discern the simples,
and the Pothicaries alone to compose drognes, and minister the^ to the patient:
And employing the Surgeons to cut, or Anothomise, and do handy Cures upon the
outward parts of the body, the Physicians reserve them selves only for the
inward parts and judgment of purgations before the Surgeon apply his Plaster,
or make incision: But such is the malice of time and men, that in these two
last Estates, who ought to be subject to the physician, has been found no
small abuse by usurpation of the Art, as in prescribing Medicines without the
knowledge of the physician, purging, restrayning, and giving Diottes: yea,
taking upon them the qualitye of sufficient Masters, being not half
instructed in the office of simple servants: of these are sprung our
Triaclors, gadding up and down the Country, Bragging that in them is power to
Cure all Diseases, and many mo, Tying Laces about men's Arms, and Shreedes
about their Necks, with their Cossinges, enchamtors, and Sorcerors: of these,
some undertake (with great impudencye) to remeedye Ruptures, and Dislo^ations
by holy words, sending away the girdle of the pacient: But in such Charms,
those holy words are abused, being written and spoken by the holy spirit to
other ends: yea old wives carye such general practice in these things,
having more Cures then the great Physicians, that to good workmen the Art is
become unprofitable. Lastly, there be Horse Leaches, who whispering secretly in
the Ear of the Horse, do brag that they heal him, which is also one of the
Sorceryrs of Satan.

The discourse continued of the abuses happening in the world by the supposed
name of Physicians, Pothecaries, and Surgeons. The.9. Chapter.
THus we see the foolish world abused, and yet no man complains, but such as
understanding the common misery of this deceit, do see many diseases become
incurable, and mo pass by the peril of death: we speak not here of the
conference and confederacy which Charmers have secretly with the devil, who
with Papers, and certain words, either intelligible, or made holy against
reason, do undertake to heal men, and beasts, not sparing to deal with
dangerous and desperate cures, which draws great concurse and admiration of
people, and yet it is but a subtle kind of idolatry, wherein as it were
better for the pacient to abide the hazard of death, then to take remedy at
the hands of such Sorcerers: so in the case of enchantment, the Christian man
ought not to resort to the remedy of Witches, but recommende him self to God,
without whose power nothing can be done.

The covetous and lewd Pothicaries, desirous to make speedy sale of their
Drognes, and by quick vent to rai^e present gain, do solicit the Physicians
to prescribe many simples in the composition of their medicines, giving great
estimation to them that confect most, not regarding the goodness of the
confection, and much less what conformity it has with the disease of the
pacient, and least of all fauouryng the expenses of his Purse.

There be also of them which sell this for that, against whom is no less
rigor to be used, then to those lewd Notaries which in writings of
importance, will use etcetera. In these men, the Physicians reappose great
trust, touching the receiptes which they send to them, wherein their
negligence bringes no small offense, for that they ought to see the Droages, to
the end there be no supposition which may send the patient to his last end.
These abuses are either the instruments of death, or at least, the causers of
long and languishing diseases: they will not stick to affirm that they are
never without all sorts of Droages of Arabya, which they can well set out in
the show of many gallande Boxes, which being but painted without, carry also
less matter within.

There is also another abuse no less dangerous, which is the corruption of
Droages, by their long and negligent keeping, by which corruption, as Physic
is turned into poison, and the faculty to cure, into mortal peril of life:
So in this, expert Physicians haunting Shoppes, are so much the more to blame,
by how much they forbear to cast such poisons into Sink holes, (for, to throw
them into Rivers, were to infect the Fish) but it happens that the Physician is
either gossop, neighbor, friend or parent to this prattling Pothicarie, whereby
ye tromperie shall not be discovered, yea, it behooves the Physician to use
silence, if he will have Credit and gain by his Pothicarye.

The ignorant knows not what to say to it, who much less that he can
comprehend the abuse, seeing of the contrary, he is often taught by the
Pothicarye to prescribe his receiptes, and compounde his Droages. There be
Physicians called by the multitude, conscionable, as to whose knowledge is
ioygned regard of conscience and desire to discharge the duty of honest men:
they never prescribe medicine of importance, but they taste the Droages, and
see ye making of the composition, and where they find corruptions, they cast
them out, committing the offenders to the censure of the Magistrate, to whom
also belonges the rate and taxation of Droages, if the Pothicaries exceed
therein. Touching Surgeons, and such whose want of use makes them ignorant,
they are so much the more worthy of reprehension, as from them are derived
perilous diseases to many, and to the more sort, death? with these may be
coupled the covetous Surgeons, who to advance their gain, of a little wheale
can make a great Ulcer, prolonging the pain of the patient, to give more value
to their practice.

But to prevent ignorance, it were expedient not to receive any professor of
that Art, without good proof of his knowledge, and exact examination of the
rest touching his resolute sufficiencye: Let him be sworn not to abuse the
Art to the hurt of any, nor suffer his servants under him to undertake any
Cure, either in the City or Country, without his commandment and Counsel,
as both to search truly the state of the disease, and appoint due remeedye,
calling if need require the assistaunce of the Physician, but not as some do,
who having a Physician friend, do call him rather for their common gain,
then for any necessitye of the disease, which is a subtle. Robberye, cunninglye
cloaked with apparent reason. Here is requisite the wise aucthoritye of the
Magistrate, to whom according to the grauitye of the matter, belonges to
apply exact reformation: For in it is hazarded the state of your lives. (O ye
Governors) and the health of your Familyes, Friends, Parents, Kindred,
Parish, whole commonweals, and every private man's well doing, whereunto you
have Dedicated your selves, with solemn oath to discharge your duty in good
office and equitye of conscience.

But here it may be objected, that greater is the necessity to reform the
ecclesiastical abuses, which I do not only confess, but wish it with
express desire, for that as by the other, the body is led to hurt and
hazard, so in this is laid up the health or perdition of Souls, wherein as
Jesus Christ says, is no exchange or commutation, nor any thing more
precious, more divine, or of more wonderful excellency, then the soul,
fourmed to the image and semblaunce of God, the daughter of God, the Spowse of
Christ, and sanctuary of the holy Ghost. I wish in God, that touching
Preaching, no man might be admitted to that estate, without the study of ten or
twelve years in holy Scripture, joining with all the conference of Lectures and
Lessons of learned men: as also I would that in the Universities, none should
be received into the degrees of Doctors, without proof of so long time study
after he be admitted to the state of Master of Art, wherein if they have not
studied seriuslye, or have aspired to the degrees by fraud and supposition of
witnesses, or if they have converted to other exercise, the time that should
have been reserved to search out that knowledge, they committed wrong, chiefly
to God, with whom it is not lawful for any to enter into degree and
authority to teach, if he be not expert in all his Law. To this may be
joined the providence of the elders, by whom it was ordained that in this case
none should employ time in other study then in the Scriptures, to the end
that being resolute in that knowledge, the world should not be led in
errors and false doctrines. It were therefore a good order to be observed in
Universities and places of congregation, not to send any young Preachers or
Nouises into the country, before they have expressed their doctrine before the
auncientes and multitude of the religion, and that in the same exposition
wherein they must teach their congregation abroad, neither adding nor
diminishing when they shall preach to the multitude: For other ways there
were danger, that without this long custom or diligent exercise of private
preaching, these young prentises would deliver to their audience subtle and
false propositions, which we call either vain doctrines, or heretical,
although they held them without any wicked or perverse will: Besides, having
once pronounced them, they would be ashamed to renounce them, and so the
people in the mean while should stand seduced: And if they do renownce them,
the multitude would not afterward believe them easily, because in opinion
they would hold that they were constrained to deny them, as we read that
Berengarius was not able to reduce those, whom he had seduced by ignorance: So
that, as there would be always fear of some error, so it could not be
without blasphemy to the truth of the Scripture, to suppose in place of the
same, a falsehood, and that in the Pulpit, which being the seat of truth,
such as are appointed to pronounce it, ought to have knowledge of good
judgment, great wisdom, perfect understanding, and holy affection,
pretending no other end or purpose but the honor of God, and health of
souls, without aspiring to particular glory, seeing all glory is due to God:
Let them bear no affection to covetousness, and much less to please men, but
study and preach to edify, forbearing for malice to any singular person, to
exhibit bityng inuectiues in general speech, and less against estates.

Here, when we speak of Preachers, who ought to be such in all perfection of
excellency, we mean Curates and Pastors, which by the charge and duty of
their Pastoral profession, are actuallye bound to discharge that estate: For
as all other Preachers are but their Vicars, so if it belong to the Curate to
be no less learned then his Vicar, is it not then contrary to all order and
reason, that he should be raised into estate and dignity above others, if he
express not greater perfections, as in wisdom, doctrine, experience, and
virtue? Why is the head raised above the other members of the body, but because
he is endued with more excellencies of nature?

I wish that none should make practice of this profession without knowledge
of all the Scripture, and absolute interpretation of the holy Doctors, which
if it had been observed in the first institution, the Church had been
replenished with learned and fervent Pastors, Neither had the world swarmed
with these new opinions, if they had well studied and observed the Doctors of
the Church. This reformation also belonges to such as enter into the exercise
of the laws, and all others that aspire to offices, for the function of which,
belonges singular knowledge to understand the law and mainteyne it in all
Courts, and not to lose any lawful cause by ignorance, or for not being
resolute in the Law: in which default, or if by corruption the equity of a
good cause be confounded, the Lawyer is bound to just restitution.

God has erected Physic, and wills that the Physician be honored, but
that we understand that all sickness comes of him, and therefore vvoulde
have us to ask health of him, and to pourge our consciences of sin: Abuse of
Physicians, with counsel how to keep us from diseases. The.10. Chapter.
Eccle. 38.
Like as the Almighty (as the wise man says) has created Physic for
necessity, the same appearing in so many sorts of Herbs, Plants, and
medicional Droages, together with many other things profitable to preserve and
restore health, wherein there is a dignity and honor to the Physician, as the
Minister of the same high God: So, we are tied also to this further
consideration, that seeing our diseases for the most part and most often,
derive congruentlye of our sins, it is requisite (with the advice of the
Book of Wisdom) to offer our selves to God in prayer and penance for
remission of our sins, to the end Physic may succeed to good profit in
his us: For if the cause of our sickness remain still in state and nature, the
art and endeavor of the Physician bringes forth no other effect then an
increase and innovation of infirmityes, and does profit no more then the
Surgeon, who thinks by Plasters, to heal an Ulcer within the body, which
has already corrupted and putrified the boanes.

The same being the cause why in old time men called first upon the spiritual
Physician, in confessing and receiving Jesus Christ: Much more ought we to
repose in God then in the physician, with prayer, that he dispose virtue into
the Medicine for the Cure of our diseases. If we pronounce blessing and Grace
upon the meat which we eat every day, and sanctify it by the word of God,
why should we not reserve the same devout reverence, specially where the
matter is of more great and necessary importance? Ochosias in his sickness,
having recourse more to his physicians and supposed Gods, then to the God of
almightye power, was told by Helizeus that he should dye: Aza suffering pain
in his feet (which grew to a gout) put confidence in Physicians, and never
demanded Cure of God, whereby he could not be healed. And albeit the
physician has power over such diseases as have their natural causes, as such
as come either by Surfeit of meat and drink, or superfluety of distemper.

Yet if God be offended, let the patient offer reconcilement by repentance,
and demand cure of him: But where immediately God sendes the disease, it is in
vain to apply Physic, without there be first a reconsileme^t as is
expressed in the sickness of Ezechias: So that in all infirmities, let us first
have our recourse to God, and then resort to the endeavor and art of the
physician: Like as also in such as be true Christian Physicians, and
understand the counsel of God, it is a commendable property to minister cure to
the Souls of their patientes, before they undertake to Remove the diseases of
the body.

But such is the wretchedness of many, that if the Physician speak to them of
God, or of consideration to the reckoning and weal of their conscience, they
subborne by and by an habilitye of health, saying, they are not yet so far
spent, nor that the necessity of their sickness requires the advice or comfort
of the Preacher. And as such pacientes desire to bring them into no fancye of
death, and much less to increase their frail sorrow with heavy counsel, so
there be also physicians of so cold reverence and taste to God, that they will
not have their pacients to feed of other diet then pleasant Speech, and if
they have been whoremongers, they dispose the time into discourses of wanton
Ribaldry, feeding their cares and eyes with the presence of fair Damselles
singing and playing of Instruments, and so lead them with their Pastimes into
the bottom of Hell, where they ought with the feeling of their Pulses, to
sound also the bottom of their Consciences, and Salve their sick minds,
with persuasions to demand pardon of God, for want of which it may be that
they are drawn into those afflictions.

But when these wretched Sick men are (as it were) at their last, and
abandoned of their Phisytions, then God is brought into their remembrance,
when the Spirits being weak, the Senses dissolved, the hearing without
virtue, and the heart languishing to his last, he has no judgment of that
which is preached to him, but what so ever stood in his affection before, be
it good or ill, he retaynes it, and the mind having no Capacitye to
comprehend Doctrine, is without regard to call it self to account or
correction, whereby it happens by the Justice of God according to Saint
Augustine, that, that almightye and terrible Judge does punish the Sinner in
the end of his days, because during his health and good disposition he lived
in negligence toward God, and never gathered the actions of his life into
accounte: It is said that as in death men have no remembrance of God, so the
fear of death and hell, more then the love of God, makes men oftentimes
confessing their sins, for touching the will, there is more danger that
sin will leave man, then man renounce sin.

So that by the way of advertisement, let as well the Physician as the patient
be warned hear, to exhibit the duty of Christians, and not to grudge if I
do exhort them, for that having in hand to write a Christian government
and Pollecye, I can not (without offense) dissemble any thing which tendes to
common duty in things concerning God.

Therefore I advise the sick man, so soon as he comprehendes the mocion and
qualitye of his disease, to bequeathe himself altogether to God, and consulte
with his Soul: For such may be the furye and violent nature of his
Sickness, that what for debilitye of body, or sorrow of mind, or other
accident of infirmitye, much less that he shall have oportunitye to common
with his Conscience, but of the contrary power shall be taken from him to
discern in what state he stands.

It is not good that every one make a Custom and common recourse to Physic,
reducing the disposition of their Stomachs to a Pothicarye shop, the same
agreeing with the prescript of the best Physicians of our time, who above all
things give this general counsel, that men dispose their lives in
sobryetye, forbear Excess, and not to become subject to immoderate
affections, as to be given to anger, to heaviness of heart, and to the acts of
unchaste love. They must refrain from hurtful things, as corrupt meats,
infected airs, unclean places, contagious sicknesses, using moderate labors,
never eating without appetit, nor drinking without a desire to quench thirste:
wherein if any by negligence do run into excess, let him use the contrary,
as if he have offended his Stomach with surfeite, let him suffer fasting, and
correct crudelitye by speedye concoction: If he have ouerwearyed his Body
with travail, let him use rest, and as health is to be preserved by things
like, so in all excesses, the remeedy is to be derived by their contraries,
observing this perpetual medicine, to abstain as nere as he can, from
offending God, who is the general, and most often ye special cause of al
diseases: Who so ever enters into medicines, Eccless 38. Math. 9.
let him do it in necessity, and as the scripture teaches us, forbear
physic till the extremity, for which purpose it was ordained of God: of whom
as we are taught ye physicians are ministers, raised for the sick, and not for
the sound, so Gallen is of opinion that all Physic bringes with it some
dommage to the person. And therefore not without cause, the Greek word calls a
Droage or remeedy Pharmacum, signifying properly Venim, rather then a thing
wholesome, as if the Greeks would have said, that medicionable droages are as
matters venomous to a man, touching a nature well disposed: so that it behooves
there be in the body corruptions and humors infected before you receive
Droages, by the which the enemy of the sound, and not corrupt nature may be
driven out, which otherwise would have murdered and devoured the same nature:
Such as compare medicine and Physic to a bucke of foul clothes, mean, that
they are not to be used but in necessity: For as the Bucke serves no other
turn but to cleanse the Clothes when they are foul, which also being often
Buckt, can not but waste and consume: So the body suffers the like effect by
Physic, whose often medicines, as a canker do freete and eat out the
strength of youth, and so cleanse us of health, that we can not reach to old
Age.

Be sure to keep your breathing Bodies pure and clean, so shall you have no
need of Purgation, no more then your Linen being neat, has need to be put
into the buck, the same standing with the advice and example of most wise
Physicians, with whom nothing is less familier then to apply physic to them
selves, and nothing more intolerable then to join their stomachs to the
custom of medicines, which we may conclude, bring no fruit but when they are
used by necessity. Therefore let every one tie him self to good Regiment, to
temperate labor, to wholesome meats, sound Air, sweet water, clean Places:
But above al, let him eschew the sweet allurement to sin: And when we
offend God, let our first cure stand in action of penance, and after use
mearines of mind, and not to grieve for any thing that may happen, as in deed
the faithful Christian ought never descend into sorrow but for his sin, but
has cause to rejoice in all adversity, sickness, yea, and in death it self, for
that (as S. Paul says) in all these things is wrought the matter of his
benefit and health, as thinking that all the passions and tribulations of this
frail and humane life are not worthy of the eternal glory which he hopes for
in Heaven, whereof he assures him self, for that by how much he endures
afflictions hear in earth, by so much is his glory laid up the greater, and he
made more happy in heaven, in which consideration only S. Paul took comfort in
perplexityes, Torments, Extreme miseryes, and in the Cross, wherein he
reioysed more spiritually (as all the other Saints did) then the fleshly men in
all their banquets, pleasures, and idle delights of the world. Let therefore the
Christian pacient, after the due action of penance and submission for his
faults, rejoice him self in his sickness with singing of psalms and holy
himnes, having also instruments of music, whereunto he may sing devout
Notes, or have them song in his presence, to raise his heart and spirit into
spiritual joy in the Lord, in which sort S. Paul wills men to dispose their
pastimes of the world, as also S. James, in all events and dollerous
accidents, counselles men to relieve their hearts with the solace of Psalms,
using in cases of sickness, and times of adversity, (with the example of S.
Augustine when he was sick) the conference of Books of consolation and
spiritual Doctrines, using the company of Learned men, for his better
assistaunce in so holy discourse, sparing to ouercharge his mind with doutes
and difficulties, but rather to recreate it with familiar textes, by the which
his faith may be entertained, and his love to God increased, with desire to
be joined to him, and hope to enjoy his everlasting glory.

But the sickeman, whose conscience testifyeth against him, as having his life
embrued with dissolutio^: in place of this music and comfortable joy which
he can not have (because it is only to holy men) let him wash the
remembrance of his life past with penitent tears, and record his sins to
God with vehemencye of prayer for mercy and pardon, and taking his sickness as
an officer or messenger to sommon him to appear before the eternal judgment,
let him prepare to sue for grace before he be presented before the burning
Throane, since afterward there is no remission: Wherein the better to
acknowledge his offense to God, let him use satisfaction to his neighbor, and
do the duty of a true penitent Christian.

But now to knit up eftsoon with the matter of the Physicians, who in many
parts of Christendom, are worse disposed then those whom we named before,
as being ready ministers, either for hate or covetousness, favor or hyre, to
murder and sell the lives of their miserable pacients by horrible means, too
familiar in the world now a days, to whose unnatural treasons, I account the
torments of hell to be but a due justice. O lamentable corruption of our
time, when even there where we lay up the confidence of our lives, we find
murder with infidelyty, and where, with the breath of hope, of comfort and
securitye, we drink up the sirope of poison, prepared by the hands of the
creator to the kind of man,

There is an other sort, in whom is little difference of sin from the others,
who giving counsel to divide the body into strange flesh, to cure a
disease, do nothing else then with the title of wretched bawdrye, damn many
souls in the filthye suddes of the flesh: where there is providence by
infinite remeedyes to pourge all such vicious humors.

Thus they abuse the art, which being a gift of God, they become unfaithful,
and unthankful ministers, against his honor, will, and commandment,
offending God more then they, who by their counsel commit such wicked acts:
Such also as keep patientes long on their hands, and Surgeons, who for gain
and practice, nourishe long time Ulcers, Wounds, and Apostumes, as in their
doing is expressed an imitacion of Thieves, so what can they deserve less then
the reward of that crime.

Lastly, I wish both the one and the other to tread in the steps of
certain devout and good Physicians, who will not meddle with the cure of the
body, before they have first prepared a purgation to the soul, and much less
will minister any thing to the pleasure of the body, against the health of the
Soul, but both the one and the other in sociable unity of friendship, making
always the servant obey his Lady and Mistress, in humble and reasonable
subjection.

The Second book.
Judges and governors of common Weals, have of God many severe
commandments in the Scriptures to exhibit justice by rightful laws,
vvherin as they are threatened of God if they fail, so because they shall not
err, the form how to Judge, is prescribed them, God so being set before
them in imitacion of Judgments which he does, which, by reason they ought
to do, because as he is of him self just, and his judgments righteous, yea,
justice it self: so they are his liefetenauntes, ordained of him to administer
his justice, wherein because they shall not be fearful to exercise their
estate, he promises them his asistaunce: Jf they be fearful, they deserve
not to be Judges, because in such a service of his, he will have no faint
hearted ministers. The.1. Chapter.
FOr that in Regiment of commonweals according to God, the christian
Magistrates neither may nor can err in the execution of their charges, they
have in the scripture the commandments of the Lord (whose lieftenants they
are) yea, often Reiterated with strait and severe charge faithfully to Govern
his people with Lawful and righteous judgments, whereof as he gives them a
form by such as he exercises upon his people: so if they proceed by
imitacion of so perfect an example they ought not nor cannot bring forth fault
or error of good justice, specially if they observe those Laws by the which
he declares his true and upright judgment in justifying the innocents,
correcting and condemning the guilty, exhorting the ill liver to reformation,
in teaching the Doctrines of virtue to the ignoraunte, and lastly in
distributing to every one according to the rate and measure of his desert.

The laws which he will have us to follow,be first ordinances of him self,
which he expresses to us in the scripture, I mean as well moral, as divine
and eternal, whereof we will speak heareafter: the others are they which we
call natural and human, grounded upon the same, containing honesty or
Public profit, or altogether.

By these foundacions and causes we may affirm the human laws to be
Lawful and directly commanded by Jesus Christ, and by the declaration of
Saint Peter, Math. 21. Luke. 10. Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2.
and S. Paul. in the obedience to Caesar, and other Magistrates: to the which
obedience we must necessarylye join the Laws by them ordained: And for the
more upright direction of governors, I will recite the express commandment of
God concerning their Estate of Judging, and by the scripture, lay before them,
in what sort they ought to keep them from corruption of justice, and how many
miseries ensue the tract of false judgments, beseeching them in the name of
God, whose Delegates they are under their Prince, being the general Judge
upon earth, to draw into deep consideration, the advertisement of the wise
man expressed in these words: Love justice you that judge the earth: power is
given you of the Lord, Sapi. 1. and.6.
and the virtue of the sovereign God communicated unto you, he will examine
your works, and search out your thoughts.

And because you are the administors of his kingdom, and have not pronounced
good judgment, and much less observed the law of justice, nor walked
according to his will, there will appear upon you a horrible judgment, as a due
sentence executed upon such as bear rule: mercy is showed to the little
ones, but the mighty shall endure grievous torments: Such as he means shall be
punished, (which are those that do not good justice) see him in this sort
interpreted to them before: the same being the cause why the scripture so
commonly exhortes the Judge to Judge well: thou shall not (O Judge says God in
Leuticus,) do that which is unrighteous, meaning thou shall do nothing
against the Law, nor entangle thy judgments with injustice: thou shall not
have regard to the person of the poor man, Leuit. 19.
by pitye to take away the punishment of his transgression amongst other
offenders, and much less shall thou honor the face of the mighty to
gratifye him in justice, but do just judgment to thy neighbor.

In the Book of Nombers, he speaks to the Judges, you shall not take the
price of ye blood of him which is condemned to have spilt it, but let him dye
forthwith by your judgment: It is is said in Deuteronomy: thou shall ordain
in all the ports of thy Tounes (which God has given thee through every
family) Judges, Deuteronomy. 16.
to judge iustlye, not declyning either to the one part or to the other.

Thou shall not O Judge, admit acception of person, in case of judgment, thou
shall have no respect, whether the man be Ritche, a great Lord, thy Parent,
Friend, neighbor, or familiar, to the end to minister favor, neither shall
thou take any presents, for presents do blind the eyes of wise men, and
change the words of the just, meaing ye oftentimes they put in the mouths of
honest men other language to pervert justice, then they spoke before. Thou shall
pursue justly that which is just, to the end thou may live happily, and
possess the land which thy God will give thee, if thou obey him.

This Law was plainly and fully executed by Iosaphat King of Judea, who
erecting Governors and Judges through all the Towns of his kingdom,
prescribed them these commandments following: take good heed (says he) to
the duty of your estate, for you exercise not the judgment of a man, but of
the great God, by whom even all the judgments which you shall give, be they
good or evil, shall be returned upon you: that that is good, shall bring forth
benefit to your salvation, and that that is evil, shall resolve to your
destruction.

Above all things, hold before your eyes the fear of God, and in cases of
your estate and office, whether it concern Inquisition, examining of
witnesses, confrontment of parties, pursuit of evil men, or execution of
justice in what sort so ever, use diligence with integrity: distribute right to
parties according to Law, and conscience: For there is no iniquity in God, as
who say, he does no wrong to any man, nor has no power thereunto, being
Justice it self, but hates all such as commit iniquity: there is not with
him exception of persons, nor any lust to receive presents, whereby he warns
all Judges to judge in the same quality that he judges, that is, in right
and equity, in truth and judgment. This was long time before recommended to
posterity by Moses, as being the Liefetenaunt of God, Deuteronomy. 1. and.16.
whom he calls the God of Gods, Lord of Lords, the mighty and terrible God,
with whom is no respect of persons, nor has his hands defiled with presents:
he that geues justice to the Orphane, and right to the widdowe, even he that
bears affection to the stranger, and furnishes him with food and clothing:
by this all Magistrates are warned to suffer no injury to be done to poor
people, who much less that they have any common support in the world, but of
the contrary, they stand subject to scoffs, rebukes, and afflictions of the
wicked, oftentimes to stir them to a more zeal to strangers, he bids
them remember that they have been strangers in Egypt.

To this he adds in another place, that who does not obey the commandment
of the Priest at the time when he does his ministerye, meaning when he is in
the exercise of his office, as preaching, teaching, and instructing in Civil
and common duty, the judge has power to condemn him to death: thou (O Judge)
shall cut of by death every wicked man, and al wickedness in Israel, as the
rebellious, proud, arrogant, and all other expressing a wicked will by any
dissolute act, the which when the people shall hear or see, they will fear,
neither shall any man afterward dare raise his mind to pride or arrogancye
against his superiors: God speaks to Joshua, the governor and Judge over
Israel, and immediate successor to Moises, Joshua. 1.
I will not leave nor forsake thee: be strong and valiant, that is, take great
courage, the better to execute my Law, which my servant Moses left unto thee.
Lean neither to ye right nor left hand of the same, so shall thou know what
thou ought to do, Let not this book of ye law depart out of thy mouth,
meaning, exercise thy self with the argument of it every day, the better to
measure the execution of al those things which thou shall find written there:
then shall thou direct thy way and know it, which is, thou shall then
understand what thou ought to do, and prosper. These speeches bring
interest to all Magistrates and governors of people, as well as they were
directly spoken to Joshua: for what so ever he speaks to any one singularly,
the same caryeth entendment to al others of the same estate.

So that let all governors of commonweals be advertised by this doctrine,
that in the due execution of their office, God will always reach them his
hand, and never forsaking them, his aid shall be always readily distributed to
whatsoever they shall do duly concerning their charge in terrefiyng the
guilty, and making the rest subject to them which be within their
jurisdiction: therefore as they need not fear any thing, but to corrupt
justice in their government, so for the execution of their judgments, they
are sure of the protection of God, whose chosen Lieftenauntes they are. Let
them use such authority, as they may make tremble the whole world under
them, specially the evil lyuers, and contain others in office of good
conversation. For this cause the Ecclesiastike advises us to take heed to
aspire to the state of judging, if we have not the courage and power to break
the iniquities of all sorts of people, seeing if we fear the force of the
mighty, we shall fear to do good justice, and so bring Sclaunder to our light
desire of souerentie: but as in good judges God displaieth some beams of his
deuinitie, as being the ministers of his divine justice, so he ioynes to their
office the operation of some divine virtue which makes the^ feared of their
subjects. For this cause are they called Heloym, that is, Gods, as partaking
with the force and power of God, the more constantly to execute his judgments
in earth.

In the Scripture we read of no Judge or Magistrate doing his estate, which
did not bring fear to all their people, and made them obedient to his
ordinances: for God by the Judge geues a secret fear, to bring others to
subjection. And albeit the Mutinus people of Israel fell into often revolt
against their great governor Moises, whom they would have stoned: Exodus 23.
yet he eschewed not his charge, and much less forbear (for fear) to do
justice, but in one day made pass by the edge of the sword twenty and three
thousand idolatours of one race of Leui, and although the resisting adversary
was twelve times more in number, yet they durst not stretche out their hands
to defend their Rebellion: yea he apprehended at one time twelve of the
greatest Lords of the people, and Captains of the army, because they assisted
the sacrifices of the Madianites, with whom they committed whordome, and yet
not in one of the multitude was found so much as to lift up his finger in
sign of resistaunce: the which remaining in example to the succession of other
Magistrates, they were never fearful to do justice, either upon any singular
great state, or upon a whole multitude offending, as knowing, that having in
hand the affairs of God, whose chief prescript was to punish the
transgressors, that he would not suffer them to endure hurt, nor forsake
them, executing severe justice upon the wicked.

Here Judges are warned not to be credulus, nor to judge by reports, to take
heed of affections, and not to judge by particular opinion: to resist which
evils, God ordained in the Law seventy Counselors, to whom he enioyneth
sobriety, chastity, integrity, and wisdom, to be followers of the judgment
of God, in the exact examining of offenses, and to punish them according to
the gravity of the transgressions: that they be not covetous, seeing that for
covetousness the sons of Samuel were deposed: they must leave no sin
unpunished: terrible sentence for unrighteous judgments: an advertisement of
David to Judges, with a prophecy of their misery if they judge not in
equity. The.2. Chapter.
THere be other precepts in the Scripture, prescribed also to Governors in
their estate of justice, which I need not now bring in particular question,
for that they have the same commandment, to have the Scripture in their
hands, which was given to Joshua, their example and Patron in causes of
judgment, the better to govern the people: and therefore I hope it can not
bring offense, if by the way of general persuasion, I do exhort them to be
such as the scripture prescribes: but chiefly (according to the rule of their
election) that they be sober, wise, and discrete, to the end they be not
circumuented by ignorance, imprudence, error, and misintelligence, and so
seduce the direction of most weighty and grave affairs: which fault was noted
in David, when he gave sentence against Miphiboseth the son of Ionathas, by
the false report of Syba, servant of the said Miphiboseth, at whose only
word, contrary (to the Scripture which allows no sentence, but by the
testimony of three or two at the least) he condemned the other, and would
not hear him in his justification. An act contrary to all reason, and right
of nature: by which as we see that in hastye credulity, conjecture only or
opinion, sudden passion of collar, or wicked affection, as hate, envy,
sutteltie, thirst of benefit, lightness of mind, with all other affections
(as things contrary to wisdom and discretion) be of power to pervert
judgment: So the same is the cause why the Law requires in Judges, wisdom,
Numb. 11.
discretion, and conference with wise men, and not to stay upon their
particular opinions, the same being ye respect why God erected seventy
Senators for the government of the people, who, consulting altogether in the
common business, and one correcting the error of another, can not but form
good judgment. Besides, such a multitude (as Aristotle says) can not be
easilye corrupted, (no more then a great abundance of water,) but with great
difficulty, where a small vessel in small time can not but suffer infection.

The Scripture advises them to be sober and moderate, the better to avoid
trouble of mind by intemperaunce, Prou. 31.
which having power to hinder the effect of good judgment in whom it
possesses, it draws also the mind to negligence, and takes away al care of
the affairs.

They are also defended from immoderate love of women, as well by the destiny
of Solomon, 3. King. 11.
who having the gift of wisdom, lost by his unbridled love and lust, all
grace in judgment: as also by the example of the two wicked Judges testifying
against Susanna, Dan. 13.
who by their inflamed desires of her beawtye corrupted their judgment: So
that by the Scripture, all Judges are warned, that neither in their minds nor
will remain any peruersitie, error, or affection: but a full inclination to
integrity, and only zeal of justice joined with knowledge, which as it is
the same light of the mind, by the which we discern clearly that which is
good or evil, just or unrighteous: so in a peruersed will, or wicked
affection, is bred confusion of the spirit, which consequentlye leads to
perplexities, and both troubles and hinders the faculty of upright judging
(even as if there be never so little a Moate or Beam in the eye, the clear
sight is hindered, and it has less power to discern the true difference of
things presented before it:) but much less possibility of sound judgment is
there in the ignorant man, who not understanding the Law, suffers the same
error which the blind man does, whose want of sight makes him unable to
discern colors: But the better to form their judgments irreprehensible
and without reproach, Deuteronomy. 1.
the Scripture lays before them the judgments of God, as the true Images and
Portraictes, Prou. 16.
representing such example of judgment and justice, as the Magistrates of the
earth ought to follow, which Solomon and Tobias call the most true and just
ballaunce: and David resembling them with the truth it self, says that such
ought the judge to be in whose judgment is found no iniquity. So that the
Judges raised by him to dispose justice in his place, ought always to have the
Majesty of him in their minds, and his judgments in imitation. He judges
not by hear say, and much less by appearance or likelihood, but according to
the truth.

In which sort it is said in Genesis, Gene. 18.
that he descended into Sodom and Gomorre, to see if the desolution of the
people, answered the horrible brute that went of them: his words were, I will
descend and see if it be so: He that knows whatsoever is done, even in the
deepest bottomes, and from whom no secreete can be hid, declares by this
familiar manner and phrase of Speech applied to our infirmitye, that it
belonges to Judges, before they enter into sentence, or pronounce against such
as are accused, to be assured of the truth of the fact, least by their
lightness or sour passion, they commit error in judgment. In the law, when
the affairs stood upon any hard or obscure doubt, this was the custom, to
refer it to the judgment of God, as in the punishment of the blasphemour,
and what right daughters had to the goods of their Fathers, Nomb. 27
in which cases there was no resolution set down in the Law, the same serving
as matter of advertisement to examine exactlye such controversies and hard
causes, as the laws have no habilitye to decide, beseeching God according to
the advice of the scripture, so to lighten their inward reason that they may
bring forth true and perfect Judgment.

But when Judges will not begin by this advertisement, nor conform them
selves to this justice of God and his judgments, let them look for that
terrible seuerytie which he has thundered upon those Judges and countries,
where he found negligence in punishment to those sorts of crimes. 1 King. 4.
Hely the great governor and Judge of Israel, because he did not justice
upon his children, brake his neck, his children were killed, 1. King. 8.
and all the country brought to desolacion. The sons of Samuel were deposed,
because they took presents. Saul was reproved for giving grace to such as
he ought to have punished, after whose death, famine came over all the land of
Palestin, for that he gave wicked judgments in the lands of the Gabaonites,
whom he afflicted, and made certain of them pass by unjust death, to
satisfye, which iniquity, Seven of the race of Saul were hanged upon Gibbertes.

The Captivity of the Israelites and ruin of Jerusalem, of the Temple, and
their Towns, happened for the transgression of the Priests and Kings done in
Justice, 1. King. 21.
corrupting it by presents, condemning the just, and justifying the wicked for
Bribes. Whereof Esaias speaks, thy Princes, that is, (thy governors as well in
Pollecye Ecclesiastical as Civil.) are unfaithful and have forsworn them
selves, yea, even they that have taken oath to do good Justice, and have not
observed it, but are become companions of Robbers, and have share in their
pray. Esai. 1.
They all love Bribes, and follow recompenses, because they have done pleasure
in judgment to the ritche. But even those as they were the chief in honor
and superioritye, so also were they first taken Captives, murdered, their
houses and goods suffered spoil, and they more then others, defaced with
ignominy, contempt, and all sorts of wretchedness.

These be the miseryes which happen to wicked Judges and their Children, and
for their abuses, to Tounes, Countries, and Kingdoms. So that with good cause
I may recommende, as a last advertisement to al Judges, Psa. 81.
to remember the saying of David in this sort? God assistes the assembly of
the Gods, who are the Judges and governors of his people, under whom they
exercise the judgment which is proper to God the true and eternal Judge, and
therefore are they as partakers of a divine aucthoritye, by enterteining and
ruling his people by that justice and souerainty. So that as God is in the
Courts of his Judges, and in the midst of them, so he judges them, whereby
is meant, that he condemns them, if they judge not according to God. Rom 3.
David also pursues them, crying in this sort: How long O ye perverse Judges,
will you Judge so wickedly? will you not acknowledge your selves in your false
judgments? will you always have regard to the faces of offenders, giving
them support and absolution of their wickedness, and liberty to sin with
impunity? deliver the poor man and Orphane, and justify the simple and
needye: suffer no wrong to be done to such as have no maintenance in the
world, and are without favorers in courts: Take the poor and needy out of
the hand of the transgressor. But what? much less that these worldly lordings
have co^munity with this great pity, seeing (as David says) they never knew
nor understood what they were bound to do according to God, so greatly were
they environed with wretched darkness, and whollye possessed with ignorance of
God and his laws: whereby it happens that the foundation of the earth shall be
moved, which is, that by that occasion, exceeding great euilles, and
intolerable aduersityes shall fall upon the nations of the earth. Therefore
where I said, you were gods, so greatly honored of God by the state which he
geues you, representing him in case of judgment, I forgot not your infidelity,
meaning, that you shall fall into no less miserye and wretchedness then any of
the ancient wicked Judges, to whose iniquitye was appointed a miserable
conclusion of their unhappy days: Wherein David, considering the lamentable
infelicities ouerwhelming the world for the false and corrupt judgment of
Judges, cries out to God saying: Raise thy self O Lord God and Judge the
Earth, condemn the abuses and faults of such people as have corrupted the
earth with impietye by their unrighteous Judgments: so shall thou reign over
all nations, and be honored as a true and just Lord and Judge of the earth,
doing justice upon so many iniquities. By this psalm Judges are instructed to
judge well, as well for the reverence of the great Lord, sitting in the midst
of them in their Judgments, to approve them if they be righteous, and reprove
them, yea dissolve them, if they hold of iniquity, condemning the persons to
horrible mysteries, yea, even to shake the foundations of the maine earth, so
grievous to God is a false and unrighteous Judge, as of the concontrary, he
delites in him, who according to conscience acquites his charge and duty: as
also for that they have the honor, estate, and reverence of Judges, to
distribute right to every one, remembering that lord in their judgment, who
has this perpetual property, to judge without affection: they ought also to
have such exquisite knowledge with exact judgment of reason, that (according
to common natural sense) they judge to esteem it a horrible sin to judge
against their conscience: seeing that as infinite Pagans, with this judgment
of reason, have established their perpetual glory for the true deciding of
causes: so, the error of our Judges, being laid up in the memory of God, will
bring them to receive sentence before his seat of judgment, to their assured
confusion: And so let all Judges know that if by their sinister sentences, any
one is deprived of his goods, honor, or life, (by which it can not be
chosen but many calamities will happen) even so many eternal damnations do they
deserve, with no less horrible pains, reserved for them in the furnace of
hell.

In humane things, Magistrates ought to follow the law natural: and in
causes divine, the Doctrine of faith, and the love of God: It was necessary
that God by his Scripture reneued the law natural, for it was darkened by
sin: and the law of faith and of love divine, was altogether unknown
without the doctrine of God according to both the one and other law, the
Magistrate may make ordinances, so that they tend to the confirmacion of the
same, or have a likeness with them. The.3. Chapter.
Governors of commonweals, thus raised to a state of divine honor, by the
which they have the title of Gods (as has been recited in the former Book,)
the better to enhable them to this divine office peculiar and proper to God,
which is, to judge rather in wisdom, discrecion, and perfection, let them
imitate God, who judges perfectly without error, then follow man, in whose
nature is propertye of error, and with his particular reason, oftentimes
bringes forth acts contrary to reason. Let them also at all times follow one
rule divine, certain and infallible, which shall lead them in a divine course
and exercise of their estate. Let them have always in their hand, for the
managing of humane and civil affairs, the law natuturall (I mean the law
general proponed by the scripture) making it their Loadestone to direct
infallibly the state of all their doings. Math. 7.


That is, the law whereunto even Jesus Christ sendes us in all common and
humane actions, meaning, we shall not do to others, that which we would not
have done to us, as withal, Let us do to others, what we would have done to
our selves, whereof the Gospel gives this interpretation, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. Upon this foundation, al Laws, customs, and
constitucions, civil and humane (so far forth as they be good and just) are
grounded: But if there be any ordinance, wherein is not contained this precept
of the Law natural, or agreeing therewith (I mean in affairs concerning
only the profit and benefit of men) it can not but hold of iniquitye.

So that it behooves that it comprehend something necessary to the socyetye
of man, profitable, and honest, like as the Law ought not to be made to give
favor to pleasure, or bring hurt to any one, and much less to suffer
dishonor or villanye to be done.

Thus the Law natural in her general foundation, being in this sort
aucthorised by the holy Scripture, stands to us as a rule for all ordinances
in causes concerning humane government. But touching the faith, the love, and
service which we owe to God in things divine and spiritual, we have an
other law, the foundation of al holy and divine ordinances: I am thy God, etc.
which is, thou shall love thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy
understanding, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, which commandment
Saint Paul includes in the natural love toward our neighbor, as in deed a
man can never love well his neighbor, but that it is for the love of God,
Exodus 20. Deu. 6. Math. 22. Luke 10. Romans 13.
as the cause formal and effectual of the other friendship: And this law was no
less natural then the other, imprinted in the hearts of the first men: But the
corruption of nature, vain opinions, and wicked manners, have so strongly
perverted the judgment of men, that God saw a necessitye (being indused by
his mercy) to reveal to man this law, yea, and revealed him self: for men
knew him not, and much less loved him: Thus this first law was clean
defaced, which was easily seen touching the law to our neighbor, for that
there were not many men in the world, in whom was desire to do pleasure to
others, without recompense of as much or more benefit, but natures for the most
part bearing inclinations to enemities, vsuries, quarelles, pertialityes,
factions, wars, with other infinite co^spiracies, raised mutually of one man
against another. And consernyng faith, knowledge and love of God, all men had
declined and erred by extreme transgression: wherefore God gave eftsoon these
precepts, and the explication of the same by diverse documentes for their
better understanding, and according to the same has erected many laws and
ordinances tending to those two ends, I mean, to understand and keep those
two commandments. Touching faith, he has revealed it to us, expounded and
caused it to be expounded by his prophets and Apostles, and according to the
same, we have also statutes and Laws reduced into twelfe Articles of the
Creed, even as the works which we ought to do in charity and love of God
are comprehended in the ten commandments.

So that since governors ought never to err in judgment, it is meet that
they judge according to these two laws: And seeing there can be no others,
but either they have affinitye with the Pagans, or are replenished with
injustice and impiety, there is great necessity that these be thorowlye
studied: And so loking with deep judgment into the law of nature, they may
erect ordinances tending to the said three ends, necessity, vtility, and
honestye, being all concluded in one general, which is, the common wealth:
they may also ordain pains for the transgressors by the conformety of those
which they see contained in the laws received and accustomed in all
Christendom: even so in the law of the love of God, they may also make
statutes to induce men, and lead them to that love: and if any have lost it:
(A thing happening by sin) they may make ordinances of reconcilement
according to the precedent of the ancients, by the exhortacion of the
Prophets, as to fast, and assemble at Prayers, which was used in the time of
the Judges, of Hester, the Ninevites, and Machabees, without express
commandment of God.

Men may use the morral Laws of the old Testament, but not the Ceremonial
and Judicial, applied to the times and manners of the Jews, which Jesus
Christ, and also Saint Paul does confyrme. These were natural, and therefore
ought to be eternal: notvvithstanding, for charity to our neighbor, and
love of God, and for advancement of faith, that law sometimes is not to be
used, at the time when men do greatest service to God, which then is an act
of perfection. The wise man can not fail to Judge vell according to the law
of nature. The.4. Chapter.
BUT because it may be asked of some, whether magistrates may judge according
to the divine Laws of the old Testament, seeing the Law of Moses was
abolished by Jesus Christ: The law (says Saint Luke) and the Prophets, Luke.
16.
led man no further then until the time of Saint John Baptist.

And as the law of nature before Moses conteynes not but certain examples of
Justice, so the law of the Gospel, meddling not with Pollitike ordinances,
entreates only of mercy, as is seen in the grace which Jesus Christ showed
to the adulterour: Go thy ways (says he) and sin no more. And touching
human laws, it seems that men ought not to stay altogether upon them, for
that the most part were erected of Infidelles, whose reason was darkened with
infidelitye, and certain of them expressly against our faith, seem to deserve
no more aucthoritye or credit, and less to be received, then their
Idolatries, that is to say, oblations done to their Gods: In this we have to
answer two obiectes very hard to resolve if we consider the simple reasons
of some, who seeking to absolve christians from al laws, say, that they are
not subject thereunto by Jesus Christ, and that the spirit of God is our
Father, who, if we doubt, will instruct us, and reveal all that shall be
necessary to our salvation. Besides, S. Paul wills that the wise christian
be judge without having regard to law: I confess that the law of Moses,
touching Ceremonies and sacrifices, signifying the state of the new Testament
(for Christ in that, is the end of the law) yea, touching the statutes of the
law applied to the times and manners of the Iewishe nation, is abolished, (as
the libell repudiatorye of the wife.)

But touching commandments moral containing instruction of good manners, and
correcting sin with punishment, much less that the law is abolished, but it
is confirmed by the Gospel: Christ says, Al such as have taken up the sword,
to strike and kill, shall perish with the sword, which the law does also
teach: we know the law is good, but let us understand and apply it to
lawful use: Saint Paul says, that the law that punishes, Mat. 18. Romans 3.
is not ordained for the Just, but to bridle the rebel, unjust, wicked,
sedicious and murderers of parents: whether he mean of Moses Law which
punishes all these sins, or comprehend all the law in general, grounded
upon the foundacions which we have recyted before: it is enough that we
declare that all doctrine of virtue, whether it be in the law of Moses, or
in Philosophy, is good and holy, so far forth as it raises and
recompenseth virtue, detesteth sin, and condemns al vice, for which cause
the Philosopher says, that reward and pain be the forces and strengthes of
the law.

Romans 2.
In deed this doctrine is not simplye derived of Moses law, but it is
natural, and therefore Saint Paul says that the Gentiles (people without all
understanding of Moses Law, but lived by their reason well instructed) albeit
they had no law, yet did they naturally the things contained in the law, whose
examples as they do well declare that the work of the law was written in
their hearts by the accusations and defenses of their consciences: So in this
S. Paul expresses aptly that al doctrines moral and pollitike contained in the
Law of Moses be connaturall to man, and engraued in him even from his first
birth by that divine creation, wherein the soul receiving the figure and
similitude of god, has taken this excellent grace to know that which is of
her exemplary patron from whom she is portrated, and by exercise of the
spirit in the study of learning with a continual heaue^lye inspiration
assisting and joined with integritye of good life, has been, and is remaining
in such as were not under the Law of Moses, such (we may say) as were
Iethro, Job, and many great Philosophers, who knew God and spoke deuinelie of
him, and of virtues and vices.

Therefore as that Doctrine is in some sort divine by his original, as
proceeding from that divine caract imprinted by God in man, which is, the
spirit, reason, and judgment: So the holy scripture, yea, the scripture of
the Gospel has aucthorised it to be perfectly divine, and so by the same
scripture, where it was darkened before by corruptions, happening by ignorance
of God, and dissolutio^ of life, it is made perfect in that wherein it had
imperfection, and so it is not only restored by Jesus Christ, and reformed by
his spirit which he has given us: But with abundance of grace and science,
augmented, yea even unto such knowledge as now we behold the glory light of the
Lord with open face, Romans 5.
and be transformed from light to light, (that is) from perfect knowledge (such
as may be had in the world) into ye self image, yea, even to be made one in
God by a divine transformation: 2. Cor. 2.
the same being wrought by ye spirit of this good and sovereign lord. Therefore
all the moral doctrines of the old Testament be acknowledged and reputed by man
from the first and eternal obseruacion, according to the which, laws have
been and will be always ordained and observed of ye faithful people: And where
Jesus Christ sent back the adulterer, without punishment of the Law, we
confess that albeit he came to preach penance, and give grace to penitent
sinners, yet for all yt he has not abolished pollitike Laws, which wickedlye
was laid against him by Julian the Apostate. But has conserved them by his
doctrine and examples, willing to give to Caesar that which belonged to him,
Math. 22.
wherein him self showed obedience to the Civil Laws in paying tribute to
Caesar, although he was not subject thereunto: He which was the supreme
lawmaker and son of God: his Apostles also taught that men must obey Kings,
Princes and governors, which obedience is necessarily joined with the laws:
for how far shall I obey them, if I know not the rate and state of their
commandment, nor what they prescribe me to do: So that my obedience must
incline to the limit and prescript of their Laws, which I ought not resist so
farforth as they are established upon such foundations as we have laid before.
Jesus christ in asking where were those that condemned the adulterer, did not
hinder or defend that he should not be stooned: But he being not come to take
upon him the state of a Civil Judge, condemns not according to the sentence
of civil laws, tendering and caring always for the principal, which was, to
save souls: and touching body and goods, he leaves the government and
pollecie thereof to Kings, temporal Princes and their judges, to whom he geues
aucthority, Math 16. Mat. 7.18.
to debate and execute punishments in yt he says: He yt has murdered or killed
shall die: the tree yt brings forth no fruit deserves to be cut down and cast
in the fire, and who does wrong and sclander to the litleones, Mat. 21. Mat.
18. 1. Cor. 5.
ought to be cast into the sea with a millstone about his neck. Approving with
pains, he approves also the Judges and executours of the same: he chaseth
out of the temple merchants, and buiers and sellers, he biddes excommunicate
the rebellious and wrong doers, and by S. Paul condemns many pernicious
Christians to the devil: Acts. 5.
he willed Saint Peter to execute a maruailous sentence against Saphirus and
Ananias, who fell dead at his feet for doubling with the holy ghost, promising
to give all their goods to the poor, and distributed but a part, reserving
the other by an unfaithful fear to suffer necessitye: It is true that being
before Infidels, he would not have us to use or appeal to justice in cases to
suffer for the faith, aduising us by this, rather to loase both the hoode and
the cloak (as the proverb is) then to be revenged of them, and endure death,
rather then to give one blow. Acts. 22.24.25.
But in cases not touching faith, we may use justice, as did Saint Paul, who,
when reproaches and false crimes by malice were laid upon him, (and Christian
faith not touched) he defended him self against his false accusers, and in
extreme remeedye he appealeth to Caesar at Rome.

Touching the Laws of the Gentiles, if (according to our opinion before) they
be founded in universal reason without error or infidelitye, they ought (as
branches springing out of the law natural) to be received and observed, as
was the marriage of Infidelles. But where they suffer error, let them with
their idolatries be abominable and abhorred. To answer the objection which
some derive from S. Paul, that the wise christian ought to judge differences
amongst the faithful, where there is no mention of laws. Saint Paul in
saying that the wise man may Judge, means that he be wise in the
understanding of the laws, for in this is the true propertye of wisdom, to
be well seen and wise in God concerning things divine and humane, so shall
his singular wisdom keep him from error in judgment, having in him (as the
teacher of wisdom says) the fear of God, knowledge and wisdom, and being
truly spiritual, which by the spirit of God makes exact judgment in all
things, and can not be reproved of that whereof he has given sentence: Yet
when he ought to Judge I will not say but that it is meet that he have the
laws of the world in his head, yea, let him have a good spirit, a sound and
ripe judgment, and understand well the cause in present question, and so laying
aside al affection, let him reco^mend him self to God, whose judgment he
exercises: Let him confer in difficult matters with other sages, which, with
remembrance of Gods holy fear, will lead him in integrity of judgment: And
knowing that the end of al law is vtility, necessity, and honesty, let him
prefer honesty before profit, and public profit before the particular gain
of any man, and that rather certain private persons lose in observing the
Law, then the multitude to suffer distress: But above all, let that honestye
which consistes in virtue, be always entertained, doing no evil whereupon to
hope for good.

The law natural grounded upon reason was two thousand years in use without
other ordinances (saving the Sabbath and Circumsition) and God has given
fevve laws concerning this natural and civil right, nor the ancient wise
governors of common weals for just causes: the people of God according to
reason have made judgments, and follovved the interpretacion of their moral
laws by the instinct of reason, by the which God did institute them, and
therefore when the Scribes and Pharisees perverted that reason, they were
condemned. Governors asvvell in their ordinances as constitucion of pains to
punish offenses, ought alvvaies to follow those laws which God has
ordained according to that reason. The.5. Chapter.
THus we have seen that governors may Judge according to Laws natural,
divine, and humane: both in what sort they ought to judge, and that it is not
necessary always to consult, with the written Law in all Judgments, for
that as there be more matters then words, more causes then laws: So the
actions of men (as Aristotle says) being infinite, can not be contained all
by memoryes, as also by reason of the dissimilitude and varieties, they can not
be comprehended in general constitucions such as be the Laws: this was ye
cause that the Lacedaemonians made no great use of written laws, leaving to the
discretion of wise Judges and grave men, the judgment of that which was not
written: God him self (the Image of all wisdom) for the same reason caused
no Law to be written in two thousand years but that of the Sabbath and
circumsicion: nor in the Gospel, we see none expressly instituted by Jesus
Christ for a common weal, but al was referred to the arbitracion and wise
judgment of governors: yea, when God employed Moses to be ye Lawmaker of
the Jews, he erected but few laws, and they only in principal matters
for the preservation of societye and polletike quiet, referring the judgment
of other affairs not contained in the same general Laws to the discretion of
such Judges as he had ordained, willing for that it was impossible to write
laws to all affairs, that in those new causes, their judgment should hold
perentory aucthority, as well as in other matters to be decided by the written
Laws: yea, he commanded that the wise men should interpret his laws by
their wisdom, as in the interpretacion of the ordinance of circumcision, that
the eight day men should be Circumcised, they reserved forty years that they
were in ye desert, without being Circumcised. In like sort of the Phascal or
feast of Easter, for the second month to such as had not done it in the
first, and so in infinite others, by very good and just reasons approved and
received in the Law: wherein he gave them aucthoritye not only to judge
according to discresion and good advise, and to interpret all Laws, but also
gave them power to make new as the necessitye of the affairs required:
whereof (for a more assured proof of others erected according to reason) we
see two approved in the Gospel, as on the Sabbath day, not to goo further
then half a league, Acts. 1. John. 10
and to celebrate the feast dedicatory in the month of Dece^ber which Jesus
Christ did assist and preach there, forbearing to speak of many other, as in
the time of Easter, which the Seniors, general Judges, and governors of the
people had ordained: So that as their aucthoritye is great to judge, and
interpret laws, and always erect according to the circumstance of time and
matter: So, notwithstanding this must be considered that in a monarchy,
governors neither have power nor office to create ordinances, but under the
approbation of the Prince, with this regard further, that they hold conformety
with the law divine, and to prefer Gods honor and common profit: wherein let
governors, in the constitucion of their statutes, have a perpetual respect to
the will and judgment of God, which they ought to preserve and interpret, and
not pervert them, as did the scribes and pharisees, and certain of the
Seniors, giving value to their proper inventions and ordinances contrary to ye
law of god, as oftentimes to wash their hands, Math. 23.
and enritche the treasour of the temple, by defrauding the poor fathers and
mothers of their natural right touching the norriture which they ought to
their children: Chiefly let Magistrates observe and cause to be exactly
observed, the laws of God, and afterward the ordinances of man, such as they
create, tending to those ends, and others agreeing with the time and nature of
places and persons, conforming all with the Laws of God: So that when they see
in the Scripture, that corporal death is decreed in the Law of nature, and
other severe judgment of God inferred to the wicked: as to Cayn for kyllyng
his brother, by the tremblyng of his body: to the murderers, by the sword:
to the world (for his delights, glory, and whordome) by the flood: to them
of Sodom and Gomorrhe (for sins against nature) by the fire of heaven: to
the adulterers and rauishers of women, by terrible vengeance: and to the
chidren of Judas who had done abominable acts, by pains of sudden deaths,
which they saw even by a natural judgment pronounced or inflicted, as to
Thamar, for committing whordome, and to the Sichimites, for the Rape of Dina
the daughter of Jacob: If governors punish not such faults by like pains,
at the least, let them ordain others, either conformable, or near approaching
them, always considering that corporal pains in the law be figures and
foreshowes of the eternal death which sin deserves.

In like sort where they see in the Law of Moises, certain sins to be
punished by the body, let them judge them right sore displeasing and hateful to
God, who, loves his creature so dearelye as he has given him his own image
and likeness, and for whom he has made the inferior heavens, the earth, and
the Elements, with all things contained in the same, and for whose cause he
sent his proper son upon the earth to suffer all miseries: yea, most cruel
and sclaunderous death. And therefore being thus instructed both by the law,
which punishes certain sins with death, specially such as be against the
ten commandments of the Moral Law, or directly against Gods honor, our
neighbor, or a whol^ common weal: and also by the Gospel, to whom certain
sins are so abominable as it condemns them to eternal death and perpetual
torments, where is gnashing of teeth and lamentable sighinges: they may
conclude such offenses to be worthy of death, specially where a whole common
weal is injured or offended. For touching secreete sins, wherein is no mean
of proof, let them refer them to the judgment of God and to the repentaunt:
Men (says the Scripture) have no power nor faculty to judge but in matters
apparent to the eye, and God seeing into the heart, discernes the secreet
things whereof he defendes the judgment to al others. But where God is
offended and the common wea^e injured, 1. Cor. 4.
there let the^ follow ye judgment of god which we know to be thundered upon
sinners committing such faults.

Therefore let Judges be well advised, and give no liberty of life to such
whom God has already condemned in heaven, both to corporal and eternal death.
Let them acknowledge that they are here erected as imitatours and executours of
his judgment: 1. King. 15.
Let them remember Saul, who pardoned Agag whom God had condemned to death, and
Saul for his indulgencye was reproved and deprived of his kingdom: Let them not
also forget the grace which Helias showed to his dissolute children, who for
that they were abhorred of god, were the cause of his death: I meddle not with
the reproaches which God gave to the governors of Israel because they suffered
sin with impunitye, suffering such to live who had defiled the earth with
their wickedness, people abominable to God, and worthy so many deaths, as they
had committed horrible vices. And therefore he condemns those Judges even so
often to eternal death, as they gave sufferaunce to others to commit such
faults without inflicting upon them corporal death. To this let them adioyne
this advertisement, that as one member corruptes the rest, so the rotten part
disposing continual infection into the rest of the body, deserves to be cut
of, even as the good Surgeon not suffering a Canker to increase, cuttes it of
so soon as it begins to appear.

Let them not doubt, but that according to the Gospel, al evil and wicked men
which the Law of nature and Moises condemn, yea, the humane law also
according to reason do adiudge to death, ought to die: For, as the Gospel so
aloweth al those laws as is before proved: 1. Cor. 5.
S. Paul advises the Corinthians, and by them all others, to take away the
wicked man, who, being corrupt in manners, corruptes others (for which cause he
compares them to the leuine, aduising notwithstanding that the punishment come
from the magistrate, Romans 13.
who having the sword, is a just terror to the offe^dor, for that he carries
it not in vain being the minister of god and executour of his law, which, even
in the gospel condemns the man yt has done evil. Wherefore al men, disposed
into the action of wickedness, must be punished by the magistrate, otherways he
should bring abuse to his estate: Is it not the magistrate by whom S. Paul
wills that all such in a common weal should be cut of by death which vex
the church, Gal. 5.
and are mutinus, sedicious, injurious and false prophets, wherein because it
may be douted to what vices the scripture appoints punishment, Pro. 17. Esai.
5.
specially by death, I mean to declare by order, the pains of such as ye law
condemns, to the end the magistrate leave the^ not unpunished in his common
weal, nor justify such (by which he should draw malediction) as god has
already condemned by the scripture. Hear we must not wink at an error of our
time received almost through al christe^dom, which is, that we observe no better
the imitacion so often reco^mended to us of ye judgments of God, to lead us
being also commanded in the scripture (according to the same) in the
punishment of sins, which is a kind of infidelitye and ignorance of God, or
presumptuous boldness, or at least an inse^sible dulnes. This error deriueth
partly from the humane laws made by the Pagans, whose government being led for
the most part by fleshly reason, suffered impunity for many sins which God by
his law condemns to death, as diuinations, sorceries, and diverse sorts of
magike, with whoredoms (saving women whoremongers, for men that made the
laws, were exempted) the virgins vestal or incestuous women with their
adulterors, condemning no more common vseries, excessive interestes, with like
sins which God abhors: Governors of commonweals ought in no wise to hold
conformety with these Pagan judgments: But reform them, making felt the
grauitye of such sins by the rigor of worthy punishment. Men were wont to
have regard only to punish such sins as seemed to bear prejudice to a
common weal, and therefore sins common against god, or which of their own
nature be common or Public, wherein ye world delights without contradiction,
are left unpunished, the same being an occasion to provoke the wrath of God
upon a whole nation, and destroy whole kingdoms: If the ancient canons of
the Church be well searched, it will be found that al such offenses are punished
by long and strait penance, as are also al oaths, yea the most execrable that
men took in vain of god, or of the gods: diverse opinions of religion although
they were absurd and wicked: and lastly invocation to the devil, and to call
him into testimony of any thing.

Governors ought to punish by death such as God condemns to eternal and
temporal death, and whom the Gospel detesteth and pronounces worthy of
eternal fire: So that all sins committed against the ten commandments
ought to be so punished, so that they were committed directlye and by a
deliberate will: but above all, such deserve grievous punishment as are done
contrary to the three precepts of the first table. The.6. Chapter.
THE Christian Magistrate conforming him self thus to the law of God, may
punish crimes de lesa maiestate diuina, Atheismes, idolatries, blasphemies,
Invocation to deuilles, sorceries, incantacions, charms and al sorts of
magic, damnable supersticions, with other faults against the first
commandment, which is to know, fear, worship, love, and serve God in
spirit, in truth, and obedience. These crimes have been condemned to death
by God, for the which there never could be any grace obtained in his law.

The magistrate shall not suffer to swear by the name of God in vain, nor
give liberty to any light oaths, no though they bring no offense to
conscience, but only to swear in judgment, in justice and in truth: He
shall not wink at any rash oath made by any creature what so ever, Math. 5.
Ierem. 4.
and much less suffer in impunitye periuries, renouncementes, and
execrations, as to betake them selves to the devil, or other oaths coniured in
the name of the wicked fend, which much less that it is not a sin most
detestable, but also it carries even a natural kind of Idolatry: he ought
not to suffer this common abuse to speak of God and holy things without
reverence, and much less to abuse the sacred scripture with scoffs and other
sense then the holy Ghost understood it, as is done now a days in Pasquilles,
and which worse is, in Charms, diuinations, and sorceries, as by the mystery
of turning of a keye and pronouncing certain holy names, to find a thing
that is lost, and by writing scrowes to cure an Ague.

He ought not to suffer profanation of the Sabbath which is the Sundaye, a
day appointed to rest in the Lord, and dispose in meditacion and exercise of
devout labors: yea, let him see it sanctified with good and holy works, as
by prayers, hearing Sermons, and lessons, with doing acts of mercy, not
suffering games or dissolucions, gluttonies, dronkennes, nor other acts
whereby the holy days may be polluted: Let him lastly defend profanation
of the holy sacraments, and temples, with the holy relikes of holy men,
which in their lives they presented in immulation to God for the faith of Jesus
Christ: It is most certain that the transgression of these three
commandments of the first table was in all seasons punished with stoning to
death, Whereunto the good governors of the ancient commonweals of Israel
would never grant grace.

In the first church, when any were received into penance, the church
ministered so strait pain and for so long time, that there was none to whom
the grauetye of the punishment gave not great horror even to have the thought
to transgress. And I wish in God that at the least those Crimes were punished
with no less rigor, then certain natural faults committed against Kings,
Princes, and Lords of the world: he that committes treason against the King,
knows his torment, to be dismembered with four horses: Who lives in court,
and entertained by the wages of the King, and should misknowe or derogate his
Majesty, falsefye his Sygnet, speak of the King as of a vile person, without
due honor, would give no obedience to his Laws, should defile his Palace
with acts of villanye, should offer wrong to the reputacion of the Princes
and Gentlemen of his train, or lastly should offend in any sort of contempt
touching the greatness and dignitye of the King, would it not iustlye stir up
the officers and good servants of the King, and laying hands of the
offendour, to commit him by good reason to the torments of the wheel, or
punish upon a Gibbet this arrogant contemnor of the sacred majesty of the
King.

Oh how many more vile acts do our eyes behold in all parts of the world
committed against the sacred majesty of our GOD, before whom his Angels are
restrained to so great reverence, that they dare not behold him, and for his
wonderful brightness, have no power to settle their sight upon him. But where
is the care of our magistrates, who possessing the chiefest place in the house
of God, have their revenues to maintain his honor, with power to plant a
reverence and universal obedience. Saint Paul and Barnabe in a holy
indignation and Spiritual anger which we call zeal to God, Acts. 14.
rent in pieces their Gowns for one only contempt which men would have
offered to the living God in their presence.

But how many millions of blasphemies, epicurities and impieties are offered
before our eyes and ears every day, and yet what officer of God enters into
the rebuke of them? The Chaldees and Egyptians with their Iuglinges and
artificial masking of the sense, are welcome into Courts, yea, they which in
times paste were burned quick at Rome: Deuinors, Charmers and Sorcerers, are
in credit, falsefiers of the sacred seal of the holy Ghost, who, are the
false Prophets are called great Doctors of the truth: Inuocatours of the
Devil, denyers of GOD, prophanours and contemnours of all holy things, much
less that they are dealt with all iudiciallye, but of the contrary, they have
honor, countenance, and reward of many: Devout swearers, or more properlye
Anatomistes of the blessed Body and blood of Jesus Christ, by the which they
are redeemed, get them selves the reputacion of great Gentlemen by their
cursed swearing and renounsing of God.

Whereof though the practice be general, yet what Judge takes such impietye
into punishment? yea, who is displeased with them? And yet in the Jews whose
hands persecuted Christ with pains of the Cross, was not found (perhaps)
so wicked an act against the Lord, whose Garments they never durst tear in
pieces, and much less dismember his body, which these swearing Crucifiers
forbear not to commit to a thousand morselles.

Let then the administours of commonweals, if they will have their estates to
prosper, and procure felicitye to that poor multitude over the which they
govern, with the correction of such vices, have Gods honor in dear regard:
which they they do in full office, when they cause these three first
commandments to be straitelye observed, imparting no grace to
transgressions: wherein let them follow the ancient governors of Israel, and
specially Moses, in whom for one only offense against one of these said
three commandments, was expressed such passion of fervent zeal, that they
had no rule over their patience, till they had done severe justice, as standing
in most assured resolucion that some cloud of misery hong over their heads
which would burst out into a storm to the whole multitude, if the offense
were not satisfied with exact and actual punishment: where, to their proper
injuries, or wrongs done priuatelye against them selves, their humilitye
overcame the mood of revenge, and they felt no inclination to furious
indignity: But God being iniuried, they held them unworthy servant and
officers, if they gave not justice to his wrongs, wherein they thought their
life a sweet sacrifice being offered to death in his behalf. For this cause,
Moses, Exodus 32. Leuit. 42.
seeing the Idolatrye of the people after the Calfe, made a maruailous
Butcherye: If he knew any blasphemer to be in his Camp, who was more ready
to draw him into judgment? yea, he that had profaned the Sabbath in fetching
only certain wood to make a fire, did not Moises forthwith cause him to be
stoned? But when Mary his sister, and Aaron his Brother murmured against him,
Number. 13. Number. 12.
despiting him with injuries, was he not patient? did he not pray to God to
pardon them? What miserye happened to Ophine and Phineas, for profaning the
sacrifices of God, and to their father (as has been said) because he did
not justice? what slaughter did God to the blasphemye which Sennacherib, 1. Kin
1.4. 4 Kin. 18.19.
by his Herraldes of Arms pronounced against him in the presence of Ezechias?
Did not God by his Angel overthrow of them in one night, a hundredth, four
score and five thousand? was not also Benadab, because he said the God of
Israel was a God of mountains and not of valleys, overthrown together with
all the Kings which he led with him, and fell into the hands of Achab? Elias
put to the edge of the sword four hundred false Prophets of Baal so much
reverenced in Israel, Kin. 18.
and honored of the Queen Iezabel: Surely God so abhors the sins
committed against the first table, (for so they are committed directlye against
him) that Hely judged them irremysible, saying, If one man sin against
another, God may be appeased: But if the sin stretche to the offense of
God, so far forth as it concerns his majesty, honor, and holy
ordinance, what is he that will pray to God for him? as if he should say,
it is a sin so great that we must confess that if God will pardon it, he
must use a singular mercy: much less then is there power in men to pardon
such crimes committed against the divine majesty. Certain hold opinion that
the crimes against humane majesty, cannot have remission of the Kings against
whom they are committed, as well for that they bring intent of malice, as for
that they are done against him whom they represent in earth, which is the
living God, and also against a whole nation or people whose heads they are:
We see when the head is hurt, all the members have interest in the grief with
him, and demand altogether revenge against him that has offended them,
neither can the head heal the rest, if first he have not full cure of his
own grief.

How is it then that crimes done against God, should lightlye be pardoned of
men? it was not without cause that in the first Church, he that was guilty
in any such disordered Crime, notwithstanding his penance of fiftye years, if
he lived so long after his sin, yet was he not received into the holy
Communion, until the end of his days, which yet was holden an act of great
grace to the offendour: which as I wish might warn the governors of our
pollecye, not to suffer God to be irreverently offended with such damnable
crimes: So, for such as have profaned holy places, pilled and abused the
sacred vessels, and yet think to eschew the terrible judgment of God, let
them resort to the testimony of those miseries which happened to Balthazar,
Antiochus, and Heliodorus.

Sins committed against the second table, are worthy of death, even so
deserve they eternal damnation: Yet must we understand when they are done
willingly, and more when they are done by pride and malice, and the more that
the object is noble and excellent, so much are they more grievous. The.7.
Chapter.
Having declared that in a common weal, the transgressions of the
commandments of the first table, deserve pains irremisible, it is meet we
show wherein and how far ought to stretche the punishments for the
transgressors of the precepts ordained for instruction of due and honest
conversation of life in societye, tranquilitye, and mutual love to our
neighbors. Those commandments are seven in number, and written by Moses in
the second table which God gave him with the other, Exodus 34.
being both two of stone, for the better observation of them, and their
perpetual memory. Like as also in the due keeping of those statutes was
eternal life, comprehending faith in Jesus Christ, and in transgressing them
was condemnation to everlasting death. Math. 19.


Seeing then that transgressors stand in such estate of condemnacion by God
in his judgments, let it be a rule to lead the magistrates pollitike to the
conformetye of that justice, the rather for that they are (as has been said
before) called in the scripture the commissionours of God to exercise his
judgments. By the first commandment of this table, we are bidden to honor
our father and mother, and so have long life on earth.

Exodus 2. Deu. 5.
And as this honor consistes not only in reverence, but in love, fear,
obedience, service, and office of nature: so, in the persons of Fathers and
mothers, this precept is exhibited also to al Lords, Ladies, universal
Magistrates, Pastors, Doctors, Masters, and al old people, yea, al
superiors, being as public and polletike fathers, the one over the body and
goods, the other over the souls. If such as only disobeye, and use
conversation of rebellion, speaking evil of their Fathers and Mothers, are
(without remission) condemned of God to be stoned.

What punishment deserve others, who plead against them, abandon them, strike
them, suffer them to dye for hunger, or lay violent hands upon them? And if
there be any duty of reverence to the Fathers of the body, by greater reason
does there belong a more higher estate of power, to the Spiritual Parents,
such as dispose norriture to the souls, amongst whom as such as are fierce
and disobedient, are subject to present punishment: So even they are within
the power of the same sentence, which gainesaye Magistrates being the Fathers
of the common weal. In this vice together with all others, the causes and
mouers of the same ought to be punished, as a proud heart, a hautye Spirit,
a malicious will, and natures enclyning to arrogancye., furye, and
disobedience. Hear let Fathers also be warned not to provoke their children
to wrath, and by their straitenesse, drive them into contempt.

Touching the Second forbidding murder: even from the Law of nature GOD has
ordained that not only man, but even the Beast that takes away the life of a
man, should suffer death, wherein God him self seeming to give the reason why
he did institute that pain, says, Gene. 8.
That man being made to the Image of him self, what other thing could it be
to kill man, then to rent the Image of God, and as it were to deface him?
Besides, man being the headde and end of the works of God, for whom all
things were created, and subsist, and for whose restitution God took upon him
the qualety of man shedding his Blood in the same, to whom the Aungelles serve
in earth as his ministers, and for whom, God has prepared so excellent a
kingdom in heaven, what offense then does the murderer to commit slaughter
on a creature so dearelye esteemed of God, and so artificiallye made, that
neither the heaven, the earth, nor all the particular creatures in them, can
not hold comparison with that incomprehensible workmanship: he that should
break the Image or feiture of a King, or raze or pluck down one of his
Castles which he had erected with great pomp and cost, yea, if the King had
employed the life of his proper son to make it up again after it be
destroyed: would the King ever receive this man into grace? it is not therefore
without cause that in the scripture there is never grace granted to the
murderer: it is also forbidden to take the price of blood unjustly spilt,
meaning that in the Judge is no power to consent that the Parents of the dead,
should sell the death of him that was murdered, but that life should be
rendered for life, neither do I think that there had been any pain
sufficient to punish the effusion of blood, if it had not been ruled by the
Law, seeing that in true equity it can not be possible to satisfye so vile
an act, yea, though the party endured strait and long fasting, to pray
incessantly to God, to distribute all his goods for Gods sake, put on here
cloathe, to suffer hard lodging, and pass in effect through every pang and
passion of a Martyr.

That is no satisfaction where restitucion is not made with the like: who has
power to give life in exchange for life? what just recompense can be offered
to the parents for the slaughter of their Child? or how can the Son be
satisfied for the death of his Parents? even so in other murders there can be
no just satisfaction, and much less any equalitye.

So that, if for razing or burning a material temple, or sometimes a common
house, the offendour suffers iustlye the torment of the fire, how should
he escape, who pulls down to the earth the true and spiritual temple of
God, and his sacred house. David, by whom was wrought the death of his
Captain Vrias, 1. Cor. 3. Hebr. 3.
could never have pardon of God (notwithstanding his great penance in
continual tears, 2. King. 2.
wherewith he said he watered and bathed every night his couche) before he
had proved infinite miseries, and his son conceived in adulterye, dead: Yea,
Psalm. 9.
knowing the law to be inviolable, he would not grant Pardon to the
murderer. Ioab his great Constable, notwithstanding the merit of his many
services, 2. King. 12.
and being the only mean by the which he recovered his Kingdom, so well
did he know the indignation that God bare to set murder, and such as by
malice spill blood, which cries on earth continual vengeance before God
against the murderer, and against the Judge that delaieth sharp and speedy
justice, Genesis 4.
yea, also against the inhabitauntes of the place, if they be careless to
procure severe punishment: this is also one argument that the effucion of blood
is of great displeasure with God, for that, who so kills another by chance,
being free from malice and far from any mood of grudge, must of necessity
withdraw him self into a Town of refuge assured by the law, Deuteronomy. 19.
there to remain until the death of the great Priest, otherways there is no
surety of his life. From thence comes the custom of our time, to sue to the
Prince for grace in cases of such murders: For, much less that the law geues
pardon to the Traitorous or malicious murderer, seeing she gives power and
commandment to kill him, yea, even before the high Altar of the Temple.

The Law forbidding murders, and distributing (as has been said) severe
punishments, has also a meaning to restrain and defend the causes, motions,
and propratiues to such sins, as iniuryes, chollers, inimities, wicked
cousayls, false reports, detractio^s, diffamations, enuies, desire of revenge,
covetousness, debates, quarrels, factions, and wars: The which causes, for
that they were not well understood in the law, Christ touches and expresses
some of them, when he says, who is angrye with his brother without cause,
is worthy of condemnation: but more he ye speaks an injury to him: thirdly,
who, with the heart of an enemy, accomplisheth the injury: if he that calls
his brother or neighbor fool, be of hell: what punishments are due to
contencions, detractio^s and unjust violences? if he that bears hate to his
brother in his heart, be a murderer before God: and expressing this damnable
grudge by outward signs, by which the magistrate may be induced to certainty
of judgment, is he not bound to put in execution ye sentence of the scripture,
specially if they be propratiues to the murder, and such as seem to give
apparent motion to the fact. But if the doctrine of god were rightly preached
and understood, how could there be any assault or act of murder, when even
to be angry, hate, or speak evil of our neighbor, brings with it the pain of
eternal damnation. Let us love one another, yea, bear such affection to our
enemies, as to die for them according to the example of Jesus Christ, who,
loved, prayed, and did many benefits, and dyed also even for his enemies.

Diverse punishments of whoredom, according to the diversity of kinds of the
same sin. The.8. Chapter.
Gene. 38.
THE third commandment forbiddes whordom (of what kind soever it be:)
fornication, which we call simple, as between a man and a woman not married,
has been always in the law of nature condemned to the fire: as witnesses
Judas, who condemned Thamar, his moare being accused of whoredom, aftershee
had been the Widdowe of two of the dead Children of Judas by succession of
death (as the Law and custom of that time did bear:) yea, he had committed
her to the fire, if he had not been guilty in the fact. In the law of
Moses, if the Daughter had defiled the house of her Father with acts of lust,
and that he knew of it: she was stoned to death with her whoremonger: yea,
Deuteronomy. 22.
if she cried not out in open voice in what place soever the violence was used,
she dyed by the Law and her rauisher also: the most excusable fornication was
condemned to infamye and grievous correction of fines. Moses forbadde that
there should be no whore nor stews, and in respect of the grauetye of that
sin, the law received the offering of a whore no otherways then as money
for the sale of a dog. Deuteronomy 23.


In the new testament, such whoredoms are pronounced worthy of eternal death,
then nothing less do they merit corporal death according to God: Christ
says, They do transform and defile a man: and Saint Paul in many places
pronounces them abominable before God, the same agreeing with common
experience, wherein we see that in no Sin is more power of beastialitye over
man, nor more draws him into thraledome: yea, it keeps him in more
subjection, then the Wine that makes him Droncke, or the King that commaundes
him.

The Wise man says, that as Wine and Women do make men Apostates, and to
abuse their honorable profession, so all sin is without man saving this,
which corruptes, effeminates, defiles and dishonors every part of the
man, yea, it pollutes the sacred Temple of GOD, and bringes to pass that the
holy members of JESUS Christ are made infected members of a Whore: If the
Law did so expreslye forbydde that there should be no whore in Israel (which
countreye was but a shadow of Christendom) and that the pain was no less
then death: Why should it be endured amongst Christians, who being most clear
and holy by that holy and divine profession, ought to express as great power
of perfection, as the light has over darkness: there is no sin, which
bringes to man more miseries, blindness, and beastlynesse, nor by whose
occasion more controversies and murders do rise: if it did only but make man
lose the reputation of his honor, and liberty of his mind, that extreme
wretchedness ought to make it hateful: much more then is it detestable, by
how much it leads him into the destruction of his soul, which is the
principal. Besides that, the sin is monstrous, to lose the seed which GOD
has ordained for the generation of man so precious in nature, yea if there be
increase of children, what shame and dishonor follows their foul
procreation, and to how many vices are they subject for the contempt which the
world has of them in their education? If then so general slander hang over
all Christendom by fornication, if it make Realms subject to reproaches of
foreign Nations, if in it be nourished the occasion of evil doing by wicked
examples, so many secret murders of Infantes without Baptism, and the
enforced delivery of wretched maids to avoid sclaunder of the world: If
lastly under the wings of fornication, be hatched the Eggs and brood of so
many divisions, questions, controversies, murders and wars, why should there
be sufferaunce of whoredom, so reprobate and condemned, and the only Nurse of
all miseries, happening to Nations and men? were it not better to condemn it
to death, or at the least, to join it to such grievous pains, that there
might be no further will to follow such allurement, the miserable cause of all
wretched deaths. Here if any will object the example and custom of the
Gentiles, who to entertayne their pleasures in their brothell places, held
opinion that man and woman consenting to such Act, did no wrong to any,
seeing, having liberty, they stood also in power to do what they would. Let
them be answered with this text of S. Paul: 1. Corin. 1
Do you not know that you are not of your selves, but that you are redeemed
with a great price, which is, the blood of Jesus Christ: therefore glorify
God, and carye him both in your bodies and in your spirits, for so does it
appertain to him: the body was not made to play the whoremonger, but to serve
God, who in the resurrection, will give it an immortal glory: where some may
object that the sin is natural, I confess it as touching a nature
corrupted, which being the more dangerous, ought so much the more to be
eschewed, and corrected. So much may be said also af natural choler,
proceeding of nature vicious, and so of all other vices: but by the grace of
Jesus Christ that vicious or corrupt nature by study and exercise of doctrine
may be reformed, and by virtue changed, by force tamed, and so by constraint
brought to God.

Socrates confessed that the Philosophy of Zophyrus was true, as who say, his
judgment by natural conjecture upon the lineaments of his body, pronounced
him to be a great whoremonger, which being reprehended in Zophyrus by Socrates
friends, he told them that Zophyrus had not judged amiss as touching his
inclination, but Philosophy made him another man: so that when it is said,
that this sin is common throughout the world, we must conclude that there is
no fear of God, no exercise of true doctrine, nor any use of virtue, no, not
so much as Moral, by the which things, the Philosophers Gentiles eschewed
sins, and won the reputation of honest people.

Let us fear that the world be not fallen into the like estate of
wretchedness, as when God powered the general flood over all the earth, that
(as the Scripture says) All flesh had corrupted his way, Gen 6.
meaning that man even from his youth ranged after the delight of his fleshly
pleasure: the same being one sign of the end of the world, 2 timothy 3.
wherein S. Paul says, that men shall be more lovers of them selves then of God.
Let these terrors be warnings to us to correct our unbridled lusts after
filthy and foul pleasures. Let youth restrain their inclination by good
discipline, continual labors, and perpetual study of virtue. Let them learn
to bear the Yoke of the Lord from the beginning, mortifiyng their passions,
and frail desires, by meditation of death, and the judgment of God. Let
Parents, according to the counsel of Chrysostom, rather use a ripe care in
opportunity to mary their children. then to leave them in the hands of danger
to offend God, and damn their Souls.

Continuance of the punishment of this sin according to his other kinds.
The.9. Chapter.
TOuching Incestes amongst near Parents, or with religious women, or
rauishmentes of maids, the Law has always condemned them to death. The
Positive Law has always judged worthy of the fire Inceste with ye maids
consecrated to God. At Rome the Vestal Virgins Pagans, being defiled with
Inceste, were buried quick, and so dyed miserably.

The ancient Church received not the incestuous religious man or woman to the
Communion until death: In all times, the law of nature has condemned
adultery to extreme punishment. Genesis 12.
Pharao and Abimelech judged it one of the greatest sins that could be, as
by whose occasion death did not only follow such as had committed it, but also
it drew infinite miseries upon houses, Courts, and Kingdoms. Amongst the
Hebrews the offendour was stoned to death. At Rome, by the Cornelian Law, it
was lawful to kill the adulterer without reprehension, and also for a man to
refuse his wife for the suspicion of that vice, even as for the sin (being
notorious and proved) the Christian may dissolve marriage, touching
cohabitation. In many places; men cut of the nose of the adulterer, and
sometimes the ears as in Egypt they plucked out both the eyes of Locres: that
was the cause why Zalence, King of that people, pulled out own of his own
eyes, and another from his son who was taken with the act, which he did to
accomplish the Law, notwithstanding the importunity of his people to dispense
with his son. To be short, there was never Nation so barbarous, which did not
punish adultery by death, or at least, heavy pains. And therefore it is an
indulgencie very cryminall before God, that there is no common punishment to
this detestable sin, to the which by all reason is no less due and merit of
grievous pains, then to the Thief whereof this furthereth ye proof, yt,
besides ye gravity which we find in fornication, there be four things greatly
enforcing the enormitie of the Act. First it is committed against the three
essential parts of marriage, as faith, lineage, and Sacrament: The faith which
was given in this Marriage is broken, which bringes perjury, and by the
ordinance of the Law, Leuit. 19. 1. Tim. 1.
the periurer ought to die: the oath was made solemnly in the Church under
invocation of the name of God, And the contract of faith, and the oath made
between the parties, aucthorised by the Priest, and approved by all the
Church as a sign of mutual fidelity, signified by the King given upon the
Marriage day. Lineage is hindered by a commixture of the seed of the Husband,
and whoremonger, or at least, it is uncertain, to whom it appertains: What
certainty has the adulterous woman of her children, whether they be her
husbands, or her whoremongers? And in this uncertainty and doubt, what
conscience can she have to nourishe them at she charges of her Husband, and
suffer them to put on the habit of his lawful heirs? If she know it, is not
her theft the more? And if hanging be a Law to Thieves, what execution to such
people?

There is also a Sacrament as S. Paul calls it in Jesus Christ, and the
Church, which is a sign of the inseparable conjunction of the Lord with the
Church, whom he has married in faith, and has given him self wholly to her,
and become one flesh with her, in receiving her into community of all his
benefits, with promise never to abandon her: the Church having likewise
promised him to cleave to him, and remain firm in his faith, law, and
obedience, without taking other Lord or Religion but his. Even in the like
manner, man and woman marying together, make public protestation to follow this
holy conjunction, in the faith and virtue whereof, they receive grace and
sanctification in their Marriage: and so protesting to live together in all
union of holiness, chaste and perpetual society, according to the inviolable
example of Jesus Christ and the Church. What great impiety is committed when
they defile this Sacrament? Is it not a profaning of sanctification, which is
one of the sins against the first Table? And if it be not a kind of Heresy
to adulterate and corrupt a holy thing, at least, if they believe not the
mystery contained under this Sacrament, it can not be but infidelity: so that
if a Christian prophaner of a Sacrament, an heretic, or an Infidel, deserve
pains of death: what is due to the adulterer, by whom it is thus depraved?
Besides the perjury of faith, and hinderaunce which he geues to procreation by
the uncertain commixture of strange seed: there is in this vice a perpetual
grudge and resolucion to do murder, either of the Husbands part, to whom the
wrong is done, or on the wives behalf, by whom is endured the injury of her
Husband, or by the rauisher, whom gelousie enableth to all bloody acts. Many
are the slanders, prodigal expenses, theftes, Rauins, and other
inconveniences which come by adultery, but more murders then by fornication.

I speak not here of Sodomitry, with other beastlynesse, so abominable before
God and man, that the earth ought not to bear so infamous and monstrous acts.
Bawdes, in the ancient church, for ye vileness of their profession,
notwithstanding their perpetual penance, could never obtain admission to
the holy Communion, so great indignity did the old fathers impute to those
wicked sellers of Christian flesh. If he that sells the servant or handmayde
of another, meriteth condemnation of death, how much more heinous is his
desert, who entertayneth a lust after the daughter or wife of the Father of a
family? Here must not be forgot that with the act it self is forbidden all
causes moving or entertayning whoredom, as gluttony, drunkenness,
idleness, words, looks, gestures, unchaste writings, and feelings,
dissolute and indecent daunces, and superfluous rich ornaments, with other
such like, sturring to wantonness, which causes most often are no less
mortal then the effects that follow them.

Keep you from gluttony and drunkenness, Luke. 21.
and cares of this world, says Christ. Ephesi. 5.
S. Paul reserving no portion of Gods kingdom to drunkardes, biddes us not to
be drunk with Wine, where is superfluity and dissolucion. And to the
dronkarde guilty in vicious acts, the Philosophers of the ancient time,
judged double punishment: as S. Paul, besides their deprivation from the
kingdom of heaven, pronounces them worthy of excommunication.

Theft was not punished in the Law, but by restitucion of double, treble, and
four fold, yea and servitude: but now for just causes, it is punished with
death. Theft by necessity in some sort excusable, in the prohibition of theft,
the causes are also contained. By this commandment it is defended to take
away the honor of another. False witness is more unlawful then theft,
neither has it any grace in the Law. All deceivers, hypocrites, and liars,
are condemned by these last precepts. The.10. Chapter.
THE fourth commandment of the second Table is, Thou shall not steal: the
transgression whereof in the Law of Moses, was not punished with death, but by
restitution of double, treble, and sometime four fold. And in whom was no
ability of restitution, they were condemned to perpetual servitude, till the
wrong was satisfied by just service: public theft as robbery, violent theft,
Exodus 22.
and murder were condemned to death in the Law, wherein was no excuse of
poverty (as had simple picking, whereunto was joined no custom but moved of
malicious will and affection): But because those simple theftes, supported with
this charitable favor, rose to the state of high and noble robberies, they
became after by wise advise subject to the sentence of the Gybbet. Wherein also
this was one consyderation, that who embeaselleth the goods of another,
seems by consequence of the evil that many times happens, to take away
also his life.

The bread of the needy (says the wise man) is the life of the poor, and who
beguileth them of it, Eccle. 34.
is a bloody man. He that takes away the bread that has been gained with the
sweat of labor, is as the man that kylleth his neighbor, whereby may be
concluded, that the blood spyller, and he that deceives another, are brethren,
as seeming to have an affinity of evil, the same being eftsoon confirmed by
a notable text of the said wise man, that who offers up his sacrifice
compounded of the substance of the poor, co^mits no less offense, the^ he
that before the eyes of the father, kills his proper son. So that by good
reason, ye justice of the Gallows is executed upon the Thief if he be not
excusable by extreme necessitye, or if, being ashamed to demand alms, and
not hable to sustain his necessityes nor have credit to nourishe his poor
familye, he has purloyned the relief of others: notwithstanding it had been
better for him to have begged, then to lay his hand upon the goods of an
other, wherein he can not have excuse of sin, for that it is never lawefull
to do evil: even no less or more ought to be punished the ritchman, whom al
Law does bind to bear aid to the necessitye of his poor brother appealing
to his succor: and finding him shamfaste, his office is not only to lend him
his hand, but also to impart with him by pure gift: yea, if the poor man dye
by famine, or any of his familye by the violent rage of necessitye, Deuteronomy. 23.
the ritche man, as a murderer, is to give Reconing of that death in the
judgment of God: to which judgment, as the true christian ought to Raise up
his eyes, and not to stand in the consideration of this fleshlye judgment
wherein is fullness of infidelity and error: so if this judgment of God were
temporalye executed hear upon those that suffer the poor to endure hunger,
thirst, and misery, whose necessities often times throw them into the action
of theftes and other violent wretchedness, and sometimes to suffer death for want
of their succor: there should at this day few ritche men enjoy their corrupt
wealth and much less their sinful life: seeing then the ritche sort are
blameable before God for all these offenses, and no less subject to punishment
then if they were the immediate parties to the fact, or procurers of the same:
it belonges to the authority and office of the Magistrate (whith whom the
consideration of this judgment of God ought to be familiar) to execute it upon
earth; constraining such people to contribute to the help of the poor and
needy, applying to the default of the ritche in this case present punishment,
to the end they may repent, and bring recompense, and others take example: By
this defense not to be a Thief, is comprehended also all prohibition, against
suttletie, deceit reproache, treason, covetousness, vsuries, with all other
unlawful means to gather riches, or to spoil the wealth of an other, to
envy him, to speak evil of him, to dishonor him, to beguile him, to vex
him by process to obtain his goods, or to consume him with poverty. In this
are most of all reprehensible, the Lawyers, advocates, and Judges, whose eyes
are closed from the sin, but their hands wide and wide open to receive part
of the spoil: wherein by so much more are they guiltye, by how much they
bear favor to lewd men, whom if they blamed, and gave no support to their
wickedness, much less that such injustice should be suffered, but withal
there should be small cause of complaint. Let all sorts of people dwell
absolutely resolved in this, that who does wrong to another, in what sort
soever, or procures it to be done by counsel, support, favor, or geues
sufferaunce to the wrong with impunitie, or lastly, who consentes to it,
without restitution either by him self, or the aucthours or parties to the
fact, can not stand assured of their salvation. S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 6.
that the wicked shall not have the kingdom of God, bringing within the
compass of wicked men, all such as do any thing against the Law of God, or
willyngly oppress others with wrong, yea if they have but will thereunto,
though there be no ability of power. Seeing the Scripture condemns all
iniquity to eternal death, it behooves the Magistrate (when it comes to his
knowledge) to follow as near as he can, the tract of the divine justice, and
being the officer of God, to administer his judgments, not to lay his
government to the customs of the Pagans, who condemned none but such as had
done some notable burglarie: deceit, reproaches, vsuries, maledictions, and all
iniquity, by express textes of the Bible, are declared worthy of death by the
judgment of God: So that if the Laws of men be not such, or that they bear
no power to punish such sins, let Christian Princes erect Statutes
conformable to the will of God, wherein may be ability of punishment to such
intolerable crimes, seeing it is an opinion oftentimes to many, either simple,
or unfaithful, that offenses are not punished with God, when they pass with
impunitie here upon earth. By common reason, and also by the experience drawn
out of the doings of the Pagans, such men and their opinions are more worthy
of death, then the thief.

Cicero when he cries out that justice is broken by force, and by craft,
applies the one to the property of the Lion, and the other to the nature of
the Fox, wherein as is more merit of hate, so by reason it bringes no less
desert of punishment.

Cato was of opinion that to give money to Usury, was an Act of great
injustice, calling it the murder and death of the needy, as in which is
wrought the extreme necessity of the poor sort, sometime compelling them to
dye for hunger: so that if the murderer be holden worthy of death, who can
avoid the merit of punishment to the Usurer? Agesilaus said, That
sclaunder, false accusation, or subtle, crafty, or malicious interpretacion,
(which can not but hold also of false witness) is more sharp and cutting
then a two edged Dagger, wherewith it were better to have a wound, then to be
hurt with sclaunder. What other thing is the devil then a sclaunderer and
false accuser of the faithful? then such as practice sclaunder are of a
faction of the devil.

All the wise men that ever were, have preferred honor before riches, and
weighed it even in the same ballaunce and estimacion that they held their
life: If then to him that steals gold and silver, the Gybbet is due, and the
murderer loses his head upon a Block, what sentence is reserved for the
sclaunderer and wicked speaker, which procures infamy to honest men, and
heaps wicked hatred against them.

Touching false witness, forbidden and expressly condemned by God to death, it
is consequent and conjoined to theft, at the least, it tends to one common
end with it, and proceeds of one Root, which is covetousness, though some
times it deriues of malice, or spiteful will of revenge, or has some other
wicked purpose. It is more intolerable and hurtful then robbery, which
Solomon holds to be a crime of less damage the^ lying, as well for the
necessity of life, as for other reasons, yea false witness is so execrable,
that the scripture names it amongst these seven sins which GOD hates,
proud eyes, a lying tongue, hands spillyng innocent blood, a heart devising
wicked thoughts, feet nemble to run to naughty acts, the man that has no
shame to speak untruths, and the deceitful witness bearer, which is so much
more detestable before God, by how much it is an instrument to sow discord
among brethren. This crime of false witness can have no excuse as has theft,
nor stays not upon one point certain to do wrong, but sometime it rauisheth
a man's goods, sometimes deuoureth his life, and most often endangereth his
honor: wherein if in the act of one of these three euyls, is sufficient cause
of death, how much more is he wretched in whom they all three concur with
equal power?

Solomon compares it to a Dart, a Sword, and to Arrows, as if he should
attribute no less evil to it, then a wicked man may do with those three
instruments.

Besides all this, he contemns the Judge, and derides his judgment, and by
consequent, both God and his justice, believing as an Atheist, either that
there is no God which understands his falsehood, and not punish it, or not
fearing him, stands in careless state, and defieth him in what he can do
against him: and so is a contemner and prophaner of Justice, and of him which
administreth it in the name of the Sovereign Judge, the same being a sin
against the first Table in this case.

The false witness is adjured ordinarily in the name of God to speak the
truth, and therefore is perjured, wherein he committes eftsoon a crime most
damnable: for which cause Solomon says often times, Pro. 12.21.
that much less that he shall escape unpunished, but that he shall perish
miserably: the same falling upon the two old Judges of Israel, who falsely
deposed against Susanna: Therefore governors of commonweals have great
reason to search diligently after such plagues, and to restrain all pardon and
grace from such wretched offenders.

The wise man says, that if false witness bearers were but simply in the
case of liars and thieves, they had alredie inherited perdicion: much more then
in so great co^curse of offenses, do they justly deserve severe punishment: No
less justice is due also to their subornors, inducing them to lie, to periure
them selves, and depose falsely to the damage of another: the like also to all
falsefiers, with counterfaite stampes, signs, and seals of Princes, or
private men, corrupt Notaries, making false contractes, caryers of untrue
reports and lies, to be short, the like justice is due to all other, working
falsehood, either by word, writing, acts, subornation, or supposition, whether
it be in case of doctrine or life: Such as deceive by fair words, as
flatterers, by feigned promises, as abusers, by scoffs, as Maskers and
Cosoners, with other Pharisees, Ypocrites, and false Prophets, being the
children of Satan, the great father of lies and shifting, ought to pass under
rigorous punishment: For such falshoodes are not only prejudicial to our
neighbor, but also do derogate for the most part the divine honor, for that
God being the truth it self, is by lies and falsehood falsified and
dishonored, Psalm. 8.
either through ignorance of God, or for want of his fear, which is a kind
of infidelity.

There is a double lust or unlawful covetousness forbidden us, as the wife,
daughter, or handemayde of our neighbor, by the which is forbidden all
fleshly lust: and the desire of the wealth, honor, and life of any man: this
covetousness is the cause of all sins, and the resistaunce of it is a
counter defense against all sins to our neighbor: means to resist it, and
not to suffer to seed any root of sin, for by little and little it grows
great, and becomes desperate against all remedies. The.11. Chapter.
THE two last commandments forbid concupiscence, which, without this
prohibition many would have thought to be no sin, and are as preservatives
of the other former, which be: Thou shall not lust after thy neighbors wife:
nor covet his house, his field, his servant, his maid, his Ox, his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

I call them with good reason preservatives, seeing God in them forbiddes us
all lust as well after women, and pleasures with Gluttony, as the desire of
other men's goods in greedines. In the same is forbidden al coueuetousnesse of
Estates, honors, and dignityes by ambition, presumption and glory: and no
less the thyrste after another man's life by hate, envy or Avarice: Wherein
we are expreslie commanded to bear desire and will to do pleasure and
service to our neighbor by the contraye defense to have no affection or
disposition to hurt him. This wicked lust, is the principal root and first
cause in the corruption of nature, to make us Whoremongers, to become thieves,
to commit murder, to enter into false testimony, and to be stained with all
other vices. So that as when the Law stoppes the conduittes of these common
offenses against our neighbor, she foreseeth that the vices, rising thereupon,
ouerflowe no more the world.

So, if the first societye comprehended in this lust or thirst after glory and
pride, were as well chained that she issued not out of her unclean channel,
which is our nature corrupt in Adam, restrained by the first commandments,
as well of the first as second Table, (by the which man is taught to humble and
make him self nothing before God, expressyng the same humility in obedient
heart and will to such as have fatherly rule in a common weal) there should be
no more ouerwening ambition, vain glory, nor presumption (causes of so many
intolerable euylles) enuyroning the world. And having remedies in these first
commandments, such as God has provided for us, we must not fail to arm our
selves therewith, and refrain to do the thing wherewith he may be offended.

The remedies are, faith, holy doctrine, continual prayer, and assistaunce of
the holy spirit inspiryng into our hearts secret mocions to do well,
together with diligent exercise of virtue, and study of moral and pollitike
disciplines, by the which we are enterteyned Ciuilly in a state of common
duty toward our neighbors and common weal. Let therefore governors of
commonweals, use providence that of these original springs, there issue out
no infect or corrupt ryuers, which then comes best to pass, when diligence is
most applied to youth to exercise them in good doctrine, and love to virtue, ye
better to entertain those graces which they have received in their first
renouatio^ by faith and baptime.

For as it is a thing easy that a Tree, notwithstanding in her first nature
she be wild and savage, yet being well griffed, does bring forth and deliver
to her labourer good and sweet fruits, with continuance of the same
fertility being relieved at the root, and often lycoured: even so it is easy
to a Christian when he is griffed and renewed in Jesus Christ by baptism, Romans
6.
where he has taken the holy Ghost the aucthour of every good work, to bloome
in good will, flourish in doctrine, and fructify in all good works, the root
of that tree being holy, spiritual, and divine, taking her norriture of the
word of God, and which Tree is made lively by the holy spirit, augmented,
fortified, and enterteyned by the sacraments, and specially by the sacrament of
the Communion, which is the lively food of the life present, Deuteronomy. 6. Mat 8.
and a comfort in all tribulations. Thus may the Magistrate pollitike relieve
the infirmities of his people, and keep them from the desire of evil, and
corruption in wicked will, which is the cause of all wicked works, as by the
contrary is wrought all good actions, according to the text of Jesus Christ,
That the evil Tree bringes forth sour fruits, and the good Tree yeeldes
fruit like to him self. But because he can neither give aid to them, nor
form judgment of them, if the fruits declare not the nature and quality of
the will: he ought (as shall be further declared in the fourth book) to travail
diligently, that the new plant of his common weal be not, nor remain not
corrupt, no nor can not be corrupted, the which shall be easy for him to do, by
the means which I will set out in the said book, treating of the institucion
of youth. In the mean while we will proceed in the other sins, which seem
not to be redily comprised in the ten commandments of the Law, and yet as well
that which we are commanded as forbidden to do is there contained, as may be
easily discerned by whosoever searches exactly the judgment of the Scripture:
for those then in whom is not that exact knowledge, I will entreat of other
offenses, which men would not have sought there, and yet are to be found, and
are most damnable: determining not to omit any thing that may be prejudicial
to a Christian common weal, yea even to handle seriously those sins whereof
men make no conscience, as though they were light and contemnible in common
judgment: But seeing GOD condemns them, and inflictes grievous punishment
upon the parties, it behooves the polletike Magistrates (being the follower
of this great and Sovereign Judge) to condemn them also in their Courts,
with the same grauetie and measure wherewith he punishes them in his. And
albeit there were very small vices (which yet are not so, if their error be
considered, seeing they are committed against so great a Lord, of him self
infinite, and against divine justice, which punishes them grievously) yet we
can not judge them such, but by a comparison with others that be very
execrable, as is Idolatrye: Neither ought the Magistrate for all this to
neglecte them, seeing (as the Wise man says,) who is careless in small
things, slides easilye into great faults: the same agreeing with the
resolucion of Aristotle, that an error, how little soever it be in the
beginning, will rise great in the end, if there be not correction in time.

The Canker appears little at the first as a wheale, but by sufferaunce it
deuoures the parts about it, and consumes at last the whole body. A disciple
of Plato being rebuked for playing at Cards and Dise, answered that he did no
great harm, to whom Plato replied, that small Vices do draw with them those
that be greater, sure, sins are as linkes annexed together in a chain,
whereof when you pull one lynke, the rest do follow: Even so the threde of
vices (if they be not restrained) how little soever it be, will rise to a
great web of sins, yea even to be able to make a long and huge Cord,
wherewith Satan does bind and imprison man in servitude and perpetual
damnation.

And like as Physicians who to avoid the greater sickness are not careless of
the least disease that happens to man, but either minister some bitter
Droages for purgation, or at least prescribe him some Diete, as also it
belonges to the good Surgeon to apply some plaster to an Apostume, to ripe
and purge it, least otherways there might be danger of desperate corruption:
Even so the Pollitike Magistrates which have taken in cure this body Civil,
if the least in their City offend in duty by light faults, (but more if the
fault be great) ought immediatelye to apply correction to the offendour, and
suffer no consequence nor example to others.

Hear, if any will say there needs not so strait censure, he may be
answered with that, that may be said to a Pagan who knows not what
miserye the impunitie of sin does bring, and sometimes holds vice in the
reputacion and opinion of virtue. But the true christian who is commanded to
be perfect and to offend in nothing (for in breaking one commandment, he
stands deprived of the fruit for observing the rest) yea, who ought not to
fail so much as in an idle word, which Jesus Christ holds worthy of
Judgment, is also commanded to lay up all his heart in the Lord, and
neither to speak or do any thing, no not to eat or drink, but to give all
the honor and glory to God, from which duty if man do swerve never so
little, he sins, for he fails of his rule, and is subject to damnation
says the Scripture. And Saint Paul says that the recompense and stipend of
sin, is death: It is therefore a vain objection to say that we need not
make so great conscience of so small faults, which albeit they draw no great
moment, yet, according to the resemblaunce of Saint Augustine, If there be but
only one creuise or vent in a Ship by the which the water enters: if it
be not stopped, the whole ship in the end is full of water, and the
passengers with the vessel in manifest perril to perish: but if there be
more ventes, they give to the water a more speedye power to drown them all:
Even so is it of vices, whereof there needs but one to lead a man to his
destruction, if he be careless, but much more spedelye is he drawn into
undoing, if he be possessed with many: See thou not (says he) that the
ship ouercharged with Corn, has her fraught with no other thing but many
grains, which in time of tempest she must discharge and cast all into the Sea
for her safetye? And as the burden is no other thing then abundance of little
grains gathered together to drown the vessel: so the multitude of small
sins, leads the soul to perdition, if in opportunity she discharge not her
burden, and for the safety of her self and vessel, throw her fraught into
the Sea.

By this resemblaunce, let the wise Governors of this Civil Nauye foresee, if
it be possible not to suffer one only fault, how light so ever it be,
without speedye resistaunce, and much less give passage to many popular and
vulgar offenses, but cast them out of their Ships, least by them they be
drowned in the bottom of all miseries: many small diseases suffered, rise to a
great sickness: the stinging of nine Hornettes (as the saying is) suffices to
kill a man, where a less number were in sufficient. Let the Magistrate
therefore beware not to give custom to many small vices, nor yet to one, for
frequentacion of sin procures to the Soul death eternal.

The third Book.
Enumeration of sins whereof men make no conscience, and are oftentimes in the
condition of grievous sins: their qualetye and grauetye do varye according
to the matters and obiectes, as lying dissembling, scoffs, flatteries. etc.
The.1. Chapter.
MAny men for the most part, make no conscience of raylings, Scoffs, Iestes,
Dances, wanton Music, and dissolute Songs, nor of diverse other kinds of
Idleness, Pastimes, and specially of the vain loss of their time: Many also
hold no reckoning of deceytes, Lies, diverse Ipocrisies, Flatteryes, with
other like vices, which according to their diverse use (or rather abuse) are
forbidden by sundry commandments of God: As if flatterye (for examples sake)
be practiced, to this end to draw the goods of any one, Prou. 7.
it apertaines to the defense of that commandment wherein we are forbidden to
steal: If it lead you to the act of any dishonest pleasures, or procure it
in others, Mat. 22.
it is within the compass of this commandment, Thou shall commit no whordom:
If the flatterer pretend, to stryke or cause to be stricken any man, he shall
find that forbidden in the precept which warnes us to do no murder. And so of
others, and many together may be forbidden by diverse commandments, not
speaking hear of lying, which ordinarilye is accompanied with peruersitye of
the mind and will.

But since flattery is first brought into example, we can not term it more
properly then a pleasant deceit, Prou. 7.
a sweet lie, a mortal poison, and a sin above al other most pernicious,
cloaked with invented speech, which as the wise man says, is the deceyte of
fools, A sweet and delitefull venim to the glorious, a destruction of Young
men, a consumer of the Ritche and noble raze, the abusor of great Princes, and
absolute ruin of great houses: Eccle. 7.
That was it that made Solomon say, it were better to be well scooled and
disciplined of wise men, then deceived with the flattery of Fools, who with
public signs will not stick to Jest at those whom they flatter, and speak as
much evil behind their backs, as their words be pleasant before their
faces. Psalm. 54.
For this cause David says, that their words were as sweet as the Oil of
Odor or smelling ointment, and yet (being sharp as darts) they were
notwithstanding very traitors, who as Judas betrayed Christ with a kiss, so
do they abuse the foolish. Right Architophels and Dechistes, wicked
counselors, and cariers of untrue reports, from whom, wars,
controversies, grudges, and murders do flow, yea, oftentimes they sow
grievous divorces between dear friends.

They are transformed into this trade, chiefly for covetousness, for seldom do
they flatter but with an intent to enritche them selves, following for the most
such as be wealthye, and are disposed into bellicheere and prodigal
expenses: I wish that to these filthes, all men would do as David did to a
flatterer, who, to obtain the grace of David, and bring great benefit to him
self, brought to him the Diadem of Saul and his braflettes, saying, he had
killed him, and was come with great diligence to bring him those good news, to
whom, for reco^pense of his dissembled tr^th, David gave present execution of
death. Psalm. 51.
David prophesied no less of the miserable end of Doech the flatterer of
Saul, and wicked reporter of that which David had done to Achimelech the great
Priest, which was, that David took Arms in the Tabernacle when he fled,
and that Achimelech suffered him so to do, and gave him vittails to goo his
way, whereof grew great murders: Architophel by the just judgment of God,
hanged him self for that he came not to the end of his counsels and
flatteries, by the which he had abused poor Absalon, indusing him to leauye
war against his Father.

Seeing also it is written that the detractour, Eccle. 28.
and he which (as the Cameleon) will turn his tongue into many Languages,
sometimes saying one thing, sometimes holding another (as do flatterers) be
cursed, for they trouble many people which have peace together. And seeing
withal, that they are so expreslye forbidden in the Scripture to be such, the
Magistrate has no reason to give sufferaunce, and much less grace of pardon
to people so abominable to God, and hurtful to their country. Yea, and as
governors them selves have need to take heed that they be not the first
taken and enchaunted with these hurtful Serenes, so let them not suffer that
the youth of their City be seduced by such spiders, whose custom is to suck
the blood of great flies. Let them rather with the example of the good
Heardsman, who pursues the Ravens that follow the weakest Beasts to pick out
their eyes, and so kill them, to the end they may feed upon the Carcass.

Let I say, our polletike Pastors over kingdoms and commonweals, thonder
exemplary justice upon these devouring Ravens, whose custom (as the
Philosopher says) is to hunt after weak brains, and give them so many
pouders of glory, that at the last picking out their eyes, they make them so
blind, that by the persuasions of these wretches, they see them selves to be
no more men, but rather half Gods, when in deed, these mistes make their
miserye the greater.

Luk 17.
The next way not to be beguiled with flatterers, is to give them no ear: to
him that knows them not, when they begin to make way into his favor by
extolling his virtues, let him acknowledge al virtues to be of God, and that
for one virtue he is infected with ten vices, and therefore has more cause to
humble him self, as in deed a man can not have virtue, if with humilitye he
be not a condemnour of him self: Besides there is no just man, which
oftentimes falls not into sin, and he that stands now upright, may
stumble and fall in a moment, Eccle. 2.
as was the case of Solomon: For which cause the wise man says: we ought not
to praise man in life, for that he bears on his back a subjection to
change: If it be forbidden to praise a man, it is no less defended to a man
to hear his own commendation: When the flatterer therefore goes about to
extol him, let him say that as he is forbidden to demand glory for his good
deeds, so has he no power to give it: but that it is his part to ascribe all
glory to God, who is the only aucthour of al good: And if he magnify him in
that which he has not, let him franklye say that he brooks no praise in
Lies: He can not beguile a wise man for that his conscience (which is the true
witness and judge of all our doings) impugneth the praises of the flatterer.
And so, who will not be abused by the flatterer, let him give him no audience,
and if he will eschew the Poison of his practice, let him stop his ears from
the Charm of his words: How many flatterers have access to a man's person,
even so many spies and enemies do enuyron his estate and life.

The Fowler counterfetteth the lay of the Bird, but it is to bring her to his
Net: the Scorpion smiles with his countenance, but it is to strike with his
Tail: The Panther shows her Beautye to the pleasure of foolish Beasts and
scatters a sweet Odor, but it is with this purpose to entrap and rauishe
them: when the Crokodile puttes on a countenance of compassion to the poor
wayfairing men, it is then she prepares her self to devour them: The
glorious web of the Spider is stretched out to none other end but to take
the foolish fly.

Let us never think but that in the invention of words, disguising of
Tongues, artificial strayning of speeches, with such like pleasant snares, is
disgested every sutteltye of a Fox, with all other parts that may be in a
sophistical poison.

The truth needs no disguised speech, nor is decked with any goodlye
apparaunce outwardly to please men, and much less is it set out with Flowers
whose smell geues Poison to the senses of men, as this deceytefull flatterye
does: truth cares not for the outward bewtye, being fraught within with
incomparable ornaments and Riches: It is a goodly treasure hid, and covered
without, with a vile stone or unclean earth: Where the other is as a painted
Sepulcher without, and contains within nothing but stincke and uncleanness.

Hear flatterye is declared very hurtful to commonweals and families: It
makes young People rise into great Pride, to furnishe the which they fall into
fond and vvastfull expenses: What is to be done for the remedy of the same.
The.2. Chapter.
AND because flattery carries this nature, to raise light spirits into vain
glory, whose sweetenes gives norriture to their delights, not thinking it to
be a sin of that grauitye and importance it is: we will add to that we
have already said, that as glory of Riches, Noblenes, or of any other
excellency above the rest is condemned of great contempt and ignominy in the
Scripture, so there is no sort of people more miserable then such as vaunt upon
the quantety and value of their Riches: If I should allege the direct texts
and examples of their condemnation, it were to stand upon infinites, and
encomber the exercise of the Reader: only they are warned of their
presumptuous folly in this passage of the wise man: Let not the wise man
(says he) glorify him self in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his force,
nor the Ritche man in his wealth.

But he that will glorify him self, let him do it in God, who knows him,
for according to Saint Paul, all the good that they have is of God. Touching
Riches, ( Solomon says) that the blessing of the Lord makes men Ritche, and
that it is he which distributes glory, Lordship, power, and kingdoms, to such
as it pleases him: It is he that geues wisdom and science: yea, all that is,
is the gift of God, Daniel. 4. Prou. 2. 1. Cor. 4.
given to men of his pure liberalitye, to the end he only may be honored
for it: What wrong then do we unto God, to attribute to our selves that which
is the Lords, and usurp the glory which belonges to him? we which have no
power, not so much as over the least hair of our head, as neither to turn it
from white to black, and much less, Matthew. 5.
to make it grow: yea even we in whom is no power but to sin, and heap to
our selves proper damnation. 1. Cor. 1.
That is the cause why S. Paul says, That who glorifieth him self, ought to
do it in the Lord, 2. Cor. 1.
to whom only belonges all honor and glory.

That we live, move, and are, Acts. 17.
proceeds of his grace and virtue. In him we are as we are, Apocal. 3.
and out of him we are but sin and damnation.

The Bishop of Laodice, thinking him self in his judgment rich, wealthy, and
happy, heard the voice of God, saying, Thou art a caytife, miserable, poor,
blind, and naked. The only poor man, and he that bears with patience his
poverty and misery of the world, yea also the rich man in goods, but
truly poor and humble in heart, giving no estimacion to richesse, but
disperseth them to those that have need: they only are they who only may
glorify them selves in their simple poverty, James. 1.
from whence they shall be raised into great wealth and glory.

But let the rich man fear and humble him self for the miseries which are
prepared for him: And let the great man think, that according to his
greatness, he shall be severely punished. James. 5.
Let therefore the Magistrate pollitike, understand Gods indignation against
flatterers, who lift up light spirits into weening, and boasters into vain
glory. Let them I say punish the one, and humble the other, according to the
rule and will of God expressed in many examples in the Scriptures: God embased
so much the state of Nabuchodoniser, King of Babylon, that of a mighty King, he
made him a poor insensate creature, yea giving him a condition to eat Grass
with the terrible beasts of the field. And as he never suffered to prosper
any long time, either kingdoms, regions, Cities, or private houses of the
proud and hauty: so therefore let him stand in example before our Magistrate,
to constrain such people to humilitye, and taking low courses, not to hoise
up Golden sails, either in apparel, Jewels, Houses, or other pompes and vain
expenses. But rather according to their gross revenues, let them make a mere
liberal relief to the poor, and cuttyng of their superfluous spending. Let
them travail to deserve well of their common weal:

Here they can not say that they have power to dispose their richesse as they
think best, for seeing they are members of one common wealth, they must be
governed by the judgment of the chiefest: wherein like as the members of one
body, the more force they have, the more service do they to it, as well in
general, as to every particular member: even so by all right of God, and
nature, it belonges to the most mighty in goods and estates, to apply their
wealth to the help of their City: which if they will not do liberally, they
are subject to constraint, as are also for their parts, the wisest, the
noblest, and all other of better ability and means to relieve their country,
who much more then the rich sort, ought to be prostrate in humility, because
God has endued them with more great and honorable graces, then are common and
temporal riches. And because we have touched in passing the pomp of apparel,
we can say no less (with the opinion of the scripture) the^ that in the use of
them now a days, is a true representacion and figure of sin, being far
from the attire of Adam and Eve, who ware only a cover over their natures made
of Fig leaves, devised necessarily to shrowde the filthiness of the body:
God gave them at last Skins of Beasts, teaching them thereby (omitting here
the opinion of the moral doctrine of mortification signified by the Skin)
how they ought to use garments, for necessity against the cold and injury of
the weather, and to cover the vileness of nature.

Who therefore uses them for other purpose then these two respects, (if the
state and custom of the country dispense not therewith) does abuse the use of
garments.

So was the wicked rich man, being through pride and glory, clad every day in
Purple, partly condemned for that excess. The Jew used an habit proper or
singular, by the which he was discerned from other Nations, and so the
Samarytane knew Jesus Christ to be a Jew. And the prophet rebuked the Jew
that used a strange attire, as new and to sumptuous, but (above other
Nations) the Venetians have never changed their fashion of garments, whose
constancy that way remaynes to their perpetual praise.

Let none glorify him self, but in his poverty, necessity, and affliction:
such as glorfie them selves in goods, scienses, etc. are vain: but much more
do they offend who vaunt of their evil doing: the euyls that come by
intemperance: what great faults are committed by gluttons, and people given to
delicacy. Chap. 3.
IT is declared before, that man ought not to glory in his riches, in his
power, nor in his wisdom, but rather in affliction, and as S. Paul says, 2.
Cor. 11. Galath. 6. Iere. 9.
under the Cross of Jesus Christ: taking specially his glory in god, in that
he knows him, fears him, and loves him: for all other things are to the
fleshly man rather occasion of perdicion then salvation, and are the very
stipends, rewards, and effect of the reprobate: We have now somewhat to
unfold the vices in intemperaunce and excess of eating and drinking: in this
many do lay up their glory, and sometimes in things more wretched (being one
of the sins of Sodom and Gomorrhe, as Esaias says) Wherein they commit sin
of his own nature irremisible, Luke 16.
for that it proceeds of a sense reprobate, neither seeing nor feelyng his
proper evil, to the end to search for cure, even as does the Letargie in his
mortal sleep, out of the which much less, that he will be awaked, but hates
and strikes him that goes about to help him. And as when medicine is refused
to be given to a sick man, and Physicians turn him over to his own desires,
it is a sign that he is abandoned, and his life in extreme peril: So when
God puts into the hand of man, the Bridle and liberty of his own pleasures,
and suffers him to prosper in worldly delytes, it is then he has least care
of him, expressing by that a dangerous sign of his salvation. I mean not
here intemperaunce by gluttony only (the very Nurse of whoredom) where is
excess of meat and Wine, which the Lord warns us to take beede of, Luke 21.
lest we be taken in his judgment (as in deed we have perfection neither of
reason nor sense to consider of our conscience if we be guilty in any sin)
And of this gluttony speaks Ezechiel, Behold O Jerusalem says he, the
iniquity of thy sister Sodom, the pride, the fullness of bread, and victuels,
and abundaunce of idleness: but I comprehend also all epicurity of belly
cheer, where me^ follow the affection of their delytes, and wallowe in the
contentment of the flesh: Of which intemperaunce Solomon notes the great
Lords and rich men of the world when he says, that region is miserable,
whose King is a child, Eccle. 10. Esai. 5.
not so much for years as for sense, and whose principal states and
Magistrates, eat early in the morning, that is to say, according to the
exposition of Esaias, wretchedness will always hang over that kingdom, whose
governors rise early in the morning to drink and be drunk, taking so great
pleasure in banquets, meats, and dilicious Wines, that laying up there all
their human felicity, they make their God of their bellyes: They are like to
those wretches that say, there is no life but to make good cheer, against whom
Amos cries out, Amos. 6.
Wretchedness upon you O rich men in Syon, who sleep in beds of Iuory, and
take your pleasures therein: who eat the best Muttons of the flock, and
devour the fat Veales, who sing to the voice of the Psalter, or have Musitions
at your Tables, drink sweet Wines in gorgeous Cups, and annoint your
selves with precious ointments, as if he had said, You that surfeit of your own
pleasures and delytes, and feel no compassion of the sorrow and misery of
Joseph representing the state of the poor sort. Esai. 5.
Esaias rebukes them for that they regard not the work of God, and seek out
how he ioynes his will and commandment to our duty: So that this
intemperaunce is not the gluttony of villaynes, (whose manner is to engorge them
selves like Woolues, and be drunk as beasts, yea even as Swine that are
soyled in the filthyest mire) but in this is expressed the epicuritie of the
most delicate, such as are more skillful in delicious fare, and sweet wines,
then in virtue and learning: such as corrupting justice, have also no care of
it, for that they are altogether partial to their bellyes, without all regard
to God, yea the time which they should apply to the cause and compassion of
the poor, and such as live in tears, sorrow, and want, they abuse in
dissolute Music, and Masks, making cheer to Curtysanes, A common vice of
our time, and famylyar even with the greatest, who notwithstanding, do take
more glory therein, then in acts of Chyualrie. Is it not a great offense to
eat and drink, more for pleasure, the^ for necessity, not to restore the
strength of the body, but by abundaunce and variety of meats and Wines, to
procure debility? to abuse the Creature, against the will and honor of the
Creator? Lastly, by that excess, to bring diverse diseases to the body, whereby
men are made unprofitable to their common weal, and often times pass by
untimely death. He wylleth us to do all things to his honor, that he may be
glorified therein: But in this intemperaunce, much less that men have
remembrance of him, seeing of the contrary there is no exercise but of
scoffing, railing, speech of the throat and belly in all unchasteness, setting
the tongue at liberty to al sclaunder, blasphemy, and impudency: what glory
does this behavior to God, whose benefit is so abused, contrary to his will
and commandment?

We eat, we drink at his charges, we live by his benefits, and we sit at his
Table, and yet we are not ashamed to offend him irreverently: He commands
us to live soberly, to pray unto him, to praise him, to break our bread to the
hungrye, Esai. 58.
and to call the poor to our eatinges and drinkinges: but what care is
rereserued to this commandment, when the rich will close their gates against
the cries of the poor, and they them selves wallow in the excess of eating?
Romans 12.
much less is he honored of such people, when he is disobeyed in this
commandment, to have compassion on the afflicted, and that we should weep
with them that weep.

Many are the poor about them, to whose tears they join no compassion.

Many are the widows that sigh, Orphants that lament, with others whom they
see to languishe in their miseries: whose estate by how much they know to be
hard and sorrowful, by so much are they slow in pity, but as men resolved
whollye in forgetfulness of GOD, they rejoice, they laugh, they sing at their
Tables, and pass their time in enterchaunge of wanton companies.

If this abuse be reproved unto them, they answer, Malencollye is hurtful
to their health, not remembering the warning of Jesus Christ against them:

Luke 6.
O wretchedness (says he) upon you that laugh, for you shall weep and
lamente: And miserye also upon you O ye rich men, which take your pleasures
here, and have your consolations:

And no less unhappy are all your others, which fill your bellyes, for you
shall endure eternal hunger. In this are most to be reprehended, Magistrates
and governors, to whose providence are committed so many poor people in their
common weal, that have so many desolate souls to comfort, keep so many
sorrowful persons in delay of justice, and yet will give them neither hope in
their causes, nor help in their necessities. And as they stand guiltye in the
same vice with those intemperate sort, if they correct not their conversation
with fines and pains, and punish their bodies, to whom the Scripture
pronounces malediction: Even so, they stand subject to fall with them (but
much more greeuouslye) if they use not diligence to take away the cause of this
wretchedness.

At Rome in the time of the Pagans there was a Law coherciue against excessive
and extraordinary expenses, Much more then, in the common wealth of
Christendom, should there be Statutes and severe cohercions, against
superfluities and damnable delytes. Let those epicures and belly gods of this
world, look up to the warning of Jesus Christ, Job. 2^.
and prediction of Job. They lead (says he) their lives in good cheer and
pleasures, and upon the point of death they fall into hell.

The rich man in the Gospel is not punished, but because he held sumptuous
feasts, Luke 16.
put on gorgeous attire, and despised the poor: And when in hell he cries to
refresh his tongue with one drop of water, Abraham answered him, My son,
thou have received in thy life thy benefits, meaning, thou have had richesse,
thou have taken thy pleasures, and made great cheer: and this Lazarus felt
nothing but miseries: therefore content thy self, thou can not have thy
felicities twice, neither he his perplexities again.

Who in life tastes of pleasure, after death shall be recompensed with
displeasure, as of the contrary, for him that suffers evil for the honor of
God, is laid up in heaven everlasting good. Other gluttons and dronkards in
general have their sentence to be shut out of the kingdom of God: (wherein to
avoid tediousnes) I will not now meddle with the examples of miseries happened
to glottons, as to the Sodomites, Israelites, and Holofernes, to al which the
sin of epicurity, brought miserable death. Hear may be resolved the
question of some, whether it be lawful to make banquets, and whether they may
be made to Ritche men: wheren, is to be considered, that if the end be good,
and grounded upon some office of Civil honestye, they are not reproved.

Abraham made a godly banquet the same day his son was wained or taken from
the nourse, but it was an invitement to thank God with his household and
friends for giving him a son in his old age: Lot banqueted Angels, whom he
took to be certain poor passangers. Isaac banqueted with Abimilech for
confederation of amity: Joseph congratulated the coming of his Brethren with a
sumptuous feast, expressing only his fervent and natural love to them.

The scripture geues much mention of Banquets, Marriages, and feasts of Kings,
and such as were made on the solemn days of sacrifices to God, into the
which were received the poor Levites or ministers of the Temple and other
needy people, as also in the new Testament specially on those days when the
communion was ministered, the poor, with the rest, for the societye of
christian Love, being made partakers of the Banquet, whereof it took the name
Agape, that is, charity.

Christ him self was often at Banquets and Marriages: But whosoever made
banquets to maintain gluttony, for which S. James reproues the Ritchmen of his
time, or for vain glory, they have their share, with the wicked Ritche man in
the Gospel, in the torments of hell.

Touching mockers and scoffers, let them think they are in the warning of
Solomon: That as their sin is grievous, so the judgments of God are
prepared for them: For seeing they ought to love their neighbor as them
selves, they ought not only to be sorye for the fault which they reprehend
and scoff at in another, but to have compassion of it, to correct it, and to
pray to God for him that has the error: Repulse them far from you says
the wise man, for in them is nourished the causes of many contencions, and
therefore, besides their condemnacion, they shall be sure to be scoffed of others,
for that Gods justice keeps his course.

Scoffers and men of pleasant conceyte pretending none other end but to
increase pleasure, are rebukeable: But more if their I esting turn to the
reproach of any: so do they offend God: How we are bound to employe our
time: It is not forbidden for all that, to recreate our selves for honest
purposes, nor to use our pastime and pleasure. The.4. Chapter.
LET Scoffers, and the vain conceyted sort (commonly called pleasant men)
practicing to make others laugh and live in pleasure, not think they are
without rebuke: In whom albeit seems no purpose of hurt to any, yet the end
tending to the scorn of another, can not be without sin, and therefore
such pastime cannot avoid the due blame of vice. Ephe. 5.
Saint Paul reproves them, when he wills that there be no fornication, nor
uncleanness, nor covetousness named amongst them, as is convenient and
beseeming to holiness? And much less that there be villainy cloaked with fond
speech, or slenting contrary to civil modestye, which ought to be far
removed from christians, whose exercise stands in giving thanks to God,
praising him, and speaking of him, Mat. 12.
employing the time also in discourse of things profitable, good, honest, and
tending to edifye the company. Jesus Christ calls this scoffing, meaning idle
words, whereof there is reckoning to be given in the judgment of God,
speech unprofitable and time lost. And as by S. Paul we are warned to use no
talk but such as may serve and apply to edifye our neighbor: Ephe. 4.
Collos. 3.
So, our tongue was consecrated of god by baptism, not to be employed to other
uses, then to form devout speeches, the hands to minister holy works, and
all the other members to be disposed to acts of goodness acccording to their
office: for being dedicated to God, to profane the^ in things, worldly,
vile, filthy, and vicious, were as a detestable sacrileage and impiety, far
more greater, then the profanation which Balthazar used of the vessels of the
temple of Solomon, wherewith he banqueted his Co^cubines, feeling therefore a
sudden and terrible judgment of God the night following. And seeing man is the
holy temple of God, wherein the holy ghost dwells, and the bodies also, the
holy members of Jesus christ who being holy has incorporated them in him: Is
not he then truly holy: where the Chalice or Cup, a thing insensible, is not
but for the use of a holy thing, consecrated and made holy. What sin
therefore is it to convert the use of this member the tongue into vain and
fond speech, and which worse is, to speak unchastly, to pronounce evil of
another, to swear, to blaspheme, which be things not only profane, but
damnable and reprobate, and restrain it from exercise of holy discourse, for
which end it was created of God, and reformed by Jesus Christ, as of purpose
to pray and praise God, to teach and instruct.

And as to such as speak vanelye, the soddaine judgment of God is
pronounced, so, let the scoffer and idle inuentour of Pastime, look for their
share in the same justice. Saint Paul commaundes us to redeem or buy again
our time, which he says is done in speaking and perpetual well doing of
things, holy and edifying, restoring in that sort the season which we had
lost in acts of vice and vanitye, before we knew God, which is a satisfaction
of duty which he requires of us, when he says, Do penance: for with
repentance and mutacion of will, which is the first act of penance, the
change also of the fact or work is requisite, giving recompense to our power to
the injuries and wrongs which we had done to others: If we have abused our time
in vain and idle talk, or employed it in unlawful things: what better
recompense can we aforde, then to use holy speeches of God, and dispose our
hands to acts of compassion and charity. Plynie being an Infidel. but an
excellent Historian, was so greedye of time, that he made Conscience to
employe a moment otherways then to benefit. Theophrastus, said time was
dear, and an expense very precious, meaning, that it ought not to be spent
vainelye: what then ought to be the consideration of the Christian? who
knows that as well of the meanest moment of his doings, as of the least
minute of his time and words, he is to yield reason to God.

Therefore let Magistrates, whose doings ought to hold conformetye with the
judgment of God, and are hear (as the scripture says) to make him obeyed in
his commandments and statutes, use providence in a cause of so great
importance, and dispose their office by such wisdom, as time (a gift so
precious) may not be turned to the abuse and dishonor of God.

I condemn not hear mirth in things indifferent, admistred to a good end, as
either to refreshe the mind, or recreate the Sick, the same being as a
medicine, to a spirit troubled, and is then best approved, when it tendes to
edification, as was that of Helias to the sacrificatours of Baal, Cry louder
says he, for perhaps your God is at rest in his Inn, or upon the way, or
else he sleeps: cry therefore alowde that he may awake: As much may be said of
honest profit, or necessary pastime, such as Isaac took with his wife by
familiar recreation: Dani. 13.
and as Susanna did, when she walked in her Garden, and washed her self,
where she was invaded by the two corrupt Judges of Israel: and as also is
written of S. John, who sometimes would has him self with his Disciples, but
would not enter into the bathe wherein Cherinthus an Heretic had bathed him
self, fearing, least for the wretchedness of ye Heretic, the bath should fall?
In these, and such like things, which of nature are neither good nor evil, the
consideration of the end and intent, measures always the praise or
dispraise: wherein let us observe the saying of Jesus Christ, If the eye be
simple, all the body is illuminate: as who say, if in seeking thy profit, or
providing for thy health, thy end be good, and that the thing which thou
do mean, be pleasing to God, thy work is good: for so did christ suffer
him self to be anointed on his head and feet by Mary Magdalen, the end and
intent being commendable: where if she had employed lo long time and travail
about another for delight only and pleasure, it had been an act of vice: even
so jesting pronounced of a wicked will, or to dishonor or scorn any man, can
not be but mortal sin, by reason of the end, and corrupt intent: And these
scoffers, Parasites, and table minstrelles, who no less vain in heart, then
vicious in affection, practice an estate of squirilitye, with an intent to
devour other men's goods, may see how far they offend God, and how
iustlye they stand subject to severe correction.

Plays which of them selves bear no vice, are not disalowable, in respect of
their ends and lavvfull causes: Unlawful games at Dice, are causes of much
evil. The.5. Chapter.
GAmes which of them selves bear no vice, as such as are devised to recreate
the mind, or restore the virtues or natural faculties of the understanding,
travailed in Spiritual actions, are not (by the same reasons we gave to honest
Pastimes) not to be reproved, no more then we may reprehend sleep after
labor of the body and the mind. To refreshe the mind, it is good to exercise
the body with games of labor, the better to entertain strength and health: as
also, sportes prepared to the exercise of an act necessary to a common weal,
as the practice of war is very profitable, to which sports were trained by
ye institucion of Romulus the youth of Rome of fiftene and twenty years, to
rise by that means to a further habilitye to Arms. And albeit they are rather
painful exercises, whose end is profitable instruction, then simple games,
which bring intent of recreation: yet, they bear but the name of sports,
because there is no serious grauetie in their acts, being as then ordained not
to strike and kill, but to prepare youth to a more agilitye in war
afterward: In such like sportes, men of war should pass their time in
truse and peace, to the end they fall not into delicate idleness. These sportes
as they may be resembled with the exercise of students in the Retrician
scooles, touching declamations to form speeches in Courts: so, of simple
sportes (whose matter and end are not evil) men may make their exercise, as of
medicine for cure of diseases: not making merchandise or traffike of it for
gain: For so it could not be properly called sport or play, but matter of
good earnest, for that sport ought to be referred to some honest end:
Otherways, who excedeth the end of sport, ought to suffer grievous
punishment, not only as unprofitable but as sclaunderous to the common wealth:
For play is occasion of infinite evils, as is expressed commonly upon the
experience of young men now a days, without reckoning the loss of their time,
where Solomon commandes us to travail withal our power without intermission:
all that the hand may work, do it says he continually, for after death thou
shall have no more work to do: meaning, whilst thou live, do as much
good as thou can, Eccle. 9.
for after death, thou have no more time to travail: Play is also occasion of
theft, companion to gluttony, a bait to whoredom, and a mouer of quarrels and
murders.

It is written in the story of ye Corinthians, that plays were causes of their
ruin, for this reason: Chilon a philosopher being sent in embassage from ye
Atheniens to Corinthe to treat of peace (for there were wars between
those.ii. tounes) and finding the Corinthians upon a Festival day so
generally set at play, that not one of them, would vouchsafe to enquire what
was the ambassador, and much less the cause of his coming. And when he saw,
that as well the counselors, and chiefest, as the rest were so carried away
with the delites of their plays, that he could not have worthy audience: he
returned at the instant, judging it to great indignity that the magistrates
and Senate should join them selves with the folly of the popular sort. And
judging that ye best mean to reduce such incenset people, were to assail them
by Arms, persuaded the Atheniens thereunto, who afterward would never grant
them peace.

Playing at tables and such like sleeping games, are called of Aristotle the
sportes of women, for that to men those sportes are proper, wherein is exercise
of the body. Touching plays at hazard, we find them uncomely for all men,
but specially indecent for the christian profession: For as the plaiers are led
more by fortune and chaunse (as they term it) the^ by wisdom or ability of ye
mind, which is contrary to the nature of sports, wherein is sought recreatio^ by
some industry of labor, or dexterity of ye spirit in which the praise is
always given to the vanquisher. So, in that play, is no glory at all, and much
less duty of praise to the player, because he does no act to deserve it. The
mind loaseth his practice, reason has no place, the judgment is confounded,
and the body has no exercise, the same being the cause why, by the just
judgment of God, that kind of play never contenteth the player, for that the
more he plays, the more ryseth he in desire, being pricked foreward with
hope of profit, and abandoned to covetousness, whereby it happens that the gain
rising by that play turns seldom to profit, being rather of a nature so
wicked, yt it draws men into disorder, makes the^ poor even to nakedness: and
retains them in that baseness of mind, that even in the hardest winter, they
sit and suffer as slaves ye rigor of many cold nights, with their feet
beno^med under a cold table, whereof are bred, gouts reumes, litargies, and
appoplexies: and yet these miserable plaiers, have no feeling of their
wretchedness, so sweetly are they lulled in the delites of this play by the
wicked spirit, the very author thereof. For these and such like reasons there
was never christian, who esteemed not play unlawful: whereof a woman
pronounsing her self a prophetis, for holding opinion of certain heresies,
was co^uinced by an Ancient, and learned Bishop, who judged her not to be such
one as she made her self esteemed, for many reasons, whereof one was, for that
she was seen to play at cards and Dice at hazard: A pastime which never
any of our religion was seen to use.

The Philosophers esteemed them unlawful, for that they have no similitude
with virtue, delude reason, and delight not so much the mind as they trouble it:
For as to the noble spirit nothing is more pleasant, then when he may win
glory by the show of some excellency: so, nothing can be more contrary to his
nature, then either by sleight or fortune, to be vanquished by his inferior,
over whom by dexterity of nature and acts of virtue, he is superior: Plato,
likewise, would not give sufferance to those plays amongst his Disciples, to
whom, when they excused them selves that they did no great fault, he said,
this little vice draws to a greater offense: meaning that from little faults
(not thinking thereon) we slide into higher abuses, if ye humor of the first
vice be not restrained. What then shall our christian governors, say to our
ordinary gamesters, but even, seeing they abuse so many sportes, and practice
the plays of Infidels, contrary to christian profession, to forbid some, and
moderate others as well by measure and limitacion of time, as by rate of money to
loase at play, the same being a necessary bridle to the affection of plaiers,
who seem not to be masters of them selves, the winners so greedy of gain,
and the losers of perplexed hope and desire to recover their losses, for which
cause if they seldom give over when al is lost, at least recovering a new
supply, they run to a new revenge, and so find no end in their plays,
turning their time into unlawful acts, and so, from quarrels, injuries, oaths,
renounsing of God, young men fall into inventions of theft and robberye, with
other practices of more wickedness.

Some have placed Hunting, amongst the sportes and pastimes of noble wits,
whereunto Zenophon seems to allure Princes and great estates, as to an exercise
worthy of them: he says, there is nothing aspireth so nearelye to the fierce
fight with the enemy, as to pursue the wild Beast, against whom must be used
art, industry, labor, and watching, and sometimes, suttletie and force to
withstand danger: only it behooves the noble man so to choose his time for
this exercise, that he bring no incommodity to the country by reason of their
corn and Grass: Much less ought he to prefer his delight to any pastime,
when his office is to consult in necessary matters, abstayning from all upon
the Sabbath day.

And as hunting to the ecclesiastical sort, is an exercise most indecent, so
there is no less cause of restraint to mean people, who have to follow any
faculty or art profitable to the common wealth, and necessary to the relief
of their private life.

Daunces with their wanton songs at this day are vain and unchaste: Music,
of an Art liberal, is converted to an unworthy vanity: what Daunces should
be lavvfull: what Daunces, Music, and Songs we ought to use a examples of
holy men, who never would be seen in Daunces. The.6. Chapter.
DAunces and Roundes no less then wanton Music now a days, are more
dissolute then in times past, yea resembling the unchaste customs of the
Pagans without faith, and ignorant of God, the same being a manifest token of
the general corruption and vanity of the present age: And Music, which
according to the ancients was an Art liberal, in the which men praised God,
song exaltacions to the noble acts of the elders, recreated minds heauyly
laden with passions, and relieved bodies weeryed with actions of travail, is
now become an art of al vanity and filthynesse, helping to the service of
Satan, the delight of the world, and pleasures of the flesh.

I deny not but Daunces were in use in Israel amongst maids and women,
specially when there was question to glorify God for any victory, for the
which they offered to God, songs of triumph in thanks giving and perpetual
memory.

In this sort the women of Israel daunsed to the Tabour and voice, after they
had made their wonderful passage through the red Sea, where Pharao and his
Egyptians were drowned: amongst whom Mary the sister of Moses led the daunse,
and geuyng the first voice to the song, the rest took it at record, and
sounded upon the Tabour.

Daunses are approved also in the book of the Kings, the maids of the
country singing and daunsing, when David had overcome Gholias, Exodus 5. 2.
King. 6.
and Saul overthrown a thousand enemies, and David ten thousand. David him
self daunsed and played before the Arc of Alliance, when it was carried to
Jerusalem, when Mychol his wife scorning him for his mirth being so dispoyled,
was punished of God to remain barreyne: And as in many of his Psalms he
allureth men to the spiritual daunses, I mean such wherein God is praised: so
we see in S. Luke that at the return of the child of conversion, the father
caused instruments to be sounded, and daunses to begin, expressing the great
joy he took in the restitution of his son: In example of which spiritual
rejoicing, the Christians being victorious over the Gentiles, (I mean, when
their idols were pulled down to the ground, at the conversion of the Emperor
Constantine, and other good Princes succeeding) daunsed near to the Temples
upon festival days, singing praises to God in exaltations and spiritual joy,
which daunses were afterward abolished for their abuses: But in all the time
of antiquity we find not that men and women daunsed together, because they
would give no suspicion, nor practice affection of fleshly lust: only we
find that the Israelite idolatours, with their wives and daughters, hand over
head as the saying is, daunsed about their Calfe of God: And the Sichimites
before the Temple of their idol, which proves that such daunses came from
idolaters and Pagans, in whom was no other pretense but to follow vain
pastime, and do honor to their idols, which I fear may be noted in many of
our daunsers of this time, who with the custom of Bacchus Knights, making
feast to their idol Bacchus, stick not in their dronkennes to offer sacrifice
to Venus, having their ears corrupt with the noise of dissolute Music, their
mouths infected with unchaste discourse, and their given over to all dishonest
thoughts and enterprises.

To these are much helping the eyes led with the gaze of impudent iesture, with
many other like substitutes of filthiness.

For these abuses, and many other reasons, expressing the general corruption
of the present season, it is requisite to the officers and directers of the
pollecie, to restrain such daunses, specially being reproved in the scripture
in this text: They have well eaten and drunk, and then they rise to play and
daunse, which some interpret to idolatry: But who did ever see a man of
sobriety to be a daunser says Tully, who speaking in the defense of a Roman,
whom Cato accused of daunsing, (which was an act of infamy) cleared him from
the imputation of that vice by the modesty of his countenance and sober
conversation of life, alluding to daunsers, iestures of intemperauncie, not
much unlike the behavior of dronkardes: Let therefore the Magistrate reform
the vice, and cull the abuses out of the virtue: And if they will eftsoons
restore the first and ancient daunses: Let them be joined to such modesty,
honesty, and simplicity, that they hold nothing of the impudency of the
Gentiles: Let them forbear to sing vain and filthye songs, for it is
written, That evil speech corrupts good manners, 1. Cor. 15.
not only in common talk, but more rather in wanton songs: A thing very
dangerous, but specially to young men and maids, before whom Plato and
Aristotle in their pollitikes, would not give sufferaunce to any dishonest
speech, nor to have read any wanton Poetry, specially if it contained impiety
to the Gods. And much less would they suffer their youth to behold any
painting or purtreit of villainy, thereby not to corrupt their tender senses,
apt in that age to receive vile impressions. Let Daunces then express
modesty, both in their singing, Hermonies, and gestures, being only practiced
in honorable assemblies and marriages: But in other banquets and meetings, as
in Tauernes and brother hoodes of epicurity, Let all Daunsing be reputed as
custom of the Pagans, and worthy of sentence: I wish that in place of Daunses
at marriage, the time were supplied with some Comical or historical show of the
ancient Marriages of Abraham and Sara, of Isaac and Rebecca, and of the two
Tobies, and their Wives, matters honest and tending much to edifye the
assistauntes.

But for resolution of all sorts of plays, vain, worldly, and dissolute, as
all men have a notable example in the life of Jeremy, Iere. 15.
who said he was never in the Assemblye of players: So let maids take for
their example, Sara wife of Tobias, who before she was married with him, and
demanding of God to be delivered of the perplexity wherein she was, put him
in remembrance of the contempt of all vain things: Thou know O Lord says
she, that I never kept custom with plaiers nor daunsers, and much less had
conversation with such as walk in lightness, to whom vanitye is as easy, as a
straw to be tossed in the wind: Sure it is not meet to sing the Psalms of
David in daunses, as they do in Almaines, the matter being to holy to be so
profanely used, requiring rather a prostrate humility upon our knees, and in
zeal of invocation, to be whollye ravished in God. Touching Roundes or Base
daunses, it is well known what prejudice they brought to Saint John Baptist,
wherein the Daughter of Herodias brought such delight to Herod, that taking
away his judgment she procured him not only to make her an offer of half
his kingdom, but also recompensed her dau^sing with the head of S. John. To
this may be joined the warning of Ecclesiastes, not to bear nor keep company
with any woman daunser, for the peril of her vain and fleshly allurements.
With these plays and daunses, may well be coupled the daunse of Masks, being
all the proper inventions of Pagans and the Devil, with a public license to
contract reprobate acts, so much more damnable, by how much governors are
guiltye to the offense by suffering the parties: For as it may be judged, their
use implies no other thing but practice of deceit, and not to be known in
unlawful acts: So, the best argument to prove the dishonesty of their
ententes, is their shame to declare before the world the state and manner of
their doings, which resolves in good conclusion, that as the good act seeks
no cloak or shadow: so, whispering under their visors, they practice in works
of darkness: being lighted by ye candle of the devil. If the face was ordained
of God to show it self manifestlye, and the tongue to speak publikelye, what
other thing is it to put on a visor, and resolve the speech to whispering, but
to deface the divine ordinance, and do contrary to God? If it be so seriously
forbidden by the law, that men should not be disguised in other kind then
they are, much more just and necessary is this restraint, not to take an habit
by the which the face is deformed and seems monstrous: And seeing the most
fair and noble part which God naturally has given to man or woman, is the
face: can there be a greater vice, then by counterfeit visors, to disfashion it
contrary to the aucthor of nature? If Saint Ciprian hold painting so wicked,
which by so much is a great offense to nature, by how much they seek not
only to correct nature, But also God the aucthour, pretending also by their
painting some vain glory, or to entice men to wickedness. What may be said of
the Mask, which breeding suspision under the visor, bringes forth oftentimes
effects of much mischief: Here if any man say there is no thought of evil,
they may be answered, that which is wicked of it self, is inexcusable.

Touching Music, seeing it is a science liberal, it is then necessarily the
gift of God, working oftentimes holy effects, as the sound of the Harp,
tuned to Psalms and devout songs by David, chased away the devil from the
spirit of Saul. And so without speaking of the Musical instruments in the
old Testament, we read in the Apocalips, Apoc. 14.15.
how S. John in an Allegory approoueth the Harmony of the Harp: And the
Lacedaemonians used commonly in the beginning of their assaults, Musical
instruments, to moderate their furious courages.

Minstrels are unworthy of the state and fellowship of Towns men, as also
Puppet Players, and such as are called shows and sightes. What Harmony
ought to be used: Players were cast out of the Church, till they had done
penance: such people corrupt good moralities by vvanton shows and Plays:
they ought not to be suffered to profane the Sabbath day in such sportes, and
much less to lose time on the days of travail: All dissolute plays ought to
be forbidden: All comicall and Tragical shows of scholars in Moral
doctrines, and declamations in causes made to reprove and accuse vice, and
extol virtue, are very profitable. The.7. Chapter.
MYnstrels, or common Players of Instruments, being men unprofitable to a
common weal, were never in old time paste holden worthy of Privilege, or
place of Towns men, but with Puppet players, and Enterluders, were reputed
infamous, because they are Ministers of vain pleasures, enchaunting men's ears
with poisoned songs, and with idle and effeminate pastimes, corrupt noble
wits: For which cause, as they are called of Aristotle the suppostes of
Bacchus, whose drunkenness making them the slaves of their bellyes, restraines
them from all ability and capacity of good doctrines: So it belonges needefully
to the governors pollitike, to draw them into rule, not suffering the youth
of their City, to be eftsoons corrupted with the soft and delicate Music of
Lydia: but rather to accustom their ears with grave Music, sturryng to
virtue: or such as was in use with the Lacedaemonians and Phrygians, to moderate
the fury of their affections: Or like to that of the Pythagorians, wherewith
at their going to bed, they put in rest all the passions of their minds: But
that sound above the rest, is best, which was familer to David, 1. King 16.
singing holy and spiritual songs, when he chassed away, or at least
restrained the invasions of the wicked spirit in Saul, (wherein in deed, the
holy Ghost by an inward virtue sturred up by the faith and fervent prayer of
David, did work more then the Harmony of the Musical Instrument:) But
because our common Minstrels, by their Art, can not be members profitable to a
common weal: It were good they learned some necessary science, wherein
according to good example, they might by compulsion be employed, not so much to
gain the relief of their private life, as to cut of ye example of their
abuses to others by a quality unprofitable, where they are bound to an office
of honest and paynefull travail according to Gods ordinance:

All Stage Plays, and Enterluders, Puppet shows, and careless Boys (as we
call them) with all other sorts of people, whose principal end is in feedyng
the world with sightes and fond pastimes, and Iuggling in good earnest the
money out of other men's purses into their own hand, have been always noted
of infamy, even in Rome, where yet was liberty enogh to take pleasure in
public sportes.

In the primitive Church they were cast out from the communion of Christians,
and never remitted until they had performed public penance. And therefore S.
Ciprian in an Epistle counsels a Bishop not to receive a Player or Minstrell
into the pension of the Church (by which the poor were noryshed) till there was
express act of penance, with protestation to renounce a science so
sclanderous. Be it that by such people sometimes, may be expressed matter
morrall, and Christian doctrine: yet their good instruction is so corrupted
with Iestures of scurilitie, enterlaced with unclean and Whorelike speech,
that it is not possible to draw any profit out of the Doctrine of their
Spiritual moralities. For that as they ex^hibite under laughing, that which
ought to be taught and received seriouslye: so, of many that goo to assist
them, though some are made merye in mind, yet none come away reformed in
manners: being also an order indecent and intolerable, to suffer holy things
to be handled by men so profane, and defiled by interposition of dissolute
words: which is, as if you should suffer fair and precious Jewels to be set
in quagmiers or foul soyles: For my part I doubt not but it is a sin against
the first table, as well for that there is contempt of that that is good, as
also in place to honor God, his name is taken in vain, and many holy words
recited without thought to dispose them once to edify: Great then is the error
of the magistrate to give sufferance to these Players, whether they be
Minstrels, or Enterludours, who, on a scaffold, Babbling vain news to the
sclander of the world, put there in scoffing the virtues of honest men, as at
Athens, Aristophenes did by Socrates whom he called a worshipper of the
Clouds, because oftentimes in contemplation of God and celestial causes, he
raised up his eyes toward Heaven: there often times are blown abroad the
Public and secreete vices of men, sometimes shrouded under honorable
Personage, with infinite other offenses.

What impietye can be greater then thus to profane the Sabbath day which
being dedicated to God, ought to be employed in holy uses, And what worse
example in a common weal then to turn other days of honest travel, into
exercises wherein is learned nothing but abuses: yea, what sumptuous preparation
apeareth in those plays to do honor to Satan, what vain expenses,
prodigally and wickedlye employed, where would not be seen the hundredth part
of such providence if there were question to relieve the extreme necessitye of
the poor: How many young men return from thence enflamed to whoredom? how
many Maids, coming thither with chaste hearts, are seen to return with
corrupt will, even ready to put it to effect, if the occasion offered? what man
has been ever so much profited by them, who, (in his conscience) returned not
in worse estate then when he went? To be short, how often is the Majesty of
God offended in those two or three hours that those Plays endure, both by
wicked words, and blasphemye, impudent Iestures, doubtful sclaunders,
unchaste songs, and also by corruption of the wills of the Players, and the
assistauntes.

Let no man object hear that by these public Plays, many forbear to do
evil, for fear to be publicly reprehe^ded, for which cause it is said,
they were tolerated in Rome, where even the Emperors were touched, though
they were there in presence: For it may be answered first, that in such
disguised Plaiers given over to all sorts of dissolucion, is not found a will
to do good, seeing they care for nothing less then virtue: Secondlye that is
not the mean to correct sin: for that if it be secreete, it ought not to be
revealed, but reformed by such means as Jesus Christ allows in his Gospel:
and if it be public, why is it not punished by the Magistrate, why does not
the Bishop rebuke it publicly, and excommunicate the party, if he protest
not open penance: wherein. (in defaulte of the Bishop) or if the offense be
Civil, the officers of the Prince ought to pursue the correction, being for
such purposes specially instituted: where such as are reproved upon the
Stage, much less that they are made better, but of the contrary, with their
custom and still continuance in vices, they rise into perpetual grudge
against the aucthors of their sclaunders, ceassing not to follow vice for all
their crying upon the scaffolde, no more then the Wolves leave to rauishe the
Sheep, notwithstanding the hew and cry of the shepherd: If they have
habilitye to be revenged, they will omit no oportunitye wherein occasion
may be given: Yea, sometimes they join them selves to the report of the
Players, vaunting with shameless impudencye that they would al others to be as
they are: which is truly witnessed in the examples of Nero, Domitian,
Heliogobalus, and others, who by so much more increased in wickedness, by how
much they understood their vices were spoken of, and seeking to give to their
vices, the estimation of great virtues, they raised to great dignityes, such as
would follow and applaude their evil doings. But according to Christianity, we
ought not to scoff at the vices of another, but to show compassion and pray
to God for him that erreth, applying correction by such means as we may:
which if it bring forth no fruit to his amendment, at the least let us with
Samuel weep for the vices of Saul, and pray to God for pardon for him.
Charity (says the Scripture) covers faults, and neither reuealeth nor
reioyseth in them, no more then the natural amity of the humane body suffers
that one member put out to public show an apostume which is in any part of
the rest of the body: and if it be already in the outward parts, she covers
it by such means as she can, that it appear not ignominiouslye. If Libels of
diffamation be punished with rigorous pain, why should public sclanders on
scaffoldes escape the sentence, where every ear is open, and free liberty of
judgment? Hear I reprove not the Plays of scollers in actions of comedies
and tragedies, common and Christian, wherein is exercise of morral doctrines,
and much less of the historye of the Bible, exhibited for good instructions
and exhortacions to virtue, and by the which they are prepared to a boldness of
speech in all honorable assemblies, enhabling their tongues to ready and well
disposed eloquence. Such plays are far from merit of blame specially, if
they hold no comixture with the superstitions of the Gentiles, nor oaths by ye
Gods and Goddesses, which often times is performed in the name of Jupiter, and
partake nothing with the lascivious iestures and mirth of the Pagans. More
praise worthy are the Plays of scollers, if in their declamations, they
ascribe rebuke to vice, and give praise to virtue, contending always in the
co^trouersy of learning, as by disputacion and compositio^: I speak not hear
perticularly of the Players commonly called Legerdemeners, and Stick and List,
for that I have comprehended them amongst the Iuglers. But if they use the art
Magic and Diabolical, as many do, illuding the sense whilst they play: as well
they as their assistaunts deserve correction as Infidels because they take
pleasure in that which comes from the invention and art of Satan. Let them
remember that S. Paul in Corinth, Acts. 19.
burned ye books of such as had written of things curious, vain, and tending
to acts of Pastime, who, if he made great flames of fire of their Magic
books where ye Devil is present to do maruailous acts: what is to be ascribed
to such now a days, by whom they are put in use and practiced to ye
furthera^ce of hurtful purposes? And as he called the Magicien barn, an enemy
of justice, vessel of deceit, and son of the Devil: So, by his example, let
our polletike Magistrates root up such common enemies, least the licour of
their vessel, being confected by Satan, run through their City to the poison
of their simple communaltie.

Idleness is a vice most common, bringing with it most other offenses, and yet
no conscience made of it: An ausvvere to such as say they have inoughe, and
have no need to travail. A declaration to the Magistrates and Churchmen,
shovving how above all others they ought to be more vigilaunt and painful
in their vocations. The.8. Chapter.
ONE of the most common vices, and from whom most other evils and errors are
derived, is idleness, a vice general following Plays, Pastimes, riotes, and
unprofitable ease: of which, as the most sort make small conscience: so, with
some, it seems no vice at al, as being so popular and plausible, that many
travail to settle their estate, and lay up their life in that ease or rather
perpetual Idleness, ascribing happiness to those that can enjoy it to their
delight and pleasure. That it is a great vice, it is certain by the text of
Ezechiel, who calls it iniquity, the cause properly of the ruin of Sodom and
Gomorre, and scourge of the Israelites. It is iniquitye, because it is against
the Law and divine ordinance, by the which it is said to man: Thou shall
eat thy bread with the sweat of thy brows: Genesis 2.
As who say, so much shall thou travail all the days of thy life in the
labors of thy profession, or art that thou shall take in hand, as thou shall
sweat to gain thy living, wherein as by this law al men are condemned for
sin: so it behooves every one, how Ritche so ever he be, or what power or
principalitye so ever he possess, to obey the law and this ordinance,
otherways he is a transgressour of the law, and punishable as an offendur: it
is therefore that S. Paul teaches, that all men ought to travail, condemning
the loyterour not to be worthy to live: and with all exco^municates al idle
people, calling them disordered, because they are not in the order polletike,
where all the world according to their particular vocation, does travail, and
none is found unprofitable: even as in the natural body, which suffers no
part or member to be Idle, but all serving an use in their body, do travail in
their humane functions.

If no man be excommunicated but for some great crime, seeing Saint Paul
excommunicated Idle people, they can not be but very criminal: God has
ordained labor as a penance to man, and to be to him as a remembrance of the
wretchedness which sin brings, an exercise to keep him in virtue, and a
mean to train him to humility and duty, according to the art whereunto he
is called, by the which his spirit is drawn from wicked thoughts, corrupt
affections, and reprobate desires, wherewith the Idle man is continuallye vexed.
For this cause S. Jerome biddes us be doing always some work, Pro. 2.
to the end the Devil may find us occupied. Besides this, moderate labor is
very profitable to the health of the body, without the which by crudity and
indigestion of humors and retaining the excrements, many diseases may breed.
And therefore, who will not bend his body to labor, should in the consideration
of these reasons, commit great faults against God, against him self, and
against his common weal, whereunto he is bound with all his mean and power.
For as (according to the resemblance before) there is no member in the humane
body, which travails not according to the facultye of his nature and office,
to give aid to the general body and every member in particular, which
otherwise would fall into infirmitye: yea, if it should persevere without
giving succors, and breed hurt by contagion, it should be cut of from the
body, not only as unprofitable, but as a corruptor of the other members: so,
what less office belonges to the member of this body polletike? Deserves he
not that which S. Paul geues to the idle Thessalonians, to be cut of and
excluded from Christian society? And if Jesus Christ condemn an idle word
(that is bringing no profit to our neighbor) to the judgment of God, what
sentence may be given of such, as not only live in idle words, but loase
their precious time, and omitting innumerable good deeds, stand idle and
unprofitable even in their proper vocation? If any will say, that in this
idleness men offend not, for that they do but walk, talk, sleep, make
meerye, and pass the time without doing evil to any, having withal whereupon
to live without travail: it may be denied for the first part of the
answer, that they cannot but do evil, for that as such life and Pastimes
are reproved, and that in all times, and for all our works and words, we
are bound to give accoumpt to God.

So, it is not enough to abstain from doing evil, but we must also without
ceassing be exercised in doing good according to the Scripture. So that the
Ritche man must not say, I have enough and need not take pain: Nor the
Gentleman must not vaunte of his great revenues, and say he has no further
care but to pass his time in hunting and other delites: Nor let the Bishop and
Churchman excuse him self of travail, for that his living is plentiful and
prepared to his hands: For every man is bound to follow his vocation, and
walk (as Saint Paul says) according to the same: He must not sleep then in
that vocation, if his office be to travail, and that with as great diligence
as he may, even no less then belonges to him that has undertaken for some
necessary affairs, to make some painful journey.

Let such people (whom God has blessed with such wealth, as to maintain
their life, there is no necessitye of labor,) consider why they were raised to
such Rich estates: who, the more they have, ye greater reckoning have they to
make to God, and are subject to more deeds of charity then others. In this I
bind not al sorts of men to a duty of travail with the hand in works of
labor: But as there be diverse sorts of travails, some of the mind, and some
of the body: So, to some kinds of labor is required, sometimes the strayning
of the body, and sometime the exercise of the mind.

The Rich man has his part of travail to direct his affairs, and keep his
servants in office, wherein, let him with Abraham seek out in the high ways
poor passangers, and about his house his needy neighbors, imparting unto them
of his goods given him by God for that end.

The Gentleman has enough to provide for the quiet of his Tenauntes, that they
consume not one another with suits, and to defend them from the oppression of
the thief or enemy: he ought to be to them as a sheephearde to his flock,
whose office is not only to defend them from the Jaws of the Wolf, but also
so to lead them as they do no hurt to the several Feeldes of another:

But in war the Gentleman is bound, for the public defense of his Country,
to commit his person to hazard: So that, whether in peace or in war, the
Gentleman having due regard to the discharge of his office and estate, has no
leisure to lead or loase his time in Idleness: What belongs then to the
Magistrate Polletike, who likewise is a pastor of his people, to guide them
ciuilly by counsel, to keep them according to the Law, to defend them with
his aucthoritye, and use such providence as they be not molested? But much
more, yea most of all, it belongs to the spiritual pastor of Souls, the
churchman of what order soever he be, to be vigelaunt in his estate, as
having in charge far more precious things then the others, and of a greater
perrill if he loase them: for in loosing one Soul (being so dear to Christ as
he gave his life for it) he loses also his own and can not be saved, Ezech.
3.34.
if only one be spilt through his default: Right straitely therefore is he
bound to pray incessauntly, to preach diligently, and to show holy
conversation in his office: who, if he lose many souls either by his example,
or through his false Doctrine, or by negligence in his duty, incurreth horrible
damtion, for that in losing a Soul, he suffers to be lost and spilt the
blood of Jesus Christ.

Thus as there is no man, who, notwithstanding his sufficiencye of wealth,
has not occasion to travail more then others, whom necessitye enforces to
pains for their relief: so, the more he is bound to God for his wealth, by
so much more is he strayned to give reckoning to God of the distribution of
it. And therefore if any say unto you, you have enough to live upon without
travail, tell him he is either a flatterer, or very ignorant, not knowing
that God by his intolerable ordinance has bound us al to travail without
excepting any, creating and apointing us to labor, as he has made the birds
to fly says Job: Job. 5. Genesis 2.
And if Adam, before sin was put in the Terrestrial Paradise, to travail
there as the scripture says: much more is man bound thereunto after sin.

The Ritche sort have more to travail then the poor, and in what: Such as
labor in mind, travail more then the painful labourer. A proof how
idleness is the cause of other euilles: Idle men are malice dreamers:
Exhortacion not to follow idleness: Exhortacion to travail by apt
comparisions, wherein idle Beasts are expulsed from the societye of others
that travail. The.9. Chapter.
GReat travail belongs to the Rich man, who, (more then any other) has (as
it were) his work cut out, if (as he ought) he discharge the duty of his
estate toward God: For how many sick and needly people be in his town, so
much the more is his travail to visit them, to distribute amongst them of his
own proper wealth, and to procure contribucion of the other sort, to whom in
common belongs that charge over the poor: Ephess. 4.
If according to saint Paul, the poor artison be bound to travail with his
hands, not only for his own relief, but also to have mean with the gain
above his own necessitye, to give aid to the wantes of others: how much more
is the ritchman strained to the distribution out of whose abundance may be
spared without hurt, a compotent portion to sustain many.

Such as are to travail in mind, as the pollitike and ecclesiastical Pastors,
have a burden of labor far more heavy, grievous, and painful then the
others: For by how much the spirit is more noble and excellent the^ the body,
by so much is his labor more vehement and painful, consuming all the virtue
and force of the body: Whereof it happens that in such people as in their
estates are used in the travail of their minds, are for the most part found
infirmities and weakness of body, subject to diseases, dry, lean, and
thin, rather the images of dead men then of bodies bearyng life: And where we
said, that from idleness derived all other vices and euyls, we may well call
it the very sincke and spring of all corruption of manners: from thence comes
whoredom, Ezeci. 18. 2. King. 1.
as is expressed by Ezechiel in the example of Sodom and Gomorrhe: and
appears also in David, who walking in his Gallerye, and beholding a far of
Barsabe bathing in her Garden, entered into lust and committed adultery with
her: Where if his mind had not been in that leisure and abstinence of
business, or if (as be confesses in his Psalms) he had then (as at other
times) thought on Gods Law, prayed, or been occupied in great affairs as
belonged to so great a Lord: he had not fallen into so wicked an act.

Was not the idleness of Eve the cause of her destruction and our death? If
she had been busily employed to labor in the earthly Garden where God put her
with Adam she had not wandered to behold curiously the fruit that was defended
her, nor had spared her ear to the tempting of the Serpent: no, the Serpent
would not have come to have entised her to an act so miserable. Idleness
makes men thieves, gluttons, and disposed to all wickedness: and therefore the
ecclesiastic says, That it teaches men much malice: Therefore is it said
and seen in experience, that people of Cities be more subtle, deceitful, and
malicious, then those of the country, because to their ease in the city is
joined time and leisure to dream and think upon malice (a natural
inclination of Adams seed) whereto the vplandishe sort, being still followed
with labor, there is no respite of time nor dispensation of travel: Prouer. 12
Prouer. 1
Solomon repeteth in many places, that need and poverty be the two ordinary
handemaydes of negligence and idleness, calling them most foolish that follow
idleness, seeing he that trauayleth has whereupon to live: in an other place
he says, that the slow hand opneth poverty, but the hand of great workers,
^roue^ 6
brings richesse: he exhorts the slothful to travel by the example of the
Ant, who appliyng diligence to opportunity, lays up his relief and lives in
plenty: The Pismyre spares not in the summer, to heap up little graynes to
feed him in the winter, whereunto he is not taught by any schoolmaster: the
like industry is in the Honny bees, yea in things profitable, good and
necessary to our life: their travel, their industrye, their art, their pain,
and the profit that our lives receive by them, is enough to move shame to idle
men, and bring them into a train of travail for profit: the Ox, the Horses
and the Asses do travel: then man, who has so many doctrines and
commandments to draw him to labor, can he deserve less then public
confusion and punishment, and in the end to dye of hunger in his extreme age?
therefore says the wise man, who trauayls not shall fall into such necessity
that he shall beg, Prouer. 1
yea God will punish him on such fashion, that he shall find no man that will
give unto him: Let the fable of the Pismyre which traveled always, and of the
Crycket which spent the Summer in singing, bring him to behold the truth: The
Crycket after Summer is spent, having not to live upon, but begging for his
sustenaunce, asks alms of the Pismyre, who demanding what he did in the
summer, answered that he song, then dance now if thou will, says the Pysmyre
for me, my store serves mine own turn and I have need of it: Great is also
the example of providence in the Bees, who (with an industry above the Ant)
make profitable, good, and artificial works, all being resolved in travel,
some in the feeldes, and others in their Hiues, not one of them losing the
opportunity of the weather: and if there be any dranes amongst them, who being
either unprofitable or idle, seek to devour the common store of honey, and live
of the labors of others, the whole companies drive them out of their
commonweal, as unworthy of the socyety of ye true laboring Bees: In their
order, policy, and trauelsome life, is expressed good example of order in
commonweales polleticke, wherein as there ought to be no tolleration to any
idle body, but all the world driven to follow some vocation: so where is a
loyterer, let him with the unprofitable dranes, be expulsed and punished
according to his merit: and if the silly Bees also travel in common, and aid
one another, not sufficing to gather only for themselves, but also for us: what
just shame and condemnation may be ascribed to Christians, who ought by nature,
and are by grace all members conjoined and united in one boddy polliticke by
Jesus Christ and in him also made one body, and one spirit, if they be
surmounted by these little beasts in society, in unity, and perfect amity?
Their King and master Be that puttes them in order, and by his humming voice
calls them to travail, is so obeyed, honored, and loved of the rest, that if
he go out of the Hiue they all follow him, and when he can no more fly, they
bear him, which may stand as instruction to governors what they ought to be,
and to inferios for the office of their service, obeing, honoring, and serving
their magistrates with ready humility, affection, will and service.

Governors ought not to suffer any idle men in their commonweales, who as they
be unprofitable, and a charge to the world, so in the end they bring ruin
to their commonvveales: therefore it is necessary that fathers put their
children to some trade, and masters their servants, and so all others. The
magistrate and Churchman ought to show example of travel to others, according
to their profession. The.10. Chapter.
Since idleness (as has been proved) is not only a vice horrible of it self,
but the seminary and breeder of many other sins and miseries: it belongs to
the Magistrate, according to all Law, both natural and divine, and common
reason, to give no more sufferaunce to slothful and idle people in their
commonweals, then the good father of a family will endure in his private
house, either to son or servant, or other hand of ability to work, without
doing something. The good Husbandman will not suffer Rats and Wesels to eat
his Corn in the Garners, nor Moathes to devour his Garments, Caterpyllers to
spoil his Trees, the Fox to eat his Pultry, the Woolfe to pray upon his
Sheep, nor the Thief to steal Corn out of his Barn: much less ought to be
suffered in a common weal, idle and slothful people, whose example devouring
first the manners and qualities of the multitude, will at last endaunger the
state of the whole, even as the other vermin by continuance bring to
destruction the profit of a private house: Let therefore the Magistrates
suffer none in their common weal, without art, without occupacion, or some
honest or profitable mean to live by, erectyng Laws to compel fathers to
provide good instructions for their children, specially in the doctrine and
fear of God: and if any carry inclination and will to search out learning, let
him according to his power give encouragement to so good a desire: And so apply
every one of the rest to the Art whereunto he finds nature to give her redyest
consent.

Let there be never a Master, who kepes not his servant in service, and
restraining all liberty to vain idleness, let him join compulsion to his
negligence, and force him to such Art or faculty as his capacity will best
agree withal: yea such ought to be the diligence and providence of the
magistrates that there be not seen in ye time of work, any man or woman,
which does not his duty according to his profession. In the Bible, the woman
as well as the man, has her labor prescribed, Pro. 31.
specially in the last chapter of Salomons Proverbs: much less then the man
ought she to be seen idle, for by her idleness (as has been said) the first
woman marred all: her office shall be more amply set out in the sixth book: S.
Paul would not that widows run or gad from house to house, as idle
babbling gossops, and either learners or caryers of news: And much less is it
tolerable, that men of estate replenish ye streets, I mean, walking up and
down for their pastime, unless they be called by occasion of business: There
ought the Magistrate to be often, scommyng as did Epaminondas, and searching
the streets, to see how every one follow their estate, and so reform the
disordred, and hear the complaints of such as have suffered wrong: and in
their absence to apply their deputies and Sergeantes to this charge, by which
providence they shall keep all their City in duty.

Touching strangers passengers soiourning in their Town, it is very necessary
to understand what manner people they are, specially the suspicion and danger
of the season requiring: If they remain there above one night, it ministers
matter of inquiry, and therefore let the host infourme the governors: If they
be men of occupation, let them search work, and avoid idleness: And if they
be people of estate, the regard to their calling geues them such knowledge and
care of their duty, that they will not loose time in unprofitable rest. Act.
17.
The Burgesses of a City ought not to come in the rebuke of the Athenians,
whose manner was to keep the streets and public places for vain pleasure, and
to hear news. Above all other, it is far from the office of Churchmen to be
seen in streets or shoppes, or before the Churches to gaze on passengers, and
much less to walk up and down in Churches, Esai. 56.
contrary to the commandment of God, whose house is a house of prayer:
wherein as many have a fond custom, either to spend the time in mumbling
their darck Pater nosters as old Priests were wont to do, or else to chatte
with such as they meet, whom they ought to instruct and reform: So being in
the church, it belongs to them to express an example of good ministers, as
either to mount into the pulpet and preach, or withdraw into some secret
place, where they may pray in truth, without fiction and hypocrisy, and in
great reverence upon their knees meditate in spiritual contemplation that
which belongs unto them both to think and do, as well for themselves, as for
the people, for whom they ought to be intercessours to God: as soon as they
have performed their duty in the Church, let them withdraw themselves to
their private studies of the scripturs: if after their study they will
practice any faculty secretly, either to avoid idleness, or to give
sustenance to their poor estate, Acts. 2. 2. Cor. 11. 1. Thesse.
ye custom is tolerable, and agreeing with the ancient fathers: wherein as S
Paul stands an example, who traveled with his hands, to avoid slander to the
Gospel, and not to be chargful to any.

Mark. 6
So Jesus Christ, before he preached (as Saint Mark writes) was called Myller
and Carpenter, as one that wrought at those sciences with Joseph, as much to
relieve the necessities of his life, as to obey ye commandments of god, who
made all men subject to labor: But after he took upon him the state of
preaching, he could not travail in those scienses more, neither ought he to
do so, for that he was come to do all spiritual duty: and so was he
occupied in continual prayer, to teach, heal the sick, and do the office of
a savior: Mark 6
He spent sometimes three days in instructing and healing the sick, for which
two causes (as S. Mark says) he had no leisure to refreshe his body with
food: and having no opportunity on the days to pray, he oftentimes passed
nights in watching and prayer: By whose example such as are called to the
estate of Ministers in the Church, Bishops, and Pastors, ought to direct their
behauiours, employing their times in spiritual labors, being seen in no
place but in exercise either to teach the ignorant, comfort the afflicted,
exhort the negligent, confirm the weak, and reprove the offender, and
express withal, always some good doctrine, and confirm it by example of
their good life: And so for the rest, I send them to ye treatise of their
institution, and resorting eftsoon to the labor whereof we spoke, idleness
whether in them or any other men of learning, is an uncomely stain.

Let them with all others of knowledge, but specially governors pollitick and
spiritual, do as the natural head of man, wherein as the spirit meditates,
debates, and deuiseth that which is good and profitable to the body and every
member: so by counsel of the same spirit, the head prouides by policy,
beholdes with the eyes, hearkeneth with the ears, and speaks with the
tongue, that which is necessary for the whole, studying altogether for the
entertainment of the body and all the members, whom he commaundes in
particular to travel with all their force and industry natural: as the eye to
look every where, where need is, the ear to hear that which is good and
profitable to the body and all his members, the hand to work in diverse
sorts, the feet to march and go etc. So that there is no member over whom
he has soueraintie, and which has mean to obey his commandment, to whom he
prescribes not what he ought to do. And even as the stomach receyues the
meat to decokt and digest it, and afterward to distribute it through the
body, even so ought the magistrates of the Church to do with the doctrine,
which they have learned out of the holy scryptures, commending the same
imitation also to ye magistrates of justice and lawyers, imparting the science
of the laws which they have learned in schools to the people, some to ye
instruction and health of souls, and other to direct the policy of their
commonweals. The like also belongs to Physicians, touching the disposing of
their science for the cure of bodies: Other members have their propper and
outward labor, as the hand that works, and the feet that serve to march
and go. So Merchants, Laborers, and Artificers, have the trauayles of the
body for exercise, not only to the particular profit of them selves, but
also to the behoof of the whole: as others have the labors of the spirit.

Here it is not impertinent to the matter to rehearse the Fable of Marcus
Agrippa, Orator of Rome, pronounced to the people which were assembled to do
violence against the Lords of the Senate, whom they said kept them in too
great subjection of labors, and contribucions of tributes, to entertayne their
rest and tranquillity: This Orator, to apease this popular mutiny, and
eftsoon to reconcile them to the Senate, brought in this resemblance: the
members of the body (says he) murmured on a time against their stomach and
bellye, obiecting that they did nothing but toil in perpetual travel to
norishe it, and yet it was never satisfied, and so being weary, forbear to
labor any more to relieve it: the hand would work no more, the feet lay at
rest and would go no further, the mouth refused to speak, the eye to see, and
al gave over to provide for the bellye. By which occasion within few days all
the members became feeble and weak, yea without hability to move, so that ye
man had no power to set one foot before another. And so foreseeing in what
danger of death he stood, for not ministering food to his stomach and bellye,
persuaded al his members eftsoon to recontinue their travail, giving them to
understand that they were not fallen into that infirmity by any other means
then because they disobeyed the stomach, refraining from travail to provide
him sustenance and norriture to the belly: which being thus beaten into their
knowledge, they took again their first office, labor, and diligence, and so
eftsoon recovered their agilitye and force, and never afterward mutined
against their stomachs or belly. To this stomach he resembled the Senate, and
in the members were represented ye people, applying so aptly this comparison
(which is as a natural lesson and visible doctrine) that he brought the people
to return to their city, and yield their accustomed obedience to the Lords of
the Senate: declaring by this peremtorye reason that it is not possible to the
world to be well governed, nor live without counsel, judgment, and providence
of God, and grave governors: some providing for the safetye of souls, and
others caring for the temporal affairs, the better to establishe a happy
tranquilitye in a common wealth.

In all creatures is seen a perpetual labor, whether in Heaven, in Earth, or
in the Sea: The profit which rises in a City by the travail whereunto the
idle sort are constrained. Exhortacion to the Magistrates to purge their common
weals of unprofitable people, declaring the evil which comes of them, and
the authority which they have to do it. The.11. Chapter.
THere is no natural Common Weal, no not amongst the Beasts, which is not
in continual and common labor, without excepting any singular creature from
travail: In the Monarchy of Bees, where the king commaundes, we have already
proved that there is no Idleness: Among the Antes, where the most ancient guide
the rest, every one is busye to bear his burden, and build his Garner: In
the flock of Cranes, where al be equal in aucthoritye, none is suffered to be
idle: Nor of Grasshoppers, when they fly in Troop. There is no winged Bird,
which flies not and geues to every day some act of travail according to his
nature: No Fish in the Sea, or other water, to whom with the use of life, is
not joined perpetual travail: No Beast above, or upon the earth, who after his
natural rest, does not employe him self according to his natural faculty: no,
natural thing if it have life and strength, is suffered of nature to be idle.

The Sea always brings forth Fish, bears great Ships, and has her
other mouinges: and as the Rivers fall into the Sea, so the fountains slide
into the Rivers. The Earth without ceassing, engendereth or preserves Herbs,
Seeds, Plants, and the plants never forbear in their season to express
their virtue and bring forth fruits, and are never unprofitable: yea, if there
be any unfruitful, it is committed to the fire, as not worthy to be
sustained with the fatnes of the earth without yielding good fruit: Mat. 21.
Christ cursed the fig tree, because it brought forth leaves and yielded no
fruit, signifying to us yt it is not enough to travail, if our labors bring
forth no profit to others: The fire continuallye burns, The sky has his
perpetual moving, carrying about his planets and stars: The Sun gives light
without intermission: And the stars in the night lead us by infallible
Lights: Thus there is no creature which God has made, seen idle, but man,
who of a corrupt nature, paruerteth his order, where he is bound by most just
reasons, both for the mind and body, to travail, seeing that as labor is
healthful and necessary to him, so he only above al other creatures of God,
receives the profit of the earth, and has of God in the end eternal
recompense: which proves that travail, whether it be to gain and preserve
goods, or that it relieve the necessitye of the body, or tend to the health
of the soul, is most behoueful and necessary to man.

It is great hurt to a common weal, to nourish mouths that eat and labor
not: Who besides their own idleness, are hurtful examples of disorder to
others: For such people are not satisfied with the loss of their own time,
but sinisterlye seduce others to their faction, and ten of those are enough to
corrupt fiftye, yea, a whole Town: Therefore let the Magistrate purge his city
of such dranes, table Iestours, Parasites, forgers of News, builders of
scoffs to goo scotfree them selves, and very natural pyllors of Tauerns: And
with the same severe diligence, let him cleanse his common weal of al filthy
quagmiers of ruffenrie, scurility, service of bawdes and bawdry: for if one
outcorner of his Town be infected with that pestilence, it is enough to
impoison the whole: yea even as there is precise order to cleanse the streets
and channels of al filth and uncleanness, to keep the town from corruption of
air: and as the head of man's body foreseeth that there remain no impediment
to any member, but the eye lokes about the body that it be kept clean, and if
there be any offense, there is a plaster applied to cure and cleanse it: even
so, al such as the magistrate shall see through idleness, or vain, or unlawful
art, to prepare to corrupt them selves, and infect others, Let him either by
justice or discipline reform them, or by good pollecye avoid them from the
society of others. If there be any fathers through whose negligence, or other
default, their children of good houses become customarye to idleness, sin,
and other vices: Let the Magistrate punish by heavy fines, such fathers for
bringing into their common weal such pernicious education, and (for example
sake) compel their children to ciuilitye by public discipline: It belongs
no less to the office of the governor to correct the prodigalities of such
whose parents diceassed, and they left to their own election of liberty and
life with full Coffers, waste their wealth in plays, glottonies, pompes, and
taking upon them the title of Gentlemen, and attire of young Princes, make love
to Ladies, they which are the Sons of Marchantes, who, to get the name of
nobilitye, sell their shoppes, holding it a stain to their reputacion to
continue the trade of their fathers: And so in continuance by much spending,
and never winning, their prodigalitye leads them at last to sell even their
houses and implements, little knowing their value at the first, and less
considering to what uses God had ordained them: Sure, such ought to be bridled
by Public aucthorytye, and restrained to rule and measure, living according to
the rate of other wise Burgesses: And if they are unapt to continue their
Shops, there may be constraint to frame them to other trade, both to their
proper commoditye, example of the City, and to keep them from extreme
pouertye, whereunto there Idleness will bring them.

Hear let no man say, have not I only propertye in mine own? may not I do
with my goods what I list? yea, who can let me to sell it, since every man is
master of his own? such speeches please well the humor of the speaker, but
agree not with the statutes of a common weal well directed, and much less have
conformetye with common reason, because a particular, is but a member of the
body polletike, who ought to be governed by his head, and give all the aid
he can to his body. Horace says, we owe our selves and all that we have to
our common weal, as who say, we are not for our selves, neither is our
goods our own, but all ought to be employed to Public behoof (but more to
God of whom we have al) so that if our country have need of our goods or
our life, we ought to refuse nothing: ought not the Arm to suffer to lose his
sleeue, yea, and the joint, to keep his body? were it not better the hand
were cut of, then to loase both the legs, or the whole body? But a man to
hurt him self is another matter, for he should not only do iniurye to him
self, but wrong to others: For that cause we say, that if a man set fire in
his own house, he ought to be hanged, for the act bearing common interest to
the city, makes the man reputed as a public iniuror of the state: be it that
the house was his, and builded by him, yet to propertyes is anexed this
condition, to use them well to the behofe of al, and not abuse them to the
offense of any. So, goods are a man's own for his necessary use, but if he
abuse them, they are none of his, but the common weal ought to resume the^ as
a good mother, and keep them for the after necessity of her child: If he that
cuttes his Arm for the nonse, deserve the punishment of a murderer, no less
merit of pain belongs to him who does wrong to his common weal to, whom
he owes that arm for the service of the rest.

For that cause even amongst the Pagans, he which killed him self, was led to
the scaffolde and hanged as an offendour, because he had in that sort cut
him self of from his body polletike, to whose service he ought him self and
all that was his. The prodigal and unthrifty man having turned his great wealth
into a mountain of smoke, by his disorder leaves this charge to the City, to
keep his wife, and to provide for the sustenaunce and education of his
children, who, being accustomed with their Father, to epicuritie and deliteful
pleasures, can not but smell of their first corruption, and be hardly kept from
intemperance, and without a hard hand, will not be restrained from the life of
their dissolute Father. And therefore as well to prevent this public charge to
the City, as to reduce to modestye Impes of such disordered stocks, it is
good to shake the rod of discipline, to keep such Youth from corruption, not
suffering any to live in Idleness, least their example infect others.

There be diverse sorts of Idle pople, some work certain hours only,
and they be certain Artificers: Some as vacabondes will never do any thing,
who bringing up their children in the same trade, train them to the vvallet
betime: Discourse of poor Beggars vvandring in Countries, and of the evil
that they do. The.12. Chapter.
BUT because this Idleness has so large a sircuite through all the world, and
is more general in most sorts of people, then any other vice, and above all the rest most hurtful to commonweals: It is necessary we pursue it even til
we bring it to the last confusion: some there be that work by fittes, and as
it were obey their hours and seasons, and in some we see a perpetual
Idleness, not following any art or labor.

There be some Artificers and handycraftesmen, who when they put them selves
in negligence and disorder, have no power to give over, till hunger constrain
them to recontinue their work: Their special time which they reserve for
these disorders, are the Holy days, which as Beasts they abuse in gluttony
and drunkenness, and by their behavior become beggarly Varlettes: If they
find no work, of necessity they must beg, or become thieves: and if they
fall sick, they die of hunger, and their familye are left to the relief of
the common alms. But much more evil do those which are poor wantonlye, or
counterfeite poor, who as stout beggarly varlettes, having once laid the
Wallet on their shoulders, are not afterward made tractable to any occupation:
truly natural and lively roages, whose bringing up is in begging, to the end
they may become miserable betimes, by whom the world is so replenished with
such vermin for want of good pollecie.

The best remeedy for our first half workmen and half idle men, standing
upon the brotherhood of Loyterours and such as are sone cloyed with work, I
mean also such as for an hour of labor, will play and haunte the Tavern a
whole day: The best mean to reduce such, were to give order that no Tavern,
nor Inn, either in the Town or Subberbes, should receive any inhabitaunt upon
a great pain, and that the workemaisters of such Iourneymen, distribute no
wages, but at the weeks end, or else to their wives, if there be necessity to
nourishe their family, driving them by this means when they are disposed to
recreation, to do it modestly at hoame, and not to run into insolences
abroad: we have declared elsewhere, when and what recreation of the mind and
rest of the body we ought to take after labor, but neither to use it, but as
we use Physic, which is by necessitye: nor to acquainte it commonly, for
fear of breeding a custom wherein is no less danger, then when a whole
body will prove Physic, which only is due to the diseased.

Touching the children of the Poor, we will speak of them heareafter: But to
the other Loytering and Idle poor, begging for the nonse, or by malicious
slight, they can not be persecuted with too severe correction, as either with
the sentence of ye Gibbet, or at least condemnation to the Galleys. For some of
them be expert Thieves and Robbbers in the end, as be these country runners
and stout beggars, a people drawn together from many places, bearing the
name of Gypsies, or Bohemiens, who, much less that they ever saw Egypt, but
know not where it stands. These with their wives, being sorcerors and
interpretors of Satan, abuse the simple, and unhappy, casting a powder into
their purses whose virtue is to bring away al ye money: others there be called
poor beggars, no more tolerable then they: they are varlettes all of a route
and race, and for the most part great Cossinges to Ragot, who, in a language or
Gibberishe only understand of them selves, give great estimation to their
trade by pitiful voices, and counterfeit sicknesses, groaning and sighing in
appearance, and inwardly merry minded, picking in this sort ye purses of many
poor wives in the country: who, if they give them not a good devotion (for
they make no reckoning of bread) they will threten the^ to burn their barnes,
and in the nights to cut their throtes: If the thief receive the gibbet for
his hyre, what sentence can be less against those, who making an act to
beguile and abuse the world, are worse then Thieves, for that they take away
the sustenaunce from such as are in deed poor: they will say, it is better
to ask, then to take away: what more sutteltye is there in robberye, or what
greater deceyte and abuse then this? yea, if they found the doors open, and
houses without guard: I doubt not but they would enter, and take what they
found without asking: If Ipocrites be accursed, if Thieves be hanged, Mat 23.
if liars be so much hated of God: if the idle sort deserve excommunication,
Psalm. 5. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
and are condemned by the Scripture to dye of Hungar: what grace then can
these deserve? yea, being no less hurtful then all the rest, why should they
be more favored then any other?

But now to a pleasant and true Historye of certain poor Beggars
counterfeyting sick men: In the time of the good King Lois the twelfth, a very
father of the people and most pitiful to the poor, as it was a custom of
this good Prince to goo every day from his Palace, to a Chapel for devotion
sake: so, one day all the Beggars there aboutes were drawn together before the
said Chapel, prepared to play their parts in hope to be well paid of the
King, to whose nature nothing was more familiar then pitye and mercy: when
they saw him coming, they scriked and fell down to the earth beating them
selves, and foaming at the mouth by a quantety of Soape, which they had sutlye
conveyed under their tongues, the better to set out their deceit, and draw this
simple King to a large Alms. A Gentleman spying the Prince to fall into moodes
of pitye, and at point to show large compassion, besought him to stay a little,
promising to show him a fair miracle: The Gentleman caused to bring him a
great Carters whip, wherewith, entering into the first part of his miracle,
he lashed with all his force these stout Beggars, who, with struggling with
them selves were become more then half naked. By that time the Oil of his
whyp had suppled their bare flesh, and drawn the blood to trikle down,
feeling still the rage of the whipping placester to redouble in sharpenes, these
traunsed men recovered their Legs and ran faster then those that followed
them, and forgetting their late frenzy, and foaming in the mouth, and every
other fit of a counterfeyte, they cried for compassion, and cursed the whip and
the arm by the which the miracle and mystery was so sharply pursued. This
proves that there is no better mean to cure says Epilepsia (commonly called
S. John's disease) nor other counterfeyte diseases in such deceytful beggars,
but either to whip or to hang them, without which remeedye, their disease will be
incurable: we see in our common weal many that have such infirmitye or defect
of members either by nature or accident, as they have no hability to travail
(the only excuse for idleness and begging) and yet are hardly drawn to receive
cure, the same agreeing with the time of s, Martin in the example of the lame
man, who understanding that in the said Bishop was power to heal the lame and
malady of the palsy, and that he should pass through the village where he was,
caused him self to be carried to an other place to avoid the restitutio^ of his
lims.

Loyterers accustomed to beg, will be applied to no other trade: The poor
religious beggars ought to be entertained by them in whose service they
travel, as Bishops and Pastors: Hermittes ought to travel according to their
first institution: the Hermites of Thebaides in Egypt of their travels
nourished the poor the well reformed religion travel certain hours of the
day. The.13. Chapter.
THus we see many desire not to be made hole and disposed of their members,
because they would not be employed in trauelles necessary to live (so sweet
is this vice of begging to ye miserable sort): which sure is an apparent
wretchedness to man to incline so to idleness, and seek to live at the
charges of an other: seeing the greatest benefit that God has bestowed on
manne after he had transgressed the law, was to give him ability to labor,
the better to keep him from infinite evils which idleness brings: whereof
one is to beholden vile, contemnible, shameful and miserable: The poor (says
Solomon) has spoken, Prouer. 1^ 18. and 22.
and none made reckning of him: all his frindes forsook him, and mocked him at
last, as is seen in the history of Job, wherein is not meant that we should
blame poverty or begging, sent of God to the weak, which for many causes is
most pitiful and merits support: but that it is an error and fault to take
pleasure in that which is wicked, or which was sent upon men for pain of the
curse of sin, and to delight in that which of his proper nature as it is
shameful, so it was a reason to S. Paul not to give food to them, but to bid
that the beggar should be shut out of christian company: and therefore he
commands all that have habilitye to travel, 1 Thessalonians. 4
not to spare labor, saying, work, that you have no need of any other: as who
say, travel with such diligence for the relief of your life, that your
wantes come not to be rated by the favor of an other, nor the restitution of
your loanes compelled: much less then gives he liberty to go from door to
door to prove men's compassion: Here if any object that the religious beggars
(commonly called Mendians) are within the compass of this correction, as
having made vows to beg: it may be answered, that in their vows is nothing
less included then promise to beg from door to door (for so should they
all go to it necessarily) but they have taken upon them simply a profession of
poverty, which is not to care or study for richesse, which they abandoned both
in will and fact, and gave all that they had to the poor, to go the more
freely through the world to preach: neither did their vow stretch, to take
nothing for their sermons, and other spiritual actions, to the which, by the
scripture is due honest recompense sufficient to entertain them: And therefore
because such religious fathers have bequeathed themselves to preach, and
supply the defaultes of pastors, for which labor at the least, they deserve to
be nourished and entertained: we say, that in this act they ought not to be
called beggars, for as the pastors are bound to recompense their labors, so
have they just occasion to demand their byer, without need to ask it at
their gates: S. Paul also to the Corinthians declares that such as preach
have good right and authority to demand their just payment: Others there be
(appertayning to this profession) which do nothing in a covent, neither
studying to preach, and much less preaching actually, nor serve in any use to
prechers: there is nothing in them to deserve to be norished in unprofitable
ydlenes: If they say they pray for their benefactors, let them resort to s.
Agustine, who will satisfy them in that point: He reformed certain Monks or
hermits of his time, who because they would do nothing but pray, were called
prayers or praying men, wresting this text of the Gospel, pray without
ceasing, and a place in s. Paul, Luke 18. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Praying without intermission: These were therefore found always mumbling in
the fields, streets, at the doors where they begged meat, yea, they mumbled
prayers even whilst they did eat: But S. Augustine told them lernedly that all
things had their time, as in deed, he prays without ceasing, which prays
in opportunity, having his heart, and affection always raised to God: he told
them farther, Eccles. 3.
that he that had willed them to pray without ceasing, had told them also
before by his irreuocable sentence, that they must eat their bread by the
sweat of their bodies, saying by his holy spirit, thou shall eat the labors
of thy hands, and shall be happy, and good shall come to thee thereof: He
resists besides, Gene. 3
that much less that the Monks of Egypt went a begging, but they traveled
with their hands to nourish their lives, Psalm. 127.
according to gods ordinance, and distributed the rest of their labors to the
poor in such sort, that in a dearth in Affrike, they sent from Egypt whole
ships charged with corn, to succor the necessities of the poor of Afric,
which the said holy doctor affirms was done in his time, to the great glory
of god, who by the poor did (as it were miraculously) nourish the poor, and
sterue the rich, by the general famine of that country: If those poor
Hermits, and other religious souls, nourished with the sweat of their bodies,
so many numbers of poverty through the world, how much more are bound to
this duty the rich Churchmen of this time, whose revenues are dedicated to
their necessities, and to sustain the poor: much more ought they to
distribute the superfluity of their revenues, seeing they are bound certain
hours to aid with their labors the poor according to the meaning of S.
Paul, who wills them to travel not only to live, Ephesians. 4
as does the poor, but also with the profits of their labor, to bring succor
and norit^re to the needy, whose hands suffice not to sustain their life, but
specially in time of famine, or to bestow relief upon them, whose infirmities
of body deny them all power to succor themselves: And as wise and holy men
understand so well by the scripture, that labor is the express commandment
of God, and that they reprove idleness, even in the religions most straight,
although there be sufficiency with fullness: So also in religions well
instituted and reformed (notwithstanding their compotency of revenue) are
continued certain hours in labor in some art or honest exercise of the hand,
selling their works to the end to make alms to the poor: whose example I
beseech God may chance others to the end that in their sinful idleness be
found no more cause of their damnation, nor to the world occasion of slander
to their holy profession.

The fourth Book.
The simple impotent and true needy poor, we ought to hold in singular and
dear care, asvvell for Gods commandments, as for that he has promised us
great recompenses both temporal and eternal, by the which many have been
stirred up to give all their goods to the poor, but specially such as would
follow Jesus Christ to do holy profession. The.1. Chapter.
TOuching the true poor, who either for their small age (as children) are
unable to labor, or being old, have no force to travel, or such as by
diseases in disposition and true infirmities of the state decrepit (as the
blind and lame) are unapt to service, yea, their handye work not sufficient
to give nouriture to their family, specially in times of dearth: together with
those poor souls, who having been rich, are now fallen to poverty, whose
shame makes them endure much, because they dare not ask: And lastely all poor
passengers, and needy strangers ought to stand with us in due recommendation
by the commandments more often repeated to us in the scripture, with more
great promises of recompense, then for any other thing which God has given us
in charge to do: the same being a sign most certain, that we can not do an
act more agreeable to God (touching duty to our neighbor) then to use
charity (comprehending always that which we ought to God) without which, 1.
Cor. 3 Romans 3. 1. Tim. 1.
though we give all our goods to the poor, yet we lose all for as charity is
the perfection, and full end of the law, yea, the very mark whereunto it
draws, proceeding of a pure heart, Math. 5 Luke 6. Psalm. 4^
a conscience perfect, and faith not dissembled, but entire and expressing a
true trust reposed upon the goodness of God in hope of eternal life: so is it
called mercy, which, who so ever do use, are called by Jesus Christ happy,
Ose. 6 Mat. 9
for they shall find mercy before God. David assures the man that releeueth the
poor, never to stand abandoned of god in his necessities: yea, so far does he
love this mercy, yt he prefers it before sacrifice, due to him as to god: I
love (says he) mercy better then sacrifice, and obedience, and knowledge of
god, more then holacust, which was a sacrifice wherein ye whole beast was burnt
and consumed in perfect oblation to God. By this he auiseth us that it were
better to nourish a poor soul, and preserve him from perishing by hunger,
then to offer all the beasts in the world in sacrifice: for as the beasts and
all other particular creatures of the world were made for the use of man: So
it were better there were a general wrack of them all, then to suffer the
meanest man that bears life to perish and dye for want to be succored by this
mercy.

This word alms (according to the Greek) has his deriuation from thence, so
that to do mercy, is to give alms, Prouer. 14 21. and 28.
according to the Greek property, whereof it is said, who has pity on the
poor shall be most happy, who exercises pity on the poor man, and aydeth
him, has his recompense of pity laid up with God, Math. 7
who will never abandon him, and according to the succors which he bestows on
the needy, God will measure relief to him in his proper necessities: Yea,
such high dignity and praise of virtue, has this charity to the poor, that
it only amongst all other virtues, is called justice, which is the most perfect
virtue, containing all other virtues, and according to the name of it, all
honest people are called just: sure none can worthyly be called honest men,
unless they be pitiful to the poor, express acts of comfort in their
necessities, and frankely, and gladsomly give unto them the duty of their
estate, which is norriture, and necessary succors: For which cause David
called such Act, justice: the just man (says he) has distributed his goods
to the poor, and his justice remains eternallye: as if he had said then
does a man show himself to be of perfect honesty, Psalm. 3.
when he imparteth a good portion of his wealth with the poor, he shall not
loase by that benefit which he does to the poor, for he shall be justified by
it (under the merit of Jesus Christ) of all sins of the which he should be
accused in the justice of God: Daniel. 4
that was the cause why Daniell spoke to Nabucodonosor: redeem thy sins with
alms and thine iniquities by charitable deeds to the poor: Math. 25 Acts. 10
For that cause will Jesus Christ absolve in his judgment, all such as in his
name have given succors to the poor: Thus does alms make and express a good
man helping to his justification in that he works or prepares remission of
sins, as the alms done to Cornelius, and prayers by the which he was heard
of God, and instructed in true faith by S. Peter: And alms proceeding of true
faith justifying by charity, helps to justify, in that they deminishe the
pains of sins, and make that man after he have obtained remission which is
done by the efficacy of the passion of Jesus, Christ apprehended by faith,
stand with God in more grace of pardon.

Besides all this, to alms is joined of God a promise of succors in all
affairs, as deliverance from diseases, Psalm. 4^ Esaias. 58 1. Tim. 4 Toby. 4
and death, increase and abundance of wealth, and fruition of eternal life:
yea, they suffer not as Toby says, a man to go in darcknesse, meaning dollors,
heaviness, perplexities, and perpetual sorrows of hell: The assured
consideration of which promises, has drawn many christians to dispose all
their goods to the poor, some of them choosing a solitary life in the
deserts, others to take upon them even the service of the poor in hospitals,
others endued with knowledge, to become preachers, not regarding temporal
goods, in hope of the eternal felicytye, which hope would not suffer them to
take goods of any: In this they conformed themselves with the Prophets of the
old testament, and with Jesus Christ, Mat. 8
who had not so much as a bolster to rest his head upon: he said to his
Apostles, that such as forsake not all they have, can not be his disciples:
They seemed also to believe and take suerty in that which he said to a certain
rych man: go thy ways sell all thou have, and give it to the poor, then
return to me, and follow me, and thou shall have a treasour in heaven: Christ
wills not by these texts, that in all men indifferently should be such actual
prostitution of their goods to the poor, and that they should leave all and
follow him and become his disciples, which haunt with publicans, and having
converted them, he commaundes them not to leave al to follow him: nor to
Zachea, who was principal amongst them, and for showed that there should be
always poor in the world, meaning then by consequence that there should be
also rich men in the world: which is very well confirmed by S. Paul in the
lesson which he gives to the richemen what they ought to do for their
salvation, not prescribing to them to leave al, but to distribute part to the
poor: of whom Jesus Christ made election of some for his Apostles and
disciples, who the better to exercise their estate, should actuallye forsake
or sell all they had and to offer it to the poor: and others he lymited no
further, Luke. 11
but that they should not set their heart upon richesse, but give alms, and
specially eschew covetousness, and cares of the world.

Many have given all that they had to the poor to follow Jesus Christ, in hope
to be happy: so did the first christians leave all their goods: God requires
not of every one such a fervent liberality, but to give by moderation, which
is at the least, their superfluitye. We must nourish the poor according to
their quality: if they be strong and able, they deserve no alms: we are
bound to give them mean to live: How we ought to give to some, and lend to
others. The.2. Chapter.
But now eftsons to the matter of the promises which God has made to the alms
gyuers, Acts. 2. and 4.
they have stirred many people in the ages past, to distribute all they had to
the nouriture of the poor, thinking themselves happy to become poor, by
making others rich, as Jesus Christ made himself poor to enriche mankind:
For which reason as we find eight thousand persons in the first preaching of
the Gospel by S. Peter, to have sold all their goods to put themselves in
co^munaltie with the poor of Jerusalem: so let the same reason serve to draw
the rich sort in a common weal, not to be negligent or cold to contribute to
the necessities of the poor, the rather in contemplation of so ample and rich
benefits of Gods promises and graces both in heaven and earth made to such as
are merciful, and also in consideration of so many examples of richemen, who
with a gladsome readiness made themselves naked of all that they possessed, to
cover and cloth others: But here we will not now persuade such poverty to
the richemen of our time: only let them either contribute to the collections
appointed by the governors for the relief of the true needy poor, according
to the example of S. Paul in his time, enioyning no less to all Churchesse
for the same purpose: or at least, 1. Cor. 16 2. Cor. 89
let every one be taxed portion like according to the rate of his hauiour, as
I have seen in many well directed Cities: Lastly let every Christian
understand, that according to the gospel, at least he ought to commit to
distribution, the overplus or more then that which is necessary for himself:
If the richman be as the procurer of God, and his receyuor, is he not bound to
dispose his goods according to his will? or being the steward or farmer of
the gooddes of God (according to the nomination of Jesus christ) is he not
bound in common equity to distribute the moyty of his labors and goods which
God has put into his hands, to those which represent him here on earth, as
Zachea did? Luke 11.16. and. 19
Let no man do with grudge nigardly, or by constraint, that which he is bound
to do with frank will, and plentiful liberality: not doubting, but with what
measure they have sown, by the same rate shall they reap: 2. Cor. 9
therefore if they will gather a plentiful harvest, let them make a liberal
seed time, not sparing to relieve and aid those, by the favor and credit of
whom they shall be received into the eternal tabernacles: Luke 6
And as the poor are heirs of the kingdom of god, so what is bestowed on
them, Math. 25
Jesus Christ turns it to benefits done to himself, and so renders
retribution of the alms given in his name to the true nedy, as if they had
been ministered to his proper person: if any man were persuaded that Jesus
Christ were at his gate demau^ding alms, when the poor in his name asks it,
would he not go speedely to receive and relieve him? would he not esteem
himself honored of Jesus Christ in sending to him such as represent himself?
and would he not acknowledge it in the person of the poor, as if he himself
were present, even no less ready relief ought he to reserve for the persons of
the poor, asking it in the voice and name of Jesus Christ: Therefore in this
confideration and faith, we are bound with ready and liberal will, to provide
for the sustenaunce of the true poor by all our most expedient means, the
better by them to work to a common weal so great favor and friendship of God,
and so many graces and felicities offered from heaven, for the love of the
poor: and not only to a common weal in general, but also to every
particular soul, contributing according to his faculty and rate of his power.

But if the poor have hability and power to labor, they must not be excused
from travel: neither do I mean that in ayding the poor in this manner of
liberal and ready will, to persuade to nourish them in idleness, if their
bodies bear aptness and capacitye to travel, and much less that men give
them what they ask for pleasures sake: VVisdome the guide of virtues.
For liberality, or charity, nor other virtue, never goes without wisdom,
nor without discretion: but as all the virtues are linked together, so they go
forth all guided and qualefied by wisdom, as the feet are directed by the
conduct of the eyes, Prouer. 4
of which it is spoken in the Proverbs: let thine eyes hehold things that be
right, as who say, Eccle. 2
go righteously, and let thine eyes go before they feet: do nothing but by
wisdom, and according to the office of eyes in a wise man's head: Math. 14
and. 15 John. 6
Let him reuolue all things in the judgment and counsel of wisdom.

Thus must they be relieved according to their necessities, and accustomed
necessary nouritures, and not wantonly or in pleasure: And albeit Jesus Christ
nourishedde the great trayn of the people following him to hear his sermons,
and see his miracles with barley loves and fishes where he had the river near
to give them drink, which stands as an example to us to nourish the poor in
christian plenty, according to their quality: yet we see God nourished Helias
with flesh and better bread, applying his noriture according to the nature of
the persons: as may be easily gathered of the text, wherein as may be noted an
example of better and more easy noriture, either in respect of his weakness,
Act. 2. and 4
or to favor his nature accustomed to better food: So in the society of the
first poor christians, it is written that every one had alms for his
noriture, according as was necessary for him: so that the sick man was
considered with more compassion, and the impotent and weak, according to their
quality were relieved by rate. But touching idleness, seeing we have proved
it elsewhere a vice not deserving support in any that have hability to
travel: the more dear therefore we hold the state of the poor, so much more
careful are we in their succors not to suffer in them this or any other vice,
whereof they and our selves together for them, Ezech. 22
may stand guilty before God, and our alms, loase their fruit, because our
alms they shall be entertained in their vices, and God abhor us for not
seeing him obeyed: So that if they be poor and workeable, let us give them
nothing, unless they express a desire and will to labor, but if they will
continue the occupation of nothing doing, and so consequently to be nothing
worth, let the law examine their lewdenesse, and the magistrate appoint pains
to their idleness: if they find nothing better than to travel, and know not
now nor where, let richmen by the example of the husbandman in the Gospel, go
seek them in the public place of the town, where all the poor ought to
assemble, and present themselves to travel: Mat 2
and so searching there, and else every where, such as he finds, let him
employ in labor, giving them somewhat more then the merit of their hyer, in
regard of their poverty: wherein besides that they shall enure them to labor
and avoid loss of time, yet in this act, they express doble alms, and
dutiful service to God, in comforting their necessities, and keeping them from
doing evil: And where there are so many in one common weal, that their
numbers exceed their means to sustain their life by labor, let every able
rich man be allotted by common counsel to a number for his service, whom as
day laborers, he may always employ in something to avoid idleness: And in
cases of occupation and trade, let the occupiers set them on work for the
help of their sustenaunce. But as in this business, the wise providence of
the governor is greatly necessary to the provision of the poor: So touching
such as have goods, and lack food for their necessity, the rest are bound
to lend them upon paune without usury or public excessive interest, which is
unworthy of Christians.

Compassion ought chiefelye to be showed to poor maids, for the infirmity of
the kind, and not to suffer them to beg: Exhortation to women to take them
into service for Gods sake, for the vvhch, they are assured to have great
rewards according to the scriptures: The manner how they ought to be provided
for: what was the ancient custom of the church for the relief of the
poor, vvherin poor vviddovves and Orphans were first provided for. The.3.
Chapter.
MVch greater compassion ought to be showed upon poor maids, but specially
upon Orphans and al others in whom is no other science, Art, or trade, then to
spin, which being not sufficient to raise their finding, yet not finding work
enough to be employed in, ye next co^pulsion (if they be not succored by
service in private houses) is to go on begging, which settes them in danger of
many grievous inconveniences: therefore as we are bound by christian and
common pity to succor (above all other sorts of poor) this frail and weak
womankinde: so the most convenient mean thereunto, is, if the virtuous and
welthy Burgess wives, undertaking to provide for them within their towns,
will in one common order take into their service, so many as they may frame
meet for their particular uses: yea, though the necessity of their service
require not: yet for Gods cause, let them receive them into common discipline
with their daughters, instructing them in some travel convenient to their
weak kind: And with this, if in time they advance them in marriage to some
men of science, besides the great and agreeable service they shall do to God,
he shall make flourish and prosper their house, recompense them to the hundred
fold, and reward them in the end with eternal life: If God requited the
charity of the wise women of Egypt, for preserving from death, the little
infantes of the Hebrews, whom the tyrant Pharao had commanded to kill: what
reward has he laid up for such good women by whom are preserved the bodies
and souls of those christian maids from filthy polution, and eternal
destruction in the desire and will of Satan? If for saving the corporal life
of those small children, God poured so many benifites upon the said Egiptian
woman, what hope of less recompense remains to our good matrons of Cities,
who have protected young maids from being dishonored (an act more worthy then
to keep them from being killed) by impudicitie, and defend their souls from
perpetual death? what greater sacrifice of service can be offered to GOD then
to keep the sacred temple of the holy ghost, which is the body of a maid
from profanation by impuritye, and to protect the holy members of Jesus
Christ, from being soyled in that unclean sink of villainy and whoredom,
wherein they should be slaves to the devil, obeying him in all filthiness
and sins: wherein if the honest and virtuous dames of their city, either by
negligence or covetousness, should give liberty of corruption and slander to
these poor maids, applying neither care nor succor to their wants, Eccle. 17
I doubt whether in ye judgment of God, they should stand clear of their
damnation: has not God given to every one a care and observation of his
neyghbor, who if he be lost by his fault, himself can not be saved, and
because therefore it is not proper to a man to have meddling with this sex, but
more convenient to grave matrons by a natural prox^mity, let the women then
undertake this act of piety, and religion, so commendable of the world, and
acceptable with God, with recompense of immortal glory: Here the burgess dames
must not allege the number and charge of their own daughters, and so forbear
their christian compassion to others, for that were the saying of Paganes, who
are ignorant in the benefit of our unity in Jesus Christ, by the which we
ought to hold all Christians, as well women, as men, in the estimation of our
brothers and systers, favoring, ayding, and succoring them in true frindship in
all their necessary wantes: And even as if we should leave any man in poverty
without succors, and his necessitye drive him into offense of the law, and so
to suffer sentence of death, we should stand before God as parties to his crime
and guilty to his death: even so is it with women and rich matrons, who much
less that they can excuse themselves in the terrible judgment of God, but if
for want of their aid, poor maids fall to whoredom or other damnable vice,
they can not but be capable of her fault, and so merit community of pain
with her: Sure such surety of recomp^nce, stands in the true consid^ration of
Gods goodness, that albeit either by their proper inhabili^y, or euercharge
with their own children, they have no great power at the beginning to aduau^ce
this poor maids, yet (seeing it is familiar with God not to forget any good
deed done in his name) he will so prosper this good act of his lyberall
charity, that themselves in time will confess that they feel an apparaunt and
manifest blessing of God in more felicity and increase of richesse, then they
hoped for: The scripture is full of the great benefits which hospitalytie or
alms brought to such as exercised it: it makes prosper the house where it is
used, as appeare^h in the books of ye Kings, 3. King. 7
in the example of the two Ladies grea alms giuers, and nourishers of the
poor: The one was a widow, who receiving Helyas, and by reason of the
extreme dearth of Israel, not having for the sustenaunce of her and her son
for one day, but only one little Torteise, imparted it notwithstanding with
Helyas her gest, for recompense whereof, she received (contrary to her hope)
such abundance of vittels for her hospitality, that she and her household were
fed with a happy fullness: The other good woman was married, but harraine
without children, and poor, she received Elizea, 4 King. 4
for the which (lodging this prophet ordinarily) she became rich, and
contrary to the hope of nature, had a child: I meddle not here with the
hospitalities of men, as of Abraham and Lot, who thinking to welcome men,
received Angels: neither how God has made happy all fathers of hospitality: as
having now to deal with the hospitality of women, the rather to draw all
honorable dames to liberal consyderatio^ of desolate maids, yea though they
be them selves poor: for of that poverty God will stir up plentiful riches,
of misery he will raise felicity, and out of harrennesse, he will draw fruit,
by this holy hospitality and alms: So that if our Christian dames in this
hard age, would to the honor of Jesus Christ, receive into their houses and
succors, poor maids destitute, there is great surety through the whole
discourse of the scripture, that all happy blissing and felicity of heaven,
will follow to the advancement of their families: In what worldly thing can
those virtuous dames be more honored, than to give impediment to poor
abandoned maids, not to wander up and down countries and towns, as seelly
errant sheep, ready for the Jaws of the woolfe: to keep them that they beg
not from door to door, and so be sold as flesh in the butchery, and fall in
pray and spoil to whooremongers, wherewith this miserable time swarms? yea,
what glory can be greater to them, then in protecting virginity from
prostitution, to preserve those sacred vessels of the holy ghost in holiness,
and christian honesty: and what greater praise can they deserve before God, then
to the virtuous education of perplexed souls, to join a disposition and mean
to marye them: to the which if they be unable of themselves, let them call the
aid of others more welthy, but specially of the Churchmen, whose superfluities
are dedicated to such uses, and they dutifully bound to be furthering
instruments to advance so holly and charitable acts, wherein I think they
will find none so hard hearted, as to deny contribution to further a work of
such Christian and common mercy. Touching old and poor widows, and other
women, in whose age is expressed some suretye of chastity, and in their
behauior, no fear of slanderous frailty: if they have no places proper to
themselves, nor mean to be received into particular houses, it were good to
bestow them amongst the impotent in an hospital. S. Paul commands the rich
parents, kindred, and alies, to nourish the poor widows of their race, to
the end (says he) the Church be not to much charged with the poor: wherein
may be gathered upon s. Paul's meaning, that the true poor without parents and
frindes, and power to gain the sustenaunce of their life, 1. Tim. 4
are appointed to the goods and revenues of the Churchmen, giving also to
understand that the Church (certain days, but specially the sundais)
contributed by collections monye for the succor of the poor, which the
Bishops and pastors gave in charge to see distributed by the deacons and other
inferior ministers: yea, such of the ecclesiastical ministers as had no
patrimony, or other benefit of living, took of this collection so much as was
necessary for them, leaving the rest to be shared amongst the other poor in
general: But here must be considered that pastors in those days, had no
other goods nor revenues then oblations, first fruits, and alms, not knowing
so much as the name of tenths, when Princes were not christened: poor
widows, and orphans, but specially needy strangers, passengers, and people
unable to gain, their convenient sustenaunce: as little children, and weak
old men, were fed of those goods in a public place, which since has been
called an hospital, or Gods house, for there, for the honor of him, were
norished poor people, which had no house to retire unto: And where there was
no Public house to receive the^, many virtuous people took them into their
proper houses, but specially and more amply, the Bishops and pastors: So that
the particular houses of good alms geuers, were as little hospitals, and the
houses of Bishops as great gods houses. S. Paul commands Bishops to maintain
hospitalitye, and above al other sorts of people to be succourors of poor
strangers: For, so we read that in particular houses, they received
Passangers, washed their feet, and entertained them with no less humanitye,
then if they had been their nearest Parents. Amongst whom, if to the woman
had not been joined the custom to wash their feet and use them in due sort
of hospitality, she could not be received into the ministry of the Church, as
to have estate to minister and serve under the Deacons at the table of the
poor, and to provide for their necessityes: which holy custom Apostolical of
the first Church, is yet continued in many places, where Maids and religious
Women, professing the state of chastity, are solemlye vowed to this office:
Wherein as may be seen what opinion of honor it was to serve the poor
publicly: So, let it then in these days be no shame to ask and gather in
Churches for this Christian pietye, nor to visit hospitalles with diligent
care to aid them: for it is one of the greatest honors that may be gotten a
fore god, and an express estate and effect of true and Christian religion.

Hospitallitye and Alms in all times have been in sin ular estimation: How
hospitalles have been named: By what reasons the Scripture inuiteth us to
hospitality, in calling us al strangers: Exhortacion to be housekeepers:
Examples of hospitalitye, and the recompense thereof. Objections against the
aid of strangers in necessity, and their confutacion. The 4 Chapter.
IN all acts of piety, Exodus 22.23. Leuit. 17.2.25.
we find that hospitalitye and Alms are most recommended in the old and new
Testament: Beue (says God) to the stranger which is within thy gates, meat to
eat if he be poor: and sell to him, if he have to pay thee, Deuteronomy. 10.14 23.
Zach. ^. Esaias. 58.
for thou art a people holy of the Lord God: In another place, he biddes us
nourishe the poor Leuit ministers of the Temple, and cause to enter into our
houses, passangers, Strangers, Pilgrims, Orphans, Widows, and poor people
demanding alms at our gate, and to break bread unto the^, meaning in
releeuing their hungar plentifully, and repayring their bodies, if they be
naked: In recompense whereof, God promises large blessings to their houses,
and al their posterity. And to induce the Israelits to this hospitality, which
properlye is no other thing then liberalitye to strangers, for whose succor
perticularlye Hospitalles were erected, called by the Greeks Xenodocheia,
which is, places where Pilgrims were bestowed: as where the sick were
lodged, was called Nosodocheia, and where the common poor were bestowed,
Prochodocheia, and in our time al such places of succor named at this day
Xenodocheia, bear the name of hospitals for strangers, Exodus 22.
or passangers: he puttes them in remembrance, that even them selves were
strangers in Egypt, forbidding them to do them any dollor or wrong: S. Paul
also in a more zeal, says, that their Patriarchs dwelt not but in
Tabernacles, (Lodginges portatiue through countries) having no permanent
dwelling upon the earth, for that they confessed they searched a better abiding
in heaven, ^. Pet. 2.
by which mean (as also S. Peter with him) he gives us aduertiseme^t yt we
are all strangers, and being not of this world, we have our country and house
in heaven, where is laid up our inheritance with our everlasting father. And
therefore let us take heed, as strangers, and be armed against al desires of
the flesh, and worldly pleasures which hinder us in the well performing of our
pilgrimage in this wicked world. But in deed yt we be truly strangers, who
searches the original of families, yea, of al cities and countries, shall find,
that since certain times, we are come out of strange countreies: It can not be
denied but yt we are descended of Sem, Cham, or Iaphet, the children of Noe:
who for their first habitacion, choase the Regions of the Orient: and therefore
being descended of them, we can not deny (how ancient soever we make our City
or country) but that it was builded many thousand years after, and so, in the
consideration of our ancestors, we can not be but strangers: And as god then
has singularly recommended strangers, 1 Pet. 4. Hebr. 13.
so S. Peter and S. Paul stood in like care over them, when they enjoin us to
succor them without murmor, meaning that we should not excuse or complain of
the burden of Hospitality, or that we had not sufficient to norish the poor
of our particular tounes and dwellinges, for by our charity that way says the
scripture, we shall receive great reward: yea, Math 25.
even the same which Iesuch Christ has promised in S. Matthew: I was (says
he) a stranger, or passanger, and you lodged me in my poverty, for which
hospitalitye, he promises recompense of eternal life: Abraham, Loath, and
Tobias, under the habit of poor strangers or passangers, received Angels
into the succor of their houses, to whom for recompense, were provided many
blessings, as to the first, promise to have children in his old age: Loath was
preserved from the fire wherewith Sodom and Gomorre were consumed: and to
Tobias was given the Angel Raphael, for ye happy success of al his good
desires: by whom was guided and happily reguided, his son with abundance of
goods, and restitucion of the sight which he had lost: David confesses that
God holds in singular grace, the stranger, pupil, Psalm. 146.
and poor widow: and in Deutronomy it is witnessed ye God keeps a dear
care and protection over ye poor stranger: such as have been vnpitiful to
strangers, have suffered severe punishment, as was expressed by god to those
people which denied passage to the poor Israelits coming from Egypt into
Canaan, and would not aforde meat to sustain their lives: But if the
Egiptians entreated Abraham so gently in time of famine, what ought we
Christians to do to our poor brethren? And as such as gave loving aid to the
Israelits, when they wandered into Arabia, were highly favored of God: so, when
the Egiptians entered into hard dealing with that people, did they not begin to
search their own ruin? Where so long as they gave favor to that desolate
flock of Israel, they flourished in all worldly felicity, and were even Lords
over al their humane desires. Al which examples ought to remain to our
governors of this time, as warnings to cherish more such poor passangers and
strangers to whom the place afordes no special favor, credit, nor knowledge,
then other the needy sort, natural to their Tonnes, and known abroad in ye
country: least, being abandoned of succors (which is more often seen then
pitied) they dye under hedges, and their bodies remain in pray to Raue^s,
Dogs, Wolves, and other vermin of the field: For which vnpitiful dealing,
great plagues of famine, pestilence, or other miseries have happened to those
places, from whence they were rejected: For the death of such as are secreetly
killed (as perishing for not being succored in their nakedness and poverty)
procures vengeance in the scripture against the inhabitau^ts of ye place by
whose inhumanity those poor souls are suffered to dye: What may be then
answered against our polletike worldlinges of these days, who, with their
goodly frail reasons impugn the very express commandments of God,
neglecting so many Rich and ample promises (whereof they are not worthy) which
God has made to such as harbor such kind of poor: They allege that when
vittails grow dear, it suffices their proporcion to norish the poor of their
particular Towns, and that if they gave entrye to strangers in so strait a
time, they should famishe them selves, and fyl their tounes with mouths
without meat, and so they hold them unable to sustain so great a charge.

By which reasons may be gathred, that in time of darth, it behooves to suffer
to starve and die, the true poor passa^gers, who, without suttelty or affected
poverty, pass only by countries having no commodity of sustenaunce but by
alms, and travailing to overcome their necessityes, fall either into the
spoil of Thieves, (as happens to Merchants,) or driven into the wages of the
Wars: which of al other refuges is a most pitiful and dangerous succor: In
this case as the dealing of one Cite, is an example to other countries, who
with common consent dispatch those miserable souls to their destruction,
either by Robbery, flaughter, or rage of Hungar.

So, how can those governors either avoid the crime of Murder, or merit the
reward of Christian charity, which at such seasons, and to such people ought
chieflye to be showed? when is pitye either more necessary, then in time of
darth, or more meritorious then in cases of extreme necessity? we read that
we must communicate, that is to say, Romans 2.
distribute our common goods to the necessityes of the holy ones, which are
christians sanctified: have we not commandments to norish our enemies, to
give them meat if they be oppressed with hungar, and to reach them drink,
when they suffer thirst? and yet we restrain lodging and refection from him
which beseeches us in gods name, which honoreth us with his knee touching the
earth, and which geues us reverence as to his lord: yea, he prays to God for
us with joined hands, and offers his tears for our prosperity, and yet, in
refusing to aid him, we chase him also from us as if he were an Infidel: we
read that to give to the poor, impouerisheth not the geuer, for god
multiplieth the corn in the garnors of the Alms geuer, blessing him with all
sorts of Goods: we read in the Book of Kings, that a poor widow lodged
Helias the Prophet in a season of extreme famine, and having but one little
loaf for the whole sustenance of her self and family, and imparting it with
him as in Alms and charity: Bread was not wanting in her house until the time
of fertillitye: An other Woman lodging Heliseus, became Ritche, and had a
Child for recompense of her liberal hospitalitye: yea, let us remember when
Christ in the desert fed the poor and hungrye troop of so many thousand
mouths, Mat. 14.15 John. 6.
as he was in the exercise and distribution of that Alms, the Loaves and
Fishes multiplied in wonderful abundaunce.

We must not fear, that by giving Alms, we shall be poor, for God who is
just and true, has promised not to suffer the alms geuer to have necessitye:
Strangers, above al other sorts of poor, are to be favored in necessity: Let
the countries as well as Cities norish their particular poor: Such as
distrust the providence of God, not norishing the poor, are convinced by the
Turks: reasons by the which we ought not to have distrust: In times of
plague, ought such provision to be made, as the poor dye not of want and
pouertye. The.5. Chapter.
THen, seeing we have so many commandments to feed and harbor the poor in
their necessityes, with ample promises co^fyrmed with examples of plentiful
graces of God: why should we doubt? if we doubt of his word, we cannot be
but Infidels: shall we dare to resist God, impugning so fiercelye his
commandments? are we not his subjects, and is not he the Lord which can do
al things, and which is just and true? In this doubt and infidelity we
merit the threatening in Solomon, Prou. 10.
That that which we fear shall assuredly happen unto us: Or in place of that,
some other more grievous plague: we shall cry to him for aid, and shall find
none, neither in life, Prou. 17.
nor in death: He says, who keeps no reckoning of the poor, or denies him
his just demand, does wrong to him that has made him, and who hears not
the prayer of the poor, shall cry, and shall not be hard: as of the contrary,
who inclines in compassion to the poor, is sure to be heard in all his
requests, for we have declared that God multiplieth the corn in the Garner,
and increases the wine in ye seller of the Alms geuer: who says, he will
give aid to the poor of his own town, and stretche not him self to help
others: Rates him self and prescribes to his will what he thinks good, and
leaves to God, to do with the rest what he will, which can not but be
heaped against him, as an ouerweening rashenesse, specially to divide and
part that which he has set in state indiuidible, willing at the least that
we use as great care to poor strangers, as to others that are familiar to
the country: The reason why God in the Scriptures, has more recommended poor
strangers, then others, is, that as he that has most need of aid, ought
most to be succored, and is worthy of most great compassion: So the stranger
having neither Parent, Allye, Neighbor, or other mean of friendship by the
commodity of the country, stands in most need of Christian charity? For
the which only (being for the love of God only) he is succored, and not for
other end. Therefore, seeing the only respect of the love of God, is more great
in this case then in other, greater necessity also requiring, the alms
employed there must necessarily be more great, and the charity more commendale.

Hear, if it be replied that we are most bound to our own country: I
answer with S. Paul, Gala. 3. Collos. 3.
that there is neither Jew, Greek, Scithian, nor Barbarian in Jesus Christ:
no, neither woman nor man: as who say, we must not make distinction with
Jesus Christ touching charity, no more, then in the case of Salvation (we
mean not hear of Parents and kindred, who in the acts and duty of charity,
ought by right of nature, and divine Law, to be first considered:)

Besides, although (as we have said) there were some fleshly affection, yet
the causes are greater to exercise charity to poor passengers, as being more
vexed with wantes, and have more necessity of help: yea, hospitals or towns
(as we have said) were made therefore with the time expressly, and principally
for them: For those within cities were sustained in the particular houses of
wealthy and honest men: Why should not then the place consecrated to their use
even from the first institution, be reserved for them? What iniquity is it to
take from them, that which they have possessed above prescription of time? But
hear I mean not that to relieve strangers, we should be careless over our
familier poor, and leave them destitute: But where is feruency of charity,
there the town may suffice to all, so that none perish with hungar: And in
our charge to nourishe strangers, I comprehend them not but as passangers or
wayfairing, and to be refreshed for a day or two in the Hospital, and not
to entertain them in idleness, or give suffera^ce to their vain pleasures:
touching the weak and sicklye, there is other consideration: For in that, nor
in any other act wherein we employ our selves to do well, charity is not ruled,
but is governed by the necessitye: And where it may be feared, that a whole
world of poor people of the country may flock to the towns.

That doubt is answered, if there be advertisement given that they receive
none but poor passangers: and that those of the country be ruled by a
general ordinance, that in every parish the most Rich of common liberality,
relieve such as are truly poor, so that none be suffered to come out of the
country, but certain, who either for shame, or other necessary occation will
go seek some mean to live by: Such men in any wise must be applied to
travail to avoid damnable idleness: of whom, if any fall to disorder, let him
be sent from whence he came with severe threats of corporal pains, having
perhaps left Father, Mother, wife and children, who, by his absence, may suffer
sharp necessitye: Touching other fears, which these timorous Alms giuers
may allege, they ought no more to be heard then Infidels, but are
surmounted even by the Turks of this age, with whom are continued goodly
Hospitals to nourishe the poor, but specially passanger strangers, and that
in time of dearth, more the^ in any other season.

Let also those fearful Christians, note that as true faith and charity have
never any fear, but obedience to God with suretye of his word: So the wise man
says, that who fears the Birds, and observes the winds in doubt of
storms, let him never cast seed into the earth, nor make his harvest: even so
let not man think that by his providence the City is kept from the evils
which he fears to happen by mean of the poor, as from great famine, and
dangerous sicknesses: who sendes the misery, and who preserves the City from
it: is it not God? whose grace if we have, shall we not be assured with David,
that malice can not hurt us, enemies can not anoye us, nor plague, no nor death
it self have power over us? By what means can we better obtain the graces
of God, Psalm. 23.26
or if he be angry, what easter way have we to reconcile him, the^ by alms
and hospitality? if we lodge the son of God in our house, and entreat him
with frank will in zealous charity (which we do, in harboring his poor
creatures in his name) Let us think that we stand in such estate of grace both
with the Father and the Son, as our requests are always acceptable with
them: Hebr 13.
Shall we have fear of evil, we that receive him that preserves and
delivers us from it? he that has power to cease the rage of Tempests and
storms, and restores life to the dead? even so of the contrary, if we reject
him, and threaten him to avoid from our gates, what wretchedness do we work
to our selves: even no less then damnation? If Jesus Christ assure us that
making the poor our frindes, by ye plenty of our wicked richesse, we shall have
them as advocates to receive us into their eternal tabernacles: let us not
doubt but as they live exercised in prayer for us, so they are heard in their
requests, and their devotion acceptable with God: If then by the mean of ye
poor yt pray for us, we have ye redier place with and who has them his
enemies can have no access to heaven: then where is our refuge, seeing they
are only ye heirs of the kingdom of god: In making them our enemies, we
provoke God grieuouslye against us, and to chase them out of our towns, or
threaten them if they approach near our gates, is to bring us and our City in
peril of his justice, who is their sovereign father and protector. There can
not be a more just cause to bring in the plagues, and miseries that we fear,
then to deal straightly with the poor passengers strangers: here I allow
not, that without discresion there be suffraunce of free entry to whom that
will, but at the least, let such be sustained, whose necessity most requires
it, giving consolation to their poverty, and not cause of further grief in
their present sorrow, Eccle. 41
which of it self is intolerable enough: It is written that we are bound to
compassion over she distress of an other, and not to defrawde the poor of his
alms: And if no man be defrauded, but when that is taken from him which
appertains to him: then to give him that is his own, is but common justice
and christian piety: Strain not thine eyes over the poor in his poverty, and
delay not that which thou will give him to increase his perplexity: if he curse
thee (that is if he complain justly of thee) he shall be heard of God, who
turns directly to thy destruction. Let us be therefore affable and mylde to
the assembly of the poor, for these speeches of the wise man are ministered for
our instruction.

Still touching the reco^mendation of hospitality and alms.
But the better to provide for all sorts of poor, it were good to follow the
order of the Apostls, who elected deacons, Act. 6
such as among the people by common judgment had the estimation of honest men
and fearing god, and they to distribute according to the particular necessity
of every poor of the church, ^. Tim. 4
to which office were called oftentimes the most honorable and virtuous dames:
choosing also inhabitants of the town of sound conscience, and fervent
followers of charity to administer the alms by faithful servants.

This Apostolik custom appears even at this day (in many sorts agreeing
with that antiquity) in certain ancient towns, where be many hospitals
called commaunderyes, as having in every one of them a Deacon, commanding as a
special governor under the Bishop or Chapter, to whom he was to make account
at certain times of the receypt, and distribution to the profit of the poor:
For to al those houses belonged great revenues, because the churchmen liberally
contributing, departed the revenues with the Bishop, and the third part or
(according to the counsel of Rome in Siluesters time) the fourth part at the
least was employed that way: the Bishop took the first, the Canons the
second, the third was given to the reperation of Churches, and the fourth (as
is said) was the share of the poor. There were besides these many general
collections, and many particular alms in large charity: many legasies by the
testamentes of richmen were transferred thither, and after the churches were
rich, all fines and common confiscations were applied thereunto: by which
means, hospitals became the richest houses of a country. But such
wretchedness is happened with the corruption of time, that those Deacons, or
substitutes, which we said are called at this day commanders, and the
syndicks have followed the declination of the time, and converted to them selves
what they thought good, not bearyng care to their estate and office, whereupon
is happened a general discontinuaunce of Alms giving: yea Bishops and
Churchmen also, have either resumed, or at least restrained their fourth part,
and the revenues and benefits growing by Legacies of good men, are lost for
want of living: For those commanders durst not draw them into question, either
fearing to be reproched for their own dissolucions, or glad to use scilence,
and live in peace with their usurped share of the living of the poor: And so
they have suffered all to be lost which was proper to the poor, both what was
in certain revenue, and what might have grown to their relief by casual
devocion, reteyning to them selves what they list attribute to the merit of
their pains, which, besides their travail to collect, should have stretched,
to visit, comfort, and care for the poor: If they had with half of that they
took, but preserved the houses which now are fallen to ruin, they had yet
performed a great part of their duetye for these latter times.

For touching the first seasons, as there has been allowed no excuse, so in
these latter days shall none be admitted, if they do not commit their charges
into the hands of such as have power to reduce them to order, which are
governors of the pollecy, who according to God and the zeal to their country,
are to take heart and enforce restitution of that that has been taken away and
divided into cantels, whereby the poor house of God is robbed by sacrilege:
procuring also restoration of the first collections and alms for the
continuance of a thing so pitiful, and agreeable to God: For the which the
ancient Macedonians were so liberal, that they gave not only one part of
their goods, but also offered themselves as S. Paul writes: Let them search
out the ancient debtes due to hospitals and let such as are indebted therein be
compelled in that which they are bound to pay for the goods they hold of
their ancestors: yea let themselves in recompense of the wrong they have done
in times past to the poor, and for the honor of God, say with Zacheas to
Jesus Christ, that for penance, he will satisfy such to whom he was bound:
I will give (says he) the half of all my goods to the poor, and if I have
deceived any manne, I will restore it fourefold, Luke ^
which if they do not, let them not think that they stand in other state
before GOD, then as men accused of theft, robbery and murder, yea the counsel
of Carthage calls them murderers of the poor.

And thus Governors having provided that the revenue be sufficient for the
poor passengers, and unable people, let the hable passengers, after two or
three days repose and harbor, have their leave to depart, and the impotent
vexed with sickness, be furnished of Physicians and pothicaries for the cure
of their diseases, which being recovered to avoid idleness, let them be
recontinued to travel and labor for their living: But in case of defect by
imbecillytie of nature, or iniquity of time, let governors measure the relief
of such according to the hability of their persons, and by their own
charitable discretion: and if there be any who either by impotency of limbs,
or imbecilyty of age, can not get their sufficient sustenaunce, let their good
wills be favored and their defectes supplied of the common store, applying ye
old women to ye labor of ye spindle according to the mean they have to work
upon. Al impotents of nature, as such as are vexed with ye paulsey, and others
who being restrained in members are unable to labor, blindmen, and all
suffering defects of body, ought to be norished wholly of ye alms: and yet ye
blind are not so fully excusable, but they may be applied to something, for yt
in many of them god has raised supplies of virtues and wisdom, as to Dydimus.
And seeing such as are lame, may aptly enough suffice to lead the blind, it
cannot be but contrary to good order, to apply stout and able beggars to that
office in whom is capacity to travel in their trade: Such as are lame only of
their feet and legs, have yet an use of their hands, either with the needle
or such like instrument: and such as are only dombe, are not vnfite for all
that to labor. Touching poor children whose insufficiencye of age makes them
unable to gain their necessary sustenaunce, it cannot but be a work of
great compassion to apply them to learning in a college under the instruction
of some good scoolemaster: by whose industry, and help of gods spirit they
may rise in time to be members serviceable to their commonweals: such as have
no disposition to study, may be applied to other sciences according to the
rate and measure of their capacities: Touching poor maids, we have before
recommended them to the honorable and virtuous dames of every City, whom we
beseech eftsoon, for Gods cause, to take to themselves a charge and office of
so singular pyety.

General, and special recommendation for prisoners, and that for debtes, we
ought not lightly to imprison one another. The.7. Chapter.
TOuching poor prisoners, we recommende them to the public and particular
alms: Amongst whom such as are skillful in any occupation, are unprofitable
in prison, where they do nothing but sorrow their estate and time in
idleness, and therefore if there be no just reasons to dispatche their causes,
it were good they were applied to the exercise of their art, and so sustain
themselves by their own mean, Esaias. 5 8
rather then to consume themselves and goods of others in heavy idleness. But
touching the rich sort that hold the poor imprisoned for debt, let them
remember what Esaias pronounces against them: great need have they (says he)
to fast and pray, that so aflyct their poor debtors, holding (as it were)
their feet upon their necks: they having not charity, shall not do a work
pleasing to God to deserve grace, and shall not be heard in their peticions
which they shall make in their adversity: unloose (says he) the bands of
impiety, shake of the burdens which charge thee with avarice. Let go such as
are broken with perplexities, and restore them to their liberty: dissolve and
shake of all burdens: break thy bread to the hungrye, and make enter into thy
house people needy, and such as have no place of retraite, when thou see a
naked man, cover him, and despise not thy flesh: And when thou have done all
this, thy light shall shine out as the morning, visibly even until it be
speedely brought into perfect light: but sooner shall thy health come to pass:
as if he had said, if thou be sick, God will restore thy health sooner then
thou dare hope for it: And thy justice (that is) thy liberality, shall go
before thy face (meaning) shall be presented before God. Then shall thou call
upon God, and he will receive thy petitions. Thou shall cry to him, and he
will answer thee, I am hear to aid thee: Therefore let not the rich
disquiet or oppress their needye debtours, but let them use Charity, and
attend till they have better commodity to satisfye their debt: yea, if the
debtor, being extreme poor, have not whereupon to live, the Ritche creditour
ought to forgive his debt franckelye, as he is bound to aid other poor in
necessitye without expectacion of profit from them: so shall they in better
truth observe the Lords prayer, where they desire God to forgive them their
debtes (wherein they stand bound to him) as they remit the trespasses of
others which are their subjects, whether they be wrongs or common debts.

But where the poor debtor has barely whereupon, and yet no other mean to
satisfy, unless he sell his lands, houses, or other small goods at little
price, there it is good reason the creditor join himself to respite, and
attend a better commodity of the debtor, who laboreth to search payment for
him: yea, let the poor debtor rather recompense the loss which the creditor
may sustain for lack of payment, by the upright judgment and consience of
honest men, the same being the interest which is called just and tolerable
amongst all interestes civil: But if it exceed this, it is damnable usury,
forbidden amongst ye Jews, who ought to live as brethren: much more then
amongst the christians in whom God has expressed a spirit of more charity and
compassion: usury was tolerated of the Jews to the Pagans, as well for the
hate of ydolatry, as because the countries of the next Pagans appertayned to
them: and therefore they made it lawful to pray their goods in any sort,
either by sleyght or force, as by reserving that which was their proper own:
and in case the debtors of their race and nation had not whereupon to pay
commodiously, if their Oxen and instruments necessary to gain their life,
were seized, they were bound to restore them to serve their necessities, yea,
bed and garments when they were required for necessary use. In the hardest
extremity, the debtor, to content his creditor, was but constrained to serve so
long time as the debt might amount unto, yea, until the seven years, which
was the Saboth of years: But we find not that by the law, any poor debtor
was put in prison. I comprehend not in this tolleration, wicked and crafty
debtors, very thieves and abusors, who having sufficiently, will not yet pay
their debtes, but either by cession of goods, ordinarily called Cedo bonis, or
by some other shift, have craft to cauell with their creditors: such people as
they deserve not only straight prison, but the scourge of the gibbet, as
subtle and malicious deteinors of other men's goods: so concerning other
debtors, simply and truly poor, let the welthy creditor consider the
condemnation of the cruel rich man in S. Matthew, who keeping his foot upon
the neck of his poor neighbor in a case of debt, which he had good will,
though not hability to pay, was for that, condemned to be perpetually
tormented in the judgment of God: What sin can be greater then to afflict the
poor, whom we ought to comfort, to make him naked, whom we are bound to
cloth, to commit him to prison, whom we ought to deliver: yea, and perhaps in
being ye cause of his death, to drive his sons into hospitals, and his wife and
daughters into dangerous perdicion through necessity? Exodus 22
it is written that the poor shall cry to God against such as afflyct them,
and shall be heard. And as we ought not to spare neither goods nor credit to
deliver them whom the iniquity of men would unjustly cause to dye: so such
as redeem captives and prisoners, Prove. 24 Math. 25
are pronounced happy by Jesus Christ. But here no man ought to reply that it
were better not to lend at all, for that makes a wicked conclusion, for that
we are bound to give to the exstreame poor, and to lend to him that has
goods albeit not in such plenty, but that he has necessitye of some
sustenaunce, clothing, or instruments to gain his living, without which loan,
he should fall into need, and be compelled to sell his small portion: Touching
the civil loan passing mutuallye between rich men, seeing there is neither
charity nor necessity, it bears no recommendation with piety, but is only a
civil honesty according to ye custom of an invited feast, wherein is no
expectation of recompense: But if it be done to the poor for the honor of god,
it draws to it eternal reward: if they look to be gloried for doing any
great virtue, it may be said unto them as Jesus Christ said in like acts: The
gentiles and sinners do they not that? then there is no glory a fore GOD and
yet it carries the habit of civil honestye and socyetye of friendship not
to be neglected, as is also to give presents and do pleasure to our friends
and Lords: Jesus Christ says it is no act of virtue meritorious before God,
for that no acts, but such as are done in his name, deserve recompense of him.
The poor criminal offenders known to be in prison by slander and false
witness, and in peril of execution if they be not reskued, as they ought by
the scryptures to be delivered by all means, least innocent blood be spilt
which may bring common wretchedness upon all such as might have delivered
them: so such as have deserved death iudicially determined by full evidence,
as soon as they have committed the crime, owe a death to God in good justice,
and to their common weal for examplary instruction. There is but one just
cause of delay, which is to appeach their confederates, and to affront them:
otherwise all delays of justice (says Plato) are signs of corruption in the
Judges, who by delaying of judgment, give opportunity to the party to reclayme
grace in time, or to compound with the adversary, or to bring the fact in
forgetfulness, or at least to qualify the rigor of the party offended, or
last of all (aspiring still to be delivered) to get committed to the
Captain of the Galleyes, the malefactor in whom is full merit of penal
death: In which favor, besides the injustice and damnable corruption, is bred
the occasion of many mischiefs, as the revenge of them that persecuted his
life, with an unbridled license to do any evil. Let Judges understand that
the law of God suffers not a determined murder to receive accord or
composition for money, Genesis 9 Exodus 21 D.w. 19
but commanding them to give sentence of death for the effusion of innocent
blood, he enioyneth them to take and kill him even before the altar of the
temple: as Solomon did by Ioas. I meddle not here with offenders deserving
grace, the remission of whose offense, belongs only to the Prince, nor with
such whom the ancient church received into penance, in which as they suffered
a thousand passions, far more paineful then the extreemest pange of one death
only: so the Church was more edified by that puplique penance, then in the
example of many actual deaths.

The v. Book.
Of the institution of youth, which is a thing profitable and necessary in a
common weal: the praise of free schools: what provision ought to be made to
build and endue them. The 1. Chapter.
WE said a little before that the institution of poor children ought to be done
in a schole: therefore it is now requisite we speak amply both of schools and
the institution thereto appertayninge: not only for the poor, but for all
sorts of children: a matter not only worthy of the first and chief care,
but also most profitable and necessary in all sorts of commonweals. A
College or schole is the foundation and flourishing branches of a common
weal, the common stoare house of all knowledge, the fashioner of all young
wits, a pure fountain purging all corrupt natures, and as a form or moule
of all as well human as divine perfections: it is a welspring of science, and
fountain of all virtue: it is the house of discipline, the mansion of the
Muses, their Hellicon and Pernassus, and the fortress of Pallas: it is the
place wherein is performed the first exercise of doctrine, christian life, and
institution of piety: yea it is the ornament and glory of Cities, a bulwark
to Borowes, and to vplandish towns of the fielden and the very beginning,
continuance, and pillar of Religion. Thus Colleages, being the causes and
perfect effects of so many benefits, deserve also (without comparison) more
singular recommendacion then all the hospitalles of the world: For in Colleges
or Schools are nourished and polished the minds of men, being the divine,
heavenly and immortal purtraits of the divinity of God, and in hospitalles
only the corruptible and mortal bodies of decayed men are fed and cherished. In
Colleges also poor children may be sustained, if the houses have liberal
dowries, the same ministering great cause to the governors to provide
Colleges, seeing also it is a common interest to all men to see to the good
instruction and education of youth, what course of science so ever they take,
as having no ability of them selves to know what is good, honest, profitable
nor what is conducible to the safety of their souls, and much less to
discern God and search out his will: yea they shall be ignorant in their rule
and government of human reason (so wicked and obscure a nature carry they by
sins) so ignorant is their spirit, so peruersed their will and affections,
whereby those children following time, without discipline and institution,
should fall into infinite errors and dissolute manners: and as vice increases
as the wicked weed grows without culture or labor, and every mind by his
proper nature carried to do evil, where virtues can not be attained without
discipline and instruction: so, these young forward plants if they should not
be licorred with wholesome moisture and moderated by the industry of skillful
workmen, they would bring forth fruits of corruption and troubles to their
commonweals, and in the end ouergrow them to their general destruction.

Let it be therefore a principal care in chief Rulers, to erect Colleges,
building them in places ayrie, clean, and fair, observing the commodity of
the Sun and wind reflecting temperatly (a thing very delightful to the wit,
and profitable to the health of the body) foreseeing that they carry such
state in show and buildinge, that as well the beauty of the workmanship as the
serenitie of the place, may draw children of noble houses to pass their youth
there, and inuit other good wits to establishe and follow the study of
learning: The romthes standing in such amplitude, and the chambers so many,
that they may conveniently conteyne the numbers of scholars within the house
(being very hurtful by many reasons to make separation of students one from
another) and under the chambers to be made forms, to the end the Regentes
and masters remaining in the said chambers, and having under them the said
fourmes may better keep their scholars in duty, then if their fourmes were
elsewhere bestowed: if the place be commodious, it is necessary to make
libraries in the said chambers, which would be very requisite for good
Students (for to young children and such as bear no vehement will to study
they would be but occasion to hinder or disorder their exercise) it were good
they were bestowed in a mild, sweet and soft aier (if the place bear
commodity) for the recreation and pleasure of wits: the windows of these
ought to have aspect toward the East and West, for the South resolves the
wit and dulleth it and filles the brain with hurtful vapor: and the wind of
the North (as in winter when it is cold) hinders the memory, and is hurtful
to the liver and lights, because it stirs up defluxion.

Secondly, a College or schole ought to be endued with revenue sufficient to
entertain a principal and Regentes of singular virtue and knoweledge with
wages according to their order and quality, and that with such just payment,
that they have no occasion to complain of their common weal, nor of such by
who^ they are called to the exercise of that profession. Touching the revenues
of Colleges (without the which the stately buildings should seem as cages
wherein the birds died of hunger for want of provision: goodly to behold, but
not to dwell there) the Church in other times has provided for her part a
principal Regent: for which purpose she leauied four or five hundredth
Frankes of estate in the Cathedral Churches for the finding of a man of
excellent learning, and virtuous life, who at this day retaynes the name called
Scholemaister, and the Bishops and commonweals supplied the rest as they saw
necessity require: wherein for the default of some of our predecessors
discontinuinge this good and holy institution, I wish our Ecclesiastical
prelates of this time (to restore and recontinue so ancient and necessary
constitution) would, where need is, either erect new Colleges and increase
their reuenew, or at least repair such as are toward ruin, and of their
gross revenues (superfluous for the countenance of a churchman) compart some
portion to the favor of learning, honor of God, service of their country,
and their own perpetual memory: and as those holy and grave prelates of the
former times saw there were no better means to prevent heresies, and correct
vices, then by laying a ground of good instruction in the first years of
youth: so, if their successors had succeeded them as well in example and
imitation, as in their huge and wealthy liuinges, they had stopped the course
to many sects and opinions, which only are the cause at this day that
Christendom stands divided in religion, and the kings thereof drawn into
acts of mutual conspiracy. In some places, commonweals and cities only,
have had the honor to build and endue Colleges with a revenue of a thousand or
xii. C. Frankes at the least, for the which they have been and are amongst all
other cities most celebrated. Others not having like ability in wealth, but no
less forward in affection to learning, seeking not to be slow or negligent in
that, which they saw raised their common weal to benefit, and them selves
into immortal honor, procured brotherheads to be annexed, levied general and
particular gatheringes to erecte and endue their Colleges, and solicited
Bishops to transfer the aid of certain benefices, making by that industry
their colleges both fair and rich: wherein, in some places as the prince (to
help the want of some towns unable but well disposed to plant such foundation
of a common weal) has wisely appointed the Cathedral and Collegiall churches
to bestow Cannon prebendes to the relief of Colleges, specially in their
capital Towns, where ought to be the residence of learned men to teach the
whole Diocese. So in many towns specially in France, where they have so
ready mean, and either will not or dare not apply it to use, what great
offense do they to their Country, and pitiefull wrong to their universal
youth? for where their cities are poor, and have chapters and rich churches
to supply their provision with the revenue of prebendes whilst they are
void: yet, they leave the care and providence of their prince without
execution, and are negligent in the instruction of their poor and frail
youth, for the which they stand not only condemned before God, but also
subject to reproach in all posterity, yea even of the youth them selves, to
their perpetual dishonor: (young wits being by their negligence abandoned to
vices, ignorance, and all sorts of dissolution) where, if they had been trained
in a college, they might have risen to great personages, as well for ornament,
as to govern churches and commonweals, even as out of the horse of Troy,
issued great Lords in the midst of the City, to the glorious victory of
the Greeks.

What Principal and Regents ought to be called to institute a College: it is
requisite they be learned and of good life: instructions who they ought to be
by many comparisons. Chapter. ij.
Having thus provided for the building, and revenues of a College, ye next
care is to furnishe it with a Principal and Regents of exquisit doctrine and
manners irreprehensible to whom young men may and ought to conform themselves
in all things, whither it be in speech, iesture, life, or any conversation, not
suffering to be found in them any vice, no more then ought to be any stayne in
a clear looking glass (for they be mirroures of youth) wherein we behold our
selves to the end to wipe away such spots as be upon our face: if it be so
(as we said before) that such as is the governor of a City, such are the
Citizens, although judgment and reason joined with the exercise of humane
affairs gives them an understanding to discern what is good and hurtful for
them: what expectation or hope of fashion is there in young children, who as
apes counterfeting naturally all that they see done, express as near as they
can, the manners and resemblance of their Master. The same was the cause that
that great and excellent Poet Homer, in his philosophical poesy, feigned, that
Achillos, so eloquent and excellent in deeds of arms, had with him always
his Master Phoenix the leader of all good Masters, who instructed him in the
parts of well speaking, and was to him always as an example of noble acts:
from Pithagoras, Archyras, Socrates, and Plato are derived great Philosophers,
and very virtuous Disciples, as good followers of their wise and virtuous
Masters, even as from pure fountains, flow rivers like to them in clear
fairness: But of the contrary, when scholars shall see in their Masters both
ignorance, error, and all sorts of vice, having neither counsel to consider
the faults of their teachers, nor subject to correction of any other, may it
not be said by them, as in a Greek proverb was laid against a sophister
having Disciples like to him self, that of a wicked Crow comes a worse egg:
meaning, that by an evil Master whither it be in doctrine or life, is formed a
Disciple like to him: For that cause Saint John, and Jesus Christ, called
seeds of Vipers such as were enuenemed with false discipline, of a wicked
tongue, subtle ipocrisie, and inward malice of the Pharesies, and other Masters
corrupted in such vices: we read that the mighty Alexander observing his
Master Leonides given to drunkenness, became so inte^perat in drinking, that he
did many infamous acts, yea, not sparing to kill a dear friend of his, and one
of his chiefest Philosophers: It is a thing most consenting to the nature of a
child to imitate vices expressed before him in demonstracion, and most easy
to corrupt him by wicked example, whose nature of it self is full of
corruption, and draws him by kind to vices without the aid of outward
doctrine, even as it is easy to one issued of a race infected with leprosy,
or other corruption of nature, to fall eftsoon into that disease being
natural and contagious, specially if he have familiar conversation or
government with such as are infected: is it not easy to make him to fall that
is weak, and not able to stand upright. But he that of himself seeks nothing
but to poor upon the earth, it is hard to make him clyme into high places.
Even so the thoughts and minds of man (being from their infancy inclined to
do evil, solleine, negligent, and slow to well doing) of themselves will
hardly pretend or aspire to clime the high hill of virtue, nor the Muses
coassembling in their stately Helicon, and Parnassus (mountains signifying the
raised heart and industry we ought to have, to come to the type of true
erudicion) if they be not led, and as it were drawn by the hand with often
exhortation take corgae by such as follow the right, hard, and strait way of
virtue and science, which is, scuh as are their virtuous and skillful Masters
of long time exercised in their own profession. The ancients in times past
for the many benefits growing to commonweals by the industry of learned and
virtuous instructers, compared them to good Dyers, giving a good and fair
teynt or die to cloth of it self vile and unpolished, which afterward in
respect of his excellent cooller becomes serviceable and usual to Princes,
Kings, and Emperors: some of them resemble them with learned Painters, who
upon their tables draw so fair pictures that there is not so great a Lord,
who takes not pleasure to behold them. And some compare them to excellent
caruers of Images, who undertaking to work purtreytes out of rude and
unpolished stones, smooth them first, and cut them afterward by such Art and
cunning, raising so lively and natural forms, that to make them natural
bodies, there seames to want nothing but life and speech, and so by their
excellent skill, in those Images they take away quite the first nature of the
stone out of the which they were hewed: even so do wise, learned. and virtuous
Masters with the wits of their Disciples, giving them doctrines and virtues,
most excellent pictures, lively coollers, and goodly ornaments of the soul.
Who, by those things, declares a beauty and wonderful excellency, altogether
divine, by the which it has affinity with God, and is honored of all men:
above all other taking charge to institute youth, the Principal ought most to
excel, who, as he is in the first degree of honor and authority over the
Regents and schoolemasters, so, it belonges to him to surmount them in
wisdom, erudicion, and good life: And being assured of the virtue and
doctrine, he must also be hable to judge of the discreation of the Regents, and
give the^ place honorable, and allowance equal to their merits, furnishing
always the fourmes when it is requisite, as if the chief Regents fail, to
supply their default to avoid disorder, and in any wise not to suffer their
youth to loose their dear time, which cannot but be to them all a charge of
conscience. Lastly they must examine the scholars of high fourmes, determining
fourmes according to their advancement: otherwise they are negligent in their
estate, co^temptible, and express not the reverence and obedience which justly
apertaine to the Principal, and therefore let no College be governed either
by a proud, or ignorant man.

A continuance of the discourse of Colleges by other comparisons. Chapter. iij.
SVch good instructours, teachers and scholemaistsrs to youth, may (also by
the doctrine of the ancients) be laid in comparison with Fathers,
Phisicions, laborers, gardeners, shepheardes, potters and goldsmithes, who,
according to their actions in ye arts wherein they deal, work the like
effect, which good tutors, by their doctrine and singular industry, bring
forth in young wits They be fathers to the spirits of young children, because
they form, and (as it were) regenerate or renew them, to make the^ by their
doctrines spiritual, divine and heavenly, who, of their nature corrupt in
Adam, were altogyther fleshly and earthly: in which estate, where they should
have lived as beasts, they are polished by their tutors, and prepared to
virtues, and so made men, and of men aspire to the similitude of half Gods:
here also they may (not unaptly) be compared to Bears, who, in the first birth
of their whelps, seeing them more like a vile and ougly mass of flesh then
breathing creatures, they fashion them into such proporcion with continual
licking with their tongue, that in the end they give them such a new form of
their kind, that by this natural industry, they seem to have reengendred
them.

In this, scholemaisters are phisicions to the souls of youth, because they
purge them of vile and foul affections, and prescribing them singular
remedies, antidotes and preservatives against vices, they prepare by this
spiritual medecin a perpetual sauetie to their souls. Laborers weeding
their ground covered with thorns and thistles, and then applying convenient
tilthes, make it ready for the seed, which being good, and sown in season,
expresses appara^tly, what profit and benefit the travel of the plough man
bringes. Gardeners, by new griffing or impinge unfruitful or savage trees do
as it were renew them and change all their first and natural quality of a
tree. It is seen in every country of the world, how necessary is the office
of a good herds man, to lead and guide his flock, which without his
providence would stand dispersed in to many casualties and perilles. The
potters, of clayish earth, foul to see, but more noisome to handle for that it
embrueth the hand, by their art make vessels so fair and delightful, that
they are made necessary to the uses of great men. Lastly, who knows not, that
the goldsmith by the skill of his art draws out of lumpes of mettell and
stones unpolished, even such fair and precious iewelles, that they give
beauty and honor to the most stately Scepters of the greatest Emperors,
Kings, and regentes of the world.

By these comparisons, the auncientes gave the world to understand, how much
young children stood need of the good and diligente institucions and doctrine
of learned Masters, by whose means, changing both manners and corrupt
complexions, they are by discipline (as it were) refyned, and made others then
they were before by their infected nature: which was very well confessed by
Socrates, when Zophirus (a Southsayer of the conditions of men by their
Linaments and outward pourtraites) Judged him intemperat and Lecherus, which
being found false by all such as knew his spare conversation and chastity:
Socrates answered for Zophirus, that he judged not amiss of the property of
his outward nature, for that such a one had he been by his inclinacion, if
Philosophy had not wholly changed him and made him an other. The teachers and
instructers of youth, resemble aptly the paynfull masters and tamers of fierce
and savage beasts, for in handling them in their first and fearful age they
change the first nature of those beasts, and make them forget the vices and
errors of their original kind, as we see by young Lions who are made familier
and obedient to their teachers, being of their nature full of fury and
cruelty: we see birds brought to speak and Hawks reclaymed from their fierce
nature, familierly feed upon the fyst of their keepers, even so by good
institucio^s of grave and wise masters, the wits of children are converted and
made tractable to any manners or conditions we will: which can not be done
when they are risen in years and stomak, for yt their corruption backed with
custom maks them careless of correction.

The tender twigge or branch of a tree, albeit it be crooked, may be easily
made straight in the time of his tenderness, but being grown to his strength he
is more apt to be broken then bowed: The wax whyleste it is soft, is ready to
receive any impression or form of him that chaffeth it by the fire, but being
eftsons resolved to hardness he bears no comoditye or use: The birds that are
taught to speak, must be taken young and made to know the cage: Lions if they
be not litell, are not made tame but with peril, yea they must be shut in
iron grates, and enclosed in straight lodgings, and so of other savage beasts
which you go about to make familiar: Even so is it of young children, who in
their young ages, apt then to take discipline and instruction, if they be not
diligently taught, but that you favor them with sufferance of time and years,
you take away the only ready mean to f^^me them as you wish, and they ought
to be. They must be instructed by men of learning virtuous life, and great
grauety in discretion, yea by such as have been first taught them selves, they
must be holden short, and kept with in the compass of a college, for that to
join liberty to their inclinacions is to make them resolute in evil and lead
them in to infinite periles: Plato left many lessons to parents to instruct
their children, when they wear young, and by teachers learned wise and
well-condicioned: And the scripture in many places enioynneth them there unto
upon straight pain to be condemned with there children in such faults as they
shall commit for not benig well instructed: here, for a last resemblaunce to
prove how necessary is the first educatio^ to change nature. I may auowch the
experience of Licurgus by two little whelps, who comi^g of on litter ought also
to express on self and common nature, yet because yt on was fed in ye kitchen,
and ye other in ye chamber where were given to him hares to accustom him to
hunt: by their diverse and contrary bringing up, they brought forth
diversity of nature, the same being witnessed publikelye by the order of
Licurgus, who commanding the dogs to be brought upon a skaffolde, set down
a dishe with potage, and a quick hare: The kitching dog smelling the potage,
and seeing the hare run, would not be beaten from the brothe till he had lapt up
al and lickt the dish, where the other no less hungry then he, was carles of
the potage and ran after the hare, as a food more agreing to his bringing
up: By which familier resmblance, he persuaded the citisens rude and barbarous,
to exercise a greater care in ye institucion of their children whilst they were
young, leaving as a sentence, that education passes nature.

Wisdom, science, virtue, diligence, and fervent zeal with love to their
Disciples, are very necessary for Schoolemaisters. The iiij. Chapter.
TO the knowledge, virtue and diligence of good scholemaisters, must be joined
wisdom and deep judgment, to discern the humors, complexions, and working
natures of young wits, accommodating the^ selves thereunto with a fervent
zeal, and by the like discreation to administer order to their Disciples, and
to themselves voluntary and often labor to teach them, leaving to them no
more time of idleness then is convenient to refreshe the mind made solenne with
study: for as too great continuance or force of travel, breaks the strength
of the body, and also long idleness restraines and weakeneth it, yea even to
vex it with the least travel that is: so, in too vehement and continual
study is great peril, specially to the soft and tender brain of a young
child, which it makes dull even to loathe and hate all study, and takes away
all aptnes and power to comprehend and retain any doctrine: so that as in all
other actions, so in this chiefly mediocretie and discretion is a principal
virtue. The grindstone gives an edge to ye dull knife, but if it be holden
ouerlong upon it, it loses a great part of ye steel, and is made
afterward unprofitable to cut. The yro^ put in use, entertaines his beauty
and proper nature, but being over strayned it breaks in pieces, and can not
serve the necessity whereunto it should be applied: even so, as the rust eats
and co^sumes the iron because it is not put in service, and too great force
either uses it or breaks it: so also, as idleness seduceth good w^^tes and
makes them apt to any contrary art, by contrary reason, immoderate labor and
too great feruencie in study spoyleth the soft wits of young children.

The young and courageous horse of his own nature fierce and hot, desirous to
run if his keeper give him the cariere, but more, if he feel the spurs,
does easily run him self out of breath, and becomes in the end
unprofitable: so frequentacion of study disposed into vehement and intemporat
seasons, closes the young wit of a child, wherein there is no less
necessity of care to his master, then to keep him from long idelnes. For
that cause is there requisite (as I said) wise judgment and discretion in
scholemaisters of youth to provide for all things by rate and measure belonging
to their instruction, as to give the spurs to such as are slow and hard of
wit, and to others more ready and quick to study by liuelynes of spirit, to
restrain the bridle, feeding their sharp forwardness of wit and nature, and
not to discourage them by fear and rude discipline: by this discretion and
wise rule, they glad the sorrowful and entertayne them in joy, to the end
they become not lean and loathsome, and compel such as are too earnest in
study to take the recreation of a scholar: they must restrain the common
gamsters, and cut short their demaundes and desires to play, and yet in any
wise forbear to deal rudely with children of liberal forwardness and apt to
receive erudition: as of the contrary they must severely correct the stubborn
by exemplarie discipline, least they corrupt others.

And seeing we are now fallen upon the recreation of wits, it is not
impertinent to make some present mention of Music, as the thing that most of
all and naturally delights and reioyseth the wit, whereof Plato and Aristotle
in their politickes speak at large: it is most sure, that harmony, pleasant
sound and voice compassed in measure, is very proper and convenient to appease
the affections and troubles whereunto young minds are subject, and to change
all moodes of heaviness and thought: for which cause David used oftentimes the
harp and voice: and S. James wills men in their heaviness to sing Psalms to
recomforte them: and therefore very necessare that the young Scholar learn to
singe, and play upon musical instruments, so that it carry that intention,
to sing it as a recreation in his other studies of greater importance. For then
does it best and most refreshe the mind and draw the fancy from wicked
thoughts, when it is grave in it self and not corrupted with wanton songs,
wherewith (the scripture is a witness) how much David relieved Saul and
qualified his bitter afflictions. But now eftsoons to the institution of
children touching Doctrine: if the Master find any of so hard capacity to
learning, that their inclination will not be enhabled thereunto, let him not
abuse and lead the parents in unprofitable expenses: but after he has given
them a taste of the christian Catechism and other principles of eternal
salvation (which may be easily comprehended through the singular goodness of
God, who commes thus to communicate himself by doctrine to all that seek to be
saved) let them be sent home to their parents to apply them to the profession
wherein their nature takes most pleasure. This is the discretion which I
require in all men professing to teach and instruct, without the which, as
neither doctrine nor zeal joined with love to their disciples, nor diligence,
industry, no nor good life it self, (much necessary to the duty of good
masters) shall be able to advance their Disciples to any perfection: so,
where all those parts concur and assemble in one painful man, it is not
possible but he shall bring forth a wonderful fruit in his estate: let him
therefore try out by infight and discretion, whether his scholar be borne to
learning, or whether he be bee-forced to it, and so apply his knowledge
according to the ability of the childs wit putting to him no more at a time
then is expedient to his capacity: vessels with strait necks receive by
little and little the liquoure put into them, and others of wyder receypte
refuse not more plentiful infusion: so that according to the capacity of the
vessel, is measured the quantity of liquour put into it. And as also men make
their burdens according to the force of their body and administer diet
according to the disposition and hauior of the stomach: even no less regard
must teachers have to the quality of childrens wits, not charging nor
confounding them with too grave or heavy lessons or doctrines, wherein both the
time should be vain to the master, and the labor hurtful to the scholar,
for that it would put his wit in peril. And even as it is contrary to all
order to commit diversity and too great abundance of meats to the stomach
having no power to digest them, notwithstanding the variety please the
appetite: even no less inconvenient and hurtful to young wits, are the
cloying lessons, albeit they seem to take pleasure in them. But because
scholemaisters are led to ye knowledge and order of their duty by many Greek
and Latin authors, I leave them to the study and consideration of them: not
inferring these speeches to minister instruction, but only in passing, to
advertise them simply, that having so great a charge, they can not be too
curious in the search and execution of their estate: not forgetting the worthy
example of Pithagoras, who, taking disciples into charge, proved first their
natures at play, wherein a child hides nothing of his disposition, (himself
looking out of a grated window for not being seen) and causing to be laid in
the place instruments or tools of crafts men, books, knyues, swords, and
such like things to observe whereunto they were most addicted, he judged by
this in what art he was to instruct them: if by long study and his pains,
they changed not (according to the desire of their parents) that connaturall
inclination, he advised their friends to dispose them to such art as their
nature inclined them, as to the wars, to marchaundise, or otherwise, saying
(which I do well appoue) that there is but one thing to be changed, a
corrupt nature, and wicked inclination: for touching the natural vocation, it
is necessary, seeing it is of God, to follow it without contradiction, onles
we would seem to resist God, because that as every member of the natural
body has his proper office, so God has given to every man as to the member
of his politic and mystical body, a certain instruction (or rather
inspiration) to follow some peculiar estate or art above others, which S.
Paul calls vocation, wherein we must walk, the better to express our
obedience to God.

Instructions to know by the way of contrary oppositions, by the comparisons of
the other Chapters, the miseries which happen to the world by reason of leude
schole Masters. Chapter. v.
LEt us now handle more at large ye incommodities and evils happening by the
fault of Masters ignorant negligent, and failing in their charge (for
hitherto we have touched them but briefly.) And, for advertisement to fathers
and parents to provide wise Masters for the institution of their children. Let
us also look into the miseries that happen for not having good doctrine in
their youth: Wherein not swaruing from the comparisons aforesayed in favor of
good Masters, but by Antithesis or contrary opposition, applying them to
express our purpose further: we say that where ignorant or negligent Dyers, in
place to give good and fair die, do either raise an evil cooller, or ill
apply that which is good, and burn the cloth, in not ministering fire
according to time and measure: What remedy to correct this desperate loss:
the cooller can not easily be changed: and the cloth is either lost, or at the
least so defaced that he will be no more brought to the price and value hoped
for: even so when Masters undertaking to imprint sprituall impressio^s in
children, have taught them that which is evil, and in place to lead their
youth in good instructions, infect them with naughty principles, either
teaching that which is wicked, or interpreting the good by corrupt and false
exposition, as not understanding the pretended sense of the author, or else, (as
vain and barbarous) bring it to their own purpose: how is it possible to
supplant in young sprits this wicked impressio^, which they have so curiously
received: the table, canuase, or parchment, receiving any paynting or
workmanship of drawing, whatsoever, can not so well be razed that the stain
do not appear to the disliking of the beholder, and much less can there be
bestowed upon it any other better counterfeit or painting, which will not
steane, corrupt, or be defaced by the fire: it is not possible to wash so well
a pot which has always holden oil, but he will keep some smacke of his
first liccour: and putting wine into it, it is in peril to change his taste and
be corrupted: Even so is it lost labor to men to break their brains to root
out of the wits of Children false opinions instilled into them from their
youth by teachers of error: and much less to cleanse or purge their fancy
defiled with unchaste lessons, and stained with dissolute and filthy speeches,
yea with acts and examples vile and sclau^derous. The Scripture teaches by
the figure of the sheep of Jacob and Laban that they should conceive Lambs
of cooller like to the rods which Jacob showed them in the fountain where
they drunk, that even so simple brains receiving any impression by Books or
lectures preferred to them in the first heat of their conceiving age, do not
only retain and by time express in action their first conception, but also
are hardly drawn from it (most specially if it be evil) either by persuasion
or contrary instruction. We read not that any Disciple of the Epicurien sect
ever became stoicke, notwithstanding all the Philosophers reproved that sect,
and by infinite reasons proved their opinion most damnable: Iere. 13.
That was the cause why God said to the Jews in Jeremy, if the Ethiopian can
change his skin, you may also do well, (seeing you have learned in the
schools of false Prophets) to do evil: as if he had said: you have been so
much corrupted from your youth by false doctrine of wicked Masters, that you
can not now dispose your selves to do well, and receive the holly doctrines
which I give you by my Prophets. But now to the other infirmities: if the
potters be not skilful in their Art, wise and careful to prepare and work
their first matter, to fashion proper mowlles, and to apply the fire with rate
and season, shall they raise any pot or vessel to commodity: if it be evil
made, were he not better to break it then to ask a new time to repair it. If
the Goldsmith fail in his first workmanship, notwithstanding he have gold
ready to make some excellent Jewel, he must of necessity break all,
otherwise he is not to prefer it to the public judgment of honest men. In
the same sort, if Masters fail by ignorance, imprudence, negligence, or
example, to prepare and make perfect the sacred vessels of the holy Ghost the
better to receive his divine, graces and gifts, yea tomake such fair and
precious Iuels as they may be presented before God: How can this error, or
rather infinite fault, be reformed afterward? Salamon according to the truth
of the Hebrew, is of opinion that, that which is depraved, cannot without great
difficulty be corrupted, (meaning, not without the special grace of GOD) Let
parents beware to give to their children schole Masters, vain, barbarous, and
dissolute, seeing without wise instruction and demonstration of good life, there
is more peril to their children, then if they put them into houses of leprosy
and uncleanness: with good reason, Philip of Macedonia, did not only rejoice
that he had a son, but thought him happily borne in the time of Aristotle, in
hope of the doctrine and virtue which he might get under the discipline of so
wise and skillful a Master. If the laborers fail to till their grounds in
season, and replenish them with good seeds, let them look to make no
plentiful harvest, but if they suffer the vermin of the field and air to
deuower the corn in the blade, they shall reap little or no fruit at all: If
they suffer them to ouergrowe with thorns, thistels and wicked weeds,
notwithstanding their labor to weed and purge them, yet they leave to the
field that which the field would have yielded to them. If children in like sort
be not carefully instructed in their beginning by good and wholesome
disciplines, it is hardly possible to see them members of profit to their
commonweal, although afterward they get knowledge. No, rather that is to be
looked for which the Poet speaks of, that the light and baren otes, will
exceed the good corn: Virgill.
the same agreeing with the prophecy of Solomon, that when the vine is
neglected, and so ouergrowen with thorns that the cluster cannot appear, Pro.
24.
the sweetenes of the grape will be turned into vergesse. All these we see happen
in those times wherein parents are careless to exercise their children in good
learning but specially in the first principles of true Religion, Esa. 5.
which has brought the world to such dissolutenes, that we may say with Osea,
Osea 4.
that the sink of iniquities has overflowed the earth, and has so washed all
knowledge and fear of God from the world, that from the lowest even to the
highest every one has corrupted their way. If the earth be not painefully
labored, well seeded, and carefully kept from Crows and Cattle, what revenue
can it yield to the Master. If the little plant in the husbandmans orchard be
not pruned and preserved from cropping of beasts, he cannot hope to see it a
great tree, if he water it not, it will wither, and so either be barreine, or
at least bring forth fruit of little price: even no more may be hoped for of
the young plant or orchard of the common weal (which is the number of youth)
Mat. 8.
if in their first graffing they be not pruned with good principles and
preserved from caterpillars whose nature is to deuower both lease and fruit.
Christ has already pronounced sentence against the unfruitful tree, or that
yeeldes evil fruit, either to be cut down, or cast into the fire. Even so
what other thing do young children procure, but (by their so abominable vices)
to hasten the ire of GOD upon themselves, their parents, governors of towns,
and the whole realm, expressed in many miseries, as plagues, wars, famines,
and desolations of regiments, not speaking of horrible pains prepared for them
after their death. We must therefore plie and bend the branch whilst it is
yet a little twigge, because, being come to his greatness there is peril to
break it: if in like sort, the nature of little children, of it self inclined
to vice, be not in his green tenderness corrected by discipline, time, and
custom will enhable it above the power of reformation: When it has once taken
his fold, it will not be easily unfolded according to the saying of the wise
man, Pro. 22.
that the youngman follows all the time of his life, that way which he takes
in his young age.

Amplifications of the said comparisons touching wicked Masters: with answer
to the objections made to reject Doctrine: praise of Science: evils of
ignorance, and leude education. Chapter. v.
IF lewd Masters, resemble wicked heardsmen, what hurt do they to young
children (being the little Lambs of ye park of Jesus Christ) when they feed
them not with good pasture, which is, sound doctrine, the proper noriture of
their souls with out ye which they cannot soundly live if they use not care to
keep them from the jaws of Woulfes, which are false prophets, but leaving them
to the pasture of heritikes and sectuaries, suffer them to live at random
wandering by hills and valeys of infinite errors: let them behold in Ezechiell,
Eze. 34
how grievously God complayneth against them, and all other pastors of his
people: If such masters be as carles and negligent parents giving suffera^ce to
the vanities of their children as Helie did to his, what masters or governors
can be raised to como^weals of such disordered disciples? Such as be tamers of
wild beasts if they fashion them not by exact industry, and by long custom,
change their nature, see their travel bring forth vain effect, for, that their
Disicples put one eftsons their original habit: Birds taught to speak return
to their savage lay, if they be not retained in custom by continual travel
of their teachers: Even so lewd and wicked scolemasters, neither learned,
diligent, nor tractable to tame and frame the natures of children for bearing
Discipline, make them at last like them selves, and worse then they wear when
they first took them in hand: If they put evil doctrine or administer lewd
co^uersasion to the^, what greater pain then to reclaim them: and what more
hearty grief then to see them infected and not to be cured but by painful
remedies: Tymotheus demanded doble wages of a father presenting him with a
dissciple that had been ill taught by an ignorant master: he said that to make
him meet for new doctrine, he must first draw from him that which he had
learned before, other ways, to administer good instruction should be but
pains and time lost, even as we see good wine to be spoiled, as soon as it is
put into a vessel of viniger or other sower Liquore: And as to preserve the
goodness and true taste of the wine, it is meet first to make clea^ the
vessel: So who goes about to institute and instruct youth, left him give no
liberty of corrupcion, for there doctrine profits nothing, where wicked
affections remain: But if teachers have knowlegde and will to reclaim children
of hard and infected natures, where in nothnig is better then continuance of art
and diligence they shall in the end bring them to facility of virtue and
manors, as we see the young horse fierce and hawty of nature, after he be
well manned becomes tractable to the service of his master, and better
condicioned then the rest: The earth over growe^ with bushes and thorns and
less easy to be broken with the plowe, is made more apt to bear good fruet
when it is purged by the dilige^c of the laberor, where, if the ground be
sandy, or covered with fearne, it is not made half so frutfull by any
industry of husbandry: The vine spreding in many branches and leaves, if
that which is superfluous be cut away, becomes more fertile and flourishing:
Thus, by the consideracion of these similitudes, we see what great benefits
come by ye instruction of youth by wise and learned masters and ye infinyt and
intolerable euels rising by such as are lewd and ignorant of instructing well
disposed wits in doctri^ according to their excelent and divine capasitie: But
we must not conclude by this defaulte that it were better to leave children
without any instruction, least they fall into the discipline of such teachers,
for that were as much as to give consent and liberty to the destruction of
children, and so abandone them to the peril of all wretchedness: many are the
commandments in the holy scripture to parents for the good instruction of
their children, and specially in the knowledge and fear of God, enioyning them
for that purpose to search out men sufficient, even such as we have described:
with the scripture, reason also teaches and natural judgment, that we ought
to be instructed even from our youth. For as the mind (as Aristotle says) is
as a table whereupon nothing is written nor painted, and so of our own nature
we can do nothing but think evil, speak, and do evil: so reason is none
other thing in us then a little spark of light, and yet so darkened in our
obscure nature, that it ca^ no more guide us to march in the darkness of this
world, then a little snoffe of a candell showing darkly in a lantern dymmed
with dirt or other filthiness, is able to give us light to pass in surety
through dark and dangerous places: it may be aptly resembled to a flashe of
lightening in the night, which when it shows upon the earth, gyues a
certain glymse of light, but very short, leaving afterward the traueling man
in greater darkness not knowing which way to take: even so, when our reason
has advertised us of that which is good, being presently occupied with the
affections and dark passions in us, strives not valiauntly to repulse and
dissolve them by her natural light (being of her self of too great
infirmities) but yeeldes to them as soon as she is surprised, leaving us in
greater perplexities of our obscure mind then we felt before. Whereupon as we
may conclude that reason without doctrine, is as a spark quickly quenched,
having no more power in a man to do well, then a body has mean to travel
without a mind: So, to the end we stomble not upon error and vice, it is
necessary we have a perpetual, clear, and burning light of mind, which is
doctrine and holy erudition. For the same difference that we find between
light and darkness, does Solomon set between the wiseman and the fool or the
ignorant: Christ calls the ignorant, blind, who if they undertake to lead
others, fall altogether in the ditch, wherein is signified the extremity of
errors, whereunto do run headlong all such as have not true science. It is
said in the law, that for the infirmity of this reason and natural
deprauation, men ought not to do what seemed good to their judgment and mind,
but must raise their regard to that which God commands, specially in
matters concerning Religion: for in things natural and civil there was more
liberty. Then seeing children are corrupt, (as Quintilianus says) before
they can go, being norisshed in delites rather then understand them, and love
the vices which they learn in the pallaices of their parents, before they have
ability to judge of them, (such is their infection even from their first
education and norture) they stand need of rate and measure, and to be corrected
even from their cradle. We said before that doctrine changes the mind and
makes it fructify, for which cause the scripture compares it to the good
seed, which as with good tylthe bringes forth good fruit, so without it, the
best grounds would rather yield thistles and thorns, then grain of profit:
as happens in often experience by the best kind of corn, which diligently
sown but in common ground, tournes oftentimes into poppel and light grain,
either by the fault of the ground, the time, or the laborer. So there is great
need, that with the doctrine and good institution of youth, there be suffered
no corruption of manners. We see the ground without tilling and seed bringes
forth of it self naturally and without art ill herbs and weeds, much more
would our nature produce vices, and needs no instructor to do evil: where
virtues come by force of instruction and labor, as well of the masters as
disciples. For having in our selves but certain seminaries or as little matches
which we must kindle by force of blowing, applying matter to entertayne the
fire if we will make any. So we must suffer this nature of ours to be qualified
and fashioned by doctrine and labor, as we see fire stricken out of the flinte
by the instrument of steel.

Continuance of the said comparisons. Chapter. vij.
THE Philosophers esteemed a man without learning, as a slave that does all his
actions by force, where the learned has a liberal agilitie to all virtuous
doings: they compared the man without Science to a beast, accompting him not
worthy to be called a man reasonable, of whom one of the greatest glories, is,
to use reason, which he can not do if he have not Science: For which cause,
Solo^ the Law reader of Athens judged not the natural father worthy of honor
and obedience of his child, if he instructed not his youth in learning, and
exercised his tender years in virtuous conversation: which opinion albeit is
condemned of the Scripture which enioynes to children strait charge of duty,
love reverence, and service to their parents: Yet so great faults of Fathers
and Mothers by the just judgment of God, deserve no duty at all in their
children, having only received of them generation and fleshly noriture,
without goo^ struction, for which end, God specially blessed them with
children: And often does it happen, that such children without discipline,
dishonor their houses, destroy great families, and by displeasure procure
death to their parents to hasten their succession: yea, they are troublous,
sedicious and ruins of good commonweals: And when they come to the scaffolde
the last pause to ye gibbot) they dissemble not, but cry with main voice,
that if their Fathers had made them familiar with correction and discipline,
they had been far from those miseries: Pro. 29.
Truth and dicipline (says Solomon) be two things that give correction to a
young man: and the child that is left to his will bringes his Mother to shame
and confusion: meaning, that a young man without instruction, can give no
delight nor honor to his parents, and to his friends he cannot but bring
rebuke and infamy: So that if he be not reformed by good doctrine, and
induced to good by the spirit of God with a true faith and charity, he can
not by his own nature, but dream upon all evil, no more the^ the thornie
brier can of himself shake of his pricks, or the wild tree bring forth sweet
fruit if he be not oftsones gryffed: And therefore it can not be justified to
say that it were better to leave a child to live at his own nature, wherein
(as S. Paul says) is found nothing but deprauation. No, let him taste of good
doctrine, which will be to him as a regeneration and reformation of nature: And
because it may be asked in what age is best to put children to learning, it may
be answered, even so soon as in the child is expressed a mind capable of
doctrine: as to some at five years, to some rather, and toothers later,
beginning with them easily, or (as it were) by pleasure, without threats, the
rod, fear, or constraint: For as science of it self is liberal, so it
requires in such as seek it, liberty and freedom of wit: But if there be
cause or place of correction, let it be for evil doing, and wicked speaking,
as when negligent children, drawing to too much play and loss of time, do
mutual injuries with corruption of manners. Where God is offended, as in malice
and wicked speech and work, correction must not be dissembled even from their
infancy, in which age (above all other things) they must be instructed to
pray to God, and by little and little accustomed to fear and serve him as much
as the state of their age will bear: Saint-Ierome holds it well done that the
child be taught even from his infancy to bear the yoke of the lord, with whom
Solomon agrees, saying: Remember thy self O young man of thy creator in thy
youth, learn even from thy youngest age to fear, honor, love, and serve thy
God: And David is of opinion that there is nothing wherein a young man
corrects better his life, then in considering and keeping the commandments
of God. Touching common doctrine, it must be ministered gently, familiarly,
easily, and if it be possible without the rod, according to the surname of
schools, being called a play or exercise of learning, where young wits must
be induced as to a pleasant play, giving to the young scholar some small thing
of pleasure to encourage him after the travel of his lesson. And for his
better society in study, it is good to join him to a companion as a spur
to his Book, Proponing to him that merits some price commending the victor,
and blaming him that is overcome, yea sometimes driving him to tears, and yet
afterward recomfort him, applying to the slow wit for advantage some what
more labor of the Master to the end he despair not in study being always
overcome. This emulation in study must be continued even in great scholars,
for one of the greatest spurs to study is mutual envy among companions, as
glory to win, and reproach to be surmounted: if there be any young children
malicious, melancholy, spiteful, or negligent, let the commandment of
Solomon be applied: Pro. 33.22.
Restrain (says he) no discipline from a young child, for if thou strike him
with a rod, be shall not die of it: beat him with a rod, and thou shall
deliver his soul from hell: if malice be gathered in the heart of a child, the
rod of discipline will root it out of him: who spares the rod to a young man,
hurts him, and shows no love to the health of his soul, but he that keeps
him familiar with the rod; declares his affection to him. Therefore Masters
that flatter their negligent and leude children, entertaining them in their
vices for fear to loose the profit they get by them, or to draw a more
number of scholars, commit treble offense. First against themselves being
guilty before God of all such offenses together with other those faults which
their scholars shall ever commit. Secondly, they further the damnation of
their disciples, who, such as they are nourished, and suffered, such will they
remain (says Solomon.) Lastly they do great wrong to their parents and commonweals, for that by the evils of those children, the parents shall have
perpetual sorrow, and the common weal continually vexed: And in the end,
such Masters by the just course of Gods judgment, shall be hated of their
scholars, and the gain they shall get shall never rise to constant profit,
but perish before their eyes.

Masters ought to instruct their Disciples whom they receive into commons
touching the body with the same labor wherewith they institute their minds,
praises of Science. Chapter. viij.
WE must not forget here, that even as masters ought to feed ye spirits of
children with good learning, form them in ciuell manors, and keep them from
corruption by evil example and doctrine, standing as condemned before God, and
deserving so many eternal judgments, as their disciples by their negligence
shall commit offenses: So they are bound to no less care to norishe and to
entertain in health the tender bodies of their young scholars: where in it is
chiefly necessary they understand their particular natures, together with the
quality and operation of meats, and so (as physicians) prescribe their
regiment touching the quantity and quality of their feeding, I mean, yt
according to the naturs and composicion of their children, they must vary in
sorts and measurs of meat and drink, giving to some more and to others less,
As to great lamps where are great matches, there must be more infusion of
oil, then to the little ones: other ways where is great match, and littell
oil and not often dropped in, the fire will easily consume and put all to
ashes: Even so young children whose nature bears a more ardent heat and are
more dry then others, must eat oftenner then such as are cold and moist, as
are ye flegmatike sort: Let therefore masters entering in to the charge of
children consider carfullye of their order of diet: And as they ought to take
heed not to train them in intemperat or delicat feeding, which makes them
glottons and wanton, and draws both body and mind in to infirmities and
corruptcion: So let them no less beware to norishe them hardly, and with
meats of evil taste, for great sobriety in young children wekneth their
bodies in consumpcion of the root humor through the natural heat which is
ardent in them: by which default they fall in the end into a restraint of breath
or tisycke, and by the nature of evil meats they come to ill disgestion the
worst of al lamentable and incurable disseases: by these two extremities unwise
masters procure to their disciples expedicion of death and so are no other then
the murderers of them: wherein such above all other are most guilty, who taking
children in to commons or pension for covetousness do either feed the^
sparingly, or by sluttishnes prepare them corrupt and unwholesome diet: wherein
they merit sentence of co^demnacion as traitors and suttel murderers of that
simple youth, abusing wickedly the trust of their parents, who through their
defaults, are the proper deliuerers of their own children to peril of death:
wine also (being the instrument yt leads them in to many sins) can not but
shorten their life: it burns by his natural heat the tender substance of
young men, even as the flame of fire consumes the oil, and so deuoureth the
dry matter and wood already set on fire: Then seeing the young child is no other
thing then fire: to give him wine, is as to cast oil in to a furnace to
e^crease the heat and burn all: for which cause Plato in his common weal
restrained wine from youth till after xviij years, and from those years till
the beginning of old age, he suffered none to drink wine, but qualified with
water, and yet in great sobriety: Besides all these, wine prouokes to whordom,
and engenders collar adust, which in the end by immoderat use, turns into
malencolie and so in ye flower of their time makes them diseased with diverse
kinds of cold and incurable sickness, by which occasion the ancients in great
reason called wine poison being in temperatly drunk: But if masters are
reprehensible for the offense of this education, no less reproach belongs to
fathers and mothers who foreseing not by counsel to whom to commit the
institution of ye youth of their children have oftentimes mor care to
entertain horsriders and falkners for the delight of their trifling fancy,
then to provide good and learned scholemasters to breath knowledge and manors
into their precious children: yea they had rather spare a few crowns to the
hurt somtims and utter destruction of their children, in committing the^ to
sellie ignorant, corrupt and covetous masters (who^ to favor their purse they
take by report with out other proof) then depart with liberal alowance to worthy
and sufficient men for the good institution and bringing up of their youth, for
the which they stand in hazard of the severe judgment of god, as guilty to all
the wickedness which their children shall do together with the miseries
happening to them, for not being instructed and their youth trained by wise and
worthy masters. But a little more to touch the fond covetousness, and
inconsiderat consideration of such Fathers, is not that man too far from his
senses, who cares for his shoe, and not for the foot for the which he had
caused the shoe to be made: even no less indiscreet is he, who seeks to
heap and get great store of goods, and is negligent to form and fashion
such to whom he must leave his wealth: if that man be a natural fool
(says Salomo^) who breaks his body and wit to get goods, and knows not
his heir, or whether he be good or evil.

What more extreme folly can be in a rich father, who having children to
succeed him, prouides not to make them able to use his goods after him?

But leaving by necessity his gross wealth to a sort of foolish and corrupt
children, neither worthy to possess them, nor sufficient to use them, is he
not more fond then he that Solomon speaks of, who condemned not the rich
man but for his too much care to heap goods, and had no suertie to leave
behind him good heirs, the same by experience happening to some fathers now a
days, who, of their children will not make them worthy and able heirs to
their wealth by good and diligent institution: such Fathers are evil advised,
who in the framing of their frail children, bear most regard and care to
their purses. First in trayning their children by unworthy masters, besides
the loss of time, they make them learn mani things which of necessity they
must learn eftsoons to forget: by which the Fathers vainly spend their
money, and to the hinderance of their children: withal, besides the
inconveniences happening by wicked education and forming of children, as well to
them selves as to others, the miserable infantes rising into age and judgment,
are ashamed of their nakedness: know not what estate to practice, no they have
no honest mean to live in honor, nor trade to entertayne their necessary
life: where the learned, if they be not left to amplitude of living and
goods, their learning and industry are lines to lead them easily to
preferment. And being left rich by their parents: they have means at pleasure
to keep and increase their revenue. Learned men have honor, rents and
revenues, where ever they go: they are welcome where they come, and have
reverence in all Countries and companies, doctrine is a nouriture to go to the
end of the world, without suffering necessity. It is a rich treasure that can
not fall into poverty: it is a guide that will not let us err in the ways of
this life: it is an vnconsuming light to light us in the way of virtue: it is a
perpetual pleasure without envy, the very honor, ornament, and glory of a man:
for it forms in man sweet delivery of words, orderly method of
reasoning, and bringes him to perfect judgment: so that science is to the
mind, the same that the soul is to the body. For which cause Aristotle being
asked how much the ignorant man differed from him that had learning, even no
less (says he) then the brute beast from the natural man. And so with good
authority we may conclude, that a man without science, is as a body without a
Soul, or as a simple human beast when she does no injury to any: but being
corrupt and cruel, he may be resembled with the fierce and savage beasts: if
he be subtle, he degenerates into a Fox, into a Swyne when he is a glutton,
into a dog when he is impudent and intemperate, into a Wolf, when he spoils
poor people, and into a Lion, Tiger, and Libberd, when he uses slaughter and
tyranny: yea Seneca called an ignorant man, but an Image of a lively man.

A continuance of the praise of science: exhortation too build Colleges in
Towns. The 9. Chapter.
But now let us return to our Science, which, seeing it is as the soul or
spirit of a man, it makes him reasonable: and if it be divine, it makes him
altogether celestial: if the man be corrupt, it corrects him, and purges all
his wicked affections, whereupon in good reason it is named the medcine of the
soul: if the man be poor, it enritcheth him: if he be low borne, it makes him
noble: if he be contemned, it honoreth him, if he be little it makes him great,
and rayseth him into dignity: and of a mortal and miserable man, it gives
him immortality and makes him happy. Then if learning be one of the most
excellent benefits, yea a treasure above all riches, comprehending in it
self all that man can wish for the contentment of all his desires, and
perfection of all humane felicities, and seeing it is gotten in a college, the
permanent mansion of science, yea the palace of the Muses and their Helicon:
how much ought we to be affected to erect stately Colleges in every Cathedral
Town, and indue them honorably? whereunto the learned me^ getting there the
mean of their honor and dignity, ought to bear special favor, and the
virtuous sort to contribute franckly, seeing by them they have received their
virtues: yea and all others have interest therein, for respect of common
benefit, as doctrine for their children, and correction of manners, and to
them selves exampes of all virtues? Parents (being Colleges in the town
where they dwell) shall always be assured of the certain discipline and
institution of their children, and understanding from one time to another, what
advancement they have in their College, they shall not loase their money upon
credit, and much less put it to hazard and fortune, as they should if they
sent them further, where they are also uncertain of their profit and success
in learning. For being far from them, they hear but opinions and untrue
praises of the learning of their children, who in the mean while run forth
their time in play and pasing the streates, looking (as the proverb is) who
has the longest nose, and live altogether as lost children: wherein for the
most part, they are little helped though they be in the charge of Masters.
For that if they be not learned, their scholars will hold no great reckoning
of them, and give less heed to their councelles, lessons, or repetitions. If
the masters (not learned) have special times to go study in some
University, what scope has the scholar to abuse his absence in all insolent
liberty: the master occupied in his private studies, has neither care nor
leisure to administer teaching to his scholar: for that it is to much for one
body to bear two burdens, and one man to apply well two trades. But if he be
corrupt, what example gives he to the poor children if he be given to
sects, what shall be his doctrine? had it not ben better (in this deprauation)
for the unfortunate father to have had no child at all? yea, if there had bin
in his Town a school, there had bin no such dangers, withal it had not cost
him so much, and yet the money he spente had remained in the Town, where he
had suertie of the principal and Regents for the institution of his child,
which he could not have, sending him far of. I mean not hear, but when the
scholar is in capacity to be received into any Court of arts or grave
doctrines, as of the Mathematikes, Physic, Law, and Divinity, that he be
sent to more famous Universities. But at the least before his departure from
the school, let him know the parts of composition in Orations, and be
resolute in Verses and histories, and ready in the parts and rules of
Philosophy, wherein let all Fathers remember the admonition of Plutarche, and
not suffer young men alone to go to any free study, until they be so
prepared and confirmed in virtue, that they need no further censure of their
life and manners. This being not observed of fathers, breeds many
inconveniences in their youth, specially to give liberty to children, when
they have need of good instructors, for that they begin to feel the fume of
fire in their head, find their own stomach, and rise into weening by their
wits and knowledge, but more by their houses and riches, which make them
aspire to the reputation and title of Masters: And (which is more to fear)
they assubiect them selves to their affections and fleshly desires, wherewith
they are more solicited in that age, then in any other: Besides, in the
general consideration of public profit, there be three common commodities:
there is first a great revenue for the town where ye school is, seeing the
money and vittels which else should be carried elswhether, remain there to the
relief of many. Merchants sell better their merchandise: Artificers have
more vente of their work and labor: and Phisicions, Apoticaries, and such
necessary sorts, find more liberal use and gain of their science: yea, there
is no kind of people in a town which in some sort tastes not of the
commodity of a College: lastly, the whole youth of a Town finds by the
presence of a school, a help to learning, and a ready way to good manners,
and so by such institution and discipline they are prepared to virtue: wherein
this ought to be a special care to Governors, that after the erection of their
school, there be not so poor a young child in the town, which is not
constrained to go to the school to learn the principles of faith and
commandmentes of God: so providing that the poor may be taught by alms till
they have age to travel, or if their inclination draw them to learning, let
there be providence by the contribution of the best. And being risen to
ability in learning to take in charge children of good houses: it is the best
act of charity to prefer them before others, not the least convenient for
such charge by their diligence which necessarily they must use above others
in consideration of their poverty and hope of advancement: and so from the
estate of masters in private houses they may in time become serviceable to
their common weal: which is all in effect I will say now touching the
commodities and benefits growinge by schools, wherein young wits, do as it
were, but play their prize to a greater excellency. For if they aspire to
profit, riches, eternal pleasures, honors, dignities, to know God, and
seek their salvation, let them have learning, as the principal mean to lead
them thereunto. And if men suffer so many cares, and toiles of body and mind
to compass those benefits, much more ought we to suffer to reach to this
liberal doctrine by the which are to be obtained the infinite and perpetual
felicities? if doctrine be the nurse of virtue and honor, if we love virtue and
honor, ought we not with the same affection to seek and follow the mean by
the which we aspire thereunto? It is not possible to have true honor without
virtue: for which cause the Romans erected two temples joined together, the
one dedicated to virtue, and the other to honor: but none could enter into the
temple of honor, but he must first pass thorough the sacred house of virtue.
Honor and glory follow the man of virtue, as the shadow does his body: but if
the ignorant or man of vices pursue honor, it fleeeth from him as from his
adversary, and can hold no conversation with him.

Examples of commodities which Science brings to the learned: with a brief
enumeration of the profits which happen to the world by men of knowledge.
Chapter. x.
SCiences co^ioyned with virtue are ye honorable pleasures of a man, perpetual
profits, and immortal glories: they be also the happy and eternal riches,
which men may carry with them without any peril: They delight, profit and
honor the learned man in what place so ever he be, and bring him (even amongst
the most barbarous) all honest commodities for his life: Diogenes taken by the
Skommers or Pirates of the Sea, and sold as a slave to inciuill people, got
such credit and estimation amongst them, that they offered him to their King as
the most honorable present they could make: and the King proving his singular
knowledge, committed his children to his discipline, and his person to his
direction and counsel: yea giving him authority to institute laws for the
pollecy of his kingdom, he shaked of his ancient and accustomed barbarietie.
This Philosopher obtained of the King, free deliverance of all such as were
taken and made slaves with him: whom when he returned into their cruntreys, he
gave them no other thing in charge, but to require in his name all Fathers and
Mothers to get for their children such riches which were not subject to the
thief by land, nor the pirat by Sea, and much less in peril to drown by all
the shipwrackes in the world. Those riches he meant by the liberal sciences,
most certain and perpetual treasors to him that gets them: They are the
goods, wherein Bias was esteemed more rich then Cressus, and in whose respect
he held all other treasures in perpetual contempt, eue^ as who is rich in
gold and silver, holds not reckoning of lead and tynne: And therefore when his
town was taken by assault of war, and that his enemy gave him liberty to
depart with all the goods he could carry with him, he would not vouchsafe to
take any riches. But being asked why he carried not away the goods of the town,
as gold, silver, and other precious mouables, he answered, I carry all my
goods with me, meaning that science and virtue were his goods. What honor had
Plato by his learning when it wrought him grace even with the greatest tirants,
who, contrary to their condition, thought him worthy of high reverence: yea the
enemies of Athens, taking him upon the sea gave such honor to his science and
virtue, that they saved his life, notwithstanding they were sworn to ye
slaughter of all the Athenians falling into their hands: if he had desired
riches, he might have exceeded all the mighty men of his time, and so might
also all the other Philosophers, the same being expressed by Thales Melisien,
who, being reproched of his poverty and called beggar, made such providence
for wealth by his excellent learning, that in short time he carried no occasions
to be called poor: wherewith when he had choked the slaunderer, he declared
immediately the base estimation he made of worldly goods departing all his
treasure amongst his friends, the more freely to follow Philosophy. Thus
these Philosophers, took such contentment in their spiritual riches, that
they esteemed the goods of the world not worthy so much as of a simple care:
for that being corruptible and transitory, they bring to me^ more burden then
benefit: They held also in like contempt all worldly honors and natural
pleasures, contrary to the spiritual felicities: For which eternal riches
Anaxagoras contemned with great constancy even from his first youth, all the
frail possessions and delites of the earth: For, being descended of a great
and rich house, he left all to go to study at Athens, and being become
learned, he said he had lost himself, if he had not lost and left the riches,
pleasures, and honors, to the which he stood possible by ye amplitude of his
house. But for all this, who seeks to heap masses of earthly goods, and
commodities of a plentiful life, may have easy means thereunto by learning,
by the which even naughty and corrupt men have been entertained in honor and
estimation: as we read of Dennis the Siracusian tirant, who chased out of his
kingdom, yet by his learning had continuance of honor, and kept a school at
Corinth, from whence for the favor only of his science, he was readopted to
his principality: when cruel Nero was threatened to be cast out of his Empire
for his tyranny, he answered, it was not that could make him careful for his
living, for that all regions nourished learned men, and who had a trade was
sure of mayntenaunce by it: Great are the benefits that grow by the men learned
in the laws, through their counselles and good judgments in the decision of
differences, controversies, and wars: and in distributing to every one his
particular and due right, what service do they to God? What excellent profit
comes by learned Physicians, in the cure of diseases? What pleasure is sweeter
to the sickeman, then to be eased of his pain? Many are the benefits in a
common weal growing by well experienced governors, wise in polletike
Philosophy, and learned in the laws, but much more by the deuines: Yea
learned men being virtuous and honest, do in the world the same which the
soul does in the body, without whose action subsisting, the body would fall
dead, and become a carcass of earth: yea that which the son does upon the
earth, without ye which as men would wander in universal confusion, so there is
would be no more delight in this life, and upon the earth nothing but dark
misery: it is not to be doubted, but as the shadow follows the body, so
riches and honors are due companio^s of virtuous science: to what estate of
honor are raised wise counselors, Presidents, and Chauncelloures, whom God
seems to honor by titles divine by reason of their estates whereunto they are
called by their excellent learning? And Kings and Princes give this honor to
learned men, that they receive counsel of them, are governed by them, and
wholly turned into their direction, and for recompense, indue them with the
highest estates of their Realms, and give them the use of their princely and
proper authority. Touching the Physicians, the wise man says, they have
honor of Kings and Emperors, and reverence in all regions and commonweals:
But for learned Deuines, and Preachers, and for the honor of their learning, I
say, that if they teach sincerely, and express their doctrine in their
conversation, they are called of Jesus Christ, the greatest in the kingdom of
God, and by David resembled to the firmament and stars of heaven: for they
shall shine in perpetual eternity. Touching the profit which they do to the
whole world (not speaking of riches and dignities which they ought to despise
in their hearts) by the mean of their doctrine, it appears plentifully,
as well by their Books and sermons, as by their examples of life, whereby they
are called the light of the world, the salt of the earth, and the eye of the
body polletike: For look how many te^porall commodities the light bringes to
the world, or the salt to preserve meat in season, or the eye serves to man for
his necessary uses, even so profitable, and necessary are learned men in the
church. And therefore for conclusion there is nothing of more dear care and
recommendatio^ to governors of countries, nor that bringes more honor and
profit to all and any whatsoever then a College or school from whom al those
honors, estates, riches, and dignities, do draw their beginnings: wherein I
may compare it to a fountain of a paradise terrestrial, watered by four
goodly rivers issuing out of it: For so out of this college or school ye
clear fountain of all learning, do issue, the arts liberal, law, physic,
and sacred divinity of the doctrine of which, the Church, the true terrestrial
and spiritual paradise, is plentifully liccored to make it every where
fructefie in all profitable and delitefull fruits: if there were no fountain
in this paradise all would become barreine: no less would happen if it were
dried up, by which occasion in the end the world would bear no flower of
honesty, nor fruit of virtue (the little plant, which I resemble to youth,
being become dry without any humor in the root, that is, doctrine, by the
which it ought to flourish and fructefie.)

It is necessary for many reasons that all scholars remain in one colleadge.
Chapter. xj.
There rests no more but to debate whether it be not good that scholars remain
al together: In the gretest and best judgment of learned men it seems very
requisite that they be al lodged in a coledge or schole for these three
reasons: The first belongs to discipline, the second to doctrine, and the
third is ciui^ Pithagoricall, (or rather christian) as shall be said: All t^^ee
containing one profit and necessity for a true and perfect institution of
youth: Touching discipline which is indiferently an instruction of manors, and
correction of vices, it is most certain in common experience, that with out all
comparyson it is best observed and entertained in a coledg: for there are given
orders, statutes, instructions and precepts, to them of ye house: where the
foriners (such as be with out the coledg) are not, nor conveniently cannot be
constrained to be, but specially they can not assist such orders as are
privately distributed to ye pensioners and chamber fellows of ye colleadg, And
for correction of faults there is no mean to exersice it upon such as lodge
with out, both for ye all beit they are not known, yet if complaint come, the
offender finds help in his absence: where by it happens that for want of
discipline. that sort of youth is norished in their vices, being far better
that such children had followed some service under the correction of their
parents or masters, then with ye study at their book, to learn to do evil,
whereby the profession of the schole and scholars suffers slander: Thus
vices rise to increase in such disordered youth for want of that good
instruction in the knowledge and fear of God, which duly is administered to the
howshold scholars, and for lack of rebuke and correction when they were taken
even in the action of their faults: And by experience this may be aduowched
for truth, that familier doctrine of the fear and love of God continued every
day in the schole, which draws so well young children from doing evil, that
it does much to take away the necessity and use of ye rodd: But for the
children of the town seeing they have not the commodities of this discipline,
it belonges to their parents to keep them in exersise and not suffer their
frail children to fall in to corruption by their ease and howshold examples:
Touching doctrine, it is not possible to work such ripe effect in scholars out
of the house, as in them that remain ordinarily with in the coledg: I mean not
at the times of readings and lectures, which is free to all to assist and to
profit all in comen: The household scholars have in their chambers or forms,
repeticion of their lectures even by the regents who have well studied and
understood them, which tutors, if they have not exelent knowledge, are not able
to repeat to their pupills, because they understand the^ not throwly: for as ye
regent notwithstanding this great lerning, gives him self to study ye lecture
two or three hours before he deliver it to the scholars: So if the tutor have
not ability of lerning how can he record with his pupills the substance and
meaning of the lecture: whereunto albeit his learning enhable him, yet having
through all the forms some scholars what leisure can he have to study the
lectures: then what ability to make it familiare with the understanding of his
scholars: To repeat the lecture, it is necessary he study it one hour at the
least, and if he have for every form two, there are three hours appointed to
the repetition to his pupilles of one form: and if he have of three fourmes
only, he must spend at the least in the study and repetition of lectures to
interpret them as he ought, xviii. hours the day. Let parents therefore (for
the better instruction of their children) choose no tutor but such as is
learned, and not encombred with many pupilles in several fourmes, which is a
meare abuse to the father, and a spoil to the time of the scholar. In a
College, they are tied to a continual diligence in study, where the
forreynors take their vain exercise in the streates and fields, measuring
their play at their own pleasure, and oftentimes run into liberty of will,
if they have not good masters. Besides, they in the College have particular
disputes, speak Latin continually, and have Theames at times and hours when
the students in the town can not assiste: they have exercise of declamations
and plays of Comedies sometimes, in which excellent and necessary co^tencion
of learning, the town scholars have no opportunity of instruction: yea they
are in continual exercise and war of learning, Pro. 27.
by which profitable emulacion Solomon says, that as iron is made sharp by
iron, so wits, by mutual controversy are best provoked to study.

The third reason proving it necessary to be instructed in a College, is the
love wherein they are nourished and confirmed by a common habitation
altogether: for which reason Pithagoras made a college calling it Caenobium,
as a Covent living together, as brothers of one house, and as Monks do in a
monastery. To which order most of the other Philosophers reduced their
colleges in Athenes, where the masters lived with the scholars, instructing
them in doctrine and co^societie of love and friendship: So that scholars,
living and leading conversation together in a college as in one house, are
induced to conciliation of love, and learned to enterteyne and retain friendship
for ever, which Cicero esteems a strong leage and knot of society and
inseparable amity. Then seeing it is a great and common benefit to a whole
country, that young children take knowledge and love together, to the end
that as they rise greater in body and years, so they may increase in
co^munitie of mind with perpetual peace and concord.

It can not but be most necessary, that they lead a common life together in
their youth in one College under one principal, and by the conduct of many
Regentes: the same being the cause why in the beginning of the book, I
allege a necessity to build Colleges, large and roomie, the better to
conteyne all the scholars of a Country: wishing the whole multitude to
observe ye institutions of the house, and as well forreinors as household
Colledgers being subject to their Principal and Regentes, to obey the
disciplines, doctrines, and common statutes of the house without any diversity
and contradiction.

In a College or School, there ought to be statutes authorized by the
Universities: the duty of Governors and townsmen to the Principalles and
Regentes: the office of masters to their Disciples, and of the scholars to
their masters. Chapter. xij.
I Need not now repete what ought to be the quality and estate of the
Principal and Regentes, having resolved that before: and much less entreat
of the number, seeing it restes only in the judgment of the Governors and
principal of their college, to rate that, according to the multitude and
capacity of scholars: only I beseech the founders and governors to erect
laws and inviolable statutes for ye establishment and guide of their College
with the judgment of their Principal, authorizing their statutes by all the
Courts of their province in inviolable stabilitie. For as the laws divine and
human are (as it were) the strength and walls of commonweals, even so are
the statutes of a College, the fortress and bulwark of the same, without the
which it can not be long kept from disorder and utter ruin. Let the
benefactors and Citizens honor their College with often visitacion and
contemplation of the principal and Regentes, to whom for their learning sake
belonges that merit of honor, but specially if they be come far off to do
service to their City, leaving their proper Countries and private commodities.
By this visitacion it will come to pass that the principal and Regents shall
be better obeyed and feared of their scholars, and they which with their
tutors, and altogyther better moved with common readiness to do the duty of
their College: and in cases of wrong, injury, and vexation offered by any,
let them join with them in aid and council to advance exemplarie justice:
wherein, in applying favor and protection to those that represent them all,
as well Magistrates as general parents of a whole province in the institution
of their youth (to whom then if injury be offered, the Magistrate and whole
common weal have interest therein, and therefore with common affection ought
to pursue the offender to public justice) they do honor to their commonweals in those learned men, who, resorting to Universities, or other public
or private places, will give honorable opinion and rapport touching the policy
and order of that City.

To be short, there can not be to great honor, reverence, and affection borne
to those persons, by whose industry in the institution and education of
youth, so many benefits grow, as by them, whole commonweals become happy:
so that if men love and honor virtue, science, honor, dignities, riches,
rest, and public felicity, much more ought they to honor and cherishe those
men by whom all those benefits are brought to whole countries? If Fathers and
mothers bear so dear love to their children, with desire to see them rise
into manners and qualities of civil men? ought they not with great affection
to embrace and cherishe such, by whom in their places, and with no less
Fatherly zeal their children are instructed, taught, corrected, and trained
even to their desires yea, if their Disciples were their proper children by
kind and blood, they could use no more affection to make them learned and
virtuous. In deed such deserve not the name of masters, who, bearing no
frank care and love to their scholars, seem as marcenary men, and but to
regard the present gain, holding their Scholars in negligence, and their
parents in hypocrisy touching their pains and diligence.

Touching the principal, he ought to love his regents as his brethren, who as
he is the ancient and first in authority over them, so, by the scripture, to
the eldest is ascribed the pre-eminence and supreme rule in a family: and
acknowledging him self as a brother, in the advancement and protection of his
brethren, giving them aid and favor to his uttermost power and credit: in an
other consideration he is called the head of the regents and scholars: (the
regents being the chief and principal members of the body under the head, and
ye scholars the inferior:) So that as he being a brother must behave himself
to his brothers in brotherly office, and as the head, govern his most
principal and excellent members with a chiefest care and duty, and so see the
rest bear mutual amity one to another. In like sort ought the Regents to
acknowledge all love, fear, and frank obedience (as they are warned by the
law of God) to their eldest and most ancient brother, forbearing (as near as
they can) to grieve their head or give him any occasion of offense, the same
being altogether against the law of nature, God, and man: as in a natural
body, by how much the members are near to the head, by so much do they
travel to give aid and pleasure to their natural head, as retayning of it
more providence or influxion: even so scholars (according to all law and
reason) ought to bear, love, reverence, fear, and obedience in all
subjection, to their head and principal first, and next to their Regents: yea
the same love, honor, fear, and obedience, which they owe to their parents,
and duties to the Magistrates, ought they to perform substancially to their
principal and Regents being as Lieftenants to their Fathers, Mothers, and
Magistrate, and whom the Principal and Regents love with the affection of
Fathers, no less then if they were their proper children: For recompense,
therefore, let them honor them with equal love and duty, and with reverence
as to the formers of their wits, and Fathers of their learning, always
considering that if their had not ben instructed, their ignorance and vice had
taken from them all dignity and honor in their life, and as blind men, they
had walked in perpetual darkness, falling into errors, and never confessed God,
and in the end had been perpetually wretched. In which respects as they well
deserve to be loved and honored as their Masters: so, yet they are bound to it
most of all, when they are risen into knowledge, by which they receive the
honorable fruit of their studies how often so ever they see themselves honored
for their learning, how often they gain by it, when they take most pleasure in
their Science, and see themselves raised into dignity and felicity above
others because of their learning and virtue: even so often let them honor the
remembrance of their Masters, and embrace them with perfect love, as who were
their original and happy means to raise them to those estates, and without
whom, they had been contemnible to the world with out any honorable ornament of
nature, forbearinge the rudenes of some unthankful disciples, who being once
highly mounted, make no more reckoning of the stirop that raised them to their
high seat: wherein much less that they deserve that they have, but with
unthankful children not acknowledging to their parents their due honor nor
the aid and duty which they owe the^, are not worthy of common life. Let such
and all other unthankful people remember, Rom 1
that it is a sin which S. Paul finds condemned of Christ to eternal
perdicion, and a sign of reprobation with God.

Refutation of the false judgments of some proud worldlings touching the
profession of schoolemasters: with a praise of that profession. Chapter. xiij.
MAny there be of too fleshly and reprobate judgment, who, either ignorant in
the dignity of learning, or sworn enemies against it, despise the state of
schoolemasters, 1. Peter. 2
calling them by many scornful and ridiculous names. But according to my
former opinion, I hold it before God, a calling most honorable and acceptable,
and in a common weal, the most profitable and necessary profession. For if
knowledge be commendable, and virtue deserve honor, much more merit of
reverence belonges to such as teach them? If to men using great estates and
offices, be reserved an universal reverence? What less honor is due to him
that makes them worthy of it, and by his industry, brings them into the merit
of such high calling? If wise and learned men be famous through the world for
the benefits that grow by their counsel, commandment and authority: is
there less duty of renoume and immortal praise to such as are the authors of
those benefits by their learning? If men learned in the laws profit so much
commonweals? If Physicians be so necessary for that in them rests the cure
of bodies? If lastly by the deuines we find comfort to our heavy souls: how
much are we bound to such as are the first causes of these divine fruits, who
are the schoolemasters, without whom and the foundation by them laid in those
doctrines, they had never ascended to those seats of honor: when we see a
goodly building so excellent in beauty that the world gives it singular
estimation, what can we ascribe less to him who laid the foundation and
raised the work to that excellency then the principal praise? For if fair,
delitefull and profitable works be so generally praised, nothing less is due
to the hand that fashioned them: Who delites to behold a goodly picture, does
great wrong to ye painter, if he ascribe not much to the commendation of his
skill: yea, if there were laid on but the first coollers, yet the beholder
ought to be thankful to his industry and labor. But if such as nourish our
mortal bodies deserve great affection and memorable renoume, much more are we
bound both in love and perpetual duty, to them that minister food to the
immortal spirits of little children: if so great reverence be reserved to
Physicians, for helping the health of bodies, which one day must die
notwithstanding: Is there not more merit of honor to such as cure our souls
of immortal diseases? The scripture pronounces many textes to ye shame of
those which despise scholemasters: of which profession Christ seemed to make
his Apostles when he spoke to Peter: if thou love me feed my Lambs. What
other thing is it to feed, then to nourish and teach in good doctrine: and the
Lambs of the flock of Jesus Christ (according to the natural property of
speaking) are young children, whom he holds no less dear then his proper
flesh. I say not that under that name are meant all sorts of people, and yet
it can not be denied but that those littleones deserve chief instruction: For
S. John, after he had taught in diverse countries, (being compelled to leave
them for a time and go elswhether) by special writing said to the little ones,
comfort your selves O ye young ones, 1. John. 2.
in that you are (by ye grace and word of God) strong and virtuous, for that
the word of God remaynes in you, and that you have vanquished the wicked
spirit through the grace and merit of Jesus Christ: Yea Christ him self caused
the little children to come into his school, Mat. 18.19. Luke. 18.
blaming the Apostles (being yet of the flesh) by cause they let those
littleones for coming to him, as though he would not have taught and helped
them as well, as even the greatest: but he commanded to bring them to him, and
pronounced them (in that instruction and imposition of hands which he gave
them) worthy of the kingdom of GOD, saying that to those and such like the
everlasting world belongs: Then such as receive little children into
discipline, exercise the office of Jesus Church: the same sturring up the
Bishops in old time to take into charge of discipline and teaching little
children, as also did both the one and the other S. John, and the Prophets had
many disciples, who otherwise were called the children of the Prophets: it is
written, that many holy men went thorough the world to teach scholars with
this intention, that with the rules of learning, they should also instruct them
in the principles of faith, and by that mean, win the Fathers and mothers to
Jesus christ: amongst these Origin was not the least zealous: and S. Gregory
the Pope refused not this vocation for certain hours of the day: For which
considerations, a certain learned doctor of our time, M. John Garson of Par.
and chauncellor of a famous university, had no shame to go through the
Colleadges of the universities at certain convenient hours, and teach little
children in familiar doctrines which he did for the love and zeal of God: And
being oftentimes reproched by other doctors, that he showed an example unworthy
his place, specially for that there were sufficient tuters to that purpose: he
answered that they were as fleshly doctors, resembling the Apostles not yet in
full liberty of the spirit, who, by glorious opinion forbad little children
to approach near to Jesus Christ: alleging that there was no duty of
access to him but by those that were grave: I ask of those fleshly doctors,
whether the shepeheard that keeps the Lambs of a Father of household do not as
good and agreeable service to his Master, as if he had in charge greater
sheep? If a Father show more dear love to his little children, then to those
that have riper age, follows it not by congruent reason, that such as give
succoures to those little ones and keep them from danger, deserve better
recompense of the Father, then if they had done service to his greater sons?
If the little plant in the garden of any Farmer, be so much cherished that the
eye of the owner is seldom from it: he then that watreth it, prunes it, and
defends it from the cropping of beasts, and other injuries, what service does
he to the owner? Yea what greater pleasure can he do to the Farmer: whose young
plant without this industry, were subject to spoil, without hope to yield any
fruit: even as if the little Lambs of the flock were lost, and the young
children corrupt, there were no exspectation of restitution of that loss and
corruption. The schoolmaster then, having in charge these little lambs of
Jesus Christ, and the preparing of this tender plant of his gardeine (which is
the Church) and lastly the leading of these little children, being the delites
of the Lord, how acceptable is his loyal and diligent service to his Lord,
and to God? And if such as sclaunder these little ones through wicked doctrine
and example, deserve to have fastened to their neck a millstone, and drowned in
the bottom of the deepest Sea: What recompense or reward is due to those
tutors and scholemasters by whom those littleones are instructed, and led in
example of all holiness? Are they not worthy as Daniell says, to shine as the
firmament and stars of heaven in everlasting glory, and to be called the
greatest of the kingdom of God? Yea (according to Jesus Christ) even the most
happy of all? And if every one ought to receive the reward of his travels, as
there is no estate of more hard labors, more great pains, more perpetual
perplexeties, and more often reproaches, yea being even as little martyrs: so
there is no profession wherein are less faults: For the Masters seeking but
to comunicate their learning with their disciplrs, never endure their vices: if
they speak evil, they correct them: if they do evil they are punished: they
never give them liberty of idleness though they allow times of necessary
recreation. In this estate is nothing but chastity, for which cause they are
called Pallas, and the Muses being Mayds, by which occasion, not without cause
the Poets fained Pallas the Gods of wisdom and maid with her nine maiden
sisters the Muses, who also as they signify the exercise of sciences,
containing in it virginity and perpetual honesty: so they are called
sisters, as being all of one mutual society, and indiuidible conjunction.
There is no thing but virtue, and godliness in a school, and therefore it
deserves well to be called a religion: if in any books of the pagans, there be
words uncivil, bearing to unchaste love, or expressing nombers of Gods: the
scholars are advertised by their tutors, that they are speeches of infidelles
which knew not God, and therefore in taking the rose, they may leave the
thorns, and being taught the good, they are also warned from that which is
evil. What rests now more to be alleged of these detractors and scoffers
of the estate of schoolemasters, so noble and happy, and almost the general
cause of all the benefits that are done in the world: where they being men of
vain and light spirits, are also a people unprofitable, and a burden and
charge to the earth, Rattes and deuowring vermin of the garnors of good men,
because they have not passed by good schools, where, (with civility in speech
and life) they might have learned some Art, profitable to their country, and
honorable to themselves: when they die, they cannot leave any testimony that
they lived upon the earth for that to them posterity can prescribe no memory
of God. These scoffers by contempt call schoolemasters Magisters and Dominos,
which turns as a glory to them, for that they have those names common with
Jesus Christ saying to his Disciples, you call me Magister and Domine, sum
etenim so schoolemasters are Magistri, by the state of their teaching, and
Domini, for that they command their disciples, and give laws to their
affections and lusts: where those dispisers of good men (for whom according to
Solomon the terrible judgments of God are prepared) are thralles and slaves to
their passions: Pro. 19.
yea, it is to be feared, that they are even the bondmen of Satan, whom they
obey, and are the executors of his commandments, whereof the greatest and
most pernicious, is, to contemn the good sort and vex with violence and wrong,
men of learning and virtue, being an estate that most batter the kingdom of
Satan, and bring ruin to his tirannie. But notwithstanding their scoffs and
vain impediments, they are both Lords and Masters, as exercising both
authority and discipline in their jurisdiction of their small common weal,
as well as the greatest Magistrate of the earth: and to scoff with those
scoffers, we may say they have their scepture in hand, with distribucion of
high and inferior Justice: for they condemn, iustefie, and absolve, and when
they condemn there is no appeal: yea there is such direct pollecie in their
common weal, that it suffers neither disorder nor confusion: where it is hard
to these inciuill iesters to put order in their small families, compounded
perhaps but upon two or three persons: but crying some times as the blind man
when he has lost his staff, strike sometimes without measure or reason,
reaping by their disorder, a grievous curse to themselves and families:
whereupon is no great cause of merueile for that being not hable to govern
themselves for want of discipline, they have less capacity to rule others:
For end let them remember the sentence of Seneca, that evil does he merit to
command others, which has not himself lived long under the discipline of
good Masters and learned to obey their commandments: So that with Solomon I
may answer them at full, that a wicked man, can not but lead his tongue in
wickedness, and who abhorres good men, are detested of God.

An exhortation to young children to study. Chapter. xiiij.
Moreover, waighing with the common benefitts coming to comonweals, the sweet
profitts that grow to singular men by learning: I exhort all young men to the
study of the same, their nature specially inclining, and their abillitie
consenting, making conscience to lose one only minute of time, according to the
examples and counsel of Theophrastus and Pliny. Whereof as the on in saying,
time was a most precius expense, signified, ye no more ought men to consume
vainly the least part of time then to make prodigal expenses or wast of a
most delicat meat: so the other held all times lost, which were not employed
in study, the same being the cause that he would not suffer his reader to
repeat to him one word twice, alleging that it hindered his time to pass
further, and learn that which yet he knew not: where ^he consented with the
most part of all wise men, whose opinions were that in all things ought we to
be liberal saving of our honor and time, in which two things being so precious
we ought to be so sparing, as not to be prodigal in either of them not to our
very frinds: But to come to knowledge and virtue, they must first demand them of
God, who is the only disposer of the^: the lord (says Solomon) gives wisdom,
Pro. 6.
and knowleg and discresion comes from his mouth: Ia 1.
who has need of wisdom let him ask it of God says S. James, who gives it
abundauntly, and reprocheth none of that he gives them, but enioyneth them to
humility, for on the humble and meek, he bestows his grace: secondly it is
necesarie to take such masters as we have described good, learned, diligent,
and discret: Thirdly, there must be aplied great labors, and seruis travel,
which abeit seem heavy and painful at the beginning, yet after the first taste
be past, they shall feel a most sweet juice or likquor in the fruit of
lerning: for which cause Jsocrates resembled learning to a tree, whose root is
sower and the bark bitter, but in the fruits, is a most pleasant and
delightful taste: Plutarch wills men not to stick at ye labor, that brings any
great or excellent benefitt: for with the infinitt and glorius recompense before
God, and the whole world of such labor, the custom of those pains makes the
burden easy: which was right aptly advised of Cato, that virtue has her
exercise in hard trauells which pass away, but the fruit there of remains
eternal being a perpetual inward delight of ye mind of man: Therefore much
less that labor ought to terifie or with draw young wits from study but, in
the consideration of knowledge accompanied with profitt, pleasure, glory, and
immortal name, there is great cause to conuite them to a voluntari forwardnes
besides that by custom, those labors are made east and pleasant containing in
them a feeding delight: the same judgment may be made of virtue, of whom
learning is the norsse, and most faithful preservation which is the reason,
that as a man rises in knowledge, so he encreseth in study more then at the
beginning: And being come to greater skill, he feels not at all the gravity
of his pains for that inward delight of mind which he finds therein: and so
aspiring (as it wear) in an ambicius zeal to learning, he finds that the
knowledge he has gotten is nothing in regard of that which he is ignorant of,
according to the answer of Socrates, that his knowledge was yet nothing in
comparison, of his ignorance: Fourthly to attain to lerning it is expedient to
use with the labor you take, inteligence or understanding of that you learn,
order of studies, repeticion, conference, and exercise of memory, and style:
Intelligence aides ye judgment, order, repeticion or conference, and style,
frame the memory, which of all other faculties of the mind, is most necessary
to knowledge as being the gardien or keeper of them: for as the immagination
aprehendes, the understanding comprehendes, debats, and judges: So the memory
reteins and as a tresur co^serues what so ever is heard, seen and red: And to
have a good memory it ss necessary to understand perfectly that is learned,
seeing to things well understand, memory is a faithful and plentiful
storehowse: order serves as an artificial memorial which was familier with
Symonides, and for that he was judged to excel in memory: Repeticion
engraueth the impression of things which you will retain, and therefore if was
a custom amongst the folowers of Pythagoras to repeat every day that which
they learned the day before, which made them above al other Philosophers most
singular in knowledge: as indeed we know nothing but what we have committed to
the guard and keeping of our memory, for if we have learned much at times and
do not retain it, we cannot say we know it, if we cannot remember it and apply
it as the occasion of our purpose requiers: no more then that man may be called
rich which gained much in times past, and kept little: but better may he be
esteemed welthy, who having got much, has of that to serve his use
plentifully, and do pleasure to his friends. So that above all, let young
wits exercise their memory by diligent and perfect intelligence of ye which
they study, then by exact meditation, and after by repeticion in them selves,
or conference with their companions, not learning that which they do not
communicate or dispute with an other, (the better to commit it to writing) or
else reduce it into common places, which will be to them as certain perpetual
memorialles.

The woll must lie long in the dye the better to take a continual cooller,
other ways much less that it would be dyed to an excellent and lasting hew,
but of the contrary the cooller would be course, and yet fade quickly: it is
then requisite that tutors who have judgment for their Disciples, apply
carefully these means, or better if they know any, for the better institution
of their scholars: not doubting but that memory (as does the spirit) is
quickened by that exercise, and seems to rise into daily increase by that
mean, even until it touch the type of singular perfection. There be that
have ready wits, and sharp memories by nature: but nature without art,
without doctrine, and exercise, is a thing maimed and imperfect: but having the
aid of these, it yeeldes wonderful fruit, even as the fertile ground well
tilled fructifieth the better, without which industry it would yield an
unprofitable harvest to the owner. And as there is no ground so barene by
nature, which by plowing, fatting, and laboring, is not reduced to some frui^^,
by the same reason there can not be such dull wits and short memories, which
by the benefits of the means aforesaid are not sharpened and made better.
This I bring in by the way, the more to stir up young spirits feeling such
weakness of nature, to travel to correct them by those industries, as we read
Demosthenes by importunat and continual labors reformed so well his vice of
nature being given to stutt and very unapt to learn, that he came to excel
even ye most excellent Orators of his time. In this sort then, both the one
and the other young wits as well sharp and forward, as slow and dull, are
exhorted to get knowledge, for the which (together with acts of true virtue)
they are truly acknowledged worthy of the name of men, as without them, they
are but creatures masked, rather then men: neither worthy of worldly honor, nor
resolved of the certain mean to their salvation, and much less able to
comprehend what God is: knowledge will enable them and set them out to what
estate they like to follow, and bring them honor, though they will not make
exercise of learning. And besides the pleasure, they shall receive by it sweet
profit, and assured honor: yea be it that they profess estate of arms (a
life seeming far estraunged from learning) even there also doctrine gives the
greatest aid, according to the fame of the Athenian Captains, who, being
learned men, brought forth acts more valiant and wonderful then others: and
by learning, the great Alexander, Caesar, and Augustus (amongst other princes
most learned) have brought no small renown to their enterprises and acts of
war. For this cause the poets have feigned Pallas (signifying science) armed,
and as a leader of a camp: meaning by that fiction that an army is most
suerly guyded by Captains learned, as in whom rests most subtle and sharp
spirits, and a settled judgment of all the policies and strategemes of other
ancient Captains conquering towns, countries, and kingdoms. Besides this,
the memory of such valiant acts would perish, were not for the writings of
learned men, who being Captains, as Thucidides, Julius Caesar, and Josephus,
or at the least men at arms, as Salust, have a better order of description,
then such as know nothing but by hear say: to such as hold that learning make
men's minds fearful and to much deliberate or thoughtfull, it may be
answered, that in the liberal and noble minds, it rather works an effect of
greater courage, as is most certain in the former examples. And touching
thought, it is necessary to consider with advise, when, where, and how to
direct attemptes of war, wherein, as it is found true in common experience,
that council and discretion in wars do more then force, so, it falls out
most commonly, that battles governed with rash boldness, bring forth
unhappy issues: where, wisdom ruling fortune seems to go with Gods
deliberat providence. For a last praise of learning in attemptes of war, we
find that the Lacedaemonians painted the nine Muses armed, declaring that men
of knowledge do then best dispose and instruct in wars, when specially they
have practiced their knowledge by some experience, which gives them a skill to
fight with more wisdom, and greater courage. This is in effect that I had to
say in exhortacion to young wits, to follow the study of learning, and
withal to answer such as hold that learning profits not artisans,
marchantes, no nor Gentlemen, if specially they follow arms, but makes them
fearful to follow the hazard and fortune of war: an opinion sufficiently
proved false, as well by reason, as by certain experience of many worlds.

The end of the v. Book.
The vi. Book.
Of the office of every estate, and first of the duty of the husbond to his
wife. Chapter. j.
WE have now to handle the duty of every estate, with the particulare
conversation of all sorts of people, except Magistrates, governors,
Phisicions, Apoticaries, and Surgeons, principals, regentes, and School
masters, and office of scholars to their masters, of all which we have
debated before: and therefore the better to prepare and order our discourse, we
will begin with the three first societies, beginnings of natural policies,
and natural foundacions of all commonweals, that is, of the man and woman in
marriage: of Fathers and mothers, and of children: of masters and servants:
and of Maistresses and their handmaydes, and so pursue successively the other
qualities and conditions of diverse persons.

Touching the Husband, he ought to acknowledge him self to be created of God
(and yt with action of thanks) man, to his image and likeness, to the end to
represent him hear in all perfection of understanding, of judgment, and of
reason. And albeit he has erred (I mean in Adam) and is fallen by sin from
that similitude and Image of perfection: yet he has always retained (by Gods
goodness) more then ye woman some excellency of nature touching the mind, and
force and ability of body, by both which reliefes of his first creation and
nature, (when he uses them in seasons and exercises) he has achieved many
right high and memorable acts. So that by how much he has that advantage
above the woman in those natural virtues, by so much more is he bound to
express and show them in the government of his wife and household: And
therefore it is meet he keep in society with his quick and sharp
understanding, a deep judgment, and a reason exempt and free from all vain
and wicked affections, which he shall then perform to his honor, and praise of
his kind, and pre-eminence of nature, when he shall most deck and set out his
mind with knowledge (specially of GOD) which is as a light to the mind in all
her speculations and humane actions: and when he shall be garnished with
faith, and reskued by the aid of Gods grace, presented, and communicated to
the humble and good livers: And so a man taking this course, with common and
diligent exercise in virtue, may marry in a competent and reasonable age,
which is, in some sooner, and in others more late, according to the importance
of their nature and strength: At the furthest, let him not exceed xxxvi.
years, a time for marriage prescribed by Hesiode and Aristotle. I think they
spoke chiefly of Philosophers, and such, to whom, by the perpetual exercise of
their youth, was no opportunity or leisure to marie) nor sooner then at xx.
years (if there be no just causes of anticipation) as not to restrain the
vigor and natural faculties of strength and growing, which continues commonly
until xxviii. years, by which the life is shortened, and children engendered
in the weak age of their father, are subject to debility in corporal stature,
partaking more of dwarffes, then of substantial and perfect men. The same is
also a lawful cause to stay maids from hasty marriage, specially before they
bear sufficient and just stature, and their natural forces resolved: other
ways they stand in peril of the inconveniences with their husbands, which
afterward can not be remedied. I know the positive laws advance the time of
marriage, giving liberty to the man at xiiii. and the maid at xii. years: not
yt those laws approve that prerogative, or anticipate marriage by
commau^dment, but only by permission, to provide for and bridle those
intemperat lusts, which easily can not be limited in young men left to idle
liberty, and without the authority of parents: by which occasion without
this mean, their hot youth would carry them into adulteries, incestes, and
rapes, with other filthy delites of the flesh, wherein they would wallow as
little pigges in puddles. This council I give by the opinion and consent of
natural philosophy, according to the which, wise men are wont to govern
their bodies, and keep their youth from corruption. And in the Scripture we
read ye young me^ grown to perfect stature, as Jsaac and Jacob, had xl. years
before they married: a time wherein they were able to enter wedlock by holy and
wise judgment, not to accomplish only the pleasures of ye flesh (unworthy
for such as know God) but of purpose chiefly to raise procreation (according to
the institution of marriage) whom they had then discretion to instruct in the
knowledge and fear of God whereunto they are enjoined by scripture: Phil. 5.
leaving the other cause (which is the remedy of infirmity) for such as
vexed with hot lust stood in danger to slide into the corrupt effects of
the flesh.

The youth of Jsrael were never admitted to marriage, till they bare age to be
enrolled in the books of mustters for the wars, the better to be able to
defend their wife and children against enemies: wherein the fact can not but
bear against all reason to committ a wife to a husband, in whom is neither
force to defend her, nor discretion to direct her (both which are most
necessary in marriage) and much less being pore him self, has no mean by art
or abylitie of industrye to provide for his wife and howshold: great suer is
the folly in any man to aspire to marriage before he have attained to the virtues
requisite to the honorable direction of that estat, and by discretion can
employe his wealth gotten to uses, and be able by law and force (if need be) to
defend him and his against all violent oppressors But much more intolerable is
that rashness that leads men to marie being not yet prepared to entertain and
provide for the necessities of it: by this the seed of poverty is sown in
all parts of a kingdom, whereof the harvest is more ple^tifull then of other
things: their children have their succoure in begging, and their wives yet
young, are constrained with dishonor to wander to the great peril of their
chastity: In the mean while, till nature establish compotent years, let this
forward youth be tamed by trauells and continual labors, let them be enured
with sermons and doctrine, by the which they may restrain their passions: but
specially on festival days, a time when idleness joined with liberty, invites
youth both to do and think evil, yea if there be any feason reserve of the
hollydays from their spiritual duties, let it be performed in some plays or
exercise of pain and travel, by the which both the mind shall be discontinued
from idle thoughts, and ye body taken out of the care of beastly desiers: But
seeing the intent of marriage, is the hope of procreation, such as ar cold of
nature, defective, and impotent ought not to marry: yea if they be married by
faulse persuasion, the marriage may be dissolved: Such also as be unclean and
diseased, ought not to entermedle marriage, as well for the respect of their
common weal, to the which their children should not only be unprofitable,
hurtful and burdenous, but also in consideration of them selves, but more for
their issue, whom they know are (by their occasiones) to remain always
misserable, for they are not ignorant, that such as them selves are, such
shall be the effect of their seed and generation: So that what other thing can
it be to them, Toby. 6
but a perpetual infelicitie to see their stock and children languish in
wretchidnes before their eyes? Yea their whole house borne to this misserie, not
to on suffered good day in all their life with out sorrow, and sighing, Genesis 8.
and bear (as it wear) a death upon their backs even from their first birth:
In this the woman disposed to marie ought as well as the man not to make
fielthy lust the principal end of her marriage, (for that were to enter
wedding with infidells) and an intention reproved in the scriptures, as in
Tobyas it is said that a devil caulled Asmodeas, killed seven husbands of
Sara the first night of their marriges, who for the only lust of the fleash,
and desire of her beauty, had married her one after another. So did the
children of god marie before the flood (I mean the sons of Seth which had
learned to serve God) who seeing the daughters of men (that is descended of the
race of Cain) worldly, faier, and bravely attired, married with them: For which
carnal affection (for they turned afterward from the fear of God) the Lord
roase in to such ire, togteher also for other vices of that world, that he sent
a general slud: And Jesus Christ gives to understand, that that lust and
disordred pleasure, are the causes that married folks, called to the spiritual
banquet of God, make no rekconing of of it, excusing themselves by the
hinderance their mariadges, which ought rather to be aids and common means
for the man and woman to animat one an other to search God, in whose name they
are assembled to pray, to prosper them in their mariadge, and give them
children, whom they may instruct in his law, acknowledging that they are
mortal, and if they offend God and live not in him, he can and will punnish
them with some misery: I say not but beauty is requisite in marriage, as we
read Jacob was more desirous to have Rachell to wife, because she was fairer
then Lia: And albeit in many places, wives are praised in the Scripture for
their beauty (which is a gift of God in nature) yet, it is with this lesson,
that men take heed, that it be not the only cause associated with lust, to
entise the mind to marriage. For such societies of wedlock as they, are not of
the Israelites and Christians who have commandments to renounce the
affections and lusts, and to put on a new man: So, they can not but stand in
danger to be profaned by such affection, as not diffring much from those
fleshly marriages, for yt which partly the general flood was sent to drown the
creatures of the earth. Touching wealth or riches for the which many do marry,
and in that only consideration, not marying wives, but their wealth, many
enter wedlock with their Mistresses, and choose sometimes wives whom they know
to be barreine, old, and counterfeit: In whom having no hope of procreation,
what other thing do such husbands but abuse marriage through covetousness, and
profane it, no less then others by unbridled and whorish lusts: The poor
ought to be married with the rich, according to the custom of the
Lacedaemonians: And in the Scripture we find that men bought their wives as
Jacob redeemed his, wherein as it is a great reproach to a man to take charge of
a wife, if he have not ability and mean to mayntaine her: So in such
societies, (I mean by unlawful means in persons unlike in quality, and
contrary in manners and nature,) it happneth, that seldom is found true
friendship between man and wife, but dissembled love, perpetual dissension,
ielosies, and dissolute whoredoms, and in the end, desperate divorce: But
touching the man meaning to marry, seeing he ought to understand that the good
wife as Solomon says, is given of God, Pro. 19.^
as inheritances are naturally left of parents to their children, and according
to the text of Jesus Christ, God is he that from heaven conioynes marriages
inseparable Let him I say recommend himself altogether to God with peticion to
bestow upon him such one for his wife whom he sees fit to assemble with him in
mutual amity, and to live happily according to his holy will, in raising
children, and them to teach in his fear, in sort that afterward they may
become instruments to his service and honor. Wherein it is not to be doubted
(seeing it is aduouched by many textes that importunity of prayer preuailes
with God) but his demand shall find grace: by this, we read the Patriarchs
Jsaac and Jacob were happy in their mariadges: In this request and peticion to
God, the woman has no less interest then the man for the obtaining of a good
and faithful husband: 2. Cor. 7.
And so let there be no mariadge but in the Lord, that is with yokefellowes of
one faith and religion: observing in their choice, his inspiration and will,
and not induced by dishonest affections, covetousness, or pleasures: which
things much less that they are of God, seeing of the contrary where any of
them remain he is not present at the conjunction of persons: only there his
presence assisteth, where is true amity in conformetie of will and manners,
and honesty, in his fear and holy affections: In this sort, the tiche shall
choose the poor as soon as the wealthy (to whom for charity he ought to do as
Booz taking to wife poor Ruth) and the stranger as his neighbor, so that he
know her (for seldom we love heartily that we know not well) and lastly the
Orphane before a maid endowed, yea and that rather for the honor of God: For
so shall they love virtue better then beauty, and the humility of the poor
handmayd, better the^ the proud and fierce stomach of a rich Lady, against
such mariadges was Themistocles, who held it better to marry his daughter to a
man needing money (albeit poor in wealth, yet rich in industry and means to
wealth) then to money having need of a man to use it: meaning that a richman
weak in the use and disposing of his wealth, becomes poor for want of
capacity and industry: herein the judgments of the Lacedaemonians were
righteous against certain rich Lords demanding the daughters of their King
Lyander in hope of great credit by that alliance: But the king being dead,
they would have refused the contractes, if they had not been constrained by
public authority of the Court: such also deserve like condemnation, who by
fearful distrust, dare not enter mariadge without great porcions, fearing, in
choosing poor maids, to suffer continual necessity: which of all other ought
least to be feared, for that if to their trade or industry to live, be joined
a will to travel, calling upon God and fearing him, the Lord will so bless
their labors, that in the end they shall be rich above their hope: At the
least, if they live justly and in the conversation of honest men, they have
promises not to be abandoned in their necessities, Psalm. 33.36
nor their children to live by alms, for that god will provide for their
necessary wantes: which promises are confirmed by many miracles in the old and
new testament: as of the Israelites whom he nourished in the desert forty
years: and of Helias and Eliseus: Likewise such as followed Jesus Christ in the
mountains and deserts, we read what providence he raised to feed them:
Besides, in this we are confounded even by the birds of the air, in whom
being no reason of care, God prouides food for them by his providence: Much
more then is his care over us, if we travel in our vocation, with fear,
prayer, service: and thanksgiving: we read how Jesus Christ approved the
society of such poor, when, with the virgin Mary, and his disciples, he
assisted the mariadges of such people: For as when the wine failed, and no more
to be had there, it is to be concluded that their want was great, so, if enough
had remained, the virgin Mary had not prayed for them, and Christ had not done
his miracle, if it had not been in time of necessity: if then Jesus Christ
bear such favor to mariadges of the poor, that he turns their water into
wine in sign that he will aid them: Let those of little faith whose
disposition of mariadge is drawn by a desire of wealth, and being afraid to
suffer hunger, refuse to enter wedlock: Let such be assured that God will
defend his poor from famine and want, when they shall fall into acts of
infamous life: And let not good Christians, albeit they have not such plenty
of wealth, make difficulty to marry in sort as I have prescribed, and much
less distrust the increase of goods, seeing as labor and time make men
ritche: so where Jesus Christ is called to the mariadge, although the wine
fail, at the length, he will turn all those malencholly waters into
comfortable wines, and even so all their small necessities, into great
abundance of wealth: Where I spoke of the poor sort, I mean such as are
industrious, as for others that will not travel, nor learn a trade to live
by, ought to be constrained to labor, rather then suffered to marry, (seeing
God assistes not the assembly of such people) but from poverty suffers them
to fall into extreme misery, wherein is wrought a common burden to commonweals.

A continuance of the matter of marriage, and the duty of the husband to his
wife, as also of her office to her good man. Chapter ij.
A Man having determined in himself with the judgment and good will of his
nearest Parents, to join to a wife, such one as he has long known to be
worthy of him, and she also with the consent of such to who^ she appertains,
ageeeth with liberal will to such marriage, ought before all other things to
observe the public Banes for avoiding of slander, and after to proceed to
the rest by the hand of the minister in the word of God and that faith one to
another which publicly he shall minister to them, addinge the blissing which he
shall give and the prayer which he makes with all the assistantes for them to
GOD to knit them together in holy unity, inviolable love and society, and
give them happy days in their marriage with plentiful multiplication of
children, such as they may institute and bring up to his service, without which
observations, the ancient fathers judged such society of man and wife, no
lawful marriage, but rather a bed of concubines, and pagan conjunction. This
man being thus married, ought first with the consideration of his perfection
of nature and common graces of GOD which he has more then the woman, to
employe them all chiefly to the instruction, guide and government of his wife,
and then to the direction of his affairs: he is bound to communicate such
laws as he would have his wife to keep, with loving instruction, exhortinge
her to the parts of her duty friendly, without any force, protesting also to
perform what belonges to his office, being both bound thereunto by the
express statutes of God. Touching his part (besides the first consideration
of his more perfect creation) he ought to consider that as he is the head of
his wife, so in that he resembles the purtreite of Jesus Christ, so to lead
his wife, as our Lord governs his church. The head gouernes his body, by the
understanding, moving, and sense: even so Jesus Christ inspireth his church,
and infuseth his graces into her, the better to know and do that, which
concerns God, and her own sauetie. The head has the eye to see, the ear to
hear, the tongue to speak and taste, and all to the profit and benefit of the
whole body, taking perpetual care of it, and feeling the greeues of every
member as his own: even the like does Jesus Christ for his Church spiritually,
seeing and foreseeing what so ever is necessary for it: he hears her plaintes
and necessities, and gyues her succor with perpetual aid: what then ought
the man to do to his wife? to what care and providence is he bound over her?
yea to what rate of aid and succor is he tied, if he will worthily express
the example of his patron? if he do it not, what greater wrong can he offer to
God, or manifest injury to the holy institution of marriage? makes he not
solemn profession to follow that divine Spouse of the Church by his marriage,
as also the woman protestes for her part to follow the church? Besides, as the
head naturally loves the body, as united with it by nature in indivisible
unity, he works for it, he takes thought for it, and defendes it: so Jesus
Christ conjoined to his church, loves it dearly, watches for it, kepes and
protectes it against the assaults of all visible and invisible enemies. What
belonges then to the husband, the image of this spiritual spouse of Jesus
Christ, who redeemed his church with his blood when she was thrall to satan:
washed her with his proper blood when she was unclean: dyed to revive her
being dead: justifies her and blisseth her afterward in communicatinge to
her part of all his benefits, and making her with himself coinheritor of his
Paradise. Could he show her more great signs of perfect amity? yea he has
conjoined himself with her as one flesh, making her flesh of his flesh, blood
of his blood, and bones of his bones: as we believe, Eua was taken out of the
ribbe of Ada^, whereby he acknowledged her to be his flesh and bones: And for
virtue of that conjunction, he said, that (touching cohabitation together) man
should leave Father and mother to cleave to his wife: yea so great is this
conjunction and inseparable unity, that no more can it be divided, then the
flesh of the ribbe (being connaturall to it by consent and order of nature,)
can be separated from the bone, nor the body disioyned from his head: wherein
man may understand with what love he is bound to his wife: how he ought to
love her as his proper flesh, with resolution to live with her in amity and
unity of indiuidible will, as he sees her conjoined to him by indissoluble
communion, both according to the first ordinance of God, and by the second
renouation and alliance which Jesus Christ has made with his church in
spiritual marriage: with this (a thing knit to true love) let him think that
the woman was taken out of the ribbe of the man, to signify that she should
be his companion, and not cut out of his heel, to be his handmaid and
subject. For that cause S. Peter calls the woman coinheritrix of grace and
life with the man, and (with S. Paul) exhorts husbands to entreat their
wives with all gentleness, and cohabit with them by discretion, as being weak
vessels: giving them honor, and not to grieve them either with too great
burden of business, or by worldly or fleshly lettes whereby their prayers may be
hindered: meaning partly (with the council of S. Paul) that man and wife
sometimes ought to refrain mutual cohabitacion of their bodies, to exercise
themselves in prayer and fasting, as when there is preparacion for the
communion: which Ioell: commaundes also to do in time of penance, when there
is question to reconcile God with tears and fasting: then is the time (says
he) that the husband should divide bed with his wife, and she forbear her
marriage couche, the better to pray to God. For notwithstanding such
cohabitacions and acts of the flesh in marriage, are not of themselves (in
respect of the purpose of that institution) unlawful at all times, yet because
they draw the spirit (of it self divine and heavenly) into corrupt thoughts,
quenching the spiritual force and action of the same, and as it were, weaken
it of power to raise it self to God in pure and lively contemplacion, they can
not be but hurtful, without moderation. For which purposes if men be bound to
fast, and to qualefye their unruly lusts: with better reason ought they to
absteyne from such acts, which no less, or rather more, but in other
quality, pervert the spiritual faculties of the mind, then either abundance
of meats, or plenty of wine: and yet the scripture seems to give no such
express commandment touching co^tinencie as of abstinence, as not to
condemn the invincible infirmity and incontinency of many fleshly creatures,
who, even in marriage, have not power (in respect of their custom) to absteyne
easelie: Here the man and wife are to be advertised, that seeing marriage of
his proper institution is a thing honorable and undefiled, let them not deface
and stayne it by unlawful and immoderat pleasures, more beastly then natural:
let them remember the warning of David, Psalm. 31.
Be not (says he) as a Horse or Moyle, in whom is no understanding: let them
beware that they seek not after inordinate passions, which provoke to acts of
Pagans, says S. Paul: let them be without perturbation of mind, as not
bearing anger nor grudge against any man: let them not lurfeyte of eating and
drinking, nor be subject to gluttony and dronkenes. For it is most certain,
that the procreation shall resemble the qualities and corrupt natures of the
Father and mother: and therefore Diogenes not without cause, seeing a young boy
wanton and given to wine, gave judgment, that his father begotte him when he
was drunk, as also most commonly, bastardes be leacherous, by reason of the
unchaste lust of their Father and mother wherein they were engendered. But now
to the laws and rules which the husband ought to give to his wife according to
ye doctrine of God. First, the better to prepare her to humility, she ought to
acknowledge in her self such frayelty and infirmity by nature, both in mind
and body, that as Aristotle says, without the guide of the man, she is no
other then as a matter without a form, and naturally can not live without his
direction, as being drawn out of the ribbe of man: and therefore what she has
touching her body, is derived of man, and was made for him, and not man for
her, being the first in creation, forbearing here to recite all that may be
said particularly touching his pre-eminence: only I may allege in general,
that as the man was not seduced by the Serpent as was the woman, so the reason
of the great error and fall of the man, was the obedience he bare to his wife
contrary to Gods commandment, for the which she also was first condemned, and
made subject to more miseries then the man.

These textes bear, this intent to make the woman more humble and obedient
as well to God as to her husband, for that by her nature, she is easily carried
in to arrogancy, pride, ouerweening, glory and disobedience, as being
envenomed with the poison which her great mother Eve took of the Serpent,
suttill, arroga^t, proud, glorious, and cruel: here the husband must give
her to understand, that in nothing God is more displeased, then in pride, and
disobedience done as well against him, as to her superiors: Then let him
discende to the declaration of his superiority over her according to Gods
creation in nature, according to his holy ordenaunce, and according to the
example of Jesus Christ, by whom he is appointed head over her, with authority
as to a husband, with promise not withstanding to use this pre-eminence to her
benefit, and contentment with loyal amytie: here he must not for get to putt
her in rememberaunce of the confederation which they have made together, to
live in holiness according to the similitude of the sacred conjunction and
marriage of Jesus Christ with his church and that in all mutual honesty, and
holy conversation on with an other: let him then prescribe laws and rules
fit for a wife: That she serve God with all her heart, and love her husband
only with franck obedience to his commandments, giving no occasion wherein he
shall perceive that she has either said or done any thing to the offense of
God: Secondly let her bear to him affection and care as to her husband and
head, as he (for recompense) must love her as his proper flesh, and as Jesus
Christ loves his church, chastely, unfeignedly, and perfectly: Thirdly, that
she be to him as to her lord and head, obedient, and yield to him all honor, as
the church does to Jesus Christ (where of she is a figure) resisting him in
nothing, but honor him with francke and liberal affection: We read Sara
exercised the same duty to her husband Abraham and called him Lord: of whom
so honorable a mother in the scripture, wives in all ages ought to be as good
daughters and folowers, aspiring to her virtues: the wives of Jacob also yield
to the will of their husband and thought the greatest effect of their duty,
consisted to obey him: Fourthly with this obedience says S. Paul, she ought
to fear and please him and not grieve him at any time, as the church shows
her an example in her behavior to her dear spouse: it is writtten how Vasthy
Queen of Assiria, for that she fell from fear, to disobey and displease her
husband Assuerus, was refused of him, and in her place Hester, was received,
for amongst her other virtues, she bare a name to be gracious and of great
humility. Let her consider that she was given to man to be an ayder and a
comfort to him: so that as often as she finds her husband perplexed with much
business, cares, greefes, displesures, losses, dishonors, with other like
accidents and disquietts of the world: it belonges to her office to bring
consolation to him in modesty and discresion, as Micholl did to her husband
David, who suffering passion for the heavy malice that Saul bare to him,
found comfort in his wife, and council to flee, taking upon her ye remedy of
his peril that might come by pursuit: Lethir not be as those foolish women
which the scripture condemns, I mean the wives of Job and Tobias, who, in
place to recomfort those good Fathers so heauely laden with affliction,
reproched unto them that their good works were the cause of their miseries, and
wickedly said that for their good they had recompense of evil, not
considering, that as God uses to prove his people by tribulation, so he can
give them power and patience to endure them, and at his pleasure delivers
them to their great praise and happiness. Let her never give wicked counsel to
her husband, as did Jezabel who seeing her husband Achab in desire to have the
vine of Naboth, counseled him to work his death by suborned judges and witnss
s, and so receive the vine by confiske, for the which, wrechednes fell upon
her, upon him, and their whole race: what other success followed the wicked
persuasion of the first woman to her husband, then the coommon ruin of all the
world? In this, men ought to be most circumspect, to hear nothing of wives
tending against God or his honor: even no less belongs to the office of the
wife, to administer no wicked advise: for that as she is given to her husband
to be to him, as a worker and cause of God: so if she find in him any
impression of wicked will, it belonges to hirto use diligence to remove it,
according to the example of Pilates wife, whose persuasions if her hubsand had
believed, he had not ben the morderer of the son of God: yet the wife is bound
to this justice in her duty, to restore any default her husband makes as did
Abigail the rich Nabals wife, who understanding that her foolish husband had
returned the people of David, not only with out the effect of their demand but
had done injury to them, and taken their master: took great store of
vittells, and went to meet David (whom she doubted not to be iustlye
displesed) coming to commit all to sack and spoil: she so appeased him, with
modest, gracious, and wise spech, that he did not only dissolve his enterprise,
but took her afterward to his wife, when he understood Nabal was dead:
Lastly let the husband remember, that if he receive good counsel from his
wife, not to reject it, such as was the advice of Micholl, and that which Sara
gave to Abraham, to expulse Hagar, and his son Jsmaell which God ratified by
a consequent commandment to do so.

Still touching the duty of the wife. Chapter. iij.
Fifthly, if in the husband be unquiet moodes or mind of anger, if he be an
evil liver, yea an infidel, the wife is commanded to be humble, modest,
pacient, and also of so good conversation, that by her virtues she may reclaim
the wickedness of her husband: so did Moniqua the Mother of Saint Augustine
win her husband being a Pagan: 1. Cor. 7
Saint Paul persuades her much to that duty, seeing that by those means at
the least she works this good, that her children which should have been
dissolute, are, by her institution and example, sanctefied. This virtue of
modesty and patience, is declared to women in the ceremony of the Doves which
wives offered in their purification: signifying that they ought to bear the
importunity and angry natures of their husbands, by the humility and
meekenes of the Doves, who, enduring the continual pecking and crying of the
Cock doves, much less that they abandon them, seeing they never mislike or
are angry, nor do any thing to their displeasure.

Sixthly, the wife is bound to the circuit of her own house, without liberty
to iorneyes or voyages, no not to go from house to house (being also forbidden
to wydowes) nor to walk the streates as one seeking adue^tures, 1. Tim. 4.
Tit. 3.
yea she is tied to modest humility, as the vine or latteise is fastened to the
walls of the house, which is never removed else whether: she ought to be a
careful huswife, to govern her house wisely, to travel diligently, and to
keep her servants and handmaydes in office, not giving them any occasion of
disorder or ill thought: Let her read the last Chapter of the Proverbs of
Solomon, wherein she shall find the lesson of a huswife or Mother of a
family, rising early with her maids and servants to enter into travel, and
not to take upon her the state of a great Lady, being a huswife, and much
less hunt after her pleasure and delites, as a worldly and Pagan woman, nor
deck or make her self glorious because of her beauty, which she ought to
esteem as deceitful, (vain, and transitory: No, let her fear God, in whom
is reposed her glory) and yield to no other desires then the care of her estate
requires, fashioninge her attire according to the honor and rate of her
calling, and yet with such modesty as the mind, (though there be no
opportunity to ye fact) be not corrupted with vain glory and wantonness: Let
her leave precious embrodery, and carquanets to great Princes, whose estate
tollerates those sumptuous attires, and was thought well of in Hester,
specially joining to those brave outward ornaments, a heart repleat with inward
humility: To honest matrons seeking reputation by their chaste and virtuous
lives, let it be a shame to be seen in such dissolute habits. Seeing they are
contrary to the opinion and renoume of their virtues: how can a woman (says S.
John Chrysostom) in those proud attires expressing her high heart, present
her self before God, who regardes not but the prayers of the humble and meek.
Seventhly, to the behavior of wives belongs such wisdom and discretion, that
they give no occasion to speak evil of them: for it is not enough not to
offend, if they do not also avoid the occasion and suspicion of blame: wherein
albeit there is equal care and respect to the husband, yet above al other
creatures, honor is most proper to women (being as the soul of ye kind) which
being lost, there remaynes nothing but unsavory carcases, and ill smelling
donghilles, yielding abomination to all that speak of them: Their honor
consistes in all action of virtue, but specially in virginity touching maids,
in chastity to the married sort, and touching wydowes, incontinencie: of which
virtues if they be slau^dered they have no reputation though they were perfect
in all other graces of nature and fortune: for that being dishonored, they
stand before men as bodies abominable: if a woman (which is improper to her) be
hard and nigardly, yea covetous, yet if she be chaste, it takes no honor from
her, but gets her an opinion of too great and near a huswife: And albeit she
ought to be liberal and an alms giver, by the example of the wise woman in
Solomon, and if she be subject to passions and injuries (wherein she is
expressly forbidden) yet she shall loose no honor, otherwise then that they
will say she is a shrewe (for to be cruel and tirannous, as was Jezabell, to
strike and do injury to poor people) were rather the mood of Proserpina, or
infernal Harpia, then the action of a woman simply, whose nature is tied to
effects of modesty, pity, and gentleness: Lucrece, fearing to have lost the
honor of wiuely chastity (notwithstanding the force of the ravish or cleares
the innocence of her consent) killed her self: loathing any longer to live,
having in her opinion, lost the only renoume and reputation of life, which was
her honor. The like affection has been found in many holy virgins and wives,
who have rather committed their bodies to many martirdomes, then suffered the
rauishor to pray upon the honor of their chastity: seeing therefore, the wife
ought to know that in this virtue restes her chief ornament, let her keep it
with special watch and care, and (as near as she can) give no occasion to put
it in question: for her dishonor brings with it this displeasure to turn
upon her husband, her children, and all her parents, as by her virtue, all
they should be honored: Let her beware to give no cause of ielosie to her
husband whereby both he and she should be in perpetual discord and the whole
house in miserable mutiny. Let her therefore use no secret speech with any man,
unless there be warrant of near kindred, and much less, let her pass
familiar conversation with any stranger: In the absence of her husband, let
her receive no man into her house by whom may arise suspicion: let her hold no
acquaintance with messengers or women of ill name, and much less use speech
with wanton people, and when there is cause she speak, let her remember that
testimony justifies innocence: Let her esteem no man more fair, more wise,
nor more perfect then her husband, according to ye wife of Hieron, who never
kissing any but her husband, and being told by him, that his friends reproched
him for that he had an unsavory breath, answered simply that she thought it
had been so with all men: Let her never be seen idle, nor take pleasure to
play the gossip in suspected companies: if she hear any dishonest word, or see
any man behold her with an unchaste eye, let her withdraw her self from such
company: if any attempt her with unchaste suits, let them find she is a woman
of virtue, and as they press her with importunity, so let her rise stronger
in faith, alleging that, besides the wrong to her husband, she should commit
perjury to God, profane the holy institution of marriage, which, being the
inviolable union in Jesus Christ, she should commit damnable impiety, and by
mingling the seed, the issue also would rise uncertain, the same being a
theft and sacrilege worthy of a thousand hols, and whereunto no satisfaction
would suffice: to be short, let her allege that God would be so offended, as
her soul should stand in eternal peril, and she justly deserving to be
refused of her husband: if she stand resolutely armed with these memorials,
she may easily withstand temptations, confute whore followers, and confound the
wicked that sought to suborne her by presents and promises of great benefits,
repulsing and aunswering in this sort all comers, yea though they be great
estates, and promise mountains and liberal relief to the children, which
also is an unjust and unlawful gain: she that uses this virtuous resistance
does worthily aspire to the reputation of that woman which Salomo^ speaks of,
that is to say, she is ye crown joy, and honor of her husband: her praises
can not be carried to high, and to her glory is allotted immortality amongst
the number of holy dames and wives of the Patriarks. The maid that is clothed
in the habit of shame fastnes, brings to her husband a great dowry, though she
bring nothing but her body. Touching the virtues of the wife and her chastetie,
they ought to be no less familiar to the husband, because by how much he
excels her in perfection of nature, by so much ought he to be able to
enstruct the ignorance of his wife in things appertayning to her direction and
their common honor, wherein, if he fail of his duty, greater is his merit of
rebuke, for that the kind of woman by corruption of nature, is more weak, more
easy to fall, and most inclined to evil: But the man bearing a more excellent
dignity, and mean to know more then the woman, by which he is chosen her head,
guide, and example, is not to be excused, and much less to be pardoned: yea
let him not think, since he instructes not his wife from the beginning, but
leaves her to the liberty of her fancy, with license to cherish her own will,
not sticking sometimes to help her with ill example (being himself an
adulterer) but that, being solicited to evil, she stands in great peril to
be seduced or at least (by the just judgment of God) become so waspishe,
Eccle. 7. Pro. 21.
that he finds her more bitter then gall, and in his house more troublesome,
then the smoke, ye snow, or the frost: yea he shall think it better dwelling
amongst serpents, then in house with a quarellous woman, to whose malice is no
limit, Eccle. 25.
no more the^ there ca^ be worse poison, then is in the venomous head of a
serpent: he shall see in his house a general and natural disorder, for yt she
will aspire to the office of head, to direct, commau^d, govern, and lead all,
wherein as may be feared the effect of that ill sign and common proverb, when
the hen crows before the cock, and the cart put before ye horse: so, it can
not but bring malediction to the whole house, for want that the wife is not
well instructed and governed by her husband: I say not but the wise woman may
and ought to command in the house, and as ( Aristotle says) have the passage
and superintendence of the household business, as to the husband belonges the
care of outward things of greater grauetie and importance: and where he can not
attend the private affairs of the house (as unworthy of him) she may take
upon her to be the faithful storer and keeper of the household revenue,
fulfilling the proverb in Solomon, That a wise wife buildes and edifieth the
house, Pro. 4.
where the fond woman with her hands subuertes it: only it is necessary to
the good man (the better to draw his wife to diligence) to call her oftentimes
to reckoninge for the revenues and benefits of the house, to the end she
abuse him not, seeing there be some that are hoarders or given to lay up,
either for them selves, fearing to become widow, or (by stealth) to amend the
portion of some one of their daughters more dear then the rest: and sometimes
to gratify a friend of secret reserve, which of all others shall be least made
known to the good man. Wise husbands ought some times to support in their
wives without present correction, some light and easy infirmities, as we see
the Phisicio^ gives suffrance sometimes to a small fever in a sick man, to
avoid a greater disease, determining with time to apply convenient cure.
Tobie and Job endured with patience the reproaches of their wives, without
beatinge them, but with gentle declaration they corrected them, and had them
afterward very obedient: yet I wish no husband in this case to be so much a
Philosopher in patience as was Socrates to his wife Xantippa, who reuersing the
table upon her husband and other Philosophers disputing longer then she looked
for, he said only to the assistantes: who has hens flying upon the table,
though they turn down the dishes, and break glasses, yet the owner will not
kill them, for that they be profitable to lay eggs: even so my wife bringes
me forth children. An other time when his wife had wearied him with great
outrage and violence of words, and after whelmed a basin of urine upon his
head: he gave her no worse recompense, then that he always thought that
after thonder, rain would fall: wherein albeit his patience is more praise
worthy in him, then put in practice by the successors of these days, yet
seeing a wife is given in discipline and correction to her husband, and that
she is neither meare savage, nor desperate intractable (which though she were,
yet men make tame both Lions and Tigers) it were good first to use doctrine
as well by him self as others her parents and nearest kindred, and bringing her
to the conference of sermons, to leave unproven no gentle, easy or friendly
mean, that may further her conversion: but if there be no limite to her
frowardness, then with the council of S. John Chrysostom, let him minister
such discipline, as may make her a good and obedient disciple: for to refuse
her, or bring in separacion, there is no sufferance by law, nor conscience:
there is but only adultery which has power over the deuorse, and yet that
has no force, but where is no hope of reformation: or for heresy which is a
spiritual adultery: in which the law forbiddes all rigor, for that if there
be no breach of chastetie, and that she has desire to live in duty and
obedience civil with her husband, he ought not rashly to refuse her, and if
he do, yet he stands restrained from remarying, seeing marriage, faith, and
sacrament of constancy, are immutable. In sickness there is required in them
both a mutual care, as if they were but one flesh, as in all other accidents,
yea, if one of them should fall into leprosy, there is no excuse to the other,
seeing faith is given between them: wherein, if there were but that faith
between such as by extremity of age, have no hope of liguage, yet it draws
sufficient cause of mutual succors, and faithful aid and comfort, even
until death: whereof if either of them be reduced to widow age, there is one
law general and equal to them both, not to diminish the love which they bare
one to an other, as in deed which of them dies, lesseneth nothing the love,
but rather increases it in heaven toward the other remaining here in life,
so that touching the reverence of his funeral, the remembrances leaft to her
by him that is dead (here I speak of the woman, meaning no less to the man)
as to cherish his poor parents and friends whom he loved, with any other charge
committed to her faithful and honest love, she is bound to execute them with
no less obedience, then if he yet lived: if he left her children, she is
enjoined to double care as both for father and mother: if they have small age,
she is bound to lead them in good instruction and example, and having
rypenesse of years, her office is to pushe them forward (according to their
faculties) to the vocation whereunto their late father had prepared them: if
she be a young woman, 1. Tim. 5.
S. Paul will not restrain her to perpetual continency, but councelleth her
only to remain in the estate of widowhead: which, for the liberal service of
God, is most acceptable, and after virginity, an estate of most high
perfection: but if she resolve to marie again, let her join to her affection,
this civil consideration, that first her children be brought up and advanced
according to the example of the most brutish and savage beasts on the earth,
1. Cor. 7.
who will never enter into the action of new procreation, before they have
nourished and given ability to their young ones. No ye birds will not eftsoons
couple with new makes before their young ones have wings to fly for their own
relief and sauetie: let them not observe the infidelity of certain right
Pagan stepmothers, who, being eftsoons married, much less that they are
beneficial to their first children, but of the contrary, they refuse to take
knowledge of them: which happens most in such as have issue by their second
husband, who raking all from the house of their first husband to enriche the
second issue, leave some time the poor children sent by God as a singular
blessing and first fruits of worldly felicities, naked and perplexed with many
injuries, resembling in those unnatural moodes, the she mastyf, who will not
once look upon her first dog, but snatch and byte him, after she have
accompanied with a second.

Widows (as I have said) have but one principal cause to marie again, which
is, if they be young, and have no children, or if they have (which is a cause
helping to the excuse) and they by unruly disobedience abuse her in their
duty, or that by some collateral match she may either bring increase to her
revenue, or help the portion of her daughters, she is justified in her second
marriage, wherein (above all other cares) let her beware that no mood of
incontinencie lead her, for that in our Christian religion it is accounted a
vice most slanderous. ^. Cor. 7.
Touching such as are contented with the state of widowhed, let them (with S.
Paul's council) exercise their times in prayers, take their delites in holy and
godly things, and travel with all their heart to cleave to God, and to please
and serve him in all purity of will, and spiritual affection: and for their
better mean to those holy actions, let them eschew conversation with men, and
prepare their flesh by fastinges and great sobriety: ^. Tim. 5.
for as S. Paul says, the widow that lives in delites, is dead, as whose
wanton conversation wallowing in ease and belly cheer, has corrupted her mind
with affections of mortal sin, wherein she is ready to join effect to her
fleshly will, as opportunity shall consent. But holy widows live spiritually,
and keep their bodies in necessities, and their minds in devout exercise, as
fasting, prayer, and other devout meditations of the spirit, seeking after the
perfection of the virtuous widows in the scripture, as Judith and Anne the
prophetisse, who from their youths beeinge widows, Luc. 2.
received great graces from God, as the one in the execution of Gods enemies,
and the other in prophesying of the coming of Christ, publishing openly in
the temple when the Lord was brought thither, yt he was the true Messiah.

The office of Fathers and Mothers toward their children, and the duty of
children to their parents. Chapter. iiij.
TOuching the office of the second society in nature pertaining parents
toward their children, and of them reciprocallie to their fathers and
mothers, we will discourse according to the scripture: (Leaving the doctrine of
the Pagan Philosophers as opinions doubtful in themselves, and uncertain to
Christians): fathers and mothers have in comen, to bring up and institute their
children, where of the mother is tied to a special care whilst they are
young, as growing into state of years and bigness, they belong chiefly to the
fathers, as well for their authority as their greater and more wise providence.
Touching administration of noriture to their bodies with all other provisions
which ye necessity of nature requiers, the mother most commonly takes upon
her that special care, as in whom the zeal of nature does most abound, some
times sparing food from her self to feed her children, and restraining her
own body to cold and hunger, sticks not to cloathe her naked and tender
impes to whom she bears more compassion then to her proper wantes: But for the
feeding of the soul, being the principal part of man and by the which we are
men and regenerated in to the children of God (the body being none other thing
then the vessel or mantio^ of this soul) the provision and care is equal to
the father and mother, both straightly enjoined without distinction, to provide
such spiritual feeding and clothing as may be worthy for this soul formed to
the Image of God, which is holly doctrine of salvation, and correction,
instruction in good manners, the same as it is the principal cause why God has
blessed them with children: So, with out those institutions, children would
fall into degeneration with natures and actions of brute and hurtefull beasts:
they would be come children accurssed, whose dispsiscion would bring forth
nothing but pride, covetousness glottony, whoredom, malice, and dissolute
manners: yea they would become instruments altogether obedient to the will of
Satan Prince of the world: and some what to qualify ye grieves of mothers,
bringing forth their children in great pain and sorrow, and often times in hard
and mortal peril of life, lulling and cherishing them with cares and watching
day and night, 2. Tm. 2
with many other perplexities belonging to the institution of their little
youth: S. Paul gives them this great consolation: that the woman shall be
saved by the generation of her children if, with her instruction she conioyne
this care to keep them by exhortation, and her example, in the constancy of
faith, charity and sanctification (which they receive by baptism) enclining
always to do holy deeds with sobrietye, which to young people, is the mother
noresse of all good doctrines and virtue: as of the contrary, children
dissolute following their foul will, Pro. 1.
never attain to scence, and less follow study, and least of all exercise
verteous actions: and because the mother ought thus to teatch her children,
Solomon gives them commandment to hear and receive her law, as well as to
harken to the doctrine of their father: And for example he resites that his
mother Bersaba taught him from his infancy in the fear and wisdom of God,
where by even in his youth he became so wise as the scripture reports: And
albeit S. Paul restraines a mother of a family to preach in the church: yet
he takes no liberty from her to instruct her household and children in their
duty and office of life with out offending god, which then is best performed,
when she makes the doctrine of God familier with them: The daughter of
Pithagoras, well instructed by her father in virtue and love to virginity,
kept a school for mayds, who^ she made so singulerly wise and learned, that
they confounded the ignorance of many men, and with her resolved to persevere in
the state of perpetual virgins: Cornelia mother to both the Gracchus, read to
her children the art of retoricke whearein she raised them to such knowledge of
excelency and eloquence that she was esteemed for the most happy lady of Rome:
yea one day when a gallant or vain dame of the city bragging of her Jewels,
showed her much stately work of embrodery and stones, she answered her: I
never was careful to make my self shine with so false lights as Jewels and
stones, nor to embosi my house with flourishing hangings of goldworke: but here
says she showing her eloquent and learned children, is the sun wherein I
shine, and the tapistrie, Jewels, and treasure of my house: which in deed, as
they brought her more honor, then if she had been Lady and owner of all the
riches in Rome: So yet she had aspired to more great and supreme felicity, if
according to her travel to distill knowledge into them, they had expressed
their excellent learning in acts of modesty and virtue in the discourse of
their life: But because it is a common question at these days, whither the
dugge of a mother is more proper to feed the tender infancy of the child,
then the milk of a stranger, as also what sorts of meats afterward are
fit for their noriture, it can not be impertinent to declare our opinion (as
it were) in passing. Touching the first noriture, if there be no lawful
excuses in the mother, as weakness, want of milk, or necessity of other
extreme sickness, she ought not to commit so dear a Jewel to the fashioning
of a stranger: wherein, besides that it is an act expressly again nature,
yet she shows her self to be but half a mother and more corrupt in kind then
Tigresses or Lionesses, who having passed the panges of bringing forth their
young ones, think the greatest part of their zeal does yet remain and
therefore they give them suck, cover them, lick them, delight in them, and till
they be great, thee defend them (to the danger of their own lives) from the
violence of such as would take them. The mother, refusing the nursing of her
proper child, gives suspicion of her love to the Father, and great signs of
corrupt zeal and nature toward her children: and nurses (for the most part)
being but mercenarie bear no other love and care to their nurse children, then
for the time and for money, whereby the poor infants, sucking the seeds of
diseases, become impotent, and all the days of their life, feel the unnatural
unkindness of their mothers, who, with their wretched nurses, stand in great
hazerd of judgment before GOD: and no less to their Fathers, suffering this
unnatural disorder, if there be not lawful excuse: if, to take the rest of
the night at their pleasure, and to eschew the disquiets of the day, they
banish their little children into ye hands of strange nurses, wherefore are
they Fathers and Mothers? Why should they desire children, if they have not
delight to nurse them? If God have replenished the dugges of the Mother with
milk, to serve for a noriture to her child, is it not to impugn the law of
nature ordained of GOD, and slander all humane reason, to restrain gods
benefit plentifully intended to little infants? The strange nurse perhaps is
compounded of other complexion and humor then the mother, and the child,
accustomed to a natural noriture which he received in ye belly of his mother,
what may be feared by this mutation, but either change of nature, or at the
least a miserable subjection to sicknesses, which bring more peril of death
then any other disease: If the nurse by necessity use a spare diet, what
shall be the strength of the child? If she be given to gluttony, what indigestion
to the weak stomach of the infant? Who, with the milk of her pap, will suck
the intemperance of the nurse, seeing the manners and customs of the mind,
follow the complexions, noritures, and outward temperatures: if the nurse be
chollerike, melancholy, or furious, what hope of good composition in the child?
If they say such things may be helped and reformed afterward, it may be
answered that it is hard to correct nature. Let therefore mothers (according to
God, nature and reason) nurse their proper children, if they be not excusable
by the causes aforesaid, wherein they shall but follow the virtues of
ancient Ladies, yea Empresses, and Queens, to whom it was not irksome to
give the dugge to their own children: and having not sufficient milk of
themselves, they supplied it by the aid of some other good nurses, but not in
full noriture for fear of danger, and rather then they would use two nurses
(because the diversity of milkes can not but be hurtful) they observed the
order of the Saxons, to norish the child with meat chawed in their own
mouths, by which, remaynes yet a common opinion, that the Saxons are more
strong then the other Almaines: Touching their other food, in any wise wine
must be avoided, for that it inflames the blood: and their general diet
ministered rather in sobriety then in fulness of delicacie: For too great
abundance of deyntie meats quenches natural heat, even as too much doung or
fatness rancketh the earth and cloyeth the corn: it is convenient even to
children of great houses risen into strength and age, not to live in choice of
their meats, but to accustom their stomachs to all sorts of diet
indifferently, and to drink such liccour as is most common, the better to
enhable them against necessities, and extremities of countries, wars, and
barbarous places, where perhaps in place of delicate wynes, they shall be glad of
puddle watter, and their fine fare, turned into foul and vncoath meats, and
yet in no plenty: How heauely and hardly will such penury be borne? Yea what
peril of life comes with this strange and sudden mutation? If they have
never endured cold, and after come into snow, and ice, and want their wrapping:
what passion more intolerable? yea they will think they have death between
their teeth: if they be strangers to pains and travel how unapt are they to
endure ye perplexities of war? If they have no exercise how hardly are they
fashioned to the use of weapons? And being never accustomed to march, they are
with great difficulty trained and prepared to the field: And therefore let no
youth be norished in ease, but specially none yt are dedicated to great
affairs and martial actions: In such sort were fashioned the youth of Rome
and Lacedemonie, who in those two estates of people was most valiant and
industrious, and after Lacedemonie, the youth of Germany flourished most by this
education: which, joined with custom made them hable bodies, against hunger,
thirst, cold, heat, and all intolerable labors and necessities. But so sone
as they changed this excellent course of exercise, and suffered their youth to
slide and languish in pleasures, their common weal became weak, and their
flourishing triumphs turned into tavern plays, whereby Lacedemonie was made a
slave to those strangers, over whom she had commanded. Rome, the triumphant
Lady of the whole world, become but to the cou^tena^ce of a handmayd, and
Germany, by this corruption of the youth of great houses is now a place of good
cheer, and bears no other renoume then for banquets and feast making, the
same giuinge a dangerous argument that the destiny of the Empire aspireth to
his end. But in the mean while, the youth of the Turks, nourished in great
sobriety, is accustomed to drink water, is careless of flesh and fine meats,
delites more in labor then in rest, takes pleasure in perpetual exercises of
the field, the better to prepare them to the war, whereunto their use
bringes great dexterity, as appears by their many enterprises against the
Christians, to the dishonor of holy religion. In the time of Aristotle, the
Lacedaemonians used their children to go bareheaded, and naked on their feet,
ye better to overcome heat and cold: and as soon as they were wayned from the
dugge, they were carried out of the city, as not to be corrupted by the sweet
and soft pampering of their mothers, and brought up in the country and
fields, their bodies being made acquainted with sweat and labors: when they
had desire to meat, they won it by killing some wild beast or foul which
they brought to their master, and being but of small age, there was hanged by
a thread in a high place some piece of bread or other food, which they shot
at out of a little cross bow, and if they brought it down with their arrow, it
was the reward of their pains: so did they learn to form their minds in
civil manners, and fashion their bodies to painful exercise for the war,
wherein they became fierce executioners in their age of ability. The oldest
and of most ancient courage and virtue, were instituted masters over the
youth, in whom if every fault and error were not reprehended, the master was
condemned to a fine. In this institution all the communaltie of Citizens,
specially ye ancients, were bound to esteem all the youth as their proper
children, and therefore had authority of correction, council, and persuasion,
no less then if they had natural interest in them: they had no liberty of
conversation with strangers, for fear of corruption by their dissolute
manners: they had no handling of money, nor other pleasure which might bring
abuse, so that they knew not what delites were. Touching their reast, they
slept always in the fields upon straw waddes, forbearing fether beds, as
not to effeminate their bodies: for intemperance, or whordome, much less that
it was familiar amongst them, but of the contrary, during the time of their
ancient discipline, there was none of their youth knew what vice it was.
There was seldom Citizen of Lacedemonie accused for any quarrel, and less to
have hurt or wro^ged any man: by which severe policy, they brought such
reputacion to their common weal, that far and strange Regions sought their
alliance: yea the Jews thought them selves assured against their enemies (as
is said in the Machabees) if they had confederation with the Lacedaemonians: ^.
Match. 12 and 14.
much more then belonges to Christian commonweals, and specially to Noble
houses touching the education and guiding of their youth, seeing our law is
infinitely more perfect, expressing many commandments with promises of favor,
and eternal felicity, if we institute our youth as we ought, where amongst
the others, was but only a regard to civil honesty and glory to have
raised such an institution to their youth: great wrong and dishonor do we to
God (who sendes us children to the end we frame them meet for his service,
whereby his glory may shine) if we abandon them to the world and satan the
prince thereof, to the common and eternal destruction as well of them as of
their posterity.

Still touching the education of young children. Chapter. v.
LEt us eftsoon return to the institucion civil of children, such as
fathers and mothers ought to procure more then is contained in the discourse of
the other chapter: they must first be entered in ye knowledge of God, and
elementarie grounds of faith ye commandments, sacraments, and principal
points of salvation, the same to be ministered in their first age, and
according to the mesure of their capacities, expressing with all good example,
which as an eye of doctrine co^firmes the other: herein Agiselaus answered
wisely to a father asking him how he ought to teach his children: put into
them says he at the beginning, the best and most necessary doctrines, such as
may serve thy children for the ground of their life: Which foundation of
piety and religion, ought to be first laid, and remain in the building which
is made of all the other doctrines: Let fathers consider with wise masters (by
whom their children are instructed in these grounds) where unto they are most
drawn by nature, which, if it carry them not to ye zeal and study of
learning, let them pushe them forward whether God seems to call them: for
other wais with the vain spending of their money, they should be guilty of
the loss of time to their children, if they should strive to change their
vocation natural or rather divine, and bestow them else where by their own
opinion joined with some affection to some peculier trade, perhaps more to
their proper profit, but less to the commodity of their children, wherein
they shoulld seem to resist God and nature, and attempt even against the
suggestion and ordenance of god, who as he has placed in a body natural,
diverse members and appointed them to diverse functions, with out changing their
order and office: so has he bestowed in his church and comonweals, sundry
sorts of people, all members of both the one and the other body whether
mystical or civil inspiring to every one of them, a will and instinct as well
of nature as of special grace, to defier to follow some one certain
profession for the service of his body, as to the eye, he has given the
faculty of sight, to the ear property to hear, to the nose the quality of
smelling, to the tongue habyllitie to speak and taste to the hand, power to
dispose actions, and to the feet, agillitie to go and to run: even so has
he yet done more (which turns to his glory) as having endued every one with a
peculiare affection to follow an estate most conducible to his proper
sauluation, and where in he shall be most serviceable to his Lord God: for ye
cause S. Paul puts us often in remembrance, 1. Cor. 1.
that every one ought to follow his vocation with perseverance and
constancy, wherein Aristotell seemed not to be ignorant: saying that there are
some men, who of nature are free and as Lords, borne to learning and to the
welding of great affaiers, and some others bond men and slaves, and by their
servile and gross condition, without all faculty either to rule or command:
amongst the Philosophers it was an opinion to do nothing against nature, as
not to command the hand to go in place of the foot, which if it were done by
force, could have no continuance: as also the foot has no facility to do
that belongs to the function of the hand. By these we see that in vain do
Fathers and Mothers put their children to religion, if they have no devotion,
but have rather the inclination of soldiers: such becomes evil the habit and
profession of Religion, whose affections and hearts aspire to the office of
valiant Captains: From which if they be restrained, they are not drawn too
any other exercise but by force, where in they have neither thanks nor favor
of God, but (which worse is) suffered to commit infinite offenses, which are
like to be laid against them, by whose covetousness, or supersticion, they are
intruded into such profession: great is the evil also in forcing maids to be
religious, whose inclination had made them more meet for matrons of
housholdes, in whom (for recompense) are found many legerdemaines and pleasant
parts played in their monasteries: on the otherside, many are the children now
a days that profess study to please their Fathers, but they do even as much
as if they beat the water of the river, aduauncing nothing to the common
profit, nor their honor: Of that sort, many, in place to study follow their
pastimes, to avoid (as they say) melancholy: And yet it is for such commonly
as benefices, Prebendes, Prelatesship, and estates are purchased, wherein may
be gessed how well they will behave themselves, seeing they were never touched
with the thought to become worthy of them: and so are raised to priests, before
they deserve to be clerks: Abbots, not being meet to be Monks, Judges, before
they have pleaded in causes of right, and Masters before they were disciples: No
greater disorder or confusion in a common weal: When Fathers shall find their
children inclined to learning let the^ apply their purse to their disposition:
so shall they make them most serviceable to their countries, honorable to
themselves, and most happy as touching their proper salvation: if they have no
sufficient mean to continue and entertain their study, let them pray to
God, and rather then to disco^tinue their book, bestow the^ in colleges to
serve some Doctors, Regents, or learned scholars and so lead them by long and
painful ways to the estimacion and conquest of learning foreseeing in any
wise not to discourage or despair the lively will and spirit of a young child
taking pleasure to study: For as it is a sign certain of the calling of God,
so there is no less hope and suertie, but that to that inclination and vehement
affection, the almighty Lord (being earnestly prayed unto) will join
convenient oportunities to come to that whereunto he calls him: by the which,
we read of many proving so excellent in all liberal sciences, that by their
doctrine they have been chosen Bishops, Presidents, yea and made more great,
then in their youth they were mean, poor, and simple, some of them having no
other beginning then trained in the function even of the meanest servant,
wherein is fulfilled the sentence of Solomon, Pro. 17.
that there be poor servants, who in the end, by their wisdom will bear
rule over the rich children, in whom is no ability to govern themselves
discreetely. There rests to a young man but a strong desire and fervent mind
to study, to make him at last, wise and learned: and such one (says
Aristotle) though he knows nothing, yet he is more then half learned, if he
begin well. Touching ye election of Masters to institute children, I have
spoken at large in the last book: only I advertise rich parents, that to
entertain good Masters it is better to bestow crowns then shillings: For by
them, money, time, honor, knowledge, and virtue are gained four fold: which
all are lost, where the instructor is either ignorant, negligent, or corrupt:
In this, the consideration of covetousness does much blind indiscreet parents,
more fearful of the wast of their money, then favoring the benefit of their
children, according to the example of ye man in Plutarch, who suing to a
Philosopher to teach his son, and he requiring compotent hier: what? says
this covetous father with so much money can I buy a slave by who^ I can raise
yearly great revenue: so, says the Philosopher may you have two for one, if
you leave your child ignorant and without discipline: meaning, that by his
covetousness, he should have a son a slave to his desires and affections, who,
living always in dishonor and subjection, would never bring forth any good
actions but by force or fear: where, having institution, as he might by
doctrine and virtue, lead his life in right honorable liberty: so, if for
want of discipline, he became prodigal, and spent his wealth, he should be
driven to serve, to supply the necessity of his miserable life. Touching the
subjection wherein a Father ought to lead his child, Pro. 10.22.19.
he has prescription in ye scripture, that he must minister Discipline to his
child that is not wise, and by the rod chastise his malice, to the end to
deliver his soul from hell. The wise man in an other text gives this council:
if thou have children, Eccle. 7. and 30.
teach and discipline them, and lead them in humble subjection, even from
their youth: hold them short by sharp correction: hyde in thy heart the love
thou bear them, and give them no indulgence and liberty to pleasure, since
as by thy good correction thou shall receive of them great joy and comfort
upon the end of thy days: so, how much thou do enlarge their youth to
liberty, even so far do thou lead them in the pathe of their own
destruction, to thy right worthy displeasure and dishonor. Pro. 29. Heb. 12.
Apo. 3.
The child (says Solomon) that is left to live at his will, gives confusion
to his mother.

We have an example in our great and heavenly Father, who, the more he loves,
the straiter discipline and subjection does he hold over those who^ he best
loves, as we read by his hard dealing with the Jsraelites, and leaving the
Pagans without correction, saying, In thy life time give not thy children power
over thee: Eccle. 30.
as if he had said, dispossess not thy self of thy goods to thy children,
yea make not thy self familiar with them, and put thee not into their mercy,
but being master so long as thou live, retain thy authority over them, to
correct them, to disinherite them, and punish them, if they offend. Who
spares the rod from his child, Pro. 13.
says Solomon, hates him, and loves not his salvation: therefore, ^o long as
thy power remaynes over them, if thou punish not their offenses, thou stand
in the same estate of blame and damnation with them, as witnesses Hely,
whereof we have spoken before. It happens ordinarely by the just course of
Gods judgment, that as the father forgettes in his office and authority to
minister instruction and discipline to his child: so, in his ryper years,
that negligence efts^ones turns his son from ye duty of a child, becoming
disobedient, disordered, and dissolute, and gives no reverence either to father
or mother: yea sometimes he robs them, does them wrong, outrage and
injury, and setting his feet even upon their throat, is the cause oftentimes
that they dye before the end of their days Saul is commended, for that
finding his son Ionathas by chance in transgression of the law, he condemned
him to death, as if he had been another, which also he had suffered, if the
people had not delivered him. David was somewhat to dear over his children,
Genesis 49.
which in the end turned to his rebuke and hurt. Jacob deprived his eldest
Son Ruben of his right of inheritance, because he was an inceste. Abraham
chased Jsmael because he had played with Jsaac, which some interpret, that he
had beaten him, and others, that he would have committed Idolatry, and induced
Jsaac to that impiety: which though it be understand simply to play, and
loose time in importunat and unlawful sportes, seeking also to seduce his
younger brother, and that Abraham could not be ignorant but that Jsmael was
corrupt, yet he expulsed him justly: yea even by the commandment of God.

Noe punished with curse over the family of Cham, the mocking that he made of
him: wherein is no great cause of marvel, for that the father being the
Lieuetenant of god here in earth over the regiment of his children, ought to
execute his authority and suffer in them no impunitie of vice: such commission
was given to fathers and mothers by the law, that if they understood their
son to be disobedient or rebellious, they ought to produce him into
judgment, and prosecute him to sentence to be stoned, Deu. 2^.
where the father and mother ought to cast the first stone against him. But as
the father is bound to severity toward his children that are arrogant,
disobedient, and corrupt, so to such as are humble, obedient, and of most
service to him, Christianity and natural office bind him to more frank
courtesy and consideration. So did Noe reknowledge Sem and Japhet by blissings,
because they had been his good and faithefull children. Abraham for the
obedience of his son Jsaac, made him his heir: giving but legacies to his
other children: Genesis 25.
And Jacob recompensed Joseph with portion double above the others.

Touching Maids, the scripture enioineth parents to keep them short, to have
their eye continually upon them, and never to accustom them to familiarity,
for that sex without subjection in youth, bears a nature easy to slide, and
is frail above all other creatures, more dangerous to be preserved the^ any
other brickle vessel. Dyna went but to visit the maids of the City of
Sichem, and was forthwith ravished by the prince of the country. Thamar David's
daughter going only to comfort her brother Ammon, whom they said was sick, 2.
King. 13.
fell into violacion of her body: many there are of who^ nothing is more
required then opportunity to express their corrupt wills, for which cause it
belonges specially to the mother, to give them no liberty out of her company,
nor license to speak to men without testimony: For there needs but one
word to infecte a maid, as one word of the serpent was sufficient to seduce
Eve, notwithstanding her wisdom. A maid is as a brickle glass, which, as if
you touch but with your least finger, it is enough to make it fall and break,
so the very type of a wicked tongue suffiseth to entyce to evil a young maid,
being not instructed in the fear and knowledge of God (so dangerous says the
scripture) is the virginity of a maid: Ecle. 30.
therefore (according to Solomon) that father does a great work, when he
marieth his daughter.

And in ye mean, let him keep her in extreme subjection, feed her in sobriety,
and keep her in express exercise of some work of the hand, the better to
restrain her from thought of evil: if they be pore, let the parents prouid
some occupation, which with diligence and chastity, is a rich dowry in
marriage: And to the rich, science and labor, are occupations necessary to
draw ye mind from foolish and vain thoughts: for end, as there be six things
to keep maids from corruption: doctrine, shame, fear, subjection, sobriety,
and perpetual travel: So, in the consideration of ye charge of parents to
their children, let fathers remember, that seeing they know by faith that they
are ordained of God to serve him in propagation, noriture, and advancement of
the children which he gives them (for they are as his ministers and
lieftenaunts in that behalf) let them raise themselves to him in faith, and
hope, that he will never abandone them, seeing the children do more aperteine to
him then to them: as having endewed them with a soul, (the figure of his
deuinitie) and forming their bodies of wonderful composition, created infinite
sorts of creaturs for their sakes, let fathers confess, that they are but as
nurses to God, norishing his proper children, and administering his service in
those acts so dear to him, they have to receive of him perpetual rewards: if
there be honorable recompense in a king or prince of the earth, to a common
nourse, ministering noriture to the kings child according to the will and
prescript of his father: Much more surety have fathers by their Faith, (joined
with prayer, that the heavenly King (touching the necessities of common life)
will never for sake them, if they norishe and feed his children according to
his will, and to his honor for that he never sendes children without Fatherly
providence for their aduaunceme^t: By the same reason, let fathers take heed
that they suffer no vice or deformety of manners in them, seeing that as God is
pure, holy, and undefiled, so he has given children to fathers to fashion
them such ones for him, wherein if they fail, he will repute them as
principal authors of their faults, and with their children, hold them guilty
in his terrible justice: Therefore let them not pamper nor corrupt them with
wanton liberty: let the^ not make Idols of them in the intrales of their
hearts, nor damn them selves, to raise their children to riches and estates
which they have not deserved: whereby perhaps for recompense they will procure
peril to their lives: But let them only observe the will and prescript of God,
and present them to him in the institution which he demaundes at their hands,
having no commandment of him to make their children great Lords, but rather
men of honesty, then possessers of great wealth, which being duly observed of
fathers in the institucion of their children, increases the honor of their
houses, and bringes a recompense of eternal glory to their whole posterity:

In what duty children are bound to their Fathers and Mothers. Chapter vj.
THE Scripture by many commandments, binds children to honor and obey their
fathers and mothers: And by all right of nature, and laws human, Civil, and
barbarous, they are enjoined to disobey them in nothing I mean, concerning
humane honesty, natural duty, and divine ordenance: For if the
commandments of Fathers and mothers stretch to other things they abuse their
authority, seeing (as I have said) they represent God in earth in the
procreation and noriture of their children as the ministers of his providence
and will, and therefore their commandments ought to agree with the prescript
rule of Gods will. And touching the disobedience of the child to the Father and
mother, it is well expressed in the law of GOD given to Moses, Deu 21
how grievous that disobedience was being commanded to stoning, even a like
punishment as if the disobedience had been don against God, as in deed the
transgression and fault returned against the same Lord, who, being the great
and sovereign Father, has ordained this father fleshly in nature, as his
Liefetenant and executor of his will: he cursed likewise the child that was
guilty in disobedience: as in the law natural Noe punished his son Cham
with curses for that he mocked him, which God ratefied: Jacob deprived his
son Ruben of his descent, because he did outrage against him: The Scripture
afordes many curses to the child that either in act or word disobeyeth his
Father and Mother, and the Son that scorneth or disdaineth either of them, is
judged worthy that the Ravens and crows pick out his eyes, meaning, that in
no sort such one deserves the use of common light, nor the prosperity of life
but to suffer all miseries, since he is offensive to these by whom he lives
in the world: yea he is worthy to be thrown in a hollow ditche, without
burial, where carrion vermin may de^ower his carcass as they do other dead
beasts: For which consideration, the child is bound to this duty to his
parents, and not to refuse death to sustain them in what so ever concerns
them in honor, health, and life: For having received all his wealth and
benefits of them, what more worthy or just recompense can he return then a
frank and thankful prostitution of all that he has to their uses: if he take
pleasure to live, and doubts not that of all other things of the world life is
most excellent: if he think that the pleasure of life, is one of the most
singular benefits that may be demanded: if lastly, commodities, riches, or
common goods, and honors do please him: What reverence, love, honor, and
obedience, is he bound to bear to his Father and mother, by whom, or at the
least, without whom, he had not enjoyed them: but if he make no recompense to
his power and less thankful at all to his parents, is not his ingratitude
intolerable, and by just right him self deserve to be deprived of all ye same
goods? The same also being the cause why God by his law takes away without
appeal ye life of him that offendes his father and mother. But if the
unthankful and disobedient child be flattered with some prosperity let him
think it has no long continuance, no more then the itch of an old man is
pleasant longer then it is clawed, but being scratched, it falls of smarting:
For it is written, Pro 2^
that who curses or does evil to his Father and mother, his light shall be put
out in the midst of darkness, that is, he shall loose his prosperity and
good hap in the midst of adversities and dark miseries, which shall fall
upon him even when he thinks to sleep most soundly in the delites,
pleasures, and eases of this world. Besides, the better to draw children to
obedience, God promises them long life: honor (says he) thy father and
Mother, Exodus ^
so shall thou live long upon the earth: to which promise above all other Saint
Paul says, is added surety of recompense: as in the promise of long life, is
meant commodity, rest, and necessary furnitures of life, as plenty of wealth
and humane felicities: For which cause it is said in another place that ye
blessing of fathers and mothers given to their children, confirms and
continues in happy succession the houses and families of their children: as of
the contrary) their curse helps much to the ruin and subversion of ye same.
Touching the honor they get by obeying their father and mother, it is written:
listen my son to the discipline of thy father, Pro. 1.
and let not the law of thy mother be forgotten of thee, to the end grace might
be joined to thy head, and collers about thy neck: if thou do thy duty of a
good son to them, God will give thee this favor and credit to be honored of
all men, and raise thee into that estate where thou shall bear the honorable
enseignes of thy high dignity, even as we see kings bear their diademes
upon their heads, and Knights of the order, their precious collers of gold
about their necks, in sign of their dignity, honor and authority due to
them for their virtues by which they have worthily aspired to such estates.
Seeing then God reserueth for children such ample promises of long life: such
worldly prosperities, and such high honors, which three being the very effect
of all that may be desired to make this life happy in earth, comprehend also
what else may be attributed to worldly felicity: How much are they bound
(besides the reasons erst rehearsed) to bear humility, obedience, and
reverent duty to their parents, whom if they disobey, they have their
condemnation to miseries, dishononours, and to death, yea and by their sin of
disobedience, they stand in hazerd of the eternal curse. The oblation of this
duty of children to their parents, is indispensible to all purposes, but in
cases of infidelity: as if the father being an Idolater, seeks to seduce his
son to that impiety, in which this strait bond of duty cease: For God is
to be preferred, and man abuses his authority, according to the understanding
of the gospel: Who hates not father, mother, brother, sister, and leaves
them with all that he has, can not have the kingdom of God: yea they must
leave ye dead to bury the dead to follow the Evangelical vocation: For
touching the Apostolical profession (which may be alleged for that they
forsook father and mother to follow Jesus Christ, and to preach the Gospel) it
is a vocation particular and priuileged, as when Helizeus aba^doned father and
mother to go with Helias, and as, for this purpose may be disputed touching the
life monastical.

But that vocation ought not to be alleged to the execution of this
commandment: for he that calls such as he pleases, reserueth such
providence over the necessities of their parents, that they stand no need of
the peculiar service of their children whom their parents of their proper will
ought to exempt from that office of personal and temporal service, since God
calls them to him self to do to him a service spiritual and of more
greater perfection and fruit, then any function wherein they could employe
them: yet touching the vocation Monastical, Saint Augustine holds good, that
in necessity of the parents the child being a Monk, is bound to leave his
Monastery, to succoure them: for as the law of God derogates not the right of
nature, but rather confirms then restraines it: so by greater reason in the
humane and positive statutes, and specially such as be in Monasteries, there
ca^ be no prejudice. Matt. 25.
Therefore did the Scribes and Phariseis under color of religion, ordeyne,
that the child, giuinge all his goods to the temple, was not bound to aid his
father and mother: yea by that mean, he held him self no more bound to serve
them, according to that constitution by the which they expressed, that such
honor to God, grounded upon that devotion, abrogated all honor and natural
duty which the child ought to show to his father. But Jesus Christ gives
them to understand, that by such tradicions they commit great impiety,
resisting the first ordinance of God, natural, and divine also, and inviolable
by his Scripture. We see that even the most perfect and Apostolic life was not
exempted from this subjection, as Christ him self was subject to Joseph and
the virgin Marie: and exercisinge xxx. years after his divine vocation, he
rejected not from his train his mother, his Auntes, and cousines, but called
them and entertained them with him (I mean the poor) of the revenues which
men presented him withal: Luc. 2.
no less did the Apostles to their parents and kindred, of whom, the greatest
part which were married (according to Jgnatius) carried with them their wives,
and nourished them together with their parents and poor, of the Apostolical
revenue. For, as who holds no account of his household and domestical
familiars, ^. Tim. 5.
is as an apostate, and more wicked then if he were an infidel: so, we ought
not wickedly and wrongfully think, that the Gospel takes away any humanity
and natural piety, but rather nourishes, susteyneth, and confirms it,
making it spiritual in true love and duty, and so much ye more perfect, as
the doctrine is more excellent, then the doctrine of nature and Moses.

It is a question of many, whether a man is more bound to nourishe and succor
his father and mother, or his proper wife: whereunto may be answered, that in
the case of obedience and subuention, there is more bound of duty to parents,
but not touching cohabitation. And to prove the bond of duty to parents, it
is certain, by treble right, natural, divine, and humane, which including an
immutable and inviolable bond, can not be weakened or abolished by marriage,
as well for that it is the first, most autentike, and has a t^eble bond (for
every law has his proper obligacion and subjection, where this has but one,
touching corporal cohabitacion), as also for that it binds marriage with a new
subjection, that the wife with her husband, ought to strain all their power
and means to relieve such as by marriage are made their father and mother, and
to help their grand parents, by whom both they and their fathers have being
in the world. There be yet these causes consequent, and (as it were)
accidents to ye former reasons, which ought greatly to stir up children to
honor their parents: that is to say, the inexplicable love of fathers and
mothers to their children, their care in their first nouriture or nurssage,
their continual trauelles and perplexities to preserve and prefer them, and
lastly, this just consideration, that as they behave them selves to their
parents, so to expecte the like recompense of disposition and experience in
their children toward them. The love of parents is so great to their
children, that they stick not to take to them selves the greeues and
displeasures of their children, not refusing sometime the hazard of death to
preserve their littleones from peril. And the scripture never commau^des them
to love their children, to nourish, nor prefer them, because, by nature
parents have that forward inclination: but they are enjoined in many places of
the scripture, to discipline and instruct them in the love of God, as therein
prescribing to them the manner how to rule and moderate their affections, not
loving their children otherways then God loves them: neither to let their
zeal be so vehement, fleshly and partial, as (with the she Apes) to destroy
their children: nor yet with extremity of affection to hold them in severity
and fear, and so make them at unawares, toward or weak sprited, wherein
albeit they are forbidden, Ephesians. 5. Mala. ^.
for that they are always restrained to moderation in discipline, yet in
holding over a hard hand upon the^, they express the best and truest
affection, and lead them in the readiest way to the estate and reputacion of
honest men. Great then is the bond of duty, obedience, and affection of the
child to his father and mother, if, with his unthankfulness, he be not
altogether out of the sense and judgment of nature, yea, he shall answer to
that so perfect love, for God (in this case) challenges that he ought to be
beloved of us by reason. If I be a father (says he) where is the zeal
wherewith you love me as children do their Fathers? Here, if any will object
certain mothers procuring untimely birth to their children, or others that kill
them after their delivery to avoid dishonor: I answer that to such
mordering mothers expressing worse nature then the most fell or fierce beasts,
who cherish and lick their little ones and often times fight for their safety,
there can not be devised laws severe enough for their punishment: yea Moses
(as after him Licurgus and Solon) erected no prescript law for such morders,
nor against children, likewise yt killed their fathers, as esteeming it an
offense to which man could not ascribe sufficient, severe, and worthy
punishment: Touching the cares, labor, and industry in bringing them up, there
is no estate subject to so many perplexities, the mother specially, bearing the
infant in her belly, what care has she to preserve so precious a fruit: and in
her travel, is there greater panges, or more peril of present death? how long
remains she in weak estat and sickness? what pains takes she to norish it:
what be her sorrows, if it weep, if it miscarie, if it fall sick? she
fasteth to feed it, and being hongrie, restraines food from her self, to
appease the unruly appetite of her child: she with her husband, offer their
bodies to pasion of cold and heat, yea sometimes go naked, to cloth, wrap, and
entertain their children: What recompense of affection and duty do these
cares and perplexities of parents deserve of the children? where in if they be
necligent how can they a void the crime of ingratitude, or be innocent in the
vices proper to the reprobate? Romans 1.
yea let them assuredly trust, that the displeasures, wrongs, and disobedience
which they do to their parents, by the just measure of Gods judgment shall be
returned in more heavy and grievous quality upon themselves, by their proper
children: for so we find hapened to a contemtuous and disobedient child who
trailing his father by the hair of his head out of his own house: This is but
a just recompense my son (says the father) seeing that even ye like behauior
I showed to thy grandfather in this house, which now thou use to me: But of
the contrary, we read that many wear the benifites and graces doubled upon
the obedient children of the patriarchs as is expressed in the example of
Joseph, to whom his father Jacob gave double blessing above his other brethern,
because he honored him with more service then they: for end, let children in
all things discharge the right and law of piety to their parents, with this
consideration, that because Fathers represent God on earth, he will take the
disobedience done to them, as an injury meant to him self, moreover in the
consideration of their duty and aid to their parents, let them remember that
in succouring their necessities, they offer acceptable service to God, for the
which (as we have said) their recompense is laid up both in earth and in
heaven, which with suertye to find at the hands of their own children the
like measure of relife in their necessities together with the same rate of
comfort if they fall into impotencie of age: But if they fail of this duty,
they stand in hazard of treble condemnation of death, as they are bound to
that office by treble laws: having interest in all such acts of humanity even
toward all old strangers according to ye reverent observation amongst the
Lacedaemonians, who used not only the law of perfect piety to their proper and
fleshly parents, but also even to all old people, whom they honored as their
fathers, and gave succor to all their affaiers, as if they had been their
natural children: They esteemed them happy if they were called to do service
to old men tacking it for the greatest praise that could be ascribed to the
actions of their life, to pushe forward the affires of ancient men, whereby it
was said in common proverb that happy was he that became old in Lacedemonia
as having so many children readily disposed to honor, serve, and support him as
there was young people in the town.

The duty of Masters toward their Servants. Chapter. vij.
THe third ground of a common weal and order of pollecie, contains the
authority of Masters over Servants, and obedience of servants to masters:
wherein the master may be considered in two manners: either as Lord buying
with his money his servant, which they call bondsman or slave, or conquering
him in war by victory as his enemy: or else he is master, not as Lord
proper or owner, but as trying and using the servant only for a time, as in
England we have no others. So that this second sort of servant is no bond
man, but rather in the nature of a hyreling or marcenarie retained for a
season: when ye scripture speaks in the Hebrew word of this name (aued) and
the ancient Latins of seruus, as also the Greeks of their Donlos, they mean
no other commonly then the perpetual bondsman. This master called Lord, has
borne before time supreme power over his servants, putting them to death by
his discretion without law of reprehension. For so we read Metellus, a
Citizen of Rome, handled so many bond men as brake him cups of Crystal, and
was not called to punishment for it: which coming to the knowledge of
Augustus an Emperor pitiful, he entered the house of the said Roman, and to
take away the occasion of a second cruelty to his poor bond men, passhed in
pieces all the vessels of Crystal and glasses that he found in the house.
Old Cato, otherwise reputed very wise, was so tyrannous over his bondmen,
that, when by extreme age they had no further ability to serve him, he
caused some to be committed to slaughter, and suffered others to dye of hunger,
which common humanity denies even to a dog, or horse that had been long used
in service: but that liberty, or rather imperious, and unnatural authority of
Masters, was afterward bridled and limited by many laws, as is written in
Exodus: Exodus 21.
who strikes his bond man or bond woman with a rod, and they dye presently
upon the blow, is guilty of capital crime: but if they live a day or two
after, he shall not be punished, for he has bought them with his money: as if
the law had said, he thought not to kill them, and so loose the money which
they had cost him. And albeit God often times recommendes unto masters to
handle their bond men gently, wherein to draw them to more pity, he puttes
them in remembrance of the miserable servitude which they endured in Egypt,
yet the hautie, covetous, and malicious nature of many masters, draw them
often times into acts of great tyranny toward their bond men, vsinge them
more cruelly, then their necessary and traveling cattle, yea in no other
estimacion nor use then as brute beasts.

For the which God by his prophet declares how angry he is, and sending
ruin and spoil to their towns, Hier. 34.
he suffers some of them to be murdered, and others made slaves to strange
and barbarous nations. The Jews had commandment to give liberty to the bond
men of their nation the vii. year, Exodus 21.
which was as a sabbath sanctified to God. But because above their prescript
limite, they retained their poor bondmen in hard subjection, and if they
complained, redoubled ye straynesse of their bondage, and either not suffered
them to appear in the court to demand justice, or else corrupted the Judges,
and so choke the way of their remedy: the Lord, partly for this transgression,
sent desolation upon Juda, and transmigration into Babylon.

Let us now see the office of a master to his bond servants, wherein we
shall find that by reason he ought with much more lenity to behave him self
toward those which are not to him but as temporal servants: First, seeing
their slaves are men as well as they, they ought to love them as their
neighbors (for all men are our neighbors) and if he were a Pagan or ennemie,
should a man do wrong to him whom he loves? would he enjoin him to things
unrighteous, hurtful, hard, and too full of labor? If every one (by the law
of nature) be bound to do to an other as he would be done unto him self,
would he in the state of such subjection, be commanded to things above his
ability to execute? Secondly, if the bond men or slaves be Christians,
religion (much more then the law of nature) ought to draw us to affection
toward them: If they be young, we ought to hold them in the reputacion of our
brethren: if they be ancient, let us give them reverence as to Fathers (I
mean touching love, for concerning the bond civil and servile it is not
cancelled by the law of the gospel) why should we then with so arrogant,
proud, and angry heart, command such rigorously, whom we ought to love and
cherish with Christian humanity? Romans 12. ^. Cor. 12.
If we be al united by one JESUS Christ, as are the members of one body,
under this Lord which is made our head: should it be possible that the
master, who in this body is as the eye or hand, and the bond servant to him
is as the foot or least toa of his foot to obey and serve him, should
command or enjoin to this bond man any thing which should not be reasonable,
honest, and profitable? the same agreeinge with the commandment of Saint
Paul, not to do any displeasure, damage, or wrong, to that low part being so
conjoined to him by natural harmony: no rather, if it suffer necessity,
grief, or anguish, the superior part is bound to travel for it, and yield
compassion to his sorrow. The Master not touched with this spiritual
judgment, and less feeling of this inward sense touching his office to his
servant, does not rightly acknowledge him self to be a man, but much less a
true Christian, and faithful member of the mystical body of this Lord: The
same being ye cause why many Christian nations, in the consideration of such
love, according to nature and grace, will not use that imperious authority in
their house over any bond man. But, taking certain infidelles prisoners in
lawful wars, as soon as they become Christians, they give them liberty,
and receive them into their houses with wages and hyers for their labors:
obseruinge the virtues of the ancient Nations, who, after long proof of their
bond me^ in servitude, and seeing them disposed to their service with a frank
and liberal will, gave them liberty: wherein I wish and exhort that no man,
holding of the gospel, which is a law of liberty and grace, be surmounted by
such as were under the law of servitude and Moses in the which the Jews
enfreeed their poor brethren bond men in the vii. year of their service, and
in the Jubilei gave liberty to all the other slaves of strange nations: or at
the least such bond me^ were as their marcenarie servants, having yearly
hyer for the labors they took in hand, to the end that with time they might
redeem their miserable condition.

But now eftsoon to the duty of a Master, wherein as we have spoken of the
love and gentle dealing which he owes to his servant: so he must understand,
that with this love, he must minister to him doctrine and discipline: Doctrine,
in instructing him in the rules of faith, according to the example of the
Jews, who never took bondmen whom they caused not to be circumcised and
taught in the law, so leading them in good examples of faithful Jsraelites, as
for whose faults they should answer even no less then for the rest of his
family: Ecle. 33.
There be three things says the wiseman necessary for the good entertaining of
a servant: bread, discipline, and work: as to the Ass, men give prouender,
beating, and his burden: by the bread is understood, sufficient noriture,
being too great iniquity to keep servants at travel and make small allowance
of sustenance: Deuteronomy. 25
if the Ox reserved for the plough, gives over his work when he is faint for
want of meat, 1. Cor. 5.
why should the poor servant be shortened of his allowance, by whose industry
both the plough goes, the Ox is preserved, and the Master lives: discipline
is due to him, for that if he be not well instructed, nor of him self well
given, he works with an evil will, and increases in vices, as having not
tasted from his infancy of any good instruction. Eccle. 33.
For that cause says the wiseman it is needful to offer him the rack, that
is a good correction, specially when he ronnes either from his Master or from
his work, even as the Ass must feel the cudgel when he will not go: But
when he corrects him self or commits any light fault, Ephe. 6.
let the Master says S. Paul pardon his offenses, as he will have God to
remit such as he has done so often times in the Scripture, and the perpetual
pains which he has deserved: In that sort S. Paul wills Philemon to pardon
Onesyme a bondsman, who in his running away became a Christian by his doctrine:
he wills to rebuke him without rigor, and keep against him no passion of
evil will, but receive him as his dear brother to serve him in all temporal
and spiritual things: And therefore let the Master take heed not to be bitter
against his servant by hate (for in that case S. John says he should be as a
murderer) and much less do him wrong by malicious choler, cruelty, and
impacience: Ephe. 6. Col. 4.
For he must remember that he has a Master in heaven, and that the other is
but as a servant with him of that great Master, with whom is regard neither of
Lord, nor master, nor acception of persons: but judges equally the one as the
other in all things touching well or ill doing. Let him not then think, that
either his person shall be more worthy, or his works better accepted, because he
is a master, or a Lord of greater estate: For there is but the multitude of
virtues which stand in place of credit and favor, wherein both the one and the
other are indifferently received: And has not Jesus Christ employed his life
and blood indifferently for the one and other? Then touching estate and
greatness according to the world, it is but vanity and a certain apparent
felicity: and the chance of worldly things may be such, that this day a
Master, and to morrow a servant, which we read has happened to many: Let him
consider lastly whilst he is a master, to make account to God of his
authority and rule which he has received of him, where in he is so much the
more subject to reckoning, by how much GOD has called him, above the other, to
that estate. Touching travel, let him rather keep him in continual work,
then ouerlay him with heavy labors, measuring his bourden according to the
rate of his strength to bear it: Exodus 25.
Let him not follow the example of Pharao in the time of Moses, who, of a
wicked will laid upon the people of Israel more great and hard labors then
they were able to overcome, beating them if they performed not their complete
task of work which he prescribed to them above their forces: wherein the
oppressed Israelites crying out to God, were heard in their complaints to the
ruin of Egypt, and drowning of the King and all his proud army: The Master
ought never to suffer his servant to be idle but at resting times in the night:
on the holy day, he ought to keep him exercised spiritually, either in
prayers, or to hear Sermons, giving him no liberty to hunt after gluttony
and unlawful plays, which two kinds of most dangerous idleness, above all
others are causes of infinite evils to many men, but specially to servants and
the young sort: Pro 26. Ecle. 33.
In which reason the wiseman says that as well as the Ass ought to be fed with
prouander, so has he need also of the bastonado, and the bridell, and the
burden: so must the Master sometime entertayne the servant with the noriture
of the rod, and work, and not give liberty to his nature, which of it self
will raise him into disorder and disobedience says Solomon: only his
correction must run in a course of amity of a Christian Father of household,
who has commandment from S, Paul, to do that which is just and reason to
his servant, whom he ought to esteem as his spiritual son, and companion
according to God, of the life to come. The wise man advises him also (if he be
faithful and wise) to love him as his soul, and to give him freedom and
advancement: as in deed the servant puts his soul, which is his life, his
body, his labors, and industry, to continual pains for the service of his
master: so did Abraham love his servant Elizer, committing to him all his most
weighty affairs, and for recompense if he had had no child, Pro 29 Eccle.
7. and 33.
he had succeeded him in his inheritance. In the gospel, we see how the
Centenier loved his servant traveling carefully for his health when he was
sick: In whose examples may be reprehended now a days many masters, who
handling hardly their poor servants, send them in their sickness and
impotencie to hospitals, but if they have but an Ox sick, or a horse lame,
they fail not to aplie remedies for their cure, as bearing more care to a
beast then affection to a man, who touches them in Christian brotherhoode: and
touching ye duty of ye servant to his master as he is not only bound to fear
and honor him as his lord, but love him as his head, (as in deed he is
according to God:) so it is chiefly his office, to join to his service an
effectioned, francke and ready will, even as the member should serve his
natural head, and as the son with a good heart should do service to his
father his service must not be for the eye only, or for manners sake (as the
saying is) but with the consent of the heart using his absence and presence with
one loyalty in service, as if he should serve God, and that with out
hipocresie or wicked affection, for that God seeing into the meaning of the
heart, abhoreth all corrupt will, malice, hypocrisy, and sutteltie, so that, if
he serve with these virtues, fidelity, diligence, hearty zeal, or true love,
with humility or obedience with out resistance or countermaund, with
consideration that what service he does for his master ought to be profitable,
agreeable and honest, he serves God: for so does God lay out the estat and
rate of his service, which he ought to accomplish according to the vocation
whereunto he has called him, referring the end of all to Gods honor, by faith
and hope to please him, and to obtain in the end, his last and eternal reward.
1. Cor. 7.
Therefore being thus instructed as S, Paul teaches him, he need not care to
be saved remaining still a bondsman: for in such estate he may partake with the
grace of salvation as well as his master, for that God (as was even now said)
regardes more the virtue then the person: Besides, he is made fre by Jesus
Christ from the servitude of sin and satan, which only servitude is to be
feared of the Christian, and not ye other which often times helps to
salvation: where licentious liberty gives occasion to many of perpetual
sentence: here some philosopher might say further for the bondsman, who serving
still not having where with to redeem his liberty (for that he ought to do to
ye end to serve God with more freedom of mind) lives a martyr, taking and
suffering patiently his servile condition: and praising his creator in all
travel, when he dies in Jesus Christ, they will follow him for eternal rest
and perpetual recompense in heaven And so he shall so much the more glorify
God for that bondestate, by how much he knows that by the providence and
goodness of heaven he has been preserved in it from infinite sins which with
many others, he had committed in fleshly liberty, and received damnacion,
where now he has hope to be saved in this estate: Thus his servile condition
is made happy, which, with worldly men, was holden wretched and desperate:
here also we have to understand yt God does a great grace to such, as of their
natures are servants, that is, borne to serve, and having neither judgment nor
authority nor mean to get power and knowledge, yet, acknowleging themselves,
do follow their humble vocation in honest service and duty: But if they take
it against their natural inclination (being a secrett motion of God, touching
the vocation) their usurped ambicio^ and ouerweening leads them into many
offenses being causing to their damnation: Touching hireling or year servants,
their condition is all one for the time they serve: and daily laborers for the
days and space of their covenant are no less bound to serve then the slave
condemned to perpetual service during his life: And being subject to the same
laws of discipline with the bond servants, they are also bound to the same
fidelity and simplicity of heart in working by this general commandment of
nature authorized by the scripture thou shall not do to an other that thou
would not have done to thy self, and by consequent thou shall do to
another, as thou would be done unto, and as thou would do for thy self,
loving an other as thy self, and his goods as theine own: And as God has
commanded the master to pay well his servant and workman, yea not to detain
the hier of the day laborer till the morning (for it is the sweat of his body
and his life. Leuit. 29.
) So servants and workmen are enjoined by the same commandment to travel in
simplicity, honesty, and truth, even as they should travel for them selves
in their own business.

How men have been made noble, and of their duty toward their subjects or
tenants. Chapter. viij.
WE have discoursed upon the authority of Magistrates, touching their rule
over commonweals, as Fathers, Masters and Lords polletike, having a lesson
in the Scripture to entertain their authority by true fatherly love and care:
under the rule or Lordship of these, may be comprehended the regiment of
gentlemen over their tenants: having gotten their noblenes, prorogatiues of
honor, and jurisdiction in their lands, by their virtues, valiantnes, and
high enterprises: even as governors and Magistrates, for the merit of their
doctrine and knowledge, have worthily aspired to the regiment and government of
others. Noble men and gentlemen are as special governors and Magistrates in
their proper lands, wherein they have double office, as both to govern by the
law, being particular judges of their tenants: and defend them by arms from
the inuation of oppressors: And as to governors and Magistrates belongs
under the Prince general authority over all: so, these have special
jurisdiction under the same Prince, for their particular government: And
therefore are bound to govern their tenaunts not only as masters use their
servants, but as fathers cherish their children with singular love, and as the
head with loving direction guides his members: and being also as pastors and
herds men over their peculiar people, they are bound to no less affection,
care, providence and duty, then the shepherd to his flock, the head to his
members, and the Father to his dear children. But if they fail in their
regiment, or misleade their private charge, as we have showed these for the
vices of their general government to deserve a horrible sentence of God,
without grace: fo, gentlemen abusing their particular estate, stand in hazerd
of a terrible judgment, seeing, Wisd. 6.
as the mighty (says the wise man) shall suffer cruel torments, so stand
they accomptable before God for every their particular tenant (touching civil
government and defense of them) as the curate must answer for every soul
within his parish: And so the temporal Lord (for temporal pollecie) has
special government over his lands, so to guide his tenants, as their
conversation be honest, far from quarrelles, and discordes, do no mutual
wrong one to another, nor injury to strangers: to keep them from suits, or
at least to accord their diffrences, and cut of way to processes and giving no
scope to controversies, to keep the^ all in modesty and office, and suffer no
idleness nor vagabondrie. Lastly let him prosecute the observation of Gods
commandments, and establish and follow the instructions and doctrine which
the Curat or spiritual pastor shall pronounce: Wherein the Curat and he ought
to be as the spirit and soul in the government of the body, and as Aaron and
Moses knit in indissoluble amity, to establish a cure, peaceable, and happy
to the people, the pastor preaching doctrine, and the gentleman ministering
discipline, to reduce by force the wicked and disobedient, in whom is no
readiness of will to Gods service, or civil order. But if either in matters of
doctrine, or temporalitie, there happen causes of hard dicision, wherein the
one without prejudice of conscience, cannot determine, and the other, by his
counsel can assure no certain judgment. Let the curat return the cause to
the Bishop, if it be ecclesiastical, and Gentlemen appeal to the higher
courts temporal as we see in the old law, God ordained both the one and the
other court with diversity and distinction, erecting in every court Judges
superior for the grave and hard causes, and others more inferior to debate
matters of meaner qualetie: So that as Curats are as first judges spiritual,
and Gentlemen as temporal and seculer, for the courts civil: the second are
as seneshals or baylifs: and the highest as presidents and cou^sellours: So
yet, all causes requiring dispe^se of ye law, or yt have need of grace are sent
to ye Prince, in who^ only is power to make and chaung laws upon just causes,
and to him only belongs the gift of pardon and grace even in such causes of
crime as deserve death: But now to return to our gentilman, seeing he is judge
of his tenaunts, let him resort to the instructions of our second book the
better to lead him in that estate: and if, either for the number or gravity
of causes, he call to him a judge, let him choose him by the rule and
prescription of our first book not suffering him to pronounce affected or
faulse judgments, which is a vice most heinous against God, whose judgments be
just and even as a balance, Pro. 1^.
acording to the which the judgments of men ought to be ruled, wherein in deed
as justice and judgment belong properly to God: such then as execute them
under him in lawful authority ought to observe his commandment and manner in
the measure of justice and judgments: otherwise, their usurpation makes them
guilty of high crime before the heavenly judge: Together with this order of
justice, the gentilman is bound to keep and defend his tenants, as the
shepherd his Lambs, that they be not devoured of vagabounds, spoiled of
thieves, and mordered by robbers: But as the good shepherd watches over his
flock, defends it from woulues, and chasing them with dogs, takes them and
hanges them on trees to terifie others not to anoy^ the slocke. even with such
lively diligence ought the gentilman to pursew roages and rauinors serving to
no other use but to devour a country, causing them to be hanged in public
places by the high way side, and to exinte utterly that wicked generation:
And if their skin be worthy any thing, I mean if they have substance
remaining upon their rauinus trade, let it be distributed to such from whom
it waa unjustly taken: In consideration of such regiment, guarde and defense of
pore contrimen, the gentilman has rents and revenue, and is honored, feared,
and loved, and called Lord of such as resort under him: Wherefore does he only
in a parish wear a sword, but that to him a lone belonges the defense of his
people, and to serve ye prince? Therefore so often as he is called Lord and that
with reverence and homage they bring him rents and benefits, let him even so
often remember for what cause he is raised into such singular estimation, and
by what merit he aspired to that dignity of honor. And if either by his
proper virtues, or desert of his au^cestors, he has achieved that estate of
noblenes: Let him even by the same virtues retain and keep his repuacion, by
the which he got it: Let him think ye honor is not due but to virtue, and
authority, belo^ges not but to the wise and discrete: no more are his rentes
and revenues constituted for other purpose then for the regiment, guarde, and
defense of his tenantes, as the farmor takes not the fleese and milk of the
sheep, but to feed and keep the flock: since he is a Gentleman, let him
refrain from all acts of villainy: let him not be ignorant wherefore he has
the name of noble, which, according to the Greek, signifies bright, as a
clear light: and in Latin it is he that is known and renoumed generally: he
can not shine with clear light, nor be known famous thorough the world but by
his enseignes and valiant acts, not sparing his life for the defense of the
church and his Country, employing his body and goods for the support of Gods
honor, and put his life in hazard to deliver the people from extreme
dangers: which he could not do but by seruinge and praying to God, living
soberly, using justice and wisdom in his actions, magnanimity, and patience
to the reproaches of his enemies, tolleration of hunger and cold, with other
passions of hardness, and keeping no reckoning of the wounds he has received:
traueling in ye action of these high virtues for a singular charity toward
God, whose honor, with the common spoil of the people, had else stand in
hasarde. Then this noble Gentleman, passinge so many perplexities, to put in
suertie and rest a town or a region, can the merit of his virtues bring to
him less reward, then the title and name of noble, both according to the
Greek and Lattin phrase? has he not won and purchased rentes and revenues,
that has wasted his proper living for the benefit and public sauetie? Even
so, who follows not the virtues, by the which this name Honor, Renown, and
Rentes, have been gotten, how can he deserve the use, benefit, or estimation
of them? yea, what degeneration does he express from his ancestors by whom
they were gotten with the sweat of their bodies and common dangers of their
persons? should he not bring forth dishonor, if he followed not their
steps? If he be given to vices, greatly would he darken their noble virtues:
if he be a coward, much more would he deface their high and valiant attemptes:
and if he give not him self to the maintenance of the church, and defense of
the people (specially such as he has in singular charge) what imitacion of his
virtuous predecessors, who reposed all their glory in the happy
occomplishing of these things, thinking they could not woorthely retain the
name nor the honor, (or at least hold them by false and unjust titles) if they
conserved not the just causes of those dignities, as also unworthily possessed
their rentes and revenues, due (by their original nature) to the exercise and
hyer of such noble enterprises. Gentlemen then not living within the limits of
religion, but persecute, blaspheme, and under the title of their noblenes, not
knowing the woorthines of it, do many injuries, despise others, calling them
villains, peasantes and varlettes, who notwithstanding are their norsses that
put the bread into their hand wherewith they live: they make ready the meat
and wine wherewith they are fed: they prepare the garments that cloth their
bodies: the horses whereupon they are mounted, and put into their pursses the
money that supplieth their common uses: and for recompense they are beaten if
they whyne (as the saying is) when they justly complain. Such Gentlemen also
whose delight is laid up in dronkenes and whoredom to the dishonor of God, and
slander of the people: such, whose covetousness is not satisfied but with the
spoil of their people, yea drawing the skin quick from the carcass, taking
the pullettes from the widow, and the best sheep from the farmor, and from the
poor husband man the hay and oats wherewith his traueling cattle should
live: such as promise and perform not, borrowe and pay not again, follow
their hawking and huntinge, oftentimes to the hurt of the country, as when
corn and grass are in their increasing season: such, as are served with the
labors of their tenantes without reco^pense, and strain their horse, their
ox, and cariadge to their proper work without satisfaction. To be short, who
so ever wrongeth in any sort the meanest that is, can not in any equity merit
the name of Gentlemen: and much less enterprise upon a title so honorable, in
whose life are expressed such apparent effects of dishonor, and public
infamy: can they in acts of villainy and vices, worthily displaye the
honorable enseignes of virtue and nobility? will they make noblenes the
cloak to oppressions and wrongs, which, by virtuous acts, is raised the
beauty, excellency, and dignity of houses? he is not gentle in whom is
found violence or tyranny, and far from the name of a Gentleman whose
conversation expresses dissolute and deformed disposition: no, he is a villain
in equity, whose life is stained with acts of villainy, as of the contrary
virtue does raise and enoble villains of blud and race, yea virtue only is as
the soul of noble families, without the which they were but as vain and dead.
By which reason, as to our place and estate of nobility, is tied higher and
greater pretenses of virtue, so also by reasonable congruence, the more higher
we stand in title and dignity, the more notable are our vices and faults,
as a skar or deformity in the face shows more then if it were in the hand or
foot, because those parts be more inferior and less apparent: yea, one small
vice in a Gentleman, is more reprocheable to ye world, and damnable before God,
then many faults in many meaner people (as in the law a prince over a whole
nation offered as much sacrifice to God for his sins, as the whole multitude
for their common offenses) for ye in place where he should express to his
people examples of virtue and lead them in conversation of civil life, he
gives public occasion to do evil, for that his errors being known, draw the
multitude to imitacion. If a Gentleman (so often as he falls) understood the
gravity of his damnation, where as his lightness leads him some times to
glorifye or vaunt his nobility, to shake his sword, to manage his great
horses, and to muster in gorgious garments and armor, as pompes of his
nobility: he would even so often common with his careful thoughts, how to
discharge and acquit that duty of a good and Christian Gentleman, such one
according to our prescription. I deny not, but touching his general
estimation with the world, he must maintain place and countenance according to
his house and race both for the honor of the virtues of his ancestors, and to
express in him self fruits resembling and worthy of such trees: Let him have
castles, horses, armor, and ornaments aunswering the estate and majesty of
his house: and withal let him, to that honorable prerogative (expressed in
those visible fignes) join the consideration of his office, which is, to lead
his people (whose nature is to bear reverence and love to such as are worthy
of them) in equity, obedience, order and fear: as in deed, it has been a
perpetual custom in all ages and Countries, that as in Kings, Princes, Noble
men, and Magistrates have been more perfect examples of civil and christian
order, so to such has been always most due and decent all stately pompes,
whether in rich iewelles, apparel, horses, or costly houses: wherein this care
is carefully and continually to be applied, not (as preposterous men) to make
of the accessory the principal, of the shadow the body, and of the accidence
ye substance: but always to entertain ye aute^tike and first causes of ye
nobility of ye house, which are, religion, Justice, and zeal to Gods honor,
and the defense of his Country, accompanied with wisdom, advise, sobriety,
temperance, and invincible magnanimity, by which virtues Josua, Othoniel,
Sampson, Jeptha, and David, have won honor to them selves, and perpetual
noblenes to their houses.

The duty of Aduocats, or Councillors at Law. Chapter ix.
Advocates, or Councillors at law, are not as coadiutors to Judges and
Gentlemen Presidents and chief Justices, to decyde and determine: but only
with their advise by opinions and reasons, alleadginge customs, ordinances,
statutes, and laws, they serve to explayne causes of their clyentes, leaving
the judgment to the Judges called and constituted. To every one of those the
wise man speaks: open thy mouth to the dombe, meaning, speak for the
ignorant man, and understand the causes of al persons: Pro. 31.
consider well that which is just, and take upon thee the cause of the poor
and needy: as if he had said, thou which art Aduocat, receive the causes of
all such as come unto thee and their complaints (for that thou art bound to
all by thine estate) speak liberally for ye poor, in whom being no knowledge
to deduce their case, they have less mean to inform the Judge: such
instruct both what they shall say and do: be no party either in council or
mayntenance to a wicked cause, nor suffer any to do wrong to the poor (to
whom the wise man seems to persuade most compassion, for that to such is
seldom showed favor or credit of men) for God has given thee grace to
speak, and opened to thee the understanding of the Laws, to the end to
minister help to others, as to the tongue he has given the faculty of
speech, to speak for the whole body and for every particular member, chiefly
when any of them is grieved, and in cases of wrong: even so the Lawyer which is
the tou^g and interpretor to the body polletike and of all men being in
affairs and business, ought to spare no compassion to the cause of the poor,
disposing his office to iustefie right, and bring all wrong to punnishment,
wherein, besides that he satisfies at the full the office of his vocation,
yet, in soliciting for the poor, he does a service of greatest merit with God,
in seeing justice to be kept (one of the first acts of virtue) and in
justifying the innocent, he defendes him from violent oppression, and
preserving his small portion of goods, keeps him from the hospital, and his
wife and family from perishing by hunger: In sustayning the cause of the
poor, and procuring condemnation to the wicked, he does double work of
mercy, and observes that which so often God recommendes in the Scripture:
wherein, the Judge, executing the good advise and exhortacion of the advocate,
accomplisheth the judgment of God, doing an act of high praise, and worthy of
eternal felicity. The advocate thus being the mouth of the people, and chief
enformer of the Judge, ought not to be ignorant in the written law, customs,
statutes, and ordenances of the land, helping his wit with the art of
reasoning, and his judgment with general experience in all affairs, wherein
the science of Logic, moral discourse, and specially the study of polletike
reasoning may bring great help to him: for if by ignorance he give wicked
counsel, and lead the party in a vain expense of money to pursue an unjust
cause: or if by indirect or subtle dealing, he cause an other to loose his
righteous suit: though the laws of ages and countries appoint him no
punishment, yet, being guilty both to the one and other loss, I doubt not but
by the laws of heaven and conscience, he ought to refine to the parties the
full damage happened by his corrupt counsel: No less punishment (but greater
shame) is due to the ignorant judge giving corrupt sentence by the persuasion
of the advocate, as to whom it belonges to be more wise and resolute, not
deserving to sit in the seat of a Judge before he have thoroughly passed the
office of an advocate, and practiced laws in public court which he had read
in private studies. But if the advocate entertain by covert sleightes and
suttleties unjust causes, procuring cauillations by delays, to weary the man
whose suit is good and enforce him to a hurtful accord, and so by his shifts,
pervert justice into iniquity: besides that he is bound to satisfaction of the
loss, yet he is not out of the peril of Gods curse: Advocates and procurers,
who by entertayning processes in delays empouerish good men, and become rich
them selves: and such (the very instruments of Satan) as either breed or
norish quarrel between parties, are condemned to all wretchedness by Jesus
Christ: For if such as be peaceworkers be happy, of common congruence the^ who
hinders, confounds, or delayeth peaceable causes are ordained to misery, as
by whom is set abroche among neighbors the vessel of grudge, malice, hatred
sorrow, heaviness, and utter undoing, and also loss of time in their
established trades and vocations whereunto they are called by God: and if they
be not ye causes directly that their clients offend God in many sorts, at
least, they keep them from serving him, restrayning al their heart thoughts,
and industry to the furthering of their process, which cannot be but a kind of
impiety, yea oftentimes it happens, that by the dilatorie shifts of
solicitors and attorneys, many rich clients see no end of their cause in many
years, whereby it happens that he that prevails reapes not so much as he has
spent, and he that is overthrown is sent to the bag and wallet, being before
the beginning of the suit, of good estate of ability: To such as be the
occasions of this evil, I ask this question, if they be not judged by their
own law, which says, such as give the occasion of evil, seem to do the
evil it self: if the sin be as great to him that holds, as to the other
that cuts the throat of the just man is there any grace or distinction in the
sentence touching the Judge, specially if he may apply remedy, and abuse his
mean? Let no man err by couertures of writtes, or wrested titles of the
expounders of the law, or orders of courts, for in what sort so ever they do
wrong to any man, according to judgment and conscience (which with great
advise ought to be considered, more then the opinion and comments of writers
hid under the shadow of the law, and yet against the law, which of it self
is just and good, so that it be not abused) they work their own deprivation
of the life eternal: The unrighteous (sath Saint Paul) shall never possess
the kingdom of God: 1. Cor. 6.
And who are more unrighteous the^ such as work against the judgment and
intencion of the law, and contrary to the secret advise of reason and sense of
conscience which is not blinded through affections and custom of evil: Would
those smooth and coosening Lawyers (if they were in the state of their simple
clyents) attribute it to well doing, to have (with them) their best blood drawn
from them without feeling, and that which remains, become too corrupt for
horseleaches? Let them think unhappy is the gain, wherein unhappily is
wrought the destruction of poor souls: What other thing do counselors and
attorneys committing to their Clerks Books of length and many lines, and
consequently of more gain to them selves, but draw by suteltie money out of
the poor man's purse? What other thing is it then to impugn God, hurt their
conscience, seduce the Prince, the Court, and the world, and under cooller of
that just and lawful gain, to commit manifest theft, whereof they stand
condemned in the judgment of God, where all suttletie shall be revealed, (which
Saint Paul calls darkness) and all iniquity examined, 1. Cor. 4.
not according to the vain fancy of covetous and fleshly men, which think
there is no other iniquity but that which is seen and palpable to the hand:
but even the most and subtle craft that may be imagined, shall be by the
everlasting eye so clearly spied and descerned that it shall be judged worthy of
death: one of the offenses that most displeases God, is the sin of the
Devil, as to be a deceiuer, a Traitor, a dissembler, malicious, author of
quarrelles, subtle, and polletike to do evil: it is said the Devil that
appeared to Eve hid under the visible serpent, was, of all other creatures most
crafty and subtle: Then if our advocates and attorneis, being instructed in
the devils sutteltie, stick not to glorify themseiues to have so good a
teacher and master to learn them: by good reason, as they practice his
instruction and example, they are also to receive with him a common reward and
recompense, yea let them be assured, that the subtle are taken in their own
snares, and that no council, cunning nor reason stand a fore God, who being
able to confound all, will call into terible judgment al such masquid and
disguised suttelties? is it not a vain and foolish sutteltie to beguile a
poor man of a halfpeny, and for it to be condemned to lose a crown: Job. 5.
1. Cor. 32. Pro. 21.
what folly more, then for the gaining of certain transitory dross here on
earth by subtle means, to be condemned to the loss of all goods, body, and
soul eternally in the world to come? But good advocates led by simplicity of
conscience (as Aristotell, says by his knife serving to mani uses, and
therefore very profitable) are men no less convenient, necessary, and
honorable, then any other sort in a common weal, and of whom particular estates
in a kingdom, stand in need: so that if they pursue their estate according to
the right office and duty of the same, they contain men in order and bring
infinite commodities to a whole country: they supporte the right of the prince,
and valiantly resist such as seek to blaspheme against his majesty:
blasphemye I call with the apostels, outrage done against ye majesty of the
prince representing God in earth and therefore the injury done against the
prince turns against God: In causes of affairs concerning princes, officers
of all estates, chauncelers, presidents, counselers, noble men, merchants,
rich, pore, widows and maids, there is necessity of the advocate, who in
causes of pleading, is called and instructed in the cause: yea in these days,
the dissembled vicar of Rome, his cardinals, bishops, curats, pristes, and
clerks, if there be question touching their office or authority, must resort
to the advocate to emplede the estate of ye cause in what supreme court
soever it be: he good advocate serving God and following integrity, is the
mediator between quarilous people, O reconcilar of ennmies, ye authore of
peace and an example to a common weal: Touching common process, he accords mo
in one hour, then a whole parciall court does in three years he will make
conscience to enterteyne a process, which he foreseith is like to continue
long? and therefore gives council of agreement to the parties: if he know any
poor man ouermatched with a rich or captious adversary, he does what he can to
draw the matter to accord, whereby he delivers the person from encomber, and
his goods from danger to be lost by the hazard of the judges: yea one good
aduocat does more good service to the world, then many judges in whom is
constraint to give sentence, according to their offices being not able to
accord the parties by arbitration: it is not meet that an advocate
(notwithstanding his excelencie of knowledge, without long experience of
pleading) aspire to the office of a judge or president but either by constraint
of the Prince, or by compulsion of old age, being no more able to sustain the
labors due to the duty of that profession: not buying ye dignity, which the
Pagans esteemed the same vice which we call simonie: but by election of other
Judges of the Court in whom may rest surety for his upright dealing:
procurers, which are as public soliciters and general syndickes of all
causes, in place of the parties to solicit advocates and Judges, and procure
expedicion of Justice to their clients: and notaries appointed to receive
faithfully and truly the appoyntments of Judges contenting them selves with
their rate authorized by ye court, or ordained by their Prince, ought without
futtletie, delay, or covetousness, exercise their estate: wicked notaries in
Esaie are subject to malediction, Esaias. 10.
as also unrighteous Law readers and Judges, because they write and pronounce
unrighteous Laws.

The duty of Merchants. Chapter x.
Merchants, following an estate of just commutacion, are men no less profitable
necessary, and far more honorable in their common weal, the^ many of the
other particular sorts of calling mentioned in the other Chapters: And albeit
(according to the consequence and order of the Book) I have placed them after
the other, as I have coopled clerks with their Masters, procurers with their
advocates, and other necessary officers with men of Justice most necessary to
serve them in that estate: yet, there is no cause of disgrace to the honest
merchant, in this pre-eminence of place for that only necessity of order tied
me thereunto, which I have observed in the discourse of Apothicaries and
Chirurgions following the Physicians, where I should have placed them after the
advocates, and many other of qualetie. But as in this observation is no
dishonor to the merchant, so, he shall find no less instruction touching
the office of his calling according to God, then if his discourse had come
before the rest, over many of whom I must confess he has right of
pre-eminence by common custom of nations and reason. The Merchant then above
al things (in the exercise of common traffike between men) is to consider
deeply of the two general laws, Thou shall not do to another that which
thou would not have done to thy self: and love thy neighbor as thy self.
And as they use the yard to measure their wares, and the balance to weigh it:
and that there is no cloth nor other wares measurable, which they do not pass
by the yard or elne, nor any thing meet to be waighed, which they cast not
into the balance, using both the one and the other as well in vile and base, as
rich and precious things, applying also the help of nombers for the better
division of perticularities if need requires: So, in all traffikes, whither
in gross or in retaile, the merchant is bound to the observation of those two
commandments, by ye which he is expressly enjoined, that as he would not him
self be deceived, so also he must not willingly administer deceit or wrong to
an other, neither bear such love to his proper profit, as in it may be bred
the injury or harm of another: but in all things of commutation and bargain,
to use the same conversation to strangers, which he would others should use to
him: Who, in their common actions, would rightly apply this law of nature
grounded on true reason, and the other of the Gospel derived of charity, ye
perfect fulfilling of all laws, much less that they should need
instructions, seeinge they should seldom find occasions to err. And the
cause why there remain at these days so many prescript, constitutions, and
statutes, is in no other respect but that men either could not or would not
rule their actions by those two laws, and much less apply them from
generality, into special particulars. I would to God, that even as the
Merchant of cloth uses his elne or yard not to beguile him self or his
chapman in the measure, that also and as well, he would use the law of nature
and charity, in the price and goodness of his cloth, even such as he would the
other should sell to him, if there were exchange of quality: if he would have
the price reasonable full measure, not to be passed by the short yard, which
ought to be sold by the long, and that the cloth be good, substantial and
sufficient, neither corrupted in the making, nor burnt in the dying.

Let him even do the like to his chapman, coming to buy of him: where then
shall be the common saying amongst them, Let the merchant sell his wares as
well as he can, it is lawful to every one to make his best profit: No man is
bound to sell so justly: and that the law binds to no restitution, though
the wares be sold at double prise: all these speeches, and the effects that
follow of them, are of the very inuencion of Pagans, and wretchedly vpholden
and entertained by pagan christians, whose eyes of understanding, covetousness
has closed up, and restrained them from the clear light of reason, infused
into us from heaven even by JESUS Christ the self light: But all men what so
ever, not having these two laws of conscience ready to serve the^, in
contracting, bargayning, selling, buying, choppinge, changing, and in the
traffike of every particular merchandise: I say, if he do not all in
conscience, as a brother ought to do to a brother, and one friend to an
other, abandoning deceyte in every dealing (for in case of desire to gain by
deceit, blood, and brotherhoode, and friendship also will swell against it) he
ought not to aspire to the reputacion of a christian as having no place there,
seeing he has not observed those two laws, as the first letters of his
christian Alphabet. But here the Marchantes allege, that it is so with all
the world, and if they should go so stricktly and justly to work, the
principal and necessary charges would not be gained. Little do they remember
in this, that it is forbidden to conform our doings with the world, Romans 12.
1. John. 1.
but to reform our selves in spirit, to take up a new life and conversation
truly Christian, not loving the world, nor any thing therein, John. 17. Matt.
18.
as unworthy of love, nor to follow the errors of the world, springing of
glory, couetousenesse, and pleasure. Let us rather esteem this world
wretched, as to the which Jesus Christ would not once vouchsafe to imparte one
only prayer, but has prophesied upon it malediction, in respect of the
miseries: who follows then the guide of this diring, cursed and blind world,
is it not directly to suffer him self to be led into the bottomes of hell?
Touching the other point that by selling justly is no great gain, let them
behold the persuasion of David, that a little is better with the fear of God,
Psalm. 36.
then all the riches of sinners: what does it profit to gain a whole world
for certain days, and loose a paradise for ever? Oh you Marchantes of little
faith, fearing to feel necessity if you live in the state of honest men,
behold the man following his vocation in the fear of God, and living
according to his laws, is assured by the word of GOD not to fall into want,
but that God will aid him and give blessing to his labors: where, of the
contrary it happens that the deceyuer is beguyled, Esaias. 33.
and who does wrong to an other finds recompense of wrong, and what he
fears, happens often times unto him: Pro 10.
yea, albeit God suffer him to become rich by unrighteous means, his wealth
taryeth even no longer, then we see a landflud fallings in great abundance,
and presently passes away, and the place become dry. And as we see in daily
experience that the second or third heirs of such marchantes unjustly
enriched, sell their houses, shoppes, liuinges, and become bankerout, leaving
no other remembrance then that which a foul smoke leaves to a new whited wall.
So the small stock of a good and upright merchant takes his increase by little
and little, as the corn and grass multiplieth into plenty: yea, his
succession becomes an infinite generation. There be marchantes of honest
policy, but of covetous intencio^, who, selling at reasonable rate, do often
times gain more then others: for, setting reasonable prices of their wares,
they draw more buyers, and by consequence, more use of money: whereby it
happens, that gayning but a groate in a yard, he finds his increase more
in the years end, then an other that (with a slow vent) gains a testor in
every yard: who, to avoid the hazard of his wares by long keeping, and
because he would raise a great gain, selles his wares of credit to chapmen in
the country, but at his own price, some times double or treble above their
proper worth: thus sells he time which is none of his, and beguiles simple
people, who, either not knowing the value of his wares, or at least constrained
to take them by necessity: whereby, the merchant, bound by Gods law, to
relieve and favor the necessities of the needy, leaves the^ not in this, but
committes them to ransom, and afterward when payment comes, lays them
upon the rack, distreyning their corn, their harvest, and for a small matter,
leads away the substance that should nourishe them and their poor families
all the year. There be also that use a worse trade, increasing their money by
monthly loan which they call honest interest: but because as well monthly usury
as ye lewd dealings of many marcha^ts and their broakers (being as the devil
and his disciples) are sufficiently detected and punished by wholesome laws of
many christian nations. I will not here touch any person in particular, and
much less discourse upon ye whole abuses of interest men, having now to do
with public traffic of merchants, who, to the other laws aforesaid,
seem to have one more concurring with the^ which is the rate of markets, the
state of times, and the consideration of places: whereby as they may as
lawefully gain at on time, as they casuallie loase at an other which is the
common fortune of marchaunts: so let them take heed that in the mean and
policy to make their profit, they be not found the causes of ye evil
season, or to abuse the market or the place: as for example: there are in on
city an hundredth or more of the most principal marchaunts, who, doubting the
dearth of corn with in the year, or at least hope to gain much by bargains
of corn: go from market to market to restrain corn in the season that they
see it good cheap, and sometimes make it rise higher, to enforce pore men to
sell to them: By which intolerable traffic, all ye corn of a country is
drawn into their hands, and yet will sell none during the store of the
country: But when it falls whereby the necessity of the market redobleth the
price, then those corn marchaunts (or more properly cormorantes) begin by
little and little, by mutual intelligence either to sell one after an other or
every one to feed the market with his proportion or else sell in their
private garners by their discreation, raising at wonderfully and extorted
gain: here if they say they sell according to the rate of the market, and are
ruled by the estate of the time and place: they may be answered that in taking
the benefit of their own law which is but concurringe they transgress ye two
first laws, seeming to do pleasure to others, with the common ruin and
misery of a whole country, and so by their unlawful gain, abuse their
vocation, they only are the imediate causes of the dearth of corn: for if they
had suffered eueri one to sell his corn according to his necessity, and
forborne to ferme corn and forestall the market, such to whom the goods
aperteined, had made sale to the commodity of them selves and to their poor
neighbors, where these devouring golphes of merchants, in respect of their
particular gain, care not to put a whole world to undoing: for the husbandman
selling his feeldes and working cattle, becomes poor, even he yt before was in
good estate to live: The laboring man, has his refuge in begging, and his wife
and daughters abandoned to extreme poverty, subject to filthy prestitution:
yea some of them dying of hunger: what recompense to these wrongs? what
relesse to these extremities? how can these wretched marchantes and manslears,
satisfy so great offenses? all the indulgences and full pardons of that
counterfeit priest of Rome, can not absolve them from dampnation, if with
contricion they weep not and cry in heaviness for the mercy of God all the
days of their life, and with good Zachea, satisfy to that which they have
gained vnlawefully, and commit the greatest part of that which, remains, to
alms and deeds of charity and compassion: which if they do not all the
miseries happening by their wretched covetousness, shall be written in their
forehead before god in condemnation, and they shall find verified upon them
selves the effect of Salomons warning, Pro. 21.
that cursed shall he be above all the people of a nation, which has hid
corn, gathering it from all parts into his private garners, and not put it to
vent till the world weep for hunger: In this, may be comprehended also the
dearth of all other things necessary to man's life: the same being the cause
and for such like great abuses yt with Saint Ambrose the traffike of merchants,
was holden an estate damnable: wherein it behooves the magistrate by constraint
to open the garners of such greedy storers. (as being a thing of most equity
to make particular profit give place, to the common benefit, specially where
the particular is superfluous, and not necessary to the owner.

How the Merchant may perform his lawful trades and gain justly in his
estate. Chapter. xj.
THe Merchant cannot lawfully make this provision of corn and other common
vittels without doing hurt, but in two causes: either when ye stranger seeks
to make so great transport that without careful provision the country would
within the year fall into great want of relief: (then such providence of the
merchant is both virtuous and commendable, and worthy of honest profit, not
such as their covetousness requires, but according to the rate and judgment of
the governors: or when there is such plenty, that it lies void to use:
there common store fully furnished, and the peril of ye year already past or
else provided for. Thus did Joseph in Egypt, Genesis 24.
foreseeing the dearth and necessity to come. There is besides this, a
providence of good marchaunts, both more profitable, and of greater gain: as
when they see an iminent necessity of vittels in a country, but chiefly in
their own: then to traffike into strange countries where is plenty (as Gods
infinite goodness has so provided, that by the plenty of one nation, shall be
supplied the wants of an other, to entertain them in amity and perpetual
confederation. Many merchants in many towns become very rich by those
traffikes, for which, and such like merchandise was first instituted bringing
profit to many, and doing hurt no none. It is not long since that a merchant
of Britain died welthy in many thousand crowns, rising to that estate from
an alms asker and basket carier: it pleased the King, by the report of his
wealth, Frauncis the first.
and his frank liberality to the poor succouring the good sort without
interest or vsery, to reason with him, how he became so rich, to whom (as a
Philosopher) he answered, with buying dear, and selling good cheap,
explaning his meaning to the King, in this civil and modest circumstance. Sir
(quod he) when I understood that in any foreign country corn was good
cheap, and dear in this realm, I resorted thither with as much money as I
could borowe of some, and of others, such merchandise as I knew to be dear in
that country. And being there I had quick vent of my wares with reasonable
gain, and with the money bought (somewhat above the market) so much corn as
my proporcio^ would stretch unto. By which means, upon my return, embasing
the price of corn in mine own country, every one ran to me, desirous with
ready money to be my chapmen, and so making my return (for the most part)
every two Months, I gained by both voyages: And so according to the increase
of my stock, I roase to furnish Ships, Barks, and Boats of mine own,
setting many idle mariners on work, and succouring many other sorts of poor
people, for the which, God blessing my labors, I increased in wealth as it
were sleeping, never receiving any notable losses, my mind (my leege) being
always void of care, and my body in estate disposed as you see. The Gentlemen
of the Country also, seeing my success in wealth, were sometimes contented to
make me their Farmor, and suffered me to gain plentyfully under them, for the
which I account me bound to remain at their devotion. Thus (Sir) I gained both
by land and Sea, and am (by Gods only goodness) risen to this little wealth,
which to your Majesty, is made great ritchesse. The king deliting in the
civility and roundnes of the man, attributing with all much to his merytt, for
doing good to the whole realm, made him a gentleman with arms to his great
comfort, and contentement of the estates of Britain, who had erst commended
him to his Majesty. Let this example lead other good marchantes for the
honor of their estate and proper vocation, to use the like providence to
succor the necessities of their Countries, by their honest and well meaning
industry. Many may be here the questions of many busy marchantes, who, if
they consider well of the lessons in the first two laws, may be both resolved
and satisfied: Can I (says the merchant) (suffering some wast in his corn
either by leckage, or other common casualtie, or has his cloth marred in the
carriage, or by his own negligence is beguiled in his wares) recover my money,
if I may not sell above the market to redeem my losses? or seeing my intention
was to bring relief and profit to the whole common weal, is it reason that on
me only should be laid the loss and hindrance? I answer, if his will were
such, and his desire in deed christian, and that he had in venture the common
money of the city, he ought to be aided of the general store, as being a
public minister and factor of the City. But if they be hard to consider his
losses, and more strait to restore him to succors, he has his comfort in a
patient hope, that God at some other time will recompense his present losses
with greater gain: as no man is without his perplexities, ^. Pet. 1.
so no merchant does always gain: For some times as well in affairs on sea as
land, GOD sendes afflictions, for proof and trial, but he delivers the just
man in the end to his greater comfort. But if in his voyages and trafykes he
had no other intent the^ to advance his own private gain, I see not how the
common weal has interest in his restitution, seeinge as he traded for him
self, without respect of public benefit to the country, so there can be no
reason of restitution, where is no cause of merit: No, let such as restrain
their wares to a dearth, in hope to enhau^ce the price, and in the mean,
either the season grows plentiful, or their wares corrupt: let such I say,
suck the juice of their covetousness, with the broth of rigorous punishment,
together also with that cankared sort of merchants, who, by reason of loan or
credit, pass their wares to poor chapmen of the country, either for better
then they are, or at more price then they are worth. Such also as making store
of their corn, and never appear in the market but when the price begins to
abate by the great supply that the country bringes in, and to restrain or
forstall it, will not stick to send two or three leagues about in the country
to all ye vittellers and corn men, with threats or false brutes not to bring
in their corn as yet. What other reward do such merchants merit of their
commonweals, but public infamy and exemplairye justice? yea they are bound
to restore the damage that is sustained by it: wherein it belonges to the
officers of the town and other special ministers under the Prince, not to wink
at this great injustice done by these cormorantes to a whole common weal,
least by their coniuringe and dissimulation, they stand no less guilty before
God and their country, the^ those that are the special dooers: if they
allege (which is ordinary with them) that they made the provision for the
town, and therefore ought not to sustain loss: how false that is appears
by this argument of their doing: for if their store had been reserved to the
relief of their town, they might have given plentiful succors not only to
the town, but to the country about, at the beginning, when corn drew to a
scarcetie and high price in the market: but as by their extreme covetousness,
suffering it to mount to extreme rate, they brought lamentable prejudice to
their common weal, so, much less that there is any color of excuse, seeinge
by the appearance of their doings, the common people finds good cause to
accurse them with infinite outcries, which being retained in heaven, can not but
breed effects of their ruin on earth: Exodus 21. Esaias. 9.33
for God (according to ye scripture) drawing up the cries of the poor, uses
to revenge their injuries with all lamentable miseries, thondred upon the
proper dooers and their posterity to the extreme rooting out of their houses:
Let the magistrate also look to it least God wrappe him in the common pains
with such as do the wrong: Let him not dissemble justice, by any merit or
estimation of the person, for that the greater they are, the quicker Justice
their offense deserves, as being unthankful children and brethren to their
common weal, which is their mother: albeit in them be respect of parentage,
neighbourhead, gossupship, or other consideration of friendship, yet they ought
al to pass under equal punishment, for that as the law is equal, so with God
(whose lieftenantes they are) is no acception of persons: who, when there is a
fault committed in his house eue^ by his dearest children, there begins he
his correction, before he proceed to justice of others: Deuteronomy. 5.
So did he to Moses, who spoke to him face to face, that is privately,
reuealinge him self to him more then to any other: as soon as he erred, he
is first condemned for certain infidelity: neither could he at any time
retract the sentence, but that he dyed in the desert, and could not enter into
the land of promise. Deu. 33. Act. 5.
Ananias and Saphira, were in the Catalogue of the first Church, but as soon
as they lied to the holy Ghost with an unfaithful (but weak and frail
distrust) are executed to death by divine vengeance: it is written that Chylon,
when he was created sovereign magistrate in Athens, sent for his friends,
saying yt from ye time forward, he renounced all friendship, meaning yt in
causes of trespass, he would use parents, frinds, and kindred, in on rate and
equity of justice, with others: There be, that in the traffike of marchandice,
and corn specia^ly, do forestall the time, as when they buy corn yet in the
blade, and fruits not resolved, but in their blossom, with many other helps in
bargeyning, where of I leave the resolution to the laws, for that my
profession here is to meddle with none but such as concern concience and
Christian duty: And so, because the time is not yet ceraine to make by common
judgment a certain measure of corn and fruit, no man ought to buy (as they
say the pigge in the bag) nor ye corn in the blade, for that the market is
the place appointed for the traffic of such things: Such forerunners of time
and forestallers of markets, never buy in that sort but at too plentiful a
peniworth, as the seller seldom observes those seasons to sell in, but by
some great necessity, which, as a matter of force and constraint is also
impertinent to the bargain making: it is said that fear and force make
unprofitable accordes, as in which two passions, is neither full liberty, nor
perfect judgment: And therefore, in common reason, the buyer can not but offend
in conscience, if he enforce the necessity of the pore seller to his private
gain, and the undoing of him self and desolat familye, specially buyinge his
corn in the blade, and other his goods which are not yet in nature: touching
rent corn of fermers, if their Lords deal not with them sometimes, more in
conscience, and consideration of the year, then according to the straight
equity, and rigor of their couenaunts, they may (to their dishonor) flea them
quick (as the huntsman caseth a fox, to have his skin) and leave their wives
and children to poverty, to their perpetual confusion before God: ye land lord
ought to deal with his tenant, as the herdsman with his flock who is contented
only with his fleece, and feding him still to thend he may estsons increase, he
defends him from the woulfe, and sucoreth him in time of his poverty.

Great also is the gredines of merchants in their other particular trades, and
no less damnable their sheftes and subtelties, enforced with a custom of
lying and swering, vices for the most part familiar with inferior bargeinars and
retaylers aspiring to be rich by those abominable helps: But to co^demn this
covetousness (the very norsse and feeder of all other vices) this were only
sufficient, if merchants had no other purpose or pretense in their contractes
and trades but to serve GOD according to their vocation, which is in his fear
to follow with faith and diligence their trades, and with out unlawful
affection to other men's goods, not to doubt but God will bless their labors and
sanctify their profession, according to his promise: and not observe the
example of many now a days, who being drowned in the pretense and device to
gain, have no other cares day nor night, but on their traffikes, thinking on
them even till they dye, yea, some have been seen counting their Crowns at ye
very instant of death, dying even with bargains in their mouths: A time
wherein (above all other) men ought to raise their eyes, their hands, and their
hearts, to God, and not to turn their contemplation from him to think upon
the goods of the world, which in deed at no time ought not to be esteemed but
as instruments of virtue, and means subsisting life, with out other affection,
least they lead them in to the vice of Idolatry, and so make merchants
unworthy of the name of Christians: where in albeit they are not without
infinite reasons for their defense, yet, pertaking with Infidles and Pagans,
and tending to justify their wicked couetounes: I leave them to the warning of
their proper conscience, which, being touched with grace, can hold no society
together, no more then a weak stomach can brook a corrupt medicine with out
casting it up.

There be great Merchants, which seem to aid inferior occupiers, but it is to
eat them up altogether: as such as deliver money before hand to poor butchers,
bakers, and bruers, and receive it again in provision of flesh, bread, and
beer: which weekly provision, eats in effect the very profit of the poor
occupier: the same trade also is common to retaylers with their country
chapmen by credit, who, being half fallen, much less that they are remounted
by such weak hands (who notwithstanding are bound to raise them by Gods
ordinance) but of ye contrary, are utterly trodden down, and so pinched by
these great biting marchaunts, that they are driven to enter into fraud,
swearing, lying, and other merchant shifts, to help their gain. But touching
shift, deceit and suttletie they stand upon so many kinds and manners, that
they are too infinite to be rehearsed (so sufficient is the wicked nature of man
to co^triue sleightes to hurt his neighbor:) And if a poor man seek his
reasonable remedy by the law, he were better to rest beguiled, then joining
loss to loss, heap his utter undoing, by following the delays of the law:
For after the merchant (as the Jtalian saying is) has presented the Judge
with a golden comb for his silver beard, it is a charm against the poor
occupier, who either can not be heard at al, or else will be persuaded that the
community of the case makes it tolerable. Bakers have many ways to abuse the
world in their trade, subborning many intolerable suttleties. Bruers also and
drawers of wine, are not without their deceites, who for the better taste and
sale of their wine, forbear not the confection of things, which to rehearse,
is no civility, of which, are bred many diseases, as corrupting and poisoning
the intralles of such as drink them. Butchers blow up their meat to make it
seem full, selling as much wind as flesh, Fishmungers, Cooks with any other
that trades and turns the penie, are not without their arts to beguile the
eye, the ear, the hand, the mind, the reasan, and the judgment of the buier:
which suttleties in their several parties are so much ye more damnable, by how
much they are either dissembled or iustefied by such to who^ belongs the
reformation of abuses, the rather for that in them God is grievously offended,
our neighbor endamaged, evil example suffered, vice norished and favored with
impunitie, and in the end vengeance executed of private authority, for want of
public justice. Marchaunts have special example and commandment not to
deceive, in these words of S. Paul: 1 Thessalonians. 4.
take heed (says he) you circumue^t not your brother in any business or
traffike, not selling vice for virtue, nor yt which is naught, for good wares.
The deceitful balance (says Solomon) is abomination before God, Pro. 11.
and the just weight is according to his will: Leuit. 19.
Let thy balance be even says God in Leuiticus, and thy waights equal, thy
bushel and thy measure al one: And if we shall be measured with the same that we
measure others, such as have given wicked measure, how shall they be judged?
Matt. 7.
Let every occupier use the same reason to a child ignorant in the value of
wares, which he would administer to an other fellow merchant of the same
trade. To deceit in bargayning, is added a custumary vanity of many words,
lying, swearing, and forswearing: And since by the scripture we stand in
danger of sentence for every idle and untrue word, how perilous is the state
of them who enhable the value of their wares with oaths and lies, specially
seeing the lying man murdreth his soul: Pro. 10.
And who swears untruly without necessity, puts the name of God to
blasphemy, does wrong to his neighbor, and sins against his conscience:
Matt. 5 Iam. 5. Ecle. 36.
For which cause the wise man says he found two things very hard and
dangerous: that the traffiker or merchant could hardly keep him self from
deceit, and the retailer (which is the regrater) could not be iustefied in his
word: which vice (as Tulli says) though it spredes commonly through the whole
course of merchants, yet it is most in custom with the inferior sort, who buy
in gross, to deliver to others by retayle: to whom I wish such rigor of
reformation, that the abuses and the endamage thereof, might be restored by
present satisfaction: so would the example be a terror to others, whereby God
should not be offended, the neighbor hurt, nor them selves in miserable
peril of perpetual sentence. And so leaving the abuses of all other estates
to the censure of the law, (if by conscience and Christian warning they will
not be reclaimed, I will end with husbandry, whereunto is joined the state of
a pastor to help to norish man (as Cayne was the husbandman, Genesis 4.
and Abell fed cattle in ye feelde.) In husbandry I think is least guile,
for that he tilles his ground, and laboreth his viniard with simple industry:
only his abuses may be in these three manners: if he present not faithfully to
God the first or chief of his fruits, which was the error of Cayn, and
therefore God received not his presents for that they were not offered with good
heart, but complained and grudged with that which he gave to God: where Abell
offering willingly in sacrifice his best and fattest lambs, God (as seeing into
his sincere heart) beheld him and his presents, accepting them as worthy to be
received of him. The second fault may be, if he pay not his tenthes in the
name and by the commandment of the great God, to entertain his ministers:
Malachy. ^
God said by his Prophet Malachie, that he had just reason to be angry with
ye Jsraelites, in sending them dearth of corn, for not paying their tenthes:
yea, if the husbandmen forget their tithes to the poor Leuits, and left not in
harvest time for the other poor to gleane, and distributed alms at other
seasons according to their duty, they were thretned with barrennes and dearth
over the land: wherein Christians have to consider touching all those texts
standing upon the law of God, and authorized by the Gospel, being more justly
bound then the Hebrews to whom the causes were nothing so reasonable, as also
for that the ministry (without comparison) is of more value and more honorable
in the Gospel then in the law: and lastly for that the Gospel recommends the
poor dearly to us, and with more rich promises of recompense, then the law.
The third vice may be in the payment of their rents to their Lords and
creditors, to whom as they may use subtletie, and either defeat or delay them
of their duty: so in bargaining for corn and wine, they may sell corrupt
wares, and in diverse sorts: for the which it happens by the justice of God,
that in the end poverty is the reward of those people, joined with recompense
of every fatal and miserable calamity either upon them or their houses.
Pastors and herds men are bound with diligence, faith, and care to cherish
their flock, and with that affection, that they defend them from al peril of
rauine, for the which they are to give account to their Masters as if they were
their own: And therefore to the sick, they ought to apply remedy, and
giving strength to the weak, not to abandon the worst from their eye and
perpetual care, to the end they may vaunt with Jacob, to have been good heardes
men: wherein, pastors Ecclesiastical, are here advertised spiritually touching
their pastoral office, for whose cause I have adjoined this little addicion,
and so leave them to the consideration of their high fu^ction in the lesson
given to good common herds men.

All other estates are comprehended in those that have been already debated:
the explication of the qualeties of persons. Chapter. j.
AL other vocations are contained under those that have been already debated:
So that if any other estate separate, as Ambassador, Orator, or other of
infinite profession, as messengers, intelligencers, interpretors, or spies, with
others of that rate, would know how far their offices stretch according to
the Scripture, they shall find them comprehended in the former estates: above
all other things, the Ambassador being the faithful substitute of his Prince
or common weal, ought not to reveal the secrets of his legation: whereby,
either the affairs of his Prince may be hindered, or advantage given to the
foreign Magistrate: he ought not for his glory, profit, or pleasure, to
practice any extraordinary innouatio^, or be invested in any estate to ye
disaduau^tage of them from whom he is sent: For which act, Hermolaus Barbarus,
a man of great knowledge, Ambassador for the Venetians with the Pope, taking
the patriarchship of Aquilea, was publicly condemned by the Senate in the loss
and deprivation of the privilege and Burgeship of Venice: and had it not ben
for ye credit and merit of his former service joined with the diligent
intercession of the Pope, he had been in danger of capital sentence. By this
(as it were by the way) may be warned our preachers the Ambassadors of the
living God, neither, to say or do any thing in Gods name further then the
commission of his word will bear, nor to hope for or take any presents of
spiritual promocion either to corrupt or tempt the^ to disguise the truth,
covering ye apparent vices of their benefactors, against whom God commaundes
them to speak boldly upon pain of his judgments, and not to hold their
peace, as does the dog which forbeareth to bark, when his mouth is filled
with meat. Touching the Orator, I may send him to the office of the advocate
for the conueniencie yt is in those two estates. Between whom, this is only
the difference, that the advocate alleges only the laws for such affairs
as may be decided by them: and the Christian Orator, decks his matter with
eloquent phrase, prosecutes it by popular reasons, by arguments sometimes very
likely, and most often necessary, iustefieth his proofs by histories as well
holy as profane, to persuade his purpose and enforce his causes of conjecture,
whereof in the law can be raised no certain proof. The advocate and he,
reason both to one end, as to defend the just, and accuse and condemn the
evil doer, persuading in things honest, profitable and necessary, whither
touching the Church, or temporal estate. The spy is as a faithful and wise
servant of his Prince or Captain that uses him, of which estate he ought to
make no conscience, being assured that ye war wherein he is employed is just,
as being proclaimed through the kingdom as a matter of consent by the Prince,
his counsel, and grave estates: and signified to the enemy. So are Josua,
Caleb, and others sent to epsy the land of Canaan, authorized by Moses: of
whom, if the rest had been of the like faith and courage as were Josua and
Caleb, so many miseries had not fallen upon the Israelites.

There rests now to treat upon only the qualities, or diverse fortunes (as
the saying is) of men, that is to say, rich, and poor, over and be sides
that we have already touched of them in the Chapter of hospitalls and releeuing
the pore, together with the qualities of the learned, and ignorant, men that be
good, and such as are of worsse sort: these qualities we find in all estats,
trades, and vocations, some rich, and some pore, or part^y rich if they be
conferred wc such as are extremely pore: or half pore, if they be measured,
with them that exceed in wealth: so may we judge of ye other qualities,
wherein, before we descend to discribe amply the duty of the rich and pore, we
may note three things by ye way: ye first is, ye riches is no honorable
pre-eminence, nor makes not an estate of dignity, and therefore, let not the
rich man by any credit or reputation of his wealth, aspier to honor or
dignity above others, nor others attribute more to him then to the simple and
honest pore, in regard of his abundance: wherein certain Christians even in
the primative Church (reteining yet the error which they had being Pagans)
bearing more honor to the rich then to the pore (the common fault of the
world) were grievously rebuked by Saint James, Jam. 2.
charging them in the crime of acception of persons with unrighteous doing
wrong to God, and to the pore: for God says he, estemes as much the just
poor man as the rich, yea he seems to bear more favor to the pore, adopting
them the heirs of his Kingdom, which he gives to such as love him: Saint
James also rebukes the honor that is given to richemen in great assemblies for
the only respect and name of their wealth (a kind of Idolatry to honor a
creature, vile, and insensible in a man, as is riches) and not reverence the
pore, by reason of his poverty, which notwithstanding is most acceptable and
honorable with God, as being innocent and without hurt: where in ye rich man
(according to the Apostle) is found many acts of oppressions, which have
favor of impunitye, albeit they deserve extreme judgment: To despise also
the poor man, is double sin, as both retorning in injury against God, who
has made the pore as well as the rich, yea, honoreth him with his more
singular graces as apeared even since the time of the law, choosing for his
prophetts men extremelye pore: as also against the poor man himself, who with
his present poverty feels yet an other affliction, when he finds him self
despised. Secondly, rich men ought to be persuaded by faith, yt their wealth
comes not altogether by their labors, their wits, nor prouidences: for (says
Solomon) the blessing of God makes men rich, and keeps them from suffering
affliction: it is of mear grace that God makes some to prosper in the goods
and affairs of the world with out suffering loss or vexation? And as there be
many that travel no less then they, yea with equal industrye, providence,
and care and yet are under the yoke of poverty: So then let rich men
attribute nothing to them selves, but all to the bountiful providence of God,
by the mean of some little labor which they take, as if they would attribut the
fertilytie of a good ground yelding for one grain abundance of corn, being
but simply tilled to the provident ordenance of God, and not to their industry
and manuring, seeing there is no ground, which though it be tilled and fatted
with great labor, and sown with never so good seeds, will yet yield no
fruit neither in plenty nor price, because the blessing of God has not been
given to that ground to make it rich in corn: even so the poor are ordained
of God to their estate of poverty, I mean the good sort, for such as by
negligence, by whoredom, or other unthriftiness, become poor, are causes of
their own decay: as there be, that contrary to the ordena^ce of God get
riches by vseries and other unlawful means, deserving not to be called the
rich men of God, but of Satan: as also such as by misgouernement become poor,
are not called by the poor of God: and as such are not true poor falling into
poverty by their own vices, and not poor by God but by his permission, so
also rich men are rauinors by the suffering power of God, and not by his will.

Thirdly, rich me^ by faith may apprehend Gods providence, bearing them favor
and friendship to establish them in prosperity and ease above their other
brethren, (as belonging all to one heavenly Father, drawn out of one mother
which is nature, and qualified of common elements touching the constitution of
the body) whom they see subject to more poverty and affliction: for the which
as they are bound to a more action of thanks to God, so let them search the
cause why he reserueth such favor for them: and why also and for what end
there be so many poor, even to the end of the world, which can never attain
to riches, on whom (if it had so pleased him) he might by the opening of his
plentiful hand, have bestowed great riches, as he did upon Job after his
extreme poverty: In consideration of all which causes, it will fall out
necessary with our purpose, to prescribe as well to the rich as the poor,
their particular duty according to God. First then the rich ought not to
swell or presume by any opinion of his riches, nor the poor fall into
infirmity of heart by reason of his poverty, and much less esteem him self
of inferior grace with God, or estimacion amongst men, according to one self
judgment of reason: but (with Saint James) let him take occasion to glorify
him self in God of his poor and abject condition, in hope to be exalted: as
of the contrary, the rich arrogant man has to fear to be thrown down after
this life, the same being expressed in the example of the wicked rich man,
cast by wicked spirits into extreme necessity and horrible torments of hell,
where the soul of poor Lazarus was carried by Angels into the bosom of
Abraham. The promise of Gods kingdom is made only to the poor, and therefore
if the rich will be saved, let them buy it of the poor by true faith and
charity, and alms, with deeds of compassion. You rich men (says Jesus
Christ) make you friends of the Mammon of iniquity, Mat. 5. Luc. 16.
that is, of the richesse which induce men to much evil, draw minds to
unlawful lusts, torment hearts with wicked cares, make their owners
idolators, being unjustly gotten, are also carefully kept, and by their abuses,
are the causes to infinite people of everlasting damnacion.

In this also the rich sort ought to fear, for that GOD gives riches to many
as their porcio^s which they have to look for from him, according to the
saying of Abraham to the rich man in the Gospel: My son, thou have already
received thy pleasures, Luke. 15.
and Lazarus likewise his pains in the world: content thy self, if thou have
at any time dou any good, as prayed to GOD, or heard his word, thou have ben
sufficiently paid for it: thou can not pass from a vain pleasure, to a
true and perpetual pleasure: from temporal richesse (which thou did abuse)
to an everlasting felicity: from worldly glory and honor, which were thy
delites, to a glory eternal: which as a sweet reward is reserved for this
man, on whom the world threw contempt because of his poverty: Wherein then as
the rich men of the world have more occasion to submit in humility and fear,
so, to the poor is given comfort and hope to be exalted, for who^, the more
miseries, perplexities, and contemptes they have suffered in the world, the
greater recompense is laid up, in the joys, felicities, and eternal delites
of heaven.

Still touching the qualities of persons. Chapter. ij.
RIch men, considering in the^ selves that wealth is a gift of God, and not the
only fruit of their industry, as they ought to glorify the Lord: so, by how
much he favors the^ above others, by so much are they bound to submission
and humble recompense of thanks giving, with increase of love toward him,
because without their merit, he has aduau^ced them to goods, as foreseeing
that they could not easily bear the poverty and misery of the world. They
have also to consider, that he has blissed them with so great store, to the
end to make distribucion to their poor brethren: for which purpose as their
heavenly father raised them to that plenty, to the end that in their
liberality might be expressed their office of brothers: So, if they failed in
this zeal, what iniquity did they to their brethren, having right in the
goods of their father, at least touching necessary relief: and what more
apparent wrong to their said Father giving them the said goods in super
abundance, to the end to compart them to the aid of his other children? shall
not he have just reason to disenherit those unthankful rich children, and
convert the inheritance to the others who were not relieved but of their
hands, and would not endure hunger and nakedness to impart compassion with
them? If there were no brotherhood but only society, as being all companions
and conseruauntes in the service of one master: who giving them (as to his
deputies and stewardes) money and provision to entertayne his house, if they
converted all to feed them selves, or made private uses of it in their own
houses, Luke. 12.
whereby their fellow servants complained: is it not said that such
servant as murderers shall be bestowed with the ypocrites and wicked, and feel
perpetual torments? Let therefore the rich sort, by the advice of the
Scripture, acknowkedge the poor as their brethren: and in the same
consideration, let them entreat them faithfully in household society according
to the will and commandment of ye great Master, who has given them
provision enough to nourishe ye whole multitude of his family: by which there
is no doubt but GOD as a discrete Father of a household, and wise and rich
master, bringes compotent provision of all sorts of necessary relief (yea
even to abundance) to feed and entertain his family: and is not accustomed
to withdraw that bountiful store, if it be not to correct the disobedience of
his dissolute and unthankful children and servant. So that let the rich
understand here (suffering the poor to smart in necessity) in what estate of
sharp condemnacion they stand before God, whose stewardes and officers they are
to distribute his treasure, not to the fancy of their vain pleasures, Matt. 6.
or to keep it to unprofitable uses, but after the necessity of their own
family be satisfied, to commit the rest to distribution to their poor
brethren and fellow servant: whom if they abandon, and use in negligent
compassion, even so many miseries, diseases, and deaths as they shall suffer
for want of succors, shall be reserved and refined upon the heads of the rich
in the eternal judgment of God. Let them not be ignorant that God has not
replenished the earth with so many poor, but to be a mean to the rich men
(using aid and compassion) of their salvation, as without whom they cannot be
received into the kingdom of recompense. For so, he that aids a prophet,
receives the hyer of a prophet: and who has compassion of the poor,
receives the recompense of the poor, which is ye kingdom of God. And so the
rich man may have paradise as well as the poor, so that he give him society in
his riches. Saint Paul in these few words co^prehendes all the duty of the
rich man: Instruct O Timothe, 1. Tim. 6
says he, the rich men of the world, not to be proud, nor to lay up any hope
in their uncertain riches, but in GOD, who impartes to every one plentiful
means of honest and sufficient hauiour: Let them do well and be rich in good
works: give easily (that is, in liberality and without grudge or force)
communicate their riches to the needy, and so lay a foundation of everlasting
life: Let them be the servants of God, and not thralles to worldly goods,
wherein, who reposeth confidence, falls into misery, from the which riches
can not deliver the^ says the wise man, but virtue only before God: they draw
men into infinite sins, Pro. 10.
making their owners more covetous, forgetting God and the duty of nature:
they vex them with disquiet of mind, and will not suffer them to afford
compassion to the needy, no not by way of loan: the same being the cause,
Matt. 12.
why Christ holds it no more possible for a rich man to be saved, then a
great Camel to pass through the eye of a needle: and for the rarenes of good
rich men, it is said, right happy is that rich man which has been found
without blot, Eccle. 31.
and has not gone after gold (covetousness having this property in rich men
never to be satisfied, but with the plenty of goods, increases in desire to
have more, as ye fire becomes hoater being fed with abundance of dry wood) If
there be any rich man (says he) without blot (as not proud, not covetous, not
injurious, not dissolute, but humble, liberal, pitiful to the needy, and not
careful of the pleasures of the world) we will praise him. Rich men have their
example in Loath and Abraham, great alms giuers, who, of their wealth, made
instruments of piety. Let the poor also for their parts, be humble,
patient, without murmur, and pride, a vice (above all other) most intolerable
in poverty: let them offer their bodies to labor, to the end they be not
unworthy of ye bread they eat: Let the^ reioise in the promise of that wealth,
which far exceedes the value of worldly goods: not douting, but if god had
seen that the abundance of earthly treasure had been necessary for them, he
had ordained them to it as well as others: but knowing their infirmities, he
foresaw that the abuse of riches would have led them to have displeased God,
and so be instruments of their eternal destruction: Let the^ follow their
humble vocation, in mildnes and duty of mind, with this suertie, that their
heavenly protector and patron will never leave them without succors in all
their affairs and necessities. But now, because Christ biddes us give to all
that ask, Luc. 6.
whereupon question may rise, whether we be bound to give always, or to give
to him that borrows, or lend without demanding profit. First, we must
consider, that in the commandment of JESUS Christ to give to all that ask,
is meant to give to the poor, and in the name of GOD: Otherwise it could not
be an act of virtue, and worthy of the eternal reward promised to the alms
giver. And as in giving to him that has given, or, if we do pleasure to him
of whom we have received or hope to receive benefit, is but an act civil,
common to the Pagan: So also to give to the poor by a natural compassion, for
the only regard of his poverty, 1. Cor. 8.
is a work of natural bou^tie, which some make moral. But seeing the act is
not done to the end that it ought, that is to Gods honor, to the which all
deeds ought to be converted, it is not worthy of recompense of God, because
there is nothing done for him. Well, we are bound (according to the rate of our
hauiour) to give always to the needy, but with this lesson, to know first who
be truly needy, of who^ there be three sorts: the one is, he that is
extreemely poor, to him I owe my vittailes and garments that remain above
the necessity of mine own use: And if I be not able to succor al such needy
people, at the least (with Saint Augustine) let me relieve him whose necessity
is first offered to me, drawing by my example rich men to relieve others: In
this case the rich man refusing to aid the poor, is a tyrant and unjust
possessor of the goods of others, for that the superfluity is a due portion of
the poor, according in the words of Saint Basil, The money (says he) that
thou keep in thy coffers, the apparel not serving thee to use, and the
vittailes that thou have in abundance, are the goods of the poor, over whose
right thou do usurp: In this, he seems to hold conformity with S. James,
James. 5.
that the rich men ought to sighe and weep for ye miseries that will happen to
them, whereof he alleges three causes: the first, for that they keep their
gold and silver till it ruste, and have no need, where many poor bodies
perish of hunger: and that their garments are gnawne with moathes, where
infinite poor creatures stand naked subject to the injury of the weather. The
second is, that they pay not reasonably such as serve them, whose cry
pearceth the very ears of the lord of hosts, demau^ding vengeance of their
iniquity. The third is, that they make great cheer, and anoint their throats
with the liccorous sirops of sweet meats, and suffer the teeth of their poor
brother to bite no bread, nor his stomach to be refreshed with whole some
liccour: Many other needy people remain in a City, who notwithstanding their
trade and occupation, are driven by some ouercharge of children or casualitie,
to sell their necessary implements, and sometime the very instruments of their
occupation, not being hable to borowe, and having shame to ask.

Of Christian amity, and how many sorts of friendships there be. Chapter. iij.
Having not yet spoken of the duty of a friend but in general sort, nor of
Christian charity, wherein consists the perfection of a Christian, and of
most dear commendacion in the Scripture: it cannot be impertine^t to infer
some discourse thereof, the necessity of our purpose so requiring. Amity is of
four kinds: as natural, civil, carnal (such as was amongst the Pagans) and
Christian or spiritual. The two first have their approbation even by the
scripture: and ye third, which is carnal, has been by the judgment of good
men, reputed corrupt, as in deed it is, and much reproved according to the
doctrine of God. Natural friendship, is as the love of parents toward their
children, and one kinsman or country man to an other: Civil amity, is got
either by conversation and society of men together: or in respect of profits,
either received, or hoped for: this friendship is called of the Philosophers,
humane, and as it were due of common office: But better is it expressed
(whereby it is called a virtue moral) when it unites mutually hearts and
wills together, and sometimes it is but of the one part, which is the cause of
Tullies opinion, that such is the force and property of virtue, that it
constraynes men to love such, on whom there goes but an opinion and reputation
of honesty, though they never saw nor knew the persons. But notwithstanding
the reasons and judgments of the Philosophers touching that kind of amity,
the Scripture will never repute it a virtue, if it have not a purpose and end
to the honor and love of God: without which end, much less that all virtuous
actions have any recompense or glory before God, but, (with Saint Ambrose) that
kind of amity is accounted corrupt, 1. Cor. 10 Col. 3.
as not done to that end which the Scripture co^maundes: by which we are
commanded to do al things for the honor of God. Fleshly amity or friendship
is contracted, under a hope or present enjoying of goods, honors, and carnal
pleasures. And sometimes the natural and civil amity degenerate into this
damnable love, being most often the very love we bear to our selves, deliting
more in our own glory, Tim. 2.
and pleasures, then in GOD, or that concerns our salvation: Where upon it is
said, that men upon the end of the world, shall be so worldly and fleshly (a
sign of reprobation) that they shall be more fervent followers of their proper
delites, then of God, This love Saint Augustine with good reason, says, is the
foundation of the City of the Devil, as the love to God is ye ground work of
ye holy city of the sovereign Lord: Christian love is that charity which so
often God recommends to us, comprehending an entier love with all our power to
him, and a sincere amity without fiction to our neighbor, even by the same
measure, that naturally we love our selves, with this inte^dement always that
all be for the love and honor of God, (as ye cause and end of al amity and al
our actions) to ye end to receive for it eternal retribucio^, This amity,
leads, directs, and makes perfect, the natural, civil, and moral friendship,
and even so corrects altogether that, ye is carnal, as being corrupt by wicked
affections, and makes it turn into spiritual, by spiritual conversation: as,
if a man loving his wife, only for that she is fair and rich, and for his
beastly pleasure (a Pagan love and little differing from the affection of a
whoremonger to his concubine) and being afterward instructed by Christian
doctrine, with what zeal he ought to embrase his wife in marriage: loves her
not for the reasons of the flesh aforesaid, but as his companion of grace,
coenheritrice of the glory of heaven, loving her with that spiritual and true
love where with Jesus Christ loved his Church: And as a Father loving his son
not simply nor naturally, but with a worldly affection, as making him his
Idol falls to love him afterward in God by Christian institution, that is
according to the prescript of the Scripture, keeping him in discipline and
virtuous exercise. Thus the whoremonger is converted, and forbearing his
fleshly affection to his troll, will hate in him self and her all damnable
lightness, and never look on her but with a displeasure and remorse of his
sin: which, after their conversion she is also bound to do. And if there be
danger eftsoon to fall, they are bound to restrain sight and mutual company
and stand upon their guard, no less then such, as having ben once enuenimed
with a sweet poison, and by an antidot preserved from death, will beware
eftsoon of charms or sweet liccours: neither is penance of any force, if
the sin be not altogether abandoned, and all carnaletie abhorred. And if in
deed amity (to speak more properlye) be a virtue more then morrall, and not
affection only (according to the error of some Philosophers) it can not be
joined with vice: for so thieves, and other of vice albeit they vaunt of
friendship in susteyning one an other, can not truly be called friends, but
confederats in league, conspiring by common consent to do evil: Amity is
perpetual, as is all virtue of his lively and proper nature: So that such as
love richmen, by reason of the proffites they receive by them, are not true
frindes, for that when such rich men shall become pore (which God does often
suffer) they are for saken of their frindes, because riches was the only cause
of such friendship: and who loves an other, as it were in recompense of
affection that he bears to him, loves not as he ought, for that the cause
rising of bare fancy which afterward may change into hate, the frendshipp
can not be certain nor perpetual: yea he that loves an other for his virtue,
loves not simply as he ought according to God, for that as the virtue of ye
man enclines to vice, so the affection of his friend will convert into hate, for
which cause Aristotle aloweth the sentence of a wise Philosopher saying, that
men ought to love, but not so much, but that they may hate, meaning, that
loving men of virtue, and their virtues, torning into vices, our affection may
resume his first quality, (if for charity sake we forbear to hate them) This
was his judgment of friends that might chaung by francke and loving will: Matt.
3. Romans 5.
But by the Gospel we are warned to love our ennemies and wicked men, yea
Infidels which seek to persecute us to death, so much are we bound to love
them, as to pray to God for the^ and to present them with our goods, help,
and life, if there be hope of their salvation, not so much as willing or doing
to them any displeasure: so did Christ love us all, and died for us being his
ennemies: The cause of this love is God, for the honor, love, and commandment
of whom, we love, loving that which he loves, according as he loves, and for
what cause he loves, conforming us wholly to his will and his love, in the
which, and for the which he loves us all: Let us love therefore that which is
of him, as (in man) his Image and semblance, his handie work, his virtues, and
his graces, conforming ourselves to ye love which he bears him having made for
him so many creaturs, given him his Aungells for his protectores and guides,
and his only son to death for him, yea even when man was his enemy,
blasphemed him, and was altogether disobedient to him: Thus must we love the
soul of our neighbor, (albeit he be our ennemie) as the dear conquest of
the precious blood of JESUS CHRIST, and his body being the sacred temple of the
holy ghost: yea so we must love him, as Jesus Christ loved him, giving his life
frankelye for him: whom by baptism, as he has incorporated him, in him self
to be a member of his body, and by faith in the holy communion made him his
flesh and blood, so I ought to love him as one of the members of the body of
this Lord, and as his flesh and blood: with all, seeing we are all made by him
members of the same mystical body, and children all of one father by
spiritual adoption, then the same affection ought to be conversant amongst
us, which passes between members of one self body, and proper and natural
brethern: in effect, the friendship, that we ought to bear one to another,
ought to be without acception of persons, counthries, kindred, or parents: with
which zeal if we love not even the most strangers of the world, John. 6.
the most unthankful amongst men, and our mortal enemies, we are not the
disciples of Jesus Christ, Ioh. 3.
by whom we are told, that then we declare our selves his folowers, when we
do that which he commaundes us: his precept is that we love one an other, as he
has loved us, to say and do well by our enemies, yea to dye for them if
need require, in hope to gain and save their souls, in sort as he is dead
for ours: So that, who hates another, bears malice to him, does him injury
seeckes reueng of him, strikes him, and (which is extreme iniquity) kills
him, apertains no more to Jesus Christ, as to bear ye name of on of his
disciples, or of his flock, the^ ye wolves Lions, Tigres, are of the heard and
flock of Lambs under the charge of a shepherd: Suchthen that have quarrels
aspiringe to combat one against another, and practice revenge of wrongs by
their proper authorities, belong nothing to the profession of Christ, and in
their hearts have no more taste of God then Pagans and unbelieving Atheists: He
that will offer sacrifice to God, Mat. 5. Tit. 3.
can not by Jesus Christ make it acceptable to his father, if he have offended
his neighbor, and is not reconciled, as also, who hates his Brother, is a
murderer and stands void of grace for eternal life: I comprehend not in this,
such Christians, as by lawful justice pursue the restitution of their goods,
honor, or wrongs, received by any wicked men: for, seeing justice and
judicial order is of God, and by him commanded to procure punishment in form
of justice to the wicked acording to their merits, and that by the Magistrate
and the law, is not only lawful but also acceptable to god, so that it be
done without hatred, and affection of particular vengeance, not regarding so
much our proper benefit, honor, or private interest, as to correct vices, and
by that justice to give succor to the soul of the transgressor, to the better
stay and example of a whole communaltie. This is also expressed in the example
of a body which we go about to purge from botches, impostumes, and boyles: In
which body if there be any member so corrupt, that it would infect the others
to the danger of the whole body, it is cut of, but with a great displeasure
to all the other members, who, by a communion of nature, being conjoined and
knit together, do love one an other with connaturall and perfect zeal. And to
return to the matter of Christian amity, we are bound to love men as God
loves the^, whose love is so much the greater toward them, by how much he
finds their affection pure to him, and the more does his zeal increase, the
more he sees in them that which is his, as faith and charity, with fervent
zeal to his honor, and exercise of good deeds: even so, the more faith and
simplicity we find in men, the better affected to Gods honor, of a more ready
and frank mind to his service, better disposed to acts of compassion, and
aspiring nearer a divine perfection of God: even in so much greater affection,
honor, and frank mind of service, are we bound to them, as knowing that in
that we most please God, who, for those respects honoreth them more then
others. And therefore we honor nor love them not so much in their persons, as
we express our selves to love God in them, in whom we honor his gifts and
graces, and all that we find to be divine in them: So that as we are bound in a
stronger affection and more readiness of service to those whom we know to be men
of honest integretie, then to others in whom we can acknowledge no such
virtues: So, yet we must hate no creature according to the example of God, who
bears no malice to any man he has made, Iere. 4.
as having declared therein his power, his wisdom, and his bou^tie: For which
three things we must acknowledge his handy work with thanks giving. Besides,
we know that God is not but charity and love, and who is constant in charity,
dwells in God, and God is firm in him: as of the contrary, who hates any
man, has no perfect charity, and by conclusion cannot be of God: So that as
we are first bound to love GOD with all our hearts, so in the second place we
ought for his sake to love al men with a true and perpetual love as our selves.
But if we find them possessed with any vice or fault, loving still the
creature, we may hate that which we see not to be of God and hated of men, as
knowing that in God there is nothing but integretie and what else is good and
virtuous. These be the causes why we ought to love the souls and bodies of
sinners as being the ha^die works of God: but lawfully may we hate their
sins and wicked conditions, as we ought not to love any thing in the Devil,
but his creation, which is divine, since, touching the rest, he is nothing but
peruersitie, of his proper will: for which cause he is called wicked, as not
taking pleasure no (which is worse) not having power to delight in any thing but
to do evil, ye same being the reason, why so often we are commanded to shonne
him, and not to suffer him to enter into us by any pleasant suggestion, but to
resist him, and esteem him our only enemy, a serpent and venomous Dragon, a
rauining Wolf, a roaring Lion, a thief and murderer, seeking after nothing
but by suttletie, force, ambushes, and treasons, to betray our souls: yea, if
it were not by his wicked and wretched temptations, we should never have
enemies, malice, or miseries, no, not once have the thought to do wrong one to
another, the same being the cause that our savior Christ calls him our
enemy: it is he only whom we ought to hate, Mat. 13.
and all that is in him (except the spiritual substance, the first creature of
God) it is he only whom we ought so much to detest, as not once to hear him,
see him, or seek to learn any thing of him, in whom is nothing but deceit,
lying, abuse, and murder: it is he, of whom we ought to take nothing that he
offreth, for he corrupts all that he gives: And seeing he is a poysoner, let
us always take heed that he enuenime not our thoughts with vain and wicked
pleasure, with infidelity and consent to evil: and that he poison not our
words, with vanity, injuries, detraction, lies, false oaths, and blasphemy:
nor infect our works or actions with ipocrisie, or dissembled intention, nor
by any other trangression of Gods commandments. This wicked spirit has
stretched out his snares in all places, and dispersed his poison throughout the
world: he entrapped Eve in the earthly paradise, and poisoned her with lust of
glory, which, as an infection he has erst distilled into infinite nations and
persons: his ginnes are so suttlely wrought and laid, that they are espied and
avoided of none, but such as are humble and lowly such as live in continual
contemplation of Gods wisdom and his holy fear, such as resolved into
spirit, have no conversation with the flesh and the world: such as are strong
in faith and of that immouable love to God, that they take no other pleasure
but to do his commau^dements: Such does the spirit and wisdom of God
instruct to epsy and break his subtle snares, and give them remedies against
the poison of that venomous basiliske. Touching amity cyuill which we get by
society of study, by conjunction of life, and similitude of estates and
functions, or in recompense of benefits: we may conioyne it with the Christian
amity, by the which it has his confirmation, and is made better and more
agreeable to God: By this, if I love better him that is thus my friend, then an
other professed unto me by common Christian amity: I do no wrong to no
Christian fre^d: for ye I take nothing from him of ye which is his, I mean of
ye which I owe him in true and spiritual love: in ye same sort ye love natural
is not deminished by ye christian amity but is made more firm and spiritual
as ye Christian Father loving better his own son, then an other child,
forgetts not for all that to express effects of Christian amity to the
other: So that by this love, parents, kindred, and Christian neighbors, may
love one an other with greater love, and yet do no wrong to others touching
the zeal which they ought to bear them, as we see by the comparison of the
fire (where in is resembled charity and perfect Christian love) which beegins
first to heat and burn those things yt are presented nearest to it: I will
not hold for all this yt in case of election of a magistrate, friendship is to
be expressed, for that there particular amity should give place to public
friendship as where is more need of virtue, verity, and justice, then of
singular love only: for as virtue (being divine) is and ought to to be
preferred before all human affections: So he, in whom is most reputation of
wisdom, learning, 'integritie and justice, although he stand to us neither in
parentage nor kindred, yet for the friendship we bear to the public or common
weal, ought to have our voice to the state of magistrate: And in case of
judgment, the father being judge, ought not to be partial to his child, his
kinsman, his friend, nor dearest familiar: For there, particular friendship,
giving place, to public regard, has no respect to affection but to reason,
right, and justice: And seeing, (as has been said) that amity as well natural
as civil, ought to be ruled, by christian friendship and that directed
according to ye will and commandment of God, with whom sin is condemned,
and detested: we ought to bear to our friend, no percialitie of favor, support
nor council, to ye hurt or dishonor of an other, and much less obey his
fancy, pleasure, or will, so far forth as it may bring detriment to the estate
of his soul: we must not flatter him to the end, to please him in any thing
dishonest or unjust and much lose hear, or incline to him in any thing against
God, or the purity of our conscience, which we are bound to keep altogether
to God: The greek proverb is, ye we ought to love one an other even to the
alter, ye is, so far forth as God be not offended, either by oath or other
vice: no who makes a lie, to further the benefit of his friend, yea or to favor
his own life, offends God, what interest soever it bear to father, or mother,
magistrate, King or Emperor.

How a common weal is gouernened and wherein it erreth. Chapter iiij.
IN all estates in their particular function discharge well the care and duty
of their office, and that by the direction of the Governors, to whom belonges
the first example of behauior, as a head, and the principal member of a body
natural, do first their proper and general offices for the better regiment of
every common and particular part of the said body. A body pollitike under
these observations can not err nor much fail to live together in happy
conversation, and consent to peace, concord, amity, and every other good
conversation. And as we see the natural body of man complete with his due
organes and instruments disposed, and sound to do his perfect actions
thoroughe all his parts, not suffering any fault or negligence in any one to
whom belonges office or function: So they do all agree and consent, albeit by
travels and operations unlike or differing (as is difference amongst the
members) yet conspiring and tending all to unity under the will and judgment
of the head, every one employeth his force to do that belonges to his natural
faculty: wherein, if there be any that fails in his proper action, his
infirmity is immediately discerned, either that he is sick, or other ways
restrained by dolor and grief that he can not perform his office: as when the
eye refuses to aid the body and every outward part with his visible
faculty, it is seen that he is troubled with some corrupt humor falling out
of ye brain, or being vexed with some other accident, he cannot serve his
body, for the which as he remains in sorrow and grief, so every member in
particular, and all together in common, do join to his succors. First the
brain begins to debate and judge what the disease is, and how to provide the
remedy: commaundes the tongue to declare the grief, and demand means to cure
it: the ear hears, the foot trauelleth, and the hand is diligent to apply
the medcine: wherein all the rest have common interest, and that with general
care, compassion, and busy travel, as if the passion were proper to every of
them: even so, and by this resemblance, we see this body pollitike to be then
in his best estate, when it suffers none of any condition or calling what
soever, to live void of function and travel according to his duty: where, if
there be any, either by superfluity of evil humor, or by nature corrupt, or
of discipline peruersed, which leaves his function, he is not only
unprofitable to him self and others, but also a trouble to the rest of the
parts, but specially to the most near and noble parts, which are his
neighbors, parents, and nearest familiars: even so, in a body pollitike, the
greatest in office or credit, ought to advertise the magistrate, which is the
head, to the end to consider how the infirmity may be helped, to whom all
the rest of the parts are bound to be assistant for the cure of the part
infected, which least it grow to increase of evil, they ought to purge by
some sharp discipline: And that doing no good in his simple application, they
are bound to redouble it to the uttermost: wherein if it prove incurable, let
the^ apply the searing iron, and as an extreme remedy, cut it of, to keep
the other parts from corruption and the whole body sound. And this, albeit can
not be done without extreme sorrow to our whole common weal, but specially to
the next parents, neighbors, and familiars, yet being driven thereunto for
the health and sauetie of the whole, the necessity makes the co^straint
neither hateful nor intolerable. The magistrate only as being the head of this
body has the judgment and execution of this business, as he only has the eye
to see, the ear to hear, and the imagination and judgment, to determine to
the sauetie of him that fails in his duty, and to the benefit and profit of
the whole body pollitike, wherein is not to be forgotten that naturally the
head of man finds out speedely the grief or disease of the member to give
succors to it: the same being an advertisement that the chief ruler or head of
a common weal, ought also to know the evil that is happened in any place of
his government, whereunto he is bound with his eyes, his ears, his
understanding, and all his other sensible synowes, I mean officers inferior,
to whom belonges the information of every thing, to the end reasonable remedy
may be applied: But this were a great evil, if the head should become diseased
by vices and peruersed affections: for being so, he would make to languish all
his poor body, and lead the members into disorder: yea worse would happen, if
any gross or corrupt humor, hindered or stopped the natural conduites, by
the which the lively spirits proceeding from the brain could not pearce and
pass thorough all the parts of the body, whereby it might fall by apoplexy
as dead, without speech, without moving of breath, and seem to have no sense.
In this we signify, that if the law (which is as the soul of the body civil)
be in the head of the magistrate, restrained or hindered by corruption or
abundance of humores infected (as couetousenesse, hate, fear, love, and false
opinion touching religion) to perform her free functions through all the said
body pollitike in motions and senses (which are gouernements) by wise
providence, equity and justice. The poor common weal can not but fall
quickly to the ground, even as a house has no mean to stand, when his proppes
are taken from under him. This we read happened in the time of Sedechias king
of Jsraell, Hier. 20.
when the great Sacrificator Phassur and all his under sacrificators and
Prophets (except Jeremie, EZechiell, Daniel, and a few others) together with
their king, and his officers, were occupied in acts of covetousness, rapines,
injustice, and pagan superstitions, and forhearing the exercise of the law of
God: all those as they were the first that declined to sin, so they were the
first that were committed to spoil, captivity, and murder, and afterward
the rest of the whole body slaughtered, with all that miserable common weal
defaced (which before stood in flourishing prosperity, so long as her heads
performed their office, and justly exercised the law): And where the soul of
the common weal (which is ye law) were not but by certain small humors
(corrupt with certain vices) hindered to do her action, whereby one only
member should be distressed: all the body could not but be in pain, and not
able freely to do his general office: So the default of execution of justice
in one particular man, is the error of the magistrate, and the cause by the
which the whole common weal is put to trouble.

Therefore, O you Magistrates, in whose hands stands the direction of the
soul and body of this Christian common weal, and also of whom depend the
success, rest, and happynes of the same by your grave government, as of the
contrary, if there be default in you what wretchedness and misery it
suffers, is attributed to you: provide so that this soul, I mean the divine
law, entertayning with it the law natural and politic (as the reasonable
soul in man comprehe^des under her regiment the spirit sensitive and vegatiue)
be Lady and mistres chiefly over your selves (as governing your doings
according to her direction) to the end that by your guide, she govern and
entertayne all the rest of the body politic, without being hindered by you in
favors or other corruptions civil: yea let her freely stretche out her self
in vigor and virtue, equally to every general and particular part, for the
better ability of his proper and natural action: I mean let every one
exercise the particular vocation whereunto he is called, for the better
regiment of the whole in one equal faith, without acception of persons, every
one with frank readiness enclining to the prescript of that law according to
the limite of his particular charge: by which observation, there can not happen
either to the whole, or any peculiar proporcion of the body, any disorder,
disagreement, contencion or confusion. And even as when the humane body of man
is governed and ruled by physic, it seldom falls into disease, for that in
that Science is prescription of all things necessary to conserve health: even
so by this law, (the true Physic and medcine of minds) so long as they
observe the rules of it, commonweals are not only entertained in plausible
and constant prosperity, but withal armed against the assaults of al casual
inconuenie^ces either by suttletie, malicious force, or pollecie. But as the
body then slides into infirmities and diseases, when it gives over the counsel
and judgment of physic: so ye body civil neglecting the rule of the law,
prepares to it self occasions of many passions, as war, famine, with such
miseries as God uses to send for the transgression of his law. God in many
places in his law, but specially in Deuteronomie, forespeakes blissinges, and
happy success, to the good obseruers of his law, and that as well in their
houses, Deuteronomy. 27. and 28.
as their Cities, Countries, and whole affairs, as of the contrary his
threats be terrible to the tra^sgressors, prophesying all miseries to their
families, their goods, their cattle, yea to their own bodies: with these
miseries the Prophets often times threaten the Israelites for their
transgression, as also other strange nations, for that they had been cruel to
the desolate people of Jsraell.

There are none more imediat causes of the miseries afflicting men in private,
or commonweals in general, Gene. 4.16 26. Heb. 12. Gene. 38. Joshua. 7.
then the transgression of the law, and obstinate constancy in wickedness: For
we find that in all times, misery has followed sin, as the smoke does the
fire as well to particular men, (as in Cayn, Lamech, Agar, I^maell, Esau, Hei,
Onan, with many such from the beginning of the world) as to whole commonweals
suffering impunitie of sin: as in Josua it is said, that for Acham, who
contrary to Gods commandment took a wedge of gold, and for the sacrileage of
Hiericho, all the Army of Jsraell, to whom was promised victory, was put to
flight, so grievous to God, is sin how secret so ever it be, who will have it
punished: for that cause Solomon says, Pro. 14.
that sins makes people and nations unhappy: which then appears most when
it is known, and the common weal makes no care to do justice of it as we see
happened in Gabaon of the Beniamits, Judges. 16.
in which City (for the unchaste violacion of a woman dying of ye violence)
almost all the said Beniamites were overthrown by the other Jsraelites, God
ordeyning this judgment for the revenge of the woman's dishonor: oftentimes
the man that has done evil, is not punished only, but also the affliction
stretches to his house, as happened to Cham for mocking his Father, with whom
his son Canaan with all his Chananites were scourged. Genesis 9.19
The sin of Loath and his daughters is not punnished only with the penance of
the good Patriarch but also upon his children. The Moabites and Ammonites, who
were rejected from the allia^ce with the Jsraelites for their reproved
generation, yea forbide^ to enter into ye temple, albeit they were converted to
god: much more grievously is punished ye sin of the Prince and ye Magistrate
not upon themselves only, but what they love is touched, and their whole
people visited, as is manifest in David, who notwtstanding he did penance for
his adultery and murder, yet his son died for the punishment or satisfaction
of those two sins, 1. Kings. ^ 15. and 24.
as also for the adultery he did to an other ma^s wife, his own co^cubines in
ye mean while were polluted: And for that he rose into pride he was stricken
with plague, by the death of three score and ten thousand persons, who
consenting with their Prince in his vain glory and vices, Genesis 7.
had their share in his judgment and punishment: when all the world was
resolved into sin, God spared not a general punnishment by the great flood
which had power over all flesh, saving eight persons preserved in the Arc: In
Sodom and Gomorrhe the fire of heaven consumed all but Loath, his wife, and his
two daughters: And in the first sacking of Jerusalem, but much more in the last
and general spoil of Titus and Vespatian, Mat. 24. Luc. 12.
to the ruin of all Judah according to the prophecy of Jesus Christ. For all
the world had erred, either actually or by manifest consent, or secretly, and
to come: yea even the little-children, who albeit had yet done none evil, yet
if they had had then judgment or ripe age, they had had the same will with
their parents; as with all, children in some sort are the substance and
principal goods of their parents: So that, their fathers offending, and
deserving to be grievously punished, the scourge falls also upon their goods
and children (I mean touching temporal pains, for, concerning the soul, the
sin follows the author) according to the judgment of God, who, as a just
and sovereign Lord, punishes the man for his proper vice, and every vice in
ye man, as we see he did in the first ruin of the world, when he drowned
fathers, mothers, children, servants with all sorts of beasts, saving such as
he reserved for propagation and sacrifice.

Counsel of the remedies to cure and preserve commonweals from misery,
Chapter. v.
IT belongs then to governors of a common weal, (as to good Physicians) by
the doctrine of the law both divine and human, the true medecin and
preservative of Christian souls: to keep and conteyne their people: and
governing them both in general, and particular by this law that they fall into
no dangerous sins and mortal diseases of the soul, they are restrained to
no less care art and duty to preserve them, then the Physicians corporal are
bound to defend the bodies from sicknesses by judgment and rule of good
regiment: And not confounding the two estates Ecclesiastical, and pollitike or
secular, from doing their particular functions albeit in profession diffring,
yet te^ding to one general end to erect Gods kingdom, let them labor to
keep their common weal whole and sound; that, neither in manners, nor
discipline, nor touching the laws, customs, statutes, and ordenances, there
be no error by superfluity or want, receiving succors by doctrine, sermons,
and particular lessons, (touching Religion) of the Churchmen, to whom they are
bound to stretche and lead their hand according to GOD, as we see the body
serves the soul in that is necessary for the use and conseruatio^ of man: And
if in the said body politic, there be happened any evil, of what side soever
it be, either of them selves or others, either within or without, whether of
one, or many, or all together, they ought presently to descend to the remedy,
to the rooting up of the evil if it be possible in the beginning and not
suffer it to increase by conueniencie or dissimulation. Let them not doubt but
God as he is of nature merciful, so he is greatly provoked when he punishes
man for vice, but more angry when he scourges a whole family, afflictes a
town, and visites a whole country: but extremly and most of all is he stirred
when he distroyeth a kingdom and general nation: let them not think that then
the cause of the sin is small or simple, but in diverse sorts multiplied
touching ye number, and of heinous importance concerning ye quality and
quantity, yea increased with ye number complet, even to an incensible gravity:
for often times God attends the fulness of our sins, Genesis 15
specialy before he strike a nation or whole people, according to the text of
Genesis, that he would not punish the Channites till their iniquities were
accomplished: The best preservative against all these evils, is diligent
providence of the governor and magistrate, who then may best restrain vices,
when they prouid that ye law may be understand of all, with such commandment
to keep it and under pain of such due ponishment, that even in the first that
transgresses against him that made it, there may be actual justice to the
common instruction and example of others, wherein for their better help, and
effect of this verteous policy they must begin to institute the litelones, and
to teach the ignorant, blaming both sorts if they do not learn and observe,
and so to others, instructtng every one in the office and duty of their
estate, and in what sort they ought to serve the common weal: using herein
specially for their first foundation, ye doctrine of faith: then the grounds
of good conditions, and lastly the rules of policy, which doctrine in these
three parts, we have declared before: In this sort the magistrate may preserve
his common weal, from infinite evils, as we read Joshua and Samuel, standing
upon these reasons of government, never were trobled with sedicious, nor any
miseries hapened to them after they had purged them by penance of former
offenses. There hapened in the government of Josua but one defalt by Achan, but
imediatly after inquisition was made, he passed by ponishment, by whose example
let governors bring into correction what vice soever they find done against
God. with out regard to qualify it either by person, parentage, place or
other partial, or corupt circomstance: for it is most cerraine that as, that
vice being suffered will be the cause of the damnation of the doer, so the
impunitie and example will draw many others to do evil, Genesis 2.
whereby the ire of God will kindle against a whole kingdom: For which cause,
Abraham as soon as he understood that Ismaell went forth to play with Isaac, or
as some in terperet, to provoke him to Idolatry, he expulsed him his house
with his mother: Moses, when he found any fault done in his camp, specially
bearing offense to God, exercised present and sharp punishment: what justice
thundredhe upon those that worshipped the golden Calfe? and no less upon the
blaspheamor and transgressor of the Sabbath, with other offenses which he
foresawe might provoke god to sentence against the doers, and to destroy him
first, being governor for negligence of justice, and so consequently all
others consenting to the vices? he was advertised of the judgment of God,
as well by his express law, as by examples past, and such as stood in present
experience: as in the case of whoredom he had seen 24 thousand overthrown by
the hands of God, with commandment to him to xecute the Princes and captains
of the people, by whose wicked example the multitude run to their sin of
uncleanness: he knew also that for the zeal of justice, God appeaseth his fury,
as appears by that which Phineas the son of Eleazer did upon two
fornicators thrusting them both through with his sword, for the which it is
written that God ceased to make the people die: he knew by many other examples
that the fury of God was terrible upon a whole world, Psalm. 105.
if he found not exercise of good justice by correction: which the Israelites
sought to eschew in punishing the offenses done in Gabaa as has been said: And
Saul (being yet a man of grace and fearing God) when he understood the people
had eaten flesh with his blood against the law: 1. Kings. 14.
cried out saying, roole upon me some great stone, and put me to death: Oh
what sin have the people commitied against the Lord: seeing God, has been
offended, he will punish us all justly by some miserable accident, if we resort
not all to penance: therefore he commau^ds to make ready sacrifices, to
confess their sins, detest them, and ask pardon of God by prayer: whose
example, if the Magistrates of the world before the flood, had observed, and
after, in many places of the world if governors had applied such quick
Justice and discipline in the first beginning of vices, neither had the
universal ruin happened, nor such common misery to many general nations: if
Helie had chastised his sons and kept the people from corruption of
Idolatry, he nor his children had not died, nor the people suffered slaughter
and destruction: If Jonathas had not transgressed the Edict of King Saul his
father, the oracle of God had not ceased, and he not run under judgment of
death, which he had suffered had it not ben for the intercession of the people:
if Saul had not done wrong to the Gabonites, he had not ben the cause of the
famine which happened in ye time of David, 2. Kings. ^1.
for the appeasing whereof, there was commandment to execute seven of the
race of Saul: By these exemplary aduertisements, let Magistrates of the
present time foresee that in their gouernements there be no vice done, or being
done, that it be pursued with present punishment: other ways let them be
assured that with the example of a disease in the body entertained and
norished, and neither preventing it before it happen, nor being happened, is
careful to purge and heal it, will breed by continuance a fever, disquieting
the head and so much vex the whole body, that in the end he shall not be able to
have any use of his members, whereby death does follow. All which happens by the
default of the head, in whom was understanding both to keep him self and the
body from evil, and also to provide remedy if it did happen: even so, when
there is either ill providence to prevent an evil, or worse negligence to
purge and cure it, nor seeking out the cause till the effect be expressed: it
is then we see plagues, and famine, with other rodds of God: wherewith yet as
he does not scourge specially a country or common weal, without great offense
(as one that will not strike with his staff but where he finds obstinacy and
resistance: Psalm. 88. Pro 3.
) So let us then do as children to their father who^ they have offended (for he
strikes as a father) and seeing him stand with rods in his hand ready to
discipline, Heb. 12.
fall upon their knees at his feet, and with tears demand pardon, on whom,
in respect of their hearty submission as he is content to bestow but two or
three little lashes, and presently cast the rods in the fire: so also, if their
weeping and humility had appeared before he took the rods in his hand, they
had not at all felt the smart: even so deals GOD with us, correcting us with
easy discipline as his children, and if we cry him mercy, there is nothing
more familiar with him then forgiveness, yea he will burn his rods, and
embrase our conversion: withal, such is his goodness toward us, that before he
enter into correction, be inuites us to submit and acknowledge, to the end he
be not constrained (being a just judge) to lift up his hand and make us feel
the rod: Es. 45.
convert (says he by his Prophets) to me, Iere. 3.3^.
and I will be converted to you I will keep no remembrance of your faults:
yea I will repent me that I went about to strike you: it is grievous to him to
scourge his people, and an act which becomes him not properly: Es 1.28. Exodus
3.4.
his nature is to do mercy for the which he is called merciful, long suffering,
patient, and mercy it self: he would not punish David upon his person
notwithstanding he had deserved extreme Justice, but pardoned his sins, when
he asked forgiveness with great contrition and grief. Touching the rods which
he holds in his hand and strikes not, but shows them as matters of fear to
offenders: we see that Josophat being threatened with such rods which were the
Moabites, Ammonites, and Sirians his enemies, withdrew himself altogether to
god, published fastings through all ye country of Juda, and asse^bling all ye
people to pray to god in ye temple, he, in ye midst of the^, made this
oration: O Lord God which art the god of our fathers, the god of heaven, and
have dominion over the kingdoms of all nations, in thy hand is force and power,
and there is none that can resist thee: is it not thou O Lord that have killed
all the inhabitants of this land (being idolators and pagans) before thy people
of Jsraell? We have not force to resist so great a multitude, and therefore not
knowing what we should do, there restes nothing to us but to turn our eyes to
thee O Lord, as hoping in thee only for aid and succors: And as he continued
thus in prayer, (wherein there was not so mean a woman and least child which
did not pray with him in the temple, behold the prophet spoke unto him: fear
not this multitude, it shall not be thy war, but the war of God: which
happened accordingly, for all those armed enemies forsaking their purpose, fell
upon the Jdumeans, and after slaughtered one an other, without any necessity
of him to go to the battle: so happened it in the time of Jonas to the town
of Niniuie, where the king understanding the hand of God to be ready to destroy
them with in xl. Ioell. 3.
days, commanded a general fast for three days: yea even little children and
beasts were restrained to abstinence: and joining to this penance, contrition
and supplication for mercy, it fell out that the City felt not the rods of
God otherways then in fear. Touching the whippes wherewith he scourges for
not having thus prevented, and yet in correcting them selves and asking pardon,
he forgiueth them, it is written of the Jsraelites, that they cried to God when
they were in tribulacio^, and he delivered them from their necessities: which
is amply declared in their deliverance from the captivity of Egypt, Psalm. 106.
wherein they felt sharppe and smartinge rods, yet crying mercy to God, they
were heard and delivered. David, seeing the fury of the plague upon his
people, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, where he saw an Angel holding a
sword over Jerusalem in sign of the punishment which he made of the people
by plague, cried with a loud voice: O Lord God, it is I yt have offended:
punish me: afterward he offers sacrifice to God, and the death ceased.
Ezechias, (for particular example) who feeling in his person the discipline of
God by a disease whereof he must dye: after he had acknowledged him self, and
cried to God for grace, had answer to live yet xv. year with the receipt of the
remedy to heal his infirmity. And touching the public affliction which he
and his town of Jerusalem suffered by the Assirians, that had besieged ye town
and made breaches to enter, the same night by great miracle the Angel of God
slew a hundredth four score and six thousand of his enemies, which brought
such confusion and fear to their King Senacherib, that he fled early in the
next morning. In these maibe noted (as it were by the way) that as it is said
in the book of Judith (according to the promises which God made in his law)
when the people of Jsrael served God well and observed his law, Judith. 5.
they were not vexed of strangers, nor felt common miseries, but such as
offered to oppress them were confounded, as Pharao and his often in ye chase of
these people were swallowed in the red sea: even so, when the Israelites fell
from this course, and offended God, he stirred by enemies on all sides, of whom
they were either overcome and slaughtered, or at least by other hurtes felt and
found the certain tokens of gods wrath, whose effects they proved wc extreme
misery, if they did not repent: many nations and people were not reformed by
preachings, nor threats of gods judgments, but scorned the prophets that
pronounced them, calling them fools, mad men and sedicious: and deliting in
their own scorns, they said, let the day of God come, we s^are it not, for
we have the temple. Iere. 7.
Many trusted in Idolles, and others hoped for succors of Kings to be strong
against their enemies: yea there were that persecuted the good Prophets that
foretold their calamities to come: and the false Prophets reassured them
again with promises of all good success: yea when famines, diseases, or other
punishements happened, they laid the occasions to the good Prophets and
catholic people: Ezech. 13.
as some of them attributed their plagues to the stars, which were the
Chaldeis, and others judged them to be things fatal, as the Phariseis: In
which confusion and hardened obstinacy, and few men finding that it was the
hand of God and his word to be true, whereby without conversion they deserved
extermination: Ier. 7.14.
God willed Jeremy not to pray for ye people: as withal Moses and Samuel,
Ier. 15.
favored of God, and their prayers so often hard: Noe, Job, and Daniel above
others no less dearly beloved of him: made continual supplications for that
obstinat and peruersed people (whom he would not he are in their prayers) not
to slaughter that people and destroy their city, Ezech. 14.
which is a fury of god irreco^ciliable, wherein Jeremie prays him not to
correct the^, but in judgment, for there he uses not the rod to administer
discipline, Psalm. 2.
but liftes up the bar or rod of iron wherewith he threateneth to break
the heads of such as obstinatly and arrogantly rebel and will not hearke^ to
his word: for so in ye time of Noe he destroyed ye world with the flud,
subverted Sodom and Gomorha: and led in such displeasure the Jsraelites that
were unbelieving, disobedient, and ^utiners, that as David says, they could
not enter into ye land of promise, because they were unfaithful and held no
reckoning of gods word: and after wards, for the same abuses, suffered them by
the Assirians and Romans to be overthrown, their temple battered, and their
town raised, which is a punishment of the reprobate.

How God some times punishes a whole people for a secret sin: how
Governors ought to enquire thereof, to the end misery happen not to the whole
common weal. Chapter. vj.
AS we have seen in what sort God strikes for sins that be manifest: so let
us consider whether for the secret offenses of some particular me^, he punish
not even a whole Nation: In which, if Governors see public scourges or rods
of God upon a whole kingdom (as common sickness, famine, war, and such like
punishments) and understand no public offenses, let the^ search out the cause
the better to provide and work reconciliacion: as we see good phisicions sift
out the causes of the sicknesses of man's body, we spoke while ear of the
shameful confusion in ye battle against the Chananites, of whom they were
overthrown where they should have had victory. By which punishment as it was
well showed to Josua that the people had sinned, or at least some of them, for
the which God was justly angry so not being able to know where the fault was,
he referred the inquisicion and truth of the matter to lottes, by which it was
found that Achan was guilty: so when Saul saw that god would not auswer in
any common manner to ye which was asked of him touching the success of ye war
against the Philistines, he knew God was angry: 1. King. 14.
for which cause laying Lottes upon all the families, he so examined it from
lineage to lineage, that at last the lot fell upon Jonatha^, who was found guilty
of the divine indignation. We read that in the common famine of Israel in the
time of David, when none knew that the common trespass of the people had
deserved it, David, demanding answer of god by the priest, was told that there
was no other cause of the famine, then the wrong that Saul had done to the
Gabonites, to whom Josua and the princes had sworn that they should have no
harm: And therefore as there must be justice done for the trespass, so the
Gabonites required vii. children or successors of Saul to be put upon a
gibbet: after which execution plenty and abundance of al things renewed over
all the land. By which example (be it spoken by the way) appears how God, for
the trespass of one in particulare, punishes a whole communaltie, not
immediately after the fact, but with long expectation: as even in the time of
Saul, Samuel by the commandment of God, gave charge to Saul to go sack the
countries of the Amalachites, ^ Kings. 15
and to pass by the edge of the sword, women, children, and beasts without
dispense or grace, giuinge a reason of that extreme justice, for that those
people had done many oppressions to Israel, and resisted them in their voyage
out of Egypt into Chanan, being more then five hundredth years between the
offense and the revenge: oftentimes god takes a great leisure to punish sins,
as well to show his patience, as to declare his bou^tie exspecting the
repentance of people: and yet as it is most true, that there is no sin which
either early or late, is not suer of his punishment, if the author do not
justice on him self. So withal, by these textes and examples, it is easy to
understand that God never sendes affliction to a whole nation, but for sin:
which, when it appears, brings with it sufficient? conjecture and judgment
that for some trespass god is provoked to punish them: which we see not
always happen to one in particular: for often times he endures either to keep
him from offending, as S. Paul confesses of him self, who suffered a great
affliction in trouble of mind, persecution, and torment of satan, to the end
he presumed not for his reuelacions: or else for proof of his patience (with
the ancient fathers, and specially Job:) or lastly for the manifesting of his
glory, in the deliverance: But here is no question of sin to be the cause of
such evil: and therefore because governors may ask how they may know that
secret sin is the cause of a calamity, seeing that neither the lot is now in
use, nor we have not reuelacions by oracles, or prophecies: I sai, that albeit
the secret cause of a common affliction can not be known, yet, by sermons there
ought to be endeavor to stir up every one to think and enter into him self,
declaring that right wretched were he for whose cause so many people should
endure, as it happens oftentimes when a prince transgresses because the
fault is public, as was ye of David, who also required to be only afflicted,
Genesis 1^.
and not the people yt had not sinned, at the least so horribly: neither is it
to be doubted, but as God promised Abraham to preserve Sodom if he found but
ten good men, so also if ten come to God in prayer wholly converted into
continual fastes, alms, and penances, but specially priests, as did they of
ye time of Joell, it is no doubt but they shall be heard. Touching lots, I hold
it not meet yt they be used in things vain, but in matters serious on the
which the honor of God depends, and such as cannot be decided by certain
judgment, as we find the Apostles did in ye election of S. Mathie, which,
notwithstanding was not done without invocation of the name of God, and prayer,
wherein there is no doubt but god will direct the lot according to his will, as
is witnessed in the text of Solomon: the lots (says he) are put in the bosom
of some, and are te^pred, or governed of God: Pro. 1^.
And so to return to the matter of the evils that happen in the world, they
are already well proved to descend directly from God, and not by any
providence of fortune, as the Epicuriens, and Atheists, of our time believe: nor
fatally, according to the opinion of the infidels, together with the
Astrologians, who attribute all to their aspects, constellations, oppositions,
and reuolutions of stars: and much less according to the philosophical
persuasion of the Physicians, bringing in the alterations and corruption of
Elements, and natural bodies, not raising up their spirits to the
consideration of the divine providence, that the soul gouernes not better all
the parts of our humane body, then the great God rules and measures this huge
world, not suffering the least herb or plant to move or grow without feeling his
virtue and power: Nor little bird to fall upon the branch of any tree without
the providence and will of that omnipotent mouer of all things: nor lastly the
least hair of our head which is not kept in reckoning by him: The Physicians,
or later Philosophers, do oftentimes beguile themselves by the second causes,
as making them the imediat or first causes of any evil that happens (which is
a kind of infidelity) not fixing their judgments but on things which they see:
as when the South wind hot and moist, has blown much and most commonly in a
year: when ponds lakes, and fennes, are corrupted: when in a dearth of
vittailes, people are constrained to eat unseasonable meats: when the air is
close, and gives out an evil seat: when the winter, contrary to his nature, is
hot and sootie: when many vile and vememous beasts engender upon the earth:
and caterpillars, frogs, and other vermin fall out of the air: when such
signs appear, the Physicians say they are the cause of plague and sickness,
not considering that GOD uses these second causes ordained by his providence
as instruments and manifest signs of the same providence, and that for this
reason: By those signs he gives warning to the world that he prepares to
execute his justice upon people and nations, and by these foretokens inuites
and aduertiseth men to fall to submission and supplication for pardon to ye end
he thunder not suddenly his full indignation and rigor upon sins. A child,
seeing his father prepare rods, and binds them, and shake them in his hand,
has to think, that he has offended, and the time of his scourging draws
near: and therefore, in fear, tears, and humility, he ought to fall
prostrate before the knees of his father, as we have before advised: By these
means says Joel: what know we, Joel. 2.
if God (of nature good and reconcilable to our vices,) will be converted and
aforde grace? at the least he will not condemn our souls, if with a changed
heart, we perform action of penance: when the Prince, by long counsel and
advise, causes to be erected in many public places of his Realms, great
scaffoldes, gibbets, and the instruments of torment: such as have offended the
law, and have no mean to flee, what other thing can they think of this
preparation, then a resolute purpose of the Prince to execute smarting justice
upon them: great is their present fear, but far greater the grief and
displeasure which they ought to have of their offenses: ought they not to call
into practice all means serving for their delivery? yea, if they tarry till
they be led to the scaffold, their hands and feet bound with other attires of
high offenders, and being ready to be offered to the execution, there is small
hope or expectation of mercy: let them go themselves with their halters about
their necks, and taking their best friends to solicit in their intercession to
the Prince: let them discover true effects of contricion, and imploring the
free mercy of the Prince, let the^ offer restitution to the parties offended,
and better obedience and behauior here after in them selves: so shall they with
David not suffer the utter most rigor of justice, or else avoid it altogether as
ye Jsraelites escaped it in ye time of Jonathas, and ye Niniuits also by their
severe and wonderful penance: eue^ so al these second causes, are but signs
and instruments of Gods justice, tokens, preparations and fore shows (as
according to the examples of the rodds, skafoldes, and gibbets) by the which he
declares his anger and disposicion to punish sin: The semblance that is made,
the preparation, and the rod, as they are no causes of gods justice, but it is,
for the punishment of our sins that execution is so aparantly prepared: So
after such shows and warnings, does not the Father begin to scourge his
son? Does he lay aside the rod, before he see ye amendment of his son, or at
least some hope that he will core^t him self, and not return eftsoons to his
naughtines? The child can not accuse the rod as the cause of his scourging,
and much less the tree where it was gotten, and least of all his father that
laid one the lashes: But entering in to the view and judgment of his own life,
let him accuse himself, and say that his sin is the first cause of the
evil that he suffers: For, if he had done well (because the law is not to
punish the just) he had not feared that rod: 1. Tim. 1.
as in deed to speak properly, he fears it not though he have offended, but
fears his father which holds it in his hand, since the rod can do him no
harm, if he be reconsiled to his father.

To remedy all evils the causes must be taken away, the discrtion and wisdom
requisite there unto. Chapter. viij.
I Would we were as good Philosophers, touching our faith, as Phisicions be in
their medicines and physic: Then would we apply as good spiritual cures
against sin, as, by them are ministered temporal remedies to heal and
preserve bodies from diseases. They, as soon as they deserne the second causes
of a sickness, apply present provision to the place where they remain: they
minister purgations to keep bodies from corruption by evil humors: they cause
the streets and straight corners of the town to be cleansed, lest the air
congeale infectio^: they make fires abroad to mortefie and purge evil smells,
and within howses disperse and strew perfumes: They prescribe sobriety, and
forbid excess, they banish all unsavory meats, and bring in abstinence from
cohabitacion, they apoynt Methredat and other preservatives, and give order to
wear Rue and other strong herbs proper against ye Plague: In like sort, if we
used spiritual means to keep us from evil doing, we should with the fact of
sin, avoid also the perils and miseries that are brought with it: yea, if
as soon as we deserned the second causes (threatening signs of the vengance of
God) we would purge our selves of all wicked affections, and vices, and not
suffer in our common weal impunitie of sin, but perform one holy and
general conuertion and conversation according to christianity, we should not
only turn away the hand of God from us, but eftsoon restablish his gracious
favor to the accomplishment of all our desiers: wherein our general prayers,
and spiritual demeanors accompanied with charity and correction of vices, are
of great power to apease the furious storms of heaven, and restore to the
earth ye calm of gods ancient clemency, even as we see the roaring noise of
huge Cannons, break the clouds, and persing through tempests, seem to make
cease their thu^ders, and clarify and reduce ye trobled air to his clearnes.
The Phisicions, having in cure a diseased body, observe all the signs that
best serve to disclose the nature and state of the disease: they behold the
patient, they consider the part that is grieved they enquire of the hour of
his sickness, and doubting of surfeit, they examine what, and when he has eaten
or dronken: yea they will be informed of his keepers what rest he takes and how
his fits do discontinue or increase: wherein, as by those observations and
examinations they bolt out the true cause of the disease, and from thence do
draw the remedy: So, albeit the patient complain of his extreme passions,
and desire them to take him out of the pangs he endures, yet they will
answer him, that they must not begin that way, but first curing the cause,
all his consequent grieves will cease: even so, in a common calamity (as a
general plague) afflicting a whole country, it belongs to our Christian and
spiritual duty, never to cease to search out the first cause till we have
found it, and then to be more careful to administer imediat remedy, the^
curious to heal the particular passions of the present misery: For the cause
(whether it be simple, double, or in many sorts) being removed, the sin is
also purged, and the plague prepared to cease, as we have read and seen, that
afflictions which God has sent upon his people have been dissolved in one
instant, when they entered into the correction of their vices. But such is the
mischief of the present season, that suffering the cause, we seldom seek
further then to cure the present passion whereby our evils rise to continuance,
and most often to perpetuity: For if we minister purgation, we do it not in
fulness, whereby, of the dregs remaining, we fall eftsoon into disease, and
tarry not long without either wars, plagues, or general dearth: yea sometimes
we see raised from ye earth, and from the sea, fo many vapors and exhalations
of our unclean pleasuees and heats of lust, that they gather and congeale into
a terrible storm, and break down our houses, root up our trees, blast our
corn, and bring upon us so many other calamities that a whole country (as a
sick body) becomes by them so shaken weakoned, and made miserable, that there
is no expectation but to see and suffer universal ruin: For according
eftsoon to the resemblance of the dregs remaining whereby we suffer relaps
of sickness for want of full and perfect purging, we see that after wars,
famine, and then pestilence follow as in common society: which are not
(according to the argument of Philosophers) to be attributed to the stars,
or, by good Christians, can not (with out apostacy of faith) be referred to
natural reasons, since in the scriptures, (wherein with the surety of the
only truth, the infallible judgment of God is declared to us) we are assured
that the will of God was not to scourge us with two nor with three rods, and
much less to strike us with the staff of his rigorous justice: but as a
father sought to whip us with one only rod to make us acknowledge our faults,
and yet sent us before hand certain signs and fore warnings to inuit us to
demand pardon, and not to punish us, or at the most, to give us but certain
light lashes with a small rod: For which cause as we seldom find, that God
has thundered such afflictions, but that he has sent before forewarnings: So
yet, if he saw the people would not correct their faults and draw to
amendment, by the rod of war, he would pinch them with famine: and if by
that discipline he saw no reformation, he trebled his rod by pestilence,
sending sometimes the one before the other by contrary order: But seeing into
their obstinacy and resolute inclination to sin, he leaves them often times
(according to his threats in Ose) abandoned, not caring to forewarne the^ by
such disciplines, but to dissolve and break them altoget^er, or (which is most
to be feared) to deliver them over to their fleshly delites, and to become
apostates of true religion. But here we must not think that the people of God
(as they of Juda) acknowledging their faults by the scourge of war, were
iouched with other persecution: no, we find not but in Samarya (a country of
Idolaters) that either famine or pestilence have follow wars because there was
conversion of the people: only, at the notable sack and spoil of Jerusalem
and Judea both by the Assirians and the Romans, we read that in the
chastisement of those people, GOD did not only use his three common scourges,
but also he stroke with his rod of Iron to break all, adding captivity and
banishment to those that remained of the first fury and slaughter: wherein
such may be noted of extreme ignorance of God, or apostatie of Christian
faith, who qualefying the lamentable events and calamities happening in these
days in Christendom, whether by the Turks, or Christian nations one against
an other, or whether in one kingdom by reuoltes, mutinies, and Civil wars,
yea not thinking their wickedness such as they ought to be considered upon
(being indeed the most hard scourges of God, and signs of his extreme fury)
say they are but common miseries of the world, and such as men ought not to be
amassed withal, for that they are ordinary, and happening yearly in diverse
countries: as in Spain has been seen many popular mutinies, in Germany, and
in the climats of the Turks and regio^s of very near neighborhead. Such men
do either not at all, or else very coldly affirm, that those miseries are sent
for the scourge of our sins: no, they call them rather (with contradiction
and repugnance) fatal and as destinies inevitable, and that the world must
pass so, as ye sky tourneth and the elements move and alter: Oh barbarous
opinions, and language of infidels: wherein, what other thing do they then
applawde the vices of men, and support wicked wars, helping to excuse such as
raise factio^s, monopolies, rebellions, and give countenance to sedicious
subjects against their natural Prince, favoring and approving, thefts,
sacrileges, murders, and spoils of good men, and all under cooler of certain
destinies and divine ordinances which cannot be resisted, ascribing, impunitie
to such as do the wrong, and will not hold them worthy to be corrected.

Confutation of human Philosophy touching the affairs of faith, wherein,
and in things serious, men ought not to decide but according to the Scripture.
Chapter ix.
TOuching humane Philosophiers, it is written, 1. Cor. 13. Romans 8.
ye as the wisdom of ye world is but foolishnes before God, so with him, such
fleshly wisdom is also envied: and therefore, who seeks to be wise according
to God, let him labor to be a fool according to the world: as if Saint Paul
had said, that there is no other wisdom according to god, then the holy
scripture, according to the which, we must aspire to become wise: But if we
moderate and rule our selves by our own knowledge and fleshly judgment,
contrary to the doctrine of the same wisdom, we are fools, and beguile our
selves in faith, Colos. 2.
(such philosophy being subtle and deceitful, and no less differing from
faith, then bestialitie from the sense of reason) the same being the cause why
the wise man says, that vain are those men, in who^ is no knowledge of God:
And to resolve touching the opinions of those new philosophers, concerning the
euentes of the miseries happening in Christendom, it is meet we stand
resolutly upon the judgment of the scripture without passing further,
following simply ye which briefly we have spoken before: which is in effect,
that we believe that they fall upon the earth by the wisdom and providence
divine to such as know and love God, and that for their profit, benefit, and
health, says S. Paul, and that he empouerisheth not but to enrich again,
hurtes not but eftsoons to cure and heal, Romans 8.
nor strikes none to death but to revive them again to life: he sendes not
into hell (meaning eternal miseries) but eftsoons to deliver them, so that
nothing happens but by Gods providence, and that for our profit, whereby the
elect and holy ones receive their probation, and are kept in bridle and made
better. Secondly, we must think that he keeps us not in punishment for
our sins no longer then we deserve it, no more then the Physician purges his
patient, but according to the necessity of his disease: for which cause
affliction is called purgation: And as the metal by the fire is purified of
his rust and earthy filthiness until he be refined: even so God cleanses us of
our iniquities under faith in Jesus Christ, making us by that mean become
better: therefore when he lays his hand upon us, he does it with the clemency
of a father: but if we correct our selves, his rods are thrown into the
fire, and, with our deliverance, he gives us spiritual pleasure, joy, and
plenty of all necessary benefits, Thirdly, if he see we persevere in vices,
he continues his punishment, making them so much the more sharp and grievous,
by how much our sins are cankered and of hard cure, not sparing (according
to our obstinacy, Romans 1. Luc. 15.
merit, and grauetie of our wickedness) to root us up by death, as he did
Herod, or else delivers us up to our own lusts, and will punish us no more,
as reserving us for his just and terrible judgment, as he dealt with the rich
man. This is that which according to the scriptures, we ought to believe,
touching the calamities which God sendes to a common weal or a whole realm:
and therefore to those dispusers and doctors of policy, speaking not only so
rashly, but also in infidelity of the adversities of the world, be it said,
that they learn a new lesson and speak as Christians, least the world hold
them in the reputacion of infidelles and men ignorant of God. Touching such as
maintain that through out the world and in all ages, there have been miseries,
and therefore not to be holden strange that in this time particular nations
suffer aflictions, let them join with all these further considerations that
God uses other ways (I mean for other causes) to touch with miseries those
men and nations which acknowledge, honor, and worship him in true religion as
their sovereign Lord: then he does to other, either Apostats, and
schismatikes, or all together Infidels: ye good sort and holy ones receive
these afflictions as disciplines and corrections, by the which being advertised
of the indignation of their heavenly Father against them, they are stirred to
conuertion, to cry him mercy, and with all duty to dispose themselves to
serve him: where the others, when he has rebuked the^, yet they are not
chastised by those scurges, which in deed he will not suffer to work the
effect of correction in them, as knowing their obstinacy: but as they are
punished for that they have done wrong to his children, being to them as Lions
and wolves to the pore flock, so he makes them understand it to thend they do
no more wrong to them: Esa. 17.14 15. Ezech. 29.31.32.
That is the cause why Esaias and Ezechiell fore tell the desolation of many
towns and regions, of the infidells, as having vexed with cruel wars the
Israelites, or to stay them with mutual wars from offering oppression and
tyranny to ye faithful, as we see proved by many examples in the old
Testament. And albeit God served his turn with them, Esau. ^.
and made them his scorges to whip his children and the axes to dismember them,
yet he meant not yt they should tiranously deal with them: but as often times
it happens they acknowleged not how, nor for what they were victors, but
proudly attributed to themselves ye glory of victories: So, for that pride and
tyranny, God sent them afterward other tirants that requited them with just
recompense, both for that they might understand they had evil done, so to vex
his people, as also to call them to a better modesty if afterward he should
send them to discipline his people, for no other causes God seems to care for
such reprobates, but (with the sentence of the scripture) delivers them up to
their particular affections, desiers, and wills, with whom the devil (who is
their prince) does what he list: And where he gives them ye fruition of this
inferior world common with his other people, Romans 1. Act. 17
as health, liberty and plintie of goods: He does yt of his general
providence, not meaning (for their impiety) to break ye order established from
the beginning of ye world, as giving blessing to the earth, to beasts, fish,
and men, for procreacion (having so disposed the Elements, the generation and
corruption of natural things) all which do as well bring profit and pleasure
to Idolators, and infidels, as to the people of God, and even so, so many
calamities and miseries, (yea often times more, and death it self) do happen
as well to those, as to others as ye wise man says. Eccl. 2.3.4.
Here may be deserned how our babbling natural disputers, do slide (with their
sweet error) in to extreme impiety, not seeing in to the high council and
wisdom of God, who, as he is wise, constant and immouable in his general
ordenances, so he enterteyneth the order established in perpetual providence
of his creation: they consider not as wisemen ought to do and much less see in
to the cause why he has made all this that is, nor for what end he
entertayneth and preserves it: They ought to have learned that ye unfaithful
and evil liver deserve not to possess the use and benefit of any creature,
seeing they misknowe and offend their creator: no more should they enjoy it
long if the number of Gods elect and his faithful servants were accomplished,
^ P^t. 7.
for then would he reuerse ye world to ye which he gives not this continuance
but for their sakes: And therefore wicked men ought to honor ye good sort, by
whom they are, and prosper in the world, as with out them they had been ere
this carried into ye deepest botoms: But much less that those pore blind men
can see the estat of their proper errors, seeing they have not the faculty of
consideration of things necessary, for they have neither eyes of faith, nor
light of scriptures to deserne that which concerns ye health, or perdicion of
men. Touching factions and wars of one Christian realm against an other,
there can not happen to the world a more great malediction: no there are no
actions of men where with the majesty of God is more offended: wherein such as
(under the pretense of any profit) give counsels, and be (as it were) the
bellows to blow the brondes of such murders, cannot but stand guilty and
worthy of a thousand hels, in respect of the infinite offenses committed against
God by breaking the league of Christian fraternity and indissoluble aliance of
amity, wherein Jesus christ has knit us together in more strong charity, then
natural brethern one with an other, who, if they raise contention one against
an other, what will their Father say? if they strike one an other what cause
of indignation against them? but if they kill one an other, what great
displeasur to him? it is holden by ye scripture ye Adam remained a hundredth
years from knowing his wife Eve for ye sorrow which he had of ye murder of his
son Cayn against his brother Abell: Genesis 5. Pro. 6.
and if such as sow discord amongst brethern, be above other most displeasing
and abominable to god, what reputacion to those brothers entertayning civil
debate amongst them selves, who in nothing more can incur so great
abomination before god: Mat. 5.
if such as only hate their brethren be murderours, and can not have eternal
life, in what danger of judgment stand they, who not only hate but oppress,
persecute, and kill? if simply to be angry against reason and of a wicked
heart, deserves condemnacion: if to offer half an injury, bringes merit of
punishment: and if for calling our brother fool, we stand in danger of hell
fire: what infliction of punishment ought to be prepared for brethern
maintayning controversy by hate, enforcing acts of mutual hostility, and
with great contempt of nature, cut one another throat if God refuses the
prayers or sacrifices of such as present them before his altar bearing enimitie
against any, and not performed reconcilement: how can such as slaughter one
another so directly against the will and commandment of the Lord, offer
either prayers, or other acts helping to their salvation: yea, if they purge
not their grudge by reco^ciliation, their prayers can not be drawn up to
heaven. Let therefore these reasons with others of no less consideracion, be
drawn into deep counsel, before war be taken in hand: let all means of
peace be searched, and if there be malice, seek after atonement: Ephe. 4.
yea let not the sun go down upon your anger (says S, Paul): if there be
question for a town, fortress, or country, let wise Princes, Presidents, and
Councillors, accord the difference: For if war be once begone, peril
appears on every side, and as the event is uncertain, so the charge of three
months pay for an army will rise to more then the profit yt comes by it in
many years: besides, to a place being gotten with great cost, belonges no
less care to keep it, and therefore no small grief when it is eftsoons
recovered not reckoning the spoils, robberies, murders, violation of wives,
mayds, and widows, with other infinite evils incident by the fury of war: for
the which, what satisfaction can be acceptable before God? woe be to those
seducers, who for any temporal benefit, stir up Christian Princes to lenie
war one against another, to the great dishonor of Christian Religion, and
oftentimes their proper ruin: by this it happens, that as Kings and Christian
Princes have been in division, the furious tiger of Christendom observing his
oprtunitie, has entered into our common weal of Europe, and made much of it
subject to his tirannie, against whom all nations and Kings of the, faith ought
to conspire in one common force, and chase him out of the park of Jesus
Christ, which he has already invaded with violent slaughter of the seely
sheep of our almighty Lord: yea, they ought also to keep war against the
Wolves and Foxes wandering throughout the world, to deuower the residue of this
poor flock, I mean heritikes and authors of these new reprobat sects:
against whom the Princes of Christian nations ought to fight no less valiantly
then did the Jews against the Philistines, Amalachites, and other Idolaters.
Christians ought not to commence suit one against an other, least by pleading
in processes, there arise hate or malice: And to the man of GOD, better were it
to suffer the loss of worldly goods, then to vex the quiet and tranquillity
of his spirit, to lose the exercise of his godly vocation, to put him self in
hazerd of Idolatry to corrupt Judges for the gaining of his cause, to take
occasion to bear evil will to his adversary, to forge deceites, delays, and
lies, and lastly to be constrained (for his justification) to discover the
vices of the witnesses suborned against him: All which perplexities joined to
abuses damnable, ought to warn and arm al Christians not to attempt process
for light causes, but rather to search all means of concord as Jesus Christ
commands us: Act. 24.25
And in cases where men are compelled to prosecute pleading (as S. Paul was to
defend him self against ye false accusations of the Jews) let them beware
they bear no malice to the party, whom we are bound to love according to the
advertisement and exa^mple of Christ: as also when a Prince raises war
against a tirant, he ought not to bear hate to his person, but pursue him to
justice with compassion: Let Princes and al other popular states observe the
rules of charity, in whom since God is delited to make his perpetual
residence, there is no doubt, but if she be the guide to our worldly actions,
we shall bring forth in our common co^uersatio^ such true effects of
Christianity, that neither ambicio^, malice, nor pre-eminence of place, or
authority, shall carry us into acts of opression against our neighbor, nor
yet the consideration of small wrongs offered to our selves by others, move us
to take to blame those things which by the office of our religion, we are bound
to cover, or at least not to enter into violent recompense, but to leave the
reueng to God, to whom it belongs.

Let thefore public preachers and pastors of the holy word, exhort the world
on all sides to reconcilement and tranquillity of mind. Let private chapleines
governing the religion of princes and potentates, persuade their majesty's to
erect laws principally to advance the honor and service of God, and then to
corect vice, and give reverence where virtue deserves it: by which two the
wise man attributes to a commonweal an assured foundation, and most happy
sequel: let the prelates of the church disperce into every particular cure of
their several bishopprickes doctors and preachers, able by their learning to
revoke ignorance and confound supersticion and error: Let lastly all
magistrates and ministers of justice with such as have charge over the civil
policy, strain out their authority to the aid of ye church, with whom (as
joint ministers of one almighty sovereign) they may under their natural
prince, create and execute laws to the reformation of universal faults: by
who^ the multitude, being well instructed and lead by the rule of this good
regiment and example of their superiors, can not but fall into the correction
of their common vices, whereby our languishing eyes may yet live to see a happy
estate of Christendom, which I beseech the eternal Lord to accomplish to his
honor and glory, and general con^usion of all the enemies of the faith.

FINIS.

