THE WORTH OF WOMEN.

LONDON, Printed by William Jones, dwelling in Red-crosse street. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, VIRTUOUS AND TRVE RELIGIous Dame, the Lady ANNE
WENTWORTH.
Marvel not Madam that I have made choice
Of you amongst all other Princely Dames,
Whose secret virtue challenges each voice,
And my poor zeal beyond all ethers flames.
The first oblation of my morning Muse,
Lo here I offer at your sacred Shrine:
Which if you please but graciously peruse,
And sanctify with those pure stars divine,
Whose radiant rays and bright reflecting flame,
May purify the most impolisht rhyme:
And bearing but the Livery of your name,
Shall live, despite the cankred jaws of time,
And flourish like the everliving Bay,
When monuments of Marble shall decay.
Your Ladyships humble and devoted servant, Richard Ferrers.

To the curious Readers.
SVspend your judgments, censure not in haste:
But ere you judge the first, first see the last.
May 28. 1622.
THE WORTH OF WOMEN.
1
MY infant Muse that slept in silence long,
Resolved no more her untuned notes to sing,
Ashamed to hear the ignominous wrong,
Detracting idle heads did daily bring
Upon that noble sex of women-kinde,
Prepared her self some Antidote to fince.
2
Within an humble valley where she lay,
That was with lofty hills inuiron'd round,
Through which a pleasant crystal brook did play
With pibble stones that roled on the ground,
Where chirping birds melodiously did sing,
To entertain the sweet refreshing Spring.
3
There Philomela did bewail the rape
Of wicked Terius that incestuous King:
And lovely Laeda in her Swan-like shape,
Hid her black foot under her snowie wing.
The matelesse Turtle you might also see
Sit mourning by upon a Willow tree.
4
Vindictiue Progne by her self alone,
Upon an old decayed Trunk did keep,
Under the which Halcyone did moan
Upon a bush, whose doleful note was, Weep;
And Pyres daughters in those pleasant vaies,
Would often be chattering pretty wanton tales.
5
From hence among the lowly Myrtle boughs,
Oretopt with Pines and lofty Cedars tall,
She pearcht her self and made a stately rouse,
Wherewith a quill she from her wing let fall,
Intending now to take a higher flight,
She bids me make a pen, sit down and write.
6
Which I obeying, had no sooner done,
But all the carping-critick-squint-eyd rout,
Like dogs to carrion did about me run,
And forty faults in twenty words found out:
Each several humor must his censure give,
And at their verdict I must die or live.
7
Their great god Momus did no sooner spy
My books rich title, but in heart repining,
Began to draw his goodly mouth awrie,
As if his worship had on Plaice bin dining;
Reads some few lines, and in a furious snuff
Casts it aside, and swears it is simple stuff.
8
Which Zoilus straight snatcheth up again,
And viewing but a virtuous woman's name,
Cries, fie upon this poor man's silly vain,
To read his book, it were a burning shame:
Whereat the rout of giddie headed geese,
Did all bestow at least a word a piece.
9
One cries, a woman is composde of feather;
Another swears, their faith is like the wind;
A third, their zeal is made of frostie weather;
The fourth, a chaste one never yet could find.
A fig for these, since better spirits know,
Save ignorance, true knowledge has no fo.
10
Emboldned thus my daring Muse goes on,
Attired with naked Truths unspotted robe,
And Eagle-like beholds the dazeling Sun,
Even in the Apogean of his globe,
To teach these Critics that have erred in this,
To know hereafter what a woman is.
11
Know then the woman, God did first create,
And with the man in Paradise did place,
Was for an help when he was desolate,
Coequall with him in the state of grace.
Out strait cries the multitude, 'twas she:
That plucked the fruit from the forbidden tree.
12
Even here this rabble have devised a lie,
The Serpent plucked, she gave the man to eat,
Who had free will this weak attempt to fly,
Knowing the heavy vengeance God did threat
What time soever he this fruit did taste,
That he should die the death and be displac't.
13
Which surely followed, for when God did call
For Adam as he usually had done,
He now perceiving his most wretched fall,
From his all-seeing presence would have run
But finding no escape, cried out, and said,
I heard thy voice O Lord and was afraid.
14
Why have thou eat of the forbidden tree,
Which I commanded thee thou should not stir,
He said the woman has deceived me;
She pleades the Serpent had beguilled her:
When God in justice saw their fault was even,
Both with a curse from Paradise were driven.
15
Yet shortly after see how God did bless,
Obedient Sarah, Abraham's faithful wife,
And fruitful made her aged barrenness,
Even in her latter dying days of life:
A son she does conceive within her wom be,
From whom shall Kings, and realms, and nations come.
16
A blessed mother of a chosen son,
With whom the Lord has promised he will
Establish his covenant now beguune,
Which Isack is ordained to fulsill
And as with him says God I have decreed. Genesis 24 25.

So after him for ever with his seed.
17
This promise God inuiolate will hold,
Which to confirm he does Rebeccha choose,
A virtuous woman more esteemed then gold,
Whom Isack for his wife does not refuse:
From Esau she the blessing did obtain,
To Jacob where the covenant does remain.
18
And as to Isack, so did God provide
For Jacob faithful women full of zeal, Genesis 29. 30.

Rahell and Leah are to him affi'de,
With whom the Lord most graciously does deal:
For being barren, by their prayers conceive,
Children, which they unto success shall leave.
19
Though wicked Pharoh strictly did command Exo. 1.

The Mid wives all men children to destroy,
This practice they would never take in hand,
But did his vild iniunction disobey:
And durst no child of his dear life deprive,
But fearing God, preserved them all alive.
20
Whereat the King with anger them pursues,
Saying, How durst you my co^mandme^t break?
Which matter they so wisely did excuse,
As that the King had not a word to speak.
Wherefore God prosper'd the^ in all things well.
And built the^ houses wherein they might dwell.
21
Now see how God miraculously wrought, Exodus 2.

By Pharohs daughter this poor child to save,
Who unto her by stratagem was brought,
Even by the mercy of a senseless wave:
She fearing naught her fathers stern decree,
Gave straight command, it should preserved be.
22
And by the secret providence of God,
This infant to his mother does commend;
The miracle effected by his rod,
His poor oppressed people to defend:
The Oceans parting testifies most,
Wherein did perish Pharoh and his host.
23
Behold, the Lord a woman chooses out,
In all the town, his secret Spies to hide; Ios. 2.

Who being straight examined thereabout,
With constant zeal she seruently denide,
And closely them into a roof conuayd,
Who otherwise their lives had surely paid.
24
And even about the deadest time of night,
Out at a window she does them convey,
And to the woods aduisd them take their flight,
That so the spies might miss them on the way:
For which good deed (as God had the^ inspired)
They faithfully perform what she desired.
25
His care of women he does here express, Exo. 22.

With special charge the widows to defend,
And not to hurt the children fatherless,
For I shall hear (says he) their cries ascend;
Then with ye sword I will your lives bereave,
And children orphants with your widows leave.
26
A most renowned woman next we find, Judge. 4. 45.

A famous Judge and sacred Prophetess;
She unto every Israelite assigned
His equal portion, were it more or less:
Under a Palm in Ephraim she abode,
And judged according to the will of God.
27
To field she does the Prophet Barak call,
Against the King of Canans mighty band,
Foretelling him that Sisera should fall;
For God will surely give him to thine hand.
And Barak answering, said, I will not go,
Except thou likewise go with me also.
28
Then Deborah with Barak went along
Unto mount Tabor where a while they stay,
Till Sisera with men and chariots strong,
Did call him down where Deborah did say
To Barak, fear not, God for thee does fight
And Sisera this day shall put to flight.
29
But to a woman he shall give the fame,
For thy weak faith, which else thee was due
The wife of Heber, Iael was her name,
That with a nail this famous Captain slew:
For which the Lord has said, she shall be blessed
Above all women that in tents do rest.
30
Thus God delivered Canan to the hands
Of Israel, to Deborahs great fame,
Who while their towns depopulated stands,
An happy mother she to them became,
For many kings went forth with her to fight
And Israel grew happy in her sight.
31
A cheerful song she with the King does strait,
Unto her God with warbled notes record, Judge. 5.

Hearken o Kings give ear you Princes great,
The mountains melted from before the Lord:
Yea even Sinai at his voice did melt,
The heavens did drop, the earth his thunder felt.
32
The wife of Monoah being barren long,
God by his Angels most divinely blessed,
With such a son as is not found among
The Nazarites with heavenly strength possessed:
Where with he shall begin to break the bands
And Israel save from the Philistians hands.
33
Now Monoah, (as the Angel did command)
Unto the Alter with his offering came,
Where while it burnt, his wife and he did stand,
The Angel lo ascended in the flame:
And Monoah told his wife there standing by
We have seen God and we shall surely die.
34
The faithful woman comforts him and says,
And if the Lord intended us to kill,
He would not then accept the thanks and praise
We offer here according to his will:
Now God did bless this child to be a man,
And made him mighty in the host of Dan.
35
Of Naomy and Ruth what tongue can tell, Ruth. 34.

The tender love they each to other bear,
Together would they go, together dwell,
Together they the Lord did serve and fear:
Together they would laugh, together cry,
Together live, and eke together die.
36
And Naomy with fervent zeal did pray
Unto the Lord, that of his mercy great,
He would on Ruth his loving favor lay:
Who heard her prayer from his tribunal seat,
And graciously his blessings he bestows,
As she was gleaning in the field of Boez.
37
A mighty man with riches great possessed,
Whom God inspired with an ardent flame
Of faithful love, which could not be suppressed,
Until an husband he to Ruth became:
From who^ (by his decree, whose acts are wise)
A blessed generation does arise.
38
A lively pattern of rare faith indeed, 1. Sa. 1.

In barren Hannah we may here behold,
With tears which from a contrite heart proceed,
Unto the Lord she does her grief unfold,
With fervent prayer she might a son obtain,
Vowing to give him to the Lord again.
39
God heard her prayer, and granted her request,
She does conceive and eke bring forth a son,
Which brought her disconte^ted thoughts to rest,
She magnifide the Lord for what was done:
And to the Altar where all knees do bow,
She brought the child, and there performd her vow.
40
A true Idea of a virtuous wife,
In Abigail is worthily expressed, 1. Sam 25.

Who by her wisdom saved her husbands life
From David's just revenge, and all the rest,
When he had vowed of Nabals house, there shall
Not one be left to piss against the wall.
41
And shortly after, God did Nabal smite
With sickness, whereof presently he died:
Then David said: Blessed be the God of might,
That has my hands to shed his blood denide,
By her advice, whose love he now pursues,
And for her virtue to his wife does choose.
42
Unspotted Tamar in a brothers power, 2 Samuel 13.

On who^ she thought she might her life depend,
Whilst he inhumanely did her defloure,
See how she mourns for what she cannot mend:
Her clothes the rent, and dust and ashes throws
Upon her head, thus desolate she goes.
43
Bathsheba by the Prophet is inspired,
To move the King that Solomon might reign 1. Kin. 1.

Alone (no doubt) the highest heavens desired,
Ordaining her the subject to obtain:
Which well appeared by his divine success,
God did with wisdom, riches, honor bless.
44
So rare that from the wild Arabian south,
The Queen of Sheha iournied many day s, Kin. 10.

To learn sage wisdom from that sapie nt mouth
To her immortal everlasting praise:
Which when she did with wonder great behold
She gave him spices, precious stones and gold.
45
And blessed, says she, be God which does delight
In thee O King, and of his mercy great,
That so his people may be judged aright,
Has thee invested in the judgment seat:
This woman shall (says God) in judgment rise Luke 11. 10. 31.

Against those people did their Lord despise.
46
How highly God of women does esteem,
The widow of Sarepta shows plain, 1. Kin. 17.

Which widow poor ye Lord does worthy deem
The holy man Eliah to fustaine:
When famine sore the country did oppress,
By miracle he does this woman bless.
47
A little oil she had within a cruse,
And meal likewise to make a cake withal,
Whereby herself she justly does excuse,
Unto the Prophet who for bread does call:
Lo this is all is left my son and I,
Which I am dressing, we may eat and die.
48
Eliah said, woman be not afraid,
Make first a cake and bring it unto me,
The meal is in thy barrel God has said,
Nor yet the oil shall ever wasted be,
Until the time the Lord does send forth rain
The earth with plenty to possess again.
49
And she unto Eliah brought a cake,
Then for her self and son did likewise dress,
And many days did this provision make,
And yet her meal and oil was not the less:
And to confirm her faith still more and more,
Her son deceast, he does to life restore.
50
An other widow straight the Lord has found
On whom he does most plenteously bestow, 2. Kin. 4

A miracle for ever to be crowned,
Her vessels all with oil does ouerflow:
And ceased not until the woman said,
My vessels all are full, and then it staid.
51
Then came she to the man of God, and told
The blessings which she had received that day,
Eliah said, straight let the oil be sold,
Wherewith thou mai'st thy creditors go pay:
And as the Lord this day thy state has blessed
So keep thy self and children with the rest.
52
The faithful Shunamite deserves well,
To be recorded with this sacred crew,
Who did the holy man of God compel,
To eat with her at every season due:
And seriously her husband does inuit,
To build a room, where he might lodge all night.
53
Wherefore Eliah prayed unto the Lord,
She being barren, and her husband old,
To make her fruitful, and he does accord,
The Prophet called the Shunamite, and told:
For this good deed, which thou to me have done
Thou shall conceive, and eke bring forth a son.
54
And in due time this miracle was wrought,
By his great power, that rules the starrie sky,
A joyful son into the world she brought,
Which shortly after happened to die:
Hereby to show his love does never cease,
To life he does this child from death release.
55
What title shall I give this happy Queen,
Whose sacred worth, her state does far exceed, Hest. 14

No ear has heard, nor wa^dring eye has seen
An act more bloody, then is here decreed:
Her people all should be destroyed and slain,
Whose prayer and fasting did their lives obtain.
56
Of Provinces one hundred twenty seven,
The Jews should die, the King had given and sealed
Which was opposed by the powerful heaven,
And at this gracious Queens request repealed:
And to a shameful end the man she brought
That should this bloody massacre have wrought.
57
Thus Hester by the Lords out stretched arm,
Who never fails them that in him do trust,
Preserved her people from this woeful harm,
And brought their foes even down in the dust:
For as they thought ye Jews to deal withal,
The same revenge upon their heads did fall.
58
When Sarah whom her fathers maids despise, Tob. 3.

Was overcome with hearts oppressing grief,
Unto the Lord for succor strait she flies,
Who heard her prayer, and granted her releife:
And husband of his grace, he does ordain,
Which into mirth, her mourning turned again.
59
If wisdom, valor, worth, and zeal were lost, Judith. 13.

And this rare pattern only did remain,
The world can scarce, of such another boast,
Whereby it might redeem them all again:
Who by her prayer, obtained from Gods high hand,
To save a City, and preserve a Land.
60
First dust and ashes on her head she throws,
And all in sackcloth she does fast and pray,
Then into Olofernes camp she goes,
Where she this famous Captain does betray:
With courage stout, and wisdom rare she used,
His head she brought, which all the land excused.
61
Then did she call the Elders of the Town,
Saying behold what God for you has done,
With stately wreathes, they did her straight way crown,
And every where with shoutes of joy did run:
The riches great of Olofernes tent,
With one accord they do to her present.
62
Thus while she was extold, and magnified,
Whom every eye with wonder did behold,
Unto the Temple of the Lord she hi'd,
And offering all this wealth of plate and gold:
With humble zeal before the Alter bows,
Unto the Lord, and thus performed her vows.
63
A mirror of a chaste religious wife,
Is fair Susanna, being fore distressed,
Who rather chose to loose her dearest life,
Then yield unto the Elders vild request:
Lo thus resolved, aloud for help did cry,
And false accused, she is condemned to die.
64
But see how God did graciously provide,
To save this woman by a childs decree,
Who did the Elders severally divide,
And found them both in several tales to be:
For which unworthy deed, their lives they pay
To her great honor, who they did betray.
65
A woman more then wonderful behold,
Whose resolutions so undaunted are,
As by no earthly power, can be controlled,
More permanent then any fixed star
Within the Sphere, of that celistiall round,
To whom fames trumpet gives the loudest sound.
66
Seven sons she had, who by the Kings command,
Because they would not his behests obey,
To violate the custom of their land,
Were all adiudg'd their dearest lives to pay
By sundry tortures, which she seeing plain,
Imboldned them, still constant to remain.
67
When six of them, the Tirant had destroyed,
He wild his mother, move the seventh to turn
That so he might this cruel death avoid,
In stead whereof, she bids him boldly burn:
And Martyr-like, the Tirants rage defy,
Thus with his brothers he does bravely die.
68
Like Hecuba for death of Pryam old,
The mother now all terms of life defied,
With courage greater then Sheuola bold,
And thus this ever honored Martyr di'd:
Where we will leave the^ to ye world to mourn,
And to our Grandame Eve, again return.
69
And there behold, the race poor man had run
When God and Angels did him both forsake,
Fit for precipice thou were undone,
And could no way, a good attonment make:
Till this rare creature thou dispisest so,
Was chosen out, to mittigate thy woe.
70
Assist me now ye sacred Sisters nine, Luke 1. 10. 27. 28. 29. 30.

That I with reverence may her praises sing,
Who was elected by the powers divine,
A sanctified and blessed birth to bring:
When man to sin was subject, and to thrall,
Became a sweet redemption for us all.
71
For ever blessed be that glorious name,
Which God and Angels have pronounced blessed
From whose dear loins, our happy Savior came
That to the world brought love, joy, peace and rest:
And did not spare his precious blood to spil
Condemned man's salvation to fulfill.
72
All honor praise and glory due be done,
To her whose seed has conquered death and hell
A happy mother of a royal son,
Before whose throne, she does in glory dwell,
Where she with Angels, and Ark-angells sings
Sweet haleluiah to the King of Kings.
73
This blessed woman if I could not find,
An other subject to defend their case,
Might well persuade men, if they were not blind,
With envious malice, vold of human grace:
To strive as much, their honor to maintain
As they pursue the^ with such foul disdain.
74
A second Mary does this first succeed, Mat. 28. Ioh. 20. Mar. 16.

Whose love and zeal, throughout the world is spread
The tears would make a marble heart to bleed,
Which for her dear deceased Lord she shed:
Deep plunged in woes, in sorows great oppressed
Her mind amazed, her senses dispossessed.
75
In this sad passion to the place she goes,
Whereas she thought our blessed Savior lay
No pen so doleful can express her woes,
When she perceived the body stolen away,
A fresh she wept, and down her head she hung
Like lapwings yt are robbed of their young.
76
The precious ointment yt with her she brought,
That glorious body to imb^lme and keep,
She naught respects, since it was gone she sought
She sighs and sobs, and does not cease to weep:
Like Niobe this woeful woman's fears,
As if she would dissolve herself in tears.
77
Then came the good Apostles to the grave,
From whence they found his corpse co^uai'd away;
Feareing the Jews, were glad themselves to save
And soon returned, not daring long to stay:
When Mary still stood weeping at the tomb
And would not stir for deaths most cruel doom.
78
But down her head she bowed into the grave,
Scarce giving credit to her woeful sight,
Where lo at either corner of the cave,
She saw an Angel clothed all in white:
Whereat aghast she would a side have stepped,
Had they not spoke and asked her why she wept.
79
For him I wept, full fraught with grief she said,
Whose like on earth, shall never more be found,
Whom cursed Jews most cruelly betrayed,
And now have stolen him from this blessed ground
They comfort her, and say, thy tears refrain,
For he thou seek'st, is raised to life again.
80
But she continues still her woeful cheer,
And to her woes no comfort would allow,
Until our Savior did himself appear,
And asked her, woman, wherefore weepest thou:
She taking him, the Gardner sure to be,
Said sir, if thou have hid him, give him me.
81
And Jesus answered, Mary, I am he
Thou seek so, wherefore be not afraid,
Go to my brethren, and report of me,
That thou have seen, and heard what I have said:
And will them into Galile to go,
Where I will shortly meet with them also.
82
Twixt grief and joy she stood amazed a while,
Then down she falls, and worships at his feet,
And with a loving entermixing smile,
With tears of mirth she does our Savior greet
And to perform his will with reverence due,
She rose, she went, she ran, she rather flue.
83
Until she came where the Apostles were,
Deep plunged in sorrow, and with grief oppressed,
To whom she did this joyful news declare,
All she had heard and seen, she there expressed:
Which done, she strait returned back to find
The company that she had left behind.
84
Another sacred Mary with her came,
And with them also many women more,
For save the Apostles (to their lasting fame)
Were none but women did his death deplore:
Early they rose before the break of day,
Meaning from thence to take the corpse away.
85
A fourth most sacred woman of this name,
Does with the rest preceding well agree,
A woman filled with religious fame,
At Jesus preaching she would ever be:
In humble manner, seated at his feet,
To hear his wisdom, and his doctrine sweet.
86
Her sister Martha must not be forgot, Ioh. 11. 15.

A most renowned woman full of faith,
Whose love unto our Savior ceased not,
And as the holy Scripture plainly says:
Christ Jesus likewise loved them again,
Who^ men would seem so slightly to disdain.
87
One only brother these two sisters had,
Who accedentally fell sick, and di'd,
But hearing Christ was coming, they were glad
For on his power, these women much reli'd:
Which did alay, and mittigate their grief,
Hoping by him, they might yet find releife.
88
Martha went forth her loving Lord to meet,
And humbly prostrate at his feet she fell,
Saying o Lord, and my redeemer sweet,
Had thou bin here my brother had bin well:
But this I know undoubted truth to be,
What ere thou ask, God will give it thee.
89
Then Jesus said, thy brother shall arise,
Yes at the resurrection Lord know,
I am the resurrection he replied,
Both of the living and the dead also:
Who this belief shall stedrastly retain,
Though he were dead, yet shall he live again.
90
Beleiu'st thou this? Lord I believe it all,
And that thou art, that Son of God now sent
That should redeem poor sinful man from thral
If he believe, becoming penitent:
O rare belief, and faith of women kind,
Proceeding from a pure unspotted mind.
91
Then back she came and did her sister call,
Who hastily went forth her Lord to meet,
And with an heart oppressed with grief does fall
With bitter tears before her Saviors feet:
And with a mournful voice, O Lord she cried
Had thou bin here my brother had not di'd.
92
Be present with me every woeful wight,
Who^ doleful grief has turned to dust and mold,
Even in your saddest, and most mournful plight,
Let me your ghastly visages behold:
I may express the agony he felt,
And marble hearts into compassion melt.
93
When in the spirit he did groan with pain,
Which did his sad and heavy heart molest,
How with a troubled soul he gron'd again,
Oh wherewith can his torments be expressed:
Who could not be disburthned of his cares,
Until his passion burst it self in tears.
94
Oh ye mine eyes to conduit pipes would turn,
I might his tears perpetually deplore,
Weep sinful man, and do not cease to mourn
Christ's tears, although thou never weptst before
Shed now a tear from thy obdurate eye,
Or else hereafter be for ever dry.
95
In this sad plight unto the tomb He went,
Whereas deceased Lazarus was laid,
Where first he prayed to God which had him sent,
Then Lazarus come forth, alow'd he said,
who strait came forth, bound hand and foot also
Christ willed them to loose and let him go.
96
Who can express the faithful thanks they give
To magnify this miracle he wrought,
Whereby they saw their dearest brother live,
Which was a work impossible they thought:
With joyful hearts they do not cease to sing
Continual anthems to their heavenly King.
97
Now shortly after Jesus came again
To Mary's house as he had done before,
With heavenly joy she does him entertain,
Who for her brother loved him more and more:
And as at meat with Lazarus he sat,
Under the table to his feet she gat.
98
Whereon she does a costly oil bestow,
VVherwith she washed those ever hallowed feet. Ioh. 12.

Too pure she thought on mortal ground to go,
And kindly gives him many kisses sweet:
Not knowing how she should her love declare
This done she takes and wipt them with her hair.
99
But his Disciples murmuring, him told
This precious oil should be esteemed more,
Which for 3 hundred pence might have bin sold,
And better far bin given to the poor:
But Jesus sharply them rebuking said,
Let her alone, why trouble you the maid.
100
The good that she had done he does unfold,
Saying, the poor shall daily on you call,
But me you shortly shall no more behold,
She brought this balm to bury me withal:
Where ere me^ preaching shall ye Gospel name,
This shall be spoken to her lasting fame.
101
The faith of women all men may behold,
As in this following subject well appears,
Who had a bloody issue long, and could
Receive no help by physic many years:
Believed if she might lesus garment touch,
She should be whole, her faith and zeal was such,
102
With this strong hope she thrust into the prease, Mat. 15:

And touching but his very garments hemme,
Immediately she felt the issue cease,
O famous faith, in estimable iemme:
He knowing what was done, looked back to see,
And missing her, asked who has touched me?
103
But she that knew, what miracle was wrought,
With fear and trembling at his feet did fall,
And for his mercies sake, she him besought,
To pardon her, and therewith told him all:
He said O woman, with a voice most free,
Great is thy faith, and it has saved thee.
104
Next see the woman that in Canan dwelt,
By faith believes his mercies to obtain,
How earnestly she with our Savior dealt,
Have mercy on me Lord, she cried amain:
And heal my daughter being sore perplexed,
Who with a devil cruelly is vexed.
105
He heard her well, but did no answer make,
Till his Disciples said, send her away,
She followed still, and would not him forsake,
Though he to her with bitter words did say:
It is not lawful woman I should give,
To dogs the childrens bread whereby they live.
106
True Lord she said, and yet the dogs do eat,
The croms which from their masters tables fall,
And still for mercy she does him entreat,
Who wondered at her faith, and said withal:
O happy wight with heavenly faith inspired,
Be it unto thee as thou have desired.
107
And in yt hour her daughter was made whole,
Unto her everlasting joys increase,
With faith as steadfast as the fixed Pole,
According to his will she went in peace:
Oh faith most rare, ye like has not bin found
Worthy in leaves of marble to be crowned.
108
The sinful woman of the city Nain,
Doubts not by faith but she shall purchase grace Luke 7.

And weeping at his back she does remain,
A little while in most perplexed case:
Then down she falls, and with a sea of tears
His feet she washed, and wipt them with her hairs,
109
Anointed them, and gave them many a kiss,
Where at the Pharise in himself did say,
Where he a Prophet, as men say he is,
He Would know this sinner, and not let her stay:
When Jesus knew his thought, Simon said he,
There is a question I must ask of thee.
110
A certain lender, lent a little sum
To one; and to another lent a great,
But neither able when the time was come
To pay: forgave them both their several debt:
Now which of these think thou, will love him better?
He answered, I suppose the greater debtor.
111
Well have thou said, our Savior then replied,
See thou this woman that by faith is led,
Yet since I came, thou neither did provide
To wash my feet, nor yet anoint my head:
She has done both, no kiss of thee I got,
Thy faith is great, o woman go in peace.
112
Wherefore this woman thou do here behold
Whose firm belief, and constant faith is such,
As by no man's expression can be told,
Has much forgiven her, for she loved much:
To her he said, from sin I thee release,
Thy faith is great, o woman go in peace.
113
Elizabeth old Zacharias wife, Luke 1.

A rare example wherein men may see,
The blessing follows a religious life,
A faithful woman she is found to be:
Whom God the Father by his Angels blessed,
In barren age, and with a son possessed.
104
A child adopted of his special grace,
And sanctified even in his mothers womb,
Elect to go before his glorious face,
And prophecy that he should after come:
To strengthen those whose faith was weak and frail,
The glory of his people Israel,
115
Old Anna then a sacred Prophetess,
Who served God with fasting night and day.
Came forth and did her blessed Lord confess,
While yet within his mothers arms he lay:
Redemption preached, to her immortal fame,
To all that did believe in Jesus name.
116
When as our blessed Savior did cast out,
The feind where with ye dumb man was possessed, ^k. 36.

Incompast with a misbeleeuing rout,
Whose wicked thoughts their evil minds molest:
To whom whilst he did wholesome doctrine preach,
Which to amend their sinful life did touch.
117
A certain woman lifted up her voice,
And said the womb had blessed and happy luck,
That brought thee forth, and let those paps rejoice
Which in thy infants days did give thee suck:
This faithful woman he does well approve,
Among the rest with dear and tender love,
118
Which love he does most manifestly show,
By miracles he wrought from day to day,
First unto Peter's mother he does go, Mat. 8. 14. 15. 16.

Where of a fever very sick she lay:
And merely of his grace it does him please
To cure her of that dangerous disease.
119
The Ruler then most humbly him besought,
To heal his daughter in extremest need,
Who now was at ye point of death he thought, Mat. 9. 23. 24. 25.

And ere he came the maid was dead in deed:
But Jesus unto Iairus spoke and said,
Believe thou only and be not afraid,
120
And forth with into Iairus house he goes,
Where did attend him many weeping eyes,
The multitude first out of doors he throws,
Then to the maid he went and said arise:
And she arose with fear and wonder great,
He strait commanded they should give her meat.
121
The woman like wise that was eighteen years
Tormented with a most infernal spirit,
Bound altogether as most plain appears,
And could by no means lift herself upright:
Our Savior seeing straight way did appease,
And freely freed her of that strong disease.
122
He had compassion of the widows tears,
The which at Nain in Galile he did meet, Luk 7. 10. 13. 14.

For her dead son expressed with many cares,
Who now to death had pai'd his latest debt:
In such a measure he could not refrain,
To raise to life, and give him her again.
123
The Pharisees and Scribes unto him brought, Job. 3.

The woman in adultery was found,
T'intrap him said, by Moses law she ought,
For to be stoned dead unto the ground:
But Jesus said, let him that has no sin,
To execute this upright law begin.
124
Whereat they all began to steal away,
Leaving her standing by her Lord alone,
Who turned a out, and unto her did say,
Woman, where now are thy accusers gone:
No man is left she said, was here before,
And I accuse thee not, go sin no more.
125
His love to women never can be told,
See how he does the widows mite commend,
Above them all that offered pearl and gold,
Saying from superfluity they spend:
When she poor wight from penury was glad,
To offer to the Lord even all she had.
126
Ioanna with Susanna, and the rest,
For there were with them many women more
The which our blessed Savior dispossessed?
Of wicked spirits, being vexed sore:
Wherefore most gratefully they him besought,
He would accept the substance they had brought.
127
Now last of all, as to the cross he goes,
To finnish there his dearest virall breath,
A multitude of people saw his woes,
But none save women did lament his death:
They weep and wail, with shreekes and piteous cries, Luke 1. 3 27. 28.

As if they would pull vengeance from ye skies.
128
Upon those cursed misbeleeuing Jews,
Their blessed Lord and Savior did betray,
And for revenge on those that thus abuse,
This holy Lamb, they never cease to pray:
Such gracious love they did from him obtain,
They know not how to show their love again.
129
And after his decease, the Apostles found
Most virtuous women still in every place,
Priscilla was a woman much renowned.
Who taught Apolloes rare and heavenly grace:
For as this good Apostle plainly says,
She took him home, and made him strong in faith.
130
Saint Peter also does as much commend,
Tabitha for her charitable deeds,
Of alms that she unto the Lord did lend,
Which from her love unto good works proceeds
Who being dead, by prayer he does obtain Act. 9.

She is restored unto life again.
131
Behold what wonders God by women wroght, Act. 16.

As holy Paul does worthily declare,
To Macedon he is by vision brought,
Where those yt heard him only women were:
Amongst whom with admiration he does tell
Of Lydia, who there did purple sell.
132
A saithfull woman, one that God ordained,
To save a kingdom by her good desert,
Who in the service of the Lord remained
For it is said God opened her heart:
And she believed our words and was baptized
With all her household as we them advised.
133
This done we were determined to go,
Along the coasts to make some further trial,
But she coniur'd us not to leave her so,
Her earnest suite would suffer no denial:
And lo together as we went to pray,
A certain virgin met us on the way.
134
Possessed with a spirit of divining,
By which her master much advantage got,
To us she was with fervent zeal inclining,
And for her masters proffitt cared not: Act. 16. 16.

She followed us and cride, these men are they
That to salvation teach the ready way.
135
And many days continued in the same,
Till Paul was grieved for her, and turned about,
And to the Spirit said in Jesus name,
I charge thee from this woman get thee out:
And it obeyed that all commanding power,
Departing from her at that instant hour.
136
An other woman he does straight recite,
He did in Athens at his preaching find. Romans 1. 16.

Called Damaris a most believing wight.
With whom Triplena may be well combined:
Triplena does with Persiis well accord,
All faithful women laboring in the Lord.
137
Amongst this crew he highly does commend,
Phoebe a servant of the Lord says he,
For whom he does unto his brethren send,
That in the Lord we might received be:
And aided by them in what ere she needs;
For she has done most charitable deeds.
138
The blessed Evangelist Saint John does write,
Unto a Lady whom he calls elect,
A virtuous woman who does much delight,
The laws of her Redeemer to respect: 2. Ioh. 1.

And taught her children likewise to fulfill,
Our blessed Lord and Saviors holy will.
139
For which says he I do not only love,
This most renowned woman of our days,
But all those Saints that love the truth approve
Her zealous works with everlasting praise:
Which they in greater estimation hold,
Then Tagus wealth, or Ophirs purest gold.
140
Thus in this sacred book of books we see,
The blesings God on women did bestow,
Which worthyly they did deserve says he,
From whom such faith, such love, such zeal did flow:
Such courage brave, such resolutions rare,
As monuments of marble shall out wear.
141
The histories that do their praise recite,
In every age so plentiful appears,
That if I had ability to write,
I should not finish, living Nestors years:
Such momuments unto their fame they build
A magasine might with the books be filled.
142
Yet to avoid the captious base report,
Of Puritant or Bible bearing poet,
As likewise to content the wiser sort.
On whom alone I freely do bestow it:
I will insert of women's virtues rare,
A stanze, or two what histories declare.
143
For chastity behold that Roman dame, Justin.

That proud Tarquinius basely did subdue,
Disdaining to out live her forced shame,
Did in her dearest blood her hands imbrew:
For which she is throwout the world renownd
And by the pens of Lawreat Poets crowned.
144
Unmatched Ovid does as much commend,
Penelope Ulysses constant wife, Ovid.

Whose widowed hands the hanging web does rend,
Whilst he in Lacedemon leads his life:
Even like the Turtle that has lost his mate,
She does bewail her desolate estate.
145
Unspotted Daphue would not be allured, Ovid.

By powerful love, from whom amain she flies
When fainting breath, her honors loss assured,
Alowd for chaste Dianaes help she cries:
Whose just consent, unto her earnest prayer
The laurel does perpetual witness bear.
146
The daughter fair of Agamemnon King, Thucidides.

Whose love and beauty was desired of many,
Held chastity so virtuous a thing,
That she would never condescend to any:
But constantly their ardent suites denied,
And thus this spotless virgin lived and di'd.
147
The virgin Lucia does all praise exceed, Domitian.

With whom the tirant King was far in love.
When she perceived it was so sure decreed,
What friendship could not force at last shoud prove:
Her star-like eyes she to the tirant sent,
That thus she might her honors loss prevent.
148 Thucidides.

Sage Fedons daughter does amaze my mind,
Whose father being at a banquent slain,
By savage men, who likewise had combined,
This virtuous virgins chastity to stain:
She to avoid this Tyrants fury fell,
Did headlong cast herself into a well.
149
Saint Ambrose of Pelagia writes as much,
Who with her famous sisters and her mother,
That no rude hand her honors worth might tuch
Themselves did likewise in the water smother:
Such dear respect to chastity they owe,
Their precious lives they do for it bestow.
150
The Lady Bona to her lasting honor, Guice^^din.

Whose husband to the holy wars was sent,
Disguised to follow him she took upon her,
Both shield and spear, moved with a chaste intent
Where bravely she his faithles foes did threat
And rescued him from many dangers great.
151
Brave Francis Sforsas soldiers to him brought,
A virgin rare of birth, and beauty great,
Whom she with friendship prayer and words besoght,
Then tyrant like the silly maid did threat:
But finding nothing could her honor stain
With gifts and praise he sent her home again.
152
The women of Tutonicaes request,
When noble Marius had their husband slain
Was yt they might have leave to spend ye rest,
Of their unhappy lives in Vestaes train:
Where they like chastest turtles would deplore
Their fatal loss, beholding men no more.
153
In Rome a woman being made aquainted, Cor. Tac.

With treason was against Nero great conspired,
Whereof she happened first to be attainted,
Of whom the Judges all the rest inquired:
With cruel torments she her life did pay,
Yet never any party would betray.
154
Renowned Loena did in sunder bite
Her tongue, and spit it in the tyrants face,
Because she would no secret bring to light,
For which the Athenians to her lasting grace: Plime.

From whom such rare unmatched virtue sprung,
A Lioness set up without a tongue.
155
Rare Nicostrata mother to Euander,
Did first unto the Latins show their letters,
Who till her time in ignorance did wander,
Yet afterward acknowledge none their betters
In History, Philosophy, or Phraise,
Of eloquence deserving worthy praise.
156
Aretha was in learning so profound,
That she in Athens public school did read
Philosophy with judgment grave and sound,
Wherein she did the learned man exceed:
Whose Auditors as Pollio does declare,
Philosophers above a hundred were. Pollio.

157
When Lucius Scilla was condemned to die,
Who falsely had three thousand Romans slain
That did upon his word their lives rely,
His daughter Loelia did his life obtain:
With one oration which she made in Rome
Whereat the Senate did revoke their doom. Cicero.

158
Senobia was in learning so repleate,
Both Greek and Latin to her sons she taught,
And did a rare epitome repeat, Pollio.

Of all ye wars wherewith the East was fraught:
Athenian Pericles, who soared so high
Did from Aspasia learn Philosophy.
159
Cornelia a famous Roman dame, Cornelia the wife of Africanus and Mother to the
Greechi.

Such eloquent Epistles used to write,
That Cicero a man of rarest fame,
Co^mends her works with wonderful delight:
With Pallaes help to end rare Lucan brought
The battle Caesar and great Pompey fought.
160
Alexandra, the wife of Alexander,
In Jury lived a Bishop many years,
Whose learned wisdom like a wise commander
Was reuerenc'd both of commonwealth and Peers: Eicsebius

Dona the daughter of Pithagoras,
In sciences a famous scholar was.
161
Two Gretian women deeply learned indeed, Plato. Lasterna Axiothe.

The love of Plato did so highly win,
That seated in his chair about to read,
Before they came he seldom would begin:
In them says he, sage wisdom does remain,
And memory grave maxims to maintain.
162
In France a sect of women did remain,
Called Druides, to whom Aurelian came,
From Rome to France their counsels to obtain
So much their wisdom was renownd by fame:
Mirrha Queen of Lydia men did call, Strabo.

Agiant for her wit, in stature small.
163
In Rhodes a Roman and a Greek fell out. Eutropius.

Who both desired their cuntries worth to raise
The Greek co^test ye Romans were more stout
But unto Greece for learning gave the praise:
Wherein said he our women more do know
Then you in arms, whereof you boast of so.
164
Upon which words a mortal war insu'd,
'Twixt Rome and Carthage, til the Rodians came,
Who earnestly entreat they would conclude,
To make them empires in this work of fame:
To whose request when they had both agreed
The noble Rhodians in this wise proceed.
165
Ten Greacian women they in Rhodes ordain
With ten of Rome shall disputation hold,
Which they with such rare learning did maintain,
In leaves of brass deserves to be inrol'd:
For with the Rhodia^s to their great renown,
with Laurel wreathes these famous women crowned.
166
For sollid sentences and learning grave,
Unto the Grecians they the praise decreed,
True eloquence they to the Romans gave,
Wherein they thought they did ye Greeks exceed
But from each side such virtue rare did flow
As me^ could hardly who were victors know.
167
The worthy Rodians in perpetual praise,
That after ages might their virtues see,
To each of them a monument did raise,
Whereby their love shall intermixed be:
Twenty huge Pillars of victorious fame,
Whereon was writ each several woman's name.
168
Two famous Theban virgins being told,
The Oracle had said they should enjoy,
A conquest from the Orchymenians bold,
If two chaste virgins should themselves destroy:
Their country with victorious praise to kill,
Coragiously their dearest blood they spill.
169
Brave Celia, that King Porsenna took, Salust.

With whom in hostage diverse virgins were,
With courage stout, by night his camp forsook,
Gat horse and swame a river, void of fear:
VVhereat the King amazed without delay.
Did raise his siege, and went with shame away.
170
Hermonia a Siracusan maid,
To save her country did her life defy, Plime.

The wife of Asdruball was less afraid,
When Scipio conquered then himself to die:
Great Mithridates wife and sisters three,
Showed far less fear of death then he.
171
Resolved Portia hearing this sad news,
Her husband, and her father both were slain, Portia the wife of Brutus.

That tyrannizing sorrow should abuse,
Her noble spirit did so much disdain.
The burning coals to eat she does devise,
Thus made herself a living sacrifice.
172
The pride of Aegipt that most glorious Queen
Did so much scorn great Caesar's camp to grace
With captine bands, where she should ly between
Despair and hope in a contemned case:
With poisoned Asps, whose touch to death does hie,
Bravely resolved she rather chose to die.
173
Philip proclaimed at Scyo every slave, Herodat.

That would come forth and with his army hold
With liberty their masters wives should have,
Which when the women heard, like lions bold
They sally out, and to their great renown,
Beat Phillip and his army from the town.
174
The Scyots by th'Egiptian sore oppressed,
Unarmed to leave the town, with them agree, Iustine.

Which when the women heard they could not rest
Until they made them change this base decree:
With shield and spear vncloth'd they march away,
Telling their foes that this was their array.
175
Among the Amasons two Queens they chose
The foreign and domestique state to guide,
Abroad Marpesia did subdue their foes,
At home Lampeda all things did decide:
With equal justice void of love or hate,
Which made them flourish in a happy state.
176
Constantinople being round beset,
With furious Goths that meant it to destroy, Cassads.

The Empress bold to the wall did get,
Where valiantly she did them so annoy:
That many by her noble hands did die,
The rest were forced to raise their siege and fly.
177
Simeramis deserves to be inrold, Iustine.

In brazen leaves of everlasting praise,
Who by her valor like a Tygresse bold,
Her hardy foes inforst their camp to raise:
From Babylon they surely thought to take,
Which she with shame compeled them to forsake.
178
Senobia forced Aurelian to confess;
With whom a famous war she long maintained
To conquer Xerxes was a task far less,
Whose greatness with the name of fear was stained
The^ stout Senobia who with spear and shield,
Came like the God of bataile to the field.
179
Penthiselia that courageous queen,
Encountered brave Achilles hand to hand,
Then which a brauer combat nere was seen,
Hippolita stout Theseus did withstand:
In single fight their honors to maintain,
Whereby they did immortallglory gain.
180
The Queen of Carryall, like the God of war,
Did chase ye Rhodians like a hare with hounds,
Against whose valor nothing was a bar,
She burnt the walls, sacked their chiefest towns,
Whereby she forced the^ to her endless fame,
To build her image, and inscribe her name.
181
Immortal Tass^ thou can never die,
So worthily Clornidaes fame to write,
Who boldly durst that champion brave defy,
Renowned Tancred, even at single fight:
And so performed yt men could hardly know
The conqueror suruiu'd his conquered foe.
182
Undaunted Hector had thou lived now,
Howmuch thy hardest soul would blush to see Iustine.

That earths great monarch should be made to bow,
And by a woman's hand subverted be:
Whose valiant head, she from his body drew,
And did ye same in his own blood imbrew.
183
Even a^ a Lioness does range the coast,
When she perceiues her whelps are made a pray
So Thamaris does break through Cyrus host,
And bravely with her sword did make her way
And to her friends his royal head she brought,
Like Pallas with the spoils of Gergon fraught.
184
Amongst these Queens oh let me not forget,
That Queen of Queens, which in our age did reign,
Who like a Comet in the sky was set,
Unparalleled for ever to remain:
To write her praise, I never shall aspire,
Whom every eye with wonder did admire.
185
The worlds great Artist, nature did complain,
Such beauty rare the earth did not enjoy,
And that no other might the like obtain,
She does again this heavenly stamp destroy:
Then all the powers supernall freely came,
And gave perfection to this matchles dame.
186
Imperious Juno at her feet did lay,
That all commanding Scopter which she bare,
Wherewith she did the pride of Spain allay,
Supported France the Royal crown to wear
And Belgia her peerless praise may sing,
Whose famous acts all Christendom does ring.
187
Arete for her Temple chose her breast,
And with fair virtues did it freely fill,
Religious Vesta with chaste thoughts her blessed,
Minerua gave her sacred wisdom still:
And royal Ceres who with a liberal hand,
With great abundance did enrich her land.
188
The faithless Pagan, misbeleeuing Turk,
Virginian heathen, with the Indian Moore,
In who^ does naught but secret mischeife lurk,
They all with reverence did her state adore:
Great gifts they offer to her sacred shrine,
So was she blessed, even by the powers divine.
189
An happy fight this blessed woman fought,
Whilst here she lived and wore the royal crown;
Her subjects all to peace and love she brought,
The humble spared, and beat the haughty down,
Thus left her thron, which time shall quit destroy
An everlasting kingdom to enjoy.
190
But now me thinks I hear some whispering say,
This fellow sure is fearfully in love,
Whilst other straight unto my charge do lay,
Some mercinary hire does him move:
No, no, my friends, it is a case more common,
Which you forget, my mother was a woman.
191
Whom nature taught me tenderly to love,
And think it is a duty which I owe,
To her and women for her sake to prove,
The praise on them both God and men bestow:
No art so excellent has ever bin,
But women have bin famous actors in.
192
It Is true say, they there was a time of old,
When women sure were better far then now,
Through this opinion diverse men do hold,
I doubt not but the wiser will allow:
This costome nature does to all men give,
To think yt age is worse wherein they live.
193
Virgill and Ovid many years ago,
Do testify that then the world was naught,
In stately style of verse from them did flow,
Their sober lessons publicly they taught:
Homer might come with music to his whores
Yet wanting money, get him out of doors.
194
Either these men have spirits of divining,
Or else the world stands now as then it did,
If worse, it is by envious men's repining,
Which if they would convert from ill to good,
Thousa^ds of women this bad age might name
That want rare pens to eternize their fame.
195
Like Romes Colassae I might write a book,
Or the Egiptian Piramid of old,
If I should strictly strive to ouerlooke,
The virtues rare that are of women told:
Which I refer to men of better skill,
Who can this task more worthily fulfill.
196
Wherein my pen already is grown dull,
VVanting that tinckture of heroicke strain,
With which brave spirits of our age are full,
Let this but animate their flowing vain:
While my poor Muse shall well contented be
Her humble valley once again to see.
197
Where she with pleasure, did behold the Bear
The Wolf, the Swan, ye Dragons head and tail,
The no mean Lion, and the fearful Hare,
The dart which against the Griffen did prevail:
The King of Egypt and his stately Queen,
Who for her beauty now in heaven is seen.
198
The crown which Ariadne did obtain,
From Venus, for becoming Bacchus love,
The harp of Orpheus, whose melodious strain
Made careless beasts, and senceles trees to move:
The son of Danaae that Medusa slew,
The waggener that lustful Phedra flue.
199
The son of Jove who^ Satan would have slain,
The serpent holder bright Appolloes son,
The fish that saved Orion in the maine,
Alcides after all his labor done:
The horse of Bacchus forced his masters love,
The bird yt brought fair Ganymede to Jove.
200
The flying horse sprang from Medusaes blood,
Bellepheron did undertake to ride,
Who for his pains, was drenched in the flood,
The horse flew up to heaven, where he does bide:
The triangle which Ceres did request,
The Gods to place in heaven amongst the rest.
201
The wife of Perseus, and the monstrous whale,
The crow which by the well the serpent found,
Ixions wheel, with Venus daughter pale,
The river wherein Phaeton was drowned:
Chyron that taught Achilles great in Greece,
The ship that brought home Iasons golden fleece.
202
The Rambe with Phirxes and her sisters went,
Ore Hellespont: Europaes roaring Bull,
The twinns of Loeda: Iunoes crabe she sent,
To Hercules, who did in pieces pull
The Lion: justice slew from earth to Heaven,
Who by her balance found men's acts uneven.
203
The Scorpion slew Orion with his sting,
Euthemiaes Son that with the Muses slept,
Disguised Pan, the Boy Jove's bird did bring,
The fishes Venus from the Giant kept:
All these the Gods have stellifi'de in heaven,
With Pleiades, whose number once was seven.
204
Until Electra seeing Trojan fire,
Shrunk in her head, and never since was seen
Whose grief does make my pitying Muse (...)tir
Casting her eyes upon the lovely green:
Where she will mourn, among the shepherds swain
Admires high hills, but love she lowly plain
FINIS.

