A DEFENSE OF THE REAsons of the Counter-poyson, for maintenance of the
Eldership, against an aunsvvere made to them by Doctor Copequot, in a public
Sermon at Pawles Cross, upon Psalm. 84. 1584.

Wherein also according to his demand is proved Syllogisticallie for the
learned, and plainly for all men, the perpetuity of the Elders office in the
Church.

1586.

To the Christian Reader.
I Must (gentle and Christian Reader) declare two things for justifying of this
treatise following. First, why it came not out before, then why it comes out
now. Before, the truth is, the author of the Counterpoyson never could get
the answers in writing as now I have got them. He saw notes of them taken by
a Doctor of the civil Law, which (as he then said) made him rather think
how to contemn them, then to answer them. So this was the cause the author
let it alone. Since that time I my self have fallen upon the whole Sermon in
writing: so that it seems it goes from hand to hand amongst those who
delight in it. It may be some perceive not the weakness of the answeares. It
may be, some believe the slanders and lies made in it, both against the cause
and the persons. Wherefore to show the truth of the cause and her strength
against all her enemies new or old, continued or relapsed, to clear the
truth from old and new slaunderers, I have made the Defense following. The
Author of the Cou^ter-poyson I am sure will take it in good part. This Defense
the Author of the Answer may confute if he can. Thou may judge of both, as
Evidence of Reason shall lead thee. The Lord grant us first to understand
his will, then to practice it.

That part of his sermon which concerned Discipline.
BUT what is said of the Church of England? Truly that it is no Church but
after a sort: and why? Because it lacked Discipline, for so say the Papists,
that it is not the true Church, but secundum quid, after a manner. But what of
this? This is but a slander given to the church by them, as a city can not
stand without Walls, no more can a Church without Discipline, yet says the
holy Father Master Gualter, writing upon the Epistle to the Corinthians: For
lack of Discipline, no man ought to depart from the Church. The same Father
writing upon the Epistle unto the Galatians, which is applied to James King
of Sicile, Ego, si quis Disciplinae formam interrogat, in omnibus gentibus
eandem constitui non posse existimo. I do think that if any man do ask of
the form of discipline, that the same cannot be appointed in all Countries and
Nations through the world. In a Catechism printed here at London not long
ago, the Scotts Catechism, the question is asked, What may the Eldership do
in the Church? The answer is made again, Admit unto the Sacraments, and
exclude from them according to God his word. Now as concerning Priests, it
is said that they are worthy of great praise, which do their office justly.
And Saint Paul says in his 5. Chap. 1. Timoth, The Elders that rule well,
were worthy of double honor, especially they which labor in the word and
doctrine, we say the place is understood of the Preachers of the word. Peter
Verides and Nicholas Emingius in the 133. pa. of their book say, That such
Preistes are worthy of double honor. There is one noted, that when he was
about the same matter and business that there is spoken of, he affirms the
Testament of Reames never came into his hands, and in deed I dare be bold to
say, it did not, for he inteprreteth the place, that they Which labor are
worthy of double honor: but he did not speak of any Ministers, save only the^
which preached the word sincerilie. Therefore he speaks and makes
difference between Preacher and Preacher. I say not by the authority of the
Testament of Reames, but by the authority of holy Fathers or Prophets, which
the Apostles do note. S. Augustine he asks the question, Qui non been
p(...)sunt? but they, which do not labor in their calling Chrysostom says,
Bonus pastor vitam ponit pro ouibus: A good Pastor will lay down his life for
his sheep. And again says Ciprian, Boni and fideles dispensatores, duplici
honor digni sunt. S Ambrose says, Praesbiteri, and qui been praesunt vita and
doctrina, duplicem moerentur honorem a subiectis quibus praesunt: Presbiters,
and they that do gouuerne well, both in life and doctrine, do deserve double
honor of those subihctes, whom they rule: so that here we may see, he does
understand the places of the preachers of the word of God. But they say, if
we should so expound it, we should make the Apostle to go backwarde and not
forward. Surely, nothing less: for this is the sense, that they which
labor, are worthy of double honor: they which do not, are worthy of none. So
that here we may see that the interpreter does not expound this place after the
Church of Rome or of Reams* but S. Ambrose, Chrysostom and Augustine. Here we
see that the Apostle does seem to make two kinds of miinsters: The one which
were occupied in the word, but not well: and why should that seem strange to
make two kinds of preachers or ministers? For my part I wish with all my
heart that all that are placed in England, were better then my self, and that
it were so through all Nations where the word of God is preached, and I pray
to God, that the Gospel of Jesus Christ were preached throughout the whole
world. The Apostle says, that in his time there were many which labored not
so much as he. I thank God (says the Apostle) I labored better then they
all, yet they deserved honor: but not so much as he, because they labored not
so much as he, for God has not given to every one the self same gift.
Furthermore they define this word ( labor) is spoken to all, as well that are
able to do most, as those that are able to do least: Therefore the Apostle
writing to the These. calls them laborers, although there were some which
were wicked amongst them. Furthermore, they add this distinction is
dissolute, and clean void of true discipline, if they be but Ministers, and
take not so great pains, yet they are worthy of honor, though not so great
as the rest, but of the honor of Widows, and he speaks of honor of Widows
in Chap. 5. ver 1, 2. Honor the elder women as mothers, the younger as sisters.
Honor Widows which are widows indeed. The Apostle says, Romans 12.6.7. Seeing
then that when we have gift, etc. And again in Epist. 1. Cor. Cap. 12.28. God
has ordained some in Churches, as first* etc. Therefore they say, there must
be presbiteries in the Church: but I do not allow of this their argument, as
they had Elders in the Church then, so it must be now. For the learned Father
M. Gualter says, That there are certain which would erect a presbiterie, they
must prove they have the same gifts as the presbiterie had then, Prophecy,
working of miracles, and other gifts written in 1. Cor. Cha. 12. They that do
these things are thought to trouble the order of the Church of God, and to
bring in contention, the civil Magistrates went to get unto them selves
ecclesiastical authority, but this turned into popish tyranny. There was a
little book printed in the year of our Lord 1558. that is called The
admonition of England and Scotland, you shall find as much there. And if it
do^ please you again to look into the conclusions of that book, ye shall
find that there is one which does conclude heavier against England, then
does Doctor Sanders.

The defense.
THE whole which he speaks of Discipline, consists in two points, The
one against us: the other, A defense of him self. Where the one is not so
false and friuoulouse, but the other is as vain and feeble. To begin, let us
see how he makes us charge the Church: then his Defense he makes for it. He
lays to our charge, that we make the Church of England but a church secundum
quid, after a sort.

Where that he slaundereth us in saying we slander the Church: we prove it by
double witness, on our part our words and deeds: on his part, by his own
allegation in this place. For our words, our preaching and writings have
always witnes^ed, that we hold the Church for a true Church of Christ, from
which no member may separate him self: although he must disallowe the wantes
in her. We have always when subscription was urged, bin ready to subscribe to
the Article of her Majesty's authority, and to the substance of doctrine, in
as large a manner as the Statut in that behalf required. This we have
declared by protestation and by writing, not only to them, but to the most
honorable Senate of her most Excellent Majesty's privy Counsel. We have by
writing defended the cause of the Church and our Prince, as much as they, that
we say no more. From our actions how many Demonstrations might be brought to
approve our right judgment, reverend account, and sincere affection toward the
Church of England*

Have we not (yea when we were unjustly against all law of God and man,
deprived for not subscribing) adjoined our selves to the Church in all the
actions of the ministry of the word preached, of prayer, and of the
Sacraments? Have we not by persuasions continued many in the bosom of the
church? yea when through weakness, because of many abuses they would have
departed. Have we sought redress by any other means the^ by humble
supplication toward our superiors according to duty? Thus our actions
approve us to the church. His accusation has bin heard, let us hear also his
witness: which as we said, overthrows his accusation. He makes us to say,
that as a city can not stand without walls, no more ca^ a church without
Discipline. We reply, there was never any that denied a city with out a wall,
to be a city, an orched without defense, to be an orchard, a cornefielde
without a hedge to be a cornefielde. Neither will any manne forsake his city,
cast away his corn, destroy his vineyard, for lack of a defense. Psalm. 80.14
Nehe. 1.
Nevertheless the want of these things must be complained of in time. Behold
how his own witness speaks for us. We have seen how he faineth us to charge
the church, mark how well he defends her. What manner of defense does he make?
not with the Word, but with 2. sentences of M. Gualter. Is M. Gualter a more
holy, learned, and ancient Father then Peter Martyr, Viret, Calvin, Beza,
Bullinger, and such other, Who by preaching, writing, and other good means,
have maintained this cause? We acknoledge Gualter to be a shining starr: but we
make not his glory like unto the glory of God in all those men. Howbeit let
the strength of his light shine out, and it shall not hurt us, but melt away
his assertion as wax, and the Bishops authority which he maintains as
pitche. For want of Discipline (says he in the first place) no man ought to
depart from the Church: we confess it, allow it, subscribe unto it. What is
the second voice? I think that the same form can not be appointed in all
nations. Lo it is a thought, no demonstration. Will you allow his judgment in
this M. Copquot? Dare you do it? Shall sweet and sower come out of your mouth
in one sermon? Have you not twice or thrice in this sermon made Discipline a
note of the Church, in these words: The notes of the Church are three, the
first. The word of God truly preached. The second, The right administraetion of
the Sacraments. The last, True Discipline. And having alleged Mat. 28.18.19.
you say, By which place of Scripture, we may easily perceive, that these are
the true tokens of the Church, where the word is preached, The Sacraments
truly ministered, and where is true Discipline. Now, if Discipline be one note
of the Church, shall it not be the same in all places as touching the substance,
as is the doctrine? Shall there not be a certain form of it, as S. Paul
says, 2. Tim. 1.
there is of the doctrine, your first mark? Again, how will these words of
Matthew, Go teach all nations, baptisinge them that believe, and teach them
to observe all things, which I have commanded you, prove your Divisions? Is
it not because all men must not only be taught and believe the doctrine, as
the first and principal mark, nor only be baptized and use the Sacraments,
which is the second, but also must be taught to observe all constitutions, for
elections, abdications, for the essential difference of offices for the
censures and spiritual corrections, which you call true Discipline, the third
mark? How then, is not this commanded Discipline certain in nature and
form? And is it not commanded to all that believe and are baptized? What the^,
shall M. Gualters sentence stand, and yours fall? After you have seen this
disagrement of M. Gualter, with him self, behold how he disagreeth in this
sentence with the Bishops and orders which you maintain. In his co^mentarie on
the 1. Cor. 5 where he has the very words you allege: he says, That the
Ministers have no Discipline further then rebukes by word: That there must be
no Ecclesiastical suspension from the Sacraments: No excommunication:
Finally, there must be no Discipline but civil, at the appointement af the
Magistrate, and that by civil persons. Will the Bishops allow this, that by
the word of God Ecclesiastical Gouuernours have no authority to suspende, to
excommunicate? Will our laws, will the Articles of the Convocation house, will
the book of ordayning Bishops, Priests and Deacons stand with this? Thus
Gualters breathe poysoneth and choketh the Bishops sweet and pure
Gouuernement. Thus far his accusation. His answer to our reasons follow.
Where first I pray the Reader to consider well the question between us: which
is one these word of S. Paul in 1. Tim. 5. The Elders which rule well, are
worthy of double honor, especially those which labor in the word and
doctrine. We say, this place me^tioneth two sorts of Elders, one which do
only govern in the Church: the other which also are occupied in the
ministry of the word. He denies this, and says it mentions only two
sorts of Preachers, some which preach well, and some which take greater
pains in it then others. Thou see the question between us (good Reader)
wherein thou may thank Master Copquot (as we also do) for making his
meaning plain without any fear. For it argues a good courage, openly at
Pawles cross to iustle out the Archbishops interpretation, to bring in his
own. Doctor Whitgift page 626.
The Archbishop understands it of two sorts of Ministers: some that are
Ministers but preach not: some that preach and labor in the word and
doctrine. Well did Master Copquot consider that it was far from the true
meaning of the Apostle, which never would account an ignorant Minister,
unsavory salt, a blind watchman, a dumme Dog, and an Idol shepherd,
worthy either of double honor, or the name to rule well. Well also did he
consider that it was a small piece of government, to read a few prayers or
part of the Liturgy, and to do all as he is prescribed. Upon good reason he
left that corrupt meaning, I would he had as easily received the full and
proper meaning of the holy Ghost. But let us come to the matter in hand: He
thinks him self iniuried that he is charged to have learned his answer of
the Jesuits, which he had (he says) from holy Fathers and Prophets. If you
bring the interpretation of the Prophets for you, we will put our hand to
our mouth and give glory to the truth and to you, although we must still
acknowledge that we read it in the Jesuits papers, before we heard it out of
your mouth. But how is it that we hear a sound of Prophets, but find the
sentences only of Fathers? Let us examine them notwithstanding, to see if
they discharge you from being the Jesuits scholar. The sentences which are
alleged, make nothing for you, some are expreslie against you. The first 2.
are made to say, Such Priests are worthy of double honor as do rule well,
admit they say it: but do they say this place makes two sorts of Preachers,
which is the question? Have you no other Fathers then these first? Yes,
Augustine, Ciprian, Ambrose, Chrysostom, these are worth the hearing, let them
speak. S. Augustine says, They only non been praesunt, which do not labor
in their calling. Ergo, the place of the Apostle is to be understood of
Preachers only not of governing Elders. I am not worthy for learning to bear
Doctor Copquot books: yet I know the man whom he now seeks to confute, would
laugh at such a reason. For all that I will vouchsafe an answer. Augustine in
giving no more for the interpretation of these words, which rule well, then
that they do it which labor in their calling, does apply it no more to
Preachers only, then to Deacons, Kings, yea Shipmaisters, who all must labor
well in their calling. Nay, by using so general words in interpreting the
first part of the verse, he manifestly declares, that he understood it was
general to both sort of Elders, both teaching and vnteaching, and so he might
apply it to which soever sort of Elders he had occasion to speak of. The
same answer may serve the words which he says are Ciprians, who yet can not
be found either so much as to allege that place, much less fully to
interpret it. And if he think that Ciprian was such an enemy of vnteaching
Elders, let him read again his Epistles, and he shall find almost in every
Epistle, that he is a great friend unto them. He will say peradventure, those
Elders were preachers: we answer, it is not credible that in one Church there
could be so many as he there names and paynteth out, especially in the time
of persecution. But to put the matter out of doubt, his own words are
alleged, where he says, Cyprian lib. 3. Epist. 22
He with the Elders, Teachers, and Readers, gave the degree of a Teacher unto
Optatus: Or if you will have the reading as it is newly cast in a popish
moulde, Quando cum praesbiteris doctioribus, lectores diligenter probauerimus,
Optatum inter lectores doctorem audientium constituimus, when with the
lharneder Elders we diligently tried the Readers, we made Optatus amongst
the Readers a Teacher of those who hear, it shall make yet more against you:
because here Elders are not only distinguished from Ciprian the Bishop of that
particular church^ as from the Pastor, and from the teachers and readers, but
also from some other unlearned Elders, who although for government they were
apt men: yet were not so learned as either they were fit to read in the
Church, or judge of those who could read and pronounce words and sentences
according to their just measure, and proper grace. We have sifted Ciprian, let
us look in to Chrysostom: He is made to say, A good Pastor lays dewns his
life for his sheep. He does so say, but the Number. 27 Acts 20
name of shepherd both in holy and profane write, is common to governors,
both civil and ecclesiastical, as well as to Teachers. Further, if one do well
mark the course of Chrisostomes co^mentarie in that place, he shall find him
against you: Poimenes laon in the Poet.
because when he speaks of the first part of the verse, he urges no
necessity of doctrine: but coming to the second, he shows that those kind
of Elders which are occupied in the word, are most to be honored, because they
sustain great labor in teaching. His words are: Quid est autem been
praeesse? audi dicentem Christum: Pastor bonus animam ponit pro ouibus. Been
igitur praeesse, hoc est, nulli parcere illorum regiminis gratia: maxim
inquit, qui laborant, in verbo and doctrina: vbi modo sunt qui dicunt sermon
and doctrsna non opus est: and hos omnium maxim iubet honorari, causamque
addit, dicens: Nullum enim labore^ sustinent: that is, What is it to rule well?
hear Christ speaking or telling it: A good shephearde lays down his life
for his sheep. Therefore to rule well, is this, to spore none, or nothing,
for the sake of their government: especially (says he) those which labor in
the word and doctrine: where are they now which say, there is no need of
the word and doctrine: and he commands that these be chiefly honored, and
shows the cause, saying: because they sustain much labor. By all which is
manifest, first that the first part of the verse. he understands only of
government (for giving the full sense of it, he makes it to be to spare none
in respect of their government) and so makes with us Elders which govern
only: and Elders which also teach. Secondly, seeing he does by the second
part confute those who said, there is no need of doctrine: he shows that
although some are to govern only, yet some which must have great honor, must
teach also. Yea, if he had understood your sense of this place, he would have
said upon the first part of the verse: All must teach well, therefore there
is need of doctrine in every place: this argument could not have bin left
out, and had bin more necessary, if he had seen that to be the meaning of the
Apostle. Lastly, in confutinge by this reason their negligence, because they
must labor in the word, and not with yours, because they must labor more then
others: he shows your interpretation never came in his mind. Thus three of
his witnesses have done him much more harm then good. What says the last?
Ambrose says, Presbiters.i. Elders, and those which gouuerne well, both in
life and doctrine, deserve double honor, of those who are under them. Is this
to prove that Ambrose understands the place of Preachers only: when besides
those which govern both in life and doctrine, he speaks of Elders and
Auncientes? If you will say that ( and) does not here couple diverse things,
but interpret only, what reason have you to prove it? Seeing he does allege
the text expressly as we do* What goes before, what follows after to
prove it? Nay, in the last words he would then have said. They deserve double
honor, of those whom they teach, but because he would make it general to
both, he says of those that are under them: which may have relation to both
sorts of Elders. If Ambrose had misliked this office, or not counted it
perpetual, you had had some reason to interpret Et (and) by these words that
is: But seeing he calls for it and co^plaineth for the decay of it, as we
do: seeing he proves it by the same places we do: his interpretation has
no coulor to maintain it self. The first is manifest by his words on 1. Tim.
5. Vnde and Synagoga, and postea Ecclesia seniores habuit, quorum sine consilio
nihil agebatur in Ecclesia. Quod qua neglige^tia absoleuerit, nescio, nisi
forte Doctorum desidia* aut magis superbia, dum soli volunt aliquid videri:
that is, Whence also the Synagogue, and after the Church had Elders, without
whose counsel nothing was done in the Church: which, by what negligence it is
worn out of use, I know not, unless perhaps by the slothe of the Teachers,
or rather their pride, whilst they alone will seem to be somewhat. The second
is manifest by his interpretation of the 1. Cor. 12. which we allege ( He
has set in his Church governors) of which words his whole interpretation
(after he had spoken upon the former words of the Teachers) is: Sunt and
gubernatores qui spiritualibus retinaculis, hominibus docume^to sunt: There are
also governors which with spiritual bridles order me^. Where, in saying, there
are also, he shows besides the teachers, there are also rulers: and such as
rule with spiritual bridles, not with the civil sword. Thus the Fathers are
heavy friends to this interpretation. It may be notwithstanding he can so
confute our reason brought against his misinterpretatio^, as we must of force
yield it into his hands. For trial sake therefore, we come to his answer.
Wherein observe two faults which are general: then you may the better deal
with the particular deceites of his answer. The one is, that he clean passes
by one principal reason, which is made against him, and it is this: If the
Apostle had meant to have made two sorts of Preachers, he should have said,
They which rule well in word and doctrine, are worthy of double honor,
especially those which labor in it, or labor more th^n others: but the Apostle
has no words nor circumstance, to make the word and doctrine common to both.
For by what law of interpretation, will you do it? Will you interpret, Ruling
by teaching? government by doctrine? One diverse thing by another? Is that to
interpret, or to confound? An other fault is, that he repeateth the fourth
reason, but makes no answer at all unto it. The cause peradventure is, for
that it was concluded in a connexiue syllogism, not a simple or ^ategoricall.
I will therefore do so much for the author (or rather him) as turn it to his
liking Thus: What soever is a common duty of all Elders that can not be
assigned by the Apostle, as a proper cause of an especial honor in some sort
of good Preachers. But Copiazein to take great pains in their office, etc. is
a common duty to all Elders, 1. These. 5.12. Heb. 1^ 17. Ergo, Copiazein to
take great pains, can not be assigned of the Apostle as a cause of especial
honor in some sort of preachers.
We will now expect his answer, although without cavil he can hardly answer
it. Thus we have beheld the common virtues of his answer, let us look into
the proper strength in the particulars. To the second reason his answer is,
that is this interpretation, they do nothing less then make the Apostle go
backward and not forward. For this is our meaning which we give (says he)
That they which labor, are worthy of double honor: they which do^ not, are
worthy of none. A sound answer, which is contrary to him self, and
touches not the force of that objected against him. Show the first. It is
manifest by that which after he says: that this place is meant of such as
preach well and of some that in preaching well, take more labor then other.
Here he understands it of those which take any pains, and sets them
against those which take none So he makes the highest degree of honor due to
that which if it be not done, he says, is worthy of no honor* How ca^ that
deserve or have an excelencie of honor, which is common to all that may have
any honor in their office? Besides this co^tradictio^ which is evident in his
own words, he touches not the force of the objection. The objection is:
Whatsoever sense makes the Apostle, in the second member of the verse, give
more to the part, then in the first to the whole, makes him go backward nor
forward in his word especially. But this sense of theirs makes the Apostle
give more to him that laboreth in preaching, which is but a part, then to him
which does it well, which is to do it with great pains, purity, wisdom, zeal,
power, soundnes, fitnes, and many other things besides labor. Therefore this
sense makes him go backewarde not forward, in his word especially. This
reason is plain. What says the answer? Does it distinguish? No. Does it deny
the first part? No. What then? It denies the conclusion, against all rule of
reason. Yet by what reason does he deny it? By giving an interpretation, which
does not make, either two sorts of Elders, or of sincere preachers, but only
two sorts of preachers, one good and worthy of honor, an other evil, which
take no pains, worthy of no honor. So that this having no degrees of
comparison (which are manifestly expressed in S. Paul's words) can not so much
as resemble the sentence of the Apostle, much less interpret it. His meaning
here peradventure is as after, that all that do it well, shall have double honor:
but they especially, who take yet more pains in doing it well. This his
meaning has two foul spots in it, as fair as he would make it. The first is
against the rule of reason, because he beggeth the question: for to prove his
denial of the conclusion of our reason, he brings this meaning of his, which
is the question we dispute about. The second fault is against plain dealing in
interpreting the scripture, and that in two respects: one is in interpreting
ruling well, or being over others well, by preaching well. Which is to
interpret the general by the especial. If he say, one may do so where there
is a Trope or an improper speech: he must first prove by evident reason out
of his text, or other scripture, that there, is a Trope, else he seeks a
knotte in a rushe. Besides this, a figure can not stand here, because the
Apostle does specify the general, of being over others, into the special of
being over also in doctrine: so that he can by no means enter here upon such
an improper speech, but must be content to read, ruling well, ruling well, not
teaching well. After this strange interpreting, before this new coined meaning
(carrying the very stamp of the Jesuits) enter, he must (not without great
blame if he look not to it) add to the words of the Apostle. For, all the
force of his interpretation stands upon an addition, to the words of the
holy Ghost: which is, to make him say, he that takes more great pains then
they which preach well: All which words, more then others which do it
well, are neither in the Apostle in express words, nor in any of like force
to them, neither has he, or can he With any Syllogism conclude it out of his
words. If he can, let him show his cunning. The word Copiazein, which
signifies, to take great pains, will not here help him: For it does not
include a comparison with others. 1. These. 5.12
For it is common to all Elders, much more good preachers. For the Apostle in
making comparison, says, en copois, in labors more abou^dant: and so by
adding the word of comparison to it, shows it is not contained in the very
word it self. 2. Cor. 11.23
In his answer to the third reason, where he made three sorts of Preachers,
and even those that do it not well, worthy of some honor for defense: he
says, he sees not why such as take pains, may not have an honor such as is
dew to Widows: Wherein first he trifleth, fleeing from the matter in hand to
another. For he should have proved that his interpretation gave not a single
honor to some which did not preach well. Secondly, he is contrary to him
self. Before he said, here were understood only two sorts of Preachers, good
and evil: after he said, good and excellent: Now, three sorts are
understood, single ones, such as may have the honor of Widows: double ones,
such as may have double honor: and treble ones, which may especially have
double honor. Wherefore (as the Author of the Counterpoyson said before, so I
say again, this is dallying, and not interpreting: And What soever he say,
this Discipline of his, is dissolute. ^or if men preach well, they are worthy
of double honor, which is more then the Widows honor. if oteerwise they are
worthy (as he said before) of none. His answer follows to the last reason
out of Roma. 12.6.7. Where the Elder for government only, is made a proper
member of the church, differing in his proper action from the Teacher,
Exhorter, Distributer: And out of the 1. Cor. 12. where God is said (besides
all other ministeries and gifts) to have ordained governors in his Church:
whereunto he says, he denies the argument, there were such then, therefore
there should be such now Because (as M. Gualter says) We must first prove
they have such gifts of prophesying, doing of miracles, and diverse such like
as are there mentioned. To all which we reply, first with thanks that he
yields to the truth, and grants that such were ordained of god. In the
second place we will prove they are perpetual, and then that it is unreasonable
to demand of us, to prove that now they have such gifts as he speaks of. We
mainteyne out of these places, that they are perpetual. First, because they
are members ordained of Christ, having actions for the profit of the whole
body. For unless he can prove God has repealed them, who shall cut them off
from the body? Secondly, the Apostle in the 12. to the Romans reckons up none
but perpetual, as Teachers, Exhorters, Rulers, Distributers. Now, him self
(I dare say) will acknowledge the gifts of doctrine, exhortation, ability to
distribute, and govern, with the actions proceeding from the^, to be
perpetual, and still necessary If the^ the proper actions (as the Apostle
there speaks) of the members be perpetual, shall the members be mome^tarie?
Does Christ now give doctrine, Ephe. 4.10. 1, Cor. 1^, 28
exhortation, government, and not Doctors, Feeders, and Governors? Or does he
give teachers for doctrine, and not governors for government? Mat. 28.19.
Further, if the Church daily need these for government, and seek orderly
for them, and yet have them not: how is Christ present with his Church, to
enable her to do all he commands? In the second place, does not S. Paul
say he has set governors in his Church. How can any man set them out then?
They will say, he says, there also he has set Apostles, which yet are
not perpetual. It is true: there are mentioned also teachers and helpers
which are perpetual. So this objection ministers us occasion of a double
reason: the one by equal comparison, as the teachers office (whereof the gift
and necessity is perpetual) for that cause remains, and the Church ought
continually to call for men which are fit for it, because God has set them in
his Church. So for the Elders office, seeing their gifts of watchfulnes,
ability to admonish, and to advise and govern does remain, the Church is
continually to call me^ fit for the same office into it, because God has set
them in his Church. Further, as no authority of men could have removed the
extraordinary, unless God had denied their extraordinary gifts and calling:
so no man can remove these where the gifts remain, and an ordinary way of
examination, and election does remain for their calling. Thirdly, the Apostle
writing unto Timoth. does give as general a charge for this sort of Elders and
their continuance, as for the other which are ^^aching: therefore if you ca^
prove one perpetual* you may also prove the other to be so likewise. For the
precepts for their honor, their reasonable immunitie from accusations, their
just rebuke, their careful ordination, are set down, as common to both
sorts, though, as in the first of honor, so in the rest the teaching Elders
are especially to be regarded. Lastly, they can find no commandment, reason,
or other ground in the scripture, why the Pastor in his place should be
perpetual, but we will bring the like for the Elder in his. One is more
necessary, we grant, but not more perpetual then another: as the eye, or
the tongue, or the hand is more necessary the^ the foot, the right ones more
then the left, yet alike ordinary and perpetual. These are our reasons to
prove the^ perpetual, which being set down for the unlearned more grosely, we
will also set the^ down with some other in syllogismes, that he may the better
deal with them, out of Romans 12.

No members of Christ's body having actions for Ergo,

Al offices whose gifts and proper actions are ordinary Ergo, They are
offices perpetual Out of the 1. Cor. 12.28. No offices which God has once set
in his Church, may be put to an end by humane authority. But the offices of
Elders and Deacons, have bin once set in the Church by God, Ergo, they may not
be putt to an end, and consequently are perpetual. Whatsoever offices have
the same cause of continuance, are alike perpetual, though not alike
excellent. The office of teachers, and of church governors and Deacons, have
the same cause, as the ordinance of god, the co^tinua^ce of their gifts, and of
power of the church to call the^, 1. Cor. 12 Ro^. 12. Ergo, they are alike
perpetual. Whatsoever have the like cause of ceasing and remayninge, the cause
of remaining being continued, they remain, as the cause being ceased, they
cease. But the offices of Church governors and Deacons with the offices of
Apostles, workers of miracles, have the like cause of ceasing and remaining, to
Wit the will and ordinance of God in continuing the gifts, and the ordinary
and mediat calling of the Church for the one, and his will in withholding the
extraordinary gifts, and immediate calling of the other. Ergo, they do by the
like cause remain that the other are taken away

Ergo, they are alike perpetual.

Whatsoever offices are necessary in every congregation Ergo, such an
assembly is perpetual.

Whatsoever offices were ordained for ordinary Moses to Christ, have as the
other offices of teaching and exhorting, bin newly increased and augmented by
Christ to the Church under the Gospel: those are perpetual: because there
can be no cause so great, found of altering offices of ordinary gifts and use
since Christ, as was between Christ and Moses. But the office of governing
Elders adjoined to Teachers and exhorters are such. Ergo, the assumption is
proved by these places, Leuit. 4.13, 14, 15. (Where the Elders, as bearing the
person and sins of the whole congregation, are distinguished from the Priest
and the Magistrate.) Iere. 19.1. Where the civil and ecclesiastical Elders
are distinguished* 2. Chron. 19.8.11. Where for the matters of God, to the
Priests and teaching Levites, are adjoined Elders, Hesr. 10.8. Where the
counsel of the Elders for excommunication is joined, though (distinguished
from it) with the counsel and decree of the Princes touching confiscation of
goods. Nehem. 8.5.8. Where the Elders in governing the Assembly, are
distinguished from the Priests and teachinge Levites. For counsel they are
adjoined even with the Prophets, 2. Reg. 6.32. Out of the new Testament the
places are pregnant and many, Act. 4.5. and 6.12. and 5.21. Act. 13, 15. and
18.8. So that this proves the ordinance and continuance of them from Moses to
Christ. That Christ continued them and augmented them with gifts, as he did
the offices of teaching and exhortinge, the place of Mat. 18. Tell the
assembly, and if he hear no^ it, let him be a Heathen and publicane, does
prove it: for by using express words, proper to that order of theirs, he
does manifestly establishe it. The places which have proved them ordained in
the Church, prove this point also. Lastly, them selves grant Christ ordained
such, only they deny them to be perpetual.

Now, if they demand humane witness, what can they have more clear then that
Ignatius, who (as they say, was S. Ihons Scoller) writing to seven Churches, in
every Epistle speaking only of such offices as were ordinary and perpetual,
Bishopps, Elders and Deacons, does say (as has bin alleged) that No Church
can be without her Eldership. And least any man should say, he meant teaching
Elders. Let them mark that he defines their office to be a Senate of
Counselers, and assistants to the Bishop in every Church: over which Bishop
he acknowledges no Church Officer but Christ, without which Bishop it is not
lawful to administer the Communion, Baptism, or perform any action in the
Assembly. His words are these^ What is the Eldership, but a holy Senate, the
Counselors and assistantes of the Bishop. And a little before: The Elders are
as the Senate of God, and the hand and sinewe of the Apostles of Christ,
without these the elect Church is not, no Congregation of Saints, without
these, Epist. 2. ad Tralles. Here the office is defined, as consisting only in
government. That in the Sacraments they might only assist the Bishop, and not
administer them, or do any public action, is manifest by these words: It is
not lawful with out a Bishop, either to Baptize, or to offer, or to prepare
the offering, (in the Communion) or perfect the gift or distribution, but that
which seems good to him, according to the good pleasure of God, that what
soever you do, may be safe and sure. Ignat. Epist. 2. ad Smyrnaeos, and in the
same Epistle, Therefore let all things be done of you, according to good order
in Christ. Let the lay men be subject to the Deacons, ^ute th^sian proscem
ze(...) out d^chen epitilem.
the Deacons to the Elders, the Elders to the Bishop, the Bishop to Christ, as
he to his Father In the time of Cyprian, they remained. Ambrose, when they were
fallen away, does complain of it, and does make the cause of their falling
away, not because they were not perpetual, nor yet because they might not
continue, but the negligence and pride of the teachers.

Now that we have proved that he required of the perpetuity of these
offices: let us come to his reason, why he denies them to be perpetual,
which is, because we can not first prove the Elders to have such gifts of
prophesying, doing miracles, etc. But we bid him prove first this strange
and monstrouse assertion: that it is necessary for us to prove it. Secondly,
we will show him the vanity and detestable absurdities which follow this his
demand. The vanity may appear by these reasons out of the text. The
governors and the gift of government are as much distinguished from Prophets
and doers of miracles, as they are from teachers: therefore to require such
necessary for government more then doctrine, is to overthrow the purpose of
the Apostle, which is to show how every office has his several and proper
gift. Secondly, if the use of such gifts as he speaks of, be no part of
government, what necessity is there of the^ in Elders as they are Elders?
Thirdly, we demand of him, whether he require these gifts in all Elders or in
some, and in whom he does require the^, whether he would have all those gifts
to be in them or some only. If he require them in all, he must prove first that
they were in all the Elders in the Apostles time, which he shall do ad graecas
kalendas, that is, never. If he require all those gifts in any, let him prove
that any Elder was furnished with them al, which he shall never do. If some
only, let him show which are necessary, and which not. And let him out of the
scripture prove his saying, and we will yield. Thus we have seen the vanity
of the demand, mark the absurdities following. First, that they make
themselves wiser then the Apostle, who requires no more in the duty of an
Elder, then to be over the flock with diligence, Romans 12.5.6. Secondly, they
require more in the Elders the^ the Apostle required in a teaching Elder or a
Bishop, when he gives the rule of his examination, 1. Tim. 3. Thirdly they may
by the same rule throw out teachers, seeing in this place the Apostle gives
such gifts no more to the Elders then to the teachers: especially this
consequence is necessary, because the principal end of those gifts, being
either to deliver doctrine, or give credit to it, is more necessary for the
teacher then the gouuernor.

Fourtly, seeing they understand by Elders those who preach, and will have
none governing only, it remains that by his reason we must first prove those
gifts to remain in them, James 5.
ear we can prove such to remain. Mark 16.17 Act. 2.16, 17, 18, 19^ Act.
21.8. 1. Cor. 14.26.34.
Lastly, seeinge these gifts were common to private persons, yea to women,
even to all sorts of believers, we must first prove (by their reason) these
gifts to remain, ear we can prove there be any church or faithful men in
the world. These are the detestable absurdities which follow upon this reason
of theirs, whereby the answer to it is evident, that the Apostle sets down
there, both offices, as Apostles, Teachers, Prophets, Elders, Deacons, and
also some gifts, which were common to all, as ornaments to confirm for a
time, Christian Religion: Now, although these gifts are long since ceased, yet
the offices may remain without them: especially the offices of teaching,
exhorting, governing, which are for their use, and the gifts required in them,
perpetual: every part of which answer has bin before confirmed in the
particulars. Hitherto he has labored against the truth, to overthrow it:
Now, fearing that all the instruments he had, would not throttle the cause,
so as she should no more open her mouth: he seeks to disguise her with a
slander. Where we will first see what he brings: then we will mainteyne the
contrary. The sum of that he obiecteth is, they which stand for Discipline,
are thought to bring in contention, and to undermine the power of the
Magi^trate. In this accusation first you must well observe, he does not, nor
dares not say, it is so, but that it is thought so. To which it may be
answered, that it is thought, that the other side seek to drive out the
sufficient ministry, that they alone may reign, pille the people af her
Majesty; abuse the^ and grind them, without having any of their filthiness
discovered. It is thought of some also, that they make a way to Atheism,
Popery, and all confusion, whylest they thrust our so many worthy and
paynfull laborers out of the L. Vineyard, and bring in ignorant, ungodly,
riotouse, idle and covetous persons, in their steed. Nay, some of these are
not only thought, but manifestly by experience in many places felt. Secondly,
you may observe how the light of his conscience strove with his affections
against the cause. His affection and desire was to disgrace the cause it self,
as prejudicial to the peace of the Church and civil Magistrate. Now, When in
his conscience he found he could deduct no such thing out of the matter of
Discipline, he turns from the matter to the persons, and says, they are
thought so to do. Why does he not show who they be that so think of them, upon
what grounds, by what signs and tokens, by what counselles, writings,
examples or deeds they have given likelihood of it? If he can neither
conclude any such matter out of the cause it self, nor prove any thing against
the persons which seek it. How, Is it not the maintenance of a malicious
slander? We have have hard what he says: will he add no ground of it? Yes,
An admonition to Scotland, printed An. 1558. co^teineth co^clusions as
strange against the Estate, as D. Sanders (that traitors book) does. What
does it? Does it conteyne flat treason, that the Prince by any Ecclesiastical
power may be deposed or resisted? That the Queens most Excellent Majesty is an
heretic, or receives not Discipline, and thetefore must be excommunicated,
and after accounted no lawful Queen? Has any favoring Discipline written
these things, or the like? If he can not show any such thing, what is he but a
Preacher of slanders at Pawles Cross? The book he speaks of, to my
knowledge, I have not seen: neither know where to have it. Yet I assure my
self, he can bring forth no such conclusions from any which has spoken or
written for Discipline. But be it that some one man had written without ground
or reason contrary to the scriptures, shall that or any man's abuse, blot out
the credit which so many Churches in France, Scotland, Germany, the low
Countries, has brought to it, as finding it holy, peaceable, and no small
pillar, both of the peace of the Church and civil government? When we
consider what inconveniences follow any matter, we must not consider what some
(which hold the cause) would have, but what the cause of his own nature will
infer. For, as the good meaning of a good man will not make a perilouss cause
safe, so the ill meaning of a noughtie man, will not make a safe and just cause
dangerouse. I marvel what cause may be found out to make Discipline hurtful
to the common wealth: or what reason why the Magistrates authority and it, 2.
Chro. 19.11. Iere. 19.1. Hes. 10.8. 2. Reg. 6. 1. Sam. 30.27 28, 29, 30. Acts
4.5. and 6, 12. and 5.21 Act. 23.14.15.16. and 25, 15.
should not dwell peaceably together. The Kings and Rulers of Israel found it
not so: The Romans after them found it not so, they being Heathen, more
curious to look into such matters then any: more jealous, more politic, most
jealous over the Jews of all others, because of the King which they looked for
to come in worldly glory, could never yet find out any such suspicion. In
all their times it was quietly practiced. The Kings and Princes, both
Protestant, which have allowed it, and popish (as in France) which have
permitted it, they have found no such thing in it. For the second point* By
what reason should the Magistrates authority be at such enimitie with
Discipline, or discipline with it? Is it because the Magistrate will or can do
that, which the Elders do, or the Elders will or can do that which he does?
Will the Magistrate watch over particular flocks, admonish every sinner they
find out, follow men by spiritual means, till they bring them to
repentance? will they them selves execute the spiritual censures of
suspentio^, excommunication, and such like? Is this his office, or can his
conscience bear this burden? Does the Elders meddle with any civil cause,
or use any oher means then which are spiritual? Shall they do things so
closely, that al their acts may not be seen of the Magistrate, if he suspect
any thing? Nay, must not all things they do, come to open knowledge, if they
pass a private admonition? Will they bring no good to the common wealth:
meet with no seeds of sedition? Shall they not be able to give notice of the
dispositions of al men? Shall they not find out Jesuits and all heretics,
and bring them to light? Shall not the smaler vices and sometimes foul ones
also, which the law now meddleth little with, by this means be cu^t off?
In deed, then men's purses should not be picked, as they are now. Then so
many Velvet coats should not be maintained by spiritual revenues. But I will
speak no more of these matters. Only I conclude, seeing men have in the time
of prosperity more need of admonition and wholesome Discipline: seeing the
Eldership does nothing which the Magistrate does, nor can any way hurt him,
but he may see it better ordered then in persecution: that as this order is
necessary always, so especially in the time of peace. The Lord give us all to
be of one mind, to see the truth, and practice it.


