THE Whole doctrine of the Sacraments, plainly and fully set down and
declared out of the word of GOD.

Written by Master DVDLEY FENNER, and now published for the use of the Church
of GOD.

Imprinted at Middelborg, by Richard Schilders, Printer to the States of
Zealande. 1588. Cum priuilegio.

The whole doctrine of the Sacraments, plainly and fully set down and
declared out of the word of GOD.
The place out of which we will draw the general doctrine of both the
Sacraments, is, 1. Cor. 12.13. For by one spirit we have bin all baptized
into one body, whether Jews, Greeks, or servants, or free, and all have bin
made to drink into one spirit.

The general declaration of a Sacrament drawn hence: A Sacrament of the
eternal covenant, is a public and faithful work of the whole Church,
wherein by the Ministers putting apart by the word and prayer, to an holy
use, a visible sign, ordained of God in the order prescribed, by his delivery
and their receiving of the same, the holy ghost does offer and represent
lively unto all, but more surely apply to the due receyuer thereof, the
offering and giving of God in three persons, and the Churches receiving of
Christ cru^ified, and the covenant concerning justification, and sanctification
unto eternal life, fully ratified and confirmed in him.

Notes which show how every part is gathered out of this place with more full
confirmation by conference of Scripture, which declares the true use of every
point.

[ A Sacrament of the eternal Couenant] so called, to put a difference
between other signs, as the Rayne-bowe, laying on of hands in ordination,
and other such signs, so called of old, Gene. 17.10. and does seal up the
same, Romans 4.11. 1. Corint. 11.

[ is a publike] that is, to show the nature and true reverence of those
works, because these are not at any time for one, by one, or concerning the
dignities of one, as appears by this it is said here, all have bin baptized
into one body, all made to drink into one cup. Which shows, that it is a
work of a public nature, of public fruit and privileges to all, of public
profession of the same, and therefore in regard of the dignity and reverence
of it, to be publicly ministered with the prayers of all, and for the profit
of all: so for this end Circumcision was ministered publikelie, and they came
together to it, Luke 1.59. and in the supper they continued together, Act.
2.42. it should be in the Church, not at home in the house, 1. Cor. 11.
therefore there were conuocations in the Passover, Exodus 12.6.47. Act.
2.42.20. chap.

[ And faithfull] this is gathered, because it is said, by one spirit we are
baptized into one body, and made to drink into one spiritual drink, all
which is done by faith, by which he does dwell in our hearts, Ephe. 3.17.
John 6.36. so in Baptism, Gal. 3. As many as are baptized, have put on
Christ: by faith we are the sons of God. This is plain in those who
receive, being of discretion, that make profession of their faith, Acts.
8.36.37. and Mark 16.16. Now in the baptism of infantes, the Ministers ought
to have faith in this work, the parents who offer the childe^, in regard of
the covenant of God made to them and their seed, Gene. 17.7. Act. 20.29. the
Church even with their prayers to God, and witnessinge do work with faith:
and last of all, the child when he comes to discretion, shall have comfort by
it: only, if he dye, the spirit of God does work the effectual knittinge of
him to the body of Christ, by a secret working, as pleases him, in steed of
that faith which comes by hearing. Therefore he says, that by one spirit
all the members of the Church, are baptized into one body, etc. which is so
general, as it co^prehendeth infants, who have not faith. Of the Supper of the
L. there is no doubt. This does teach us, First, that faith is not secure, but
careful to nourishe and uphold it self by these means, when infidelity
neglects it, Act. 8.36. Romans 4.11. Esai. 7.13.14. Secondly, that it is not
the outward work that will help, unless faith and the holy Ghost work
inwardly, not the washing away of the filthe of the flesh, but in that a good
conscience makes request unto God through the resurrection of Christ, 1. Pet.
3. and so the Papists are confuted, that say, that the work wrought
outwardly in it self, does give grace: for as the word profits nothing
unless it be mixed with faith, Hebr. 4.2. so it is with the visible word which
speaks to all the senses, as it were: [ Worke] so it is called, because it is
not only a sign, as a Rayne-bowe, but a work wherein the Minister has his
part in declaring or preaching, praying, etc. and the people theirs in joining
with him: not water only, but washing: not bread only, but giving, taking,
eating, etc. Which is because the Lord would have the inward man more
effectually moved, when not only the ear, but the eyes, hand, feeling, and
such like instruments of the outward man, are effectual instruments of the
holy Ghost to work withal.

[ The whole Church] This is added, to show that this appertains not to all,
but to the Church only, none to be baptized, but those that are holy, 1. Cor.
7.14. and which are in the covenant: none meet for the Supper, but which know
and believe according to Christian doctrine, 1. Cor. 5.11. and to such
belongs that saying only, which are Citizens, and not strangers from God,
Ephe. 4.11.12. and therefore, these holy things must not be given to papists,
profane and wicked persons, 2. Chro. 35.6. Act. 8.36. nor to dogs, Mat. 7.6.
Secondly, it is added to show that not the Ministers alone must work here,
but the Church with him, in witnessing his work, in approving the same by one
consent of the spirit of grace, by consenting in prayer, and thankes-giuinge,
for which they are said to do the works of the Sacraments, Luke 1.59. 1.
Cor. 11.5. In Baptism they receive not only comfort by remembering of the same
work in them selves, but also as no member is cut off by excommunication, but
in the presence of all, with prayers and consent of Christ's spirit in all, 1.
Corint. 5.4.5. so it behooves, that by the proper consent of the Spirit of God
in all, the party to be baptized be solemnly received, and the whole Church
to be assured by that work that he is a fellow heir to be partaker with them
in the communion of Saints, and to whom they ought to render the same: so that
this is also one good and sure ground for which they ought to be present. In
the Supper likewise, when God calls all to a banquet, why should any be
absent which have faith and repentance, Act. 2.38? Why should they not show
that they are one body, because they eat all of one bread? 1 Cor. 10.17.
Wherefore the general body of the Congregation, if they may, or as many as may,
ought to be present, and in the Lords supper to be partakers.

[ Wherein by] In the whole Sacrament there are two parts: the one the outward
work, set out by it self, the other the inward and spiritual work set out by
it self: and both these as they answer one to another, so are they set down in
this place, in both there is the person authorized, to put apart to that use,
to offer, to give and to receive. In both there is the thing rightly put apart,
offered, given, received, and applied to his proper use. The persons without, is
first God his Minister, authorized from him by his Church: his works are to
put apart, consecrate or dedicate to that holy use, by opening the covenant of
god, by praying for his blessing promised to these creatures, by giving thanks
for the blessed work of that action. Also to offer and deliver aright the
creatures, the water to wash with it, the bread to be eaten, the wine to be
drunk. Secondly, the persons without are the whole church, joining with the
Minister in prayer, in quickninge their faith by the covenant of God, beholding
the former works of the Minister, and ratifying the^ in their hearts: and last
of all, by receiving and applying, or having applied aright the visible signs.
The persons which are inward, is the giver, one God in three persons, who by
this visible word in the Sacrament do offer, give and apply the inward
matter set forth: and also the said Church, being inwardly strong by
knowledge, faith, and repentance, do with joy receive that which is offered
unto them, applying it to that fruit for which it was given. The outward
matters are the creatures ordained of GOD, sanctified by the especial word
and prayer, and so ordered in outward manner, as Water to wash, bread to be
broken, wine to be drunken, as is prescribed: their fruit is to represent to
the eye, ear, feeling, etc. Secondly, to seal up and be an instrument more
certainly to apply, for although it does apply no more the^ the word
preached does, neither by other inward gifts then the working of the holy
ghost by faith, yet because the instruments are more, and in the work GOD has
sanctified more instruments in his creatures to our seeing, feeling,
receiving, etc. they do more provoke faith, kindle faith, strengthen faith, to
the receiving of Christ. The inward matter is Jesus Christ crucified, who was
sealed up and consecrated by the Father him self and the H. Ghost: yea by his
own prayer to the work of our mediatio^, neither is he here barelie offered,
but offered, given and received as the ratifier of the whole covenant of God by
his death, especially to justification, and so full redemption for ever: he
must therefore be so seen here, so received here by faith, being received, so
applied, as we may feel these fruits conueyghed to us from him, and this is
the whole substanciall order of Sacraments, set forth at large, and now
follows to be proved and applied to use.

First therefore that there are these two principal and substantial things
in the whole nature of the Sacraments, it is most plain, when he says, You
have been baptized into one body, you have bin made to drink unto one
spiritual drink: Lo then, not water but washinge: you have bin washed, and
then so as ye came to be one body in Christ to communicate in all his benefits,
and so you have bin made to drink outwardly, but therewithal and thereby, as
by an instrument, the spiritual drink is delivered out of Christ. Now to
come to the particulars, that the Ministers of God must be the first outward
person, here it is plain: for when the very nature of washing or giving
drink, does require a person to wash, and to give drink: a holy washing
does require a holy person, to put a difference between this washing and all
other washings, and giving drink. By holy we mean that which is in a
peculiar manner authorized and blessed from GOD, Mat. 23.25.
though the Minister peradventure be of an evil life. Secondly, when as the
being of this work depends upon the delivery of the word from God having
his authority, which is solemn, as Paul says, Ephe. 5.6. by the washing of
water through the word, the Minister being only called of God, to be his
Ambassador, to be in steed of Christ to beseech us to be reconciled unto God,
2. Cor. 5.20. it remains that he of necessity be required.

Thirdly, seeing they only are the disposers of God his mysteries, they only
can preach and minister the Sacraments. Fourthlie, as the firmness of the
seal stands not only in the print or form it makes, but especially that
it be set on by one that has authority thereunto: it is therefore much more in
this case. Lastly, as there is inwardly considered, not only the thing
given and received, Christ, but also faith that eats it given, and does
receive from him (unto whom this honor properly belongs) even one God in
three persons, especially in Jesus Christ God and man, and to take this as
offered from another, is to deny God: so in the outward work which must fully
answer to this, is required he who bears Gods person in this work, and
therefore can only consecrate, offer, and deliver with authority, the outward
thing which answers to the inward matter: So that to receive it from
another, is to deny Gods ministry, and to give the glory of it there, where
he has not given it, and to deprive our selves of this comfort, that our heart
may say, Gods solemn voice speaks, his solemn hand offreth and gives,
which is here the lively stay of our faith. And this is that that Saint John
Baptist urges, Matthew. 3.11. I (Gods Minister) baptize you with water, but he
that comes after me, shall baptize you with the holy Ghost. Where we see,
he playnelie lays together, and compares sacramentallie him self as God his
Minister, representinge Christ with the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
who do inwardly wash and baptize: and his outward washing with Christ his
inward washing.

Now that his works are to put apart or sanctify by declaring Gods
ordinance, by praying for his blessing, and by giving thanks, is plain, not
only because that is required of every one who gives ordinary food to his,
but especially because these creatures having no natural properties given of
God in them to work such an heavenly work of representing and offringe unto
all truly, and applying to the faithful Jesus Christ: it must needs have
this property from the word of God, it must be received by prayer,
acknowledged with thanksgiving: otherwise how should it come, if the word
gave it not? and how given by the word, if by him not asked and conueighed,
and how can the assurance of this be witnessed to the glory of GOD, but with
thankes-giuinge, and who is here the common mouth of God and the Church, but
the Minister? Therefore he says, the washing of the water by the word, Ephe.
5.6. Therefore the bread of blessing which we break, and the cup of
thanksgiving, which is it thus blessed, is the communion of the body and blood
of Christ, 1. Cor. 10. and not he that eats that bread, but he that eats
this bread, that is, thus blessed and made holy, etc. eats and drinks his
own damnation. And here we must learn against the Papists, that it is no
magical witchcraft, which by the virtue of one word murmured in an unknown
tongue, clean abolisheth the natural substance of things, but it is the
plain and fruitful declaration of the promise of God and his institution,
which (with their prayers) does give these creatures another property then
they had, although they keep their former properties and substance still, even
that they might be such instruments as have bin spoken of before: So we do
not (as they belie us) put no difference between these creatures thus
dedicated to God his service, and others: We do not deny a change, only we
allow that change which is according to Gods word, and has fruit and
commodity with it, that is, that it does not only now nourish or wash the
body, but is an effectual instrument of farther and more excellent things unto
the soul. Here also we must further note, that although this dedicatinge of
the creatures to their use, only be required of the Minister, as that being
of such necessity, as if it be omitted, it destroys the Sacrament, yet the
Lord requires a further thing of him in regard of the greater glory,
beauty, power, etc. of this whole work, which is the lively preaching of
his word. For when the right order of the Lord has bin kept, the Church has
not bin wont to shut up her solemn prayers, without this work: So that
Solomon* says of his time, When thou go into the Temple, look unto both
thy feet, and be more ready to hear, then to offer the sacrifice of fools,
Act. 15. We see it has bin a custom from old generations, that every Sabbath
when they prayed and Moses was read, there should be preaching in their
Synagogues: and the Apostles have observed this, Act. 2.42.46. We must not
maruayle then if in this solemn work, when the outward things are more
effectual, by the understanding of the word, this be required very
straightly. As I said before, it has bin the continual order of Gods
Church: therefore in the Passover, the first day, and seventh day, were days
of holy convocation or assemblies, wherein we have showed this work was
observed, and may further appear by Nehe. 8.14.15, 16. etc. Therefore when the
Apostles celebrated Baptism, Act. 8.12.38. and Act. 9.17. and. 10. and
16.15.32. and when they celebrated the Supper instituted by Christ, Act. 20.
this order was observed. And St. Paul expreslie notes it in John Baptist,
that he first preached that they should believe in Jesus Christ that was to
come, and they hearing it, were baptized, etc. Act. 19.4. Where we may note
also the duty of the Church, which ought to give especial good ear and
heed, to hunger and thirst for it, and to be quickened by it. And this plainly
meets with a common error, that many desire often to come to the Lords
Table, but care little for the preaching of the word of God, which is as great
madness, as if one should look much upon the sealer of certain writings, but
never care to know the conueighances of estate, the couenantes and several
bonds contained in them, the way how to come to the possession ratified and
sealed up by those seals.

The Ministers other works are, that he must offer, deliver, and apply
according as is prescribed the outward creatures, so that the water he must
apply to washinge, the bread he must deliver to be eaten, not to be
worshipped, kneeled unto, etc. so that herein they must keep the order which
they have received from the Apostles, as they received it from Christ:
therefore we see the Apostle 1. Cor. 11. shuts out all abuses in the Church
of the Corinthes, with this reason, that which J received, J delivered: and
that which is grounded on our Savior his commandment, Do this, teach them
to observe whatsoever I have commanded, Mat. 28. in the end. And therefore
here all additions of new signs, especially as crossing, spitle, milk,
salt, oil, of new actions, as lifting up, adoring, sacrifyzing, etc. do all
abhominably pollute these holy Sacraments of GOD, whose whole honor is, that
they remain unto the Church of God in that simplicity he left them. And when
no action here is worth any thing, Mat. 15. Mark 7. 1. Cor. 12.
but by reason of Gods word, which is sanctified to a profitable use, and
made an instrument of the working of the holy Ghost: it follows, that to
bring in such additions of orders with their significations and uses, or to
bring in other actions or uses of the outward parts of the Sacraments, is to
command the holy Ghost to be at our beck, to bless our instruments, etc.
which is to make our selves at the least equal to him in wisdom, clean
contrary to that in Nomb. 9. We should not follow our own ways and eyes,
after which we go a whoring.

The other outward persons are the Minister and the whole Church, who must
join in prayer, quicken their faith, by consideration of the covenant of God.
For god has not prescribed the former works of the Minister that the Church
in them should be idle: which we may understand even by this, that the
Scripture gives the work of prayer, prophesying, sacrifizing, and so now of
administering the Sacraments unto the Church, because in the prayer their
hearts join, in the opening of the ordinance and covenant, they are taught:
and in remembrance they are confirmed, their hearts allow the work. In the
action about the creatures, they make their use: In the putting aparte the
water, they behold the blood of Christ crucified, yea him self and al, his
deserving put apart, as for a fellow member, so for them selves and their
Baptism received long ago, now comes fresh, and quickens a fresh, for
as the Scripture teaches us the fruit of that work, is not to be for a time,
but daily, Ro^. 6.1.2.3. so no doubt when our hearts join in this work, one
for another, it shall be then very fruitful unto our selves. In the parents
this is yet more, who receive after a sort the covenant of God, especially
concerning one part, ratified in the flesh of their children. In the Supper
all this is more lively to all, they ought to have their faith stirred up,
provoked, confirmed, etc. by the putting aparte of the creatures, by the
breaking, notinge out the bruising (as Esaias says) of Christ for our sins.
The use of the delivering, receiving, etc. has already bin spoken of and
shall be further hereafter.

Here therefore especially we must take heed, that we account not our selves
free to lean our minds to other matters then are done of the Church, till it
come to us. And thus we have seen the outward persons with the inward
answering to them, as has bin touched in the particulars: God to his Minister,
and the inward matter to the outward in the Church: their works also have
bin considered in part. Now the matter follows, which are the creatures of
God put apart for that work which he has ordained: as water put a part to
wash, bread and wine put a part to nourishe, refreshe and make glad the heart
of man. These having fitnes in them to that work, can even provoke us to the
right use of them, as in the Eunuch to desire to be bapt. as soon as he came
to the water: in those to who^ Salomo^ speaks, Pro. 7. who ought to be
provoked when wisdom has made ready her wine, and furnished her table. Now
these instruments are outward signs being so put apart by the Minister, as is
before declared, and being prepared, offered, delivered, and received, do lively
represent and offer to all, and seal up the true believer by faith, God
offering and giving, and the church receiving of Christ crucified, and the
covenant of God and all the promises of the same ratified in him unto eternal
life. Here first we must consider the proportion and relation of the outward
matter, and the application of the same. The signs or outward things have
relation unto Christ crucified, and the covenant of God ratified in him: so
the water which is a matter apt to wash us, does hold proportion with Christ,
who is apt to wash and cleanse us, 1, Cor. 6.11. so the bread and wine being
matter fit to nourish us, have respect to the flesh and blood of christ
crucified, spiritually and fully to nourish us, as the words of the
institution declare: This is my body, this is my blood, and the bread which we
break is it not the communion of the body of Christ? We are made to be bapt.
into one body, and made to drink into one spiritual drink. Then the offering
and delivering of these signs, has respect to the offering and deliuring of
the things signified and noted before by one god in three persons. For as we
are in bapt. baptized unto the name of the Father, Son, and H. Ghost, so to
be (as shall appear) in and by Christ the spouse, children, and household
servants of God: so this one God in three persons must offer and give Jesus
Christ God and man unto us, which is set forth by the Minister who bears
their authority, and does perform this outward work, which has relation to
the inward. So the Son is said, Mat. 3. to baptize with the H. Ghost, when he
by the H. ghost does apply him self as he is god and man crucified to wash,
etc. neither can the Father possibly be shut out, who by the Son through
the H. ghost works as they are one, and as his work is especially noted,
Col. 2. and all 3. jointly, Tit. 3. are co^prehe^ded for that work in bapt. the
like is to be said of the supper of the Lord: for the Father has sealed up
the Son, the true bread from heaven, and does teach us, draw us, and give
us it, and power to receive it both in the word and Sacraments. And the Son
also gives his flesh to be meat in deed, and his blood to be drink in
deed, both in the word alone, and also in the Sacraments, John
6.27.32.37.40.45.46.57. Which place is not proper to that given of Christ in
the word alone, or in the Sacraments also, but common and general to both.
Now as the outward offering and giuinge has relation to his inward, so also
the outward receiving or having applied, has relation unto the inward. So in
being Baptized, we are said to put on Christ, to be washed with him, Gal.
3.27. So in taking and eating the bread, we are to receive and turn unto
spiritual nourishment Jesus Christ, and therefore it is here said, that we
are all made to drink into one spirit, that is into spiritual nourishment
out of Christ. And this is the true relation between the inward and outward
matter, with the applying of the same.

Now we must consider the effects or working of the holy Ghost, by outward
signs in regard of the inward matter, to which they have relation. Where
first it is to be noted we speak of the holy Ghost to declare that God has
not given the effects and workings following to these instruments, as
faculties or properties which are naturally in them, as that water should as
well by force inherent in it wash our consciences from dead works to serve
the living God, as it has virtue to wash our bodily filthe away, and to
cleanse us, but only that God has chosen them as his instruments to work
by, not by any property in them, but by virtue which the holy Ghost does
work by them, so that as Paul says of the ministry of man generally, Paul
is nothing in planting, nor Apollo in watering, but God which gives the
increase: the same must likewise be understood, especially of the
Sacraments. And therefore it is said, We are baptized into one body by one
spirit: so that in deed the whole cause that in Baptism we are set in the
body of Christ, is from the H. Ghost. Therefore it is said, John does baptize
as the Minister with water: but Christ as the Lord with the holy Ghost, Mat.
3. therefore all this working of the inward graces is given to the holy Ghost,
1. Cor. 6. Tit. 5.5.6. and so Paul shows he was exhorted to wash away his
sins in baptism with calling on the Name of God, who only should work that
work.

This being learned against the papists, we may know that the work of the
Sacraments, comes not from the very work wrought, but from God his spirit
working in and by the same, and that working is by the work of faith in Gods
children.

Now the effects of working as they are seals: both which are distinctlie
noted of the Apostle as signs, Romans 4.12.
in that by their relation with the spiritual matter, they do lively set forth
to the understanding by many senses, as feeling, seeing, etc. the inward
spiritual matter, to which they have relation, the doctrine of the word of God
being anexed: so the Passover was a sign upon their hands, a fro^tlet between
their eyes, Exodus 13.9.
that the doctrine of GOD might be in their mouth. Whereby we see it is become
a schoolemaister by the word, more excellent then the word alone, that even the
doctrine of god may be more lively spoken of. Now, it is not a sign only to
set forth and lively represent unto us these things by outward means: but
also to offer from God in truth, all those benefits in Christ which are
represented: for God does not dally, but does truly offer in his
Sacraments, to all that are admitted unto them all that which is there
signified. And therefore it is said of Saint Paul, That all did eat of that
spiritual meat, and all did drink of that spiritual Rock, which was
Christ, 1. Corint. 10.23. etc. Because all did eat that spiritual meat
which did offer unto them the spiritual Manna: all did drink of that Rock
which did follow them, and was in show and representation a true and very
offering in deed of Christ. But some of them receiving only the outward
signs, did neglect or refuse the spiritual grace so lively represented, and
truly offered them.

The second effect and working, which is only in the children of GOD, and
those which are of discretion by faith alone, does seal up, that is, more
surely, firmly, certainly and comfortablie apply Christ unto us, and all
his gifts necessary for us, according to the covenant and promise of God in
him. So that this use of the Sacraments is plain, that although Christ be
bodily absent, yet he is truly and in deed by faith present with all his
benefits truly received, and so his communion and fellowship applied unto the
true receyuers. Only this is the difference, that in the word and by the word
alone our faith is wrought, we truly receive Christ by faith, but in these
Sacraments our faith is quickened, confirmed, and increased, and so does more
fully, lively, and comfortablie apply Christ and his benefits. Both these
are very manifest in the Scriptures. The first, that in deed Christ with his
benefits is in and by these signs as by instruments received. For we are
said to be baptized here into one body, that is by baptism to be engrafted
into one body: and have bin made to drink into one spirit, that is, one
spiritual drink of the blood of Christ: so truly and in deed Christ is put
on, we are truly planted into him, his death, resurrection, etc. Gal. 3.27.
Romans 6 3. We are washed, we are saved, not by the outward work done, as the
papists imagine, not by the putting away of the filthiness of the flesh, but
by the answer of a good conscience, through the resurrection of Christ, 1.
Pet. 3.21. So in the Supper it is most apparent, the bread which we break is
the communion of the body of Christ, so that we which receive, communicate
Christ in and by these signs, as the whole order and institution shall make
this more manifest afterward.

Now the other points, that these are seals, not first to give, but more
firmly, surely and comfortablie, to give and to apply, is plain, because
in those of discretion, in Baptism faith to apprehende Christ and all his
benefits, is first required, as appears by the Eunuche: only in children
remains some show of doubt, but seeing the Apostle says, they are holy,
that is within the covenant of God, J am thy God and the God of thy seed.
Christ and his benefits in this covenant of grace does belong unto them, that
living, by faith it may be applied, or dying, the spirit of the grace of GOD
may work in them as he knows how, and has not revealed. And this they
have before baptism, even being alive, but not by any virtue of birth which
brings death, and that only in respect of original corruption: but by the
grace of Gods covenant, that if the tree be holy, so should the branches also.
So then this is the proper work of the Sacraments, more surely and strongly
and comfortablie to apply and seal up Christ crucified, and the covenant of
God ratified in him to salvation. And thus much generally of a Sacrament: now
follows that which is gathered out of this general, which every one must
do concerning the Sacraments. First before this work is required
examination, Act. 8.37, Act. 19.4.5. 1. Cor. 11.
after the feeling of sin: Then our acceptable knowledge of GOD in three
persons, as of Christ his person, perfect God, and perfect man, his office to
save his people, to be their Priest by his sacrifice, perfectly to reconcile
and justify, to make also continual intercession, that our obedience,
prayers, etc. may be accepted, to be their King by the government of his
Church, to kill sin in them, to sanctify them, and to apply the whole
matter of salvation, wrought in his Priesthood. After, of a true faith and
repentance, that being in one body with him, he come aright to the Sacraments,
and the imperfections, weaknesses, etc. may be supplied. In the work it self
by a right knowledge of the doctrine of the Sacraments, faith must work in
every point, as has bin declared above.

The use and end must finally be applied, that all the doctrine of Gods
good will here in Christ sealed up, may be in our hearts, and so in our
mouths, to confirm and strengthen our selves and others, in all temptations,
both against justification and sanctification, Exodus 13. Psalm. 50.7.

Of the division of Sacraments of the covenant, gathered out of this place.
The Sacraments are two Baptism. The Lords Supper.


THAT these two only are the Sacraments of the covenant of God, appears by
the declaration of a Sacrament, gathered out of this place, with which none of
the other five imagined of the papists, can stand: for they can not show us,
Matrimony.
that Matrimony is an instrument whereby God does apply Christ and his
benefits, and this is not a common instrument of the common salvation and
benefits which all have in Christ. Orders.
Orders only are proper to Ministers, and is not an instrument to apply any
common grace of the Church, but to signify that which is proper to the
Minister. And Penance has not any visible sign ordained of GOD, Penance.
but is only one fruit and benefit of Christ, which is sealed up in both
these Sacraments, as shall more fully appear afterward.

Confirmation.
Confirmation is an invention of their own brain, taken from an apishe
imitation of the laying on of hands in the Apostles time, or those who
received the gift of miracles, and therefore was proper to them. For Philip
the Evangelist was above all Bishops, and yet could not administer it, but
the Apostles, Saint Peter and John, Act. 8. and this wholly to derogate from
Baptism, as shall appear after. Neither does there any Oyling agree to this
definition, which was not a public work, Extreme Unction.
but a private: which was not for ever, but for a time whilst the gift of
healinge lasted in the Church, which was not of the covenant of God to
salvation, but a temporal blessing, or at the farthest, if the party had
committed any special sin, which was the cause of that correction, by
being restored to health, he should receive assurance of the forgiveness of
that sin, all which last of all does not apply to the worthy receyuer, the
benefit of health there promised, no not with them: and therefore by the former
declaration, can be no sacrament.

Secondly, we gather this division out of this place, because the Apostle
playnlie makes it: for being about to show how that many are in one body of
Christ, he proves it by a full division of those pledges, both our being set
into the body of Christ, and our nourishing in the same.

Now if there had been any other pledges, he would never have omitted them.
Last of all, the effect or use of both these Sacraments here does prove it,
for when as we can have no more inward grace applied unto us then Christ, and
that is first to be borne in him, and to have all privileges of eternal
life, and then after to be nourished in the same continually in him: both these
being fully represented and sealed up unto us in these two, it follows that
Christ (who would have the fewest, but the best Sacraments that might be under
the Gospel) would, nor did ordeyne no more, 1. Cor. 10.1.2.3. Exodus 12.48.

Of Baptism,
The place of Scripture, Mat. 28.19. Go therefore and teach all nations,
baptizing them into the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
This place is taken to draw out of it the especial doctrine and declaration
of the Sacrament of Baptism.

Baptism is the first Sacrament of the covenant, wherein by the Ministers once
washing or baptising in water into the name of the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, there is represented, offered, and truly applied to the right
receyuer, his once settinge into Christ for ever, to have fellowshippe with
one God in three persons, for his glory, and with his Church, for partaking
the washing of our new birth, and the benefits of Christ by the merits of his
death, to hide, cover, and clean take away the guiltines of our sin, and the
merit of our righteousness and resurrection, to make us unblameable before his
judgment seat, for justification unto eternal life, and by the power of the
said death to the killinge and burying of sin in us, unto righteousness for
sanctification acceptable to GOD through Christ.

[ The first Sacrament] this appears plainly, both out of the division going
before, and also now by the doctrine of Christ, willing his Apostles to
teach all Nations: when they believe, he will have them straight way
baptized, so we see the practice of the Church touching the same thing, Act.
2.38. Act. 10. in the end. The history of the Eunuch, etc. and it is plain
by the effect or virtue of it.

[ By the Ministers once washinge] that it should be the Ministers work, is
proved generally in the Sacraments, and is plain here by the words of our
Savior, who speaks to his Apostles, and gives them the charge of this work,
as dependent or hanging upon their preaching. This word once is added, as
that which is gathered out of the iustitution of Christ, who wills them to
Minister to every believer, baptism, not baptismes: who says not of this as
of the Supper, as often as you do this. Also according to the plain example
of the Apostles, who would not have the members of the Church baptized the
second time, as appears by this, that those who believed, continued in the
doctrine of the Apostles, in communication, breaking of bread, and prayer, but
not in being baptized, Act. 2. And also that Paul, Act. 19.4.5.
finding these that were baptized of John, and had not received the gifts of
the H. Ghost, does instruct them of the doctrine of Christ, and the baptism
answering the same, and does not baptize them again, but laying on hands on
them they received visible gifts of the H. ghost: and the reason of this is,
because it seals up our washing in Christ, our once being borne again, our
once settinge into the body of Christ, our once spiritual marriage with him, as
shall after more plainly appear. Washing or Baptising, both are added,
because washinge is necessary to the Sacrament, and yet there may be washing
without baptising, as it does signify in his narrow and straight
signification, that is, a washing with a whole plunging of them in water. So
then we must know, that washing is of necessity, because so St. Paul
declares the nature of baptism, Ephe. 5.26. the washing of water through the
word: and that is applied in the word baptize, used of our Savior, which
does signify a plu^ging, to make clean and wash away the filthe, and
therefore this is necessary, because of the proportion and relation it must
have with our spiritual washinge of our new birth, Tit. 3.5. for the purpose
of Christ is to set down before our eyes lively in this outward bare
applying of water, the applying of Christ unto us in our new birth: that as we
know in washinge there is a being under the water, a soking up of the filthe,
and leaving it behind, so this might be lively set forth in three things
answering the same in our justification and sanctification, as shall after
appear: which was also most lively noted in that plunging before. Now in
that it is added, with water, that must needs be understood in the words of
our Savior Christ, as appears by the Apostle: The washing of water, etc.
and in the words of John Baptist, I baptize you with water. And in Act. 10. in
the end. He called for water and commanded them to be baptized, and by the
story of the Eunuch.

And in deed, because nothing is apt to set forth the blood of Christ and his
merits, which is apt to cleanse and wash us, but water which leaves no
filthe: herein therefore we learn playnelie, that Christ would lively teach
us, and make us see and feel in his outward work, that same which is inward.
That which is further adjoined, into the name of the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, is that which pertayneth to the form of this Sacrament, that
so we should be washed, that thereby it might be noted, we are segregated
from the world to have fellowshippe with one GOD in three persons, as a wife
with an husband, which is noted by this, into the name, that is to bear the
name in being one with these three persons by faith, and by hanging on them
for all government, blessing, etc. Whereof it comes that as the wife is
called by the name of the husband, and to bear the man's name, or to have his
name called on a woman, is to be a wife, Esai. 4.1. so to be into the name of
God, to bear his name, is to be separated and dedicated to him as his spouse,
to obey him and receive protection and nourishment from him alone in Christ, as
Dan. 9.18. and Paul also says, Into whose name were ye baptized? into the
name of Paul? was Paul crucied for you? and J baptized none into mine own
name, 1. Cor. 1. for none was by bapt. washed to bear Paul's name, to come as a
wife in the Church to him, to have spiritual fellowship, nourishment, and
government from him. And so this interpretation stands the word (for it is
the word unto, as 1. Cor. 10.) with the circumstance and conference of
Scriptures, as also the Fathers their interpretation, to prove the Trinity of
persons in one God, because every one is God, because we bear his Name, look
for salvation, life, gouuernement, etc. as a wife from an husband.

From these three persons, which are one GOD, and so we learn in this former
manner of baptism, we are called from the fellowshippe of the world, of
Satan, sin, etc. to have fellowshippe with God. Thus we see the outward
part of this Sacrament playnelie proved out of this place: Now it follows
that we come to the second or inward part, that which is represented, and
offered to all, and applied to the true believer and receyuer by the outward
work, as an instrument, as has been declared before. The inward matter is,
first our once settinge into the body of Christ for ever: then the end and
fruit of the same applied in this Sacrament. Concerning the first, although
it be not here expressed, yet it is to be gathered hence by the diligent
consideration of the last words and conference of Scripture: for when this
word does clearilie say, We are joined with one God in three persons, to have
all necessary benefits from him: And further, that we can not know God, or
come to him but by Jesus Christ, John. 17.2. That we can not be his sons,
but by him, Romans 8.9.17. Galat, 3.26. That we can not bear any fruit,
except we be in him, who is the Vine, as John says, chapter 15. that we can
not be justified and sanctified but in the name of Jesus Christ and the spirit
of our god, 1. Co. 6.13. that the washing of our new birth can not be shed
on us abundantly, but through Jesus Christ our Savior: therefore this is to
be joined (once to God for ever) which must needs be, to be for ever once set
into Christ: and seeing the other in baptism must needs be by the effectual
applying of his benefits to us, we must needs be first in him, and therefore
Saint Paul says, Christ gave him self for his Church, that he might purge
it, cleanse it, and might present it holy, perfect, without blame, spott, or
wrinckle, by the washing of water through the word. Ephe. 5. therefore we are
said in baptism to be engrafted into Jesus Christ, Romans 6.3. to be engrafted
with him into the similitude of his death and resurrection, Romans 6.5.6. Col.
2.11.12. we are said in baptism to put on Christ, Gal. 3.27.

Now it is said further, that we are set in him once for ever, because he
that comes to Christ once, he casts him not away, John 6.37. he shall never
hunger. 35. he shall not be lost, 39. he shall live for ever, 50. And John
says of those that came outwardly to Christ, and the fellowship of his
Church: If they had been of us, they had not gone from us. And this, as it is
true of our setting into Christ, that it is but once in Christ for ever, by the
immortal seed of God that dies not, 1. Pet. 2. and by the eternal working
of the Spirit of God, which nothing can break: for what shall separate us
from Christ, when we are by his working adjoined unto him? Romans 8. in the end:
as this is true, and does rightly answer to the sign: so it is in all the
other respects of Christ's application unto us in this Sacrament. This
outward washing being but once, does seal up our once ioyninge to GOD in
spiritual marriage, that God finding us dead in our own blood has made an
eternal covenant with us, that he will never turn from us to do us good, but
we shall be his people, and he will be our God: he will give us one heart and one
way, that we may fear him for ever, that it may be well with us and our
children: and he will so put his fear in our heart, Eze. 16.8.
that we shall not depart from him: we have therefore sum of marriage once
for ever, never to depart: Ier. 32.
so likewise it is the seal of our new birth by the spirit and water, Hos. 2.
that is the Holy Ghost, which as water cleanses us, and begets us again.
Now we being borne of God can not sin, that is, be given over unto sin
again. 1. John 2.19
Whosoever is borne of God sins not, because the seed of God is in him, he
can not sin, 1. Ioh. 3. so baptism does seal up therein our once bearing
again in Christ by his H. Spirit which shall remain for ever. And if we
could clean fall from the grace of God again, we should have another bearing
again, and another seal on the same: but because we are but once borne, and
after nourished still: therefore we are once baptized and daily receive the
Lords supper. And this plainly by David, Psalm. 51.
who in his fall though much grace was hidden from him, so that he desired his
heart might be created clean within him: yet he prayed God, not to take his
holy Spirit from him. Thereby declaring plainly, that it was within him, even
in his feeling.

So we see in the incestuous person, excommicated, and delivered to Satan,
the end was, that the flesh might be destroyed, and the spirit might be
safe in the day of the Lord, 1. Corinthians. 6. So that, as every one who is of the
Church, is thought to be regenerate, so even in his excommunication, he is
thought to have the spirit and flesh within him, though the flesh seem to
have gotten the upper hand. Wherefore, this is a full comfort which is sealed
up unto Christians in the Sacrament which makes them take comfort in all
temptations, and to assure them against the terrors and fear of conscience,
to keep and strenghthen them, that they have received the spirit to bear
immortalie: so that Gods glory shall not dye, but they have his power and his
grace ready to defend them. And this co^futeth the papists their fantasy in
their imagined Sacrament of Penance: who imagining a clean falling from
grace, so that we have no comfort by baptism, seek a restoring in pe^nance,
whereas (although every Christian risen from his fall repents vnfeynedlie,
and shows forth the fruits) he did never fall from grace, neither needs
an outward seal, that he partayneth unto Gods favor and love, and his
merciful Covenant, because that has been sealed up so in baptism, that it
can not depart, and the fruit and comfort of it does remain after: for the
Lord Christ Jesus, does extend it as well to the time to come, as also the
ryme past: he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mark 16. And Peter
says, the baptism which now saves us, speakinge of those who were baptized.
And Paul, 1. Cor. 6.2.3.4. does playnlie extend the fruit continually to
continue all dying to sin and rising to righteousness. Their devise therefore
is wicked, destroys the true use and nature of baptism: it makes one to
judge the grace of God and his favor is clean gone, and that a new birth (as
it were) must be had, which discomforteth a man: whereas if after a great sin
he see the filthiness and weakness of the flesh, with the horror of the same:
he knowing that the grace of God is in him, will comfort him, strengthen him in
repentance, hatred of sin, bringing forth the contrary fruits, etc. Neither
this assurance, the root of all courage in temptations and will, to fight
manfully against sin, does pull away from us care to please God, and bring
us to security, but does strengthen us, and will make us nourish good works,
as the fruits whereby we feel and are assured that Gods seed is in us:
Neither can any have a feeling of Gods grace, when he shall be by this means
encouraged unto evil.

Thus we see the first point of being set into Christ: Now the fruits
follow. First, that to the glory of one God in three persons, we seek to
have fellowship with one God in three persons; and that is the point which is
given us to understand plainly in these words: We are baptized into the Name
of the Father, etc. For (as we have expounded before) this does teach us, that
we are consecrated, dedicated, and joined to God, that we may carry his name as
his wife, that we may have fellowship, as Saint John says, with the Father
and the Son, 1. John 1.2.3. that this one God in three persons may hold as
his own to be glorified in us for ever: which offreth such strong consolation,
such great excellency to a Christian man, as can not be expressed: hereby our
profession is sanctified to God, that it may be acceptable. The next end is,
that we may from this fellowship with God, have fellowship with the Church, in
the benefits which God does bestow upon the Son, and are sealed up in
baptism. First therefore, let us behold this fellowship, and then the
benefits. This fellowship is fitly expressed of the Apostle, when he says:
We are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apoststles JESUS CHRIST,
being the corner stone, in whom all the building is coupled together, and
grows to an holy Temple in the Lord, in whom also we are buylt together, to
be the inhabitation of God by the spirit, so that as we come by Christ unto
God, so to his Church, that we may have fellowship with it, and in it, in
which alone all we have salvation, for none is saved out of the Church, but
in Sion the City of the living GOD, we are partakers of all blessedness.
Therefore this is a pleadge of our being one body, though many members, Galat.
2.
1, Cor. 12.13. and this is the sign that we are begotten of one God and
Father: have one clothinge by faith of Christ his righteousness: one life, even
his life, in us all, Ephe. 4.1.2.3.4.5.6. and therefore this is a first
entering into public society, and as it were our solemn inuecting into the
Church and house of God. The benefits and privileges that are here, is the
washinge of our new birth, (which is so called of the Apostle in that place of
Tit.) which does spread it self into two especial branches, justification
and sanctification, according to that saying: but you are washed, you are
sanctified in the Name of JESUS CHRIST, and the Spirit of our God, 1. Cor. 6.
Which washing in general has the lively proportion with the outward work,
but in special, we must see these benefits and their special proportion,
which is to be seen in this, that as in washing, the water does cover the
filthe, does soke it up, and leave all clean, pure, and unspotted: so the
merit of the death of Christ, who satisfied the wrath of God for our sins,
by giving him self a sacrifice for sin: does not only cover (as the
Prophet says) our sins, and hyde them from God, but so drink up the
guiltines of the same, that God imputes no sin, according to the saying of
the Psalm, Blessed is the man, whose wickedness is forgiven, and to whom God
imputes no sin.

Neither only is he made sin for us, that is, 2. Cor. 5.21.
by imputation of sin unto him, but also an offeringe on the cross for
sin, and this is that we might have the righteousness of GOD in him. That
when as no flesh can be justified in the sight of God, we might obtain the
righteousness of faith, which is free without all respect of works, even the
righteousness of GOD, which he does give us, inherent not in us but in
Christ, that in him we may be holy and without blame: here therefore by faith
comes justification, from whence peace of conscience, standing in the grace
of God, deliverance from the wrath to come, and full certainty of eternal
life proceeds. And this (as it carries full proportion with the washing and
order of it: so it is said to seal up the full remission of our sins. Be
baptized (says Peter) into the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins, Act. 2.38. Act. 10.43.48. so says Ananias: Be baptized and wash away
thy sins, in calling on the Name of the Lord Jesus, Act. 22.16. Which also
is contained under the other point, seeing the forgiveness of sins was to
justification, for it seals unto us the forgiveness of all trespasses,
original and other, and has put away the handwriting against us. The other
also concerning sanctification, is urged in many places of Paul, but prosecuted
especially in Romans 6.2. where we are said to be baptized to the similitude
of Christ's death, being drowned, as it were, under the water, our sin being
made clean by Christ's death. Also we are baptized to the similitude of his
burial, as lying rotting in the water, in the tarying of the water till it
does soke up the filth and carry it with it. So that we have not only the
power of Christ his death to kill sin, but to bury it, and more and more to
rott it: and not only that, but as he dyed for our sin, and rose for our
justification, declared by this, Romans 4. and 1. Pet. 5. and.
that all sin was answered for us, seeing he rose again: so likewise we do
by his resurrection rise to righteousness and holiness of life, which is also
signified by the washing which does leave us clean and white. And although it
be true in deed, that this holiness can never be perfect, and in that full
measure it ought to be in this life, according to the law, and that it be as
the Prophet says, as a filthy clothe, and the flesh rebel against the
spirit, and that in nothing we can do the good we would, so that if God enter
into judgment with this holiness of ours, we can never stand before him: yet
this worthiness wanting in it self, is accepted of God through Jesus Christ, 1.
Pet. 2.5. so that being washed in his blood, we be Kings and Priests unto
God, and our works are acceptable: and this is also sealed up in this
Sacrament, as is plain, Romans 6.5.7.8. and so we see that in this Sacrament we
are set into the body of Christ, into the fellowship of God and his Church,
and all the privileges of the same, and that here is strong comfort against
all temptations, our sins be forgiven for ever, Gods wrath appeased, and we
absolved before Gods judgment seat: that we have here grace to forsake our
sin, to die unto sin, and to bury it co^tinuallie: which benefits when
they are sealed up here to be with us for ever, how wicked is that distinction
of the papists, that baptism is for remission of sins, life, and
sanctification: See their note on Act. 8.17.
but confirmation, for corroboration and strength to fight against spiritual
enemies, as though there were any sanctification without strength to fight
against spiritual enemies, and as though when we have hence comfort against
terrors and temptations, 1. Pet. 4. we are not strenghtned against them, when
Paul shows that by the power of Christ sealed up in bapti. we are made able
to kill sin, to bury sin, yea in righteousness to cleave unto God: Is it not
most intolerable boldness, to say, We have strength in sanctification to fight
against sin, we kill it, yea bury it: yea rise up to all newness of life?
Does not Saint Peter make it a piece of sanctification, when he says,
Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer
to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, 1. Pet. 3.15.
And if this be a piece of sanctification, how can they separate this from
spiritual corroboration and strengthening? and can they deny this to be sealed
up in baptism, where we are consecrated to confess one God in three persons,
the religion and service of the same God, and to have fellowship for ever with
him? Let us cast away therefore these fantasies, and let us know, that we are
by faith in Christ for ever put into possession of all his merits and
benefits which is sealed up in baptism, and also we shall ever hereafter be
nourished and kept by the same faith, and that which is sealed up in the next
Sacrament.

Thus much of Baptism: Now of the right use of the same according as it is
proper to it: in which as there is diversity in those who must use it, so
there is diversity of rules prescribed unto them, in the word of God.

The persons therefore are of 2. sorts, the baptized infantes. men of
discretion.
others the parents of the infantes. the whole body of the Congregation.



OF infantes in their infancy nothing is required, but that they be borne
under the covenant of God, as has bin showed before: after when they come to
discretion, they are to make that especial use which others do. For those of
discretion it is prescribed, that they besides their preparation in general,
ought to have this especially, that they feel Christ to be there for ever, and
in him to be begotten to an everlasting fellowshippe with God and his Church,
and a communion of all benefits with them: and this preparation S. Peter being
asked, teaches, Act. 2.38 39.40. and so the nature of this Sacrament
requires. In the work it self they are by faith lively to behold and apply
in the outward and inward relation of washing, Christ given to wash them in
their new birth for ever, unto justification and sanctification, as is
commanded to Paul, Act. 22.16. In the use they are always afterward to be
strengthened, that they are one with God for ever, that in their temptations
they shall not fall away, that they shall stand, that their service to God is
acceptable, etc. and this Paul urges to the baptized, Romans 6.2.3. etc. and
2.2.11.12.13.14. this therefore must always be before us to comfort us.

The parents of the infantes before they bring their children to be baptized,
The others not the^ baptized, but before and first of the parents.
must call to mind the merciful covenant of God toward them and their seed,
and by their experience they must assure the^ selves of their child: and they
must also remember the ordinance of God, who (they having brought their
children in his covenant and holy seed by grace) will have it also sealed up in
their flesh: for which cause they must earnestly desire it, and with all
speed that may stand with order and public assembly of the church to
hasten it, Gene. 17.10.11.12. and the wrath of God against Moses for deferring
it, does show this duty, Exodus 4.24.25.26. In the work it self they are
reverently to offer it to God his Church, and by his Minister, with the
public prayers of God his Church receive that seal in the flesh of their
child, as is prescribed, and in the mother tongue give such a name as may
stand with the reverent work of baptism, and the solemn inuecting of the
child into the fellowship of the church, Luke 1.59.60.61. etc. after, they are
to apply this work unto them selves, to make them diligent in catechizing and
nourishing up their children in discipline fit for children, and admonition of
the Lord, because they have once received that seal which does seal up that
God will circumcise the heart of their children as well as theirs, Genesis 17.13.
Deu. 30. The whole body of the Church ought with knowledge of Gods covenant and
joy of a member to be added to the church, adresse them selves to this work,
Luke 1.59. In the work it self they must with attentio^ to the work, joining
also earnestly in prayer, receive assurance of a fellow-member, so receiving
him with one consent and heart, in which respect they were said to circumcise,
and may be now to baptize, Lu. 1.59. Afterward, it must stir them up to all
love, unity, fellowship and communicating of gifts and privileges with the
party received, Ephe. 4.1.2, 3. etc.

Of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
1. Cor. 11.23. etc. For J have received of the Lord, that which J also have
delivered unto you, to wit, that the Lord Jesus in the night that he was
betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it and said:
Take, eat, this is my body, which is broken for you: This do you in
remembrance of me: after the same manner he took the Cup when he had thanked,
saying: This Cup is the new testament in my blood: this do as often as ye
drink it, in remembrance of me, etc.
In this text concerning the Sacrament we must consider how

Paul here sets down 2. things, First, he sets down generally what he
delivered, which is declared by relation of Christ. Then the particular, that
he received, is repeated, where the Sacrament is set forth by the circumstance
of time, in the night: by the parts of it in Christ's work, the bread, 24. the
cup, 25.


[ That which J receyued] out of this is gathered, that nothing in the matter
and form of administration and order of the Sacraments should be altered,
nothing added, nothing taken away, but all done as Christ has prescribed, as
has bin declared further before.

The circumstance of the time was in the night he was betrayed, and this was
upon especial cause, because the supper of the Lord was to be administered
after the Passover, in steed whereof it came that being abolished and then
ceassing at the death of Christ: now this being done upon a particular
occasion, the time is not to be held but upon the like particular occasion: and
we may find the time changed by the Apostles, Act. 2.42. and 20.11. So that
this is for edification, that we may be fittest to that work, and for
comelines in the time of peace to do things which are solemn and public in
comely time, which is the day, and for good order, because in the day order may
best be kept, and therefore is fitly changed of the Church into the day.

The declaration of this Sacrament, gathered of the parts of the Supper, as it
is described by Paul.
The supper of the Lord is a Sacrament of the covenant of God, wherein by the
Ministers blessing, breaking, and delivering of bread, with saying, this is the
body of Christ. etc. by his blessing and delivering a cup of wine, saying:
This is the new Testament in Christ's blood, unto the members of the Church,
which are able to examine them selves, by their receiving, eating and drinking
of the same: is lively represented and offered to all: but truly applied to the
receyuer with faith, the giving and receiving by faith of the very body and
blood of Christ crucified, and so whole Christ with unfeigned thanksgiving to
God for the lively shewinge forth and representing the death of Christ,
spiritual applying of the same by faith, to the mutual and continual full
nourishement together, in and by all the merits of Christ, and the promises of
God in him, unto eternal life.

The further confirmation and opening of this declaration.
HEre we see, first the outward work is to be considered, then the inward. The
outward work in his parts, first of the bread, then of the cup. Yet this is
general to both, that they are blessed, that is, expounding the institution of
God and the use of the same: by prayer and thanksgiving are put aparte from
their common uses, to that which is holy, by Gods ordinance receive a
property they had not before, to nourish our souls, as is at large declared
above. Now that this is set down in the first place, it is the order that
Christ has observed, and we are to follow, and that which is fit for the
works following. For when as the breaking, pouring forth, giving, etc. of the
bread and wine are sacramental works, that is, such parts of this work, as
have relation with the inward, do offer, represent, and seal up, it may not
be that these or any of them should be first done, and then this working of
blessing come after, because they have their form and force to be sacramental
works from hence. In the first part the breaking of the bread comes to be
considered, which is so playnelie set forth as a work, and has relation to
the torments of Christ on the cross for us: for in that bread is broken, that
it may be eaten it does lively set before us, that Christ was tormented for
us and for our nourishment, and as the Apostle says from Christ, my body
which was broken for you, although it be true that not a bone of Christ was
broken, and so breaking is not here taken properly, but by a similitude, for
weeping, tormenting etc. as he was pierced, crucified, and on the cross made a
curse for us, and as the Prophet says, He was wounded for our transgressions,
he was broken for our infirmities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him,
and with his stripes we are healed, Esai. 57.5. So then this is to be done
playnlie in the sight of all, and all ought to give diligent heed and weighty
consideration with the meditation of these things with us.

Mat. 26.26. Mark 14.22 Luke 22.19.
[ Giving of bread] this is gathered, because he says, take, eat, etc. and it
is plainly expressed of three Evangelists, as that which may not be omitted,
because, being the Ministers work to us, it does represent the person of GOD
in three persons giuinge Christ his body and blood to nourishe us. For they are
the dispensers of Gods mysteries to dispense unto us the spiritual
nourishement in these things.

[ Saying] this is added also plainly, according to the commandment of Christ,
who willed the^ to do this, the ministers that which christ did, the people
that which the Disciples did: and S. Paul shows that that which Christ did,
is to be done of the Church in this heavenly ba^quet, the Ministers doing that
which appertains to them, and the people that which belongs to them, and
this is very necessary, for it is not meet for the Minister in delivering to
be dumb, but he shows us our duty: and he shows what is offered and given
by the outward signs, and what we are to receive by faith, as well as bodily.
Now although the words here in Paul and some other Evangelists, do differ,
yet this sense comes to one, and the holy Ghost does give us liberty to
take which we will for edification, and to show that the force lies not in
the words, but in the matter signified by them: and yet therewithal to give
us a certain rule which we might follow. Only this is to be noted in all
that which our Savior Christ JESUS prescribes, that the words be spoken
generally to all, and not specially to one: both because that is fittest to
note out the fellowshippe and communion of the Church in this work, the
person of Christ by the minister, bidding all his guestes with one love as
from him to be merry, and eat with faith one spiritual meat together, which
also does playnlie confute the papists private communions of the Priest and
his boy: which as it has bin confuted generally: so here it shows that
they go directly contrary to Christ's institution, and the Apostles
practice, who would have it a banquet for all that were fit to receive. Neither
is there profit in this order of Christ in this respect alone: but herein our
faith is further succored when we may together and with one heart apply our
selves to the meditation and fruit of this speech of Christ by the Minister,
which in the particular speaking does both lose that our working together, and
makes the minds of Christians hang the longer in the waiting for this
sentence, and the comfort of it, and their minds are offered unto greater
occasion of slippes and withdrawinges by humane infirmity, when these things
are prolonged, which may more effectually be done together and speedily:
wherefore this also is to be kept, and we to use it for our comfort, for
although this be not that, which if it be done otherwise then it ought, does
take away the virtue of the Sacrament, neither is any to absteyne from it
because it is a blemishe, not a plain deforming and destroying of the work,
yet it is to be kept from the former occasion. The meaning of the other
words, this is my body, shall upon more fit occasions be farther opened
afterward. In the Cup the same order is to be observed, and that proportion
of the outward work in giving, etc. as in the bread, according as Saint
Paul does express, he did likewise in the cup. only here is to be
considered, that same analogy which the work has in both these parts, that
bread is given apart, and the wine apart, which as it does show a full
nourishment, a feast which is neither meat alone, nor drink alone, so has it
an exellent analogy with Christ crucified, whom we receive as one that has
bin slain for us, whose flesh we have for meat in deed, and his blood for
drink in deed, that we might have full and perfect nourishment in him, as our
Savior Christ expresses, John 6.54.55. etc. which both are lively
representation and sealing up not of Christ alone, but Christ crucified and
given up to be a full and perfect nourishment, even meat and drink unto us.
This the papists destroy and clean take away from the people, to mainteyne
their transubstantiation, and they teach, that the bread being turned into the
body, has blood in it, and as well might they make an other reason to give the
cup alone, wherein also is the body, for in Christ, the one is no more the
blood with the body, then the body with the blood. They allege in deed that
it is said, Act. 2. and they continued in breaking of bread: and Act. 20. they
came together to break bread: whereby they gather, it was ministered under one
kind. But this is gross blindness of theirs, that they can not see, that as in
the Hebrew phrase to eat bread by a part for the whole, is to receive whole
nourishment, so in this manner of speech is noted the whole Sacrament, as on the
other side in the former place of the Corinthes, that to be made to drink into
one spiritual drink, does note out the whole Supper, and none ever imagined
yet, that the cup might be administered alone: And why may they not imagine as
well that they blessed not the bread, as the cup, 1. Corin. 10, 26. because
Paul says, The bread which we break, and names not blessing? This is
therefore but a wicked shift, to displace the plain ordinance of Christ, Do
this in remembrance of me, verse. 25. They do contrary to the custom of the
Church, when as they received from the Apostles, that Christ did so, so they
practiced it, as is plain by this chapt. 25.26. And again, they destroy the
doctrine of S. Paul concerning the one principal use of the Sacrament, which
is, to show forth the death of Christ, which is lively done when both are
delivered, the one for flesh, the other for blood, but not otherwise, and
therefore he says, as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, you
show forth the Lords death til he come. Also they do thereby destroy the
properties of all nourishment, mentioned before. Let us therefore hold fast
and rejoice in the perfect and most full ordinance of Christ, and let us not
forgo the comfort we have in this point. There follows, that this must be
delivered, and this is spoken to those which are able to examine themselves,
which thing is proper and peculiar to this Sacrament: and that which Paul
urges after in this place approves the same: A man must examine him self,
and so come to this table, etc. and in the Passover their children were not
admitted, but such as could enquire and be instructed of their fathers, Exodus
13.8.9.10. and 12.26.27.
that the same might be a frontlet before their eyes, and a sign upon their
hands, that the doctrine of God might be in their mouths.

In deed if we mark and way the matter well, the difference of the outward
work here from that in baptism does by proportion require this: For although
those that are of discretion and are to be baptized, must make profession of
their faith and repentance because otherwise we can not know they are within
the covenant of God, and it is meet that they having discretion to use the
seal of God aright, should show they are so prepared to do it, yet for all
that we see, the very washing of water does not require discretion in him who
is to be washed, because we can wash and cleanse well those things which have
not only no understanding, but not any sense. But where there is required a
reverent giving, hearing of that which is spoken, and understanding, a reverent
receiving and eatinge, that we so cannot be in the outward work, even with one
discretion, to consider of who^ to take, what to take, to understand what is
said and what to be done, which discretion if God will have in the outward
work, what does he thereby but playnlie declare, that there is required
understanding of what Gods spirit does speak, who gives the true body of
Christ, what we shall receive by faith, what it is to eat it spiritually, and
be nourished by it.

Let us therefore hold also this fast: and therefore let none presume to come
hither, but seriously examining him self. Let not the Pastors presume to
profane the holy things of God, by admittinge any they having not prepared
and tried, Zopho. 3.4.2. Chron. 35.6. The outward work of the Minister we
have seen: there follows the outward works of the Church, which are
besides the hearing and beholding of the former, as has bin noted, the
especial receiving, eating, and drinking, and these are commanded of Christ,
have bin always performed of the Church that Christians might be partakers of
the Table of the Lord 1. Cor. 9. and all might eat as the Israelites did, one
spiritual meat and drink in this Sacrament: wherein is confuted the madness
of the Papists, who do shutt out many of the people from this work, and
therefore destroy the Sacrament, which without this is no Sacrament, do take
away the form of it, and use for comfort, which is that they might eat,
drink, receive, etc. according as they are consecrated, broken, and delivered
to this end, as we have seen before: They I say, wickedly take away this,
bid them fall down, worship it, acknowledge it the very sacrificing of the
body and blood of Christ: none of all which they have received of Christ, and
therefore should not deliver it in his name, but the clean contrary, for to
eat and worship with not teaching are contrary, and to offer to another as a
sacrifice, which must be given to us to eat: for when they imagine to offer,
they do clean contrary. Thus the spirit of Babel has confuted all, and
turned light into darkness. But let us remember that these actions are of the
substance of the Sacrament, commanded of Christ preciselie, and for the which
all the other actions are, as appears plainly by the institution of Christ,
and therefore may not be omitted unless we will lose the whole comfort of the
same. The work of receiving has his proportion with the true receiving of
Christ's body and blood crucified, which is done by faith: for as he dwells
in us only, and is united to us only by faith, Ephe. 4.37. Gala. 3.25. so the
receiving which is inward and has proportion with the outward, must be by
these means alone. And so is the eatinge and drinking nothing but that work
of faith, whereby Christ is so applied, as we feel our selves to draw one
spiritual nourishment by faith from him, as shall be after declared. So then we
do see, how excellent this outward work is, if we consider aright the
parts of the same, and the proportion they have with this inward, whereunto
now let us come and briefly touch the same.

The work which is here represented and offered to all, and sealed up to the
faithful, is, God giving in Christ, and our receiving of the body and blood of
Christ crucified, and so of him self. When we say, that Christ his body and
blood is not only offered and given, but of the faythefull thereof is sealed
up, thereby we said, that we acknowledged and held Christ to be present in
deed, even as in baptism, and therefore his body and blood, because it is
received and is our meat in deed, as we shall see afterward. But we do not
hold that he is bodily present in and with the bread, or that the bread is
turned into his body: for as we have ground of the former, because Paul says,
The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? The
Cup that we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? that is,
an instrument whereby truly is communicated by the working of the H. Ghost to
our faith, the very body and blood of Christ: so the words, This is my body,
that is, an instrument which offers and represents to all, one body, and
seals up the true receiving of his very body and blood, as shall be proved by
and by in the co^futinge of the adversaries the papists, which hold, that the
bread is turned into the body of Christ, because ( this is my body) must be
properly taken. The Lutherians say also, that the body is bodily and
locallie with, or in, or under the bread, because this word ( is) must be
taken properly. Now their reason why it must be taken properly, is, because
in the Sacraments the speech must be proper and fit, which is a false and
vain opinion. For what speech is more fit and effectual, where the bodily
things are instruments of spiritual and heavenly things (signs are to
deliver more effectual things signified) then these figuratiues, which have
more grace and effectualnes in them. And when one receives liberty and season
of land, or an house, or a city by a sign, who does not know this speech
is more effectual, I give this my land, this key of my house, then if he had
said, This is a sign or token of my land, and my house delivered. And they
are confuted by the Scriptures, which does especially in Sacraments chose to
use this speech, my couenat shall be in your flesh, speakinge of circumcision,
which yet is but a sign, or Sacrament of his covenant, as he interprets
there, Genesis. 13.11.13. when they are said to kill the Passover, that is
the Lamb which was a sign, seal, and remembrance of the Passover, Exodus
13.21.11.13. etc. So the Arc is often called the Lord: so the Altar of Moses,
Exodus 17.15. So the son of Iaacok Bethel, Gene. 28.22. and to go no further,
this place of the Apostle, when he says, This is the new Testament in my
blood, will they have it here proper, and not as we interpret it? Will the
papist say, wine is transubstantiated into the covenant of GOD? which is not a
substance, but a truth of promise only? And shall we have two
transubstantiations, one into blood, another into the covenant? The Lutherians
likewise, will they have the covenant to be there bodily remaining, as
remaining locallie, which can not be in a place? so then here the foundation
is clean overthrown. And yet they stand not to their rule: for let them tell
us, is this a proper speech, this bread is my body, that is, has with it, or
under it, or in it my body? Do they not find us out a strange and new
signification of this word, That it has in it, with it, or under it, which
was never heard of before? And as for the Papists we say also, How can they
say, this is a proper speech, bread is my body, that is, bread is
transubstantiated into my body? that the proper signification of it is, that is
transubstantiated? If they say, the bread is not understood in this word,
this, but the body, then they make Christ to say, This body is my body, which
besides the unfitness it has with the Sacrament, what shall become of the
express text for transubstantiation, for here is no word where it is
expreslie said, The bread is transubstantiated into my body, so that they
must be driven to their wooddon collections, from express and proper words
which they cleave so much too.

But because this point is a ground for many arguments, let us make the
truth of this apparent: First we see the plain following of the text in
speech and reason, does plainly show, that this word this, is referred to
the bread, for when he says, He took bread, he brake it, and gave it to
them, we ask, whether he gave not bread, and that it be here to be
understood? If not, he gave not that he brake, and he brake in vain.

Again, when there is a plain word bread going before, which is
necessarily to be referred to break and give out, how can they refer this,
to that went not before, and leave out that which did?

Secondly, this word eating, which notes the work of the mouth, in
grindinge and preparing to digestion, how can it be referred, except they
change the proper significaton to another then bread?

Thirdly, when as in the second part, this is not referred to blood, but to
the Cup which he took and blessed plain by Saint Luke and Paul. Let them
show how it can be otherwise in the bread? If they say, the Cup is put for
that in it, which is blood, that is, to beg the question: and when as the
adioyntes of color, taste, strength is there, as in a subject, will they say,
that also is turned into the blood of Christ?

Fourthlie, when Paul calls it bread, after it is received, saying: He that
eats this bread, and drinks this cup: is it not here plain that this is
referred to bread? I know their slip, that he called it bread by a figurative
speech, for spiritual nourishment, See the note John 6.32.
as in John Christ says, J am the bread which came down from heaven, etc.
to this I answer, They are blind if they can make no diversity betwixt that
speech which is in John, where the circumstance is of Christ, when he
says, J am the bread of life, and then that he says not simply bread,
but bread of life, the bread which came down from heaven, etc. and between
this of Saint Paul, who having made mention of bread, blessed, and consecrated,
says, He that eats this bread, simply, that is, this bread so blessed,
broken, etc. Secondly we say, when he says, He that eats, seeing he
joins the proper subject bread, to eating, the proper work of it, and the
body of Christ can not be properly eaten, as is showed before. It remains
that we must call it properly bread, and so chap. 10. when he says, The
bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? Where
note, that bread before consecration, can not be the communion of the body of
Christ by your own judgment. Secondly, that metaphorical bread can not be
broken, Christ's body can not be broken: therefore very bread must here be
understood. Wherefore we conclude, that bread remains, and this word,
this, must be referred to the bread, and therefore they can not stand to
proper significations of words, they (I say) who urge it so much.

Now we will come to the reasons which prove, that these words ( this is my
body) must be figuratiuelie taken, and so consequently in that interpretation
and figure, which we have showed to be proper: neither yet will we (for
shortness sake) bring all the reasons that might be brought, but these which
are plainly gathered out of the text.

First, Christ is said to give that which he says was his body: now if this
is my body be properly understood, Christ had one body which gave, and
another which was given. But that is absurd, therefore it must not properly
be understood.

Secondly, if the speech be proper, they are not diverse things, as bread may
be said properly of an other as of a body: but that can not be, ergo.

Thirdly, if that be properly understood, then Christ may be said to be
bread, as well as bread Christ, but that is false, ergo. etc.

Fourthlie, if that be proper, then that which is true of the bread, that it
is of wheat, is true of Christ: and that which is true of Christ must also be
true of the bread: then also the bread shall be united personally unto Christ
as his body, which is false and wicked, therefore it must not be so
understood.

Fiftlie, if bread be the body, then there are meant two substances: one for a
sign, the other for the spiritual matter, and the accidents, as color,
taste, etc. must signify and seal into the body of Christ, which is false.

Sixtlie, if bread in deed be turned into the body and wine into the blood:
then they be separated truly, or else the bread is blood and the wine is his
body, which is false: if they be separated truly, then it was not only
separated truly in his death upon the cross, which is false: if
Sacramentallie, then it is his body and blood only Sacramentallie, that which
does aptly seal up the body and blood of Christ, which is that we hold.

Seuenthlie, if the bread be his body in deed, and the wine his blood in
deed, then Christ every time the Supper is administered being alive in heaven
truly, is dead in earth truly and bodily in deed, which is blasphemous:
therefore it must not be understood properly.

Eightlie, if bread be turned into his body in deed, or his body in deed be
locallie with it, then Christ's body which always has his parts, is
visible, etc. has a hand, a foot, etc. differing from it self, it shall the
same time be invisible, yea no hand, differing from foot, etc. and there
shall be a contradiction, his bodies visible, and his bodies not visible, and so
the truth shall lie: all which is abominable.

Ninghtlie, it is said, the bread broken is his body broken, and the pouring
out of his blood, which is a sign, seal, etc. of it, so must the bread and
wine be his body and his blood, as it represents, seals, etc.

10 If the wine be his blood in deed, then blood is still powered out, which
is false.

11 As the wine or cup is the new Testament in his blood, so the bread is his
body, and the wine is blood, but that is a Sacrament which represents and
seals the new testament in his blood: Ergo it is not proper.

12 Here is a plain difference betwixt that in the cup which is said to be
the new Testament, and between that wherein the Testament is, that is his
blood, for these are distinguished, therefore it is not properly said his
blood.

13 He says, Do this in remembrance of me, therefore he is not here eaten.

14 We are said to show forth his death till he come, therefore bodily he is
not come, nor is not there, nor can not be properly said, to be so, only by
these manifest and plain reasons out of the text agreeing with the proportion
of faith, we have proved our judgment.

Now then having showed how JESUS Christ his flesh and blood is here in
deed, not bodily, how it is received in deed not bodily but spirituallie by
flesh: we must consider of that we say, that we receive his flesh and
blood, yea and so whole Christ, which is in deed true and must necessarily be
understood as a ground and foundation of our whole comfort here, and in deed
it can not be otherwise, for if we receive him flesh and blood, we must thereby
needs receive him God and man, which is not separated from him and whole
Christ does dwell in us, Ephe. 3. neither can the flesh of it self justify,
fructify, quicken, etc. For these things being more excellent then the first
creation are proper to the Godhead: So then Christ does only quicken us by
his flesh and blood, as by a mean or matter whereby he does co^uey the
virtue and power of his Godhead, in his sacrifice and sufferings, whereby he
overcame death and all principalities and powers, in his resurrection by which
he rose again: so that we must become one with Christ, and he must be in us
and we in him, and he dwell in us and we in him, which is by the virtue and
power of his divine working, and the natural uniting of his natural humanity
to us, to whom we be knitten. Therefore in that seventh chapter of Saint John,
he says, That not only his flesh, but he was the bread of life, verse. 35.

We must come to him, believe in him, that we may never hunger nor thirst. And
verse 46.47.48. etc. Then this foundation of strong comfort and consolation
being laid, let us consider the ends and fruits of the receiving of Christ.
First to Gods glory, then our good.

For Gods glory, that this heavenly and excellent work of the possession of
Christ, decread and brought to pass by one God in three persons, might be
remembered, according as it is said, Do this in remembrance of me. And
again, You shall show forth the Lords death, till he come, and that to the
glory of Gods wisdom, power, mercy, etc. which in the same may always be
remembered, praised, glorified, etc. which is with unfeigned thanksgiving and
praying to GOD, as we have seen the Evangelists mention of our Savior
Christ, and when GOD does liberally preserve and defend us, etc.

How can we be unthankful even at this present for his merits? The other
end is that we apply him to spiritual, mutual, and continual nourishment,
and growinge in grace with the whole Church. For this is in deed that same
which gives a most lively difference between Baptism and the Lords
Supper. For in baptism we are set into the body of Christ, and are washed with
the washing of our new birth in him, and have an assurance of all privileges,
are set into the right title of possession of them, with the rest of the
Church.

But here Christ is so applied and his benefits, as we do grow, increase,
and wax strong more and more, in the forgiveness of all our sins, as assured
more and more, we feel the righteousness of Christ, ours, our consciences more
and more appeased, our peace greater, also our killing and burying of sin,
our quickening and freshing in obedience greater, and that not only in our
selves but in communion and fellowshippe with the whole Church.

Therefore Paul says, As in baptism we have bin set into one body, so we
have bin made to drink into one spirit, that is, spiritual nourishment. So
he says, we have together communion of the body of Christ and of his blood:
we are at his table and fed together: we come one body together, so many as
are partakers of one bread, 1. Corint. 10.4.16.17. We come together in unity
of faith, of joy, of obedience, as the household-seruauntes of one master,
and Citizens of one God and Lord. So we daily increase and grow against all
our temptations, and daily wantes. Where we see again the wickedness of the
papists, who as before, by their confirmation, they derogated from baptism,
so hence more from the Lords Supper: seeing as strength is there given, so
here mainteyned, nourished, and increased, as spirituallie we grow fatt and in
good liking. Therefore Paul teaches, that this must make us cast away all show
of idolatry, overcome all temptations, serve God soundly, 1. Cor.
10.13.14.15.16.17.18. and this is that which answers to the eating of the
bread and drinking of the wine, which is more then receiving: for it is not
only to take it into one, but being received, so to apply it, as it be
digested and turned into good nourishment for the body. So I do not here only
receive Christ by faith, but so apply him and his merits received by my
faith, as I feel my self to grow with the Church in all the former benefits
unto the assurance of immortality and eternal life. And hitherto of the
Sacrament it self: Now follows the use.

First, all the whole Congregation, even as many as are able to come, and
examine them selves, ought before hand not only to examine generally, as has
bin taught generally in the Sacrament, but here they must see and feel their
faith, not only to receive Christ, but to apply him for increase of strength
and growing in repentance. Likewise, what be their several wantes, weaknesses
of faith, terrors of conscience, weakness to resist sin, and follow
obedience, and so here to seek increase of strength and comfort: for this is
the examination urged of the Apostle, as answerable to the nature of this
Sacrament, 1. Cor. 11.26.27. In the work it self, men's hearts must be
occupied in the whole variety of the works mentioned and opened above, and so
must feel strength and comfort to be ministered to stir us up with the whole
Church, in the fellowship of this banquet, sweetly to offer praise to GOD, in
Psalms and spiritual songs, 1. Corint. 10.13. Mar. 14.24.25.26. The
continual profit after, is always hence to have increased strength and
spiritual might, and here in all fruits to have refreshing, that even as
Elias well refreshed, went in the strength of that nourishment a long time: So
here we being refreshed, must walk forward in spiritual comfort, by the
strength thereof, which we have received, sealed up by this seal already, 1.
Cor. 10.3.4.5.6.7.8. and further, because we are so inco^passed about, this
profit must make us to come often to this banquet, to seal up our daily
nourishement in CHRIST daily.

FINIS.

