EPOTOANIA OR A TREATISE Discoursing of the Essence, Causes, Symptoms,
Prognostics, and Cure of LOVE, OR EROTIQVE MELANCHOLY.

Written by JAMES FERRAND Dr of Physic.

OXFORD. Printed by L. Lichfield and are to be sold by Edward Forest. 1640.

The Author to the Reader.
IT is reported of the Philosopher Posidonius, that being once taken with a
Disease so violent, as that the very Pain and Torture it put him to, made him
ready to wring his Arms and crash his teeth together, for the very anguish of
it: Notwithstanding he, thinking as it were to outbrave it with a proud
Stoicall Patience, cries out, Nihil agis Dolor, etc. Do thy worst, Pain; yet
will I never confess that thou art an Evil.

And do we not in like manner daily see, many brave spirited Gallants, so
besotted with some, perhaps but Imaginary beauty, and so tormented with this
folly of Love, as that both their Imagination is depraved, and their Judgment
also utterly corrupted; who, with this stupid Philosopher, are so far from
seeking a cure for this their Malady, as that they will not be persuaded, that
it is one: and therefore employ their whole study and care, in chanting forth
Loves Encomiums, and the praises of their Mistresses, the sole cause of their
Distemper.

That therefore I might let these men see the grossness of their Error, and
withal discover the vainenesse of this Stoicall Opinion of theirs: (Although I
profess my self to be rather Philologus then Logophilus; and account him
eloquent enough, that can but cloth his own conceptions with a bare natural
expression:) I have adventured to present you with this little Treatise, which
is devoid of all Elegancy or Queintnesse of expression, as being composed by
one that is a Professor of that Faculty, that the Prince of Latin Poets called
a Mute one. Wherein you shall find variety of Remedies of all sorts, for the
cure of this the most frequent, and most dangerous Disease that both sexes are
subject to; collected out of all kinds of Authors, both Physicians, Poets, and
Philosophers: that so you might have variety to delight you.

Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci. The Reasons that moved me to
write of this subject, after so many, and so learned Physicians that have done
so before me, are chiefly Two. The first is, that being my self a Practitioner
in Physic, I found that most of them handled this disease of Love-Melancholy,
indifferently, as the other kinds of Melancholies and Madnesses; never showing
precisely the cause and seat of this Malady: and that, both to the great
prejudice of the Parties affected, and also their own no small amazement and
confusion, not finding those effects, that they promise themselves, of their
Physical Prescriptions.

The second reason that moved me to attempt this discourse, was, to confute the
erroneous and impious opinion of some Physicians, hereafter mentioned, who
although they are Christians, the most of them, do notwithstanding prescribe
for the cure of this disease, Lust, and Fornication. But I doubt not, I shall
sufficiently refute these men, in this ensuing discourse; and that by strong
and evident reasons, both Natural and Moral: and the rest I shall leave to
Divines.

To the Learned Author on his Love-Melancholy.
THou, that from this Gay Title, look no high'r
Then some Don Errant, or his fullsome Squire:
Who count'st the price a Damage, if thou meet
No little Cupid wrapped in every sheet:
Sufely abhor the bargain of his Lure;
Least unawares, perhaps, thou buy a Cure.
Alas, miserable Lover! What sad plight
Would vex thy soul, should thou be well ere night!
Should thou forget thy Postures! should thou wear
Arms of thy own; not folded to Despair!
An high, erected Forehead! thy discourse
Flow on securely; with no sigh made hoarse!
What if these Ills befall thee, that from hence
Thou should, perhaps, recover Brain, and Sense?
How could thou bear the stroke, if from this Pen
Thou did grow sound, and rise up man again?
These are our Authors vices; to apply
A Cordial, where the Patient feign would die.
Count not the Erratas then: since if it be
Solid, and firm; there all the mistakes ly.
Poor, humble spirit! Fondly to behold
The painted Dross, yet startle at the Gold.
Mai'st thou henceforth thy pension bestow,
Instead of Books, only to graspe a show.
Thy Pageant-study be adorned, and hung
With Leaves, not so well writ, as fairly strung.
Good luck to thy Gilt-Leather. Such as, no doubt,
Is a good work, till the Ribband's all worn out.
Yet, if thou can not form thy wanton Eye
To read a page more serious then thee.
Jf thy sad Pill must be disguised, and woo
Thy Palate with a Candid hoary dew.
Expect no Terms, or Notions here: the style
Is not prescribed; tastes less of the shop, then File.
Few Drammes, or Scruples grate thy tender Ear:
No Opiats, or Gargarismes here.
Nothing to sour thy looks: no Austere phrase,
Which might perplexe thee, worse then thy disease.
A strain, harsh as the Ingredients; such, as we
Shall need no other Drugs to vomit by.
Here, all, like thy own Mistress, smooth appears.
Stories, like those she tells thee, apt, and clear.
Such Elegancies interweav'd, you might
Doubt, if he was Physician, did write.
If you would know how far Love reigns, here One
Rages, enamored of a cold, pale stone.
He sues to his Patient Idol, as the Clay
Might be a Bride, ere Pyrrha threw't away.
One courts his own fair Picture, as if he
Might, to himself, both Nymph, and Husband be.
Like those Androgynes, which here you find,
In the same Body to involve either kind.
Here one courts life: yet so, she cannot spit,
But the Officious Sr, will gather it.
Another does on wrinkles dote as fast;
And the Chin, that drops it self down to the Wast.
Her hollow cheek love's Temple, does appear.
Her Eye! That kills not with a Beam too clear:
And, sure, the Experienced Maid will pass on, free
From that young sin, the sale of chastity,
A Dame, so modest, no Bribe can entice:
So coy, that even to her own bed she is Ice.
Her Nose cannot be so vast, but he will raise
A Trumpet thence, to Echo forth her praise.
And though, all ore, It sure a Monster be,
Yet, whilst his fit lasts, it is a Deity.
But whilst I thus brag color, J profane
The Nerves and Marrow of thy Weighty Vein:
Who sound'st the depth of Authors, and can tell
Where Galen, and Hippocrates do well:
Yet where they err too, It Is not all thy skill,
Awed at some mighty Name, there to stand still.
As if, in your profession, 'twere a sin
To out-goe Galens sober Discipline.
Thou do not bind thy liberal Art to come
Within the compass of One Axiom:
Nor yet of One tongue: Who art Critic grown
As well in Language as in Potion.
Greek, Latin, French, Italian, all, so much
Thy own, we doubt, whether thy Nurse were such.
And yet, through all this danger of thy skill,
Thou do retain God, and Religion still.
Hence, then, with those rash clamours, which apply
A profane stamp to that blessed Faculty.
Amongst whom Charity is slander, Sure
This is no piece of Atheism to Cure.
Health is the gift of Heaven. Nor dare I
Thinke't may be stolen thence, through Blasphemy.
May such Defamers, then, converted be
By a Reforming Gout, or their own Fee.
May they be racked, and tortured, till they do
Send for Physician, and adore him too.
Till they, to him, pay their Devotion;
And, almost, are, themselves the Atheists grown.
Let them be Wild, and Melancholy look,
Nor find one Remedy through all this Book.
W. TOWERS. Chr. Chapter

To the Author upon his Love-Melancholy.
Cupid, the art idle: lend another dart;
It Is poor, to triumph ore a single Heart.
Ben't partial, strike 'em both; that we may find,
The art truly Justice, not in an Emblem, blind.
Let all thy shafts be golden ones, be it profane,
T'approach thy Altars, with a Vestall flame.
What a hard case it is, to see thy Votaries,
With their neglected Hats, pulled down their eyes,
Look like so many Cupids? but that they
Cannot make their Ladies squeake, as Cupid may.
Pray y' pity him, Lady! How you make him look!
His clothes he wears, as if he had mistook
One piece for the other; and you may safely swear,
Though he seem dressed, yet they still scattered are.
His buttons, (like Tarquins Poppy heads) fall down,
Some half a dozen at a sigh; and's Crown
Is grown bald with scratching Tunes out: such stuff,
As I conceive the Spaniard in the ruff,
Woes his sword with. Another doleful Wight.
Struck into a deep Melancholy plight,
Because (forsooth) his Mistress does but frown;
Thinking to show a worse face then her own,
For a foil (poor Unthrift!) straight runs out
Of all the wit he has; and lays about,
(As he were wood) to make some Anagram;
(Hoping she will prove as fruitful as her Name)
Or some pure Dialogue; which He, alone,
Repeates to her; all in one, constant Tone,
Like the fellow that tell's billets out, or rather
Like him, that plays (without a pipe) of the Tabor.
This is your doing, Cupid; it is a plain Case,
It Is you, that tie their Garters in the wrong place.
Come, button up your doublets, Gentlemen;
And learn to speak your Mother Tongue again;
(For, this you never were borne to) talk in Prose,
Like sager Common-wealths-men in Trunke-Hose.
Had the blind God more fiercely wounded thee,
Then the twelve signs do the Anatomy;
Did never woe her, but in the dismal Tone
Of King Darius: and did then put on
A Face suitable, that one might doubt, whether
Thou were not some clown, praying for fair weather;
Were thy story of as much direful woe,
As that, of Juliet and Hieronymo:
Here Is that would cure you: better far, then e're
Or Cupid can, or else his Messenger.
Apollo, once again is Mortal; He,
Blind God, no more now dreads thy Injury.
And, 'cause thou made him doat upon the Coy
Daphne, he now has wounded thee, proud boy.
RICH. GOODRIDGE. Chr. Chapter

To the Book.
MEthinkes a spruce Sr Amorous I spy,
In quest of his adored Mistress Eye.
His Looks, his Gesture, Garments, Hair, and all,
Composed exactly Geometrical.
As if that he assured were to prove,
At first assault, a Conqueror in Love.
Each glaunce of's Eye, each step he takes, declare
What the most hidden thoughts of his Heart are.
Nay, by that very Nod, I plainly see
What his saluting Complement will be.
Yet, thinks he, he is in a closer shroud,
Then was Aeneas in his Mother's Clowd.
Dreams, the most piercing Lvnceus cannot detect,
What the Mark is, at which he does direct
All this his service. Nay, he is confident,
His Sylvia nere shall spy out his intent:
But yield her Fort, ere the first Onset's made;
That he may boast, with what no pains he had
Obtained his wisht-for Conquest. Heightened thus,
With more then promise of a prosperous
Success, away he marches: whilst his Feet,
And nimble Pulse, in the same measure meet.
Both keep a Triple-time: until by chance,
On the next stall casting a careless glaunce,
He spies Thee, (little Book:) surprised much
With thy bare Title Page alone, (for such
A Sympathy betwixt his thoughts there is,
And all discourse of Love,) he stops: will miss
His present Visit, hoping here to find
Somewhat, may better his Enamored mind,
In Courtship of his Saint. But, reading ore
Each part, he sees, (what did lie hid before,)
His own Disease: and, by Love-Melancholy,
Can easily censure his own serious Folly.
And now, unto his own Discovery
As open lies, as he did erst to me.
Into a sudden Cure thus cheated, he,
Leaving his Sylvia, falls in Love with thee.
BEN. MASTER. Chr. Chapter

To the Author, on his Love-Melancholy.
LOve, who, till now, was loosenes and hot Flame,
Js here made warmth; and joys he is grown Tame.
The Wanton's sober, here: this Artist brings
The Boy, as comely still yet clip's his wings.
Look on his Blushes, his Cheeks modest fires.
There Is the same Rose, only 't has lost the Briers.
He, still his Jvory Bow, still keeps his Dart:
Shootes here too, but with Judgment, and more Art.
He is not not now called Lust, or Amorous stains:
(As if the God in the shrine, were Sin in the Veins.)
Nor yet a perfect Birth: he must not shine,
Blind, in his Mothers arms, yet see in Thine.
Thus, the Author Judge 'twixt us and Cupid, he
Nor takes from man, nor slatters Deity.
But, like an equal Flame, does light impart,
To show the Beauty, yet not hide the Wart.
For, had he made Love, Good, and our Desire,
Without our reason, or wills awe, Entire:
Then Virtue had been Nature; and We, been
Good without praise; 'cause without power to sin.
Lucrece had lost the merit of her Care,
Were she as easily Chaste, as she was Fair.
Ice, had been ranked with Virtue: we should know
Chaste Virgins, Chronicled with coldest snow.
Romans, that story Beauties free from sin,
Had searched their Gardens, and put Lillies in.
Roses had then heard, modest: and one line
Made Vesta's Blushes, and her Rubies join.
And the dejected Goddess weep, to see
Her Christalls, Pure, and Virtuous, as she.
No such Position then. For here our Love
May be, or that of the sparrow, or Chaste Dove.
The Flames here drawn, nor Good, nor Bad: but are
Apt, or to shine a Comet, or a star.
They are themselves, Indifferent: and may
Rise to a raging Blaze, or temperate Ray.
The Picture, doubtful like the Face, may prove
In thy breast, either Devil, or God of Love.
No Galen here, that may confine the soul
To the Temper; and called Vice, when the Bodies foul
Potions might so make honest men; and awe
Our Crimes, like scarres; and plasters stand for law
Fevers, and lust, were One, and both would heal
By Iuleps; and men take Pills, not to steal.
The Iudgement's subt'ler, here; and has allowed
Some parched Moors, chaste: light, wrapped in that black clowd.
Here Scythians breasts of hot desire have sense:
Nor, with their Furs, still put on Innocence.
Yet, he still grants, these Flames may sooner grow,
Jn Eastern sulphur, then in Northern snow:
And, that chaste thoughts in Italy are rare:
And, that each Turtle, proves a Phoenix there.
He envies no Climes Virtue, as none's sin:
Yet knows, that some an easier Conquest win.
All may be chaste, for him: yet, it is well known,
This Jewel is some Climats common stone.
Thus the wise Author makes his Justice sure:
Allows all Rich, but those that will be Poor.
MARTIN LLUELLIN. Chr. Chapter

On the Authors Love-Melancholy.
COme hither, fond Idolater, and see
The confutation of that Deity,
Thy Dotage has created. Heretofore,
Men's ready superstition did adore
Palenesse, and Fevers: things, to which they could
Say, hurt us not; could not say, do us good.
Gods, only to beware of; such, as they
Worshiped Aloof, begging 'hem keep away,
And bless them with their absence. Temples, were
But glorious prisons, to detain 'hem there.
Just such a one is thine. If you but please
Read here, thou wilt find, thy Idol's thy disease:
Thou fall'st down to thy Rheum. I Will not stick
To say, the Lover is of's God fallen sick
View then this Mirror, (hereby thou may know
It Is true, even 'cause 't does thee not single show:)
Look on thy Metamorphosis; behold,
Thou, that wast one, art now grown Manifold:
Increased, 'cause thou would multiply: new made
Each silent minute; whilst this shows thee sad,
In a dull sleepy posture, one might say,
Thou 'rt statue; did not sighs some life betray.
I the next, thou start'st; art sometimes pale; and then
A tell tale Blush colors thy cheek again.
Now, a forced smile; anon, a willing tear
Breaks forth: thy Doubtful looks, all seasons wear
And all it is, to deserve the love of your
(By you styled Lady) Splay-footed Fourscore:
Or perhaps Older. One, more fit to be
Bedfellow with an Incubus, then thee.
Such women have been loved, and sworn to be
Goddesses. (Sure for their Antiquity)
But, what is all this? Yet, thou do only find,
Thou 'rt sick: read on; a Remed's behind.
But is there any Cure? the most conceive
Love, no disease: and they, that do believe
It Is one, esteem't Incurable. But O,
Art's much improved: and that made easy now,
Was once impossible. Physicians can
Heal, not the body only, but the Man:
See his soul right again. He Will now no more
Pule, 'cause a woman's wayward, as before.
Dart all your Beams (fair Ladies:) for, be sure,
The threatened wounds, I can prevent, and Cure.
This Booke's both Charm, and Medicine. I can bear
My Antidote about me every where.
Knowing it is Virtue, 't may be my desire,
Sometimes to feel, that I may quench the fire.
For, though J burn a while, I can the same
Rise (Phoenix like) unhurt, from mine own flame.
W. HOLWAY. Chr. Chapter

On Love-Melancholy.
COme, read and learn to languish; teach thy Care
This Fortitude in Love, to love it is Fears.
Confess a ling' ring grief, which owes its birth
To Celia's coy delays, and flattering mirth;
Who makes thee kiss oth' cheek, her mouth being fr^^
To flout fond lovers present Donary;
To breath into thine ear a doubtful tone,
Thou know not, were Adieu, or, lie alone
Ten Winters out: who, when thou 'point'st a Grove,
Not where to allay in the shade, but rescue Love
From whisperings of a rival Ear; this Dame
Eats paltry cooling herbs, to quench the Flame.
But nourish still these fopperies of youth,
(Jf folly we may call, what is natural truth;
Whose cause is Fate; not wanton Eyes; that can
Bid Matrimonial Banes 'twixt wife and man.)
And like to Celia's sauce, orewhelme thy lamps
In Humorous Clouds, and Melancholic Damps.
But such as cherish flames: we often try
The Sunne's not set, when bid in the misty sky.
Droope down thine Eyes, be wan and pale in the look;
Thou gain'st thy Groans, and act'st part of this Book.
You lost your fever then, when to revive
You still deferred, till this Preservative.
What though thou should most part oth' Book be faint,
And in the last page make thy testament?
This last page can recover; make that rest,
Which thou bequeath'st to Heaven, the bodies guest,
And give a man to the world; we cannot tell
Indeed, which were the greater miracle,
The Cure, or first Production; only see,
How Art surpasses Natures husbandry.
Come, read and learn thy health; this book's no less,
Then knowing Galen, or Hippocrates;
Who boast halfe-names in the Margent, and there lie
Not to instruct, but yield the victory;
TO applaude the Authors skill, and this Redress
Of Physic Errors in our English press.
Thus much in the Change is gained; here behold,
For Catalogues of Griefs, as manifold
As Grammar Dialect, and such as prove
The sole Disease; the Cure of scorned love.
Cease then to adore thy Celia's fading Look,
And only fall in Love and Court this Book.
SAM. EVERARD. Chr. Chapter

To the Author on his Love-Melancholy.
F^e l'me half Atheist now: sure virtues are,
Only well temperd bodies kept with care.
For when I see this Passions seat in the heart:
And a receipt against all Cupids art:
Lov's arrows so to the public view displaid
That we can see which burns, which dulls a Maid;
And how: what is the Poison he does give,
And then again what is the restorative.
Sure we must hither come our arms to unfold,
To look upright, and like our Sex bold.
Sweet Mistress pray put on. I am resolved
To laugh, being safe amongst these leaves involved.
Whilst J do read and Meditate this book,
I dare the utmost Charms of any Look.
Nay I could gaze even on Castara's face
And nere be blind nay Kiss her if she was
Here, yet nere perish for it, still be a man,
Not scorcht to ashes drier then her fan.
With a too near approach forsooth her beams
That gilds as she walks by the glittering streams.
If she would part, Farewell: when she is gone
Methinks I now should live, nere turned to stone.
If she should surfeit on a Tart orort so,
And overcharged to bed at Midday go;
J should nere light a candle, as if twere night
Pray her to rise that we might see the light.
When we were in the dark, Jde hardly say,
After my shinnes were broke it was noon day.
Nor when some spittle hung upon her lip.
Should J avouch 'twas Nectar, and then sip.
Now I have read this book, methinks one might
Enjoy the spring both in the smell, and sight,
Though she were in the Exchange a buying knots,
Or with her Tailor there contriving plots
For a new Gown, and had no time to dress
The Meadows with her looks, and so far bless
The Country, as be present for to deck
The ground with lilies dropping from her neck.
I Would not mistake her cheeks for Gardens, swear
There were no Roses in the world, but there.
If I now fluent were as the Innes of Court,
My. Musc should here run out to make her sport.
Nor would I write of the thorn that knew the charm
A Beauty has, when it did her foot no harm.
For Venus coud not escape a wound, yet this
A Brighter Venus see how whole she is.
None now shall travail up into the skies
For a huge Metaphor for her dazzling eyes.
Gallants shall think that there is a Sun ith sky,
As well as that in their bright Ladies eye.
Nor shall they henceforth whine in Rhyme, because
His Mistress spoke doubtfully in the last clause.
Study your glass you wantons, till you be
Shrunk to as perfect shadows as you see.
Pray' do more scarlet on your Cheeks consume,
Then Judges wear; so that we may presume
Your faces at the drapers cost you more
Then your large wardrops, throngd with fruitful store.
The next time you come forth, perhaps I Will say
It Is a good picture, or well plasterd Clay.
^'me now as much' against courting faces, as
Those that rail at it five hours by the glass.
This work shall our affections so refine,
That we shall here in virtue, like Gods, shine,
Stews hence forth shall be sanctuaries, and
All the Balconies honest in the Strand.
Templars shall go to plays, and never see
Whores besides those that are in the Comoedy.
The cost they should bestow in buying gowns,
Fans, Knots, and Gloves, shall hence forth purchase Towns.
Honest recreations now shall Heirs please,
Be Drunk, see Plays, and Game at Ordnaries.
The Poxe' meng these shall be a Scandal now,
As much as that they deem to hold the plough.
They shall contented be to ride in the street,
Without a bed fellow in the Coach to greet.
If I could venture Bookers hapless fate,
And durst but Prophesy after his rate,
Amongst the dearths I would produce the fear
I have, e're long Women will cease to bear.
The World will all turn Stoics, when they find
This Physic here: think only with the mind
T'engender, always judging the issue foul,
Which did not owe its birth to the purer soul.
Then we must fear the Worlds supply: be feign
T'entreat Deucalion to throw stones again.
The Country Gentlemen will quite lay by
Their English Plutarchs, to read here, and cry
Would their names perish't had, so they had took
This Authors Counsel, living by his book:
And turning from their Wives, shall e' en give ore
The Husbands office, and beget no more.
Nay Tribute then in Children will be told,
A Progeny shall be our tax, not Gold.
Shortly to Church to see a wedding go,
Shall to the People prove a Lord-Majors show.
Men, as in Plagues, from Marriage will be bent.
And every day will seem to be in Lent.
There will no Matches be, but in Last Acts:
When that the Poets strength of wine contracts.
The Priest will loose his fees, and lack; for all
He getts will be at some man's funeral;
That would because he had read this book, even dye
With too immoderate, and strict Chastity.
Women will burn: wish every cart goes by
That they were in it for some Adultery.
Yet none shall quench their flames, unless they will,
Like Phaedra, or be satisfied, or kill.
Or like Pasiphae, run to a Bull entreat
That for their Husband, that shoud be their meat.
Perhaps some Brutish Plowman, that cannot spell:
That thinks men conjured Devils out of hell
With Medicinal Figures, and will not believe,
May out of Ignorance make his wife Conceive.
But then the offspring shall no more prove him Man
Then his dull speeches, or his Proverbs can.
Since by this Act we will only judge he knows,
As much as Oxen do, how a plough goes.
Sure J have humane Nature quite forsook:
Nothing can take me now, except this book.
There does the Physic fail, and all the Art
Can but inflame, no whit aswage this dart.
This Passion's only shifted: still't remains
In us a Conqueror, but with less stains.
The Objects only changed, from well carved stone,
A Face, to Arts and contemplation.
Just like Physicians that an ague turn
Into a fever, yet still the Man does burn:
Still freezes too by fits still he is not well,
His bodies only cheated with their spell.
But they a disease turn to a disease,
Here though it be passion still, the Ill does cease.
F. PALMER of Chr. Chapter

On this Learned Treatise Love-Melancholy.
SInce every Idle Pamphlet that is writ
With a sick Judgment, and a shallow Wit,
Is Vsher'd with as many slender feet
As ever squir'd a Countess in the Street.
As 'twere the only office of a Friend
To Rhyme, and against his Conscience to commend;
And swear like Poets of the Post, This Play
Exceeds all Iohnsons Works; showing that they
The Authors seconds are, and dared to write
As rashly as young Duellists do fight.
What Blood of Verse should here be spent! To D^
Sick of a Poem now, were Piety.
It Is for Healths sake we Martyrdom endure;
Plays are the Sores of Love, this Book the Cure.
Poetique Heat, like Bonfires, should proclaim
Our Joy, and blaze, 'cause we escape a Flame.
Lust is Pandora's Box; where it does dwell.
The Soul's a Devil, and the Body Hell.
But these Blessed Lines, like Charms from Heaven sent
Do make Plagues Health, and Satan Innocent.
Hence should we then keep a new Holy Day;
And, 'stead of Versifying, Fast, and Pray.
If those were Heroes thought that killed one Beast;
The Author of this Booke's a God at least.
You that still sigh, not breath; and fondly dote
On every Black-bagge, and new Petticoate.
Playing your sad and Melancholy tricks,
Like devout Jesuits before a Crucifixe.
Being All things, but your self; Now that, then thi^
Acting'ore Ovids Metamorphosis.
Who, although Woman's from, and for Man made,
Her Creature art, more plyant then her shade.
Observing all her Wincks as seriously
As the Obedient Ape his Masters eye.
Begging Advowsons of her Hair; or that
That, which now ties her Shoe, may grace thy Hat^
Rear up thy Head, which, like the Monsters, hun^
Down at thy Breast; unty those Arms, that strung
Thee like a Book; Bid Farewell now to Tears,
Palenes, and Hollow eyes; to Groves, Dreams, Fears,
And Verses, which as lamentably run
As the last Fountain that thou sat'st upon.
Thou shall not still live an Hyperbole,
Nor vainly Jdoll thy Idolatry.
Leaveing thy louder Blasphemy, you will see
There Is no such Devil, as thy Deity.
Thy Soul's come Home again; Thy Cheeks fresh Rose
May now be smelt, by a clean Upright Nose.
Those Floods, and Ebbs of Thoughts, which raged by fits,
Are now as hushd, as when the Halcyon sits.
This Book will dress thee too; we shall not say,
Thou look like one going to Bed all day.
Nor shall the French disease (strange Heraldry!)
Blaze, as an emblem of Gentility.
You need not now seek sadder Remedies,
From a quick poison, or a Precipice.
There needs no Falling Out, like those that cry,
Discords in Souls too make up Harmony.
Love, as it is borne, is Healed too by a Look:
Read but this plainer Print, you're saved by the Book.
Cupid is now turned Man; and is all eyes;
It Is only hard to Love, and not be Wise.
Js Love a subtle Labyrinth? Here you
Have every Line a sure directing clue.
Though Woemens Beauty Tanns the soul within,
As the Sunns brighter Rays do black the skin.
Wearing this mask, you may securely see
A flaming eye, and yet not scorched be.
Passions, like Adams Beasts, shall fly in fear,
And Reason turn, when Nakedness is near.
The tempting Breasts, now bare without offense,
Raise Meditations, not Concupiscence.
They humble, not inflame; when they appear,
Well think of nothing but our nursing there.
All motion's zeal, Rapture and Ecstasy;
And every kiss, and act of Charity.
Our Bedds are Altars now, where refind Hearts
Mix as the only common, naked Parts.
We love a Mistress as a Friend, and greet
Strangers as Chaste as when our own lips meet.
No talk of Horns in the City: The Court Page
Shall not again take nightly Pilgrimage.
Nor will a tender Lucrece fear a Rape;
To meet in private now, will be to escape.
This Treatise makes all Honest; we shall have
No Infants find their Mothers womb their Grave
Thus Health alone is not recoverd; we
Owe to this Book, Virtue, and Piety.
Sickness does often make us good; but then
When we are well we fall to vice again.
But these Divine Ingredients work so sure,
That they, like Grace, Preserve, as well as Cure.
We may as soon recall the Dead from Dust,
And catch past Hours, as a relapse of Lust.
Is there a new Disease? and does no man
Know what to called? It Is the Physician.
J mean those Empericks, who out of shame
Conceal it, or, 'cause it is an easy Name.
Egyptians like the have Herbs their Gods; they read
(If it be Englished) Galen, as their Creed.
And Cure, (as Trees embrace by sympathy;)
By chance not Art, they cannot tell you why.
But least this precious Antidote should err,
A Synod of Physicians here Confer.
So many drammes of Reason make this Bill,
That it does surer save, then Poisons kill.
And least severer Druggs should fright, (as some
Will refuse Health, unless it neatly come.)
Poetry candies the Philosophy,
Like Galen mixed with Sydnies Arcadye.
Which (like two Stars conjoined) are so well laid,
That it will please Stoicke, and Chambermaid.
This, (Doctor) do I consecrate to Thee;
It Is though in broken money, a kind Fee.
But hark; some cry, the Stationer's mistook,
And placed within the Cover of this Book.
Critique; I hope these Pills may work with Thee;
Then this wast paper may be Courtesy.
My Suburbe-Wit will do no wrong; the Sun,
When it is eclipsed, is then most looked upon.
Fair Buildings have rude Antiques, and the Poor,
Where a full Table's kept, lie at the Door.
RICHARD WEST of Christ Church.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHap. 1. That it is needful to teach the Cure of Love. Chap. 2. The Symptoms
of Love Melancholy. Chap. 3. Of the name of Love, and Love-Melancholy. Chap. 4.
Of Melancholy, and its several kinds. Chap. 5. The Definition of
Love-Melancholy. Chap. 6. The External causes of Love-Melancholy. Chap. 7. The
Internal causes of Love-Melancholy. Chap. 8. Of the Manner how Love is
generated. Chap. 9. Whether in Love-Melancholy the Heart be the seat of the
Disease, or the Brain. Chap. 10. Whether Love-Melancholy be an Hereditary
disease, or no. Chap. 11. The different kinds of Love-Melancholy. Chap. 12.
Whether that disease in Women, called by Physicians, Furor Vterinus, be a
species of Love-Melancholy, or no. Chap. 13. Whether or no, a Physician may by
his Art find out Love, without confession of the Patient. Chap. 14. Signs
Diagnosticke of Love-Melancholy. Chap. 15. The cause of Palenesse in Lovers.
Chap. 16. What manner of eyes Melancholy Lovers have. Chap 17. Whether Tears
be a Symptom of Love, or no. Chap. 18. The causes of Waking, and Sighs in
Lovers. Chap. 19. During what Age, Men and Women are subject to this disease of
Love-Melancholy. Chap. 20. The signs by which we may know those that are
inclined to Love-Melancholy. Chap. 21. Whether or no by Astrology a Man may
know such as are inclined to Love-Melancholy. Chap. 22. Whether or no, by
Physiognomy and Chiromancy a man may know one to be inclined to Love. Chap. 23.
Whether or no, by Magic a man may know any one to be in Love. Chap. 24.
Whether or no by Oniromancy, or the Interpretation of Dreams, one may know
those that are in Love. Chap. 25. Whether or no, Iealousy be a Diagnostick
sign of Love-Melancholy. Chap. 26. The Prognostics of Love, and Erotique
Melancholy. Chap. 27. Of the Incubi, and Succubi. Chap. 28. Whether the Love of
Women be stronger, and more dangerous then that of Men. Chap. 29. Of the
Prevention of Love, and Erotique Melancholy. Chap. 30. Order of Diet, for the
Prevention of Love-Melancholy. Chap. 31. Chirurgicall Remedies, for the
Prevention of Love, and Erotique Melancholy. Chap. 32. Medicinal Remedies for
the Prevention of Love, or Erotique Melancholy. Chap. 33. The Cure of Erotique
Melancholy, or Love Madness. Chap. 34. Remedies for the cure of
Love-Melancholy in married Persons. Chap. 35. Of Philters, and Poetical Cures
of Love. Chap. 36. Empiricall Remedies, for the cure of Love, and Erotique
Melancholy. Chap. 37. Methodicall remedies for the cure of Love, and Erotique
Melancholy. And first of Order of Diet. Chap. 38. Chirurgicall remedies, for
the cure of Love-Melanoholy. Chap. 39 Pharmaceuticall Remedies, for the cure of
Love, or Erotique Melancholy.
Errata.
Page 5. l. 4. flultitiaque. p. 78. l. 3. caused. p. 89. l. 17. sometimes. p.
122. l. 14. transposing. p. 161. l. 11. the Cathol. p. 169. l. 8. at all. p.
190. l. 1. he would be free. p. 239. l. 1. the twelve p. 242. l. 23. (...). p.
3 21. l. 10. by reason of some p. 338. l. 3. I would come. ^. 11 (...) p. 348.
l. 16. Rulandus, Quer. p. 349. l. 9. (...). p. 352. l. 27. Alkermes.

A TREATISE Discoursing of the Essence, Symptoms, Prognostics, and cure of
Love-Melancholy.
CHAP. I. That it is needful to teach the Cure of Love.
IT may seem at the first view a vain and idle enterprise to go about to
prescribe remedies for the cure of Love: Which all, both Poets, Philosophers,
and ancient Divines, have ever acknowledged to be the original and cause of
all good: ((...), Arist. Met. 1. c. 4.
says the Philosopher: Love is the cause of all good: as contrariwise hatred,
of all evil. It is the Model of Justice, Temperance, Plat. conv.
Fortitude, and Prudence: the first inventor of Physic, Poetry, Music, and
all Plutar. Symp.
Liberal Arts; the most noble, most powerful, and most Ancient of all those
Gods, the superstitious Heathen framed to themselves out of their own brain.
Should I indeed speak any thing against this Love; I might justly be thought
worthy the same punishment the Poet Stefichorus suffered, for speaking ill of
the beauteous Helen: who was therefore punished with blindness, till he had
recanted his error. Besides, that in writing against this love, I should do
injury to the Art of Physic, which I profess: seeing that Plato, under the
person of Eryximachus Plat. conv.
the Physician, says, that Physic is nothing else, but (...). The knowledge
of those things, that respect the desires and affections of the Body, as
concerning Evacuation and Repletion. So that he that in this case can
distinguish betwixt honest and dishonest love, is to be ^ccounted the
skilfullest Physician.

But we are to observe with Pausani^s, Plotin. de Amo.
that as there are two Veneres: the one Heavenly, called Urania, the daughter
of Coelum, brought forth without a Mother: the other the daughter of Jupiter
and Di^^ne, Cic. l. 3. de not. deor. Fulgent. mythol.
commonly called Pandemia, or Vulgar: so likewise are there two Amores, Sons
of these two Godesses; the one Divine, and the other common and vulgar. Of
these two kinds of Love, the Supernaturalists and Divines discourse of the
essence and properties of the former: and the Physician of the later. Which
again is either honest or dishonest: they teach the means of preserving the
former, during the term of Marriage; and prescribe remedies for the cure, and
prevention of the Later; with the fury whereof Ignoble and degenerate spirits
are for the most part violently carried away.

The Greeks feign that Apollo had two sons, Aesculapius and Plato: this,
for to cure the maladies of the mind, Aesculapius for those of the Body. Now
love being a mixed disease, both of the body and the mind; I shall furnish my
self with precepts out of Plato, and with me dicines from Aesculapius, in the
cure of Love Melancholy, being such as I have gathered out of Hippocrates, the
Prince of Physicians: Intending to handle Love no otherwise, then as it is a
passion, or violent perturbation of the Mind, Dishonest, and Refractory to
Reason.

Vtile propositum est saevas extinguere flammas.
Nec servum vitiis pectus habere tuum.
But my chiefest purpose is, to prescribe some remedies for the prevention of
this disease of Love, which those men for the most part are subject unto, that
have not the power to govern their desires, and subject them to Reasons Laws:
seeing that this unchaste Love proves oftentimes the Author of the greatest
Mischiefs that are in the world, as they are reckoned up by Plautus.

Amorem cuncta vitia sectari solent: Plaut. Act 1. scen. 1. Merc.

^ura, aegritudo, dolor, nimiaque elegantia,
^osomnia, aerumna, error, and terror, and fuga,
^neptia stultiaque adeo, and temeritas,
^ncogitantia excors, immodestia,
^etulantia, cupiditas and malevolentia:
^nhaeret etiam aviditas, desidia, injuria,
^nopia, contumelia and dispendium,
Multiloquium, pauciloquium, etc.
Which has given occasion to a late French Poet to feign, that on a day,
Venus left whipping of her son Cupid, and afterward bound him to a Myrtle
tree. Intimating by this Poetical fiction, that Pleasure many times punishes
Lovers with scourges, signified by his purple wings, which, according to
Guitton d' Arezzo, are the Hieroglyphics of grief, and cruel torment. And
Petrarch, in his 4. cap. del Triomfo d' Amore, feignes him to be lodged in a
palace of Hopes; which makes all persons, of what condition, or sex soever,
desire to be entertained there: But the more they labor to ascend, the lower
still they fall, because the stairs that lead up to this palace are of a very
slippery substance. The three first steps are, the immodest cast of the eyes,
superfluity of words, and the violence of the hands: the upper chambers are
adorned with Idleness, dreams, vain desires, and inconstancy: the chimney of
the great hall, is the breast of the Lover; that of the chamber is his heart;
and his liver, that of the Kitchen. The seats of those that come thither, and
are entertained there, are false contents, on which they are no sooner settled,
but they break under them. Which to repair, they presently send for their
engineeres, envy, torment, and deceit. Suspense, and fear, are the surest
guardians of this palace, the gates whereof are shut up at night by false
opinion, and Distrust stands sentinel, etc. Which Apollonius Thyaneus having
well Philostr. l. 1. cap. 23.
considered, being one day solicited by the King of Babylon to invent some
strange kind of punishment for an Eunuch that had been taken in the very Act
with one of the Kings Concubines, made him this answer, that he should suffer
him still to live, and pursue his own unchaste desires: then which there could
not a greater punishment be found. For the beginnings of Lust are Fears; Ruin
attends it in the midst of its course; and Repentance concludes it: As you
shall see more clearly, when I shall have discovered unto you the ordinary
Symptoms of love Melancholy.

CHAP. II. The Symptoms of Love Melancholy.
THe diverse and violent perturbations which afflict the mind of a Passionate
Lover, are the causes of greater mischiefs, then any other passion of the mind
whatsoever. For although we read ^n Authors of good note of some that have
Arist. Eth. l. 1. c. 21.
^ied with excessive joy, as Polycrita Naxensis, Diagoras Rhodius, Chilo the
Gal. 2. de Sympt. cause c. 4.
Lacedaemonian, Sophocles, and Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant: Others perhaps of
Val. max. l. 9. c. 12.
extreme sorrow, as P. Rutilius, M. Lepidus, and Ely the High Priest: others
of Plin. l. 7. c. 36.
shame, as it is storied of Homer, that it kill led him, because he was not able
to resolve the Fishermans riddle: And Macrina, the wife of Torquatus, through
an earnest desire she had to see a one-eyed Egyptian that was to pass by her
door, her husband being abroad; at which time Modesty permitted not women so
much as to look out at a window, or to be seen at their doors, during the
time of their husbands absence. Yet notwithstanding, all these Passions in some
cases, and to some men prove oftentimes of good use, and very needful: and for
this cause are reckoned by Physicians among the six Non-naturall things. For,
Anger, although sometimes it come within a degree of Madness, Ira Furor brevis
est, yet may it do much good upon those that are of an idle, heavy, drowsy,
dull, cold, pale constitution. So likewise Fear is a kind of Physic to
Fools, Rash, Frantic, Madmen: Sadness to those that are of a Malapert,
jeering humor: and Shame, to those that are Impudent, brazen-faced, and such
as have lost their color. But love seems not to be of any use at all, but is
like that kind of Passion which Avicen, as An^geas Alphagus reports him, calls
Hea, in is Arabique tongue, which consists for he most part of many contrary
motions, as by and sadness, fear, and despair, friendship and hatred, etc.

Odi, and Amo: quare id faciam fortasse requiris: Catul.

Nescio; sed fieri sentio, and excrucior.
I love, and hate at once: yet cannot tell,
Why two such Torments in one breast should dwell.
Luctantur, pectusque leve in contraria ducunt, Ovid.

Hac Amor, hac Odium; sed puto vincet Amor.
Yet I grant that love is the ground and Principal cause of all our
Affections, and the Abstract of all the Passions and perturbations of the mind.
For when we desire to enjoy what we affect, whether it be really good, or but
so in appearance; this we call covetousness, and Concupiscence. And being not
able to compass our desires, this we call Grief, and Despair: when we enjoy
the thing we desire, Love then takes upon it the name of Pleasure and Delight.
When we think we are able to effect our desires, it is then Hope: and fearing to
loose it, either wholly, or in part only; this we call Jealousy.

By reason of these perturbations of the mind, the blood becomes adust, earthy,
and Melancholy, as in all other violent passions, except joy, according to
Galen: Cap. 86. art, med.
by which means diverse have fallen into strange and desperate diseases,
growing Melancholy, Foolish, Mad, Cynicall, Wolvish: as the learned Avicen
reports, in his cap. de Amore. Aretaeus the Physician Lib. 1. Chr. Morb.
makes mention of a young Inamorato in his time, that was so besotted with this
Fury, that he could not be cured by any means. Lucretius the famous Poet, by
this means lost the use of his judgment: Iphis grew mad for Anaxaretes: a
young Girald. l. 9. de Poet. Hist.
Athenian did the like, for the love of a Marble statue: which had also
happened not long since to a rich Merchant of Arles, had he not been cured of
his Frensy by the learned Valleriola, as himself tells the story in his
Observations, Sapho the Poetesse was so desperately enamoured ^f Phaon, that
she desperately cast her self headlong from off the Leucadian ^ock into the
sea; as both Strabo and Suydas relate the story. For women are far more
subject to this passion, and more cruelly tormented with it, then men are. For
from hence proceeds the Green sickness, (which is sometimes joined with a
gentle Fever, and is then by our modern writers called an Amorous Fever:)
heartbeating, swelling of the face, want of appetite, grief, sighing, causeles
tears, insa^iable hunger, extreme thirst, sownings, oppressions,
suffocations, continual watchings, Headache, Melancholy, Epilepsy, Ragings,
Furor uterinus, Satyriasis; and diverse other desperate Symptoms, Langius.
Market.
which for the most part admit neither cure, nor mitigation, by any other
remedies, but what Hippocrates prescribes for the cure of Love-Melancholy,
toward the end of his book de his quae spect. ad Virgin. and in his book de
Genit.

This has given occasion to some to think, that Love was a kind of poison
engendered within the body, and taken in at the eyes: or else caused by those
Medicaments, which they call Philters, reckoned by the Lawyer among the several
kinds of poisons, l. 4. ff. ad l. Corn. de Sic and venef. The which deprave the
judgment, and corrupt the blood; so that the party affected becomes of a pale
and loathsome color: as Theocritus says.

(...)
(...)
My breast, that thou, false Love, have pierced, retains
A heat within't, has empti'd all my veins.
Hippocrates seems to attribute to passionate love the power of transforming
L. 6. Epid. sect, 8.
women into men; where he says, that in the city Abdera, Phaethusa, being
stricken with the love of Pytheus, and not being able to enjoy him for a long
time; by reason of his absence; she became a Man, (...), and grew hairy all
over her body, had a man's voice, and a long beard on her chin. The same he
affirms in the Aphorism following to have befallen to Namysia, wife to one
Gorgippus: and adds withal, that it was impossible for her to ^^ recovered to
her former womanhood ^aine, (...). I dare not believe is to be a change of
sex, but of habit ^^ly, and complexion. For according to Physiog. c. 4. and l.
4. Hist. Any. cap. 11.
^e same Author, and Aristotle, the Male of the more full, massy and solid
constitution of body: on the other side the fe^^le is not so strong and
nervous, but ^ore moist, soft, and of the more delicate complexion.
Notwithstanding Galen, ^chsius, Foesius, and many other Physiti^^s, and
Interpreters of Hippocrates, (who, Macrobius says, never yet deceived ^y,)
stick to the bare letter: so that in ^^eir opinions we may believe the fabu^as
stories of Iphis, Caeneus, and whatever Plin. l. 7. c. 4. Auson.
^riters have reported of Cossitius, Cassi^^, and many young women that at the
Epig. 72.
^ne of Puberty have been metamorpho^^ Agel. l. 9. c. 4. Volat.
into men, at Smyrna, Argos, Naples, ^^ch, Vitry, Conimbria, Salernes, and in
^er places, as you may read at large the writings of Fulgosus, Amatus ^sitanus,
Pareus, Pineus, and Schenkius his Observat. cap. 25.

The Peripateticks conceive not this Transmutation of sexes to be so strange
matter, relying on the authority of the Coryphaeus Aristotle, who in many
place^ Lib. 1. de gener. c. 20. and lib. 2. c. 3.
says, that a woman is an imperfect man (...), differing in nothing from a
man, but only in the Genitalls Lib. 1. de sem. l. 14. de usu part.
which according to Galen, are restrained and kept within merely through
defect of natural heat. But nature has not done this, through any error or
Impotency whatsoever these gross Philosophers affirm to the contrary; but for
the propagation of the species.

It may very easily then be, according to this doctrine of Aristotle, and of
Galen that a woman, being enflamed with the violence of love, may put forth
those her genitall parts, which are no other, then those of a man reversed, or
turned inward as the same Doctor affirms: whom not withstanding all our
Modern Anatomists do unanimously contradict: as you may see at large in the
Anatomicall Quaestion Lib. 7. q. 8. Lib. 2. c. 10.
of Andreas Laurentius.

The learned Ludovicus Mercatus, an Rodericus a Castro, are so perplexed (...)
and 11. de virg. and vid. morb.
the explication of those places of Hippocrates, that one while they are fain
to say, at these women were troubled with ^^e Procidence of the Matrix, which
in appearance represented the Genitalls ^pper to the Male: Another while they
^irme for certain, that in those women, ^at part which Manard calls Queue;
^lbucasis, Tentiginem; Moschio and Mer^tus, Symptoma turpitudinis; Aretaeus,
^ympham; Fallopius, Clitorida; Colum^^s, Amorem and dulcedinem Veneris; Avi^^,
Albatram, i. e. virgam; was so great, ^^at it resembled a man's yard. Which ^^th
also befallen diverse other women, ^ho unhappily abusing that part, were ^^r
this reason called by the Latins, Fri^trices; by the Greeks, (...); and by
^^e French, Ribauldes: in which number Suydas, and Muretus place the learned
^apho. And in the end, Mercatus very ^arnedly concludes, that he intends not ^^
hinder any man from believing these ^ange Metamorphoses and transmutati^^s of
sex to be real: considering the ^^equent examples alleged by Histori^s, and
by the above cited Physician.

CHAP. III. Of the name of Lovo, and Love. Melancholy.
ALL Diseases, according to Galen L. 2. meth. med.
do take their Denomination, either from the part affected, as the Pleurisy,
an Peripneumony, or Inflammation of the Lunges; or from the Symptoms, as the
Fever; or from both these together, as the Headache; or from the resemblance i^
bears to some other thing, as the Cancer or lastly from the efficient cause,
as Love Melancholy: which some Physicians cal^ (...), that is to say,
Love-madnes, o^ amorous Folly. For certainly it may very properly be said of
all those that are i^ love, as Demodocus in Aristotle once did o^ the
Milesians: That if they be not fools Eth. l. 6. c. 8
they do at lest as fools do. which is intim^ ted to us by the Poet Euripides,
where (^^ the same Philosopher affirms) he deriv^ Rhet, 2. c. 3.
the name of Venus from Folly: (...) For, Amare and sapere vix ^iis conceditur.
It is not granted to the ^ods themselves, at once to be in Love, ^^d to be wise.

And here by the way we may observe, that the ancient Physicians oftimes
con^und Trallian. l. 3. c 7.
these two terms of Madness and Melancholy, as differing only in degrees:
Altim. l. 1. me th. c. 8
which difference changes not at all the ^ecies; as we shall hereafter see
more dearly.

Avicen, with the whole family of the ^rabians, calls this disease in his own
an^age, Alhasch, and Iliscus: Arnaldus de villa nova, Gordonius, and their
contempraries call it by the name of Heroical Melancholy: whether it is,
because the ^ncient Heroes, or Demigods were often taken with this passion, as
the faba^us Poets report: or else happily for that ^eat personages are more
inclinable to ^is malady, then the common sort of people: or else lastly,
because that Love ^es as it were domineer, and exercise a ^nde of tyranny over
those that are sub^^ct to his power.

Love is called by the Greeks (...), with Rhodig. l. 12. c. 37.
o, when it signifies generally the desire of any thing, (although Pindarus
uses it sometimes for Cupid:) and with (...), when it is to signify the true
Love we treat of. Some say that when it is written with, it signifies Lust, and
with o, honest and chaste Love. How ever it be, (...), or (...), i^ is derived
by the Etymologists (...), by changing (...), into (...) or else (...), the
name of his father Mars: ^^ perhaps (...), that is to say, strength or force.
For Love is the most powerful of all the Gods, as Agatho proves it a large in
Plato's Conviv: and Lucian tell us, that Love, being as yet but in his cradle,
overcame Pan, that is, Nature, ^^ wrestling. Unless you will rather have i^
come from (...), which in Hesiods language signifies, to dedicate, or
consecrate Because that he that is deeply in love, devotes and consecrates all
his desires, will and actions, to the pleasure of his beloved Mistress.

Plotinus will have it to be derived Ennead. 5. l. 5. c. 6.
from (...) to see: because that (...). Liking is caused by seeing. So Then
critus.

(...). Vt vidi, ut perii: sic me malus abstulit error. ^t seems, says
Aristotle in his Ethic. 9. ^ap. 5. that all kind of Love and Friendship Eth.
l. 9. c. 5. and. 12.
^s derived from the pleasure that is taken ^^ at the eyes. Whence the Poet
Proper^ius calls them, the Conductors, and guides ^n Love.

Sinescis, Oculi sunt in Amore duces. They are the passages indeed, by which
Love enters into our Heads, and so seazeth ^n the brain, the Cittadell of
Pallas: and ^re the conduicts by which it is conveyed into our hearts, and
most secret ^arts: as it is learnedly and copiously pro^ed by Marsilius
Ficinus, and Fran. Valleriola, in his Medicin. observat. Which they seem to
have borrowed from the ^ncient Poet Musaeus, who in his excellent Poem of the
Love of Hero and Lean^er, speaks thus.

(...) (...). The excellent beauty, says he, of a woman, that is without all
contradiction perfectly fair, wounds the heart more swiftly, then the swiftest
flying arrow, and through the eyes is conveyed into the most inward parts,
and there festers into a cruel wound, and hard to be cured. Parallel to this,
js that which Plutarque has, l. 5. Symp. Q. 7. where he says, that whiles he
that is in love, is strongly fixed i^ beholding and contemplating on the beauty
and perfection of his Mistress: her eie^ in the mean time do reciprocally
cast forth their amorous beams, to inflame ^ charm the heart of her Lover.
Whence Hesiod calls those that have fair lovely eyes, (...): and Pindarus,
(...): by a Metaphore borrowed from the Greek word (...), signifying the Vigen.
in Philo.
young tender sprigs or branches of vines For as these always embrace the next
neighboring bough, twining about it with many various circles: in like manner
the eyes of a beautiful woman apply their beams, and endeavor to entangle
the hearts of those that earnestly behold ^er.

Plato in Cratylo will have Love to be ^alled (...), because it flows, as it
were, through the eyes, into the heart: and ^^so (...), from (...), Fluo.
Although some others maintain that it is called (...), ^uasi (...). Mansuetus,
that is, Mild or Gentle. It is also sometimes called (...), which is thus
differenced from (...), that (...) signifies the desire of a thing that is
^sent, (...) of that which is present only.

Our Grammarians derive it from (...), to crave, or ask: because that Lovers
^e suppliants, and always sueing to their distresses for favor. But in my
opinion, his carnal and dishonest Love is called by a more proper name by
Plato, (...), ^uffocatio, Strangulatio: seeing that this love stifles, and
choakes up that other ^^e and honest love, And the Aeolians all it yet by a
more proper name, (...), a ^heefe or Robber; because that it violently seazeth
on, and rifleth the hearts of ^overs, depriving them both of liberty and
judgment.

(...). Others call it (...). Tangendi enim Cupido, non amoris pars est, sed
potius petulantiae species, and servilis C. 9. orat. 2
hominis perturbatio; says Marsilius Ficinus: The desire of exercising the
act^ of Venery, is no part of Love, but rather a kind of wantonness, and a
passion that only men of a mean and servile nature are subject unto. Sometimes
also the names of (...), and (...), are attributed unto this unchaste Love; but
it is (...), and very improperly.

The Hebrews, as one says, call it Hohaba: the Chaldees, Hebeda: the Italians
Equicola.
Amore; which is interpreted by Guitton d' Arezzo, and Io. Jacob. Calander, a
cruel death, as being compounded of A, and More. The Latins call it properly
Amor^ the French Amor; and sometimes, but improperly, it is styled Dilection,
Friendship, and Goodwill.

CAP. IV. Of Melancholy, and its several kinds.
MElancholy is defined by Galen to Gal. de loc. aff. c. 7.
be a Dotage without a Fever, accompanied with Fear, and Sadness. For which
cause the Greeks used the word (...), to express a man's being out of his wits
and senses. And in this sense it ^^ taken by Aristophanes in his Plutus: (...),
by Heaven the Man's mad: and (...), in the Attick Di^^ect signifies, to be a
Fool, says the ^choliast upon that place. Now that which we call Dotage, or
Madness, the Greeks call by a more proper expression, (...), which is then
said to be tru^^ called so, when as any one of the most ^oble faculties of the
Soul, as the Imagination, or Judgment, is depraved: which ^ay plainly be
observed in all Melancholy persons, seeing they frame to themselves a thousand
Fantastical Chimaera's, and Objects which neither have, nor even shall have
any being in Nature.

Fear, and Sorrow are inseparable Attendants on this miserable Passion, which
deprives the Soul, though in it self immortal, of all the use and exercise
of it powers and faculties. Now all Physitian^ in a manner, with one vote
agree, that a^ the shadow follows the Body, so every Symptom follows some
disease. And if so, we may then lay it down for a mo^^ certain Position and
ground, that all Melancholy attends some disease of a nature like it self;
which, as they say, is the col^^ and dry Intemperature of the Brain which by
consequence must therefore necessarily be the part affected, and the se^ of the
Disease; as being, according to A^retaeus, (...), the seat of Sensation not
that the Brain is any whit ill affected in the figure or structure of it,
seeing the^ is no appearance neither of any unnatural Extuberancy, neither are
the ventricles ^^ the Brain oppressed or surcharged with any ill affected
Humor; as in the Epilep^^, or Apoplexy: But in the very substance and
temperature of it, which is exceedingly dried and refrigerated: which may ^e
easily collected out of Hippocrates lib. Sect. 8. Aph. 54.
^ de morb. Epidem. where he says, that those that have the Falling sickness,
have their fits of Mela^choly intended or remitted, in like measure as the
melancholy humor gets possession either of the ventricles, or else of the
substance of the Brain: (...). If this humor, says he, work upon the mind,
that ^s to say, the Temperature, by which the Noblest Actions of the soul are
performed; it causes Melancholy: but if it spread it self through the
ventricles, and hollow passages of the brain, it then causes the Epilepsy, or
falling sickness.

And here we are to take notice, that there are three kinds of Melancholy: the
first is engendered of Black Choler, collected together in the brain. The
second ^s produced, when as this humor is diffused through the veins generally
over all the body: And the last is Flatuous, or Hypocondriacall Melancholy; so
called so that the substance of this disease is seat in the Hypocondries,
which comprehend the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, Guts, the vein of the Matrix,
and other adjoining parts; all which may be the seat of Hypocondriacall
Melancholy; and not the O^^fice of the Stomach only, which was the opinion of
the Ancient Physician Diocles and which has been since very learnedl^
maintained by Io. Bapt. Sylvaticus, Controv. 34.

So that we may very justly reduce thi^ disease of Love Melancholy to this la^
species, seeing that the parts affected in i^ are principally the Liver, and
the pa^ adjoining, from whence those black F^liginous vapors do arise, which
ascending up to the brain, do hinder and pervert the principal faculties
thereof: as shall more fully show in the ensueing chapter.

CAP. V. The Definition of Love Melancholy.
^ Very true Definition, according to the Lib. 2. post. analyt. c. 10.
doctrine of the Philosopher, must con^ ex Genere and Differentia: But because
^ many times want the true Differen^, it is lawful for us to substitute the
^pperties; which are not the same in all ^ences. Whence the Naturalist defines
otherwise then the Supernaturalist: the ^^ysitian otherwise then the Lawyer; ^d
the Orator will give it a different de^ition from that of the Poet. The truth
this will appear, by comparing their ^^verall definitions of Love together.
For ^st, the Peripateticks say, that, it is, an Argument and sign of good
will, by appa^^nt favor: the Stoics will have it to ^, a Desire caused by
some beautiful ob^^ct: the Academicks determine, that love, is a Desire to
enjoy that which is Lovely, and to make of two, one. Avicen says, that it is a
Passion of the mind introduced by the senses, for the satisfaction^ our
desires. Theophrastus demonstrates i^ to be a Desire of the Soul, that easily
an very speedily gets entrance, but retire^ back again very slowly. Plutarch,
Marsilius Ficinus, Franc. Valleriola, wi^^ many other learned Authors, will
have Love to be, a Motion of the blood, getting strength by little and little,
through t^ hope of pleasure, and almost a kind of Fascination, or Enchantment.
Tully though it to be a Wishing well to the person we love Seneca, a great
strength of the understanding, and a Heat that moved gently up a^ down in the
spirits. Galen says one while that it is a Desire; another while, Judgment of
a beautiful object. But s^ my own part I shall rather be of that pinion of
Galen's, where he says, that such things as these, definitions are altogether
Lib. 4. de Placit. Hip. and Plat.
superfluous and useless, becau^^ that every one of himself conceav^^ Lib. 4.
de diff. pulls.
what love is, better, then the subtil^ Logician can explain it unto him by
essential definition; which cannot inde^ w^ be given in such cases as these:
and ^y that pretend to effect it are to be ac^^^nted nothing but mere empty
Sophi^.

You shall meet with many other De^ions of Love among our Physicians, ^^ch in
some sort express the nature of Malady: as in Arnaldus de villa nova, donius,
Christophorus a Vega, Mer^s, Rodericus a Castro, Haly Abbas, ^^^aravius,
Avicen, and Paul. Aegineta, ^ch I shall not trouble you withal ^e, but shall
set down a definition of ^e own, which shall be taken from cause of it: for
as much as those defions, (in such things as have their es^e (...), or
depending on their ^ses,) that are given by the Efficient ^e, are the best; and
are as proper to ^idents, as an Essential definition is to ^tances. For seeing
that all Substances ^ist of Matter and Form, and that the ^e is in the subject
without any In^ediate relation: the Form must of ^essity be the Essence of the
Substance: ^reas contrariwise in an Accident, the ^e is in the subject by
means of the efficient cause. As for example, the Eclipse of the Moon is in
the Moon, reason of the interposition of the globe the Earth, when as this
planet, being the full is in opposition with the Sun^ and is situate either in,
or near the he or tail of the Dragon. So that if the Eclipse of the Moon be
to be defined, ^^ efficient cause must necessarily be brou^^^ into the
definition. Besides, in the De^^nition of a substance, the Genus is in st^ of
the matter, and the Difference i^ place of the Form, which is that t^ gives
the essence to the cause But in Accident it is quite contrary: for the the
Genus is the form, and the Diffrence is made up of the matter, with ^^
efficient cause. For seeing that the Ac^^dent is inhaerent and fixed in the
subject it must hence necessarily follow, tha^ Accidents are to be
distinguished by the subjects. Which is acknowledged ^ Hippocrates in his book
de Flatib. wh^ he says that diseases differ, according the parties affected
differ from each there. Now seeing that the essence of Accident depends on the
effect He; it must necessarily follow, that this ^se must be in the place of
the last diffrence.

These grounds being thus laid, we ^ceed to our definition, and say, that ^e,
or this Eroticall Passion is a kind of ^tage, proceeding from an Irregular de^
of enjoying a lovely object; and is atten^ on by Fear and sadness.

^es est solliciti plena timoris Amor.

cannot be denied, but that those that Gal. de cogn. and cur. anim. morb.
^^ in Love have their imagination depra^, and their judgment corrupted: the
^gement I mean, which follows Ele^n, but not always that which goes ^ore it.
For we see, that a Lover cannot ^e a right judgment of the thing he ^es, and
which is the object of his affe^^^ons: and for this cause Love is always ^nted
blind. But above all, their ima^ation is depraved, as may appear by ^^ stories
of Menippus, who was enamou^ of a Lamia, or Fiend; Machates of a ^otrum that
appeared in the shape of ^ilinion; and Alkidias of a marble sta^. Philost.
Aelian. Phlegon.


But what need we search so far abroad for examples, since we may
sufficiently furnish our selves with instances this kind, out of each days
experience For do we not oftimes see young sprin^ Gallants enamoured with some
old, cro^ked, deformed Hecuba, with a furroughed forehead, long hairy eye-browe
bleare eyes, long hanging ears, a sadd nose, thick blabber lips, black
stinking teeth with a long terrible chin hang^ down to her girdle: which yet
they w^ swear is a second Helen, whose bea^ shines most resplendently in those
love wrinkles; that her forehead resembl^ the spangled Arch of Heaven, white a^
smooth as Alabaster: her eyebrows a^ of Ivory, under which are placed two
bright shining stars, darting forth wi^^ an unparalleld sweetness a thousand
^ morous rays, which are as so many He^venly influences, whereon depends the
life and happiness. Her neck is smoo^^ as marble; her nose straight and even,
^ viding her lovely cheeks, which like ^ pleasant gardens, are variously inter^
with Lillies and Roses: her teeth are t^ rows of Oriental pearl, pure and
ever breath more sweet then Amber, or Arabian spices.

Mixtam te varia laudavi saepe figura: Propert. l. 3.

Vt quod no^ esses, esse putaret Amor.
Often have my praises styled thee, Beauties pride;
And where thy beauty failed, my love supplied.
(...) she have her neck all bedawbed with ^eruse and paint; her breast spotted
like a ^eopard; with paps swollen, and hanging down like a pair of Bagpipes;
with two great blew-bottles, instead of niples, on the top of them: yet will
these ^ottish fools fancy out of these deformi^es, a Breast of Snow, a Neck
white as ^ilke, a Bosom enriched with Pinkes and Violets, with two delicate
Apples of ^labaster, rising gently, and falling again ^y such degrees, as
seem to imitate the ^obing and flowing of the sea: out of the ^ps whereof do
sprowt forth two curious Carnation Buds. In breife, they will ^ot stick
impudently to swear, that this ^d deformed witch is enriched with all these 36
Conditions that Plato requires in an Absolute Beauty. And it is great wonder
but they will praise her very excrements, and perhaps, which is far worse,
eat them too; as L. Vitellius did the Suet. in Vit.
spittle of a servant wench on whom he doted, having first tempered it with
honey; as Suetonius reports of him.

This frantic humor that possesses our doting Lovers with these vain
Imaginations, is excellently described by Lucretius, in his Lib. 4.

Nigra, (...) est: Immunda and faetida, (...): Lucret. l. 4.

Caesia, (...): Nervosa and Lignea, (...):
Parvula pumilio, (...), tota merum sal:
Magna atque immanis, (...), plenaque honoris:
Balba, loqui non quit; (...): Muta, pudens est:
At flagrans, odiosa, loquacula, (...) sit.
(...) tum sit, cum vivere non quit
Prae macie: (...) vero est, jam mortun tussi:
At gemina, and mammosa; Ceres est ipsa ab Iaccho:
Simula, (...) ac Satyra est: Labiosa, (...).
Multimodis igitur pravas turpesque videmus
Esse in delicijs, summoque in honor vigere.
Plutarch also says that this imperfection De Audit.
is common to all that are passionately in Love. (...). He that is in love,
says he, calls his Mistress, if she be white, the child of the Gods: but if
black, she is then Manly, and of a strong constitution: if flat-nosed; she is
gentle and courteous: if Hawke nosed, she seems then to be of a Kingly race: or
lastly if she be pale and freckled, it serves his turn if he find any part
about her that may deserve his praise, or at least to him seem so to do: and
he then sticks as close to her, as the Ivy, Osier, or tender Vinebranch, that
embraces and twines about the next bough it meets withal: and will be so
strangely besotted with this his foolish passion, that you shall have much ado
to know him to be the same man he was.

Dij boni! quid hoc morbi est; adeo homines Terent. Eun.
immutarier
Ex Amore, ut non cognoscas cosdem esse?
For which cause, the Ancient Poets Higin. c. 184. Hom. odys. 1.
shadowing truth under the veil of Fables, feigned, that Theophanes his
Courtiers were all transformed into Wolves: as Ulysses companions were by Circe
into Swine.

Galen, and all his Sectaries affirm, that Fear, and Sadness are the true
Characters, Lib. 6. de Sympt. cause. and l. 3. de loc. aff.
and inseparable Accidents of Melancholy, and are caused by the blackness of
this humor. And they are of opinion, that by reason of the Animal spirits
being sullied by those black vapors that arise from the Melancholy blood, all
objects present themselves to the Imagination in a terrible and fearful
shape. For as we see that the darkness of the night works ordinarily some kind
of fear and affright in fools and children: in like manner are those persons
that are Melancholy, in a continual fear, as if they had a perpetual night
and darkness in their brain. Which Lib. 5. Col. c. ult.
opinion of theirs the subtle Averroes could not relish: but jeering Galen for
it, ^e draws many absurd consequences ^om it: and imputes the fears and
sadness, that Melancholy people are posses^ed withal, either to the Nature
and proper Temperament of the Humor: or else ^o the Coldness of the
constitution of the ^arties affected, which must consequently ^roduce effects
contrary to those of Heat. Now Heat, we know, makes men hardy, ^rong, and
lively in all their Actions: whereas on the other side, Cold renders them
fearful, heavy, and dull. And hence ^t is, that we find Eunuchs, old men,
and women, to be more fearful then any other; the manners and affections of
the mind following still the Temperature of the body: according to Galens
opinion.

Yet I think, with the learned Andreas Tract. de Mel. cap. 5.
Laurentius, that it were no hard matter to reconcile these two great Doctors,
that seem to stand at such a distance ^n their opinions: and this to be done,
only by joining these two causes together, which they have delivered distinctly
and apart: and saying, that the Temperature of the Humor should be the
Principal and Primary cause, which yet must also be seconded by the black
Tincture cast upon the spirits by the Melancholy vapor: which being very cold,
not only refrigerates the brain, but also the heart, which is the seat of that
courageous faculty which they call Irascible, and abates the heat of it: whence
presently follows Fear. The same Humor, being also black, makes the Animal
spirits gross, dark, and full of fumes; which should be clear, pure, subtle
and lightsome. Now the Spirits being the chief and principal Organ of the
soul, if they be both cold and black together, they must necessarily hinder
it is noblest faculties, and especially the fancy, always representing unto it
black species, and strange Phantasmes: which also may be perceived plainly by
the eyes, notwithstanding their residence is within the brain: as Laurentius
proves it by the instance of those that are now ready to be taken with a
sudden violent Eruption of blood at the Nose.

Now concerning desire, which is the efficient cause of Love-Melancholy, I
shall here relate you a pleasant story out of Plato in his Conviv: where he
brings in Diotimus discoursing to Socrates the manner how love was begotten,
which was thus. On a time, on Venus birth day, the Gods met all together at a
great Feast; and among the rest came Porus, the God of plenty, and son of
Counsel. When supper was done, there comes to the floor Penia, poverty,
begging for some of the relics of their feast. Now Porus being well warmed
with Nectar, went forth into Jupiters Garden; where being overtaken with a deep
sleep, Penia comes and lies down by him; and by this devise was got with child
by him, and so brought forth Love: who still retaining the condition of his
Mother, is always poor, lean, sordid, goes barefoot, wandering about the
world without any dwelling, without covering, sleeping in Porches, and in the
streets: But taking also after his Father, he oftimes brings to pass great and
worthy matters, is manly, courageous, eager, cautelous, always contriving some
strange stratagems, crafty, ingenious, a great Philosopher, Inchanter,
Sorcerer, and a subtle Sophister. To omit the diverse ways of Allegorizing
this Fable, reckoned up by Plutarch, Marsilius Ficinus, Plotinus, Picus
Mirandula, and many other of the Academicks: my opinion is, that by Penia, or
Poverty is represented unto us the Lover: (...), says Aristotle, (...). Probl.
l. 7. Sect. 3.
Love, says he, is a kind of desire; and desire, a kind of want or poverty.
Porus is the person that is worthy to be beloved, yet cares not to be so: who
notwithstanding in sleeping, when as the eyes of his soul are brought asleep
by the Poppy seed of Inconsideration and carelessness, without any regard of
the Imperfections of his Love, he satisfies his pleasures.

CAP. VI. The External Causes of Love-Melancholy.
I Shall not spend much time in reckoning up the many several opinions of the
ancient Poets, Philosophers, and Phy^^tians, concerning the cause of this
Mala^y; in that the greatest part of them are rai^d from false Principles and
mere Chi^era's. Such was the opinion of Epicurus, who, as Plutarch relates,
affirmed, that here were certain species that flowed In Eror.
from the loved Object, which moved and caused a kind of Titillation over the
whole body, sliding and passing gently in the seed, by a certain disposition
of A^omes; and so were the cause of love. Plato thought it was engendered by an
Enthusiasme, or Divine Rapture. But I shall rather conclude, with Galen, that
the Efficient cause of this Malady, is, whatsoever Lib. de diff. morb.
can cause Love and Melancholy. This Efficient L. Therap. L. de cause. Procat.
cause is of two kinds, either Internal; or External, Evident, Manifest, and
Procatarcticke; which the same Author sometimes calls (...), the apparent true
Cause.

The evident causes of Love, according to the doctrine of the Moral
Philosophers, and Platonists, are five; to wit, the five Senses: which the
Poets understood by their fiction of the five golden shafts of Cupid. The first
is the sight: (...). Says the Philosopher: No man was ever in love, with one
he never saw.

Cynthia prima suis miserum me cepit o^ Propert. el. l. 1.
cellis,
Contactum nullis ante Cupidinibus.
Bright Cinthia's lovely eyes first set on fin^
My heart, that never before felt Loves desire.
So that when we read in Philostratus that Paris and Helen were the first that
ever were in love without having seen one another, we are to understand that
this love was extraordinary, and out of some special grace granted them by the
Immortal Gods, for some secret ends of theirs.

Juvenall speaks of a blind man in Love, as of a prodigy: yet we read in
Marius Equicola of a certain great Lord named L. 5. de Amor. c. 3.
Ianfre Rudels, that was in love with the Countess of Tripoly before he had
ever seen her, only at the report of those that came from those parts unto
Bourdelois: and he was so extremely enamoured of her, that he could not
forbear, but presently puts forth to sea, with a purpose to ^^e Tripoly, and
prove whether or no ^ame had not been too prodigal in the ^raise of this
Ladies perfections. But his ^oyage was so unfortunate, that he fell ^^ck
before he could arrive at his journeys and; which the Lady hearing of, she came
^^ person to visit and comfort him. Some ^talian writers report that Petrarch,
was extremely in love with his Laura, before ever he saw her: and that from
this occasion the Italians ever since call this find of love, Amore
Petrarchevole.

To these objections we answer, without laying false witness to the charge of
these Historians, that one swallow makes no summer: And that all those
Accidents which are Rare and singular, acknowledge Fortune for their Author:
whereas on the contrary, (...). Those things that are produced after one
general and constant course, Arist. Prob. 3. Sect. 15.
own Nature, not Chance, for their Original.

Touching the sense of hearing, we must reckon up all those provocations that
attend the reading of lascivious and dishonest books, and which discourse of
seed, Generation, and many secret diseases, concerning the Impotency of men,
and Barrenness of women: which Physicians are wont to discourse of in terms,
though gross enough, yet very necessary. For it is impossible, as Celsus
observes, to follow Lib. 6. de Re. Med. c. 18.
the precepts of this our Art, and withal preserve the modesty of language:
whatsoever Manard l. 7. ep. med. ep. 2.
any Impertinent Aristarchus, or censorious Critics allege to the contrary.
The Fabulous Love-stories of the Poets, or lascivious songs and sonnets are
much more effectual in this case, and carry more danger in them.

-- Quid enim non excitat Inguen
Vox blanda and nequam?
And those flattering Love Letters wherewith Lovers are wont to insinuate
themselves into their Mistresses favor, are no less dangerous.

Neither is this given as a privilege to Arist. Hist. anim. c. 9.
men only: for Nature has instructed even the very Birds also to make use of
these Allurements: who, when they desire to stir Affection in their Mates, ^e
observed to chant it more pleasantly and melodiously then otherwise they are
^^ont to do. The Partridge by this ^eanes grows more Amorous, and con^^ives
only by the harmony of her Mates ^oyce; if we may believe what Aristotle
^eports of them. The Greeks were used ^o flatter their sweet-hearts with these,
and such like terms; (...): the Latins had ^hese: Lux mea, Hirundo mea, Puta
mea, Putilla mea etc.

Dic me tuam Hirundinem, monedulam, passerculam, Plaut. Asin.
putillam. Their Mistresses were used to be called by their servants and
Lovers, Putae and Putillae, (as the Commentator on Plautus observes) from that
part which distinguishes the sexes: from whence perhaps the word Putain is
descended, which is a name the French give those women that are too free of
that part: The women would likewise call their Lovers, Putis and Salaputia: and
the French use the word Potons in the same sense; a word tha^ seems to be
derived from (...): which words, according to Dioscorides, Diosc. c. 247. l. 4.
Aristoph. in neb.
Aristophanes, and Suydas, signify Preputium, or the foreskin. Others, as we
may observe out of the same Plautus would use these words, Meum Cor, Mi^
Colostra, Meus Molliculus Caseus, etc.

To these other allurements and provocations to Love, caused by the hearing, we
might add Music. For, as Boethius affirms, the Phrygian Mood had such a^
power to ravish the spirits, that a young man that had his wench kept from him
by another, his rival, by hearing this Mood played, was so transported with
Fury, that in all have he would needs have set fire on the house where she was,
had he not been restrained by the wisdom of Pythagoras, who commanded the
Musician to change the Mood; and so by playing the Doricke, he restored him to
his former sober temper again. Yet sometimes, I confess, the performance is
so bad; that what with the harshnesse of the singers voice, and also the
ungracefullnesse of his singing, the Music proves rather a Remedy against
Love. Pallas, as the Poets ^ell, would needs one day bear a part in a Higin.
c. 165.
^onsort of wind-Instruments in the pre^ence of Venus and Juno: but putting the
^nstrument to her mouth to wind it, she made such an ill-favored Trumpeters
^ce, that Juno and Venus fell a laughing at ^er: in so much that Pallas, in a
great chafe ^oke her pipe, and threw it against the ^round.

I shall omit in this place to speak of ^e diverse Amorous forms of
salutati^ns, prayers, and complaints that Lovers ^se to their Mistresses, set
down at large ^y Aenaeas Sylvius, Iacobus Caviceus, Bo^acius, Trithemius Abbas
in his Stenogramy, and others. Vigenerius upon Philostra^s reports, that the
Ancients were wont ^^ use a certain perfume, composed of ^^ignum Aloes, red
Roses, Musk, and ^^d Coral, tempered together with the ^aines of a Sparrow,
and the blood of a ^ung Pigeon. Which is not altogether ^nlikely, considering
that our Physicians be now prescribe the use of Musk, Ci^t, Amber, powder of
Violets, Cypress, ^^eet waters, and the like Odoriferous drugs, for those that
are of a cold constitution, and are either Impotent, or Barren. And that which
is reported by Justin, and Plutarch, of Alexander the Great, that he was very
much beloved of the Ladies, b^ reason of the sweet smells that he had about
him, makes much for the confirmation of what we have already said.

But the most powerful and effectual cause of all, and therefore the most
dangerous, is, the use of hot, provocative, Flatu^ lent and Melancholy Meats:
of which ^^ shall speak more hereafter.

And yet it is to be feared, that famil^rity and daily conversation is of much
more force then any of those things we have already named. Consuetudo
conci^nat Amorem: says the Poet: Familiarity and frequent conversation winnes
Affection.

Nam leviter quamvis, quod crebro tunditur ictu,
Vincitur in longo spatio tamen, atque lobascit.
The weakest strokes, though never so soft laid on,
^f often repeated, force the hardest stone.
This is that undid the fair Deidamia, ^aughter to Lycomedes, King of the Isle
^cyros, whom Achilles got with child, being entertained in her fathers house
under the habit of a Virgin: and also the beau^eous Helen. For from this
familiarity, ^rowing by continually conversing together, they come at length to
Revel^ngs, Dauncings, Maskings, and other such ^^ke sports and pastimes, which
are very dangerous for those that are inclinable to Love. As the Pike, says
Bapt. Mantua^us, is the proper weapon of the Macedo^ian, the Lance of the
Amazons, the ^avelin of the Romans, and the Arrow of ^he Persian: so Mirth and
Sports are the proper Arms of Cupid; especially that ^inde of Laughing which
is called by the Greeks (...), which, according to Vigenerius, signifies a
Quail, or, as Aristotle will have it, a Feildfare. Pausan. in Attic. Cicer. de
not. Deor.
And for this cause Venus is called by the Poets, (...), as if we should say,
Love-^aughter: (...), to Laugh, or Smile: Although Hesiods Scholiast will have
it derived from (...), that is, (...), the Privy Members of Saturn, whence the
Poets fetch Venus Descent: as also Plato affirms, in Phaedro. And her son
Cupid also was drawn by the Painter Praxiteles with a smiling countenance.

Nec cibus ipse iuvat, morsu fraudatus aceti:
Nec facies grata est, cui Gelasinus ab est. Mart.

No meat tastes well, not dipped in Vinegar:
Nor does that face please, where Smiles wanting are.
Kisses are yet much more dangerous then Smiles, as the Poet Moschus assures
us: and Anthol. l. 1
which is also confirmed by Socrates, in Plato.

sunt oscula noxia: in Ipsis Sunt venena labris. They carry poison along with
them.

It is true indeed that in some countries, as in France, the use of kissing is
not so frequent, as it is in Italy, Spain, and England: where they have a
custom, always to kiss at their first salutation. But this custom is
conceaved by Michaell Montaigne, Lib. 3. c. 4.
to be somewhat injurious to Ladies; in that they are hereby bound in civility
to afford their Lip to every silken coxcombe, that has but a Page at his heels,
how ill soever they like him.

And here by the way we are to observe, Lib. 1. de cause. Proc.
with Galen, that these external causes have no power at all, but upon
unworthy and Ignoble spirits, and such as are in a great disposition to evil:
And for this cause, some Physicians will not have them called the Causes, but
the Occasions only of this disease: to which notwithstanding it is not safe for
any man voluntarily to expose himself. For he that wilfully runs upon a
danger, shall fall in the same.

We will then reduce them all methodically into six heads; to wit, Air, Meats,
Exercise, or Rest; Waking or Sleeping: Excretion, or Retention; and the
Passions of the Mind.

Concerning the First, Hippocrates says, that those that inhabit the more
Northern Countries, as the Scythians, and Lib. de aere loc. and aq.
Sarmatians, are very little subject to this disease of Love: and if so, the
contrary consequence then must necessarily hold good, concerning those that are
exposed to a hotter Air, as are the Egyptians, Arabians, Moors, and
Spaniards: and this Avic. l. 3. fen. 20. tr. 1 c. 25.
is confirmed by daily experience. Hesiod affirms that women are more prone to
wantonness in summer, and men in winter: Rhaz. 24. cont.
and proves this his opinion, by the same reasons that are alleged by
Aristotle in his Problems, for confirmation of the same assertion. To which I
will add this general position out of Hippocrates, in his book de Aer. loc.
and aq. where he says, that (...). The Inward and Principal parts of the
Body do change their complexion and Temperature, as the Seasons alter: whence
he concludes, that Astronomy is very necessary for all those that profess
Physic. But Aristotle goes farther yet, where he says, that (...): sect. 14.
Prob. 1.
the goodness of the Temperature, which still depends much upon the Air,
conduces much to the clearenesse of the understanding. Which gave occasion to
Galen to write that Book of his, where he labors to prove, that the Manners
of the Mind, follow the Temperature of the Body: In which, as also in his
other writings he impiously disputes, at least erroneously, concerning the
Soul: as also many other heathen Philosophers besides him have done.

The Astrologers, for the most part, are not content to allow, with the
Physicians, that these effects are produced oftimes, and indirectly, by the
manifest Qualities of the Air, caused by the Influence of the Celestial
bodies: but are bold to attribute this power to the Planets also: saying, that
the Soul holds its judgment of Saturn; Actions, of Jupiter; of Mars, Courage
and Magnanimity, Senses, of the Sun; Life, of the Moon; and lastly of Venus
who is Hot, moderately moist, and of Benevolent Influence, Love.

I will not here stand to dispute whether or no the Stars have any power at all
to work by their Influence either on our Mind, or Body: I shall handle this
Question hereafter more at large. I shall only in this place let you know, that
it is the opinion of the Judiciary Astrologers, that the Stars have power to
work both on the Body, and the Mind, indirect a motione, and contingenter: non
direct and necessario: that is, Indirectly, and by chance; not directly and
necessarily. Iudicia quippe Astrologorum sunt media inter necessarium Lib. 8.
contra Gentes c. 86.
and contingens: as Aquinas, speaking of Ptolomy, has resolved it: The
judgment that Astrologers give, is of a middle nature betwixt Necessity and
Possibility. Otherwise it would utterly exclude the Freedom of the will, which
the Pagans themselves never denied, (in this point more moderate then some of
our times:) who, though they had no other guide, then the dim light of
Nature, have yet confessed, that, Sapiens dominabitur Astris: 'Twas in the
power of a wise man, to dispose his Fate.

And for this cause I reckon these Celestial Influences among the External
Causes, which are not at any time the Necessary causes of a disease, but only
when they are strongly united, and meet with a Gal. 1. de Proc. c. 1. l.
^ntrod. in Pulls. and l. de Teb.
Body disposed for the receaving of their virtue. The same is our opinion
concerning the manifest qualities of the Air: otherwise all Egyptians,
Italians, Spaniards, and Africans should of necessity be ^ascivious; which
Countries have yet brought forth very worthy and famous men, that have far
surpassed for chastity, both the Scythians, Moscovites, and Polonians.

Democriti sapientia monstrat,
Summos posse viros, and magna exempla daturos,
Vervecum in patria, crassoque sub aere nasci.
The wise Democritus may prove,
The dullest Climats sometimes have brought forth
Examples of rare virtue, and great worth.
Now if the Air have such great power ^over our bodies, Meats and Drinks must
needs have more. And these are of two sorts; that is, either Hot, Flatuous, and
very Nutritive; or else such as engender Melancholy Humors: as we may gather
out of Galen, toward the end of his last book de Loc. Aff. as we shall show
more at large in the Chapter, of the Prevention of Love: to the end, that those
that desire to keep themselves free from this folly, or rather Madness, may
refrain from the use of them.

Among the External and manifest causes of Melancholy, Idleness may be
accounted one of the chiefest: for as much as when a melancholy man is idle, he
is at leisure to entertain his own sad Thoughts the better; and so by this
means grows more Melancholy still. For it is certain, that all the Actions
of the Mind, as Pensiveness, and too much Thinking, do dry up the Blood, and
make it Melancholy. Besides this, Idleness is commonly the Mother of unchaste
Love, which for the most part takes its beginning and Birth among those that
are Idle, and have little else to do, but spend their time in painting,
crisping, and curling themselves, and courting their Looking-glasses: and
cannot endure to think of any manner of labor or serious Employment: as sings
the Comic Poet Menander.

(...). Besides this, they employ their time in ^ancings, wanton and dissolute
Plays and sevels,

Scalpuntur ubi intima versu. ^^ch as will tickle their spleen: and in di^erse
other such like pleasures, of which ^r effeminate Lovesick Gallants are for ^e
most part the ingenious Artists and Devisers.

We read in Theocritus, Philostratus, Aristophanes, and Virgil, that a certain
^ay with Apples was in great request among the Ancients.

Malo me Galataea petit, lasciva puella. Which play was used to be presented
^ow and then by Lovers to their Mistres^es: as appears by that place of the
Lyrick Poet.

Frustis and Pomis viduas venantur avaras. And Lucian in his Toxaris reports,
that Chariclea, desirous to win the love of her Dinias, would use to send him
wither^ Posies, and Apples half eaten. Others ^ sed Figs, in stead of Apples:
Because that the Figtree, as Plutarque observes, is the Emblem of a Woman:
whose bark and leaves are rough and bitter; but the fr^^ thereof so pleasant
and delightful, that has always been used as the Hieroglyphick of
Sweetness. Pierius.


Moreover, as to sleep overmuch, especially on a soft bed, makes folks the
mo^^ inclined to Lust: so on the other side, immoderate waking dries the
Brain, and causes Melancholy. So that we may conclude with the learned
Hippocrates in hi^ Aphorisms: that Somnus, and Vigilia, ^traque si modum
excesserint, malum: The excessive use either of sleep, or waking, i^ hurtful.
So likewise to sleep upon one Avic. l. 3. fen. 20. tr. 1. c. 25.
back by the general consent of all Physicians, is a great provocation to
venery and for this cause must be reckoned among the Manifest causes of
Love-Melancholy.

Galen, about the end of his books, D^ Lib. 6. c. 6.
Loc. Affect. proves by many Reasons an Examples, that the want of convenien^
Evacuation of the seed is a great cause of ^elancholy, especially in such
persons as ^^e at ease, and feed high: except by fre^^ent and violent Exercise,
or Labor, ^ey consume the superfluity of Blood, which otherwise would be
converted in^ Seed Equidem novi quosdam (says he) ^ibus hujusmodi erat natura,
qui prae pu^e, a libidinis usu abhorrentes, torpidi, ^rique facti sunt:
nonnulli etiam, Melan^licorum instar, praeter modum moesti ac ^midi; cibi etiam
tum cupiditate, tum co^one vitiata. Quidam uxoris mortem ^gens, and a
concubitu, quo antea creberri^e fuerat usus, abstinens, cibi cupiditatem ^isit,
atque ne exiguum quidem cibum conqu repotuit. Vbi vero seipsum cogendo, ^s cibi
ingerebat, protinus ad vomitum ^citabatur: Moestus etiam apparebat, non ^um has
ob causas, sed etiam, ut Melan^olici solent, citra manifestam occasionem. have
known some, says he, that being ^turally so modest, as that they were a^amed
to exercise the Act of Venery, ^ive by this means become dull, and ^eavy: and
some, extreme fearful too, ^^d sad, as Melancholy men are wont to be; having
neither any appetite to mea^ nor concocting what they have eaten. And I knew
one, says he, that having buried his wife whom he dearly loved and for grief
abstaining from those pleasures which he had often enjoyed wit^ her while she
lived; quite lost his stomach to his meat, and could not digest any thing at
all: Or if by chance he forced himself to eat against his stomach, he
presenthe vomited it up again: and was witha^ very sad, and that without any
manife^^ cause, as Melancholy men are wont to be And a little lower in the same
Chapter he tells a story of one that fell into the Priapisme, for the same
cause, and for want of useing exercise, or sufficient labor, for the spending
of the Abundanc^ of blood. The same he affirms also t^ happen usually to
Women: as likewise is confirmed by Hippocrates, in his body De Morb. Mul. of
which we shall speak more hereafter in the chapter of Vterin^^ Fury.

And yet Galen himself in the before cited book, imputes the like effects t^
the immoderate evacuation of the seed Qui protinus Iuventute prima immodice ^
permittunt Libidini: id etiam evenit, borum locorum vasa amplius patentia,
^orem ad se sanguinis copiam alliciant, coeundi cupiditas magis increscat. ^ose
that in their first puberty give themselves to the immoderate use of very, in
them, those vessels that serve for ^eneration grow larger, and attract the
^eater store of blood unto them: so that this means the desire of copulation
^owes the stronger.

Among the Passions of the mind, Joy ^ay perhaps make them more inclinable
Love: but Fear and Sadness makes ^em the more Melancholy. Si metus and Aph.
23. l. 6.
Maestitia perseveraverint, Melancholia ^ says Hippocrates: if their Fear and
^dnesse continue on them, it turns at ^ngth to Melancholy. For these two
^ssions do extremely cool and dry up ^e whole body, but especially the
Heart, ^enching and destroying the natural ^eat, and vital spirits, and
withal cause Gal. de Praecog. ex pulls. and l. 4. de cause. pulls.
^cessive waking, spoil digestion, thick^^ the blood, and make it Melancholy:
^d for this cause, as I conceive, Diotimus in Plato's Phaedrus calls it (...)
squallidus.

But the Poets maintain that G^ and Fortune are the most powerful ca^ses of
Love: understanding by Fortune, I conceive, those incounters and opportunities,
that a man shall often me withal; and which every wise m^ ought to avoid;
unless they mean to taken in the snare.

Me fortuna aliquid semper amare del Which gave occasion to the Achaeans,
Propert.
Pausanias reports, at Aegira to pla^^ Love, and Fortune, in one and the sam^
Temple. And for gold, we read that D^nae was won to Jupiters love: and At^lanta
suffered her self to be overcome by Hippomanes, for love of the gold Apples he
cast in her way as she ran.

Secum habet ingenium, qui cum licet, ac^ pe, dicti.
Cedimus; invent is plus valet ille meis.
He Is truly wise, that can his will comma^
And Tempting pleasures, offered, can withstand.
CHAP. VII. The Internal causes of Love Melancholy.
WE have already sufficiently proved, out of Galen, that these ^^ternall
causes cannot produce their ef^^cts, but only when they meet with such ^^eake
spirited persons, as are not able to ^ist the assaults of Cupid. For so the
^rned Sapho confessed the tenderness ^her heart to be the only cause of her
A^orous fires.

Molle meum levibus cor est violabile telis.
Haec semper causa est, cur ego semper Amem.
^ach light dart wounds my tender Breast, and this,
that I am still in Love, the reason is.
^he disposition of the Body, among other internal causes, comes in the first
plac^ to be considered: for through the natural defect hereof, we see that
young boy under the age of fourteen, and wenche^ under twelve, or thereabout,
as also de^crepit old folks, Eunuchs, and all those that are of a Cold
Constitution, are in n^ Cap. 88. art med.
danger of this disease. This disposition o^ the Body is called by Galen, causa
Antecedens, sive Jnterior; The Antecedent, o^ Internal cause, and consists in
the humors, Spirits and Excrements of the Body: all which causes Hippocrates
comprehends Valler. Med. obs. 7. l. 2.
under the name, (...) Concurring causes.

The Abundance of Blood, of a goo^ temperature, and full of spirits, caused by
the continual Influence of the Heart; by reason that it is the Material cause
o^ seed, is likewise a True Antecedent cause^ of Love, as it is a passion of
the Mind. But the Melancholy Humor, which is hot and dry, by reason of the
Adustion o^ Choler, of the blood, or of the Natural Melancholy, is the
Principal cause o^ Love-Melancholy, or Madness. And fr^^ Probl. 31. sect. 4.
this reason Aristotle in his Problem says, that those that are Melancholy are
^ost subject to this malady: (...). Which conclusion of ^is would be most
Absurd, if so be he meant here those that are Melancholy by ^eason of the
abundance of their natural Melancholy; which of it self is extreme cold and
dry, and by consequence clean ^epugnant to the heat required in this di^ease.
Otherwise, Old men, who abound chiefly with this Humor, should oftener all in
Love, then young; and his unruly Desires, increase with his years; whom
notwithstanding we find on the contrary side to be so averse from Love, that
at ^he very name of it,

Nauseat; and priscum vomitu seu fundit Cornel. Gal.
Am^rem. ^t turns his stomach, and he is ready to ^omit up, as it were, the
memory of all ^is younger follies.

But those that are Melancholy, by reason of the Adustion of Humors, as are
all those that are troubled with Hypocondriacall Melancholy, in which number we
have already placed our Amorist^ these are Hot and Dry, and apt to have
engendered within them a certain kind o^ Flatulent vapor, that tickles them
extremely, and by consequent, makes then beyond measure lascivious as Galen in
hi^ Part. 2. Com. 12.
Commentaries on the sixth book of Hippocrates Epidemicks affirms. Besides,
those that are Melancholy by reason of the Adu^stion of pure Blood, have their
Imagination for the most part very strong: by the force of which a man
oftentimes is incontinent, and by Fancying the Pleasure t^ himself enjoyes it
really: as Aristotle Probl. 7. sect. 29.
also observes in his Problems. Which must not be understood of those that an
affected with cold and dry Melancholy for those are heavy, stupid, and dull: as
i^ proved learnedly and copiously by I^ Bapt. Sylvaticus, in his first
controversy.

CAP. VIII. Of the manner how Love is Generated.
LOve, having first entered at the Eyes, Laurent. c. 10. de Mel.
which are the Faithful spies and intelligencers of the soul, steals gently
through those sluices, and so passing insensibly through the veins to the
Liver, it there presently imprinteth an ardent desire of the Object, which is
either really ^ovely, or at least appears to be so. Now this desire, once
enflamed, is the beginning and mover of all the sedition.

Hinc illae primae Veneris dulcedinis in Cor
Stillavit gutta; and successit frigida cura. Lucretius.

But distrusting its own strength, and fearing it is not able to overthrow the
Reason; it presently lays siege to the Heart: of which having once fully
possessed it self, as being the strongest fort of all it assaults so violently
the Reason, and u^ the noble forces of the Brain, that the are suddenly forced
to yield themselves up to its subjection. So that now, all is utterly lost;
Actum est de Homine: the Senses are all out of order, the Reason is disturbed,
the Imagination depraved, the discourses are all impertinent, and the poor
Inamorato thinks of nothing b^ his dearly beloved Mistress. All the Actions
of his Body are in like manne^ quite out of tune, he grows pale withal lean,
distracted, has no appetite, his eyes are hollow and quite sunk into his head
Then shall ye have him ever and an^ weeping, sobbing, and sighing by himself,
and in perpetual Anxiety, avoiding all company, and choosing solitariness;
that so he may entertain his Melancholy thoughts with the greater freedom.
Now, Fear assaults him on one side; and then presently Despair encounters him
on the other.

Marsilius Ficinus in his Comment up on C. 3. 9 and 19. orat, 7.
Plato's Convivium, and Francisc^ Valleriola a learned Physician of Arle^^
speaking of a cure wrought by himself ^on a rich Merchant that was desperate^
in Love, are of opinion, that Love is ^ used by way of Fascination: for that,
^y they, the Animal spirits being sent ^th by the Lover to the person beloved,
^d from thence retorted back again on ^e Lover; by reason of their wonderful
^btilenesse and thinness, they are easily ^ansmitted into the inward parts,
and so ^ommunicating themselves to all the ^rts of the body through the veins
and ^rteries, they trouble the blood, and so ^use this disease of Love, which,
as they ^y, is nothing else but the Perturbation ^ the Blood, but chiefly of
the Melancholy. This Assertion of theirs they prove ^y diverse reasons, and in
particular by ^e Instance of Bodies that have been M. Ficin. c. 10.
^urthered, which fall a bleeding a fresh, when the murderer does but
steadfastly ^oke on the Body, and that for the space ^f six or seven hours
immediately after the Murder committed. So that according to the Opinion of
these men, ^ose persons that have fair lovely eyes, though the other parts of
the Body be not answerably beautiful, will easily take those that look
earnestly on them, unless their Reason overrule their Affections. And so on
the contrary, be the person never so comely and beautiful, if the eyes be not
good, they do not cause this kind of Passionate Love, but only a simple
Friendship, or good likeing in the beholders: as if such Lovely persons, which
the Greeks for good reason were wont to call (...), did by the beauty of their
eyes invite those that beheld them at a distance, to come nearer and so by this
means entrap them.

But I would feign know what reasons these Academicks can render of the Loves
of Ianfre Rudels, spoken of before of that of Petrarch; and of those Scythian
Women, that caused the eyes of those slaves that had been taken prisoners i^
war, that liked them, to be plucked out before they took them into their
houses.

Holding my self then to my first opinion, I affirm that the Liver is the
Hearth that holds this Fire, and the se^ of Love; according to the old Disticke.

Cor s^pit, and pulmo loquitur, Fell concitat Iras,
Splen ridere facit, cogit Amare Iecur.
The Heart is the seat of Wisdom, the ^ungs of speech, the Gall of Anger, the
^pleene of Laughter, and the Liver of Love: which seems also to be confirmed ^y
the Wiseman, where he says, in his Proverbs Cap 7. That a young man, void ^f
understanding goes after a strange woman, till a dart strike through his
Liver. and hereto agrees that fiction of the Poets who feign that Tityus had a
vultur ^ontinually feeding on his Liver, as a punishment inflicted on him by
the Gods, for a rape attempted on the Goddess Latona. For as it is the custom
to punish Liars, Tale-bearers, and the like, by slit^ing their Tongues: and to
burn Fugi^ives in the Legs: in like manner would Jupiter have that part of
his, that had been the Original cause of that his villa^ous design, to be the
Principal also in the Punishment of it. So likewise the Grammarians call those
that are void of Gal. l. 3. de plac. Hip. and Plat.
Love, Evisceratos, without Livers; Fainthearted cowards, Excordes, Heartlesse,
and Fools, Brainelesse.

Vacuumque Cerebro Iamdudum caput hoc ventosa Cucurbits quaerit.

Gordonius does not deny, but that the Liver may be granted to be the seat of
Love, and an Antecedent Cause of it: but he Part. 2. cap. de Amore.
will have the Genitals also to be joint causes with it.

I may not shut up this Chapter, before I have delivered you the opinion of the
Divine Plato, who under the person of In Sympos.
Aristophanes tells a story, how that at first there were Three kinds of Men,
that is, Male, Female, and a third mixed species of the other two, called for
that reason Androgynes: of whom there remains nothing now, but the Infamy of
their name. Their figure was round, having four Hands, and as many Feet, with
all the other members in proportion doubled. But conspiring, as the Giants
before had done against the Gods, Jupiter caused them to be divided in the
midst, as we use to cut Eggs in two to sowse, or divide them in the midst
with hairs: and then gave order to Apollo to turn their faces toward that
part where the Dissection was made; ^o the end that seeing their shame, they
might become the more modest and temperate: and having so done, enjoined him ^o
heal up the wound again. But after this, each one desiring to recover his other
^alfe, they would run one after the other, and embrace, desiring, if it were
possible, to be reunited. But when they found ^^ could not be; they presently
perished for hunger, because they would not do any thing the one without the
other. And when the one half failed, and the other remained behind; that
which was left, sought for some other half, whether it were the Female half,
or the Male: yet thus they came to ruin still. But at length Jupiter being
moved to compassion toward them, found out a means to help them, by
transposing their Genitalls, which till then were behind, and placing them, as
now they are, before: and so contrived it, that they should engender, the Male
and Female together: for before they conceaved and engendered as Grasshoppers
do, by casting their seed on the ground. And so by this means was Mutual
Love begotten, as a Reconciler of their Ancient Nature, desiring to maked Two,
One, and a Remedy against Humane Frailty; which seems to be nothing else but a
strong Desire to be reunited and made one again.

And it is not improbable that Aristotle also, and after him, (as Iul. Scaliger
Lib. 2. de genesis anim. c. 1.
thinks) Theophrastus in his second Book of Plants, and first Chapter, favors
this opinion of Plato, where he says, that the Male was divided from the
Female, to the end he might the better apply himself to the study of
knowledge, and other more noble Actions, then that of Generation: which thing
could not be done, otherwise, then by cutting of the privy Members belonging
to the Female Sex.

It seems that Plato, in his voyage that Eusebius. de Praep. Evang. c. 7.
he made to Egypt, sucked this fabulous Opinion out of the misinterpretation
of some passages that he had met withal i^ the books of Moses, of which it is
thought he had a view: for that Moses in Genesis seems to say, that Adam was
at first created Male and Female; and that afterward, the woman was taken out
of his body, that so he might not be alone. From hence the Rabbis, Abraham,
Hieremias, and Abraham Aben Esra, would infer, that Adam was created in two
Persons joined together; the one part being Male, and the other Female; which
were afterward separated by the Divine Power. But this Opinion of theirs has
been already so strongly confuted by diverse Learned Men, that have been very
skillful in the Hebrew tongue, that it would be great Presumption here in me
to interpose. See what Ludovicus Regius in his Commentaries on Plato's Phoedrus
has collected concerning this point.

But for my own part, I am of opinion, that the Ancient Heathen Divines, as we
may call them, such as Plato, of times couched the hidden Mysteries of their
Religion under Figures, Hieroglyphics, and Fables. Yet Marsilius Ficinus,
following S. Augustine, says, that, Non omnia quae in figuris finguntur,
aliquid significare putan^da sunt, etc. We must not believe that all things
whatsoever the Heathen feigned have some private Mystical meaning in them: for
many things have been added, only for orders sake, and Cohaerence with those
things that have been Significative. Yet without any disparagement to Ficinus,
or his Interpretation; I must be bold to affirm, that Plato by this fabulous
discourse would have us understand the Force of Love, which he before had
proved to be the most Powerful of all the Gods: who, as a Mediator and Vmpire
betwixt two that are divided, sets them at one again, by the tie of Marriage,
and by the Conformity of their Wills, which in Lovers are united.

CAP. IX. Whether in Love-Melancholy, the Heart, be the seat of the Disease, or
the Brain.
IF you ask those that are in Love, what part they are most afflicted in, they
will ^^l answer uno ore, their Heart: so that we may conclude with Aristotle,
that the Lib. 3. de Part. anim. c. 4.
Heart is the true seat of Passionate Love. Which we may also confirm by the
Authority of Hippocrates, in his book de Virg. Morb. where he says that young
Wen^hes are oppressed with Fear, Sadness, Grief, and Dotage, because that
the superfluity of Blood, that ought to be excer^ed by certain channels and
convaiances ^ppointed by nature for that purpose; but cannot, by reason of the
obstructions of ^he same, and is therefore retained in the womb; where
increasing, for want of its due course of evacuation, it returns ba^ upon the
Heart and Diaphragme: a^ from hence is called Fear, Sadness, an^ oftentimes
Madness: which are Symptoms as necessarily attending Melancholy, as the
Shadow does the Body. Besides it is most certain, that Fear and Sadness
without any Evident or Apparent cause are the certain Symptoms of Melancholy.
Now these two Passions are in like manner the true signs of a cold Heart: a^
it may easily be proved, both out of Galen, and Aristotle: And therefore those
persons that are of a Fearful nature, an^ L. de plac. cap. 4. etc. 30. art.
med Lib. 2. de part. anim. c. 4.
commonly called (...), Excordes, Hear^ less. And every man may out of his own
particular experience find, that the Hea^ as it were contracts it self,
during the time of Fear, and Sadness: but in Joy, ^ Hope, it seems to dilate
and enlarge ^^ self. This also seems to be the opinion of Avicen, who
affirms, Fen. lib. 3. tract 4. cap. 18. that in Melancholy constitutions, the
Heart communicates its temperature to the Brain, by the Vapors and Humors
that it sends up unto it, a^^ by the Sympathy of the Organs.

Marfilius Ficinus, and Franciscus Valleriola in the books before cited, make
two kinds of Dotage, the first of which ^^ey call Desipiscentia, in Greek (...)
and the other, Folly: the one of these ^ising from the defect of the Brain,
and ^^e other of the Heart. The Brain is the ^^use of Folly, when it is
surcharged either with Adust Choler, Blood, or Melancholy: But when these
Humors are remained in the Heart, they then cause ^riefe, and Distraction, but
not Folly: un^^sse the Brain also do chance to suffer ^ith the Heart by
Sympathy. And these ^earned Authors are of opinion, that Pas^onate Lovers are
possessed with Folly, which is caused by the defect of the ^eart; and this
Valleriola labors to prove ^y many reasons.

On the other side, Guido Cavalcanti in ^e of his Canzonets, commented on by
Oine Corbo, an Italian Physician, proves, ^^at the Brain is the seat of Love,
as well ^s of Memory; for that in it resideth the ^mpression of the Object
Loved: whence also it is that Lovers, above all things, desire to have the
person they Love always ^n Memory.

But our Physicians conclude more rightly, first, that Fear is the
Perturbation or distemperature of the Mind, caused by the Apprehension of some
evil, either Real, or Apparent only: as Aristotle also affirms, Rhetor. lib.
2. cap. 2. Secondly, that Sadness is nothing else but a long continued
Inveterate Fear, as Galen is o^ opinion. Thirdly, that Fear, and Sadness are
the Pathognomicall signs of all kinds Lib. 4. de cause. pulls.
of Melancholy, necessarily attending this disease we now treat of, as we have
already demonstrated. And lastly, that seeing that Fear and Sadness are the
Effects of an Imagination that is depraved, and the Characters of Love
Melancholy; we may safely conclude, that it is caused, and has its seat in the
Brain, as well as the Imagination.

But I shall rather hold with Mercurialis in this point, whose opinion is, that
Lib. 1. met. c. 10.
the Part Affected is sometimes taken for the seat of the Disease it self; and
sometimes also for the seat of the Cause of the Disease. In the first Acception
we maintain, that in Love Melancholy the Brain is the part Affected: and the
Heart, the seat of the Cause only of the Disease; as in love, both the Liver,
and the Genitals are ^ynt causes of it: as Gordonius in his ^hapter de Amore
maintains.

And now to answer those Objections before alleged out of Hippocrates, and
Galen, we say, first, that it is questionable, ^hether that book which is
entitled, ^e his quae ad Virgin spect. be his, or no: ^^d secondly, that if
this be granted, that ^ext only proves that the Heart may be ^e seat of the
Cause only of Fear, Sadness, and Dotage. And lastly we answer Galen, that
there are two kinds of ^eare; Natural, and Accidental: the first ^ these
accompanies a Man from his ^irth, and is caused by the ill temperature of the
Heart: and of this kind of Fear is Galen to be understood in that place. The
^ther kind, which is not Natural, arises ^^om the Defect of the Brain, when
as ^^e Imagination is depraved; as we may ^ainly collect out of Hippocrates, in
his ^ook de morbo sacro, where he confutes ^he opinion of those men that think
that the Heart is the seat of Wisdom, Care, and Sadness: Notwithstanding that
the Brain shares indeed in this Malady, b^ Communicatio^, not only from the
Heart but also from the Stomach, especially i^ Gal. l. de de m. 3. and l. de
plac. c. 8.
young persons: as Nemesius proves in h^ book, de natura Hominis, cap. 20.

CHAP. X. Whether Love-Melancholy be an Hereditary Disease, or no.
ARistotle is of opinion, that he that not like his Parents, is in some sort
Monster; (...). For in such Cases Nature seems to have come short of he end,
and has begun to degenerate; and that sometimes of necessity, as in the
bringing forth of women, for the Propagation of the species; and sometimes also
through some Defect in the Matter; o^ lastly by reason of some External
Causes, amongst which, the Genethliacall Astrologers place the Influence of the
Starre^ L. de aere, loc. and aque
and Hippocrates, (...), the change of the Sea^^ns, and Nature of the Climat.
But the ^rabian Physicians attribute the greatest ^ower in these matters to the
Imagination, Avicen. l. 9 anim.
and endeavor to prove their Assertion by many forcible Arguments, and also ^y
particular instances, borrowed out of Valles. l. 4. cont. med. and Pli. c. 6.
^liny lib. 7. cap. 12. Franciscus Vallesius, ^lbertus, and diverse other
authentic authors.

This similitude and resemblance that required in Children, consists in three
^ings, that is, either in the species, Sex, or ^ccidents. The first of these
depends on the Specificall Difference, and the Formative Il. a Veg. c. 49. art.
Med.
faculty; the second on the Complexion and Temperature of the Seed, the
Men^ruall Blood, and the Matrix, according to Iernel. c. 12 l. 7. Phys.
Galen: and the last bears a Proportion to be difference of the Formative
faculty, ^ot Specificall, as the First, but Individual; which residing in the
Seed, and being ^estrained by the Matter which has the ^mpression fixed on it,
receaves from it the Virtue to produce Individuals, semblable ^^ Properties,
Qualities, and other Accidents to the Individual from which they spring. Now
these Corporeal Qualities which are derived from the Parents to the Children,
are such only as are in the parts Informed in such sort, as that they have
already contracted a Habitude. So that those Properties and Qualities that
depend of the Superior Faculties, and which are more noble then the Formative;
as the Sensitive, Imaginative, and Rational; cannot possibly be Hereditary:
Otherwise a Learned Physician should necessarily beget a Son as learned in
his Faculty as himself, without any study a^ all. Neither yet are those
Diseases Hereditary, which are not Habitual, as Fevers, Pleurisies, Catarrhes,
and those Intemperatures which are not confirmed: But those only are
Hereditary, that are Habitual in the Parents, and by continuance of time
confirmed; whether they be in the whole Body, or only in the Principal parts
of the same. And for this cause we may observe, that Choleric Men bege^
Choleric Children; and weak infirms men, beget the like Children. So
contrariwise,

Fortes creantur fortibus and Bonis, Hor. Od. 4 l. 4.
Men of courage, and of strong bodies, beset stout and valiant Children; and so
those that have their Generative parts of a hot and dry Temperature, beget
Children of ^^e same constitution, and consequently, Galen says, inclined to
Lust. And therefore Art. Med. c. 46.
when Helen had no other means to excuse her Adulterous practices, she made
^se of this, and cries out,

Qui fieri, si sint vires in semine Amorum,
Et Jovis, and Ledae filia, casta potes?
I Love's Powers in the Parent's seed is placed:
How can it be,
That ever she
That Is borne of Jove, and Leda, should be chaste?
Notwithstanding Fernelius, in his first ^ook de Pathol. cap. 1. affirms, that
Children do not inherit those Diseases only that are (...), in Habit, but
some other also: for that we often find Children to be subject to Agues,
Pleurisies, Catarrhes, and the like, because their Mothers had the same
Diseases, when they travailed with them.

So that hence we may conclude, that those Children that are begotten of such
Parents as have been so besotted with Love, as that they have at length become
Melancholy withal, are in danger of inheriting the same disease; unless
peradventure the Seed of one of the Parents corrected this fault in the other:
or else it be prevented by good Education, and Discipline. And it is also
probable that those that are Inclined to Love, through the Intemperature either
of the whole Body, or else of the Principal parts; and not by the depravation
of the Imaginative faculty, as the greatest part of Lovers are, will beget
Children subject to the same Discase.

CAP. XI. The Different kinds of Love-Melancholy,
I Shall not here reckon up all the several M. Equic. l. 3.
Loves, Cupids, or Veneres, mentioned by Authors: He that desires to see them,
may have recourse to Pausanias, in Eliac. and Boeot. Plutarch in Erotic. Tully
de Not. Deor, and other profane Authors. But my purpose in this place is, to
show you the different kinds of Passionate Love, or Erotique Melancholy,
wherein sometimes the Imagination only is depraved, and sometimes both the
Judgment and Discourse, together with the Imagination.

Galen, speaking of this Disease, in diverse Lib. 3. de loc. affect. c. 7.
places of his works, says, that the Dotage of Melancholy persons differs,
according as the Imagination is diversely affected; the which proceeds from the
different Complexion of Bodies: for which reason, Aristotle in his Problems,
and Anacreon in his Odes, compares them to drunken folks. There are some so
blinded with their unruly desires, that they can love Hecuba as well as Helen,
Thersites as Achilles. Others are so besotted with this Passion, that they
place their love on Inanimate and senseless things: as those of whom Aelian,
and Philostratus Lib. 6. c. 17.
make mention, who were so desperately enamoured of a Marble Statue, that they
died with the vere grief they conceived, for that the Senate of Athens refused
to sell them those Idols, they so much adored. Xerxes is reported to have been
enamoured of a Tree: Alkidias the Rhodian of a Statue of Cupid of Praxiteles
workmanship: Charicles of the Statue of Venus: Narcissus and Eutelides of their
own Pictures. Notwithstanding Aristotle Lib. 8. Eth c. 12. and lib. 2. mag.
mor. c. 11.
in his Morals says, that that Love which is borne to Inanimate Things, cannot
properly be called Love, because a a man cannot reciprocally be beloved by them
again: and because one cannot desire in them that Good, wherein consists the
Essence of Love.

And here omitting to speak of the filthy brutish loves of Myrrha, Valeria,
Tusculanaria, Canace, Aristonymus, Fulvius, Tellus, Pasiphae, Phaedra, Phillis,
and others, of whom, as it is reported by Plutarch, Ovid, Aelian, and others,
both Poets and Historians, some have basely lusted after their Fathers; Others,
their Mothers, and Brothers; and some have doted even upon Beasts: I shall
only discover to you the several Symptoms that distinguish Love-Melancholy
into diverse kinds or species. For we may observe, that Love is sometimes
attended on by Iealousy, and sometimes it is free from it: some Love is
Furious, and sometimes again it is mild and Temperate. In like manner does
the diversity of Regions and Climes much conduce to the distinguishing of the
several kinds of Love. And therefore Hip. l. de aere loc. and aq.
it is observed, that the Eastern People pursue their desires, without either
Moderation, or Discretion; yet in a kind of base servile way. Those that
inhabit the more Southern parts, love with Impatience, Rage, and Fury: those
that inhabit the Western Countries are very industrious in their Love: and the
Northern are very slowly moved or touched with Love.

The wily Italian in courting his Mistress, cunningly dissembles his Love, and
Equic. l. 4. de amor. c. 7.
insinuates himself into her Favor by Pleasant Discourses, Sonnets, and
Verses, composed in her Praise: and if he be so happy as to enjoy her, he is
presently jealous of her, and like a Prisoner, keeps her up under Lock and Key:
but if he fail in his suit, he then begins to hate her, as much, as before he
loved her; and will not stick to do her any mischief that lies in his power.

The eager and Impatient Spaniard, being once enflamed with these Desires,
runs headlong on in his Love, and without Intermission follows his suit; and
with most pitiful Lamentations Complaining of the Fire that consumes him,
Invocates and adores his Mistress. But when at length by any the most unlawful
means he has compassed his Desires; he either grows jealous of her, and so
perhaps cuts her throat; or else basely prostitutes her for money: But if he
cannot effect his purpose, he is then ready to run mad, or kill himself.

The Effeminate Frenchman endeavors to win his Mistresses affection by fair
honest means, entertaining her with Songs, and Pleasant Discourses. If he
chance to be jealous of her, he tortures himself extremely, and weeps and
laments his own unhappiness: But if she chance to put a trick upon him, and
deceave him at last; he then begins to brave it, and casts opprobrious and
injurious terms upon her, and sometimes too falls to downright violence. And
if he have once compassed his Desires, and enjoyed her, he presently neglects
her, and begins to look after a new one.

The German is of a Disposition quite contrary to that of the Spaniard: for he
comes on in his Love by degrees, and takes fire by little and little: And when
he is once Inflamed, he proceeds with Art and Judgment, and endeavors to
win his Mistresses favor by Gifts. If he be once jealous of her, he
with-drawes his Liberality: if she deceave him, he makes little stir about it;
and if he speeds in his suit, his love grows as soon cold again.

The French is given to flatter, and counterfeit Love: the German hides it: the
Spaniard is apt to persuade himself that his Mistress loves him: and the
Italian is continually tormented with Jealousy.

The French affects one that is witty and pleasant, though she be not very
fair: The Spaniard cares not how dull or heavy she is, so she be fair: the
Italian would have her Modest and Fearful: and the German, likes one that is
somewhat hardy.

So likewise in the pursuit of their Loves, the Frenchman, of a Wiseman,
becomes a Fool: the German, after his slow onset, having been held longin
suspense, of a Fool, becomes a Wiseman: the Spaniard hazards all for the
enjoying of his Desires: and the Italian despises all danger whatsoever.

In Breife, the most certain Differences of Love, are taken from the variety
of the Complexions of those that are affected with this Malady. If a Sanguine
man love Ficin in con. Plat. c. 9. orat. 7.
one of the same complexion, this Love proves happy and full of delight. But if
two Choleric Persons meet together, this is rather a slavery, then true Love,
it Valler. obs. 7. l. 2.
^s so subject to Outrages and Anger, notwithstanding the neerenesse of their
Co^plexions. There is less danger in the Love that happens betwixt a Choleric
person and a Sanguine: for these will be sometimes in, and sometimes out. The
Love that falls out betwixt a Melancholy and a Sanguine person, may be happy
enough, for here the sweetness of the Sanguine Disposition will easily correct
the untowardlinesse of the Melancholy. But if this later chance to join with
the Choleric, it often proves rather a Plague, then Love; and the end of it for
the most part is Despair: as it fell out to Lucrece, Dido, Phillis, and others
above mentioned.

CAP. XII. Whether that Disease in Women, called by Physicians, Furor Vterinus,
be a Species of Love-Melancholy, or no.
I Have observed among those Written that Discourse of the Diseases properly
belonging to Women, five several kinds of Diseases, very like each other, all
proceeding from this one Malady of Love; and they are these. (...), Furor
Matricis; (...), Pudendorum pruritus; (...), sive Cauda, Symptoma turpitudinis;
Satyriasis; and Furor Vterinus. Now although it would not be much Impertinent
to speak of them all in several: yet to avoid Tediousness, I shall only
handle the two later kinds; which differ only in Degree. For, as Moschion
says, in his book de Morb. Mulier. cap. 128. Mulierum Satyriasis (which yet
Aretaeus denies,) Est, (...). i. e. Partium Pudendarum pruritus, cum ^lolore,
ab insatiabili veneris desiderio proveniente: quod indicant, manus proprias in
^asdem parts impellendo; seposito omni pu^ore and erubescentia. Quod fieri non
potest, ^ine summo Cerebri Offendiculo: quoniam ^uicunque sensibus perfectis,
and cerebro been ^omposito fruitur, ab huiusmodi Impudicis Actionibus abhorret,
secundum Philoso^hum, Rhet. l. 2. c. 6. and Eth. l. 4. c. 15.
(...). Si vero Cerebrum patitur in Sa^yriasi Foeminarum; quomodo differt a
Fu^ore Vterino? qui est Desipiscentia Furi^sa, proveniens ab extremo Ardore
Matri^is, sive Intemperatura calida, cerebro, reli ^uisque corporis partibus
per spinam dorsi Act. tetrab. 4. ser. 4. c. 82.
communicata, vel per acres Humores emissos asemine corrupto, circa Matricem
pu^rescente. Vnde huiusmodi Mulieres garriunt indesinenter, and nihil aliud vel
lo^uuntur, vel audire cupiunt, quam Res Venereas. Sentiunt autem magnum
Pruritum in Pudendis suis, tamen absque dolor: Vnde malum hoc a Satyriasi
differt; fortassis propter Laesionem Principalium Cerebri Facultatum.
Hippocrates enim dicit: Dolentes aliqua part Corporis, si dolorem non
sentiant, his Men's aegrotat. Et quoniam Aph. 6. l. 2.
talia accidentia proveniunt ex Abundantia Seminis Acris and Flatulenti;
invenitur tantum in Virginibus teneris, Viduis, aut Mulierculis Galidae
Temperaturae, and quae deliciis omnibus and voluptatibus Inhonestis indulgent,
laute vivunt, Convivia frequentant, nec quicquam aliud nisi Cupidinum suarum
satisfactionem meditantur.

You may see more, concerning the Nature of this Disease, in Hippocrates, in
his Tract, De his quae ad Virgin. spect, where he says, that young Girls,
when they now begin to be ready for Marriage, are apt to fall into a kind of
Melancholy, or Madness, wherewith they are no sooner taken, but presently
(...): Ob acutam quidem Inflammationem insanit; ob Putredinem, clamat; ob
caliginem, terretur, and timet; ob oppressionem vero quae circa Cor est
suffoca^ionem sibi parant; ob sanguinis autem vi^ium, Animus Anxietudine and
Jmpo^entia conflictatur, and malum contrahit. For the cure of which Disease he
prescribes speedy Marriage: otherwise it is to be feared, that through Madness
and Impatience, they will make away themselves, either by drowning or hanging;
^alsely persuading themselves, that by these Remedies, (...), being very sure
ones, and as they conceive, the best they ^an find; they shall set a period to
their miseries. Which makes me think, that those Milesian wenches, that hanged
themselves by troops, as Plutarch reports Lib. de virt. Mul.
the story, until such time as there was an Edict made, that all those that
thus made away with themselves, their ^odies should be cast out naked into the
^treets, and exposed to the view of all ^ommers; were sick of this Disease:
for ^s much as that neither by fair persuasions, nor yet by threats could they
be ^ept from being their own Murderers. The same is my Opinion also of those
women at Lions in France, that threw themselves into Wells, thinking by this
means to quench the heat of their burning desires: as of old at Athens in a
great plague, those that were infected, seeking some means or other to
mitigate the Torment they endured, cast themselves into Rivers, and Privies: as
both Thucydides, and Lueretius have recorded.

So that we may very safely conclude, that these two Diseases, which we may
with the Poet Euripides, call by a general name, (...), may as well be
reckoned among the kinds of Love Melancholy, as the Satyriasis in men;
notwithstanding that one of them bears the name of Fury, or Madness: seeing
that both Hippocrates and Galen do often use the word Mania, for Melancholy,
and so on the contrary: as we have before observed; and as may be collected
also out of Avicen, Lib. 3. fen. 1. tr. 4. c. 18.
in his Chapter of Melancholy, where he says that, Cum Melancholia componitur
cum rixa, saltu, contentione seu pugna; mutatur ejus nomen, diciturque Mania.
When Melancholy is attended on with Chiding, Brawling, Quarrelling, and Market.
c. de Mania.
Fighting; it then changes its name, and ^s called Madness. Of which our
Mo^erne Writers make Five kinds: that is ^o say, Furor, Rabies, Hydorolcos, seu
Ly^aon; Melancholia, and Amor. By the last of which, we may understand
Satyriasis, ^r Furor Vterinus: The Symptoms and Cure whereof I shall set down
hereafter when I shall come to speak of the cure of Love Melancholy: referring
you for the ^est to Mercatus, Lib. 2. cap. 10. Rodericus Castro, lib. 2. cap.
10. John Liebault, lib. ^. cap. 33. and Mercurialis, de Morb. Mul. ^b. 4. cap.
9. and 10.

CAP. XIII. Whether or no a Physician may by his Art find out Love, without
confession of the Patient.
THe Enemies of the Noble science t^ Physic, which Democritus truly Epist. ad
Hippoc.
calls the sister and companion of Prudence, do peremptorily affirm, that it
is not within the power of the Physicians skill, to discover whether any one in
Love, or no, without the parties own confession: notwithstanding that the
contrary is proved not only by Authors of very Avic. l. 3. fen. 1. Aet. tetrab.
4. c. de Amore.
good note, but even by daily experience. The first Authority I shall produce
for confirmation hereof, shall be out o^ Soranus Ephesius, who in the life of
Hippocrates reports of him, how he by A^ discovered the Love of King Perdice
who was enamoured of Phile, one of h^ Fathers Concubines, and by reason hereof
was grown Hecticall. The like is reorded of Erasistratus the Physician, who
Plut. in Demet. val. Max. l. 15. c. 7.
^n like manner discovered the unlawful ^esires of Antiochus, son to King
Seleu^hus, who was desperately gone in love ^oward Stratonica his Mother in
Law: and by the same Physician was at length perfectly cured of his malady.

Neither is it necessary, that he should ^e a Physician, that must make this
discovery: for we know that Jonadab found Lib. 2. Reg. c. 13.
out the love of Amnon to his sister Tha^ar: and Canace's Love was first
discovered by her old nurse.

Prima malum nutrix animo praesensit anili. Galen, in that book of his, which
he ^ntitles, Quomodo morbum simulantes sint Deprehendendi, boasts how that
himself had found out the Love of a fellow that was servant to a Knight in
Rome, that had purposely made his knees to swell, by rubbing them with the
juice of Thapsia, that so he might not be able to wait on his Master into the
Field, but might stay at home, and by this means have the fitter opportunity
to enjoy his Mistress. And in his book de Praecog. he relates the manner, how
he discovered the Love of Iustus his wife, who was enamoured of one Pylades:
and that, merely by feeling her pulse very hard, and observing withal her
countenance, as he named him to her.

-- Quis enim been celat Amorem:
Emicat indicio prodita flamma suo.
Anacreon the Poet makes great boasts of his own skill in this particular, in
his last Ode, after this manner.

(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
in english thus.

By marks, our Horses bear,
We straight know whose they are.
By his Tiare, a man
May know the Parthian.
And so, at first sight, I
An Amorist descry.
For in his Breast's a sign,
By which I can divine.
For as soon as ever Cupid has kindled this fire within their Hearts, they
are constrained presently to lay open their Breasts, and cry out for help. The
heat of these flames oftimes discovers it self in the Cheeks, where it
presents the beholders eye with as many various colors, as the Rainebow wears.

-- Been quis celaverit Ignem?
Lumine nam semper proditur ipse suo.
Quod licet, ut possum, conor celare pudore^;
Attamen apparet dissimulatus Amor.
Who Is he, that can hide fire? whose brighter Rays,
The more restrained, the more themselves betray.
Nor can Love be by any art suppressed,
Where each Blush tells the secrets of the Breast.
And for this cause Diotimus in Plato's Conviv, says, that Love inherits this
from his mother Penia, to be always (...), naked, and without a covering. And
for this cause the Poets also always feign him to be naked, because, as
Erasmus in his Adagies observes, Love cannot be covered. For, not the eyes
alone, but even the tongue also, and the cheeks themselves by their Blushes
will necessarily discover it. Yet notwithstanding all these manifest signs of
Love, together with their frequent sighings, continual complaints, Importunate
praises of their Mistresses, and the like: the Lover still believes his desires
are so closely carried, as that the quickest apprehension cannot discover them:
whereas indeed they lie open, and exposed to every eye.

I shall willingly grant, that it is not so easy a matter to discover the Love
of one that is but lightly touched with it. But if the party be but so far
entered into it, as that Melancholy, or Love-Madnesse now begins to seize on
him: I dare undertake to find out such a ones disease, ^s easily, as any other
violent Passion of ^he Mind what ever: so that I may but have liberty to
observe the Actions and Gestures of the Party Affected; and that, ^y those
Rules I have observed to have been delivered by Galen, concerning this
Particular.

The means and order of Proceeding ^n this Discovery, I shall hereafter
deliver unto you: by which you shall be able to find out this Malady, not only
where ^t is already settled, but also where there is but a bare Inclination unto
it only in the Constitution. And herein I shall be forced to crave assistance
from all faculties, and sometimes too, as Galen says, we must be content to
help our selves with bare conjectures: as he him self was once feign to do,
when he discovered the deceit of a Knight in Rome, that feigned himself to be
troubled with the colicke, that so he might avoid being present at a general
Assembly of the Citizens. Notwithstanding, as he there observes, this discovery
was not properly of Medicinal Cognition; but rather belonged to the power of
Reason and Common Sense: which, although it be common to all, yet is it exact
and Ripe in a very few. And therefore he concludes, that where this natural
faculty is sound, and joined in commission, as it were, with Medicinal
experience, that man shall be able to make any the like discoveries as these.

CHAP. XIV. Signs Diagnosticke of Love. Melancholy.
AS this Disease finds its first passage into the inward parts of the Body
Avic. l. 3. fen. 1. t^. 4. c. 23.
through the eyes: so do they give the first assured and undoubted tokens of
the same: For as soon as ever this Malady has seized on the Patient, it
causes a certain kind of modest cast of the eyes, which the Latins expressed
by the term of Emissitii Oculi; and the Greeks call it (...), or (...). And
therefore our Modern Anatomists call that Muscle, which is the Instrument by
which this Love-looke is caused, Musculus Amorosus. Laurent.


But if the party be over far gone Gordon. c. de Amor. part. 2.
with this disease, the eyes begin then to grow hollow, and dry, (unless
perhaps some unkindnesse, or denial from their Mistress, or else her Absence
moisten Merc. l. 1. Meth, med, c. 17.
them with a tear or two:) and you shall observe them to stand, as if they
were either in some deep contemplation, or else were earnestly fixed in
beholding something or other that much delighted them.

And if the Lovers eyes be thus discomposed, and out of order; how much more
think you is his heart? For you shall see him now very jocund and laughing;
and presently within a moment he falls a weeping, and is extreme sad: then by
and by again he entertaines himself with some pleasant merry conceits, or
other; and within a short space again is altogether as sad, pensive, and
dejected as before.

This Passion you may observe drawn our to the life by Virgill, in his Dido,
Aeneid. 4.

Vritur infaelix Dido, totaque vagatur Vrbe furens, etc. Aeneid. 4.
She was so tormented with the heat of her Love, that she ran up and down
the City, as if she had been distracted.

Nunc media Aeneam secum per moenia ducit;
Sidoniasque Ostentat opes, urbemque paratam.
Incipit effari, mediaque in voce resistit.
Nunc eadem, labente die, convivia quaerit:
Iliacosque iterum, demens, audire labores
Exposcit; pendetque iterum narrantis ab ore.
Now through the Town she does Aeneas guide:
Boasting its wealth, and how it is Fortified.
Mean while her Tongue betraies her grief: And when
The day's now spent, the Feasts begin again.
To hear Troy's fall again, then does she long:
And still her eare's chained to the Historians Tongue.
These Perturbations proceed from the Diversity of those objects they fancy to
themselves: and in like manner as these are either sad or joyful, so they
themselves either blush, or wax pale at the apprehension; as the Poet observes.

Nec latet haustus Amor, sed fax vibrata medullis, Stat. l. 1.

In vultus, atque ora redit, lucemque Genarum
Fingit, and impulsam tenui sudore pererrat.
Love cannot lie hid: his torch, within the Heart
Once kindled, straight inflames each other part.
A gentle sweat bedewes the Limbs; the eye
Betraies its heat: the cheeks warm blushes dye.
To this we may add their excessive talking, which proceeds from the fullness
of their Heart. For Love, says Plutarch, is naturally a great Babbler,
especially when Symp. l. 2. qu. 5.
it chances to light upon the commendation of those things that are its
objects. For that Lovers have a strong desire to enduce all others to the
belief of that, whereof themselves are already persuaded: which is, that they
love nothing, but what is absolutely perfect, both for Goodness, Beauty and
Profit: and they would willingly have these opinions of theirs confirmed also
by all other men's judgments. This is that which moved Candaules to bring Gyges
into his bedchamber, and there to let him have a perfect view of the naked
Beauties of his Wife. Unless you will rather say, that the Reason that those
that are in Love, talk so much, is, to exercise their Persuasive Faculty, that
so by this means they may render themselves the more worthy of their Mistresses
Love.

Non formosus erat, sed erat facundus Ulysses.
Attamen Aequoreas torsit Amore Deds.
It Was not Ulysses Form, but sweet Discourse,
^at did, to seek his love, the Sea-Nymphs force.
and for this cause the Heathen of old Paus. Eliac, Plutar. tr. de praecep.
matrim.
^ere wont to place the Image of Venus, betwixt the Images of Mercury and Pi^o;
the one being the God of Eloquence, ^e other the Goddess of Persuasion. Which
gave occasion to Lucian to feign, at Mercury, as soon as ever he was ^t newly
borne, overcame at wrestling ^e God Cupid, who before had trium^ed over all the
other Gods, both Coele^all and Infernal.

By the signs we have already set own, and by his languishing countenance did
Ionadab discover that Amnon, ^^ing David's son, was enamoured of me Princess,
or great personage. For those that are in Love, says Cydippe in O^id, have
always a kind of languishing countenance, and that too without any Apparent
cause. So likewise by those above named Symptoms, joined together with the
palenesse of the Color, and feebleness of the knees, was a step mother
mentioned by Apuleius, discoverd to be in love with her son in Law: P^lor
deformis, Marcentes oculi, lassagenu^ quies turbida, and spiritus cruciatus
t^rd tate vehementior: which Apuleius could not learn any thing of Avicen,
before whose time he lived above 800 years. But this Chronologicall error the
Render may be pleased to pass by: since it cannot argue any want of judgment
in the Author, but mere incogitancy only.
Apuleius seems to have learn of Avicen, or some other o^ the Ancient
Physicians.

There is besides, no order or equality at all in their Gesture, Motions, or
Actions: and they are perpetually sighing, and complaining without any cause.
Sapho could not sit a Arnal. de Vil. no. c. de amo.
her distaffe: Paris could not sleep: Canace grew pale, lean, and froward,
and C. a veg. l. 3. meth. med. c. 17.
was still complaining without any evident cause; and by these signs her nur^^
found that she was in Love.

Fugerat ore color, maciesque obduxerat Artus;
Sumebant minimos ora coacta cibos.
Nec somni faciles, and non erat annua nobis:
Et gemitum, nullo pressa dolor, daba^
Prima malum nutrix animo praesensit anili. etc.
In like manner did Erasistratus discover Plut. in Demet. Val. Max. l. 5. c. 7.
^he Love of Antiochus, to his Stepmother: for so soon as ever she but entered
into the Chamber, his color changed, his ^eech was stopped, his looks were
smi^ing, and pleasant, or else, (as Vigenerius ^ith) very steadfastly bent upon
their Object: his face burned, and he was all in a weat, his Pulse beat very
disorderly, and ^stly his heart failed him: he grew pale, amazed, astonished
often: with other such ^^ke Symptoms, which (as Sapho affirms) are wont to
appear in Melancholy Lovers. (...): as Plutarch has it, in the ^fe of
Demetrius. Yet we find these ver^es of that Learned and Amorous Poetesse ^apho
cited thus, in Dionysius Longinus. De subl. genesis dic.


(...)
(...).
(...).
Which are translated into Latin both by Ovid, Statius, and also by Catullus
in that manner.

Lingua sed torpet; tonuis sub Artus
Flamma dimanat: sonnitu suopte
Tinniunt Aures: Gemina and teguntur Lumina nocte.
My stam'ring tongue her speech forgets.
A gentle Heat each Joint besets:
All quickness from my Eyes is gone:
My Ears hear no sounds, but their own
By which Verses we may conclude, that this Damsel was as skillful, and as
well Orib. l. 8. Synop. c. 9. de Amo.
experienced in this Art, as any either of our Greek, Arabian, or Latin
Physicians, P. Aegin. l. 3. c. 17. de Amor.
for as much as there is not nay mention made of any Symptom or certain sign
of this Disease, by them, which she seems Haly ab. 9. Theor. c. 7 Alsarau. l.
pract. sect. 2. c. 17.
not acquainted with.

Galen, Erasistratus, and all our Modern Physicians, add to these, the
unequal and confused beating of the Pulse: And Galen boasts, that by these
Signs joined together, he discovered the miserable doting of Iustus his wife
upon Pylades. I had found, (says he, Lib. de Cogn. and Cur. morb. Anim. and
cap. 6. de Praecogn. ad Posthem.) That she had neither Fever, nor any other
Corporal Disease; so that I presently conjectured that she was in Love. And
^hen, because that at the naming of Pylades, her color changed, her Pulse beat
unequally, and with diverse motions, as it ^ses to do, when a Man resolves on
any treat matter of Consequence; I concluded that she was in Love with Pylades.
From which words of Galen, there is a ^ice Question raised by our Modern
Physicians, whether or no there is a certain distinct kind of Pulse by which
Love is discovered, besides that Inequality, which Galen elsewhere calls,
(...), and Plutarch, (...): which you may read at large discussed by Fran^iscus
Vallesius L. 3. cont. Phil. and med. c. 14. Christ. a Vega. c. de Amor.
Vallesius, who, with Avicen, and the more Learned sort of Physicians,
main^aines the Negative: and that, because that Rational Love is an Affection
of the Brain, as likewise Irrational and dishonest Love is of the Liver; but
neither of them of the Heart, (as we have already demonstrated) which suffers
no whit at all in Love, but only by Sympathy.

Yet I deny not, but that by the Pulse it is possible to know a Passionate
Lover, by reason of the stirring of the Spirits: for which cause, Avicen says,
that if one Lib. 3. fen. 1. tr. 4. c. 23
would know the name of such a ones Mistress, he must feel his Pulse, and at
the same instant name the Party whom he suspects to be the cause of his
Malady, and take some occasion or other to commend her Beauty, sweetness of
Behavior, Parentage, Attire, or Qualities of Mind: for at the same time,
Pulsus diversificabitur in varietate magna, and fiet similis Intersecto; you
shall perceave, says he, a strange alteration in the Motion of the Pulse, and
it will be very unequal, and often interrupted. Which is the opinion of Galen
also, in the before cited places; and of Paulus Aegineta ind his 3. book, and
37. Chapter. Lib. 2. art. med. sect. 3 c. 6.


Christophorus a Vega adds to these Signs here set down, another, which in
my opinion seems to be of little or no moment: and that is, that those that
are in Love, will not eat Grapes; because that this kind of fruit fills the
Stomach and Belly with Wind, and this Inflation oppressing the Midriffe, and
hindering the motion of the Heart, disturbeth Respiration, and suffers them not
to sigh at their pleasure.

By the greater part of these Signs, when I first began to practice in this
Faculty at Again, the place of my birth, in the year 1604. I discovered the
foolish doatings of a young Scholar of that City, who was desperately gone in
Love, and made his complaint unto me, that notwithstanding all the Medicines
that had been prescribed him by the Physicians of that place, and a certain
Paracelsian Mountebanke that he had met withal, he could neither enjoy his
sleep, nor take delight in any thing in the world; but was so full of
discontent, that he was feign to retire from Tolose to Again, hoping by this
change of Air to find some mitigation of his grief: where as, contrary to
his Expectation, he found himself in a far worse state then before. When I
considered his relation, and withal saw him to be a young Man, and affected
with these Griefs and Discontents without any Cause, whom but a little before I
had known Ioviall and merry: and perceaved withal his Countenance to be grown
pale, yellowish, and of a sad decayed color; his eyes hollow; and all the rest
of Body in reasonable good plight: I began to suspect it was some Passion of
the Mind that thus tormented him: and then considering his Age, and his
Complexion, which was sanguine, and his Profession; I certainly concluded that
his Disease was Love. And as I was urgent upon him to let me know the
External cause of his Malady, there comes by chance a handsome servant-maid of
the House about some business or other into the Room where we were, and was
the means of discovering the true ground of his Disease. For she coming in at
the instant as I was feeling his Pulse, I perceaved it suddenly vary its
motion, and beat very unequally; he presently grew pale, and Blushed again in
a moment, and could hardly speak. At the last seeing himself as it were taken
tardy, he plainly confessed the true Cause of this his distemper; but withal
refused to admit of any other Cure but from her that had given him his Wound:
and therefore entreated me to desire the Mother of the Damsel to give ^er
consent that he might marry her; presuming that his Father, notwithstanding
she was no fit match for him, would not deny him that Contentment, on which his
Life and safety depended; oftentimes repeating that Verse out of Propertius.

Nescit Amor priscis cedere Imaginibus. Lib. 1. El. 5.

Cupid, nor Homage yields, nor place,
To Swelling Titles, Blood, or Race.
But this Marriage could not be effected: the young Man in the mean time
grows worse and worse in a desperate manner, till at length a Fever seazes on
him, together with a violent spitting of Blood. This amazes him; and seeing no
other means of safety, he is at length persuaded to follow my Directions: and
so by such Physic as I prescribed him, he was at length perfectly cured of his
Malady.

A like story to this may you read in Obser. 7. l. 2.
Valleriola, of a Cure wrought by himself upon a Merchant of Arles, who had
continued for the space of six Months distracted with Love: and had he not
been prevented by the care of his Parents, he had killed himself.

But what need we trouble our selves to seek so far for Examples of this
kind, seeing that there is hardly a Disease more frequent in our Eyes then this
of Love, if we are able but to distinguish betwixt it, and the other kinds of
Melancholy; as Madness, and the Suffocation of the Matrix: with which
Diseases, this of Love has great Affinity.

CAP. XV. The Cause of Palenesse in Lovers.
THE Palenesse of the Color, is a thing so Proper to those that are deeply in
Love, that Diogenes, one day meeting a young Man that looked very pale, guessed
him to be either a very Envious person, or else that he was in Love: according
to that of the Poet.

Palleat omnis Amans: Color hic est aptus Amanti. It is the proper Color and
Badge of Love. But by the way it is to be noted, that we must not understand by
this word Pale, a simple Decoloration, or whiteness of Probl. 4. sect. 38.
the Skin, which, as the Philosopher says, is, as it were, a kind of
Putrefaction of the skin: (...) But rather a mixed Color of White, and Yellow;
or of White, Yellow, and Green: which Hippocrates calls (...), Plutarch, and
Lucretius, (...); and all Greek Writers, (...), or (...). For these words do
not signify a bare Green; but also a pale Color, and such a one, as appears
to be in Corn, when as Immoderate Heat, and a Southern wind has ripened it
too soon: as we may easily collect from that Con. 3. in 6. Epid.
place of Galen, where, speaking of the Asians, he says, that, (...). When
they see any look pale, they presently ask, what is the reason they look so
(...), Green; making no difference at all betwixt these two words, (...),
pale; and (...), green. Now, (says the same Author,) this pale color is
such, as we see in Fire, and Ocre, or Orpiment: and is caused in the body by
the Permixtion of yellow choler with the thin waterish parts of the Blood.
Which opinion of his is also confirmed by Phavorinus, who will have this word
(...) to be derived from (...), by adding (...) after (...), and translating
(...).

Whence we perceave how grossly Ruellius is mistaken, on the 78. chapter of
Dioscorides, where he very confidently denies, that we have the true Myrrh,
because it is not Green: supposing that (...) signifies only green, and not
yellowish; or rather such a color, as appears to be in Herbs that are dried,
in Lib. de intern. aff. Aret. l. 1. de cause. and sign. morb. Chrom. c. 13.
Lentils, and in the dried pills of Pomegranats: And therefore Hippocrates
oftentimes calls such pale folks, (...), and (...): and Aretaeus, (...): and
the Comedian, Oculos Herbeos.

The Poets also acknowledged this Co^our to be proper to Lovers, and not the
Ovid. Met. 4.
white, when that they feigned, that Cly^ia, De diff. Resp.
dying for the love of the Sun, was turned into an herb of a pale and
blood^esse color, which the greeks call (...): which color is for the most
part the sign of a distempered Liver, according to Galen: (...), which being
caused by reason of the great abundance of yellow Choler, mixed with the crude
Humors, and dispersed all over the body, it infecteth with its color the
skin, which according to our Physicians, is To^tius Corporis Emunctorium.
Whence it is, that by the ill color of the skin is known the badnesse of
the Humors, that putrify within the Body. (...), Hip. I. de Hum.
(...); says Hippocrates; The color of the Humors, unless they retire into
the most inward parts of the Body, appears evidently in the skin: but
chiefly in the Face, because that the skin of that part is more thin and
fine, then of any other part; and therefore the more apt to receive the
tincture of the Putrified Humors. But if by chance any small portion of
Melancholy be mixed with the Choleric Humor, the party then becomes of a
kind of tawny color, or a dark green: which color Plutarch and Aretaeus
express very aptly by the word, (...).

CAP. XVI. What manner of eyes Melancholy Lovers have.
THere is no part of the whole Body whatsoever that sooner discovers the
Indisposition of the Body then the Eyes; according to the doctrine of
Hippocrates: (...): look in Lib. 6. Epid. sect. 4. Aph. 26.
what state the eyes are, in the same is the rest of the Body. A manifest
experience whereof we have in our Lovers, who according as Avicen, P. Aegineta,
Oribasius, Haly Abbas, and Alsaravius, observe, have their eyes hollow, and
sunk into their head, dry, and without tears; yet always twinkling with a
kind of smiling ^ooke. This hollownesse of the eyes, which Alexander
Aphrodisaeus calls (...), and Rufus Ephesius (...), proceeds, as Stephanus
Athen. says, from Gorreus. Merc. in Progn. Hippocr. Foesius in Hipp.
the Imbecility of the natural Heat, and the Dissipation of the spirits, which
do abound in the eyes: or else by the malignity and ill temper of the Humors:
or lastly by a consumption.

Yet we may observe great contrariety of opinion among these Authors: For
Avicen, Oribasius, and Alsaravius affirm, that those that are sick of
Love-Melancholy, are lean generally throughout the whole Body, as well by
reason they eat and drink very little, as also for that their Digestion is
very bad, by reason that the spirits and Natural Heat are withdrawn from the
stomach, to the Brain. And yet these above named Authors say, that, Oculi
soli non concidunt; it is not the eyes alone, that suffer in this disease:
whereas P. Aegineta maintains the quite contrary opinion, saying, that
caeteris partibus corporis illaesis, nullaque calamitate collabentibus, soli
illi Amatoribut concidunt: All the other parts of the Body continuing in a good
and perfect state of Health, the Eyes only in Love-Melancholy are ill affected.

Christophorus a Vega, willing to excuse Lib. 3. de Art. med. c. de Amor.
Aegineta, says that he understands by Collapsus, in this place, segnem motum
and Desidentiam, a kind of dull heavy motion of the eyes. But I conceive this
exposition to be somewhat forced: for as much as the same Author assents, with
all the other above mentioned, that those persons that are in Love, have a
continual motion or winking with their eyelids, semper conniventes: which
motion Hippocrates in his Epidemicks calls, (...). And Galen also seems to me
to favor this opinion of Oribasius and Avicen, when he says in his second
book de Crisibus, that Hollow Eyes and a Pale color are the evident and true
signs of those that are oppressed with sadness, and other like passions.

But these Authors in my opinion, may be reconciled, by saying, that Avicen and
Oribasius speak more consonantly both to Reason and Experience, if they be
understood of Passionate Love, which is now already grown to a degree of
Madness. For so the Divine Plato also in his Feast affirms, that Love is, of
his own Nature, and also by the Hereditary Imperfection of his Mother Penia,
always Hard, Dry, Lean, and loathsome, (...): because that by reason of too
much ^ntention of the mind, pensiveness and Anxiety, the Lover loses the
fullness of flesh and good likeing of his Body, that ^he before enjoyed. Which,
when Aegi^eta denies, he is to be understood not of those that are far gone
in this Disease, but only newly entered into it. This explication for the
reconciling of the contrariety of these Doctors opinions, if it displease any
man, I shall expect a better from him.

CAP. XVII. Whether Tears be Symptoms of Love, or no.
HIppocrates in his Epidemicks makes Aph. 17. Sect. 1. 1. 6.
Tears to be of two sorts, Voluntary and Involuntary. The last of which kinds
is caused by reason of the weakness of the Retentive Faculty in the Brain,
which has been debilitated either by some Disease, or by the great Abundance
of moisture, contracted within the Head: or else because the expulsive Faculty
of the Brain is provoked by the sharpness of the Humors in the Brain, or by
the vapors that are exhaled from the inferior parts; as it is often seen in
those that are sick of an Ague: or lastly by reason of some particular
distemper of the eyes, as Exulceration, Fistula, Opthalmy, Running of the eyes,
or the like, as also by Smoke, Dust, or other like external causes.

As concerning voluntary Tears, it was the Opinion of Empedocles long since,
that when any one was surcharged with any strong passion of the Mind, the Blood
was troubled, and from thence followed Tears, in like manner as whey comes
from Milk. Alexander Aphrodisaeus is of opinion, that the Melancholy Humor
having shut up and encompassed the Heart; the Humidity endeavors to show it
self, where it finds the freest passage.

But we say, that the material cause of Tears, is the same with that of
Spittle; which is, the Abundance of serosity remaining in the Brain, after the
third concoction: by reason whereof old men, women, and young children, are
more inclined to weeping, then any other.

Now this moisture flows from the eyes, either by reason of the compression of
the Brain, during the time of sadness: or else by the Dilatation of it; as we
often see it comes to pass in those that are charged with some sudden great
joy, or else ^augh extremely. For as much then as Lovers are subject to all
these passions, Avic. Arnald.
of Joy, Laughter and Sadness: it is evident that they are not Involuntary
Tears that fall from Lovers eyes, which, as we have already showed, are
generally dry and void of Tears, but only the Voluntary, as when they either
doubt, or else despair of their Mistresses favor. And hence it is that we
shall observe Poets so often representing unto us Lovers weeping and lamenting:
Because that Love is also delighted in Tears, according to the Poet.

Nonnihil aspersis gaudet Amor Lachrymis. Propert. l. 1. Eleg, 11.
Yet will I not therefore presently conclude, that this sign is
Pathognomicall, nor scarcely Certain; especially in women, who as the Poet
says,

Quove volunt plorant tempore, quovt modo. Have the command of their Tears,
and can weep, when, and how they please.

CHAP. XVIII. The causes of Waking, and Sighs in Lovers.
THe causes of those continual wakings Arnald. c. de Amor. Gordon. de Am.
which oppress Lovers, making them more Melancholy, sad, lean, and Dry,

(Attenuant Iuvenum vigilatae corpora noctes.) Are, the diverse Imaginations
and Fancies that steal into the Brain, and never suffer them to take any
quiet repose: whence the Brain becomes Dry and Cold; Besides that from the
natural Melancholy, which is naturally Cold, and as dry as dust, there cannot
be exhaled any sweet and gentle vapors, which by their moisture should loosen
the nerves, and discharging them of their office, may so cause withal a
cessation of all sense and motion.

And if by chance they be surprised by any light slumber, which is the
provision Nature has made for the repairing of the Animal spirits, which in
them are wasted and much impaired, by the violence of their Imagination, and
excessive wakings: that slumber is attended on by a thousand Phantasmes, and
fearful dreams; so that they awake oftimes more discontented, sad, pensive,
melancholy, and fearful, then before; and for the most part they find
themselves more tormented sleeping, then waking.

Sighing is caused in Melancholy Lovers, by reason that they many times forget
to draw their breath, being wholly taken up with the strong Imaginations that
they have, either in beholding the beauty of their Loves, or else, in their
Absence, contemplating on their rare perfections, and contriving the means how
to compass their Desires. So that at length recollecting themselves, Nature is
constrained to draw as much Air at once, as before it should have done at two
or three times. And such a Respiration is called, a Sigh; which is indeed
nothing else, but, a doubled Respiration.

CAP. XIX. During what age men and women are subject to this disease of
Love-Melancholy.
NOtwithstanding that Democritus, as Epist. ad Demag.
Hippocrates has reported him, says, that all Mankind from their very birth
are subject not only to Diseases in general, but even to this of love also in
particular: (...). Yet can it not be denied, but that some diseases are more
appropriate to certain ages, and seasons, then others are, as the same Author
affirms, Aphor. 19. lib. 3. And in his Praedict. Coac. he definitively sets
down the limits of time, wherein a man is subject to all kind of diseases, to
be, betwixt the age of fourteen years, and forty two: (...). It remains
therefore that we examine, whether or no, a man is not subject to this malady
of Love, without the compass of these years.

Love being, as Plato says, a strong desire of generation: of necessity, so
long as a man is able to perform the Act of Generation, so long he is also
subject to Love, and (if he restrain not his desires within the bounds of
Reason,) to Love. Melancholy also. Now some Authors affirm, that a man is
able to engender at nine, or ten years of age: and they go about to confirm
this their Assertion, by the examples of King Solomon, and Achaz, who had
children, when they were but ten, or eleaven years old, at the most: which S.
Gregory, S. Hierome, and Albertus Rosarius affirm that themselves have known
by experience in some others. And, (which seems a thing incredible,) Pliny
reports, that among the Indians, the Plin. l. 7. c. 2
Mandri and Calingi have children at five, or six years of age.

But on the contrary, some again there are, that would deprive men of this
power, so long as they are under the age of Caes. 6 de Bell. Gal.
twenty: and for this cause the Germans forbid carnal copulation to young
folk, before they have attained unto the age of twenty years.

But the most received opinion is, that men and women are subject to this
disease of Love-Melancholy, as soon as ever they are entered into those years,
in which they begin Pubescere, to come to their Puberty: which appears in men
chiefly by their voice, which at that time grows greater and harsh withal,
and in women it may be known by observing their breasts, which about this time
begin to swell and grow bigger, and that for the most part, about the age of
twelve, or Fourteen: And this is now the general Rule, by which their Puberty
is known, Jndagatione corporis inhonesta cessante; Lib. 1. Instit. tit, 22. l.
vult. C. quando tut. esse desin.
by the Constitutions of the Emperor Justinian.

And as concerning those Instances of K. Solomon, and Achaz, above mentioned,
we answer, that though perhaps it be granted that they are true; yet are they
very rare, and scarcely to be paralleld: and that such persons being for the
most part, very short-lived, (for Solomon lived not above fifty years:) it
seems in a manner necessary, that their Puberty should be earlier in them,
then in other men: it being the Justice of Nature, that those Creatures that
must soon meet their Period, should as suddenly arrive to their Perfection and
Maturity: as we may observe in women, who, according to Aristotle, (...), as
they are ripe sooner then men, so do they commonly fail before them.

Now as youth, or Puberty opens the way to Love; so in like manner does old age
shut it up. Which Solon finding in himself, be gave the Gods great thanks for
sending him so great a blessing as old age was; wherein he enjoyed more
contentment and pleasure, by being freed from his former youthful Amorous
heats, then he felt discommodity or trouble in Pol. l. 4. c. 16. and l. 5. de
Hist. Anim. c. 14, and l. 7. c. 6.
his old age.

Aristotle says, that it is about the age of threescore and ten, that old men
begin to be out of Cupids reach, and bid Defiance to Venus. And therefore the
Emperor Tiberius thought those men worthy to be punished that at these years
were not able to govern their desires, but suffered themselves to be overcome
by this youthful Passion of Love: and to this purpose enacted the Law called
Papia Poppaea, for the restraining of this Abuse. And to this the Poet Gallus
seems to allude, when he thus breaks out into an Exclamation.

O miseri, quorum gaudia crimen habent. How miserable is the condition of
Mankind, when as their very pleasures are numbered out unto them by their
Punishments?

But Avenzoar confutes Aristotle's opinion Lib. 2. tr. 3. c. 1.
by many forcible Arguments; which for brevity's sake I shall omit: only adding
in confirmation hereof, the examples of King Masinissa, who got a child when
Plin. l. 7. c, 14.
he was fourscore year old: and Cato the Censor, who did the like at
threescore and fifteen. Our Historians go yet farther, and report for
certain, that Vladislaus, King of Polonia, had two sons, when he was
fourscore and twelve, or thereabout. And Felix Platerus in his Medic.
Observat. says, that his Father had a Daughter at fourscore: and his Fathers
great Grandfather had a son after he was a hundred years old.

I grant that in the greatest part of old men, after they are once threescore,
all their desires, (excepting that of Covetousness,) are (...), as Plutarch
expresses it, Toothlesse: yet will we not exempt them wholly from this disease
of Love. For besides those examples already alleged; we read, that Theseus
was above threescore years old, when he was so enamoured of the beauteous
Helen, that he ravished her. And we are taught by daily experience, that the
Emperor Claudius, who succeeded in the Empire the next but one to Tiberius,
not without very just cause abrogated the Poppaean Law.

CHAP. XX. The Signs whereby we may know those that are inclined to
Love-Melancholy.
ARistotle in his Ethics, and Tully in his Tusculan Questions, distinguish
betwixt (...), the Lover, and (...), the Amorist: as we distinguish betwixt
Ebri^us, one that is Drunk, and Ebriosus, a Drunkard. Because that a Lover, is
one that is indeed fallen in Love; but an Amorist, is one that is inclined to
this Folly, either by his Natural Constitution and Temper of Body; or else by
reason of his Education, Discipline, Custom, or the Like.

The Diagnostick signs of the Lover we have already delivered in the precedent
Chapters; It remains now that we set down those by which the Amorist is to be
known: seeing our Intention is, to prescribe as well the means to prevent
this Malady, as the Remedies to cure it.

In the First place then we are to consider Hip. l. de steril. and l. 4. de
morb. not. Gal. l. 1. ad Glan. c. 1.
the constitution and Habit of the whole Body, when so ever we desire to know,
to what Diseases any one is subject. For by this means Helen knew that Paris
was fitter for Cupids service, then for Mars.

Quod been te iactas, and fortia facta rece^sen
A verbis facies dissidet ista tuis.
Aptamagis veneri quam sunt tua Corpora Marti:
Bella gerant fortes: tu Pari semper Ama.
Thou brag'st well: But this smooth cheek speaks thee far
More apt for Venus, then for Mars his war.
Let others fight; and on their enemies prove
Their ruder strength: my Paris thou shall love.
In the second place, the Temperature of the Principal, and secret parts is to
be considered; of which I shall speak more hereafter, in the Chapter of
Physiognoms only in this place giving you to understand, that a hot and dry
Temperature, or ^se such a one as is only hot; is the most ^nclined to Love. We
must also observe the parties Complexion: for we see that ^ose that are of a
sanguine Complexion, ^re generally very Amorous: Not that I would have a man
always wear a sad, towning, austere Countenance.

Habet tristis quoque Turba Cynaedos. Mart. l. 7. Ep. 57.
For under such a one there ofttimes lies hid the strongest Inclination to
lasciviousness.

^n the next place we shall do well to consider the age: for commonly the
younger Arist. l. 7. de Hist. anim. c. 1. and l. 5. de genesis anim. c. 7.

Alex.

Aphrod. l. 1. Probl. 123.

Cael. l. 15. c. 24. Al^. Botton. c. 15. de morb. mul.


people are more subject to this di^case, then the elder: especially while they
have a harshnesse in their voice, which the Greeks call (...); the Latins,
Hircire: And in wenches, when their Breasts begin to burgeon, which the greeks
all (...), the latin Fratrare, Sororiare, Catullire: At which time, Aristotle
warns all Fathers to have a strict eye over their Daughters, and not to suffer
them to converse with young men, especially such a^ are given much to
Courtship: Because that at this time they have an extreme raging desire over
all their Body.

But old men on the contrary side, are as much averse from venery, unless they
be naturally very leacherous. For Enripides says, that Venus is displeased
with old men: And for this cause the Heathens, (at Plutarch reports) accounted
those Marriages that were celebrated in the month of May, Disasterous, and
ominous; as some superstitious Christians also do at this day: because that
Venus hated this month, as being consecrated to the honor of old age.

Lacydes, King of the Argians, was known to be in love, by his over curious
trimming and curling of his hair: as was Pompey the great also, by the nice
scratching of his head with one finger.

Magnus, quem metuunt omnes, digito caput uno
Scalpit. Quid credas hunc sibi ved^ virum?
He, whom the world fears, nicely with one nail
His head does scratch; what, think ye, does he aile?
Our Ladies have the same opinion of ^ose men that are very hairy, that
Aristo^^e has; (...). Hairines, says ^^, is a sign of the abundance of
Excrements: And for this reason, those men that ^e hairy, are fuller of seed,
and therefore Jo. Bapt. Porta.
^re addicted to Venery, then those that ^e smooth. As it is also observed in
the are, who being extreme hairy, as having ^ly among all other living
creatures, ^ire also on the ball of his feet, is withal counted one of the
most lustful creatures Polemon.
that is.

On the contrary a woman cannot en^re a man that has but little Beard; not ^^
much, for that they are commonly cold ^^d impotent, as that, so much resembling
^unuches, they are for the most part in^ined to baseness, cruelty, and
deceitfulness. Such a one, as Plato reports, was Melitus Pitheus, that was
Socrates his ^lse accuser, and in regard of that very thing excepted against by
Socrates.

But this is then found most true, when they are lean withal, and have thin,
ho^ Iow, shriveled Cheeks. For, as the Physiognomists say, these marks denote
Adamant. Porta.
man to be of a filthy, lustful disposition and that by reason of the
Imaginative Faculty being depraved: but withal, Envious, Crafty, and
consequently a knave; according to the doctrine of the Philosopher, (...). in
Physiogni.


Their Extraction and Descent and things also very considerable; as well for
that children may have the same Temperature both of the Principal parts, as
also of those that serve for Generation, that their Parents have: as also by
reason of ba^ discipline, and ill example. We might also Aul Gellius. l. 12.
Noct. Attic. c. 2.
add to these, the milk of the nurse, which as Phavorinus affirms, is of very
great force, either in correcting, or corrupting as well the manners of the
mind, as the Constitution of the Body: for as much as those always follow the
Temperature o^ the Body. And of this opinion the Po^^ also seems to be, where
he brings Dido, reproaching Aeneas with his Education, and thus upbraiding him
with his cruelty.

Non tibi Diva parens, generis nec Dardanus author, Aeneid. 4.

Perfide: sed duris genuit te cautibus horrens
Caucasus; Hircanaeque admorunt ubera Tigres.
No Goddess brought thee forth: nor can thou be
Derived, false man, from Trojan Ancestry.
But thou, from some hard, unrelenting Rock
Descended art; and Tigers gave thee suck.
Michael Scotus, discoursing on this point, reports that he had seen a child
that had been nursed up by a sow; who when he was now grown to some bigness,
would eat immoderately, as Hogs do; and delighted very much to tumble and
wallow up and down in durty places. And he te^s a story of another, that had
been brought up by a shee-goat, who in his going skipped after the manner of
Goats, and would ever be pilling and eating the bark of Trees.

Hippocrates, Ptolomy, and Vegetius, affirm that the Air, Climat, and place
of Veget. l. 1. c. 2.
their Birth are of very great consideration in this particular: Et Plaga
Caeli, non solum ad robur Corporis, sed etiam Animorum facit, says Vegetius:
The Climat conduces much, not only to the strength and perfect Temperature of
the Body, but of the mind also, and its faculties. And indeed we see commonly
that the Germans are great Drinkers, the Spaniards proud, the English
deceitful, the French unconstant, the Athenians witty, the Thracians dull, the
Sarmatians Chaste but the Neopolitans, Asians, Africans, and Egyptians, very
lascivious and addicted to Venery. And Ovid makes the Thracians also bear them
company, when he speaks thus of Tereus.

Digna quidem facies ast hunc innata libido
Extimulat; pronumque genus regionibus illis
Jn Venerem: and flagrat vitio gentisque, suoque.
Translated by G. S.
Her face was excellent: But inbred lust
Enraged his blood; to which those Climes are prone;
Stung by his Countries Fury, and his own.
But these signs are very uncertain, and merely conjecturall: For, as
Apuleius says, Apud socordissimos Scythas Anacharsis sapiens natus est: and
apud Athenienses, Melecides fatuus: The wise Anacharsis was descended from the
dull heavy Scythian: and Athens brought forth Melecides, a Fool.

But what shall we say to that story of a little blind Dog in Italy in the time
of the Emperor Justinian, who, as Nicephorus Niceph. l. 17. c. 32.
reports it, was able by certain signs to give notice of such persons as were
any way touched with unchaste desires? Or the Bird Porphyrion, mentioned by
Dupreau, in Anno 563, that would make as though she would strangle her self,
if she but perceived an Amorous or an adulterous person within her Masters
house? Or to the Water of Trial, used by the ancient Hebrews, for to prove
whether P. Belon.
a married woman had been dishonest or no: Of which water an unchaste woman had
no sooner tasted, but she began presently to be very dry; whereas on the
contrary, if the suspicion were unjust, she thereby recovered a more perfect
state of health then before. And lastly to another Fountain, the virtue
whereof was such, Fulgos. l. 8. Ebor. tit. de absol. reor.
that if any unchaste woman touched it, the water would burn her flesh; but did
no hurt at all to those women that were chaste. Which Gangolphe, wife to a
certain Burgonian, supposing to be fabulous, for the satisfaction of her
Husband, who had but just cause to be jealous, would needs one day thrust her
arm into the Fountain: but she presently drew it forth again, all scorched
and burnt? What shall we say (I say) to all these, but only that God has given
to many things such hidden qualities, as that the most learned Philosopher can
render no sound evident reason of them. Nature rerum vis atque Majestas in
omnibus momentis fide caret: says Pliny: Plin. l. 7. c. 1.
In all things of strange and miraculous production, the power and Majesty of
Nature transcends all belief.

Multa tegit sacro involucro Natura; neque ullis Lucretius.

Fas est scire quidem mortalibus omnia, Multa
Admirare modo, nec non venerare; neque illa
Inquires, quae sunt Arcanis proxima. Namque
In manibus quae sunt, haec nos vix scire putandum est.
Est procul a nobis adeo praesentia very.
Wise Nature many things with mists does veil:
And then decrees, man's knowledge here shall fail.
Her secrets, of our wonder then must be
The Object, not our curiosity.
We scarcely know the things before our eyes.
So dark, and hidden are truths Mysteries.
It is much more easy to show a reason Lemni. de occul. not. mir. c. 30.
of the discovering of unchaste persons by the stones in their Rings, or other
Jewels: which are thought to change their color, and become obscure, dark,
and pale, by reason of those vapors, that arise from the unchaste lustful
bodies of those that wear them: an experience whereof I my self have seen in
the Eranos, or Turquois stone. Prol. Centil. prop. 51.


The Genethliacall Astrologers have other signs, more subtle, though perhaps
not much more certain; which they take Iul. Firm.
from the Horoscope. They say, that if one be borne when Mars and Venus are in
conjunction, he will undoubtedly be inclined to Love and Erotique Melancholy;
but perhaps much to his own damage. For if the Sun rise, under the
Conjunction of these two Planets, he will not be

Felicior Astro Martis; ut in laqueos non incidat. Aristotle, in his Politics,
will have the Pol. l. 2. c. 9.
meaning of this to be, that Martialists, and men of war, are easily taken
Prisoners by Cupid: (...): All these kind of men (says he,) are very prone to
Venery. And the Physicians say, that the Astrologers, by Venus, understand
Phlegm, or rather Blood; and by Mars, Choler: For Mars is hot and dry; and
Venus moist: which two Complexions, being met together, Ficin. c. 9. orat. 7.
in conv. Plat. Franc. Valler. Observe. 7. l. 2. Equi. c. 2. l. 4. denat. Amor.
do make the persons inclined to mutual Love. The same judgment do they
give of him that is borne, when Venus is in Leo; or when the Moon, and Venus
do mutually aspect each other: or else when Jupiter is in a Trine, or Sextile
aspect with the Sun, or Mercury; especially if it happen on the second, or
fifteenth day of the Moon

But there is no great heed to be taken, what these men say, who are for the
most part (in the opinion of S. Augustine) mere S. Aug. confel. l. 7. c. 6 and
l. 2. de Doctr. christ. c. 21
Cheaters and Impostors: as you may see proved at large by Joan. Picus
Mirandula, in his 12 books that he has written against Judiciary Astrologers,
being moved thereto, because that one of them, named Bulanus, had cast his
Nativity, and Cardan. Aph. 63. Segm. 1. Aph. Astro.
told him that he should live but 34 years: which indeed afterward fell out
accordingly. In which books of his, he seems to have comprehended all that
can be said against these Fumi venditores: and he has also been seconded by
his Nephew Franciscus Io: Picus, in his Iul. Siren. l. de Fato. Miran. l. 22.
23. 24. M. Medina. l. de rect. in Deum side. c. l. Vultur. l 3. de art. Mil. c.
1.
books, De Praenot. and many other Modern writers.

Nevertheless, seeing that Galen, the Prince of Rational Physicians, Lib. 3.
de Dieb. Decret. cap. 5. and 6. seems to attribute great virtue to the
Influences of the Planets over sublunary bodies, and divides them, as the
Astrologers do, into Influences Benign, and Malign. And because that many
endeavor to prove, that no man can be a good Physician, without the knowledge
of Genethliacall Astrology, which, they say, is grounded on experience, as
Physic is; and has its Aphorisms, as certain, as any our Faculty has: And
on the other side again, there are some that over-superstitiously abhor the
very name of an Astrologer; accounting them to be mere Magitians and
Conjurers: I think it fit so far to justify this Art, as to show the
certainty and profit of it, which I shall do in the ensueing Chapter, and
withal shall show, what use it has in Physic: since that Hippocrates says,
that Physic and Astronomy are sisters, and Both daughters of one and the same
Father, Apollo.

CHAP. XXI. Whether or no, by Astrology, a Man may know such as are inclined to
Love-Melancholy.
AStrology, as it is defined by some Philosophers, is a Part of Natural Arist.
1. Phys. c. 2. Fonsec. 2. Met. c. 3. q. 3.
Philosophy, discoursing of the Stars and their motion and Influences: and
was found out at first by one Actinus, who Pol. Virg. de Invent. l. 17. c. 17.
S. Aug. l. 18. de Civ. Dei.
for this cause was surnamed, Solis Filius: or else, as some others will have
it, by Mercury; or his Grandfather Atlas, who, for this reason, is fained by
the Poets to bear up the Heavens with his shoulders. Servius, on the sixth of
Virgils Eclogues, Plin. l. 1. c. 15. and 16. Diod. Sicul. l. 4.
attributes the glory of this Invention to Promerheus; Pliny, to the
Phoenicians; or else to Jupiter Belus: and Diodorus Siculus, to the Egyptians;
who were first instructed in this science, by the Patriarch Abraham, (as
Josephus in his Jewish Antiquities affirms:) who, by considering the glory and
beauty of the Heavens, ^^ richly adorned and bespangled with so in numerable a
company of stars, was stirred up to the Contemplation also of the Divine
power and goodness and Providence: as afterward, in imitation of him diverse
other Philosophers also have been. For Astrology, says Plato in Timaeo, and in
Legib. recalls the minds of men Procl^in Cic. de not. Deor.
from Impiety and Atheism, unto Religion, and the knowledge of one true God,
the First Mover, and Principle of all things. And for this cause, Astrology i^
called by diverse Authors Natural Theology: and Ptolomy affirms it to be the
Clau. Praefat. in Io. de Sacrob.
way and Path that leads to the knowledge of one God.

It is commonly divided into Astronomy, Pet. de Alliac. in conc. Theol. and
Astron.
or Theoreticall Astrology; and Judiciary, Prognosticall, Conjecturall
Astrology, or Practical Astronomy: which is again of Three Sorts. The first
is that which foretells the changes and vicissitudes of things; as Rain,
Floods, Winds, Faire-weather, Drouth, Pestilence, health, death, peace, war
and the like. The second delivers the Method and order of ^^oceeding in
erecting Figures, and cast^^g Nativities; and is therefore called,
Ge^thliacall. The third and last teaches ^w to make choice of times to begin
^ildings, Iourneys, Suits of Law, etc. which is too superstitiously observed
and ^ught by diverse Physicians; as namely, ^. Aponensis, Paracelsus, Arnaldus
de ^illa nova, Dariot, and others. Notwithstanding Hippocrates, and Galen, with
di^erse L. de aet. loc. and aq. Gal. l. 3. de dieb. decret Delrio l. 4. c. 3.
q. 1. disq. mag.
other learned men, both Philosophers and Physicians, confound Judiciary, ^r
conjecturall Astrology, with Astronomy: for that the Predictions are grounded
^n the Course, Motion, Conjunctions, Oppositions, and Diverse Aspects of the
stars; all which Astronomy teaches.

Now Manard, and many other learned Lib. 2. Epist. 1. and l. 15. ep. 5. Phys.
l. 8. and l. 2. de genesis and cor. and 1. de Caelo.
Physicians and Astrologers maintain, (according to the doctrine of Aristotle)
that the stars work not upon ^ublunary Bodies, but only by their Heat and
Motion. Caelum, (says he,) in haec inferiora agit, mediante Lumine, and Motu.
And they say, that whatever Hippocrates, Plato, or Avicen have said, concerning
Astrology, must be understood as spoken o^ Astronomy: in like manner as Cels^^
takes the Heaven, for the Air, in imitation of the Poets: And Avicen, by the
Caelestiall powers, understands, Certam and Praefinitam Qualitatum primarum
Mensuram, and Coelestium syderum accessu and recessu progenitam; A certain
Proportion and measure of the Primary Qualities, produced by the Motion of the
stars, which he calls, Occult; because that we cannot have any perfect
knowledge of it, no more, then of the manner how the Elements are mixed in the
constitution of sublunary Bodies; as Averroes says.

John Taxil, a French writer, being very much offended with a certain
scrupulous Bigot, that had taxed him of error and impiety in his Cometology;
has put forth a learned tract of Astronomy, which he dedicates to Msieua du
Vair: where he proves out of Thomas Aquinas. that as a Physician can judge of
the Goodness of Aquin. l. 3. cont. gent. c. 54. 84. and 86.
the understanding, by the Complexion and Temperature of the Brain, as by the
Immediate cause: In like manner may an Astrologer, by means of the Caelestiall
motions, as by the Remote cause, judge ^ the Disposition. And thence he
concludes, that Astrologers oftimes hit right ^ their Predictions concerning
the Man^rs of men; yet still without imposing a^^ necessity on Future events,
which ^ay diverse ways be hindered. And this the opinion also of M. Delrio, who
affirms in his Disquis. Mag. Lib. 6. cap. 3. ^1. that, Astrologiae illa
species non est su^rstitiosa, si tantum profitetur opinionem, ^u suspitionem
oppositi. v. g. suspitio est ^unc puerum fore talem; inclinabitur ad ^ec;
Horoscopus illi talia portendit etc. Li^t enim nobis metuere, aut suspicari
simi^a, neque ullum peccatum in hac Observati^is cautione versatur; quae est
Portio quaeam Prudentiae, and ideo secundum se Bona. This kind of Astrology is
not superstitious, ^ it only pretend an opinion or suspicion ^f such and such
Accidents, as may befall a man. As for example; if it be only propo^ed thus:
that there is a suspicion, that a Child will be thus, or thus; or he shall be
^nclined to these things; or the stars por^end, that such things shall befall
him; etc. ^or in these cases, we may lawfully fear, or suspect, that such may
fall out, an^ therefore it can be no sin at all, if we study to prevent them:
it being a gre^^ point of wisdom to be cautelous; an^ therefore in it self
good. Cardinal To let repeats almost the same words, in h^ Lib. 4. Instruct.
Sacerd. cap. 15. For it can not be concluded from hence, that Astrologers do
impugn the freedom of the Will: seeing that the Pagans themselves never
thought, that the stars did Inforc^ our will; but rather, that a wise man ha^
power to rule the Stars.

But the Astrologers say, that the starre^ Ptol. Cent. l. 1. quadr. c. 3.
may move our will, Jndirecta motione, is est, remote, and ex accidente: eam
inclinando interventu Organorum corporis, and potentiarum ei inhaerentium. That
is to say Indirectly, and by Accident; working upon it by the mediation of the
Organ and faculties of the Body. Astra non cogunt, (says Iunctinus, in spec.
Astrol.) The stars have no coactive power over us.

Hac distinctione manifestum est, quantum errarint Neoterici, nescientes
distinguere hoc nomen Astrologiae. Omnes enim S. Scripturae Autoritates, and
omnes feri leges adversantur opinioni Stoicae, and Prisanistae; Can. non licet
26. q. 5. gios. in verb. propt. seget.
and non huic Astrologiae, a S. Theogis decantatae, and quam S. Canones
conssere.

We conclude then, with Rodericus a Medi. apel. l. c. c. 2.
astro, that Judiciary Astrology is of two ^rts, Natural, and Artificial, or
Imagi^ry: and these two differ from each other ^ three things. In the first
place, the Natural or Physical Astrology, observes the ^aturall Influences
and Impressions of ^e Stars; such as may be proved by ^nse, and Natural
demonstration: But ^e Artificial forgeth certain influences ^f Constellations
and Imaginary Aste^smes, which they call Occult Proper^es; because they cannot
be proved, neither by Demonstration, nor experience: ^s when they say, that
those that are ^orn under Venus will be Amorous, when ^hey come to ripeness of
years; under Mars, Choleric, under Mercury, Elo^ent; under Luna Fools;
under Capri^orne, Kings: etc.

In the second place, Natural Astrology believes, that the Virtues and
influences of the stars have no power to work on our minds, but only by
Accident, and Indirectly, and that by reason of the Sympathy that is betwixt
it, and the Body which is also the reason why the Manner of the mind do follow
the Temperature of the Body.

Lastly Physical, or Natural Astrology Sueton. in Caes. Ner. and Domit. Val.
Max. l. 8. c. 11. Volat. l. 13.
undertakes not to foretell certainly and precisely Particular events, as does
the Imaginary: by which Julius Caesar had foretold him, that he should not
outli^^ the Ides of March: Aeschilus the Poet that he should dye by a blow on
his head Plin. l. 10. c. 3.
Nero, that he should be Emperor; bu^ that he should also be the bloody
murderer Tacit. an. l. 14.
of his own Mother Agrippina: tha^ Ascletarion should be torn in pieces and
eaten by dogs: that Galba, Vitelli^^ and Tiberius should be Emperors.

All which are Events, that depend either on Fortune; that is to say, on no
certain Determinate cause; or else on ou^ own wills, over which the Stars
have no more power, then they have over the understanding, on which the will
depend. But, which is worse then this, the^^ Judiciary Astrologers attribute to
tha^ Stars the power of working miracles, and a thousand such like
superstitious fol^ies. And sometimes also, under the pre^ext of Judiciary
Astrology, they impiously meddle with the black Art: which caused Pope Sixtus
Quintus to thunder out his Excommunication against Judiciary Astrology, and all
those that professed any such Mathematical Arts.

Keeping my self therefore to the Doctrine of Catholic Church, to the
censure whereof I submit all my writings; (notwithstanding that Cardan
confidently Aphor. 27. segm. 5. Aph. Astr.
^ffirmes, that it is easier to know by Judiciary Astrology, the Passions and
Affections of men, then to foretell winds, rain, and hail: because that the
hour of a child's nativity may more certainly be known, then that of the
gathering together of so many vapors, and their (...), or evaporation:) my
opinion is, that by judiciary Astrology it cannot bee^ known, whether or no
such a one is subject to such and such Passions, and therefore not to love, or
Erotique Melancholy. For, as Ptolomy says, Soli Divino Numinc Centil. prop. 1.
^fflati, praedicunt Futura Particularia: None can foretell Particular events,
but those only that have this gift by Divine Inspiration. For otherwise, why
might not these Wizards, as well foresee the unlawful dealing and foul play
of their own wives and Daughters: which yet they are as ignorant of, as the
simplest and most unlettered man that is. For which S. Thomas More wittily
jeeres them in an Epigram of his.

Astra tibi Aethereo pandunt sese omnia vati,
Omnibus and quae sunt Fata futura monent.
Omnibus ast uxor quod se tua publieat, id te,
Astra, licet videant omnia, nulla monent.
The Stars, to thee, their Prophet, do reveal
The Fates of all: and naught from then conceal.
Yet though thy wifes false play the Stars All see,
There Is none of them so kind, to tell it thee.
And for answer to all those instances before alleged, for the certainty of
Astrologicall Predictions, we say, with the Poet Euripides, that these kind of
Fellows In Iphigen.
are furnished with lies at all times, and very seldom tell the truth; being,
as the Epigrammatist styles them, the Sons of ^mpudence and Rashness, and
nursed up by Folly.

(...) Leonid. in Anthol.
(...). CHAP. XXII. Whether, or no, by Physiognomy, and Chiromanyc, a man may
know one to be Jnclined to Love.
GAlen, relying upon the Authority of Lib. de cub. aegror.
Hippocrates, affirms, that those men that take upon them to profess the Art
of Physic, without the perfect knowledge of Physiognomy, are as it were in
perpetual darkness, and commit many gross Absurdities and Errors: For as
much as Physiognomy is a part of Semioticall Medicine, which the Naturalists
divided into Metoposcopy, Chiromancy, and Particular Physiognomy. Now of all
these kinds, the first is the most certain, because that the Face is, as it
were, the Epitome, Index, and picture of the soul, representing by its diverse
Characters and extract of all the Titles of its Nobleness: And is therefore
placed in the Frontispice of this Fabric of our body, to the end it may be
known, that there she keeps her Court, and chiefest Residence. Animi est omnis
actio: and Imago Animi vultus est. The Soul is the Original cause and
Principle of all our motions and actions: and the Face is the Image of the
soul. Indices Lib. 3. de orat.
oculi, says Tully, quos Natura dedit, ut Equo, and Leoni set as, caudam,
Aures, ad motus declarandos. And therefore Alexanander Aphrodisaeus calls the
eyes, (...), the looking-glasses of the soul. It seems, says Plotinus, that
whatsoever is Fair and Beautiful, is also Good; for both these the Greeks
express by one and the same name, (...): as if, says he, the external beauty
of the Body, depended on the Internal Form. And therefore the Ancient Greeks,
considering this, accounted only those men that were of a Beautiful and comely
Aspect, to be worthy of the Crown and Scepter.

(...). And they prove this their opinion by the Examples of Priamus, Achilles,
Saul, Cyrus, Darius, Alexander, Augustus, Hecuba, Andromache, Esther, and many
others, in whom the Beauty and Perfection of the Soul, was attended on by that
also of the Body: because that the beauty of the Body depends on the goodness
of the Constitution and Temperature, according to Galen. Now it is agreed on,
on Lib. 1. de San. tuend.
all sides in our Schools, that a good and commendable complexion, is of times
the cause of the Laudable Actions of the Body; and consequently of those also
of the Mind. Multaenim in Corpore existunt, quae acuant mentem: multa quae
obtundant. Says Tully Tuscul. 1. There are many things in the Body that
conduce much to the sharpening of the Mind and understanding: and there be also
many things that dull it. And therefore Hippocrates in his Epidemicks lib. 6.
Sect. 5. is of opinion, that it imports much to Wisdom, to be Lean: (...).
For those that are over-fat, Exhort. ad Bon disc. Lib. 1. de san. tuend. L. 4.
de Plac.
says Galen, have their soul as it were buried in a heap of dirt; and
therefore such men are commonly heavy, and dull as a brute beast. Homer also
speaking of Thersites, that notorious Buffoon, whom Achilles slew with a box
on the ear, describes him to be ill-favored, of a ridiculous dwarfe-like
stature, with a sharp little head, ((...)) intimating unto us, that such men
are generally Mischievous, Envious, Impudent, and vainglorious fellows. So
Salust also notes Catiline for his Deformity, and Baseness of Conditions: and
the ill-favored looks of Julian the Apostate, was an Evident Argument of his
Accursed Life.

On the contrary, we see commonly Epidem. l. 2. sect. 5. 1.
that, as Hippocrates observes, those that drawle out their words, and stammer
in their speech; (...), are of a good Nature. And again, those that have little,
dry, hollow eyes, with a long, thin wrinkled visage, are lewd, crafty,
slanderous, Aristot. Polem. Porta.
envious, covetous, treacherous, sacrilegious rascally fellows: Especially, if
they are wont to look very steadfastly on any thing, and use to bite their lips
when they are thinking of their business: But above all, if they have but
little beard.

Poco barba, and men Color:
Sotto'l ciel non e peggiore.
Says the Italian;
He that has but little beard on his face, and less color; there cannot
possibly be found a worse complexion then his. And such a one is that Villain
Melitus Pitheus, the false accuser of Socrates, described to be in Plato. In
Eutyph.


Yet notwithstanding all that I have said, I would not have any man presently
conclude from these signs, on any man's complexion, as if they were always
necessarily true For Alcibiades, who was the most beautiful and comeliest young
man in his time, was notwithstanding a very vicious and envious person. And on
the contrary the wise Socrates, notwithstanding that he had a very ill favored
countenance, and was also bald-headed, hairy all over his body, and flat-nosed;
yet was he pronounced by the Oracle of Apollo, to be the Pattern of Fortitude,
Prudence and Temperance; notwithstanding that he was often sought unto, and
tempted by women: as Tully reports it of him, in his book De Fato. Cum
Socrates videret uxores in se jurgantes, and ille eas deridebat; quod propter
se, foedissimum hominem, simis narribus, recalva front, pilosis humeris
repandis cruribus, discreparent. Not but that he was Naturally inclined to
Lust; as Zopyrus, that famous Physiognomist judged of him, and as himself
ingenuously consessed: but that by Moral Philosophy he had corrected the bad
Inclinations of his own nature.

Now all Physiognomy is grounded, as Physiog c. 1. and 4.
Aristotle says, on the Sympathy that is betwixt the Body and the Mind. (...).
The Habit of the mind being altered, causes an alteration also in the Body:
and so the contrary. For, as the same Author elsewhere concludes, if the
manners of the mind did not all depend on the Temperature of the Body; in vain
should the Physician attempt, with all his Medicines and Helleborismes, the
cure of those that are sick of Love, or any the like Passions. Not that I
would have you think, that these Physiognomicall signs do always
necessarily discover the Passions and Affections of the mind, but only for the
most part, and Probably.

Besides, all Physiognomists affirm, that we ought not peremptorily to
conclude any thing, from the disposition or Temperature of any one part alone:
but we must compare diverse signs together, and so give judgment
accordingly: yet still with this Proviso, that we extend not the Jurisdiction
of this Science any farther, then to those Passions that are Natural to Men,
as Anger, Lust, etc. and not to such things as are of Free Election, as to be
an Astrologer, Physician, Lawyer, or the like.

We conclude then, that a man may know by Physiognomy, not only those that are
actually possessed with this Malady of Love, or Erotique Melancholy; but also
those that are Inclined, or subject unto it. For if I see a man that is Hot,
Hairy, high-colored, with a black thick curled head of hair, great veins,
and a big voice: I dare be bold to say, that that man has a hot and dry Liver,
and his Generative parts are also of the same Temper; and that Gal. in Microt.
Arist. 3. de genesis c. 1. and Probl. 2. sect. 4. and 26. Sect. 10. Sueton.
consequently he is inclined to lustful desires: But I shall be bold to
affirm it more confidently, if he be also Bald withal, as was Socrates,
Galba, Vitellius, Otho, Domitian, and Julius Caesar; (of whom it was once
spoken thus by one at Rome. Vrbani, servate uxores; nam Moechum calvum
adducimus: Citizens, look well to your Wives; for we have brought with Arist.
c. 6. Physiogn. Probl. 19. sect 4. Cap. ult. l. 2. meth. Med.
us a Bald Whoremaster.) Or else, if he have little Ears, a great Nose, thick
weak thighs, over-hanging Eyebrows, or is flat-nosed; as Socrates was.
Valescus de Tarenta, the most famous Physician of his Age, observes the
chapping of the Lips in Women to be a sign of their Inclination to this
Malady: for that it denotes the Intemperate Heat of the Matrix, Quae appetit
(to use his own words) semen, tanquam Lib. 2. de occult. Not Mir. c. 26.
Terra rorem. And Levinus Lemnius affirms the same of those persons that are
Lame, and Cripples: which is the Opinion also of Athenaeus, and Theocritus his
Scholiast, who affirms this to be the reason, which moved the Amazons to make
their Children Cripples: Notwithstanding Lib. de Artic.
Hippocrates, an Author of greater credit then either of these, gives us other
more probable reasons for it.

Aristotle in his Lib. 2. de Gener. Animal. cap. 7. will have the Eyes also to
be very considerable in these Predictions: (...): because, says he, the Eye
is the most Spermaticall part about the Head. And indeed the Wiseman knew an
Adulterous Woman by her eyes better, and with more assurance, then any man can
by the Hand: which cannot, as Averroes faith, denote the Disposition of Lib. 2.
col. c. 4. and 6.
the Body more particularly, then any other of the Members, and consequently
neither our Affections nor Passions, any otherwise then by the beating of the
Arteries in the Wrist; or else perhaps by the figure of the Hand: according to
which, some will undertake to guess at the Temperature of the Liver: Among
which is Avicen, and Rhasis, who by the greatness of the Fingers, pretend to
give a guess at Fen. 2. l. 1. doct. 3. c. 1. and Fen. 14 l. 3. tr. 1.
that of the Liver, and endeavor to confirm this their conjecture both by
reasons, and Experience. For the Veins, being derived from the Liver, as from
their Principium Radicationis and Dispensationis; (for as Hippocrates lib. de
Alimen. affirms, (...), The Liver is the Root, from whence all the Veins do
spring:) and being united, and meeting together in the Hand; they are the cause
of that Mutual and Reciprocal sympathy that there is betwixt these two parts.
And so by consequent, the Temperature of the Liver will appear more evidently
in the Hand, then in many other of the parts of the Body. Besides, the
greatness Th a Vega cap. 8. Art. Med.
of the Fingers is an Argument of the greater Quantity of Matter, which is
communicated by the Liver to the extreme parts of the Body, and also of the
greatness of the Liver it self. Now those that have a great Liver, are for
the most part given to Gluttony; and Gluttons, we know are generally addicted
to Venery and Lasciviousness.

But this Art of Chiromancy, has been C. illud. 26 q. 2. Tol. Sacerd. instr.
c. 15. l. 4
so strangely infected with Superstition, Deceit, Cheating, and (if I durst say
so) with Magic also; that the Canonists, and of late years, Pope Sixtus
Quintus, have been constrained utterly to condemn it. So that now, no man
professes publicly this Cheating Art, but Thieves, Rogues, and beggarly
Rascals; which are now every where known by the name of Bohemians, Egyptians,
and Caramaras; and first came into these parts of Europe, about the year 1417
as G. Dupreau, Albertus Krant. l. 11 P. Virg. l 7. de invent, re^.
Krantz, and Polydor Virgil report.

CAP. XXIII. Whether or no, by Magic a Man may know any one to be in Love.
THere have not been wanting some, that out of those words of Plato, in
Convivio, where he says, that Love is, (...), a great Magician and Inchanter,
have been bold impiously to maintain, that this disease of Love can neither
be found out, nor cured, without the use of Magic. But this opinion of theirs
I shall hereafter in a more convenient place examine, only telling you here;
that as there are some Stomachs of so ill a Complexion, as that they corrupt
the best Meats, in stead of digesting them: so are there some men of so
malicious and virulent a disposition, as that they will not stick to deprave
and corrupt the meaning of the writings of the most Authentic Authors.

It is true indeed, that there are two finds of Magic: the one Natural, and
the other Artificial. By the former of these we understand, an Exact and
Perfect knowledge of the Secrets of Nature; which makes us able to
Prognosticate and ^^retell Future Events, by the knowledge of things Past, and
Present. And this is that Magic which is styled by Hippocrates, ^n Prognost.
and Epidem. the Sister of Medicine; as being both of them Daughters of one
Father, Apollo. (...).

But the Artificial, whether it be Open, ^ative, or Divinative, is most
abominable, and utterly forbidden by all Laws, both Divine and Humane.

Professors of this Impious Art were of old, Numa Pompilius, Zoroaster,
Pythagoras, Hostanus Procones, Democritus, the Egyptian Priests, the Persian
Magi, and the French Druides: and at this present time, as they say, the Jewish
Rabbis. This Accursed Art comprehends within it a Thousand other kinds,
reckoned up by the Canonists, Cap. Illud. 26. q 2 seq. and Cap. Igitur, and
seq, q, 3. and also by Giraldus Franciscus Venetus, Polydor Virgil, Veckerus,
Delrio, and Others.

We have also sometimes among out silly Wenches some, that out of a foolish
curiosity they have, must needs be putting in practice some of these Feats that
they have received by Tradition from their Mother perhaps, or Nurse; and so,
not thinking forsooth to do any harm, as they hope, they Paganize it to their
own Damnation. For it is most certain that Botanomancy, which is done by the
noise or crackling that Kneeholme, Box, or Bayleaves make, when they are
crushed betwixt ones hands, or cast into the Fire, was of old in use among the
Pagans, who were wont to bruise Poppy flowers betwixt their hands, by this
means thinking to know their Loves: And for this cause Theocritus calls this
herb (...), quasi (...), as if we should say, Tel-love.

Oionoscopy is a kind of Divination that is performed by the observing of
certain Birds, as Magpies, Crows, Ravens, Sparrowes, Owls, and all those
other kinds of Birds which they call, Oscines. To which kind of Divination
we may also refer those Auguria, so much in use among the Ancient Heathens:
and in fine conclude with the Poet Pacuvius concerning these Bird-masters, who
says thus of them.

Istis, qui ex alieno Iecore intelligunt:
Plusque ex Alieno Iecore intelligunt, quam ex suo,
Magis audiendum, quam auscultandum censco.
Those men, says he, that peep into the Entrals of Beasts, and understand
more thence, then from their own Insides; I think they are to be heard only,
rather then hearkened to.

Theocritus in his Idyllia, makes mention of the Art of Coscinomancy, which is
to be done with a Sive, or Search made of Hair: and some others of Cleromancy,
^y the chance or hazard of Fortune, which they call Prenestine. Others speak
also of another kind of Divination, by the opening of a Book at all
adventures: and this was called the Valentinian Chance, and by some Sorts
Virgilianae: of which the Emperor Adrian was wont to make very much use. I
shall omit to speak here of Astragalomancy, that was done with Huckle bones;
Ceromancy, and all other such like fooleries: and conclude, that no man ought
to have recourse unto the Professors of them, either for the finding out, or
curing of this Malady, but rather to a skillful and discreet Physician.

CAP. XXIV. Whether or no by Oniromancy, or the Interpretation of Dreams, one
may know those that are in Love.
MAcrobius upon Tullies somnum Scipionis, and Hugo de S. Victore, make five
kinds of Dreams: but S. Gregory in his Morals, lib. 8. cap. 16. and lib. 4.
Dial. cap. 4. will have them to be six. Tertullian restraines them to Three
sorts; and Hippocrates acknowledges but Two; and those are, either Divine, or
Natural. Now if we should comprehend the Animal, under the Natural; and the
Diabolical, under the Divine; it were an easy matter to reconcile the
differences of these Authors several Opinions. Notwithstanding Aristotle, and
Petronius will not acknowledge the Divine at all.

Somnia quae mentes ludunt volitantibus umbris,
Non delubra Deum, nec ab Aethere lumina mittunt:
Sed sibi quisque facit. Nam cum prostrata sopore
Languent Membra; Quies, and Men's sine pondere ludit;
Scribit Amatori Meretrix dat Adultera numos.
Our Dreams are not upon our slumbers thrown
By the Gods: Each one's the Author of his own.
For when the Soul's wrapped in a gentle Trance,
Wantons dream ore their former dalliance: etc.
The reasons that he brings to prove, that no Dreams are Divine, are in my
Opinion of no validity at all, if a Man but examine them thoroughly: However,
his authority is of less moment and force, then that of Moses; which is also
seconded both by Hippocrates, and Homer; who affirms, that

(...). that is, as Ronsard translates it into French.

Des Dieux ca bas certain viennent les Songs.
Et Dieu n' est pas artisan des Mensonges.
Those Dreams the Gods us send, have sure event.
For they to cousenage nere give consent.
Those Dreams we call Diabolical, that are caused by Evil Spirits: such as
was that of the Emperor Tiberius, who, by the means of a knavish Magician,
was made to Dream, that he must give Him such a certain sum of Money: But
the Emperor, by chance coming to the knowledge of this Cheaters plot, instead
of the money, bestowed a halter upon him for his pains.

The Pagans were wont to expect these Dreams, lying all night upon skins,
spread on the Ground, either in the Temple of Aesculapius, or else in that of
Castor and Pollux, as appears out of Virgil. Aeneid lib. 7.

Pellibus incubuit stratis, somnosque petivit:
Multa modis simulachra videt volitantia miris,
Et varias audit voces; fruiturque Deorum
Colloquio; atque imis Acheronta affatur Avernis.
He, lying down on skins spread on the ground,
Expects his Dream: when straight, encircling round
The sacred Fane, strange awful shapes appear:
Whilst from the Gods, Deep Accents strike his ear.
But the Women, when they were wounded with Cupids dart, would choose rather to
go to the Goddess Bona, then to Aesculapius; if it were Natural Love, and
not that Preposterous Lust, that Nature abhorres: unto which many of them
ofttimes basely yielded up themselves, never thinking of God at all; who for
this abominable sin of theirs, would never remember them, but for their
Punishment. And if perchance they had had some confused Dream or other; then
presently would they have recourse to some cheating Wizards for the
Interpretation of it; which these subtle Rascals would be sure should be such a
one as should please their good Dreaming Dame.

Qualiacunque voles, Iudaeus somnia vendit. Spondet Amatorem teneru^; vel
divitis orbi Testamentum ingens, etc. Natural Dreams are such as are caused
by the Disposition and Temper of the Body. For in sleep, the soul does, as it
were, retire into the most Inmost and Secretest part of her Palace: where being
free from all disturbance, she the more easily apprehends the Disposition and
State of the Body, and enjoyes all things that the can desire, whether Possible
things, or impossible, as though they were present, and in her power.

The consideration of these Dreams, is, by the general consent of all
writers, very necessary in Physic, for the knowledge of the Humor that does
predominate, and to find out the disposition of the Body. For commonly those
that are full of Humors, dream that they carry some great burden upon their
back: whereas on the contrary those, that are free from all Repletion, dream
that they are either running a Race, or leaping, or perhaps Flying in the Air.
The Choleric Dream of Quarrelling, and Fighting; the Melancholy of Funerals,
Darkness, and Mourning. The Phlegmatic and Rheumaticke dream that they are
fallen into Rivers, Wels, Rain and Snow: Those that are Hungry dream of good
cheer, and Feasts; and the Amorist of his Wenches, Sports, Plays and Masks.

And here by the way you are to take notice, that in Dreams all things seem
greater, and either more pleasing or displeasing, then indeed they are: the
reasons whereof, he that desires to see, may have recourse to Thomas a Vega
upon Galen.

The Animal Dreams proceed from those things that a man has either done,
seen, or thought upon in the day time, as Herodotus says: (...): the Fancy in
Sleep is most taken up with those things that the Mind has been busied with
in the day. The Good, says Aristotle have good Dreams: because that when they
were awake, they had good Thoughts in their Mind. Such were the Dreams of the
Primitive Christians; because they continually medicated, says Philo Iudaeus,
on the Power and Providence of God. The Lawyer pleads in his sleep: The
Soldier Fights: The Mariner cuts over the surging Seas; and the Hunter
returns home loaded with his Game. According to that in the Poet.

Iudicibus lites; Aurigae somnia, Currus:
Vanaque nocturnis meta cavatur Equis.
Jaudet Amans furto, etc.
The Lawyer pleads in's sleep: the careful Swains
Manage their pransing Coursers ore the plains.
Lovers dream ore their stolen delights. etc.
And if by chance our dreams be not conformable to our actions and thoughts in
the day time, it is an argument of some distemper among the humors. So that it
seems to be very possible for a man to know, whether one be in Love, or no, by
his Natural and Animal dreams, if so be the party will but truly relate them
at his waking; and that without any regard had at all either to the Stars, or
any other such Fopperies, as are to be found in Iulianus Cervus, Artemidorus,
Arnaldus Villanovanus, and other such like Authors as these, who have infected
the science of Physic with a thousand toys and fooleries.

CAP. XXV. Whether or no, Iealousy be a Diagnosticke sign of Love-Melancholy.
ALexander Piccolomineus in his Ethics, Lib. 10. cap. 7. Labors to prove,
that true Love must be free, and void of all Iealousy: Because that he that
pursues any thing with a virtuous desire, is glad to find any companions in his
pursuit; for this may not only further him in the attaining of it, but may also
serve for an argument of the worth of the Object of his desires. For it is
Weakness only that is afraid of an Encounter, as being conscious of it is own
insufficiency and want of power to resist.

But Plutarch is of the contrary opinion, and says, that as Virtue is not
Praiseworthy, nor produces any laudable effects, unless it elevate the heart,
and raise in it an earnest desire and Emulation, to be like good men, and to be
accomplished with all those Indowments that are requisite for the attainement
of the height of perfection: so Love, if it have not a tin^ure of jealousy, is
neither Active, nor Efficacious. This was it that increased the love of
Achilles to his captive Briseis; of Menelaus to Helen; and of Orestes to
Hereione.

Mcrius Hermionem ideo delexit Orestes,
Esse quod alterius caeperat illa viri.
Quid Menelae doles? Jbas sine conjuge Creten:
Et poteras nupta laetus abesse tua.
Vt Paris hanc rapuit, tum demum uxore carere
Non potes. Alterius crevit amore tuus.
^restes loved Hermione the more,
Cause now she should have been another whore.
Why griev'st thou Menelaus? thou could be
At Creet, without thy wife, or jealousy.
Only thy Love a Rival could not brook.
Thus thine, from Paris love, new forces took.
I for my part am of Simonides his opinion whose saying it was, that as every
Lapwing has a tuft upon his head, so must every true Lover have a touch of
jealousy and that from hence it will necessarily follow, that Phaulius, that
voluntary Cuckold, that played the Pandar for King Philip, with his own wife,
did not love her with any true love. Nor that infamous Galba in Rome, who
having one night invited Mecoenas to come and sup with him, and perceiving him,
as they sat a^ the table, to cast amourous glances on his wife, when supper
was ended, he took occasion to counterfeit himself asleep to the end that
Mecoenas might have the more liberty to court his wife to his desires. Mean
while there comes a servant of his into the room, who finding his Master, as
he thought, asleep, went toward the table, thinking to steal a cup of wine
that stood there: which his Master Galba Perceiving, and not willing to loose
his wine, he hindered his servants purpose with a sudden exclamation; and cries
our unto him, Non omnibus dormio, I do not sleep for every body; but only for
Mecoenas.

Both of these were of the same Nature that the Hee-goat is of: which only,
along all living creatures is observed by ^e Naturalists never to be jealous of
his ^ate: (notwithstanding that the story of ^rathis, who was killed by a
Hee-goat, ^ems to prove the contrary.) Of which condition, the women of
Tartaria are re^orted to be at this day; as of old, the La^daemonian, Cyprian,
Rhodian, and Assy^an were.

But as Iealousy insinuates it self into the Mind under the title and pretense
of ^ood will: so when it has once gotten ^ossession of it, it presently begins
to play ^he Tyrant, and torments it extremely; and makes the Lover look with
a pale, ^eane, and amazed kind of visage, and sometimes casts him headlong into
Despair: as it did Lepidus, and a thousand more. And then the same causes that
served at the first to build Love upon, serve afterward to raise as deadly a
hatred: as namely the Virtues, Beauty, Worth, Reputation of the party beloved.
So that if it were possible for a man to make his choice, from which of all the
evils in the world be free; he could not, in my opinion, make a fitter choice,
then of this mischievous Iealousy. Because that in all others, the pain
endures no longer the the cause: but Iealousy springs indifferently from that
which is, and from that which is not, nor perhaps never shall be. O the
Ingenuity of this Passion! which has the power, out of an Imaginary evil, to
draw a true, and real torment. Thus the famous Painter Parrhasius was wont to
put his own servants to torture, that by seeing them, he might be the better
able t^ express to the life the Pains and Horri^ sufferings of Prometheus.

Why are we so ambitious of our Miseries, as to run to meet them, and make them
prevent Imagination? We see that many have lost their Mistresses, only for
suspecting their Chastity: as we often see those persons that are troubled with
Hypochondriacall Melancholy, to fall sick, with the very fear of being so.

So that we may conclude, that Iealousy of times causes us to be overtaken by
that which we desire most of all to avoyde: and therefore a witty fellow once
said, that Iealousy, and Cuckoldry, had their feast kept both on a day. And
indeed this seems to be confirmed also by many examples; as namely, that of
Danae, who so long as she enjoyed her liberty, continued Chaste: but she was no
sooner imprisoned in the brazen Tower by her jealous Father, but presently she
was lost. For, as the old Comicke Poet says,

(...)
(...),
(...).
There is no door so close, nor closet so secret, where a Cat, and a Wencher
will not find entrance.

CAP. XXVI. The Prognostics of Love, and Erotique Melancholy.
MAny have been of opinion that this disease was altogether incurable; and that
it was wholly Supernatural, and inflicted upon men as a punishment, or revenge
for some evil committed by them, from a kind of little Demon of the same name;
to whom the Pagans attributed the command of Love; as they also did of Fevers,
to the Goddess Febris; the Night Mare to Hecate, or the Demy-Gods; the Terrors
and affrights in the Night, to Pan: the Falling sickness, to Hercules: so
likewise making Cupid the God of Love; Venus, of Lust; Mercury, of Theevery;
and Mars of Choler and Anger: that so by this means they might find the juster
excuse of those outrages, which, when they were transported with their
Passions, they did commit. Quasi de Caelo tibi sit Inevitabilis causa peccandi;
and Venus hoc fecerit, aut Saturnus, aut Mars: scilicet ut homo sine culpa sit;
culpandus autem Caeli ac Syderum Creator and Ordinator. As if, (says
Augustine) the heavens had imposed an inevitable necessity upon men of doing
ill: and that the cause of this, or that ill action was either Venus, or
Saturn, or Mars: that so man, forsooth, should still be innocent; and all the
blame be cast on God, the great Creator and disposer of the Heavens and Stars.

It is the custom of ignorant fools, says Hippocrates, presently to say,
that a disease, and the causes of it are Divine, when they do but find some
new extraordinary matter in it. So that by this rule we must conclude, that all
new diseases, as the Coqueluchoe, a disease that the French not many years
since were infested with, the sweating sickness, small Pockes, and the like,
should be Divine, and therefore held incurable, because perhaps they cannot be
cured by the idle Prescriptions of Empericks, Mountebanks, and coosening
Impostors, nor by the charms and juglings of Magicians and Sorcerers.

Besides, seeing that all manner of persons are not equally subject to this
disease, as, for example, Eunuchs, children, and decrepit old folk: and that
Love, as we have already showed, springs from the eyes, grows stronger by
daily conversation and familiarity, kissing and embracings and other amorous
passages; and is raised to the height of rage by the use of certain Animals,
Plants, and Minerals; but is quite extinguished by other remedies that are
endued with the contrary qualities: There is no show of probability that this
Malady should be supernatural and Divine, rather then any other. For in all
diseases in general Hippocrates acknowledges that there is (...): something
Divine.

We conclude then, with Galen, that neither Love, nor the Falling Sickness,
are Divine diseases. (...)

Non Deus, ut perhibent, amor est; sed amaror, and error. Some others have
conceived Love to be incurable, because that for the most part, he that is
sick of this disease, does not desire to be cured of it.

Vive, Deus, posito, si quis mihi dicat, Amore:
Deprecor. Vsque adeo dulce, Puella, malum est.
Should Jove say; leave thy Love, and shun thy Fate.
I would not purchase't at so high a rate.
For he still feeds himself with his own vain hopes of being able to find a
cure, without the help of Physic; and bears it out with a good face,
pretending that it is nothing, but a mere flea-biting.

Amantis credula vitam
Spes fovet: and melius cras fore, semper ait.
Sed quia delectat Veneris decerpere fructus; Dicimus assidue, cras quoque fiet
idem.
Interea tacitae serpunt in viscer a flammae.
His own credulity still makes him hope; and this hope keeps him alive, in
expectation still of the accomplishment of his desires: which when he has once
attained unto, he then conceives himself to have reached the highest degree of
happiness; and persuades himself that these his joys and pleasures shall
never fail: till at the last, his own experience convincing him, leaves him
more miserable then before.

This Hope, blowing with it is gentle gales the fond desires of Lovers, kindles
in their minds a fire, full of thick smoke, which darkens their
understanding; and carrying away with it their thoughts, casts a mist over
them, takes away their judgment, subverts their reason, and makes them, as it
were, dream waking. As long as these hopes last, they will never relinquish
their desires. And here ye shall have one, that doubts not, (how unhandsome
soever he be) to mollify the Adamantine heart of his Mistress, by the force of
his beauty and comely shape: another, by his fair carriage and winning
behavior: a third presumes upon his greatness of birth, and the Nobility of
his Progenitors: a fourth hopes to win her by his witty and eloquent
discourse: however if all these fail, there is great hope that at length she
may be moved to compassion by sighs and pitiful complaints: which is indeed
the Lovers last refuge.

I shall therefore easily grant to the Sectaries of this opinion, concerning
the incurablenesse of this disease, that it is no small task to cure a sick
man of a disease, that he is unwilling to part with: considering that the cure
of any disease depends as much upon the Patient, as on the Physician. For as
Hippocrates says: (...): for the curing of a disease, it is required of the
Patient also, as well as of the Physician, that he make what resistance he can
against it, and by no means yield to it in the least degree. But yet is it not
a thing utterly impossible to work such a cure as this: for there may be means
found out of times to bring the Patient to desire and seek out for cure of his
Malady: as we shall show you hereafter, in the 32. Chapter of this Tract.

Lastly, some learned Authors have said, that this disease was incurable, not
so much through the fault of the Patient, as the insufficiency and defect of
the Agent; which is, the remedies that are applied in this case. This made the
Despairing Oenone, more skillful far in love, then Physic, cry out in this
manner.

Me miseram! Quod amor non est medicabilis herbis.
Destituor, prudens artis, ab art mea.
And even Apollo himself, the Author and first Inventor of Physic, is jeered
by the Poet, for not knowing any remedy for the cure of this disease of Love;
when he brings him in thus complaining, that he was not able to relieve
himself with all his skill.

Nec potui curas sanare salubribus herbis.
Quic quid erat Medicae, vicerat, Artis, Amor.
No healthful herbs my Torment could allay.
My Art was forced my Loves power to obey.
But those men that maintain this opinion, do not only offer great injury to
the faculty of Physic, which, as Democritus says, is the sister and companion
of wisdom: but seem also foolishly to accuse the Almighty Creator, who, being
the Prototype of all goodness, (as Galen says) has not denied us any thing,
that is necessary for us. So that if God has given us any remedies for this
disease; it cannot possibly be imagined, but that they should have been
discovered in the space of six or seven thousand years, either by reason, or
experience; which are the only means by which Physicians have found out cures
for all diseases.

Neither is it to any purpose to fly to this refuge, and say, that Love is a
disease of the mind; and that therefore the cure thereof is to be left to
Moralists, and Divines: considering that the wise Apollonius Thyaneus refused
to undertake the cure of a great Cilician Nobleman, that was desperately gone
with this disease, and could not be moved, neither by his large promises, nor
threats. For all the Ancient Physicians have handled the cure of this disease,
not simply as Physicians, but as Philosophers also, which is an inseparable
quality from a good Physician: as Galen, following the doctrine of Hippocrates,
has proved at large, in an entire Tract concerning this particular.

And if the mind be afflicted at all in Love; it is by reason of the mutual
Sympathy that there is betwixt it, and the body: as Aristotle proves plainly in
his Physiognomy, and in many other places, which I shall not here trouble you
withal; only concluding with that of Democritus, who affirms that the
diseases of the body do infatuate and dull the mind, and draw the
understanding also to Sympathize with it: (...). Cleomenes, the son of
Anaxandrides, being sick; his friends reproved him, and told him, that they
observed in him other strange humors and fancies, then they were wont to do:
To whom he made this reply; that they ought not to blame him for this: For
neither says he; am I the same man, now I am sick, that I was before: being
then changed from what I was, no marvel, if my humors and fancies be changed
also. If an Apoplexy can lay asleep, and, as it were, quite put out the eye of
our understanding: then questionless Melancholy, and Love will cast a mist at
least before it; and so by this means there will hardly be found one hour in
our whole life, when our judgment will be found in due order, our body being
subject to so many mutations, and encompassed with such variety of actions,
that it is a great chance if it meet not at all times with some one or other,
that will draw it out of the way; although perhaps a man cannot at all times
take notice of it, without being obnoxious to a Perpetuity of Passion.

These considerations moved the same Philosopher to wish, that all men were
skillful in Physic: that so by rectifying the state of their Body, they might
also preserve their mind in perfect health. Which is confirmed also by Galen in
his Praecog. where he boasts, that he had cured many of their Bodily diseases,
only by appeasing the Perturbations of their Mind, and that, both by natural
remedies, and also subtle conceits and devises, intermixed with learned and
apposite discourses, which are the only remedies for a distempered mind.

(...). Whence we may draw this consequence, that those that banish all kind of
good Language and discourse from the Art of Physic, are carried away wholly
with malice, and their own fond opinion. And therefore the Poet was much to be
blamed, when he abuses it with the title of a Mute, dumb Science.

Scire potestates Herbarum, usumque Medendi
Maluit; and Mutas agitare inglorius Arts.
Unless perhaps some body will undertake to excuse Virgill here, and say, that
he calls it, a Mute Faculty, because that, as Hippocrates says, a Physician
must not be a Prating, Babbling fellow; for, as the old Comoedian says.

(...). Such a Physician is the worst disease of the Two.

We conclude then, that Love is not incurable, though it be indeed somewhat
hard to be cured: and therefore the Poets were wont to attribute unto it, the
feet of a Gryphon; to intimate unto us, that Love enters swiftly, but retires
very slowly,

Amor animi arbitrio sumitur; non ponitur. A man may fall in Love, when he
pleases; but he cannot so easily get out again.

And yet this Malady is so much the more hard to be cured, if it be accompanied
with those Symptoms mentioned in the second Chapter; but especially that of
Iealousy.

Qui timet ut sua sit, ne quis sibi subtrahat illam;
Ille Machaonia vix open tutus erit.
He that is Jealous least he loose his Love, Machaon's art cannot his grief
remove.

For then the Heart and Brain do both suffer by the sympathy of the Liver,
and secret parts. Now Hippocrates says, that (...). Those diseases that arise
from the strongest parts of the Body, are always the most grievous.

The Astrologers say, that there is required a great deal both of Time, care,
and diligence, for the cure of those persons, that are first taken with this
disease, under the Influence of Saturn; especially if at that time he were
either Retrograde, or in Conjunction with Mars, or in Opposition with the Sun.
But if Venus were found in the House of Saturn, or was in a Trine, or Sextile
Aspect with the Moon, when the party was first seized on by this disease: there
is great danger then that he will be long afflicted with it. This is the
Astrologers opinion: and to this I will add mine own; which is, that if Old
men chance to fall into this disease, they are more grievously tormented with
it, then young men are: according to that of Menander.

Senex, Amore captus, ultimum malum. For as Hippocrates in his Aphorisms
affirms: Those Diseases that are not agreeable to the Nature, Complexion, and
Age of the party affected, are the most dangerous of all other. And such is
Love, in old men: which is one of those things, Solomon could not endure. And
conformable hereto is that of the Comoedian, where he says, that

Amare, Iuveni fructus est, Crimen Seni. It was very good and profitable for a
young man to be in Love, but a great fault in an old man to be so. And as
Pindarus, speaking of the unjust desires of covetous men, says, that (...):
men are wont with the greater eagerness, and with a kind of Madness to desire
those things that they cannot compass: the same has Hippocrates pronounced of
old doting men that are in Love.

And Avicen says, that if this disease come once to be Habitual, it is then
altogether uncurable, and makes the parties affected Hecticall, Sottish, and
Foolish; and sometimes also they are so bad, that they grow wolfe-mad, or
perhaps turn to be their own murderers: as I have already showed by diverse
examples.

CAP. XXVII. Of the Incubi, and Succubi.
SOme Divines have been of opinion, that Irregular and Melancholy Love, extends
its power and Jurisdiction, as far as to the very Angels, and Devils also:
and that this is the reason, why the women are commanded by S. Paul to have
their heads covered in the Church. But, by this word Angel, some others will
have the Ministers of the Church to be understood; who in their Sanctity of
Life should be like unto the Angels: or else perhaps the Apostle meant, by
Angels, all good Christians, who by the Integrity of their life, and purity of
Conscience, do differ as much from the common prophaner sort of men, as Angels
do from men. But those that hold the other opinion, urge for themselves that
passage in Genesis, where Moses says, that, the sons of God, seeing the
daughters of Men, that they were fair, they fell in love with them. In the
explication of which place, Josephus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Justin Martyr, and
others, by the Sons of God, understand the Angels. Notwithstanding R. Abraham
Aben Ezra interprets this place of Virtuous Men, or else the sons of
Righteous Seth: and by the Daughters of Men, he will have the daughters of
wicked Cain to be meant. Rabbi Kimchi thinks that, by the Sons of God, men of
great stature were meant: and that, according to the Idiotisme and usual
manner of speaking among the Hebrews, who are wont to call those men that are
very tall, the Mountains of God. And this interpretation of his seems also to
be confirmed by that which follows; where it is said, that to of these
marriages that were made betwixt the Sons of God and the Daughters of men,
were brought forth Giants.

For mine own part, I shall be ready; as in this, so in all other places of
Scripture, to submit my self to the determination of Divines. But I shall
hardly even assent to that ridiculous conceit of the Rabbis, who are of
Opinion, that the Incubi and Succubi are sprung from the seed of Adam, during
the space of those 135. years; that he abstained from the knowledge of his
wife, after the Murder of the just Abel, committed by his accursed brother
Cain. A more incredible thing yet then this is, if I mistake not, is that which
is commonly reported by Historians, of women that have been gotten with Child
by Devils, and Jncubi: and of such copulations, they say, were begotten,
Hercules, Romulus, Servius Tullus, Merlin, and many others. I grant it
possible, that the Devil may delude the senses and Fancy of such lewd women,
and cause their belly to swell, as if they had had carnal copulation really
with a Man: and perhaps in their travail make them seem to be delivered of a
dead Child. Iacobus Rucssius relates a story of one Magdalen, that lived in the
City of Constance, who having given way to a Devil or Incubus, that haunted
her, by the persuasion of her Confessor, was at the time of her travail
delivered of a thousand Trumperies, as pieces of broken glasses, Nails, pieces
of wood, hair, pitch, tow, stones, bones, and such like stuff, but with
extreme pain. And sometimes also the Devil assumes a dead body, and by this
means enticeth wicked minded persons to couple with him. Vincentius reports a
story to this purpose, of a certain young man, who one evening going out to a
river, to swim and wash himself, as he was in the water, he caught a woman
by the hair of the head: whom presently he carried home along with him to his
house, without speaking a word; and afterward had a son by her. But the woman
never speaking one word all this while, made the young man very much wonder at
the strangeness of it: and desirous to try if he could make her break of this
her long silence, which made both himself, and all his kindred very much
suspect the condition and strange production of this monstrous Child, he made
her believe one day that he would kill her son; at which she spoke some few
words, but instantly vanished out of his sight. Iacobus Ruessius tells a story
of a Butcher, that was in the like manner seduced by a Succubus: not much
unlike that of Machates and Philinion, related by Aelian, Phlegon, Loyer, and
Le sieur de l' Ancre. If any desire to see more concerning this particular, he
may have recourse to Ruessius, in his discourse of Melancholy: where he
plainly proves that of St Chrysostom to be true, that Quoscunque Diabolus
superat, per Melancholiam superat. Whom so ever the Devil overcomes, he
overcomes by Melancholy. And therefore the Physicians for very good reason call
Melancholy, the Devil Bath.

Yet is it most certain, that some women have verily thought that they have
been forced by the Devil, or some Witch or other; when as in truth they were
only troubled with the Nightmare, a disease which the Latins call Incubus, the
Greeks (...), Jnsilire: and by some, (...). Themison calls it (...), to
suffocate, or strangle: the Arabians call it, Alchabum, Algiathum, or
Alneidalan, as Avicen says.

This Disease takes them commonly in their first sleep, when as the thick
gross vapors which are carried up to the Brain, stop the Nerves that serve
for speech and Respiration: by which means the parties thus troubled, think
they have a heavy burden lying upon them, or else some Devil, or Witch, that
would attempt a breach upon their Chastity. And therefore Hippocrates says,
that Maids that are marriageable, and Widows, when they are troubled with
Love-Melancholy, think that they see the Devil, (...): for he does not say,
that they do see such things.

And although that this disease is caused (...), by the abundance of vapors
arising from Repletion and Inconcoction, and accending up into the Brain: yet
Physicians call it not by the name of the Nightmare, or Incubus, unless the
Imagination also be hurt withal, in like manner as in Melancholy, which
disease it often presageth; or else the Falling sickness.

I could add here, that I my self have seen, in the town of Castelnadaruy
in Lauraguex, two young women, that maintained confidently for a certain
truth, that either the Devil, or some witch or other, lay with them every
night, as their husbands lay by their sides: Both which by the help of God I
cured, and they now acknowledge the weakness of their Fancy, and their own
Folly.

CHAP. XXVIII. Whether the Love of Women be stronger, and more dangerous then
that of Men.
IT is most certain, that, as Galen says, a Hot complexion, or such a one
that is Hot and Dry, is much more prone to dishonest and irregular Love, then
any other Complexio^, or Temperature whatsoever: from whence we may also
infer, that the Loves of these Complexions, must necessarily be also the most
violent, and so by Consequence, that Men must be oftener, and more grievously
tormented with this Malady, then Women, who are of a Temperature both less
Hot, and less Dry: For as much as Nature had never brought forth a Woman, but
only for want of Heat; and therefore Aristotle calls them the Defect, and
Imperfection of Nature: (...) (...). The Female seems only to be the Issue of
Natures Impotence.

But Chrysippus the Philosopher, as Galen reports him, neglecting these weak
reasons, affirms the contrary: and says, that Love is a Motion of the Mind,
that is irrefragable, and opposes it self against the power and rule of
Reason: which is also approved both by Aristotle, and also all the School of
Physic.

Whence we may conclude, that without all doubt a Woman is in her Loves more
Passionate, and more furious in her follies, then a man is: (...): says
Hippocrates, lib. de his quae ad Virg. spect. Women are Naturally of meaner
Spirits and less courage, then Men; neither is their reason so strong as
theirs: and therefore are they less able to make resistance against so strong
a Passion, as Galen says. And hereto agrees that of the fair Hero, in her
Epistle to her dear Leander.

Vrimur igne pari: sed sum tibi viribus Jmpar.
Fortius ingenium suspicor esse viris.
Vt corpus, teneris, sic men's infirma puellis.
Our flames are equal: but your kinder Fate
Has lent your strength, your Heats to temperate.
But in our weaker Sex, our Passions find.
A feeble Body bears a feebler Mind.
This opinion is confirmed also by daily experience, which affords us Examples
great store of Women, that are ready to run Mad for Love; but seldom any Men,
whom we never see brought to that Extremity: unless they be some effeminate
weak spirited fellows, that have been always broughtup in Lascivious
courses, and in Ladies Laps. And this is confirmed by the Poet also.

Parcior in nobis, nec tam furiosa, Libido.
Legitimum finem flamma virilis habet.
Lust in us Men does not so often reign.
Our Flames would still a lawful end attain.
This Assertion may also be proved by a strong Natural reason, which may be
collected out of Aristotle, lib. 3, de Part. Animal. cap. 4. and lib. 1. de
Gener. cap. 4. where he says, that Nature has given straight Entrals, or
Guts, without any turnings, or windings at all, to all gluttonous and ravenous
Creatures; as Birds of prey, and the Wolf: but on the contrary, she has
variously and artificially interwoven the Bowels of those that it was expedient
should be sober and temperate; as Men. Whence we collect, that, Quoniam eadem
Natura (quae (...),) in foeminis vasa spermatica, propiora, and juxta cornuae
Matricis posuit: contra vero in maribus eadem e longinquo, extra ventrem
reiecit; ne facultates Animae principales, Imaginatio, Memoria, and Iudicium,
per Pudendorum Sympathiam and vicinitatem perturbarentur, ((...). Quae
propinqua, and communia sunt Affectionibus, ea, prima, and maxim vitiantur:)
Foeminas hunc Amorem Brutum magis violentum habere. Nec immerito: Consentaneum
enim videtur, Naturam, aliqua superaddita voluptate, dolores illos, quos in
puerperiis patitur iste sexus, compensare.

So that although perhaps Men appear outwardly to be the more prone to Lust of
^he two: yet must we not therefore presently conclude women to be utterly free
from the same desires, although they cunningly dissemble them as much as
possibly they can. And therefore they may, not un^tly, be compared unto an
Alembick, that ^ands quietly upon its frame, without any ^ew of Fire at all
under it: but if you but ^ift it up, and look under it; and could but ^s easily
see into the hearts of these Women; you shall there discover an equal Heat in
both.

CAP. XXIX. Of the Prevention of Love, and Erotique Melancholy.
FOR the Prevention of any Disease, it is necessary, says Galen, in the first
place, to remove the Disposition of the Body, which is nothing else but the
Internal cause of the Disease: and which cannot be rooted out, except the
External cause, that nourishes and preserves it, be first taken away. He then
that undertakes the Cure, or Prevention of Love-Melancholy, must first, says
Hippocrates, have a perfect knowledge of the nature of this Disease, that so he
may (...), apply such remedies, as shall be proper both for the Disease,
Nature, and Age of the Patient, and also agree with the Seasons, and Times of
the year. Otherwise he does but strike at the disease, Andabatarum more,
Hoodwinked.

And because that Love finds its passage through the Eye, and so seazeth on
the Brain: If he intend to cashiere it utterly, he must take heed, that no
tempting Objects present themselves unto it: least happily it fall out here, as
it did heretofore to Menelaus, who (as Galen relates it) when that Troy was now
taken, and he had fully resolved with his own hands to punish his Wives
Adulteries: he no sooner saw her, but that presently he let his Sword fall out
of his hand, and ran to her ^d threw himself into her Embraces. and so by the
power of her Beauty his ^ary was suddenly changed into as Passi^nate a Love.
Thus Galen: But the Scho^st upon Stesichorus reports the story otherwise, and
says, that it was not Mene^us himself, but the Soldiers that he ^nt to
stone Helen. However it were, we ^e commonly, that the Falling out of Lo^rs,
kindles anew their Love.

^mantium Irae Amoris redintegratio est. And as a Candle, that is almost out,
recovers its full light again, if it be but held downward a little while: in
like manner Love, that is almost extinguished, if it be ^nclined and bent
never so little to its Object, it takes fire afresh.

Quam facile Jrati verbo placantur Amantes? Although a Lover rage, and chafe;
even now One fair word from his Mistress smooths his brow.

And if the party, that is the cause of h^^ Disease, be very beautiful: the
Preservatives that are used must then be the stronger. For it is in this case,
as in the cleaving of Wood: and the Beauty of the Party be loved, as the Axe
the Wood, seems i^ like manner, as it were, to cleave asunder the Lovers
Heart; and the Sighs are a^ the Noise that follows the Cleaven stroke. But,
as by doubling the force of the blows, although the Wood is at length cleft,
yet by Reaction the Axe also hat^ his edge turned, and is spilt: In like manner
fair Ladies, after that they have perhaps with the force of their Beauty made
an entrance into the Hearts of their Lovers, oftimes go off with a crack in
their Honor.

Some Authors, of no mean note, considering the admirable Effects that Beauty
works, have been of Opinion, that there was a certain Transmission of
Spirits from the body of the person beloved into that of the Lover: which did
by this means produce a Reciprocal and Mutual Love. And for this cause the
Roman Ladies of old were wont to wear about their Necks a kind of Wanton
Figure, which they called Fascinum. And perhaps in Imitation of them, the
Spanish Ladies do at this day wear a piece of Coral, or Ieat, made in the
form of a Hand closed together with the Thumb ^hrust out betwixt the
Forefinger and the Middlefinger, which they call Higo per no ser oiadas. The
Greeks call all such toies ^s these, (...): and they were wont to make use of
them, to the end they might be secured from the malice of Envious Persons.

The Arabians, speaking of the Cure of Love, do advise us to take Occasion to
discourse of the party that is the cause of this disease, in the hearing of the
Patient; and to reckon up all her Imperfections and ^^vices, making them more,
and greater then they are; and to set forth her virtues also in the colors and
shape of Vices.

Et mala sunt vicina bonis: Errore sub illo,
Pro vitio, Virtus crimina saepe tulit.
Ill, bears the shape of Good. Thus often it is seen,
That Virtue has for Vice mistake^ been.
Quam potes, in peius dotes deflecte puellae
Or else, says Avicen, let the Physician give this in charge to some Old woman
who will be a great deal fitter to disparage and extenuate the good qualities
of his Mistress: always provided, that the Patient himself be not Naturally
a baminded Lascivious person: for this wi^^ then inflame his desires the more.
For every one Naturally loves their Like. But if she be very fair, and that it
cannot b^ denied, without the suspicion of apparent malice: then must they
endeavor to lessen her worth, by comparing her with those he himself knows
to be fairer.

Vos quoque formosis vestras co^ferte Puellas Incipiet Dominae quemque pudere
suae. And they must labor by probable Arguments to prove unto him, that that
which he judges to be comely and handsome i^ her, is, in the judgment of
those that are more quicksighted, both foul, and deformed. As for example, if
she have a handsome nose, of a reasonable size, and some what sharp: let them
tell him then she is Scold, Luxurious, Wanton, and a mere ^imbe of the Devil;
and that, according to the judgment of Aristotle. And then commend unto him
the little Nose, with Catullus; or the Hawkes-nose, with the Persians; or the
great Nose, with Alber^us, for an Argument of a good nature. So likewise, if
she have a gray sparkling Eye; say then, that she is a fool, lustful,
inconstant, and proud: and then commend as much on the other side, with Hestod,
Homer, Pindarus, Iuvenall, and Catullus, those that have black Eyes; taking the
same course in the rest of her good parts. For the Conditions that are required
by the Naturalists in an Absolute Beauty, are so many; as that there cannot be
found in the whole world a person so accomplished with all the necessary
circumstances of Beauty, but that each part will afford sufficient matter for a
Critical Eye to find fault with. Which Zeuxis, the famous Painter, knowing
right well, and being desired by the Crotonians to represent unto them the
beauty of Helen; he would not undertake it, unless they would suffer him first
to see all the fairest women i^ the Country naked, that so he might tal^ from
each of them, that which he judge^ to be most excellent.

Besides, this Judgment of Beauty, differs according to the variety of Fancy
in the beholders. Ovid would have on fair, and little: Hector made choice of on
that was brown, and of a bigger size; for so was Andromache.

Turpis Romano, Belgicus, ore, color. The Italian desire to have her thick,
well set, and plumpe: the German preferre^ one that is strong: the Spaniard
loves a wench that is lean; and the French, one that is soft, delicate, and
tender: but the Indians, a black one. Hippocrates, and after him, Celsus,
commend a tall stature, in young people: but dispraise it in old.

And for this cause the Ancient Poets fained, that Beauty was the daughter of
Iris and Admiration: because that as the Sun, reflecting upon a watery Cloud,
deceaves our Eyes, making us believe we see diverse various colors, which are
not there, but only in Appearance: In like manner is Beauty, nothing else, but
a false flash of Rays, which dazzle our eyes, when it appears from among the
clouds of so great variety of Allurements. Whence we may conclude, that the
rarest and most excellent Beauties that are, are not such indeed, as they seem
to be; but only appear to be so, through the sole defect of the beholders,
and through the weakness of their Eyes; who commonly judge that woman to be
Beautiful, which is of a white complexion, and soft and tender: clean
contrary to the judgment of Galen, who says, that those are the signs of a
False and Counterfeit Beauty; and that true and Native Beauty consists in the
just composure, and Symmetry of the Parts of the Body, a due proportion of
flesh, and the goodness of the Color. Now he that desires to know whether a
body be Proportionable, or no, he must, according to our Anatomists, lay him
all along, and cause him to extend his arms and legs equally as far as he is
able: and then taking the Navill for the Center, and measuring him round about,
that part that either goes beyond the Circumference of this circle, o^ else
reaches it not, is to be accounted Improportionable. Vitruvius says, that
the length of the face from the end of the chinne, to the top of the forehead,
is the tenth part of a man's height. If the Body be will set, and strong; it is
seven times as long as the Head; and eight or nine times as long, if the body
be slender and delicate. The eyebrows joined together, make up the circle of
both the eyes: and so is there a certain proportion in all the rest of the
parts of the Body: as you may read in Equicola, and le sieur de Veyries, in his
Genealogy of Love.

Yet notwithstanding, the Indians love those that have thick lips: the
Peruvians judge those the most beautiful that have great rolling eyes; and the
Mexicans those that have little foreheads.

If you cannot persuade the Lover, and make him confess, that his Mistress
wants these Conditions, that are required to an Absolute Beauty: then must you
endeavor to deprive her of that Moving beauty, which is called, a Good Grace;
and consists in the due Composure of the Members and parts of the whole Body:
or else of the beauty of the Mind; without which, according to Plato, Plutarch,
and Galen, that of the body is nothing worth. And then you may prove to him
both by examples, and Authority of good writers, that for the most part, those
women that are fair, are also as Common: as likewise those that are unhandsome
and deformed, are altogether as troublesome, and not to be endured: according
to that of the Comicke Poet.

(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
If a man, says he, marry an ugly deformed woman; she must needs be quickly
loathsome unto him: and he cannot take any delight either to be in her Company,
or so much as to come into his own house. But if he get himself a handsome
wife; his neigbours commonly will have as much to do with her, as himself. So
that Marriage seems to bring along with it unavoideably one of these great
inconveniences.

Rara est concordia Formae,
Atque Pudicitiae.
Beauty, and chastity seldom meet in one person. For beauty is as it were a
kind of prey, that has continually a thousand in chase of it. And it is as a
silent Letter Commendatory also of itself,

(Formosa facies, muta Commendatio est.) Which seduceth, and over-reacheth the
judgment of the beholder, leaving a strong impression behind it. But it is
withal as a Letter written upon the Sand, soon defaced.

Florem decoris singulicarpunt dies.
Each day blots out some of it is beautiful Characters.
But for as much as, in the opinion of all Physicians, that have written of the
cure of this Malady, it is necessary to represent unto the party affected, the
foulenes of his error, and the greatness of the offense, if he persist
obstinately therein: I would have this great charge left to Divines, who are
far fitter to perform it, then Physicians are.

Yet it so falls out oftimes, that these admonitions do not work any good at
all upon them, but rather incense them, and make them the more headstrong and
obstinate in their follies: according to that of the Poet Euripides, as he is
cited by Galen.

Venus admonita, relaxat nihil.
Sinamque cogas, amplius intendere appetit.
Admonitus autem amor magis premit.
Love's deaf to Counsel. And if you by force
Attempt to stop, you rather speed it is course.
But Plautus goes farther yet, and says that,

Amor mores hominum moros and morosos efficit.
Minus placet, magis quod suadetur: quod disuadetur, placet.
Cum inopia, cupias: quando copia est, tum non velis.
Ille qui appellit, is compellit: Jlle qui consuadet, vetat.
Insanum est malum, in hospitium devorti ad Cupidinem.
Love is little better then mere Madness: for they that are possessed with it,
are so humorsome, and Inconstant in their desires, that they know not
themselves, what they would have: what they are persuaded to, that they cannot
endure to hear of: and what they are dissuaded from, that they make choice of.
What is denied them, that they earnestly desire: and when it is offered them,
then they refuse it. etc. And the reason of this distemperature in the Mind of
a Lover, is, says Aristotle, because that he is wholly governed by his
Passions, which stop and hinder all passage to his reason, which only is able
to set him again in the right way to Virtue, from which he is now gone astray.
(...). He that lives, says he, according to his Passions, will never hearken to
any man that shall reprove him, or dissuade him from it: neither indeed if he
should hearken to it, would he be able to understand it. So Tibullus swear many
times, and promised his friend, that he would never look upon his Mistress
again: yet for all that he could not forbear.

Iuravi quoties rediturum ad limina nunquam?
Cum been juravi, pes tamen ipse redit.
Often have I sworn, I Would never see her more.
Yet still my feet betray me to her door.
The breaking of their oaths in these matters, they make no account of at all;
presuming perhaps upon that false Opinion that the Heathens held, concerning
perjury in Lovers, which they believed the Gods easily pardoned in them, as
being in that state, like little foolish children, without the use either of
Judgment or Reason.

We must then, as P. Aegineta, and Avicen advise us, watch for a fit opportunity
to give them some gentle admonitions. For in time, says Galen, Passions may
wear away: but not always, whenever a man pleases. For it is here, says
Chrysippus, just as it is with those that run in plain ground, who can stop
themselves in the midst of their course whenever they please, because that
the weight of their own bodies drives them on no farther. But if they take
their course down some Precipice or steep hill; they cannot then stop
themselves from falling, when they please, the weight of their own bodies
still forcing them on farther. So in like manner, when as Reason is the cause
of the motions of the mind; it is an easy matter to rule and order them as we
list: But when either Lust, or Anger, (Passions which are very intractable and
unruly, and may therefore be fitly resembled to the heaviness of the body
falling down a Precipice,) join their forces together; they cannot so easily
be checked on the sudden, and at pleasure, but must be gently dealt withal,
and corrected by degrees.

We must then watch our opportunity for to fit our selyes with this, and all
other remedies. For opportunity is the very soul and perfection of Physique.
(...) (...).

We must also endeavor, if possibly we can, to convert his Love either into
late, or Iealousy, by persuading him that his Mistress does not love him so
well, ^s she makes him believe she does; and that all her entermaintments,
favors, kisses, dalliances and embraces, are only Baits, and Enticements, to
keep him in continual slavery: otherwise, she would more easily and willingly
yield to satisfy his desires: for that true Love is, to wish all good to the
party beloved that may cause either his contentment or profit, and not their
own only; and so likewise to be greived and troubled at the evils and
afflictions of the person they love, more then for their own.

And if the party affected with this Malady, be a woman, we may then add to
this, the Dissembling of men, (which is as frequently found in men, as
Inconstancy is in women;) together with the danger they incur of suffering
shipwreck in their honor. And therefore Phidias the Painter, intending to
intimate as much unto this sex, was wont to paint their Goddess Venus, with
her foot upon a Tortoise: not so much to denote their false hood; as some have
conceived; as to war them to have a care of their Honor. For the
Shee-Tortoise in receiving the Male^ dares not turn her self upon her back,
because the Male having enjoyed his pleasure, would leave her thus, a prey for
the Eagle, by reason that she is not able to recover her Natural posture again;
thus preferring her life and safety, before her pleasure. In like manner ought
women to take notice of the danger wherein Men commonly leave them, when they
have once enjoyed them: exposing them, not only to the Eagle, which is the
Devil; but also to the Crows, which are the slanderers, and such as will be
proud to be the Trumpeters of their Infamy and dishonor.

And it is reported by Historians, that the Milesian wenches were by this means
cured of their Love-Madnesse. For the Senate having forbidden them to murder
themselves, and threatening them, that if they did, their naked bodies should be
exposed to the open view of all men: they changed their Minds, and by this
means were deterred from running mad up and own the streets, or being their
own Executioners.

I should likewise advise men in this ^ase, to represent unto themselves the
^range disasters and misfortunes that have befallen to most wise, most valiant,
and most worthy men, that have bin besotted with these follies of Love. Sin hoc
parum ^uerit; ipsarum deinde Foeminarum imperfectiones, atque immundiciem secum
meditentur.

Ille quod obscenas in aperto corpore parts Viderit, in cursu qui fuit, haesit
Amor. It is reported of Hypatia, the daughter of Theon the Geometrician, that
she was so learned, and well accomplished in all points, that she far
surpassed, both for virtue and learning, all those of Alexandria; where she
also publicly professed Philosophy, in the time of Honorius and Arcadius the
Emperors. It so fortuned, that a scholar of hers was so surprised with the
beauty both of her body, and mind, that he grew almost mad for love. But a^ one
day this young Inamorato was very earnest in his suit to this fair Damsel,
and importuning her to cure him of his disease by satisfying his desires: she
(being, as i^ seems, not ignorant of the Precepts o^ Physic in this case,)
Panno menstruos^ indidem prolato; ecce, inquit, adolescentule quod tantopere
adamas, ubi nil nisi Immundicies habetur. Which the young man had no sooner
seen, but his heat was presently allayed, and himself cured of his
Love-Melancholy.

Gordonius attributes so great power and efficacy to this kind of Remedy, or
rather Physical stratagem; that he conceives that he that cannot be cured of
his Malady by this, is to be given over for desperate, and Incurable: And, to
use his own words, si ex his amare non dimiserit; sane non est homo sed est
Diabolus Incarnatus. Fatuitas igitur sua secum sit in perditione. If this cure
him not, (faith he) then he is certainly no man, but a Devil Incarnate: and
therefore the Devil take him and his folly too. Yet by Gordons leave; although
the French have so great an opinion of his authority, that they have a
Proverb, Que le Medecin qui vasans Gordon, vasans ba^on; the Physician that
goes without Gor^^n, goes without his staff: yet I cannot ^sent unto him in
this. And therefore will ^^ve now search out for some other more ^re remedies,
which we shall derive ^^om the three Fountains of Physic, ^amely Dieticall,
Chirurgicall, and Pharmaceuticall.

CAP. XXX. Order of Diet, for the prevention of Love-Melancholy.
IT is the advice of Mercurialis, that for the cure, or prevention of this
disease, the party affected make choice of a cold and moistayre to live in. And
he wonders very much, that Moschion, an ancient Greek Physician, should
prescribe in this case, that the chamber of the sick person should be
indifferent hot and light. But for my own particular, I should rather choose
to follow the Advice of Avice who in the Prevention of this Malad^ prescribes a
Hot Air for Men, and for women, a Cold. And, as Rhasis also is of opinion, I
would not suffer them to wear clothes that are lined with Furs, E^^mine, or
Velvet; by reason that they he^^ the blood too much; as do also all
Odoriferous persumes, as Musk, Civet, Ambe^ Gallia Moschata, Alipta Moschata,
and the like. All these things I would banish both from the Chamber, and
Clothes o^ the Patient: and instead thereof substitue Camphire, which by
reason of it is col^ quality, very much tempereth the heat of the blood.

Camphora per Nares, castrat odore Mares. He must also drink water, and no
wind upon any terms: because that wine inflames the blood, and makes men the
more prone to lust; as Aristotle says: (...). And therefore the Poets feign,
that Priapus was the son of Bacchus. And the ancient Law makers did ordain,
by the laws of twelve Tables, the same punishment for a woman that ^^runke
wine, as for an Adulteress.

Yet Gordon allows the Lover to drink wine, and that too, not in a very small
quantity, nor yet so much as will make him drunk: notwithstanding Ovid says
the contrary.

Vina parant animos Veneri, nisi plurimasumas,
Et stupeant multo corda sepulta mero.
Nutritur vento, vento restinguitur Ignis:
Lenis alit flammas; grandior aura necat.
Aut nulla ebrietas; aut tanta sit, ut tibi curas
Eripiat: si qua est inter utrumque, nocet.
Wine kindles Cupids flames: unless thou steep
Thy soul in Brim-full bowls, and lay't asleep.
Thus wind, we see, both feeds, and quenches fire:
Strong blasts put out, when gentler raise it higher.
Or taste not; or drink deep, and drown thy care.
No mean: Extremes here the only Virtues are.
Wine, says he, taken moderately, raises the spirits, and provokes a desire
of Venery: but if it be drunk in great abundance, it then works the contrary
effect and takes away all such thoughts. And he proves it by the instance of
fire, which i^ increased, and grows into a great flame^ if you blow it gently:
whereas, on the other side, a rough boisterous blast quite extinguisheth it.
And therefore he concludes, that either of the Extremes, either to forbear
utterly, or else to drink it in excess, is very safe: but the Mean carries
all the danger in it.

I could be content to give a Poet free leave to maintain so licentious a
Position as this is: But that a Platonic Philosopher, Marsilius Ficinus by
name, should advise, for the cure of this Malady, to be Drunk now and then,
that so there may be new blood and spirits bred, for to supply the defects of
the blood and spirits that are Infected by this disease of Love; and so by this
means to cure one vice by a greater, seems to me to be a doctrine not only
Impious, but also very dangerous too. But for confutation of Ficinus, I shall
only put the reader in mind of the example of Lots incest, and the cause
thereof.

We advise then, that the Patient drink water, instead of wine, that so by
little and little (...); as Hippocrates says, the habit and disposition of the
body may be altered by degrees to a contrary state. Or else, which will be much
better, let them accustom themselves to fast often, and feed on bread and
water. For, as the Poet Achaus says,

(...). Love takes not up his lodging in an Empty belly. But contrarily, (...):
Venus delights in Fullness and variety of dainties. Especially if the party
affected be in good plight, and high fed, and of a sanguine, or Choleric
complexion. For in this case, all his meats must be but very little nutritive;
but rather Refrigerative and of a cooling quality. And therefore ye must give
him in his broaths, and salads, Purslane, Sorrel, Endive, Succory, and
Lettuce, which is so sovereign a Remedy against this Malady, that Venus,
desiring to forget all her unchaste desires, buried her dear Adonis, under a
bed of Lettuce. Some Physicians prefer the Seed before the Leaf. Or else we
may use conserves of red Roses, or Province Roses; which are said to be very
effectual in these cases. The same virtue do they also attribute to Mints:
not so much because they cool, as Aristotle, Pliny, Magnimus, Arnaldus de
Villa Nova, and diverse others have thought, being moved thereto, because that
perhaps they had observed out of Hippocrates, that Mints do take away all
Venereall desires: but rather for that they disperse and consume the seed, if a
man use to eat it often: as the same Hippocrates, lib. 2. de Diaeta affirms:
(...). Which makes me suspect, that that place of Aristotle is corrupted, and
that in stead of (...) which signifies to cool, it should be read, (...), that
is, to consume by dissolving, or melting. But the Poets do fabulously refer
this virtue, that is found to be in Mints, to a certain Nymph forsooth, called
Mentha, daughter to Cocytus, one of the Infernal Rivers, and beloved of Pluto:
who coming to the knowledge that Pluto was fallen in Love with Proserpine, the
daughter of Ceres, the Goddess of Plants and Corn; she made her boasts, that
she her self far surpassed Proserpine for beauty, and withal threatened to
raise rebellion against Pluto, if he offered to bring her into his Subterranean
Dominions. But Ceres, being informed hereof, she obtained of Jupiter, that this
Nymph should be transformed into an Herb of that name, with this Curse also
upon her, that she should ever be accounted an Enemy to Loves Mysteries.

Yet Avicen holds the contrary opinion to that of Hippocrates and Aristotle,
affirming that it is of a nature contrary to the Prevention and Cure of Love:
which is also the opinion of Paulus Aegineta, Aetius, Dioscorides, and many
others. But these contrarieties of opinion in these learned Authors, may, as I
conceive, be easily reconciled, if we say, that according to the doctrine of
Hippocrates and Aristotle, Mints are contrary to the motions of Love, when it
is caused by Humid Repletion: for in this case, dry meats and Medicines are
very hurtful, as we may collect out of Avicen, cap. 28. and 29. Lib. 3. Fen.
20. tr. 1. But if the complexion of the party affected be Hot, and full of
Serosities, and sharp and salt Humors, Mints are then very hurtful,
according to the opinion of Aegineta, Aetius, and Avicen.

They must also oftentimes use to eat Grapes, Melons, Cherries, Plummes,
Apples, Pears, and such like fruit. The Epigrammatist greatly commends, among
the rest, the Stock-dove, or rather the Woodquest, and Ringdove.

Jnguina torquati tardant, hebetantque Palumbi.
Non edat hanc volucrem, qui cupit esse salax.
I would also have them eat the coursest brown bread, or bread made of Rye,
Barley, Millet, or Spelt, (which Quercetanus, in his Treasure of Health,
mistakes for a kind of Wheat without any beard; because that Spelt corn is
called Zea generally by all our Herbalists:) which is but a hungry kind of
grain, that yields somewhat more nourishment then Barley, and a great deal
less then Wheat. They must also sometimes use to take Hempe-seed, or Agnus
Castus, (both which seeds Galen reckons among Aliments) Rue, Cummin, or
Corianderseed: and let them have in their sauces Vinegar, juice of Lemons,
Orenges, Sorrel, Verdejuyce, and the like. But they must be sure to take heed
of all manner of Aromaticall things, and all fried or salt meats: because that
Salt, by reason of its Heat and Acrimony, provokes to lust those that use to
eat it in any great quantity. And for this cause the Egyptian Priests were
wont to abstain from all manner of Salt meats, having found by experience,
that salt things do cause a kind of Itching or Tickling in those parts that
serve for Generation. And therefore the Rhodians, as Athenaeus has observed,
called the Feasts of Cupid, (...): as the Poets also, with Plato, have surnamed
Venus, (...), which is as much as to say, Borne of Salt, or of the Sea:
intimating unto us, by this Poetical fiction, the generative virtue of Salt,
which is indeed very great. And this is the reason that Fishes are more
fruitful, and multiply faster, then any other living creatures whatsoever. And
we see that vessels of salt commonly produce great store of Mice: the Female
conceaving without a Male, merely by licking of the salt: if we may believe
Aristotle. In like manner we see that Sheapheards usually give salt to their
sheep and goats; and Huntsmen likewise to their dogs; by giving them flesh
powdered a long time in pickle: for to raise and awaken in them their
Generative Faculty, when it is in a manner quite dulled and dead in them. Which
makes me apt to think, that this word Salacitas, which signifies an earnest
desire and appetite to Carnal Copulation, is derived from Sal, signifying
Salt; and sometimes also Beauty, or Gracefulness according to that of the Poet.

Nec est in tanto corpore mica Salis. Our Patient must abstain also from all
meats that are very Nutritive, Hot, Flatulent, and Melancholy: as soft Eggs,
Partridges, Pigeons, Sparrowes, Quails, Hare; and especially green Geese, by
reason of some certain secret properties that are attributed unto them by
Magnimus and Arnaldus de Villa nova: which I would have to be understood of the
Liver only, which is indeed very nourishing: and which the Romans, as Athenaeus
says, made more account of, then of all the other parts of the flesh: it being
most certain, that the flesh of a Goose is very hard of digestion, and abounds
in Excrements, all save only the wings, as Galen affirms in his lib. 3. de
Alimentis.

He must also take heed that he do not use to eat often Pine-nuts,
Pistachoes, small Nuts, Cives, Artichokes, Coleworts, Rapes, Carrots, Parsnips,
green Ginger, Eringoes, Satyrion, Onions, Waternuts, Rocket, etc.

Nec minus Erucas aptum est vitare salaces,
Et quicquid Veneri corpora nostra parat.
Oysters also, Chestnuts, Ciche pease, (which Pliny for this reason calls,
venerea) and all such like meats.

The Alterative Medicines, that are of the like quality, are far more
dangerous then Meats are: as the seed of the Roman, or Red Nettle, Ash-keys,
the leaves of Wood-bine, the true Scinkes (which, according to Rondeletius, are
Land Crocodiles,) Diasatyrion, Triphera Saracenica, Diazinziber, and such like
powders and Opiates, as you may find them reckond up by Avicen, Nicholas
Monardes, Scrapion, Mesue, Andernacus, Arnaldus, Matthaeus Gradeus, Rhasis, and
other Authenticke Authors.

Now as the use of any of these Medicaments above specified is very dangerous;
So do I conceive that Idleness is much more. And therefore we shall do very
well to take care that our Patient be always in some serious Employment or
other, according to his quality and condition:

(Finem qui quaeris Amori,
Cedit Amor rebus; res age, tutus eris.
^f from Loves power thou would deliverd be:
Be still employed, and thou shall soon be free.)
Whether it be in Warlike Actions, or Hunting, Study, or Husbandry. And
therefore the Poets feign, that Cupid could never prevail against Vesta,
Pallas, or Diana, notwithstanding that he had triumphed over all the rest, both
Gods and Goddesses: Intimating by this fiction, that those that place their
delight, and are always employed either in the study of Learning, Hunting, or
Husbandry, are not subject to the power of Love. And therefore let him be sure
in the first place to avoid Idleness, as being both the Cause and Fuel too
of Loves flames.

Ergo ubi visus eris nostra medicabilis Art,
Faec monitis sugias Ocia prima meis.
Haec, ut ames, faciunt; and quae fecere tuertur.
Haec sunt Iucundi causa, cibusque mali.
If thou would have me cure thy Malady,
Be sure that first all Idleness thou fly.
This makes thee Love, and so still keep thee: This
Both Cause, and Food of this sweet mischief is.
And as concerning the Exercise they must use, Mercurialis would have it to be
Moderate. But I, for my part, should rather with Galen, and Marsilius Ficinus
prescribe it somewhat violent, ad sudore^usque till they sweat again: always
provided that the disease be not alread grown to Madness. And of all kind o^
Exercise, I approve most of Hunting (whereby Hippolytus is said to have
preserved his chastity,) and Riding; although that at the first indeed it
seems rather to provoke the body to venery, as the Philosopher also observes
in his Problems. Sect. 4. Nevertheless the frequent use of ^^, is very
effectual in this case; as Hippocrates also assures us: (...): Those people
that are great Riders, are ^he least apt for Venery. And this he ^roves by the
example of the Scythians, whom he affirms, by reason of their continual and
immoderate use of Horseman^hip, to be (...) the most Impotent, and Eunuch-like
men in the world.

Yet are there some kinds of Exercise and Recreations, altogether as dangerous;
^s, the reading of Lascivious books, Mu^icke, playing upon the Violl, Lute, or
any other instruments. But the most dangerous of all, are Plays, Revels,
Masks, and Dancing: for that these exercises do ^s well open the pores of
the Heart, as of the body. So that if any Serpent in the mean time chance to
whisper into his care any Lascivious, wanton, or idle discourse; or if any
Basiliske chance to cast forth some unchaste looks, and effeminate glances: the
heart is very easily surprised, and impoysoned therewith; especially if it have
ever before been wounded with Cupids darts. And what the Naturalist report of
the nature of the Leopard, man not unfitly be applied to Love. For as the
beast, by reason of his sweet savor draws all other kinds of beasts after him
but especially the Apes, (yet these, of a the rest he is not able to catch,
because they suddenly take the top of some tre^ or other:) he therefore
endeavors to cr^^ cumvent them by craft; and therefore he lies down upon the
ground, and covering himself all over with boughs, he counterfeits himself
to be dead, and that so cunningly, that the Apes believe him to be so indeed.
Which they no soone^ perceave, but that presently they leap^ down from the
Trees, and fall to dancing and frisking round about him very joy fully: till at
length the Leopard, finding them now to have sufficiently wearied themselves
with their sporting about him, suddenly leaps out among them, and seases upon
as many of them as he ca^^ well tell what to do withal, and so devoures them.
In like manner does this little Devil, Love, daily at the first with those he
intends to ruin, inviting them with some slight pleasure or other, as ^^ncing,
revels, plays, or the like: from ^^ese he leads them on perhaps to a high^^
degree of content, which they shall ^^de in ordinary conversation and
famili^ity with their Loves: from this they ^roceed to Passionate Love; and
this perhaps at length brings them to the enjoyment of their desires. But when
that he ^^th got them once within his power, he ^en seazes on them with all
violence, ^orrupting their principal and most no^e faculties, perverting their
Judgment, and depraving their Imagination: and thus under the Appearance of
secure delights, he involves them in a thousand ^all Miseries. For the Pleasure
that Lo^ers enjoy, may very fitly be compared to that kind of Honey, which they
call Mel Heracleoticum: which, by reason of the ^ast of Aconitum that is in it,
is more pleasant then any other ordinary Honey, at the ^^rst taste: but when it
comes to the point of digestion, it causes a giddiness in the Head, and a
dimnenesse in the eyes, and ^t the last leaves a very bitter taste in the mouth:

They must also carefully avoid all manner of lascivious discourse, dalliance,
a^ Kissing: which, notwithstanding that o^ Ladies, with Theocritus, account to
^ Vain, and of no force in this case; ((...):) yet do they carry great dang^^
in them. And therefore they may be lik^ned to those Egyptian Thieves, w^^ were
wont to be called (...), that is ^ say, Kissers: because that under the fai^
pretense of saluting and kissing tho^ they met upon the way, they would so upon
them, and rob them.

But the greatest danger of all is, in the Contrectation and touching of their
hand^ breasts, and other more secret part^ which the Greeks express very
properly by the word (...), which signify to handle, or feel Birds in the
Market, t^ try whether they be fat, or no: intimating unto us hereby, that
those women tha^ will suffer themselves to be handled i^ this manner, are
either to be bought, o^ borrowed.

Now for a Preservative against this evil, Avicen, and Paulus Aegineta advise
that the Party affected should be stricke^ with some sad disaster, and great
affright^ent; or else that he be employed in some ^eighty affairs, or be
accused of some Capital Crime or other. But I should rather desire, that some
learned Divine should inculcate into him the fear of Death and Hell; and so by
this means ^^irre him up to devotion and frequency ^^ prayer. For Prayer and
Fasting are most ^overaigne Preservatives against this Love Devil. And I would
have him frequent ^he company of Religious people: that so ^y continual
Conversation with them, he may participate also of their good qualities: In
like manner as a Vine, (according ^s the Naturalists report,) being planted
^ere an Olive tree, brings forth a more ^t and unctious kind of fruit, then
otherwise it would do.

Some Physicians counsel to take them and shut them up in Prison, (if so be
they ^^e young, and of able bodies,) and there give them correction. But, in my
opinion, Gordonius is too severe and cruel, when he says, that he would have
them whip^ed, and well beaten, donec totus incipiat Foetere, till they stink
again. But the Ancients, taking a more wise course then this when they would
prevent this Disease in young Effeminate Inamorato's, were wont to fasten a
Ring or buckle on the foreskin of their yard: as Celsus reports And hereto
Martial also seems to allud^ in that place, where he says:

Dum ludit media, populo specta^te, palestr^
Heu! cecidit misero fibula; verpus era^
They must also take heed of sleeping o^ their backs, for fear of overheating
the Reins: and they must not gird themselves in too straightly; for this
causes* Dilatation of the Veins. Neither must they lie on downe-beds, or
feather-beds but rather on such as are stuffed with straw, or Willow leaves,
Rue, Roses, Nenufar, Poppy, or Agnus Castus; on which strawed upon the ground,
the Athenian Women were wont to lie in the time of the celebration of their
Thesmophoria^ which was a Feast consecrated to the Honor of Ceres.

Avicen, in his Chapter de Amore, Gordonius, Arnaldus de Villa Nova, and many
other modern Physicians, are of opinion, that the best way to preserve one,
that is but newly fallen in Love, from this disease of Erotique Melancholy, is,
to endeavor by all means possible to divert his thoughts from his Former
Mistress, by making him fall in Love with another: whom when he once begins
to be affected with; they must then make him hate this, and fall in love with a
third: following this course with him still, till at length he begins of his
own accord to be weary of being in Love. For as Aristotle says, he that has
many Friends, has never a one: in like manner do I say, that he that is in
Love with many women at once, will never run mad for any of them. And this,
Gordonius confesses that he learnt of the wanton Poet Ovid, whose advise this
is.

Hortor and ut pariter binas habeat is amicas.
Fortior est, plures si quis habere potest.
Secta bipartito cum men's discurrit utroque,
Alterius Vires subtrahit alter Amor.
Let each man have two Mistresses in store:
And 'twere much better, if he could have more.
Thus, whilst the mind 'twixt two it self does share,
One Love will still each others force impair.
For the Mind being thus divided, the desires are the less violent; and so
one love takes away the force of the other.

But this opinion of theirs, (under correction of so learned men) I cannot
approve of: considering that it is to be feared, that either we shall not be
able to remove his Love at our pleasure: (which Avicen also seems to grant,
when he says that if we cannot bring it to pass our selves, we must employ
some old woman about the effecting of it:) or if we do take him off from his
first Love, and commend a second to him, he may happily fix there too firmly,
and be as much perplexed with this, as with the first Love. Besides, I my self
have known diverse persons, who by this means have gotten so ill a Habit, as
they could not choose but fall in love with all women Indifferently, that would
but seem to entertain their Love: and as often as they came in company where
women were, their behavior was so ridiculous, that a man would have taken them
to be arrant Fools, notwithstanding all their other Actions were very
discreet, and such as might become the wisest Men. For all Passions, that are
of any long continuance, do imprint ill Habits in the Mind; which by length of
time growing stronger, are very hard to be removed, and are apt to be stirred
up at every the least occasion. An experience of this you may have in cowards,
who oftimes are afraid even of those that come for their rescue and protection:
and in Choleric men, who many times fall out with their friends. So likewise
those Men, that are prone to unchaste Love, cannot content themselves with the
Love of any one, but apply themselves to all indifferently. For Custom, which
is, as it were, another Nature, being once grown up into a Habit, has a
wonderful power in disposing the mind to that which is familiar unto it. And
as a stumbling horse is apt to trip at every stone that lies in his way; So he
that has contracted such an Amorous Disposition, is in love with every one he
sees. And when he is once thus affected, he does not then what he would, but
what his Passion prompts him to: lust as a bowl, when it is once set a going,
necessarily turns round, and cannot stay it self, by reason of it is circular
figure, so apt to Motion. Dum servitur Libidini, facta est Consuetudo: and dum
Consuetudini non resistitur, facta est Necessitas: says S. Augustine; while a
Man indulgeth his own Iustfull desires, it grows at length into a Custom:
and this Custom meeting no resistance, becomes at last a kind of Necessity.

CAP. XXXI. Chirurgicall Remedies for the Prevention of Love, and Erotique
Melancholy.
FOr as much as the seed is the joint, Immediate cause of this Disease, as
Galen proves at large by diverse both Arguments and Examples, toward the end of
his lib. 6. de loc. Affect. and seeing that the seed is nothing else but Blood,
made White by the Natural Heat, and an Excrement of the third Digestion, which
provokes Nature either by its quantity, or quality to evacuate it; which
otherwise would corrupt within the body, and so by sending up diverse noisome
vapors to the Brain by the Backbone, and other passages, would disturb and
hinder the operation of its chiefest Faculties: It seems to be very necessary
in the first place to take away the superfluity of Blood, by opening the Liver
Vein in the right arm. And if the party be of a good Constitution, Sanguine,
and well in flesh, you may take the greater quantity from him; because that
their strength will be able to bear the loss of the greater store of Blood.
And you may reiterate it, two or three times in a year, so long as there is
any danger of this Disease remaining: especially if you find that this course
would have been good to have been taken with the Patientat the first. After the
Liver Vein has been opened, I would advise to take some quantity of Blood,
accordingly as the Age and strength of the Patient would bear it, from the
Hamme Vein: especially if the party be troubled with the Satyriasis, and the
Physician find himself able enough to do this. Or in stead of this, I would
open the Saphena, or Ankle Vein: or else apply Couping glasses upon his thigh
near to the privy parts, having first made sufficient Scarification. But he
must not come to these particular Evacuations, unless the Vein in the Arm
were first opened: which in case of the Satyriasis, or Vterine Fury, I would
have to be done the first day. For otherwise this would be a means rather to
attract and draw down more Blood to those parts, which are both the cause and
seat of the disease, then to draw it away. Some use Cauterismes on the Legs:
but I do not approve of this course, but rather take it to be vain, and of
little or no force at all. The Scythians, as Herodotus reports, were wont to cut
the Veins behind their Ears, and so by this means made them (...) Impotent,
and weak: and having brought down themselves to this base dejected state,
they took upon them the habit of Women, and spun with them too: as Hippocrates
relates: for as the same Author affirms, lib. de Aere, Loc. and Aqu. the
cutting of those Veins or Arteries that join close to the Ears, makes the
persons so cut, Impotent, and unapt for Generation. Notwithstanding Vesalius,
and some other Anatomists will have this defect to proceed rather from the
cutting of the Nerves of the Sixth Conjugation, which passing along by the
ears, are terminated in the Genitals, and Spermaticall Vessels.

This remedy being so easy, might also seem very useful for all those that
have taken upon them the Vow of Perpetual Chastity: but that there seems to
be some danger in it of hurting the Memory and Judgment: as may be collected
out of Avicen, and is confirmed also by the example of the Scythians before
mentioned; who, by this Chirurgicall experiment made upon themselves, became
stark Fools and Idiots.

CHAP. XXXII. Medicinal Remedies for the Prevention of Love, or Erotique
Melancholy.
THE first Medicinal remedy shall be a Clyster, composed of cooling and
moystening Ingredients: among which it will do well to mix Hemp seed, Agnus
Castus, and the like. And the next day after, you shall give him a sufficient
quantity of Cassia, Catholicon, Diaprum, or Tryphera Persica, with a little
Agnus Castus: or else a very gentle Purge: for we must not in this case use
any violent Purgation, or which would make the body over Laxative: as both
Avicen, and Aetius are of opinion, who to this purpose prescribes the Decoction
of Betes, Mallows, or the herb Mercury. For all violent Medicaments do heat
the Humors, and inrage the Blood, driving down the Excrements toward the
Inferior parts, and Spermaticall Vessels. And for this reason Arnaldus de
Villa Nova, cap. de Regim. Cast. Vivent. preferres Vomits, in this case, before
Purging.

Then let the party take every morning a little milk, or else some broth, or
Iulip that may refresh the blood: using also some Medicinal drink, which is
of a contrary nature to the generation of seed: especially if the party be of a
moist complexion: for, for such persons, these kind of Medicines are very
good, as Avicen says.

This Medicine I commonly use.

(...) Rad. Buglos. borag. and cichor. ana (...) 5. fol. Endiv. acetos. portul.
lupul. and lactuc. ana m. j. sem. 4. frigid. major. and minor. ana (...). j.
semin. viticis and papav. albi ana (...) ij. passul. Corinth. flor. Nenufar.
and viol. ana p. j. decoq. ad lib. j. in colat. dissol. sirup. de pomis
redolent. viol. and Nenufar. ana (...) j. and misce, fiat Iulep. clarif. and
aromat. (...). j. santal. albi pro tribus, aut 4. dosibus matutinis.

Sometimes also I add hereto some few grains of Camphire: or else I temper it
with water of Lettice, Purslane, or Water Lillies: and so give it him to drink
for some certain Mornings: especially the party affected be of a Hot and
Choleric constitution. For, as Dioscorides says these herbs are very
powerful and efficacious for the Prevention and cure of this Malady.

The Athenian Priests were wont to take Hemlocke for this purpose:
notwithstanding that it was the Ordinary poison that the Areopagites used to
put Malefactors to death withal: as we may observe out of Plato. And S. Basil,
(who is reported to have been as well an excellent Physician, as a Divine,)
affirms that he had seen women, that have quite extinguished all their
unchaste Heats, merely by drinking of hemlock. But we must take heed that we
use not any Diureticall Medicines, and that for the reason before alleged
concerning Purgation. Besides, all such Medicaments are commonly Hot and Dry,
except they be qualified with a little quantity of milk and water, which may
temper their Heat. For Mercurialis affirms, that he has cured women of this
Love-Madnesse, by these remedies only. Or else let them use this.

(...) Lent. palust. p. 5. sem. lact. port. and ^apau. albi, ana (...). j.
rosar. and nenuf. anae ^ 5. coquant in aqua, and cum q. s. sacchari ^at sirup.
quo utatur singulis diebus. Some ^ake and boil in their broaths a little
Mo^ell, and Hemlocke; but I am not of their Opinion.

And if there be any danger of Ventosity, as there may very well be in such
persons as are of a Melancholy constitution: then you shall use Decoctions,
Iulips, or Ointments, and the like; rather then cooling Simples.

After that he has taken these drinks, it would not be amiss, to purge him,
with those Medicines above set down; or else with Rhubarbe, and sirupe of
Roses, or with the sirupe of Succory, compounded with Rhubarbe.

But methinkes it is a very Ridiculous conceit of Arnaldus Villanovanus, where
he says, that there is no better way in the world to secure a man from this
Disease, then to carry about him a knife, with a haft made of the wood of Agnus
Castus.

It is also very good to bath the privy members in Vinegar, the juice of
Morell, Plantaine, Hipwort, House leeke, or the like liquors: especially if the
party do no marry. But for my part I conceive, that a^ there is less danger
in bathing ones self in cold water, so perhaps there might n^ less benefit
issue there from: considering that those wenches of Lions were heretofore cured
of this disease, only by leaping into the river Sosne, as we have before
related. This bathing, which must be done with cold water in the summer, and
i^ lukewarm in winter, you may reiterat^ oftentimes, always anointing the
reine^ of the back, and the Groyne, with Galen. Refrigerating Ointment, or
Mesues Ro^satum, or Camphoratum. To which you may also add the juice of those
cooling Herbs before mentioned. Yet must there be great heed taken, as
Aegineta says, least while we are so careful of cooling the Privy parts and
loins, the reins do not suffer too much by it. There is also great danger of
stopping the course of their monthly Terms in Women and Virgins; if so be
that these Stupefactive and cooling Medicaments be used too frequently. And
therefore, least that avoiding one inconvenience, we fall into a greater, we
must take heed of giving women ^ay inward Medicines, that have Vinegar ^ the^:
(...): saih Hippocrates: It ^ffends the Matrix and secret Parts, causeing great
pain and gripings in them. And Avenzoar gives the reasons hereof, unto whom I
must refer the Reader for more particular satisfaction herein.

Aetius, besides the anointing of the ^eynes, Loins, and the parts adjoining,
advises to bath the forehead and Temples also with Oxyrhodeum; especially if
there be any danger of Madness, Vterine Fury, or Erotique Melancholy.

If it should seem to be somewhat dangerous for the patient to have these
Ointments, Cere-cloathes, or cooling Fomentations aplied unto him: you shall
do well then to gird him about with a thin plate of lead; to which both Galen,
Avicen, Aegineta, Andreas Laurentius, and all our modern Physicians attribute
great virtue in this case. But they must take heed that he wear it not too
long, for fear it may offend the Reins. Besides all these Remedies already
set down, Arnaldus de Villa-Nova adds yet another, the use whereof he
commends to a^^ that desire to live chaste, and especial Friars, and other
Religious persons: which is, to go Barefoot.

There are yet some other Remedies that concern particularly the cure of the
disease in Women, who are the most of a^ subject unto it. And these are
commonly Clysters, composed of very cold Herbs mixed with a certain quantity
of Camphir^ Castorium, or Rue. Or else they may us^ Vterine Clysters, such as
this.

(...) Lent. excortic. p. ij. flor. salic. and rosar. ana. p. i. fol. olivae m.
i. fiat decoct ad lib. i. in qua dissol. trochisc. de Cam^phor. (...). i.
misce, fiat Clyster: injiciatur i^ sinum pudoris.

Or else this other, out of Aetius.

(...) Nitri and Cardamomi ana (...). i. cum ceratis excipito: fiat pessus,
quem pudendis subdito. Vel certam quantitatem Diacordi^ cum solani sucoo mixtam
in sinum Veneri^ indito.

There are also diverse other Remedies and Prescriptions, in case of this
disease, which have been left us by women, that have had some proportion of
skill in Phy^^cke: such as was Cleopatra, sister to Ar^oe, who in her Prologue
to her book desires to be called, The Queen of Physicians. Her advise to her
daughter Theodota ^^, that if the disease be already grown to Madness, or
Vterine Fury, that then she should intra portulam Veneris radiculam ^mmittere
panno involutam: dicitque (mirum dictu) super pannum hunc exinde repetium
Vermiculos quosdam inveniri.

And here I would desire the Reader to take notice by the way, that my desire
^s to speak as modestly as possibly I can: ^et must I withal observe the
Precepts and Terms of Physic, which cannot so well stand oftentimes with
the Civility and modesty of Language. Amo Vere^undiam; (says Tully,) sed magis
amo libertatem loquendi. I love Modesty: but yet I love the Liberty of Speech
more. And yet am I not one of Zeno's sect, cui placuit suo quamque rem nomine
appellare; who would have every thing called by its own name: and maintained,
that nothing was Obscene, nor unfit for the chastest ears to hear. And indeed
it may seem to be something a disputable business, whether or no the names
are obscene and dishonest, when as the Parts themselves that are signified by
them, are not so, but are Natural, useful, and necessary: and of which also
we oftentimes make public dissections and demonstrations, and discourse
openly of their substance, number, figure situation, connection, Actions, and
use.

Perrot, a French Physician, advises to take Camphire, and distill it a douzen
times: assuring us that this remedy excel all other in virtue, and efficacy.
And Arnaldus de villa nova, says, that if a man take the right stone of a
Wolf, and put i^ under the right stone of the party affected he will in a
short space forget all his unchaste desires. But this is not the only trifling
devise, that is to be found in that book of his, de Venenis. But if this
should be true, which yet I am very apt to suspect, we must attribute this
effect to some certain Occult quality: to which we must also refer the
virtue which both he, and diverse other Physicians do impute to the Carbuncle,
Sapphire, Emerauld, and Iaspir stones, for the preserving a main from
Love-Melancholy, if he wear any of these precious stones on the Ring-finger of
his left hand.

CAP. XXXIII. The cure of Erotique Melancholy, and Love. Madness.
DIogenes going one day to the Oracle at Delphos, to ask counsel, what was
the most sovereign and speediest Remedy for the cure of his son, that was
grown mad for Love: received this answer, that he must enjoy Her, that was
the cause of his Madness. The same counsel did Ionadab give to Amnon, who
doated on his sister Thamar; Hippocrates, to King Perdicca's son: and
Erasistratus, to Antiochus, King Seleucus his son. This opinion is also set
down in express terms by Hippocrates, about the end of his book De his
quae ad Virgin. spect. thus: (...) (...). My advise is, says he, that all
young wenches, when once they begin to be taken with this disease, should
presently be married out of hand. The same is the opinion of Galen also,
toward the end of those excellent books of his, which he composed in his old
age, de Locis Affect, as also of Avicen, Haly Abbas, Gordonius, Arnaldus,
Valescus de Tarenta, Pereda, Lucretius, Ficinus, Ovid, and many others.

But the enjoyment of their Desires does not cure this disease alone; but even
the very power, or Liberty to enjoy them, does oftimes work the same effect:
according to that of the Poet.

Jlli, peccandi studium, permissa potestas
Abstulit; atque ipsum talia velle subit.
And sometimes also a bare dream does the like: as may appear by that story
of a certain young Egyptian, that was extremely in love with one Theognis,
related by Plutarch. This young Inamorato prevailed so far with this wench,
that at the last she consented to satisfy his desires, upon condition that he
would give her a certain sum of Money: which he very readily condescended
unto. It fortuned in the mean time, that as this lusty youth one night lay
asleep in his bed, he dreamed that he embraced in his arms his beloved
Theognis: and his Fancy was so strong upon him, that he conceived himself to
enjoy her really, in the height of Amorous dalliance: and was indeed by this
means cured of his Malady. Which the Damsel coming to have notice of, she
demands her salary of him: and upon his refusal to pay it, she sues him in the
court of Justice, alleging for the reason of this her proceeding, that she
had performed the conditions on her part required, in that she had cured him of
his disease. Which when the Judge heard, he commanded the young man, that he
should bring into the Court the sum of money agreed upon betwixt them, and
there power it out into a Basin: and withal decreed, that as the Egyptian had
contented himself with a bare Imaginary Pleasure, conceived in the enjoyment
of Her body: in like manner should she be satisfied with the sound and color
of his gold. This sentence of the Judge was approved of by all, save only the
Damsel: who objected against it, that the dream had quenched the Egyptians
desire: but on the contrary, the sound and color of the gold had increased
Hers the more; and that therefore this sentence was unjust.

And here before we either approve, or reject this Remedy, we must distinguish
this enjoyment into two kinds, either Lawful, or Unlawful. Now there is no
Physician, that ever denied to his Patient, for the cure of his Love-Madnesse,
the enjoyment of the person he loved, so it were in marriage lawfully concluded
on of all sides: considering that, as the Poet says.

Amoris vulnus, idem qui facit, sanat. The wounds of Love, are cured only by
that hand that made them.

(...).
(...).
I, sweet, am Telephus: Thou, Achilles be.
And let thy Beauty cure, that wounded me.
Avicen, in his chapter de Amore, says, that this is the only, and last remedy
that we must have recourse unto. Amplius cum non invenitur cura, nisi regimen
coniunctionis inter eas, secundum modum permissionis fidei and legis, fiat. Et
nos quidem iam vidimus, cuireddita est salus, and virtus, and rediit ad carnem
suam, cum iam pervenisset ad arefactionem, and pertransissetipsam, and
tellerasset Aegritudines pravas, antiquas, and febres longas, propter
debilitatem virtutis, factam propter nimietatem Ilisci. And he professes that
himself has seen some, that have been recovered by this means, when as
through the extremity of this Love-Melancholy, they have been grown lean and
dry, and have had scarce any flesh left on their backs, and through weakness
and faintness have been brought into cruel Inveterate diseases, and Fevers
of long continuance. But in case that Marriage cannot be accomplished betwixt
the parties, by reason of any Impediments on either part: I dare not be so
impious as to prescribe for the cure of our Patient, as Avicen, and Haly Abbas
do, Emptionem puellarum, and plurimum concubitum ipsarum: and earum
renovationem, and delectationem cum ipsis. And yet I do not marvel at all,
that these Mahometans should embrace this so wicked an opinion: considering
that their Alcoran permits them to have as many wives, and Concubines, as they
are able to maintain: as we are assured by the relation of all those that
have written of the customs, and manners of the Turks, and other Mahometans.
Neither yet do I wonder at Ovid, and Lucretius among the Poets, who made a
virtue of Luxury, and Incontinency. But this opinion is most vile, and
execrable in the mouth of Christians, that would seem to maintain it: such as
were Arnaldus de villa Nova, Magnimus, Valescus de Tarenta, Pereda, Marsilius
Ficinus, and some others. But I leave this question to be disputed by Divines,
whether or no Fornication be lawful: and whether we may do Ill, that Good
may come of it: And shall only for mine own part believe, as the Moral
Philosophers teach us, that Vice is never cured by Vice, but by Virtue, as by
it is contrary: (...): For Contraries are cured by Contraries; as I shall be
able to prove unto you out of Aristotle: and shall show you withal, that those
persons that take this lewd course to cure themselves of this Malady; instead
of being cured, they rather grow far worse, and much more inclined to Lust,
and all unchaste desires. (...). For by this means, says he, the passages of
the body are opened and made more capacious, and the spermaticall vessels are
enlarged: and withal, the Remembrance of those sweet pleasures they have
formerly enjoyed, begets in them a strong desire to act them over again. This
doctrine Aristotle seems to have derived from Hippocrates, who discourses of
this point, almost in the very same terms; (...). For, says he, if a man do
exercise the Acts of Venery very frequently; his Veins by this means grow
larger; and so attracting the greater store of seed, he is a great deal the
more prone to Venery. Galen also is of the same opinion; and proves it by that
excellent and true Maxim of the divine Plato in Theaeteto; where he says,
that Jgnavia quidem exsolvit: proprii autem officii exercitatio, robur anget.
Idleness, and want of exercise, destroys the strength: but labor, and often
using of a man's strength, increases it. And this he confirms also by the
instance of Women's breasts, which breed the greater quantity of milk in them,
the oftener they are sucked. But on the contrary side, says he, Cantatoribus,
and Athletis, qui iam inde ab initio nullam vitae partem Veneris illecebris
contaminaverunt, nullam admittentes Venereorum cogitationem, vel Imaginationem;
iis Pudenda exilia, and rugosa, veluti senibus, sieri consueverunt, nullaque
libidine tentantur. Which place, I hold to be very well worhty the consideration
of all those that have taken upon the^ the vow of Chastity. Besides, if the
contrary opinion of those Authors above named were true: it must needs then
follow, that those persons that are married, should never feel the force of
any of these unchaste Heats of Lust: notwithstanding experience proves the
contrary. And this has moved even some of the Ancient Fathers to confess,
that it was a harder matter for a man to preserve his Chastity, then his
Virginity.

CAP. XXXIV. Remedies for the Cure of Love-Melancholy in Married persons.
IT is often seen, that Married persons, whether they have been joined together
by their own good liking and choice, and without any constraint on either side;
or else perhaps against the consent of the one or the other; do at length
conceave a secret hate against one another, which occasioneth betwixt them such
discord, malice, and neglect, that they cannot endure the company of one
another: but presently yield up themselves to the embraces of some new Loves,
whom they entertain with all fervency and strength of desire, notwithstanding
the unlawfullnesse of this their foul and lewd manner of living. The cause of
this, is diverse for it is sometimes either the Dissimil^ tude of Manners; or
else a secret Antipa^thy in their dispositions: sometimes also some
Imperfection either of body of mind in one of the parties. Sometimes it is
caused by some Charm, or Enchantment; or else perhaps a Iealousy, or conceit
that they have, that their Love is not requited with mutual Love again. And
sometimes also it is caused through the want of that Pleasure that Nature has
in great measure bestowed on the Genitall parts in the Act of Copulation, by
the means of those Nerves which are placed in them, and the Serous sharp
pricking Humor that is reserved within certain Kernels in the neck of the
bladder.

For the cure of this Natural defect, I shall desire you to have recourse to
Marinello de Vigo, Avicen, and others, and especially Liebault in his first
book of the diseases of Women, and 35 chapter: where he sets down the means
that must be used, for the reconcilement and bringing together again of new
married persons, that hate and fly the company of each other. And here by the
way you are to take notice, that as there are some Men that are Cold and
Impotent: so are there likewise some Women too, that feel no motions of the
flesh at all. Platerus in his Observations makes mention of two in this kind,
who were for this reason always Barren. Of this constitution was Amasis, King
of Egypt; as Herodotus reports: and Theodoricus, King of France, is reported by
Paulus Aemilius to have been Impotent toward his Wife, but not toward his
Concubines. The same is recorded also in the Annals of Aragon, and by Dupreau,
in the year 1196. of Peter the Second, King of Aragon: which the Quen being
advertised of, she went one night, and lay in one of the Kings concubines beds,
and was got with child that night, and afterward delivered of James, who was
afterward King: and so by this means and subtle device of the Queens, the
King was brought to see his error, and ever after abstained from his unchaste
Loves.

Homer faignes that Juno, for to restrain her Husband Jupiter from falling any
more in Love with Latona, Jo, Calisto, and other his Concubines, borrowed Venus
Girdle,

(...) Wherein were wrought all the desires, graces, persuasions, baits, and
allurements required to the confirmation of love betwixt man and wife.

If either of the parties have any defect in their person, which may seem to
have been the cause of the others neglect; they must then endeavor to repair
it by all convenient remedies. Or if this be impossible to be done; they must
then strive to recompense this defect of body, by the beauty of their mind.

Vt teneas Dominam, nec te mirere relictu^:
Ingenii dotes, corporis add bonis.
Maximus Tyrius reports, of Achilles, that he seemed so beautiful to all those
that beheld him, not so much for his long golden Hair; for Euphorbus had a
fairer ^ead of Hair then he: but because that ^is personal Beauty was adorned
with that of his Mind. The learned Sapho makes her self praise worthy in this
respect, when as in her Epistle to her belo^ed Phao, she boasts, that what
Nature ^ad denied her in beauty, she her self ^ad repaired that defect by the
Indowments and graces of her Mind.

Si mihi difficilis formam Natura negavit:
Jngenio, formae damna rependo meae.
They must also endeavor to make themselves conformable to each other in their
wills, manners of life, and conditions: according to that advice of the Poet.

Certus Amor morum est. Formam populabitur Aetas:
Et placitus rugis vultus aratus erit.
Sufficit, and longum Probitas perdurat in aevum;
Perque suos annos, hinc been pendet Amor.
He that his love on a fair Face has placed:
As Age shall ruin this, his flames must wast
But where two equal minds, and chaste desires
Do meet; these kindle never-dying fires.
And if there be any secret Antipathy betwixt them, they must yet still pretend
some show of love the one to the other: for it may so come to pass, that this
feigned Love may in time convert to true real Love. It is reported of one
Caelius in Rome, that, to avoid the Attendance on some great person in the
Emperors Court, counterfeited himself to be grievously troubled with the
Gout, applying all those ordinary remedies that are prescribed for the cure of
this disease: Till at length Fortune did him the favor to send him the Gout in
earnest. Of whom Martial has this witty Epigram.

Tantum cura potest, and ars doloris.
Desiit fingere Caelius Podagram.
Caelius now feignes not. (see what Art can do!)
He that before would not, now cannot go.
Appian also makes mention of another, who in a jeering way counterfeiting
blindness in another, within a short space became blind himself. Love must be
answered with Love again. Monstrabo tibi Amatorium sine Medicamento, sine
ullius Veneficae carmine. Si vis amari, ama. says Seneca. I will show thee a
way how to procure love, without either Philter, or Charm: If thou would be
Loved, do thou first love. Themistius, and Porphyrius have a pleasant fiction
to this purpose, which is this. As one day Venus, having perceaved that her
son Cupid did not thrive at all, went to consult with the Goddess Themis
concerning the reason of it; she received this answer: that Cupid could not
recover a perfect state, and strength of body, unless he had a Brother, which
must be called Anteros, or Reciprocal Love, for the mutual assistance of each
other. Anteros was no sooner borne, but presently Cupid began to grow, and
spread forth his wings; and so long as Anteros was in presence, he appeared
both greater, and much more beautiful: but in his Absence he seemed always to
diminish, and abate both in strength and beauty. So that by this fiction is
intimated of how great force and virtue, honest Embraces, kind words, and
courteous entertainements are, for the continuance and increasing of mutual
Love. And for this cause the Ancients, as Plutarch reports, were wont to give
the Bride a Quince to eat, on the wedding day.

Nam facit ipsa suis interdum foemina factis,
Morigerisque modis, and mudo corpori' cultu,
Vt facile insueseat secum vir degere vitam.
It often comes to pass, says this old Poet, that a woman, by her applying
her self to the humors and conditions of her Husband, and by her neatness,
and comely attiring of her self, tempers the roughness and harshnesse of his
disposition; and so by this means they enjoy each other very peaceably and
Lovingly.

Philostratus reports, that the eating of Hares flesh, was accounted of great
virtue among the Romans, for the maintaining of Mutual Love and amity betwixt
married persons, and to divert their minds from thinking on any strange loves.
And this custom was grounded perhaps on a certain opinion, that, as Pliny
says, they had, that the flesh of a Hare makes those that eat it comely, and
of a gracious aspect. And hereto Martial seems to allude, when he writes to
Gellia thus.

Si quando Leporem mittis mihi, Gellia, Mandas,
Formosus septem, Marce, diebus eris.
Si non derides, si verum, Gellia, mandas:
Edisti nunquam, Gellia, tu Leporem.
Gellia, when ere thou send'st to me a Hare, Thou bidst me eat it, and I shall
be fair Seven days. If this be true, as thou do say:

Thou never eatst a Hare, good Gellia.

Aristotle commends for this use the fis^ called Remora, by the Latins; and by
the Greeks (...): and says that they were wont to use it in their Philters.
(...): which place of Aristotle is thus translated by Pliny: Echineis,
Amatoriis beneficiis infamis, Iudiciorum, and litium mora. Which opinion of the
Ancients seems to me in all probability to have been grounded on a certain
fable that they have, how that such a Fish^ should stop the ship of Perianders
Ambassadors, whom he had sent to geld all the Males that were left of the blood
Royal: as if Nature her self held it an unworthy Act, that man should be
despoyld of those parts, that were given him for the preservation of the whole
kind.

The same virtue is attributed also, by some other Naturalists, to that kind of
Coral, which is for this reason called Charitoblepharon; and also to the
Herb Catanance: and by Philostratus, to an Oil that drops from certain
trees, growing on the bank of the river Hyphasis in India; wherewith all the
Indians are wont to annoint themselves on their Marriage day.

But for mine own part, I am more inclined to be of the Poet Menanders
opinion, who thinks that the strongest tie, for the retaining of Man and Wife
in Mutual amity and concord is to have Children. (...). Because that,
Children, as the Philosopher says, are Commune Quid, a Benefit that both
parties have equal share in: and are therefore the fittest Mediators, and
Vmpires betwixt Man and Wife. Now it is the property of a Mediator to
reconcile, and reunite both parties: as Aristotle says. (...). Now if you
desire to know what means are to be used for the cure of Impotency in Men, and
Barrenness in Women: I desire you to have recourse unto a treatise I have
formerly written of the same subject.

The Roman Ladies made great account of the herb Hippoglossum, or
Horse-tongue, which they called Bonifacia, and attributed great virtue unto it
for the reconcilement and reuniting of married persons. Albertus Magnus, and
Lemnius attribute the like virtue to a certain stone, which, they say, is
found in the belly of a Capon, that was not gelded until he was four years
old: which stone, they say, is of an exceeding bright color, and as
transparant as Crystal, and about the bigness of a Bean. Now he that means
to prove the virtue of it, must take and wrap it up in a piece of skin or
bladder, and so wear it about him. Pliny affirms that Eringo roots are of
great force in this case. But I for my part am of the Poets opinion, who says
that

Male quaeritur Herbis;
Moribus, and Forma conciliandus Amor.
It is an idle and vain thing, to go about to procure Love by Herbs, or
Charms, or the like foolish devises: for true Love is caused only by beauty,
and the virtuous dispositions of the Mind.

Yet sometimes I confess, it is brought to pass by the use of Charms and
Witchcraft, that Married persons fall off from the Love they formerly bare to
each other: and so by this means are forced to entertain new desires, and
yield up themselves to embrace the Love of strangers. These Charms are
commonly called in Latin, Nodi, sive Ligamina Amatoria: of which many of our
Modern Physicians have written, and particularly Arnaldus de Villa Nova, in
his Tract de Ligaturis Physicis. And it is the opinion also of many both
Divines and Physicians that it is probable, that the Devil, who is the Author
of all Mischief, has power to quench lawful Loves, and to kindle new and
unlawful desires in men: as first, by making the Husband Impotent toward his
own wife, by the application of some natural things that may have that
virtue; which he can at his pleasure remove again, when the same man comes to
meddle with any other woman. Secondly, by raising dissentions, and Iealousies
betwixt them. Thirdly by causing some loathsome disease or other, in either of
the Parties: as it is reported of Medea, who by the power of her Charms is
said to have made all the Lemnian women to have stinking breaths, in so much
that their Husbands could not endure to come near them. Fourthly, by troubling
their Imagination, and making either the Husband, or the wife seem misshapen
and deformed to the others eye; and all other both Men and Women to appear
fair and beautiful. Or lastly, by working some secret Antipathy betwixt them.
For it is reported by Egnatius, that one Valasca, a Bohemian wench, by her
charms caused the Women of Bohemia to kill all the men in that place where she
was, all in one night. Or else the Devil may do this, by working some strange
Alteration in the Temperature of the Genitall parts either of the Man, or of
the Woman: for by this means some men have become Impotent, and unapt for
Copulation: and on the contrary, some Women have been as salt as Bitches: as
Saxo Grammaticus reports.

But we must take heed that we do not Ignorantly impute these effects to
Magic, Charms, or Sorcery, when as indeed they are produced by Natural
causes: As did of old the Scythians, who, having made themselves Impotent, by
cutting the veins, Arteries, or Nerves that join close to the Ears,
notwithstanding thought that it was a punishment inflicted upon them, by the
Goddess Venus Urania, in revenge of the injury their Ancestors had done unto
her, in pulling down and rifling a Temple that was dedicated to her Honor in
Ascalon, a famous City of Palestina.

We must also be sure that the Woman be not (...), wanting the natural passage
destined for the use of Copulation; as was Cornelia, the mother of the Gracchi:
And in this case, the passage must be opend with an instrument, according to
the directions of Albucasis, Aetius, Joan: Wierus, Pareus, and other
Authentic Authors: Which thing I my self also once caused to be done in the
City of Castelnaudary to two young maids of the same place. Notwithstanding
this defect is incident both to Widows, and to Married women also, if their
Husbands chance to be a long time absent from them: as Iean Liebault affirms
that himself has known it happen to two women that were neighbors of his.
And I am much inclined to suspect, that Namysia, and Phaethusa, two women whom
Hippocrates reports to have been Metamorphosed into Men, were only troubled
with this disease: which is indeed more rarely, and seldomer seen in Women,
then the other contrary disease to this is, which many times proves the
Occasion of quenching Loves desires in Married persons. But I shall not here
set down the manner of curing these two opposite diseases: but shall rather
refer you to Avicen, Aetius, Aegineta, and all modern writers that have
spoken any thing of Barrenness, or of the Diseases of Women.

Arnaldus de Villa Nova, in his tract that he has writren concerning the
Remedies that must be used against the Devil, and his sorceries, counsels us
to cause the party affected to carry about him a quill of Quicksilver, or else
a piece of Coral, the herb Motherwort, or Squills. Ioannes de Vigo advises
to besprinkle the house of the party that is enchanted or bewitched, with the
blood of a black dog. Some other will have him eat the flesh of a Magpy, or
Wood-pecker: or else to annoint the body of the Enchanted person with the gall
of a Raven, tempered with the powder of Hartwort.

But my opinion shall ever be, that Enchantments and Sorceries, are to be cured
rather by Prayer and Fasting, and not by Physical or Natural remedies.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Philters, and Poetical Cures of Love.
BEfore we descend to the cure of Love-Melancholy, it is necessary that we
examine, whether, or no, this disease may be caused by Philters, and in like
manner also cured by Poetical remedies, or any other thing that is of a Nature
contrary to these Philters. Those that endeavor to maintain the power of
Philters, or Love potions, allege for themselves, that if it be in the power
of a Sorcerer or Magician to cause Hate; they may then as easily produce the
contrary Passion, which is, Love; and that, by the use of certain Characters,
Charms, Poisons, Meats, or Medicines, which may stir up the Humors, heat
the blood, or by some other means provoke them to Lust. And this their
Assertion they labor to prove out of that place of the Prophet Nahum, where
there is a woe pronounced against the bloody City etc. Because of the multitude
of the Whoredoms of the well favored Harlot the Mistress of Witchcrafts, that
sells Nations through her Whoredoms, and Families through her witchcrafts.
Where by Witchcrafts, they say, is meant Philters, which they used to make, by
burning the stones of Olives: as may be collected out of the book of Baruch.
And this is the reason, as they conceave, that Plato, in Convivio, says, that
Love is (...), a great Magitian and a Sorcerer.

The Heathen of old time attributed so great power and virtue, to these
Philters, and Love Potions; as that they believed it to be impossible, but that
whosoever drank them, should forthwith yield themselves up to the pleasure of
those that gave it them.

Hic Thessala vendit
Philtra, quibus valiant mentem vexare mariti,
Et solea pulsare nates, etc.
Plutarch in his discourse of Marriage seems very confidently to believe, that
there is such a Virtue in Philters: but yet he absolutely rejects them, and
holds them very dangerous to be used. And he proves it by the example of
Poisoned Baits, that men use sometimes to fish withal. For as these poisoned
Baits do indeed suddenly, and very certainly catch all those Fishes, that do
but taste of them: yet are the Fishes to taken the more dangerous and unfit to
be eaten. In like manner fares it with those women that use Love Potions,
Charms, and Sorceries, to inveagle those they dote on: for, notwithstanding
that by this means they are indeed certain to enjoy them, yet it is but in a
kind of Forced and Enraged manner, without any true co^tentment at all. Circe,
says he, was both of this Sex, and Nature yet received she but small content
from those that she had by her Philters and Magical Spells transformed into
Beasts. On the other side, she doated on Ulysses, who knew well enough how to
love with discretion, notwithstanding all her powerful Charms.

You shall meet with diverse of these kinds of fooleries, in Tibullus,
Propertius, Horace, Theocritus, and in Virgil also; who has this that follows.

Limus ut hic durescit; and haec ut Ceraliquescit,
Vno and eodem igne; sic nostro Daphnis Amore.
Apuleius in the third book of his Metamorphosis, relates a pretty passage that
befell his Hostess Pamphile: who sending Fotis her Waiting-maid for some of
the hair of a certain young fellow, whom she was desperately in love withal;
intending to try an experiment of her skill in Sorcery upon him, to force him
to her will: the Maid, as it seems, missing of her purpose, and not daring to
return home to her Mistress empty-handed, espies by chance where some were
shaving the hair of certain bladders that they had made of Goat-skinnes for
to swim withal. And so taking with her some of this Hair, she returns
home, and concealing the truth of the business, delivers it to her Mistress
for the true Hair she sent her for. At length when Pamphile had finished all
her Magical Ceremonies, and now began every minute to expect her Lovers
approach: on a sudden, clean contrary to her expectation, there comes
leaping into her Chamber those Bladders of Goat-skinnes before mentioned, of
whose hair Fotis had brought to her Mistresle, which came very readily to
satisfy her desires, in obedience to the power of her Spells.

Ioubertus, and Liebault report, that the women in many places, when they are
newly delivered of a daughter, desire the women that are present, to save the
Navill string of the Child: hoping by this means to gain them store of
Suitors, when they are once ripe for Marriage. For they very confidently
believe, that if a little quantity of the Navill string, being fir^^ dried and
made into a powder, be give^ to a young man in his drink; he cannot choose
but instantly fall in love with the Wench that gives it. The ground of this
custom, or rather Popular Error, you may read in the abovenamed Physicians.

And the Sorceresse Medea thought that Venus made the same use of the Bird
called by the Greeks (...), which, as Noel le Conte in his Mythologies, and
Vigenerius upon Philostratus conceave, is the same that the Latins call
Motacilla, in English a Wagtaile; which is accounted of great power to cause
Love: and therefore Pindarus calls it, (...), a Raging, or Mad Bird. But in my
opinion, these Authors are very much deceaved in this: for the Bird (...) is
described by Aristotle, to have two Claws on each foot before, and as many
behind; quite contrary to the nature of all other Birds whatsoever. This Bird
is called by P. Bellonius, Turcot, or Tercot: and by the Latins, Torquilla, a
Wryneck, or Hickway: Gaza, and Pacius translate it, Turbo. But the Wagtaile is
called in Greek, (...), i. e. Culicilega avis.

These Philters, for the most part, were mixed with some poisonous Ingredients;
which many times caused the death of the party that took them. Such were those
that were given to Lucullus, and to Leander, son in law to Aretaphile; of
whom Plutarch makes mention: and to Lucretius, as Eusebius reports: to
Fridericus, Duke of Bavaria, and King of the Romans; as it is related by
Cuspinian. To which we may add that, for which Temnia, an Athenian Matrone,
was justly condemned to death by the Athenians, who notwithstanding had a little
before (as Aristotle relates it) pardoned another woman, who was convicted of
the same crime; the Areopagites thinking the grief, that she must needs
conceave, for having been the murtheresse of her own dear Husband, to be a
punishment more cruel then Death it self: which is the punishment assigned
for this fact by the Civil Law, l. etiam. ff. ad l. Corn. de sic. and Venef.

I might here add that which was given to Lancelot, King of Naples, by one of
his own Physicians, that owed him a spite, for having basely forced his
daughter: of which, both the King, and the Innocent Damsel also died, in a
most cruel and miserable manner: as you may read the story at large in
Nauclerus, M. Montaigne, and G. Dupreau, in the year 1440.

Those Philters which did not kill those that took them; did notwithstanding
utterly destroy their Judgment. And of this last kind was that which Ciree
gave to Ulysses Soldiers: and that which Coesonia gave to the Emperor
Caligula her Husband: according to the Satyrist.

Tamen hoc tolerabile: si non
Et furere incipias; ut avunculus ille Neronis,
Cui totam tremuli frontem Coesonia pulli Infudit.
This Philter, here spoken of by Iuvenai, was a certain piece of flesh that is
found growing on the forehead of a Colt newly foaled, and is about the bigness
of a Fig, being of a black color, and almost round: as both Pliny and
Aristotle affirm. Notwithstanding Aristotle in another place gives the same
name to a certain liquor, that drops from a Mare when she takes Horse, being
somewhat like unto the Seed of the Mare, but more liquid and thin. (...): And
some, says he, call this liquor, Hippomanes: but some others will have that to
be the true Hippomanes, which grows on the Colts forehead. Tibullus the Poet
seems to be of the other opinion, where he says:

Vbi indomitis gregibus Venus afflat amores:
Hippomanes rabidae stillat ab inguine Equae.
Notwithstanding Aloysius Anguillara, Cratenas, Dodoneus, and Veckerus, are of
opinion, that Theocritus, by Hippomanes, means the Herb Stramonia, called by
the Arabians, Nux Methel: and by the French, Pomme de Peru: in English, the
Thorne-apple. And Rodericus a Castro will have it to be a certain little plant
growing in Arcadie, called in French, Faug ere.

Porphyrius in his book de Sacrificiis, notwithstanding that he was himself a
Notorious Magician, as S. Augustine witnesses of him, lib. 10. de Civit. Dei,
cap. 9. confesses the Devil to be the Author, as of these Philters, so of all
other deceits, cousenage, and lies. And therefore I dare not assent unto
Josephus, and some others after him, who are bold to affirm, that Moses, when
he had brought the children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt, and the
peoples desires were still toward the place from whence they came, composed by
his great learning and Art, certain Rings, that had the power to cause
forgetfulness of Love, in the parties that wore them.

However, we deny not but that there may be Medicines, Meats, and Poisons, of a
power provoking to Lust: of which kind you shall meet with diverse Catalogues
in Avicen, Aetius, Aegineta, Oribasius, and all our Modern Physicians, that
have treated of Sterility, and Impotency, both in Women and Men. But we
absolutely deny that there is any such power in any of them, as to make John
love Jone, rather then Julian: much less to make any one besotted with Love.

Non facient, ut vivat Amor, Medeides herbae,
Mixtaque cum Magicit Marsa venena sonis.
Phasias Aesonide^, Circe tenuisset Vlissem,
Si modo servari carmine posset Amor.
No herbs, nor powerful Spells can Love constrain:

Medea here tries all her Charms in vain. For if they could; she then had
Iasons will Controlled: Ulysses had been Circe's still.

Thus she, that boasted she could with her Charms transform Men into diverse
forms and shapes, had no power at all over Ulysses.

Non hic herba valet, non hic Nocturna Citaeis:
Non per Medeae gramina cocta Manus.
The true and most powerful Philters consist in the beauty, comely grace, and
courteous behavior of a Man or Woman: all which the Greeks expressed by a
general Name, (...): and these work the more powerfully, where they meet in
those persons, betwixt whom there is a mutual Sympathy: especially if they
live an easy and dainty life.

Male quaeritur herbis:
Moribus, and forma conciliandus Amor.
Of this opinion also was Olympia, wife to King Philip of Macedon, and mother
to Alexander the Great: of whom it is storied, that when one told her that a
certain Damsel about the Court, had by the force of some Charms or
Enchantments that she had used, caused her husband the King to fall in love
with her: she no sooner saw the beauty of the Damsel, but that presently she
cries out; Valiant Calumniae: tu in te Philtta habes. Away with these false and
slanderous accusations; I must acquit thee of them; Thy Beauty is all the
Philters thou usest.

Si possent Homines delinimentis capi:
Omnes haberent nunc amatores Anus.
Aetas, and Corpus tenerum, and morigeratio:
Haec sunt venena formosarum mulierum.
Mala aetas nulla delinimenta invenit.
If Love by enchantments could commanded be,
Each old Witch then would please her Lovers eye.
Beauty, Youth, Virtue, these are Loves best spells.
Cupid nere sports, where Age, and Foulness dwells.
The Pagans were wont to preserve themselves against the power of these
Philters, by certain remedies of the same stamp, which they call Homericall.
Not, because this Poet was the first Founder and Inventor of them, as some have
thought: But they were rather called by this name, because that, as they
conceived, they deserved all Admiration and praise, as did all the Actions and
works of this Divine Poet: who, as it is reported of him, by repeating
certain words over sick persons, cured diverse diseases: and in like manner
by saying certain verses over one that was troubled with an issue of blood,
instantly stopped it: as it is also reported of the sons of Autolycus, who
stopped Ulysses blood, when he had received a great wound in his thigh on the
Mountaint Parnassus, only by some Charm or spell they used.

(...) These Poetical, or Homericall Remedies, consisted in certain Charms,
Characters, Amulets, or such like Periapses, which no Christian Physician ought
to use: notwithstanding that the common people do to this day too
superstitiously believe, and put in practice many of these Paganish devises.

In conclusion then we affirm, that the most powerful and sovereign remedy
against Philters, are Prayers, reading of good books, and other serious
exercises.

Ergo quisquis opem Medica tibi poscis ab Art,
Deem Veneficiis, Carminibusque fidem.
If therefore for thy griefs thou seek'sta Cure,
All faith in Charms and Spells thou must abjure.
CAP. XXXVI. Empericall Remedies for the Cure of Love, and Erotique Melancholy.
THe Ancient Greeks in this case, had in great account the Copaean Lake,
wherein Agamemnon is reported by Plutarch to have bathed himself, when he
desired to quit the Love of the fair Chryseis. Dexicreon is said to have cured
the Samian women of this disease, by some certain Ceremonies, and Expiatory
Sacrifices that he used. Others were wont to repair to the Sepulchers of
Rhadina, Leontina, or Jole, and there offer up their devotions. But the most
famous, and certain Remedy of all, was the Leucadian Rock, from the top
whereof distracted Lovers would throw themselves down headlong into the sea.
The first that ever adventured to make experiment of it, is said to be Sapho.

Saltusque ingressa viriles,
Non formidata temeraria Chalcide Sapho.
And this she did, because she could not obtain the Love of hard-hearted Phao,
as she complains her self: and this provoked her to this desperate Attempt.

But those Antiquaries, that have enquired more diligently into the truth
hereof, affirm, that the first that ever took this Leap, was one Phocas; or,
as some rather think, one Cephalus, who was enamoured of Pterela. Sapho, in
Ovid, attributes the glory of this discovery to Deucalion, who was extremely
transported with the Love of Pyrrha, whom afterward he married.

Hinc se Deucalion, Pyrrhae succensus amore,
Misit; and illaeso corpore pressit aquas.
Nec non versus Amor fugit lentissima Mersi
Pectora: Deucalion ig ne levatus erat.
The fair Calyce also, so highly commended by the Poet Stesichorus for her
beauty, was so miserably enamoured of Evanthlus, that seeing her self refused
by him, she adventured to run that desperate course that Sapho had done
before her.

But the harshnesse and unpleasantnesse of this Remedy, gave occasion to some
others to substitute instead thereof Cupids fountain in Cyzicus, the virtue
whereof, as Mutianus reports, was such, as that it would utterly extinguish and
allay the heats of doting Lovers. Of the like virtue also was the river
Selemnus, spoken of by Pausanias; who notwithstanding seems to give little or no
credit at all unto it. For if this were so, says he, (...): the water of this
river would be far more precious then gold. Notwithstanding for my own part, I
find no such great Absurdity, or Improbability in the story of this River. For
it is most certain, that a Bath of cold water is a very sovereign Remedy for
the cure of the Vterine Fury, which is a Species of Love-Melancholy; and also
of the Dropsy: especially if the water be any whit Mineral, as it is probable
the waters of those fountains were. And this seems also to be very much
confirmed by Mercurialis, who assures us that he has cured diverse women of
this disease of Love, merely by making them drink a good quantity of cold
water, and bathing them in the like.

The Doricke Music is also reported to have been of so great force in
appeasing and composing the perturbations of the Mind, as Galen says, as that
Agamemnon, the General of the Grecian forces in the Expedition against Troy,
left no other Guardian of his Wives Chastity in his absence, save only a
Musician, that was excellently well skilled in the Doricke Tone; who by the
power of his Harmony restrained Clytemnestra from all unchaste and Illicite
Loves, so long as he lived. But the Adulterous Aegistus, perceiving that so
long as the Musician lived, it was impossible for him to compass his designs;
he caused him to be murdered, and by this means at length obtained the love of
the fair Clytemnestra, Boethius tells a story of Pythagoras, how that meeting a
company of mad Youngsters, who being well heated with wine, were going about to
offer violence to some that detained a sweetheart of theirs from them,
threatening to set the house afire about their ears: Pythagoras presently
caused the Musician that played to them to change the Tone: and so by a heavy,
grave, Spondaicall Music, he presently appeased their fury, and made them
give over their violence and insolent attempt.

Ovid makes mention of a certain Oblivious, or Lethaean Love, to whom the
ancient Romans dedicated a Temple, and built it on the the top of the Mountain
Eryx, near unto which stood the Temple of Venus. And to this forgetful God
would all those, that desired to deliver themselves from their Amorous follies,
tender their devotions.

Est illic Lethaeus Amor, qui pectora sanat,
Inque suas gelidam lampadas addit aquam.
Illic and Iuvenes Votis oblivia poscunt:
Et ^i qua est duro capta marita viro.
Instead of this Deity, the Greeks acknowledged and offered sacrifice to
Venus, surnamed Apostraphia: which I conceive to be the same with the
Celestial Venus, or Urania: whom the Scythians also anciently worshipped at
Ascalon, after that by cutting the veins or Arteries behind their Ears they
had made themselves weak and Impotent, as is before delivered.

Terpsicles, as Athenaeus reports him, prescribes for the cure of Love, a
Mullet, that has been suffocated in a vessel of wine: And Pliny for the same
purpose commends Chrysocolla, which the Arabians call Baurach: or else the
drinking of wine that a Lizard has been choked in. The Ancients made great
account also of the wax of a man's left ear; and of Pigeons dung, steeped in
oil: as also of the Urine of a Hee-goat, mixed with a quantity of Indian
Spikenard. Johannes de Vigo, who was Surgeon to Pope Julius the Second,
counsels the party affected to take the Excrement of the person he is in love
with, and burn it: affirming very confidently, that this is a most singular
and certain remedy; if the Patient do but smell it. But such Receipts as
these, come out of the shops of such kind of Physicians, as Aristophanes calls
(...). Some other there are, that in this case will have a wenches hair cut
of; just as Farriers use to do with Mares, who cut of their Manes, when they
desire to take horse.

In a word, there is not a Naturalist, that has not invented some strange
Medicine or other, for the cure of this disease. Albertus Magnus, and Cardan,
commend the Emerauld, Ruby, and Sapphire in this case: some others as highly
extol the virtue of the Diamond: and a third sort prefer the Topaz, and the
Amethist. Picatrice commends the juice of the Myrtle tree, the brain of
Swallows; and also the blood of the party beloved. Which experiment we find in
story that Marcus Aurelius the Emperor proved upon his wife Faustina, who
doated extremely on a certain Gladiator in Rome. To quench which unchaste
desires of her, the Emperor was advised by the Chaldaeans, to cause the said
Gladiator to be murdered secretly, that his wife might not know it, and that
some of his blood should be given her to drink, the next night that himself
intended to lie with her: which was performed accordingly, but with this bad
success. For that night was begotten Antonius Commodus, one of the most bloody
and cruel Tyrants, that ever Rome brought forth: and such a one he was
besides, as spent his time wholly among Fencers, and such like companions, and
was far more like the Sword-player that was killed, then his own father, the
good Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who, as Ausonius says of him,

Hoc solum Patriae, quod genuit, nocuit. Was never injurious to his Country in
any thing, but only that he begot this Son.

Deianira, being Jealous that Hercules made too much of Iole, was persuaded by
the deceitful Centaure. Nessus, that she might utterly extinguish all his
unlawful desires toward her, or any other, if she would but follow his
advise; which was, to send him a shirt, that had been dipped inoyle, and the
blood of the Centaure. But the Event miserably deceived her expectation: for
instead of curing him of his Love-follies, it made him dye a most cruel death,
and full of rage and Torment.

CAP. XXXVII. Methodicall Remedies, for the cure of Love, and Erotique
Melancholy. And first of Order of Diet.
MArsilius Ficinus upon Plato's Convivium, and Franciscus Valleriola, affirm,
that seeing that all diseases are cured by their Contraries; according to that
true and common Axiom, (...). Jllaqueationis autem contrarium est solutio;
Loosing, is the Contrary to Ensnaring, or Binding: it hence necessarily
follows, that Love must be cured by Solution, or Looseing. And of this
Solution they make two kinds; the one Natural, and the other Artificial: the
latter of these depending chiefly on Evacuation, as we shall show in the
Chapters ensueing: the other on the admonitions of pious, virtuous, and learned
men; as also the change of Air, Abstinence, Labor, Cares, Fears, and
Sadness. Which Remedies notwithstanding I account more fit and proper for the
Prevention of this disease, then for the Cure of it: considering that it is
far easier to destroy Love, when as it is yet but in the Bud, then after it
is ripened into a disease. According to the advice of the Poet.

Dum novus est, caepto potius medeamur Amori.
Flamma recens sparsa parva resedit aqua.
Opprime, dum nova sunt, subiti mala semina morbi.
Nam mora dat vires: etc.
Stop Loves beginnings, that it grow no higher.
A little water drownes new kindled fire.
Diseases must be killd 1'th Birth. For length
Of time, and riper growth improves their strength.
The Regiment then, or Order of Diet in the cure of Love-Melancholy, differs
not at all from that, that is to be observed in the Prevention of it: save only
that it ought to be somewhat more Humectative, and less Refrigerative: Not
forgetting in the mean time those meats that by some certain Occult
Properties they have in them, are found to be very good for those that are sick
of this disease: as, the Turtle-dove, the heart of a Wolf, young Owls taken
and boiled in the juice of Marioram; the flesh of Rats, and the like. And if
the party be fallen away in his body, and is now grown very thin, and dry: you
must then prescribe him the same order of Diet, according to Avicen, as you do
to those that are Hecticall.

Besides this, it is agreed upon by all, both Divines, Philosophers,
Physicians, Orators, and Poets, that it is very good in this case that the
party change the Air and place of his Abode: and that, not so much because it
is a very wholesome course so to do, in all Chronicall, and long continued
diseases, as Hippocrates in Epidem: affirms; (...): but rather, because that
this change and variety of Place does awaken the spirits of the Melancholy
Lover, diverting also his thoughts, and depriving him of the sight, and
ordinary conversation that he formerly had with the Object of his Love, and
cause of his disease. Adducendus, says Tully in his 4. Tuscul. ad alia studia,
curas, sollicitudines, negotia: Loci denique mutatione, tanquam agri
convalescentes, curandus.

Nothwithstanding, as this Change of Air, and Place, has no power of it self
to cure Folly; or to make him wise, that desires not to be so: ((...) said one
of the seven Grecian Sages: Change of Place neither takes away Folly, nor
teaches a man wisdom.) So neither does it profit a Passionate Lover any more,
as Plato says, then the shifting of his Bed does a man that lies sick of a
Fever. And the reason is, because that the Lover is always longing for the
presence of his Mistress, and contemplating on her virtues, and Perfection,
which seem, by this her absence, to be the more increased. For, as the Poet
says,

Animus, quod perdidit, optat:
Atque in praeterita se totus Imagine versat.
It is natural to the minds of men, still the more eagerly to pursue those
things that are denied them, and to desire the more earnestly that which they
cannot compass. To what purpose should a Lover run away, says an old Poet,
seeing that Cupid has wings, and can quickly overtake a Runnagate, though he
make never so great have to avoid him.

(...),
(...).
These two wings, says P. Haedus in Anther. signify the double Hope that a
Lover has, of being loved, and of being able to compass the enjoyment of that
he loves: which is indeed the Principal Obstacle that hinders the cure of this
Malady.

But this change of place is a very sure remedy for the prevention of this
disease; and also not altogether Unprofitable, for one that is actually in
Love, if so be that he has fully resolved to endeavor to quit his desires.
And this we may see confirmed by the example of Ulysses: and also of Aeneas,
whom the Queen of Carthage loved, and made so much of. Otherwise this course
proves very dangerous, and hurtful for Melancholy Lovers.

Nam si ab est quod amas, praesto simulachra tamen sunt
Jllius, and nomen dulce obversatur ad aureis.
That this remedy therefore may prove the more effectual, it behooves the party
affected, that first he discharge himself of all his desires, before he quit
his country; as Diogenes once answered a Love-sicke Gallant: That so at his
return he may make his Mistress the same answer, that the young man did, of
whom S. Augustine speaks: who returning home after a long pilgrimage, and
meeting with an old sweet heart of his, who wondered very much at his
strangeness, and that he took no more notice of her: which made her suspect
that happily he might, by reason of his long absence, forget her: she therefore
to prove the truth of it, told him who she was, in these words; Ego sum ego: I
am the same you left me. But he returned her this peremptory reply; At ego non
sum ego: Though you are the same still, I am not.

Dii faciant, possis Dominae transire relictae Limina: proposito sufficiantque
pedes.
Et poteris; modo velle tene. etc.
As this Change of the Air, and Place, is no very powerful Remedy against
this disease: so neither is Solitariness; as we may perceave by the examples
of Phillis, Echo, Pan, and many others, spoken of by the Poets. And I confess
my self to be of Aegineta's opinion, who very confidently affirms, that many
ignorant Physicians have undone their Lovesick Patients, by enjoining them
Abstinence and Solitariness: (Hos igitur maestos, and pervigiles, cum quidam
dispositionem non satis pernoscent, illotos in silenti solitudine, tenuique
victus ratione colliquefacerent: ex quibus Cordatiores, deprehenso Amante, in
lavacra and commessatum, and gestationes, and spectacula, and modulationes,
fabulasque animum abducunt:) where as, says he, a wise and understanding
Physician would rather cause them to cheer up themselves, and seek to divert
their thoughts from Love, by carrying them to Music, Plays, Sights, Feasts,
and the like. And the reason is, because that these kind of people, in their
Loneliness think of nothing else but their Loves, having their hearts filled
with longing desires, their mouths breathing forth naught but sighs and
complaints, and their eyes, for the most part, ore-flowing with Tears: all
which increase their flames the more: as the Poet says.

Quisquis Amas, loca sola cave, loca sola caveto.
Quo fugis? in populo tutior esse potes.
Nam tibi secretos augent saecreta furores.
Est opus auxilio? Turba futura tibi est.
Tristis eris, si solus eris: Dominaeque relicta
Ante oculos facies stabit, ut ipsa, tuos.
Lot, we know, was transported with unchaste and Incestuous desires, so soon as
ever he had retired into a solitary place with his daughters: who
notwithstanding before had always lived chaste, in the midst of the Infamous
and wicked Sodomites. Our Poets also have filled their writings with the
stories of the Loves of Faunes, Satyrs, Cyclopes, Nymphs, and Hamadryades. But
on the contrary side, Company, and Frequency of conversation, and commerce with
people, diverts the mind of a doting Lover, and cheares him up, and makes him
see his Error.

Franciscus Valleriola, in his Observations, says, that he found by
experience, in the cure of that rich Merchant of Arles, that Solitariness does
very little good in this case, but is rather very Hurtful and dangerous. And
therefore he took all the care he could, that he should be continually visited
by his kinsfolk and acquaintance. And I am of opinion, that the danger is so
much the greater, if the disease proceed from black Choler, or Melancholy: for
then it is to be feared, that if he be left alone, he will either make away
with himself, as diverse in this case have done; or else he will run mad: as
Avicen advertiseth, about the end of his Chapter de Amant. Notwithstanding I
do greatly approve of Solitariness, for the Prevention of this disease:
provided always, that we join with it Fasting, Watching and Prayer: as many
Religious and holy men have done, who have retired into Caves and Deserts, for
this very purpose.

To Solitariness many have joined Hunting: for by this means Diana was able
to repel all Cupids darts; and Hippolytus neglected the unchaste embraces of
his shameless stepmother. For Hunting seems to be very useful in this case,
not only because it diverts the Lovers mind from entertaining its own
unbridled Passions: But also because that it excites and quickens the Appetite
of the poor decayed Melancholico; and by weariness, provokes in him a kind of
pleasant Refreshing Drowsinesse, and disposition to sleep, which gives him not
leisure to dream of his own fond desires. And yet Hunting did the more
inflame the Love of Queen Dido, as it has also done in many other of the
Nymphs.

Those that delight not in hunting, may use in stead thereof diverse other
exercises either of the Body, or of the Mind, ((...):) which are indeed the
surest and most wholesome remedies for this disease, by the common accord of all
our Doctors: for as much as these divert all Amorous thoughts, blot out all
remembrance of past pleasures, consume the superfluous blood, and refresh the
spirits of the sick party, restoring him to his former state of body, if his
disease have any whit impaired it.

The exercises I would especially commend, should be Walking, discoursing,
honest pastimes, Banqueting, Music, and such exercises of Recreation: from
which I would banish all young Men, if so be the party thus affected be a Maid,
or Widow: and so on the contrary, if it be a Man, you must by no means admit
the company of Women: (although I confess, Valleriola is of the contrary
opinion.)

And yet Avicen affirms, that it is often seen, that these Remedies prove very
hurtful to many. And therefore the Clinicall Physician must be sure to deal
very warily, and discreetly in this case.

The Poet Menander adds to these, Hunger, and Poverty: assuring us, that Love
never seizes on Poor Men, nor Beggars.

(...) And the Poet Ovid gives us the reason of it also, in those verses of his.

Cur nemo est Hecalen, nulla est quae ceperit Irum?
Nempe quod alter Egens, altera pauper erat.
Non habet unde suum Paupert as pascat Amorem.
Poverty has not wherewithal to maintain Loves flames.

Rondeletius, in Method. Mercatus, and many other of our Modern Physicians,
prescribe Fasting, and Abstinence to Melancholy Lovers: as likewise do also
all Gynaecian writers, to Women that are troubled with the Vterine Fury, which
disease we have already proved to be a species of Love-Melancholy. But herein
they all contradict the opinion of P. Aegineta, and Oribasius, who reprehend
those Physicians, that prescribe Abstinence in these Cases. The words of these
Authors I shall here represent unto you, as I find them translated out of the
Original into Latin. Eos, qui ex Amore curis affecti, vigiliisque torti
essent, cum nonnulli id minus intelligerent, balnei, cibique abstinentia, and
tenui victu consumpserunt. In quibus, cum nos Amorem in causa esse
deprehenderemus; eorum animos, ab Amore, ad Balnea, ad Compotationes, ad
gestationes, ad Iudos, and ad fabulas adduximus. And indeed Phaedra, who was in
love with Hippolytus, found little help in Hunger; as she her self confesses
in Euripides. And although the Proverb say, that Sine Cerere, and Libero,
friget Venus: yet do our Poets assure us, that Neptune himself, together with
all the whole Rabble of Gods, and Goddesses of the Sea, Rivers, and Fountains,
have been often wounded with Cupids darts: Neither could our own forefathers
escape his fury, even in those times when they fed on nothing but Chestnuts and
Acornes.

Glans aluit Veteres; and passim semper Amarunt. To reconcile therefore these
different opinions, we say, that if the Love-sicke person be so far gone with
Melancholy, as that he is now become lean, dry, and his body very much
impaired; Fasting and Abstinence is then very dangerous for him: And we must
give him good meats, and such as may moysten and strengthen his body again.
But if he be yet in good plight, and has his flesh about him, and is full of
blood: Abstinence in this case must needs be very good, ad Seminis, utpote
causae primariae Amoris, consumptionem: that so the superfluity of seed, which
is indeed the Primary Cause of this disease, may be consumed. So that hence we
may conclude, that this Remedy is more proper and necessary for the Prevention,
then for the Cure of Love-Melancholy.

Galen in his lib. 4. de Plaecit. Hip. and Plat. acknowledging Time to be a
sovereign Remedy of all our Passions, prescribes it for the Cure of
Love-Melancholy also: which works its effects chiefly, by employing the
Imagination, with various occurrents and diversities of Actions, and so at
length dismisseth, and rooteth out this first foolish impression of Love, how
deep so ever it were. And Clemens Alexandrinus also, alleging Crates
Thebanus for his Author, says, that it is the last remedy of Love, except
Death. (...). This Author, says he, (speaking of Crates Thebanus) said well in
another place, that the best remedy for to extinguish the violent flames of
Lust, is Hunger: or if this fail, we must then see what Time may bring to
pass: but if neither of these succeed, the last refuge must be a Halter. For
so will I have that passage in Clemens to be read and interpreted: seeing that
this clause, ((...).) which is omitted in Clemens Alexandrinus, is found not
withstanding both in Diogenes Lacrtius, in his life, and also in the Anthology.
The verses are these.

(...).
(...)
(...).
Which the learned Alciat has thus translated into Latin:

Amorem Egena sedat, and superat Famos.
Sin, Tempus: Ast id si nequibit vincere,
Laqueus medelam gutturi nexus habet.
Many in this case use to whip and cudgel them; thinking by torturing the
flesh and external parts, to extinguish their inward flames. And of this
opinion is Gordonius, who would have them whipped ad putorem usque, till they
stink again cap. 15. de Amore. But the Curtesan, of whom Seneca speaks, that
put her sweetheart into a Heat, by beating him; would have found an effect
clean contrary to her expectation, had she but lived: and not without some
reason. For it is very certain, that by cudgelling and beating the Back and
Loins, the blood is heated, and Flatuosities stirred up; which filling the
Fistular Nerve, may erect it, and cause that disease which Physicians call
Priapismus. And indeed the wench that was in Love with Cornelius Gallus, the
more cruelly she was beaten by her Father for it, the more eager and violent
was her Love: as the Poet himself confesses.

Increpitat, ceditque: Jgnes in pectore crescunt;
Vt solet accenso crescere flamma rogo.
Tunc me visceribus, perterrita, quaerit anhelis,
Emptum suppliciis quem put at esse suis.
Those stripes, with which her Cruel father maimes
Her tender limbs, do but increase her flames.
She loves the more: and, by her sufferings taught,
Calls him her own, whom she so dear has bought.
This Remedy then, in my opinion, should rather be Prophylacticall, for
Prevention of the disease, then Therapeuticall, for the Cure of it, when it is
now settled.

And now seeing that neither any of these Remedies here mentioned, nor
thoseother, reckoned up in the 21. Chapter of this book, are found sufficient
for the cure of this disease of Love Melancholy; we shall now in the last place
have recourse to Chirurgicall, and Pharmacouticall Remedies.

CAP. XXXVIII. Chirurgicall Remedies for Love-Melancholy.
IF the Patient be in good plight of body, fat and corpulent, the first thing
we do, we must let him bleed, in the Hepatica in the right arm, such a
proportionable quantity of blood, as shall be thought convenient both for his
disease, complexion; and strength of body; as we have already showed in the
Chapter of Prevention of Love-Melancholy, Because that, as the School of
Salernes has it,

Exhilarat tristes; iratos placat; Amantes,
Ne sint Amentes, Phlebotomia facit.
Phlebotomy makes those that are sad, Merry: appeaseth those that are Angry:
and keeps Lovers from running Mad.

But if the disease be grown to that ripeness, as that the party affected
has his Judgment and Fancy perverted, I would then advise to open the Median,
or Common vein, (which Rhasis, and Almansor call, Vena Matrix, seu Cardiaca;
as Valleriola also counsels: always observing this rule, that if the blood
run black, gross, and very thick, we may then take away a good quantity of
it: but if it be of a good color, thin, and clear; we must then presently
stop the Vein; according to the prescriptions of Galen, Avicen, and their
Sectaries.

After this general Evacuation of blood has been performed, for the
correcting of the Intemperature of the Liver, and the spending of some part of
the Melancholy blood: I come next of all to the opening of the Saphena, or
Ankle Vein, especially in Women, who in this disease are commonly troubled
also with the Suffocation of the Matrix, or the Vterine Fury: because that by
this means there will be the greater and more easy Revulsion of the Humors.
For it is Hippocrates his advise, (...): Revellenda ea sunt, quae, quo non
oportet, vergunt. Besides, those parts that are situate below the Kidneyes,
have greater Affinity, ((...)) and Correspondence with the Veins of the Hamme,
or Ankle, then they have with those of the Arm.

Some Physicians will have some blood to be taken from the Veins in the
Forehead, either with an Instrument, or else with Horseleeches. But I should
rather prefer the opening of the Salvatella in the left Arm: which I have
found by experience to have been very good for the Cure of any disease,
proceeding from Melancholy.

Or else I would provoke the Flux of the Haemorrhoids, as being a very sure
remedy, and very necessary also in the cure of all Hypochondriacall Melancholy:
because that by this Flux, the Spleen, and Mesentery discharge themselves of
all gross, and earthy Humors, that cause obstructions in those parts. And
this course is commended unto us both by Hippocrates in his Aphorisms, and
Epidemicks, and also by Galen, in his Tract de Mania, and in his Comment upon
the 25. Aphorism of Hippocrates, lib. 4. the words whereof are these: (...).
The opening of the Haemorrhoids is the surest remedy both for the Cure, and the
Prevention of any Melancholy disease.

The Varices have almost the same virtue, that the Haemoroids have, if they
chance to happen in this disease of Love-Melancholy; by reason that the
Melancholy Flatuosities are conveyed away from the Privy parts, where they
would otherwise provoke a desire to Venery; and are derived to the Veins in
the Thighs, and other Varicall Veins: according to the opinion both of
Aristotle, and all our Modern Physicians.

But I must needs confess, for my own part, that I have found the Varices to
be of very little, or no force at all in this case. And therefore I should
rather substitute instead thereof, as Arnaldus also advises, Couping-glasses,
applied on the Legs, or Thighs, with sufficient scarification: or else apply to
the same parts, one, or two Potentiall Cauteries. But if the Clitoris, by
reason of its length, be the cause of this Furious Desire, as it very often
happens so to be, it must then be taken shorter, according to the manner
prescribed by Moschio, and Albucasis: unto whom I must refer you, because I
desire to avoid Tediousness.

And in case these Remedies avail not, and the disease still grows stronger,
in so much that it may be feared, that without some speedy redress, the
Patient will grow Wolfe-mad: you must then open the Arm Veins, and let them
bleed, till the party is ready to fall down for faintness, and loss of
blood: and you must also apply an Actual Cautery, if the party can endure it:
otherwise you must be content with a Potentiall Cautery applied to the
Forehead; as both Aegineta, Oribafius, Avicen, and other Authors of good note
inform us, in their several Tracts de Lycanthropia, Lycaone, Lycano,
Alchatrab, and Alcutubut, into which disease this of Love-Melancholy does many
times degenerate: as Avicen affirms, in his Chapter de Ilisco, sive de Amore.

CHAP. XXXIX. Pharmaceuticall Remedies for the cure of Love, or Erotique
Melancholy.
AS the Scurfe and Itch cannot well be cured, unless the Blood be first
purified, and the salt, Nitrous Humors, which are immixed with the mass of
the blood, be purged by convenient Medicines, orderly administered; and not
rashly and inconsiderately, but gently, and, as we are wont to say, per
Epicrasin, purging out the bad Humors by degrees, and supplying good Humors
instead of them: ((...): says Hippocrates. All sudden and violent
Evacuation, Repletion, Heating, or Cooling of the Body, or any the like violent
Motion in the body whatsoever, is very dangerous. For Nature abhorres
whatsoever is too much; but is pleased with a Mediocrity in all things. (Which
Aphorism, although it seem to be pronounced of all diseases in general; yet
is it proved more particularly to be true, in the Scab, and Itch, which always
are observed to grow worse, by the rash and unadvised application of Ointments
and Purges.) So likewise must we take the same course and order of proceeding
in the cure of Love-Melancholy, or Erotique Madness; which disease requires a
great deal of time for the curing of it, as well for those reasons before
alleged in the 21. Chapter, as also, because that the Humor Peccant is the
more headstrong and Intractable, by reason of its extreme Dryness: (...):
that which is Dry, is very hard to be removed or wrought upon.

And that this disease is not suddenly cured, but requires some good space of
time for the effecting of it, Hippocrates also assures us, in his book de
Natura Hominis. (...). For Melancholy, says he, being the most Viscous and
clammie Humor that is in the body, is therefore the hardest to be purged
forth, and requires the lo^gest time to be removed. Which seems also to be
confirmed by the cure that Valleriola wrought upon the Merchant of Arles, which
he could not perfect, under the space of six, or seven Months.

But for our more orderly and Methodicall proceeding in the cure of this
disease, we will divide it into two Principal parts; namely the Humectation,
or moystning of the Body, or of the Peccant Humor: and the Evacuation, and
purging of the same: according as we are instructed by Avicen also in this
case. Canon curationis Melancholiae est, ut pervenias ad ultimum in
Humectatione: and cum hoc, non sis diminutus in Evacuatione Cholerae Nigrae.

Now this Humectation must be performed by Meats, Alterative Medicines, Baths,
and Topicall Plasters. And the Purgation is to be done with all convenient
speed, but very gently, and with intermission; for fear of over-heating the
Humor. And yet the Humor is many times so stubborn, as that gentle and easy
Medicines work not at all upon it. And therefore it was not unfitly compared,
by one, to a troublesome Garrison of Soldiers, that are billetted in some
poor town or other, where they may live as they please themselves, no man
daring to controwle them. For though they entreat them never so kindly, yet
shall they very hardly be rid of them, without much ado: But if they give them
the least distaste, they will then stay there the longer; if it be but to vex
and torment them the more.

We shall do well then to begin our Purgation with a gentle Clyster, for to
evacuate the Excrements of the first Region of the Body: and we must compose it
of some mollifying and Refreshing Decoction, adding thereto some Catholicon,
Diaprum. Simp. or the like. The next day we may give our patient a convenient
quantity of Cassia, with a little Sena Orient, well prepared: or else a dram
of Confect. Hamech, or Diasenna: or, if he please, he may take a gentler purge,
of Catholicon, Tryphera Pers. and Syrup. Rosar. to which you may add a
quantity of Rhubarbe, and Agaric.

After this Minorative, it will then be time to fall to the preparing of the
Humor by Iuleps, or Decoctions: as for example.

(...). Buglos. and Borag. cum radic. Cichor. Endiv. Acetos. Pimpinellae, and
caeterach. ana m. j. summit. lupul. fumar. Beton. ana m. ss. polypod. querni.
(...) ss. passull. mund. and Corinth. ana (...) iij. Prunor. dulc. par. iij.
semin. melon. Cucurb. and eucumer. mundat. ana (...) i. ss. semin. Agn. casti
and anisi ana (...) i. flor. trium Cordial. Thymi and Epithymi ana p. i. fiat
omnium decoctio lib. ij. Colaturae add sucor. borrag. lupuli and poenor.
redolent. depurat. ana (...) iij. iterum leniter bulliant, addendo sacchari
electi libss. fiat Iulep. clarif. and aromat. pulver. laetific. Rhazis, aut
laetitiae Galen. vel Diamarg. frigidi (...). j. and ss. pro quinque aut sex
dosibus.

And if you think it needful, you may reiterate it for two or three days:
because that this Melancholy Humor, by reason of it is cold, dry, thick, earthy
quality, as being a Humor very stubborn and rebellious to Nature, has need
of great preparation: wherein the Physician must employ himself for many days
together, that so at length it may be the more easily wrought upon, and
evacuated by the Dejectory Medicines; which I do in this case prefer before
Vomits, being encouraged so to do, by the Authority of Hippocrates, who says
that (...): Melancholy persons do purge more freely and copiously by siege:
(notwithstanding Arnaldus de Villa Nova holds the contrary:) But in case the
Patient feel any Crudities in his stomach, or any kind of bitter taste in his
mouth; I should then prescribe him a Vomit: because that this is a sign, that
the meat he has eaten is corrupted in his stomach: as both Avicen, and Rhasis
affirm in the abovenamed places.

Now therefore after that the Humor has been thus prepared, we shall begin
then to purge it, (especially if there be any sign of perfect Digestion in the
Urine,) with this Dejectory Purge.

(...) Prunor. dulc. par. iij. passul. Corinth. and flor Cordial. ana p. j.
Tamarind. recent. and select. Drach. ij. fol. senae Orient. mundat. Drach. iij.
anisi, Agni Casti, and Cinam. interioris, ana Drach. ss. Epith. p. ss. fiat
decoctio ad (...). iiij. in quibus colatis dissol. express. (...) iiij.
Rhabarb. per noctem, in sero caprillo infusi, cum sex granis santali rubri,
Confection. Hamech Drach. ij. Syrup. rosati solut. (...). j. and ss. fiat
potio: detur mane cum regimine artis.

And on the morrow you shall give him a little quantity of Conserves of Roses,
flower of Borrage, or of the root of Buglosse.

If you intend to give him a Vomit, then take an ounce of Radish roots, a dram
of Agaricke, and a dram and a half of Asarum: then boil all these together in
barley water, and taking ten ounces of this Decoction, mix with it two ounces
of Mel Scyllitic. or Syrup of Vinegar, and give it him to drink lukewarm. If
you should add hereto flower of Broom, the Vomit would work so much the
better. But take heed of meddling with Hellebor, or Antimony: because that such
kind of Vomitories are very dangerous.

The Paracelsians do use to give their Patients in this case a kind of gentle
Vomit, with six or seven grains of sal vitriol. which the party must take
either in wine, or broth: or else Vomitivum Pantagogum, and the like: as you
may see in Rulandus Quercetanus, and other writers of that sect.

After this Purgation, you shall then give your Patient some respit for some
few days, without giving him any Physic at all: and then afterward you shall
do well to reiterate your Alterative Medicines of the Humor Peccant, (...):
says Hippocrates: For the bad Humor must be purged out by degrees, and with
intermission; that so there may be also in the mean while good Humors
engendered, and substituted in their place: Always observing the rule that the
learned Rondelet in his cap. de Amant. has set down; where he warns all
Physicians, that they admit not into the number of their Alterative Medicaments
of the Melancholy Humor, any such as may increase or generate seed, ((...), as
Nonnus calls it:) such as are Eringo roots, Satyrion, and diverse others of the
like quality. For this would be a means of adding more strength to the
disease, and so render it the more incurable.

And if the Patient be unwilling to take that other before set down; he may
then take Diasena: or else this Magistrall Syrup here following, once or twice
a month.

(...) Rad. Buglos. utriusque, aspar. capar. scorzon. ana Vnc. j. endiu.
Cichor. buglos. borrag, acetos. lupuli, fumar. caeterach. ana m. j. absynthii
Po^t. menthae and melissae, anam. ss. glycyrrh. and passul. Corinth. aqua
tepida lotar. ana Drach. vj. semin. Citri, Cardui benedict. lactuc. papau.
albi, and agni casti, ana Drach. ij. flor. trium Cardiac. thymi and Epithym.
anap. j. polyp. querni, and fol. senae Orient. mundat. ana Vnc. iiij. agaric.
recent trochisc. Vnc. ss. caryophil. Drach. ss. storum Nymphaeae and anthos ana
p. ss. fiat decocti^ ad lib. ij. in quibus dissol. express. Vnc. ss. Rhabar. in
part dosis, cum pauco Cinamomo infusi, and sacchari albi q. s. misce, fia^
syrupus perfect coctus, and aromat. Drach. ij. puluer. laetitiae Galen. de quo
capiat aeger Vnc. ij. bis in Hebdomade, cumjusculo pul^ li, vel aqua cardiaca.

Franciscus Valleriola added to his Magistrall syrup that he used in the cure
of the Merchant of Arles, a dram of Hellebor; but in this point, for my part, I
dare not follow him. Notwitstanding Hippocrates himself very frequently used
Hellebor in such diseases as this; as appears plainly out of his works. And by
the use of this Herb, Melampus also is reported to have cured the Lovesick
Daughter of King Praetus: whence Veratrum, or Hellebor is called ever since,
Melampodium.

Neither yet dare I adventure to follow the learned Avicen, who in this disease
prescribes the use of Great Ivy. But if those medicines before set down be not
of strength sufficient for the evacuateing of this rebellious Humor: I would
then rather give him three or four grains or more, if need be, of Antimony
well prepared: which is the advice also of all our Modern Physicians.

Some other of the Paracelsians use Turpethum Minerale, and Ladanum Mercuriale;
which are not much different.

Neither do I much dislike that powder, of which Haly Abbas makes so great
brags, and says of it thus. Posito, quod aliae Medicinae non valiant; ista
valet, nutu Dei, misericordis: and est Medicina coronata, quae securissime
teneatur, ut Intellectus Humanus, quasi deperditus, cum hac Medicina
restauretur. This Medicine is of so approved virtue, as that when all other
fail, this alone, by Gods assistance, will certainly effect the cure of this
disease, even to the restoring again of the understanding, if perchance by the
violence of the disease it has been decayed: and it may very safely be taken,
and without any danger at all.

(...) Epithym. Vnc. ss. lapidis lazuli, (aut securius, cum Mercato, Armeni,)
and agaric. ana Drach. ij. scammon. Drach. j. caryoph. No. X. fiat pulvis, de
quo aeger capiat semel in hebdomade (...) ij. aut (...) ij. ss. cum syrupo
rosato solut. aut conserv. rosar. and viol.

If your Patient be unwilling to purge so often with liquid medicines, although
they be a great deal the more fit to purge Melancholy Humors, then the solid
are: for to satisfy his desire, you may give himsome such Laxative Electuary,
as this following.

(...) Succi Mercur. depurati Vnc. ij. in quibus infunde 24. horas fol. senae
mund. Vnc. ij. expressio decoquatur cum s. q. sacchari in formam electuarij.
Postea add pulpae Cassiae recenter e canna extractae Vnc. ij. Epyth. Vnc. ff.
caryoph. conquass. Drach. ij. misce, fiat opiata, de qua capiat semel, aut bis
in mense Vnc. j. and ss.

But in the mean time we must not forget to comfort the Heart, Liver, and
Brain of our Patient, with some such Cordial as this.

(...) Conserv. rosar. Vnc. j. conserv. flor. nenuf. and borrag. ana Drach. vj.
carnis Citri, and lactucae saccharoo conditae, ana Vnc. ss. myrobal. emblic.
saccharo condit. number ij. confect. Alkermes Drach. ij. pulvoris latit. Galen.
Drach. j. Margar. Orient. (...) iiij. rasurae eboris Scrup. ij. misce cum
syrupo, de pomis fiat opiata, de qua capiat ad quantitatem unius castaneae,
superhausto tantillo vino albo, aqua buglossi multum diluto, alternis diebus,
horis circiter duabus anto cibum.

Or else this.

R. Terebinth. Venetae aqua lactucae lotae Vnc. ss. semin. dauci, agnicasti,
and Cinnam. ana gr. viij. agar. rec trochis. Drach. j. fiat bolus purgando
semini idoneus, ex Hollerio, Mercato, etc.

Dioscorides prescribes for this purpose the Powder of Aphrodilles, and the
seed of Coltes foot, given in drink. Porphyrius, as Stobaeus reports, and
Pliny, commend Willow blossoms given in cold water to drink.

Cujus flos in aqua sumptus, frigescere cogit Instinctus Veneri cunctos acres
stimulantes. I should here also commend the use of these Losenges, or some
other of the like virtue.

R. Semin. agnicasti, portul. and ruta, ana Scrup. ss. semin. lactucae and
papau. albi, ana Scrup. ij. granor. Canabis gr. viij. cornu cervi usti, coralli
and anther. ana gr. vj: semin. melon. Drach. iij sacchar. aqua rosar. and
borrag. dissoluti, q. s. misce, fiant tabella, vel Lozengae ponder. Drach. j.
capiat unam ad horam somni, vel mane, long ante cibum.

And it would not be amiss to give him sometimes four grains of Bezar,
steeped in water of Scorzonera, or of Lettice; which herb, by reason of it is
singular virtue in this case, the Pythagoreans called (...): as Athenaeus
reports.

After we have thus done, we shall then come in the next place to our external
Medicines: among which, Bathes of fresh water are the first and chiefest: For
as much as both P. Aegineta, and Oribasius, in their several Tracts of Love,
make their boasts, that they cured diverse of this disease of Love-Melancholy,
merely by Bathes of fresh water. And this is confirmed also by Avicen, whose
advise is the same: Fac ipsos balneari, secundum conditionem Humectationis
notam: and also by all the Ancient Physicians. And we shall do well to add
hereto some other Simples that are of approved virtue against this disease, in
manner following.

R. Althaeae, cum toto, maluae, lactuc. borrag. Nympheae, cucurb. fumar. lupul.
lapathi acut. ana m. 4. summit. salic. and pampinor. vitis, ana m. ij slor.
nenuf. viol. borrag. rosar. calend. ana p. iiij. semin. viticis and Cannab. ana
Vnc. ij. capit. vervec. number. ij. fiat decoctio in aqua fluviatili. pro balneo
iiij. dierum, in quo sedeat hora una circiter.

Some are of opinion, that it is very good, that in the mean while the Patient
is bathing, there should be some by, to entertain him with merry Jests, and
pleasant discourse, and Music, and whatsoever else may be thought fit to
provoke him to Mirth.

Aetius advises to apply an Oxyrrhodinum to his head, for to repel the vapors
that ascend up to his head from the spermaticall vessels in men; and in women,
from the Matrix, who may also in this case make use of a suppository, made of
Diacodion, tempered with a little Vinegar, and the juice of Sorrel: or else a
little quantity of Nitre, and Cardamomum; or else a Nascall, or Pessary,
composed of Castoreum mixed with Rue: to which Avicen adds the roots of
Lillies and Nenufar. Or else you may make use of this Vterine Clyster,
prescribed by Lodovicus Mercatus.

R. Lactis caprilli, vel bubuli Vnc. iiij. aquae marinae Vnc. ij. mellis Vnc.
j. misce, fiat Clyster, iniiciatur in sinum pudoris.

But I should rather prefer this other here following.

R. Lentium p. ij. fol. and flor. salicis ana m. j. fiat decoctio ad lib. j. in
qua dissol. trochisc. albor. Rhazis, and trochisc. de Camphora ana Drach. j.
misce, fiat Clyster, infundatur in delta muliebre.

Eros adds to these, Opium. Pliny, in his Natural History, and Rondeletius in
his 12. book de Piscibus, cap. 19. will have the secret Parts to be rubbed all
over with the gall of a Cramp-fish, which is of a marveilous Narcoticke, or
Stupefactive virtue: or else a Pessary made of the root of Nymphaea Heraclea.

Briefly, you may find a thousand such like medicines as these, in the writings
of Physicians that have spoken of the cure of this disease; with which I shall
not here trouble you. Only thus much for the present I shall advertise you of,
that Nicolaus Monardus, a Physician of Sevill, and Clusius, speaking of
Medicaments that have been lately found out in the Western parts of the world,
do highly magnify, for a sovereign remedy, and Antidote against Unchaste Love,
and Philters, the Powder of a certain Herb called Contra-Yerva, brought not
long since from Charcys, a Province of Peru, being in shape like Corne-flag,
and having leaves like Figtree leaves. Which relation of theirs if it be true,
we may say of this Plant, as Pausanias did of the fountain Selemnus, that it
would be more worth then all the gold in the world. The like Judgment do we
give of the stone called by the Greeks Selenites, or Aphroselenum, spoken of
by Dioscorides: as also of the Amiantus, a certain stone found in Cyprus,
which Pliny calls, Linum vivum; Strabo, Carystium; Zoroaster, Bostrychitem;
Solinus, Carbasum; some others, Corsoidem, Spoliam, and Spartospoliam; and the
vulgar call it, though improperly, Stone-Allum: whereof in old time they were
wont to make Table-cloathes, that would be made white only in the fire, and yet
never burn.

Mercurialis, in his 4. book de Morbis Mulier. affirms, that himself has
cured diverse both Maids, and married Women of the Vterine Fury, or
Love-Madnesse, by the use of cold Mineral waters; such as are those waters in
Italy, which they call, The waters of Virgins, or de Villa. But this seems to
me a thing incredible, considering that (as we have already proved,) it is most
certain, that the cure of Love Melancholy, as of all other diseases proceeding
from this Humor, consists principally in the Humectation and moystening of the
Humor: as Galen also affirms. Now all those Authors that have written of
Mineral Waters, do generally agree, that they are of a Desiccative, or Drying
Nature, and therefore seem to be directly contrary to the cure of
Love-Melancholy. Yet thus much we may say, in the behalf of Mercurialis, that
Mineral waters, notwithstanding their Dryness, are wholesome in Melancholy
diseases, in regard they do very much cool the Liver, which is the seat of
this disease, opening all Obstructio^s of the Hypochondries; and also comfort
the stomach, and purge the blood, excerning all the Serosities and waterish
parts of it by Urine and Stool: as Johannes Baptista Sylvaticus proves at
large. Neither yet are all Drying Medicaments to be rejected in the cure of
Melancholy diseases: seeing that Alexander Trallianus, P. Aegineta, Oribasius,
Avicen, and Rhasis, prescribe Epithymum, Hiera, and Hartwort in these diseases;
and Aetius Vinegar also: which notwithstanding, Hippocrates says, does both
settle, and increase the Melancholy Humor, (...)

The Physicians of France and Germany, do attribute the same virtue to the
waters of the Spa. And those of Encausse in Gascony, notwithstanding they be of
a nature Hot and Dry, are not altogether unproper for the cure of Melancholy
diseases, which proceed from the Hypochondries: as I my self have found by
experience.

Heurnius in his Pract. appoints this Decoction here following, to be used
instead of these Waters above named, in case they cannot be had.

R. Aquae font. q. s. capit. ariet. number. iij. pedes vervecis number. iiij.
contusis capitibus and pedibus, add rosar. rubr. fol. lauri, ana m. iij.
portul. recent. m. v. solani, sempervivi, ana. m. ij misce, fiat decoctio,
eaque tepente bis die utatur aeger horis duabus ante cibum.

You must take the same course also, in the curing of the Symptoms that
accompany this disease, reckoned up in the second Chapter, for which I must
refer you to the prescriptions of those Physicians that have written hereof:
especially Galen, Avicen, and Aetius. I will only here set down the remedies
that are most proper for the cure of two of them, and those indeed the most
dangerous: which are, Continual Watching, and Extreme Leanness.

For the First of these we usually give Syrup of Poppy, Almonds, Poppy seed,
and Lettice in Broth. Sometimes I use to prescribe in this case four or five
grains of this Opiate, which we may call Nepenthes, or Ladanum.

R. Confect. Alkermes Vnc. j. specierum Diambrae, and laetitiae Galen. ana
Drach. iij. Croci albigensis, and opii, ana Vnc. ss. mixta macerentur in aqua
vitae, extrahatur tinctur a, posted fiat consumptio evaporatione ad consistent.
Opiatae. vel R. Specierum Diambrae unc. ij. infundantur per 12. dies in vino
distill. ut latum digitum superemineat, and add opii drach. vj. mumiae drach.
ss. succi hioscyami unc. j. Corallirubri, and Carobes ana scrup. ij.
Crociscrup. j. Moschi Orient. gr. 16. ambrae gr. 12. affuso rursus spiritu
vini, ut superemineat latum digitum, digeratur post fornacem per mensem,
quotidie agitando. dosis Scrup. ss. aut. gr. viij. pro aegri constitutione.

You shall find many such Receipts as these, in Rulandus, Quercetanus, Penot,
and diverse other Chemists; which you must put in practice with very great
Circumspection and Care, and that too, only in case of Extreme Necessity: as
you must also do in the application of Diacodion, and Requies Nicolai.

But for my own part, I should rather cause the party to smell to a Nosegay of
Violets, Roses, Gilliflowers; or Marjoram steeped in Vinegar, wherein has
been steeped also a grain of Camphire, and Opium Or else let him use this
Pomander

(...) Semin. Hioscyami and cicutae, ana drach. j. cortic. rad. mandrag scrup.
iiij. Opii scrup. j. misce cum oleo mandragorae and succo aizoi maioris,
addendo Moschi gr. j. fiat Pomum.

Others apply, though with bad success, Horseleeches behind the Ears, and
when they take them away, they presently clap to the place a grain of Opium.

And for the recovering of our Patients flesh again, we must appoint him to
drink Asses, or Goats milk, putting a little Sugar into it; and this he must
do for the space of a month, or thereabout. Or else he may use this Marchpane
here following.

(...) Amigdal. dulc. excortic. and lot. primo aqua tepida postea aqua rosar.
lib. j quatu. or semin. frigid. mayor. mundat. and lotor ana drach. vj. semin.
papau albirec. and mundati unc. iiij. sacchari albi lib. ij. fiat pasta, and
cum aqua rosar. Martius panis, de quo capiat aeger certam quantitatem ante
somnum.

This Marchpane is very good to procure sleep, and it refreshes and nourishes
the body withal. But yet this other following is the more Nutritive.

R. Pulpae capi lib. j. aqua rosar. q s. sacchari unc. iij. cinnam. sub finem
decoct. additi (...). ij. coquant and fingantur frustra dura.

To conclude, besides all the Medicines here specified, I shall wish all
Melancholy, or Mad Lovers, that Sovereign Remedy, that Hippoerates wished to
Democritus; (...): The Perfection of Wisdom, which is the most easy, and
Effectual Remedy of all; and the true Moly that Mercury, the God of Wisdom,
in Homer, gave the wise Ulysses, as a Sovereign Antidote, against all the
Baits and Enticements, by which the Infamous Sorceresse Circe endeavored to
bring the Mind of that Noble Captain in subjection to Her unchaste desires.

(...). FINIS.

