A SHORT TREATISE against STAGE PLAYS

Prove. 10. 23. It is a sport to a fool to do mischief.

Prove. 21. 17. He that loves pastime shall be a poor man.

Ephesians. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them.

Printed in the year of our Lord 1625.

AN HVMBLE SVPPLICATION TENDERED to the High and Honorable House OF PARLIAMENT,
Assembled May xviij. 1625.
WHereas Stage Plays are repugnant to the written Word and Will of Almighty
God, the only wise Governor and righteous Judge of the whole world; dangerous
to the eternal salvation both of the actours and spectatours; breed many
inconveniences wheresoever they come; procure the judgments of God to the whole
kingdom, for sin tolerated pourchaseth Gods wrath to the whole nation, as
appears Joshu. 22. 18. and Solomon says Prove. 14. 34. Sin is a reproach to
any people; and have been justly censured and worthily prohibited by statutes
made in the late Reign of famous Queen Elizabeth, and of our Learned and
Noble King James: May it therefore please this High and Honorable House, which
is the most honorable Court in all Europe, upon view of this short Treatise
following, to take once more into consideration this matter of Stage Plays,
and by some few words added to the former Statutes, to restreyne them for ever
hereafter.

A SHORT TREATISE OF STAGE PLAYS.
The Preface.
IN all ages the Prophets have applied their preachings to the present
occasions: and the general concursse of many baptized Christians to
Stage Plays, every where in these times, have occasioned the Lords
remembrancers, which stand continually on their watch-towres, both more
diligently to examine the nature of Stage Plays, which have had much
countenance, and some defense; to try whether they be warrantable by the word
of God or no; and also more earnest prayer to God for his assistance, and
serious endeavors to dissuade Christians from entertayning them. Hence
proceed these few ensuing reasons, briefly contracted into a narrow room,
that the reader may with facility conceive the force of the arguments, and
soundly judge of the truth of them. And for better direction to the Reader,
the whole sum is drawn to these four heads.

First, the original beginning of Stage Plays is showed: sect. 2.

Secondly, the end is pointed out for which they were first devised. sect. 3.

Thirdly, the general matter or argument acted in them, is opened in few
words: sect. 4.

Fourthly, the reasons to prove them unlawful are rendered: sect. 5.

I. The original beginning of Stage Plays.
2. THe first beginning of plays proceeded Heathen invented plays.
from those men which were not in the Church of God. When God had appointed man
to get his living, with his labor Genesis 3. 19. Iuball the seventh of Cain his
race invented playing. Genesis 4. 21. on Instruments, which (as after) is a
lawful recreation. But the invention of diverse sorts of unlawful plays is
briefly noted by Plinius Histor. nature. lib. 7. cap. 59. by Eusebius de
praepar. euang. lib. 1. cap. 2. and lib. 2. cap. 2. by Arnobius contra gentes
lib. 7. by Polydorus Virgilius de rerum invent. lib. 3. cap. 13. by Alexander
ab Alexandro genialium dierum. libr. 6. cap. 19. by Caelius Rhodiginus antiq.
lib. 8. cap. 7. Whether they grew up first at Lydia in Asia as says Herodotus
lib. 1. or at Athens in Graecia, as Polydorus Virgilius lib. 3. cap. 13. and
Volaterranus lib. 29. ca. 11. report, it is not material. Pausanias in Eliacis
writes that Iphitus was admonished by the oracle of Apollo to restore the
Olympike games. Josephus Scaliger poetices lib. 1. cap. 22. etc. may satisfy
all men that desire to read more of this point. About the beginning of the
Persian monarchy, which The solemn beginning of plays.
was almost 500 years before Christ, and about the time of the Jews return
out of the captivity of Babylon, this miscreant author always of some hurt,
never of any good to Christian or heathen, first came abroad with great
solemnity, as it may be gathered by Herodotus. Afterward from those Lydians
in Asia, or from the Grecians at Athens, came plays to Rome in the reign of
Tarquinius Priscus, as Eusebius notes in his Chronology at the year of the
world 4602. Hermanus Contractus at the year of the world 3341 notes the
Alexander (...) A^^xand. lib. 5. c. 16.
same. And Titus Livius lib. 7. Pomponius Laetus in Philippo, Funccius in his
worthy Chronology at the year of the world 3512. and Herodianus lib. 3.
witness how the Romans augmented their plays afterward.

The first authorized entrance that any such kind The entrance of plays into
the Church of the Jews.
of plays or heathen exercise had into the church of God, seems to be about
170 years before the birth of Christ, when that wicked Jesus affecting
heathenisme, changed his name into Jason, and for 150 talents of silver
purchased a commission of Antiochus Epiphanes king of Syria, that he might
erect a place for heathen exercises at Jerusalem, and train up the youth of
the Jews in the customs of the Gentiles, 1 Maccab. 1. 12. Joseph. antiq. lib.
12. cap. 6. but more specially 2 Maccab. 4. 7. etc. Which exercise though it
was not to play on the stage, but for activitie of their bodies, yet it may
here be observed as an entrance to other heathen customs, and as that which
makes way to bring in Stage Plays afterward. Then Herod the great
increased heathenish plays and exercises greatly in his days, building one
theater at Jerusalem; Joseph. antiq. lib. 15. cap. 10. or 11. and an other at
Caesarea Stratonis; Joseph. antiq. lib. 15. cap. 13. and lib. 16. cap. 9. The
horrible sins of the Jews cut them off shortly after from being the Church
of God, and therefore no more can be said of their heathenish exercises.

How or when Plays came into the Christian Church, and who first gave them
intertainment, Their entrance into the christian church.
is more incident to this present purpose, and fitter testimony to give
evidence hereafter either for them or against them. When the Roman Emperors
delighted too much in all kind of plays, and when christian religion grew
mightily under them in Europe especially, christians imbraceing the Gospel
could not be altogether ignorant of these stage plays, but sometimes some
christians resorted to these plays, as by the complaints and invectiues of
some ancient fathers against them, it does appear. And though secretly by such
means plays through satan's subtilties approached near to the church door,
yet all this while neither the Emperors power thrust them upon the Church, nor
the reverend Fathers and faithful Pastors of those times gave way to such
open wickedness by their silence. But when that great scarlet colored whore of
Babylon with her golden cup of abominations in her hand, which has a name
written in her forehead, a mystery, great Babylon the mother of whoredoms,
and which reigns over the kings of the earth, was set in Peter's chair at
Rome as the Papists say; then did the king of the Locusts, called Abaddon and
Apollyon, having the key of the bottomeles pit, with full power for such a
purpose, set the church door wide open for sundry sportes and plays to
enter freely into the house of God, as Platina reports Paulus II. did. And
that not only in their great solemnities and festivals, which were spent
commonly in belly cheer and Plays, as Peucerus writes of Vrbanus IIII. much
after the fashion of the Israelites, sitting down to eat and drink, and
rising up to play: but specially in their rich Iubilies, first begun in the
Christian church by Bonifacius VIII. in the year of Christ 1300. and
afterward continued and hastened by his successors. Of which Sports and Plays
Aventinus annal. Bojor. lib. 7. speaking of Clemens VI. and Bale in the life of
Julius III. do write. And thus much shall suffice for the beginning of Plays
among the Lydians of Asia; and among the Grecians and Romans in Europe; as also
for their entrance into the Christian church, first secretly by the malice of
Satan stealing some Christians affections to such vanities; then openly by the
power of that Abaddon of Rome, who besotted men's senses with such fooleries,
that he might rob their purses in his rich Iubilies.

II. The end for which Plays were devised.
3. THe final cause or end for which the Heathen first devised Plays, was to
pacify their angry gods, and so remove some present calamity which vexed
them. The Lydians sought by Plays to remedy a great famine that was among
them, as Herodotus witnesses in Clio. The Athenians renewed their Plays about
the latter end of the Persian Monarchy, in the days of Euthydemus their
governor, thereby thinking to remove a grievous pestilence, as says Diodorus
Siculus lib. 12. Also Livius lib. 7. and Paulus Orosius libr. 3. cap. 4. write
that the heathen Romans sore afflicted about the same time, with pestilence, by
the advice of their idol priests, set forth their Stage Plays to turn away
that affliction, thinking their Plays would please their gods.

But Dionysius Halicarnasseus li. 7. Arnobius. lib. 7. contra gentes. Pausanias
in Corinthiacis. Augustinus de civitate dei lib. 2. cap. 13. and lib. 3. cap.
18. and lib. 4. cap. 1. and cap. 26. Polydorus Virgil. de inventione rerum lib.
3. cap. 13. and Volaterranus lib. 29. cap. 11. write so plainly and fully of
this matter, that the reading of any one of them may satisfy the sober minded,
and give them to understand, that as Christians by direction out of Gods word
use prayer and fasting to turn away the Lords provoked anger: so heathens
instructed by the Devil their master thought to remove their afflictions by
Plays. But the Popes of Rome solemnised their Festivals and Iubilies with all
sorts of Plays and Sportes for recreation, and to delight the people with such
fooleries.

III. The argument of Stage Plays.
4. WHereas Stage Plays ordinarily go under the name either of Tragedies or
else of comedies; we are to understand that the argument or matter acted in
tragedies is murder, treason, rebellion, and such like; and in comedies is
bauderie, cosenage, and mere knaverie.

But here some men either merely ignorant (as Objection.
the most religious and learned are ignorant of many things, for we know but in
part. 1 Cor. 13. 9.) or Bucerus de regno Christi lib. 2, ca. 54
else perversely irreligious, will say, that sometimes the sacred Scripture is or
may be acted by players on the stage, and thereby a man may learn more then at
a sermon.

But for better information of the ignorant, and Answer.
more forcible confutation of the perverse and profane, a threefold answer may
be given.

First, concerning those persons that so greatly 1. answer.
desire to learn religion at Stage Plays, let them examine their own
consciences by their works which are manifest before God and men, and consider
themselves in these five points.

1. They seldom come to the Church to learn religion according to Gods
ordinance, though God command them so to do, Deuteronomy. 12, 5. But ye shall seek
the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes, to put
his name there, and there to dwell, and thither thou shall come, etc. though
God entreat them so to do, Prove. 1. 20. Wisdom cries without: she
utters her voice in the streets. etc. as also (...)

cerning good and necessary matters.

As for hawking, hunting, fishing, fouling, and such like, they are rather to
be counted honest and lawful callings, wherein men may get their living with
their labor, then recreations, except it be by change of labor, as in other
lawful callings.

And now to come to confutation of the objection, Confutation.
it seems that Stage Plays cannot be counted in the number of recreations,
and that for these three reasons.

First, they are not worhie to be compared to any of the former lawful
recreations.

Secondly, they serve not the end of recreations, which is to refresh the
weary, but not to make men delight in sin.

Thirdly, the most persons that ordinarily resort to them, are very idle
persons, that should rather be set to some honest labor, then so unprofitably
to mispend their time to their own hurt.

The original beginning then is sufficient to persuade the faithful to
renounce Stage Plays, and say unto them, Get thee hence. Esai. 30. 22.

The second reason.
6. THE second reason may be taken from 2 Reason.
the matter or argument, which is acted upon the Stage, which is either murder
and mischief in tragedies, or bauderie and cosonage in comedies, as was
observed before sect. 4. And the reason may be contrived thus.

It is not lawful for Christians to sport themselves either with the
dreadful judgments of God, or with the abominable sins of men.

But in Stage Plays there are acted sometimes the fearful judgments of God,
as in tragedies: and sometimes the vile and hateful sins of men, as in
comedies.

And therefore it is full of horror seriously to think upon them, and much
more to be either actor to show them, or beholder and hearer to laugh at them,
or delight in them.

Ham derided his Fathers nakedness Genesis 9, 22. but he was accursed for it.
Curses are denounced in Gods Law against all sinners, Deuteronomy. 27, 26. And they
that make a sport of sin cannot avoid Gods curse, no more then they that
feasted when they should have fasted, Esaias. 22, 14. Surely this iniquity shall
not be purged from you, till ye dye, says the Lord of Hoastes.

The third reason.
7. THE third reason is taken from the Stage Players, and from such their vices
as properly 3 Reason.
belong to them, as they are Stage Players. And four of their vices may
persuade all men that their plays are unlawful.

First, they being men, change their apparel, and put on woman's apparel,
without which exchange 1.
they cannot act some parts in their Plays, which thing the Lord forbids.
Deuteronomy. 22. 5. The woman shall not wear that which perteyneth to the man,
neither shall a man put on woman's raiment: for all that do so are an
abomination to the Lord thy God. For this change of apparel makes the man
effeminate, and the woman manish, as some can testify if they would, some have
confessed, and the Heathen know. Cyprianus lib. 2. epist. 2. speaking of this
change of apparel in Stage Plays, says thus: evirantur mares; men loose
their manhood etc. Charondas made a law to the inhabitants of Thuria (which is
a city in Greece, described by Pausanias in Messenicis, and by Strabo lib. 8.)
that if any man refused to go to wars, or being in the field cast down his
weapons and ran away, he should stand three days in the open market in
woman's apparel, which argued effeminatenes in him, as if formerly he had used
it. Diodor. lib. 12.

Secondly, they never come on the Stage in their own name, but some in the
name and person 2.
of a devil, others of a fool, others of a bawd, others of a tyrant, others
of other men, which beseems not a Christian, neither proceeds it of God,
nor is approved of God, but is contrary to Christian profession. Tit. 2. 12.

Thirdly, they swear by the living God, which is contrary to the Law of God,
Exodus 20. 7. or by 3.
heathen idols, which is forbidden, Exodus 23. 13. or by both, which is reproved
Amos 8. 14. Zephan. 1. 5.

Fourthly, they teach their hearers and beholders much sin in the acting of
their Plays, as to 4.
swear, curse, lie, flatter, cosen, steal, to play the bawd and the harlot,
with very many such other lewd lessons.

The fourth Reason.
8. THE fourth reason arises from the consideration of the hearers and
beholders, 4 Reason.
who being baptized into the name of Christ, are brought into danger of gods
wrath, and their own condemnation, in as much as they are partakers of the
sins of the Players and of the Plays in approving them. And whatsoever
brings men into these dangers must needs be evil. And besides the approbation,
which makes them guilty, they learn sin: for as says Cyprianus lib. 2.
epist. 2. adulterium discitur, dum videtur, they learn to commit adultery,
when they hear and behold such immodest and unchaste words and gestures upon
the stage. And many go honest thither, which return home dishonest. Job made
a covenant with his eyes, that he would not look on a maid, Job 31. 1. David
desired God to turn away his eyes from regarding vanity, Psalm. 119. 37.

The fifth Reason.
9. THE fifth reason may be taken from consideration of these eight fruits or
effects 5 Reason.
which follow Stage Plays:

First, the Stage Players get their living by an ungodly and unlawful trade,
never approved by God, 1.
and when they shall stand at the bar of Gods judgment, they shall be
speachles, and cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, except they repent and forsake their wicked trade betimes, whiles the
Lord grants space to repentance.

Secondly, the hearers receive much hurt by them, as was noted in the fourth
reason, and if it 2.
be true which is reported, whoredom is sometimes committed at that place, and
at that time.

Thirdly, the better sort of men which are governors of families, receive
damage, when some of 3.
their families resort to Stage Plays, for sometimes their goods are stolen
to maintain Lewdnes, sometimes their daughters or maide-servants are defiled,
or stolen away, and married without their governors consent or privitie.

Fourthly, the word of God and the ministers thereof, are now and then taxed
and taunted. 4.


Fifthly, the Lord himself is there blaspheamed ordinarily. 5.


Sixthly, the poor in the church of Christ, are 6.
hindered from some relief, which otherwise they might have. for the
prodigality lavished upon did. 86, c. 8
Stage Players, restrayneth the liberality that might and ought to be bestowed
upon the poor.

Seauenthly, there is loss of precious time, which should be spent in Gods
service, by those that are 7.
hired to be diligent laborers in his vineyard, and not be wickedly misspent in
such sinful sportes, seeing every one, both young and old, must give account
to God of his labors, and of his time spent in this life. The Holy Ghost says
Ephesians. 5. 16. Redeem the time, for the days are evil; but some men say, Let
us have pastime, that is, any sinful course, whereby we may pass away and
mis-spend the short time which we have in this life, that the day of death,
judgment, and condemnation may come speedily upon us before we repent, and
before we consecrate our selves wholly to God. Peter says: It is sufficient
for us, that we have spent the time past of this life, after the lusts of the
Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts, drunkenness, in gluttony, drinkings,
and abominable idolatries. 1 Pet. 4. 3. And if any be otherwise minded, the
Lord in his time will either convert or confound him.

Eighthly, whereas the life of a Christian effectually called, should be spent
continually in fighting 8.
against all kind of sin, in crucifying the old man, and in renewing the
inner man daily, these Stage Plays quench the spirit, and destroy the new man,
as also on the other part, they foster, cherish, and mainteyne the old man, as
all those that have the spirit of Christ know and feel. But if any man have
not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his. Romans 8. 9.

The sixth Reason.
10. THE sixth reason may be taken from the 6 Reason.
opinion and judgment of all sorts and states of men, by whom these
Stage Plays have been disalowed.

First, all orthodoxall Protestants of all ages and 1, Orthodoxal Protestants.
times, which maintained the general doctrine of the Catholic church, have
censured Stage Plays, as unlawful from age to age hitherto. To report and
repeat their several judgments out of their own writings, or out of
histories, is more then I can perform, it would make a great volume, it would
be tedious to read, and perhaps not so necessary.

Wherefore it seems rather convenient to call a great number of them
together out of all the places of their dwellings, and as it were out of all
the world, that they all may be heard to speak altogether with one consent and
voice. But because it would be a very tedious, and troublesome thing, for so
many, so reverend, and so old aged Fathers to travel so far; it is more
convenient and reasonable to spare their labors so much as may be, and call
them together at three several times, and in three several places of their
habitations; that is, to call those of Asia, to meet together in Asia: those
of Africa, in Africa: and those of Europe, in Europe.

In Asia, about two and twenty of the most reverend Asia,
Fathers of those times, met together in Laodicea, somewhat more then 300 years
after Christ, and holding a council there, decreed cap. 54. that none of the
Clergy should be present at Stage Plays. And the Centuriators of Magdeburg
have inserted this whole Council in their laborious and worthy history Cent.
4. cap. 9. col. 834.

In Africa more then 400 years after Christ there Afrike.
were some four and forty of the worthiest and learned Fathers assembled at
Carthage in the third council that was holden there, amongst whom was that
worthy Augustinus, and they decreed cap. 11. that the children of ministers or
of others of the Clergy should not be present at Stage Plays, seeing none of
the Laity might be there. Semper enim Christianis omnibus hoc interdictum est,
ut ubi blasphemi sunt, non accedant. that is; for all christians have evermore
been forbidden to come in place, where blasphemers are. And the same religious
Fathers then, and there decreed also cap. 35. That the church should not tefuse
to receive the Stage Players into their fellowship, if they repented and
renounced that their trade of playing. Whereby is evident that Stage Players in
those former and purer times, were generally excommunicated, and cast out of
the society of the saints.

In Europe diverse worthy and grave Fathers of the church, called and summoned
by Constantinus Europe.
Magnus, a little after the Nicene Council, to come together at Arles in
France, held two Councils there, the first, and shortly after the second. In
both which they decreed the excommunication of all Stage Players, so long as
they continued that trade of life. And in the first Council, cap. 5. thus they
say: De theatricis, and ipsos placuit, quandiu agunt, a communione separari;
that is, as touching Stage Players, we think it good, that whiles they
continue in that trade of life, they be kept from the communion. And in the
second Council held there presently after, they decree the same thing again,
can. 20. and almost in the same words.

But yet to give in more evidence, we may have all the worthy Fathers of the
Churches in Asia, Africa, and Europa, assembled together in the sixth general
Council, which was held at Constantinople, approve that which at Laodicea in
Asia, and at Carthage in Africa, was decreed against Stage Players. For when
Constantinus Pogonatus in the year 681 called that sixth general Council at
Constantinople against the Monothelites of those times, as Zonoras, Tomo tertio
shows, about five years after, his son Iustinianus II. assembled the
Fathers there again, as Gratianus did. 16. cap. 7. and the Centuriators of
Magdeburgh, Cent. 7. cap. 9. col. 455. do witness: and can. 20. they approve
those two former Councils of Laodicea and of Carthage.

And thus we have the judgment of all the orthodoxall and true Catholic
Fathers of the churches throughout the whole world, against Stage Players, and
Stage-playing, with one consent.

Secondly, the Papists, though they be favorers 2, Papists.
of Stage Plays, and actors sometime upon the Stage (as lately at Lions in
France) yet they cannot for very shame justify them, but contrariewise
condemn them in their writings. And in their great Canon book of Decrees
compiled by Gratian, they ratify the four first general Councils, and all the
other Councils made afterward, and contained in that great book of Decrees,
did. 15. cap. 2. and 4. and did. 16. cap. 6. etc. they approve by name the
three Councils alleged before. More particularly they approve that which was
mentioned before of the Council of Laodicea, de consecratione did. 5. cap. 37.
and that which was decreed against Stage-plaies in the third Council of
Carthage, de consecrat. did. 2. cap. 96. and the canons of the sixth general
Council, de consecratione did. 3. cap. 29.

Thirdly, the Honorable Court of Parliament in this Land, has justly censured
Stage Players, as 3, Parliament.
those that live not in a lawful trade to mainteyne themselves by. as in the
xiiij. year of Elizabeth, chap. 5. and in the xxxix year of Elizab. chap. 7.
and in the second year of King James, chap. vij.

Fourthly, the civil law in pointing out those persons which are of evil note
or name, says thus 4, The civil Law.
of Stage Players Pandect. lib. 3. tit. 2. Eos enim, qui quaestus causa in
certamina descendunt, and omnes propter praemium in scenam prodeuntes, famosos
esse, Pegasus and Nerva responderunt; that is, Pegasus and Nerva said, that
those were infamous which tried masterie for gain, and all that came upon the
Stage for a reward. Also who list, may read somewhat to the same purpose.
Novel. constable. 51.

Fifthly, the infidel Heathens, howsoever they first devised them, and after
used them very much, 5, Heathens.
yet have they disalowed them, as Augustine de civitate Dei, lib. 2. cap. 13.
rehearsing the words of Scipio out of Tullie, shows: Quum artem ludicram
scenamque totam probro ducerent, genus id hominum non modo honor civium
reliquorum carere, sed etiam tribu moveri notatione censoria voluerunt. that
is, The Romans accounting those plays, and the whole Stage to be reproachful,
when they valued the goods and enrolled the names of their citizens, gave not
the honor of other citizens to Stage Players, but razed their names out of
their wards or companies. Suetonius taxes Nero for a favorer of them, and an
actor among them. Arnobius lib. 7. contra gentes, appealing to the conscience
of the Heathen, shows that they disallow them, and says thus of the
Stage Players, actores inhonestos esse jus vestrum judicavit, that is, your
own law has adjudged the stage players to be no honest men.

And these judgments of men are sufficient to condemn Stage Plays as
unlawful, and dishonest also, as Cornelius Nepos says in his preface before
the description of the noble Emperors.

The seventh Reason.
11. THE seventh and last reason is drawn from 7 Reason.
the judgments which God has inflicted upon the Players, and beholders.

1. Philip king of Macedonia, and father of Alexander the great, was slain at
a play by Pausanias, as Diodorus Siculus writes lib. 16.

Plinius histor. nature. lib. 7. cap. 53. speaking of diverse that dyed suddenly,
says, that one M. Ofilius Hilarus a noble player of Comedies, after he had
played his part gallantly on the day of his birth, and was vaunting at supper
of his days work, died suddenly at the table.

3. Paulus Orosius lib. 7. cap. 4. writes that in the twelft year of
Tiberius, (which was three years before Christ began to preach the Gospel
publicly) there were twenty thousand persons slain by the fall of the
Theater at Fidena in Italy.

4. About thirteen years after, Caius Caligula the Emperor was slain at a
play. Joseph. antiq. lib. 19. cap. 1. Suetonius in Caligula cap. 58.

5. About 150 years after Christ's nativitie, whiles the Plays were kept at
Rome with great solemnity, for the space of three days and three nights
together, continually and without intermission, a great part of the city was
set on fire and consumed. And Phillip the Emperor was slain at Varona, and
his son at Rome, as it is reported by Sextus Aurelius, Pomponius Laetus, and
Eutropius lib. 9.

6. Tertullianus in his book de Spectaculis, says, that a Christian woman
going to the plays, was then possessed of a devil, and when other Christians,
intending to cast the devil out of her, demanded of him, how he durst presume
to assault one that believed in Christ, the devil answered, that he found her
in his own house, and therefore had good right to seize upon her. Also he
writes in the same Book and place, that an other faithful woman going also
to behold the Plays, had either a fearful dream or a vision the next night
after, wherein she was checked for going to the Plays, was warned of her
death, and dyed within five days after.

7. Aventinus annal. Bojorum lib. 7. writes, that about 1200 years after
Christ, three hundred men were slain with hayle and lightning at Pisonium, a
city of Bavaria, in the confines of Italy, whiles they were there to behold
the Plays.

8. The same Author Aventinus annal. Bojor. lib. 7. writes also, that when
Pope Nicholaus V. solemnized his rich Jubilee, in the year 1450, with Stage
plays, five hundred and threescore persons, coming to Rome to behold the
Plays, were partly trodden to death, and partly drowned in Tiber.

9. At London in the year of Christ 1583 eight persons were slain, and more
hurt, by the fall of the theater.

10. At Lions in France in the month of August, in the year 1607, whiles the
Jesuits were acting their Plays, to the disgrace of true religion, and the
professors thereof, the Lord from heaven continuing thunder and lightnings, for
the space of two hours together, slew twelve persons presently, and amassed
all the rest with great terror and fear.

FINIS.

