THE Prayer and Confession of Mr. FELTON, word for word as he spoke it
immediately before his Execution. Novem. 29. 1628.
OH God, I humbly and heartily thank thee gracious Father, that thou have
given me so long a time of Repentance. Lord, I humbly thank thee, I praise my
God, and blessed be thy holy name. Oh Lord, my glorious God, that thou have
been so good and gracious to me, as to take away the feeling of the sense of
death from me, I thank my God, I have no fear of death, Jesus I thank thee.

I thank the noble Duchess of Buckingham, and I wonder at her great worth
being of so good a disposition, that she should forgive me so foul a fact,
so foul and horrid a sin; Oh God, forgive me likewise; and I hope in Jesus,
he has.

Likewise, I humbly and heartily crave of the meanest of all her Servants, from
a sincere relenting heart, I crave forgiveness of them all for that horrid
fact that I have committed, Lord thou know it pierces me much, and
afflicts my soul exceedingly? Oh Lord, I have dishonored thee, I have brought
a scandal upon my Religion, for which fact O Lord, I have deserved Ten
thousand punishments to be inflicted upon me.

Oh God, I do wonder at thy mercy, that thou have been so good and gracious
to me, seeing I have committed so foul, and so horrible a sin. Oh Lord, thou
have showed me mercy many times; Lord thou art wonderful, I cannot express
thy wonderful mercies toward me. In delivering me from many single combats
and diverse other perils and dangers, for which I give thee most humble thanks.

I beseech God to bless my gracious King, and that he may long live O Lord,
and that the Parliament may agree, and be united in one for Jesus Christ's
sake, Lord I beseech thee.

That which drawed me to this horrid sinful fact, was some foul reports,
which though they had been true it was damnable in me, in committing and
acting so foul a sin, Oh Lord forgive me for it, though it had bin so, I
have dishonored God, in taking the Judgment from him.

Gentlemen, I am a Soldier, and I cannot speak, I pray God forgive me what
is past, and receive my soul Oh Lord I beseech thee, Lord forgive me.

Then the Marshall asked, have you any more to say Mr. Felton.

He answered, I know not what to say, the Lord have mercy on my soul.

Then he spoke to the People concerning the Executioner, as follows.

I beseech you now all of you, that the poor man here suffer no wrong I
beseech you, for he does but his office.

Then after they had sung the 51. Psalm, he said.

God bless the Kings Majesty, and the Queen, the King of Bohemia and the
Queen, and all their Noble issue; Lord Jesus receive my soul.

Gentlemen, to satisfy you; Know that in this Bloody and heinous fact that I
have committed, I was seduced by the Devil, such a foul thing could not have
proceeded from me else; Lord forgive me, and be merciful unto me.

Lord bless the Noble Duchess of Buckingham; If I had had the disposing of
mine own life, she should have had it as it had pleased her self, and not
thus favorably.

Lord Jesus forgive me this horrid and vile sin; Lord Jesus forgive me this
vile and bloody sin.

Lord I thank thee, that thou have taken away the fear of Death? Lord, the
sentence was terrible.

The hearing of Death yesternight, affrighted me much, but I praise God I have
now no fear of Death.

I beseech you, none of you think that the fact was done well; it was
abhorrent, I have much dishonored God in it, Lord forgive me this bloody
sin, and all my other sins.

I beseech you Gentlemen pray for me.

Well, I praise my God, I have no fear of death, Lord Jesus I thank thee I
have no fear of death I praise my God.

Lord bless the Duchess of Buckingham that noble Lady, Lord be merciful to
her.

Truly, they are wonderful merciful to me, I did not think but that I
should have come to a crueller death, as I have deserved.

Oh Lord! I thank thee, that thou have taken me away, I pray my God, that the
death of his Son may take away all fear and horror* Lord I believe, I have
full assurance, receive my soul, oh Lord.

Then he asked if any of the Duchesses Servants were there, they said yes: and
asked what he would have. He said.

I pray tell her, That I desire with all my soul to be forgiven, Even of the
meanest servant, of the veriest Skullian in her Kitchen.

Lastly, he desired the people, for Gods sake that they would not misuse the
poor man, The Executioner.

FINIS.

