A notable sermon made within S. Paul's church in London, in the presence of
certain of the kings and Queen's most honorable privy counsel at the
celebration of the exequies of the right excellent and famous Princess, lady
Ione, Queen of Spain, Sicilie and Navarre, etc. the xviij. of June. Anno.
1555. By master John Feckenam, Deane of the said Church of Paul's.

Set forth at the request of some in authority whose request could not be
denayed.

EXCVSVM LONDINI IN aedibus Roberti Caly, Typographi* Mense Augusti. Anno.
1555. Cum priuilegio.

Gens absque consilio, and sine Theme. Deuteronomy. xxxij.
prudentia: Vtinam saperent, and intelligerent, ac nouissima prouiderent.
People void of good counsel, void of wisdom, and of all foresyghte of
things to come. Vtinam saperent et intelligerent: Would God they would be wise
and understand, and provide for the last things.
THese are the words of the prophet Moses, written in the xxxii. chaptre of
Deute. Which I have chosen as a theme or proposition at this time to stay
upon, for so much as you do so manifestlye declare your selves to be gens
absque consilio, People clean void of all good consyderation, knowledge or
counsel what to do: and sine prudentia, and without wysedo^ and foresighte to
know how things ought to be done. That by the declaration made of the said
theme, you might be brought into some more better consideration of your
selves and of your own most frail and brickel estates: and thereby to learn
now at the length (after so often callinges upon, and so many virtuous and most
godly instructions) these three notable and chief sessons: whereof the first is
sapere, to be iij, Lessons.
wise: the second is intelligere, to understand: and the third is nouissima
prouidere, to make provision for the last things. That by the first lesson
and learning of wisdom, we may have sure knowledge of things past. By our
second lesson of perfect understanding, we may have the right consideration
of things present: thereby the more earnestly to atteyne ye third lesson of
good provision making for ye things to come: when Salomo^ says in ye. xiiij.
of the proverbs: acceptus est regi minister Prou. xiiij.
intelligens. A wise servant says he, which by the knowledge of things
past, and wise disposition of things present, shall here in his life time make
good provision for things to come: acceptus est regi, is approved and accepted
before God. Let us therefore at this present learn of the prophet Moses these
three notable lessons, that is to say, sapere, intelligere, ac nouissima
prouidere, to be wise, to understand, and to provide for the last things, that
we may be made wise servants and prudent ministers, and be accepted and
approved before God our Lord and king. When by the first lesson (sapere) of
wisdom, we may here in this life have intelligence of al things apperteyning
to God: By our second lesson (intelligere) of discrete and perfect
understanding how passing and transitorye, how vain and slydyng these
worldly things are: Whereby we shall the more easily atteine the third lesson
(nouissima prouidere) of good provision making for the last things and
things to come. When by the first lesson of a wise and circumspecte knowledge,
a man shall perceive Gods most vprighte and terrible judgments, which can not
be deceived: By the second lesson of clear understanding. he shall enter into
the remembrance of him self, of his own corruption and mortal nature, which
can not be avoided: Thereby to make the better provision for the joys to come,
which can not be expressed. Be you wise therefore (derely beloved) and let us
from hence forth be no longer sicut ge^s absque consilio and sine prudentia, as
people void of good counsel, and without wisdom and knowledge: but let us
now presently lift up our hearts. and prepare our selves to learn these three
so profitable lessons, sapere, intelligere, ac nouissima prouidere, to be wise,
to understand and to provide for the last things: and with so much the better
wills, for that it has pleased almighty God (Qui non Ezec, xviij.
vult mortem peccatoris sed, magis vt conuertatur et viuat who desires not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live)
like a most bountiful and most merciful father to send his prophet Moises as
an ambassadoure to excite and admonish, and call upon us for the same with
these words which I have chosen for my theme. Gens absque consilio and sine
prudentia, Vtinam saperent and intelligerent ac nouissima prouidere^t. People
void of good counsel, void of wisdom and all foresyght of things to come.
Would God they would be wise, and understand and provide for the last things.

Hic fiunt preces.

Gens absque consilio and sine prudentia Thema. i. and. ii. membrum.
vtinam saperent, and intelligerent, ac nouissima prouiderent. People void of
good counsel void of wisdom, and of all foresight of things to come,
vtinam saperent and intelligerent: Would god they would be wise, and
understand, and provide for the last things.

First the prophet Moses First to know that this present life is slydynge.
Gods ambassador, earnestly wishes and desires that we mortal creatures
here living in this world; as it were in a slipper passage unto death, should
be of such ripe wisdom and perfect understanding, as to know how that
this present life is but transitory, and (as Job says) quod quasi flos
egreditur that it passes away as it were Job. xiiij.
a flower, fugit velut vmbra, flies as it were a shadow. and repletur multis
miseriis, and is albewrapped in wretchedness, subject to all manner of vanity,
defoiled with the filthiness of sin, and that it shall perish within a
short time. And therefore in the scriptures the life of man is compared and
resembled unto things of most vanity: As sometime to herbs or grass growing
in the feld, as the prophet David says. Homo sicut Psalm. cii.
foenum dies eius, sicut flos agri sic efflorebit. The days of man are but as
grass, he does florishe for a little season even as it were a flower in the
field. Sometime to a shadow and vanity. Homo vanitati similis factus Psalm.
cxliii.
est, dies eius sicut vmbra praetereunt, says the Psalmist. Man is made like
unto a vanity, his days pass away as it were a shadow. Sometime to a wind.
Ventus enim est vita mea, says Job. My life is but a blaste of Job. vij.
wind: Sometime to a vapor, as Saint James says. Quae est eni vita vestra?
vapor est ad modicum Iaco. iiii.
parens, and deinceps exterminabitur. What thing is your life, says saint
James? It is, says he, even a vapor appearing for a little season, and then it
vanishes away: And sometime to nothing. Nihil enim su^t dies mei, says Job.
For my days Job. vii.
are nothing: God so disposinge clean to withdraw the inordinate love of this
wretched life out of the hearts of men. When there is no man of any wisedo^ or
understanding that should much regard or set by that life which is so
uncertain as the flower of the field, so inconsta^t as the wind, so vain as
a shadow, so transitory as a vapor tossed and tombled in the air, and finally
so little worth as nothing: But by this wise knowledge and understanding, the
more vile that this present life is known to be, the more easelye it may of
all men be neglected, despised and set at naught for the love of yt life, which
shall never vanish, but ever endure.

Besides this knowledge, how fikell, how frail, how vain ^^. To know ^he
miseries ^herof.
and how transitory this present life is, the prophet Moses wishes unto us
a further knowledge to be had of this our mortal life, and that we mortal
creatures would be wise and understand, how sorrowful is the first entringe
of man's life into this wretched The first entry of man into this world is full
of sorrow.
world, maximo cum fletu, vagi tu, inertia and imbecillitate magna, with much
weeping and crying, with much ignorance and feebleness: He is borne naked into
the world and naked from hence he must depart again, made of the earth, and
to the earth he must return again. How chau^geable his life is for his time
here abydinge, and as The time of his abiding here is full of mutabilitie. Job.
xiiij
Job says. Nunquam in eodem statu permanens. Never continuing in one state,
now rich now poor now hoole now sick, now merye now sorye, now
counynge now ignorant, now seeing now blind, now free now bond, now good
now evil, And finallye His end departure full of fear
how terrible and fearful shall be the passing of the same at his departure
again.

Over and beside these knowledges, ^. To know the necessity of death.
the prophet Moses earnestly wishes that we miserable creatures here abiding
in this world, would once be wise and understand and know the great
necessity of death that reigns over us: An act and decree being already
past against us, that die we must. Statutu^ est (says S. Hebre. ix.
Paul) o^nibus hominibus femel mori. It is decreed and appointed for all men
once to die. And this great strait and necessity of death then first
begins to take place in man, when the soul is joined to the body, and
continues in man until the separation of the soul from the body again. For
life is no sooner comme into the body by the presence of the soul, but but
death furthwithall issues out of his grave and sepulcher to take away the same
again: and by the very same way that life goes, death comes. Do not we see
the order of this present life to be such, that after infancy comes
childhod, after childhod youth, after youth man's state, after man's state age,
then old age, and so at the last death? The which order and natural course
can by no law, statute or means that man can invent, be infringed or broken,
neither yet once stayed or plucked back. No not Minos Minos. Lycurgus.
the law maker at Crete, nor Lycurgus at Lacedemony, nor yet the wife Solon in
Solon.
his laws devised at Athenes, could make any repeal of this decree and
ordinance of God. When from the first man Ada^, unto this most noble and
gracious queen of Spain late departed, none has escaped or ca^ escape this
sentence of death. No not Noe for all his righteousness, Noe. Loath.
nor Loath for all his hospitality, nor yet Toby for all his diligence in
buriyng ye dead Toby.
could escape this rigorous sentence of death. When it was neither the strong
and mighty faith of Abraham, nor the supplanting Abraham.
of vices that was in Jacob, nor the great mekenes of the Jacob.
prophet Moses, nor the chastity of Joseph, nor yet the holiness Moses.
Joseph.
of the prophet Samuel, that could persuade death to be the more favorable to
the^. The great wisdom, riches, might and power, of king Solomon, Solomon.
the great strength and force of Sampson against his enemies, the puissaunce of
the king and prophet David, his feats of chiualtie and great might in arms
could not avail against the assaults of death: death being favorable to
no man, but like cruel and tirannous to every man. And therefore I do read
that death was portred and painted of the Paynims with the face and
countenance of a tiraunt having in his hand ready bente bow and arrows to
kill, slay, and shote at every man without all respect or acception of
persons. And in daily lousing of his darts at us, albeit that sometime he
ouershoteth us, and in faylinge of us sleath kings. Queen's, Dukes, Earls,
Lords: Sometime his darte lights to short of us, and in the stead of us,
strikes our servants, our tenauntes and our poor innocent neighbors
dwelling by us, so^time his dart makes a very narrow mysse of us on the right
hand, and kills our wives, our children, our friends and kynsfolkes so
derely beloved. And albeit that his fierce dart glyde somtymes to wide on the
left hand, and in failing of us, kylleth our adversaries and enemies, and
thereby brings us oftymes into a vain comfort, foolish mirth and
reioysinge, making us believe that he is our friend in the dispatche of those
that love us not: Yet the tira^nie of his hand is such that he will not fail
at the length to hitte us. And whereas death at the beginning was so unripe and
imperfect a boweman, that he first shootinge and lousynge his darts at our
first father Ada^, it was nine hundred and thirty years, Adam, 930.
(whose age was no fewer years in nu^bre) before he could strik him. And
whereas he bare his bow daily bent against his son Seth, it was nine hundred
Seth. 912.
and twelve years, before he could hit him. And whereas he daily lay in
wait to overthrow with his dart Mathusalem, Mathusalem. 969.
Enoches son, it was nine hundred threscore and nine years before he could
overthrow him. Yet within a certain space after, by daily custo^e and exercise
of his hand, he began to wax a more perfitte bowemanne, every day shootynge
more nere his mark the^ other, in so much that by the time and days of king
David, he got him such a readiness and steadfastness of shotynge, that he
would not have failed (for the more part) to strike his mark within the space
of. lxx. or. lxxx. years, like as the prophet David witnesses saying. Dies
annorum Psalm. 89.
nostroru^ in ipsis septuaginta annis. Si autem in pote^tatibus octoginta anni,
and amplius eorum labor and dolor. The days of our age* says he, are. lxx.
years, and if men be so strong that they come to. lxxx. what so ever is more,
is nothing but labor and sorrow.

Thus you may perceive not The tirannie of death
only the necessity of death, that die we must: but also how cruel a tiraunte
death is, whose tyranny daily increases against us more and more, every
day shorteninge our lives and shootynge more nere the mark then other. Whose
assaults and lieng in wait for us be wonderful subtle and crafty. Sometime
he makes toward us as it were with open battle, sendynge before him unto us
diverse infirmities and sycknesses: and unto, some hoare hears, blered eyes,
tremblinge and shakinge hands, stouping shulders and crooked backs, as it were
messengers or herauldes at arms sent before him. Sometime he comes privily
creapinge as a thief, and stealing upon us like as he did upon the richeman,
of whom we read in the twelfeth of saint Lukes gospel, sending to'vs no
warninges or messengers at all before him. Therefore almighty God, to cause us
to be in a redines against his sudden coming, and oftentimes to have the
uncertain hour of death in remembrance (which our frail and deadly
sickness makes us so often to forget) has sent unto us his Prophet Moses:
which prophet Mo^ses much lamentyng and sorowynge our great blindness, says
unto us these words of my Theme.

Gens absque consilio, and sine prudentia: Vtinam saperent et intelligerent, ac
nouissima. etc.

But why does the Prophet Moses so vehementlye wish and desire unto us this
clear wisdom, and perfect understanding of the vanity of this present
life, of the myserye of the same, of the filthiness of our own corruption, and
the necessity of death? Doubtless forbycause the perfect knowledge and
through understanding of these things are in us, the destruction of pride,
the quenchinge of envy, the very medicine of malice, the driving away of
lecherye, and the extirpation of all worldly boast and vanity, and finallye
the recoueringe of everlasting life. For what thing (I pray you) lies in
the compass of man's wit, that sooner moves a man to mekenes, and to the
perfection of al holiness, then does the consideration of his own corruption:
and the diligent understanding how that he lives here in this wretched world
as an outlaw a pilgrim, a geste full poor in all virtues, full unstable in
living, peradventure not abydinge here till to morrow? For this manner of
consideration and diligent understanding, doubtless shall cause a man to despise
all the boaste of this life, the business of worldly vanities, and all unclean
lusts and delectations of the flesh. And in this manner of thinkinge, the
soul receives knowledge of sin, the knowledge of sin brings
repentance, repentance causes amendment and satisfaction making for
sin, and all these together do engender in a man a very hope, sure trust,
and firm strength in our Lord God. The which thing the Prophet Moses
throughlye consideringe, wissheth by fervent desire, saying unto you the
words of my Theme. Vtinam saperent and intelligerent ac nouissima prouidesent.
Would God men would be wise and understand, and provide for the last things.

But alas how long shall we be sicut gens absque consilio and sine prudentia,
as it were people void of good counsel and without foresight and wisedo^? All
to few being among us that have the consideration, the wisdom and clear
understanding of these things in perfect remembrance* Full few there be that
set before their eyes ye knowledge of their own infirmity, their bodily
corruption, the mind of their sins, the day of their death, or yet the pains
of hell: but much like unto brute beasts do pro^cede living here in this
world, neither regarding God, nor yet very much fearing the devil. Would
God therefore, in folowyngs this exhortation of the prophet Moses, we would
once begin to wax wise, to understand, and to make provision for the last
things: And The glass of our own corruption.
that by the contemplation and beholdinge of our selves in this so profitable a
myrroure and glass of our own corruption, and frail nature, and of the
great certitude of death that abides therein. At whose first entrye and
breaking into our houses, behold how the conscience begins to dread,
how the heart quaketh, the head stoupeth, the wit wastes, the strength
fails, the visage waxes pale, the tongue fombleth, the breath goes away,
the speech very rare and thynne, all the beauty of the body clean turned
into a griselye and filthy corruption: and after that the body is buried, it
falls into a carionlyke stenche, the flesh clean turned into grubbes
meat. Be you wise therefore, O ye mortal creatures, and understand how that
this is an horrible syghte, but it is full profitable.

O how blessed and happy is he, that circumspectlye beholds him self in
this mirror or glass, when there is no craft, no medicine, none instruction
or teaching that sooner destroys all vices, and planteth al virtues, then
does the inward beholdinge of a man's own corruption and last end.

To this glass therefore repair Young men
ye first, O ye lusty young men, (which by the deceitful wanto^nes of your
youth do go so upright, stretching out your selves, bearing up your heads
aloft with lusty courage) and learn of strong Sampson, of mighty Golias,
and of the hardy captain Holofernes, and other which perished in ye boaste of
their own strength, what great folly it is to glory in the strength of the
body, which shall so seen decay and be overthrown.

To this glass come ye al, O Old men.
ye old fathers, unto whom death being very favorable has sent before him
unto you so many messengers, as your hoare hears, bleared eyes, droppinge
noses, sagginge chekes, your lips hanging, stowping necks and shulders: come
you hither and behold your selves and learn at the least ways now in your
old age to be wise and understand what vain hope you be in, which do look
and make your most vain accomptes, to live one year longer: be ye never of so
great an age, ever crepynge away and fore fearinge to die. O ye old fathers
and hoare hears, why fear ye to die at. lxx. or lxxx. years of age, when all
the time that ye shall live after is in heuines, in grievous aches, in continual
decaiyng, and never upright, but rolinge, relinge and redye to fall in to the
grave, which you do so loathe? Why therefore fear ye so sore to dye, when by
death God doethe change us from an old filthy house into a new? For
certainly death is but a play, wherein the player (if he be wise) aduentureth
but a little to win much. Which thing is very easlie perceived of all
those men which are of perfect knowledge, how much blessedness God is of, unto
whom we hope to go by death, and of how much evil these worldly men are,
with whom we are conversant here by life.

O ye gentlemen and men of Gentlemen
nobility, come you hither also to behold your selves in this glass. And
here you shall learn to be wise and understand, whether the filthy grubbe
worm or maggotte dare not as well breed in your, flesh of your blood
whereof you brag so much, and wast and consume your carcasses, of your
parts always so deintely made of and so de licately nourished and fed, as well
as other inferior and porer men's.

O ye gentlewomen and fair Gentle women.
ladies greatly deliting in pure glasses, forgette not I pray you to behold
your selves in this glass of al other most profitable, which are so fo^dely
given here in this world to set forth your selves, with your browdred hear
(which is a great abuse) your fyngers be set with ringes, bearing purses
full of sweet sauoures and smelles, and bands about your necks fynely
wroughte with silk, and beset with pearls, with bracelets full of gaudies, and
such other like manner of disguisinges. O ye folishe women which do bestow
and spend a great part of your lives in the devise of such vanities.
Vtinam saperetis and intelligeretis. Would God you would once learn to be wise,
perceive and understand with what goodlye trinkettes you shall be apparailled
in ye straitnes of your graves and sepulchers, where ye shall with Job say.
Putredini dixi, pater meus es tu matter mea Job. xvij.
and soror mea vermibus. I said unto corruption, thou art my father: and unto
the worms you are my mother and my sister. Why do ye therefore make so much of
so filthy a carkas, and wast so much time in washinge, kemming and pranking of
the same, unto no small pride and oste^tation: when ye do but loose your
labors, and in so doing you do nothing else, but flower a filthy donghyll,
and garnish a smokie miskin, which you shall never make sauerie, wash him
never so much.

O ye great richmen, men of Rich and honorable men.
authority, honor and estimation, which are as Gods here in this world, all
things therein being at your commandment by reason of your authority and
riches, Come you also and repair unto this glass, and tell me whether you can
with all your authority, might and power, with all your gold silver, and
worldly treasures, either fear or corrupt death, yea so much as to make him
so partial and favorable to you, that he will let you escape: like as in all
other worldly things else, you can do, peruertinge all good laws by the
suppression of justice. O ye worldlynges which live here as gods upon the
earth: Do not you here lyuinge perceive, how the time flies without
retorninge? how the life traueileth on her journey without ceassynge? how the
flesh consumes without feeling? and how the glory of this woride passes
as it never had been? (The lands, possessions, riches, iewelles and treasures
thereof oftentimes falling into those men's hands, who by our wills should
have the lest part thereof.) Why therefore be ye so forgetful of your selves,
and so noselde in all worldly vanities, as though they should ever contynewe
and never take end.

O ye kings and Princes* ye Kings Princes.
magistrates and rulers of this world. O ye prelates and bishops, having
charge of Christ's Priests, Byshippes and subjects
church and family. O all ye of high and low degree, whether ye be
gouernoures or subjects, masters or servants, superiors or inferiors,
come hither and behold your selves in this clear mirroure and glass of your
own corruption: and by a diligent examinacio^ and consideration with your
selves Consider what we were.
what you have been, and of how vile a matter borne in to this world (ne^pe
ex menstruo mulieris:) What you are at this present touching the What we are.
body, when as S. Bernard says. Considera quid per oculos, quid per nares,
per os, per aures, coeterosque corporis meatus emiserit, et nunquam vidi vilius
sterquiliniu^. Consider well, says he, what a man sends forth and auoydeth by
his eyes, his nosetrilles, his mouth, his ears, and other the passages and
pooers of the body, and thou may well say nunquam vidi vilius
sterquilinium. I never saw a viler donghil: And what we shall be, nempe terra
et What we shall be.
ciuis. Even very earth and ashes. Quia pulnis es and in puluere^ reuerteris.
For duste thou art, and Genes. iij.
into dust thou shall return again: and you shall begin to wax wise,
perceive and understand, how much more matter we have in our selves of
humility then of pride, of mekenes then of ostentation, of sorrow then of
joy, how much more matter also of abhorring our selves, then of gloriynge
in our selves, of contemnynge and setting this world at naught then of rejoice
in the world, and of followynge the most godly and wholesome counsel of the
prophet Moses, then of neglectyng the same. Which prophet as an ambassador
sent of God to pluck us into a more perfect remembrance and knowledge of our
selves with most earnest and hearty desire wishes the same, saying unto us
the words of my theme. vtinam saperent et intelligerent. etc.

And this wisdom and understanding being first obtained and got by the
consideration and diligent beholdynge of our selves in this mirror and glass
of our own corruption and mortal nature: let us now proceed to ye last part of
this theme, and express in a word or. ij. what To provide for the last
things.
provision must be made of our parts for the last things, and so I shall
shortly commit you to go. And touchig a right order to be observed in this
provision making for the last things: First I shall declare unto you, what
these last things are, and so after what provision of our parts ought to be
made for the^. And these last things being many in nu^bre (when al these
things may justly be called nouissima, ye last things which shall serve at
the last, and be of comfort to the soul of man, when al friendship, al help,
confort and pleasure of this world shall fail.) But here at this present, to
use brevity, I shall entreat chefely of these four last Four las^ things.
things, that is to say, of death, of the judgment of God, of the pains of
hell, and of the joys of heaven. For the which four last things I would have
you in the short course of this present life to make provision. First that
First.
we may here finish our life, and die well. Second, that we ma receive Second.
at the hands of God a comfortable and a merciful judgment. Thirdly, we must
here provide Third.
to avoid the horrible pains of hell. Fourth and last we must proprouide
Fourth.
so here to live yt we may be partakers of the life everlasting and joys of
heaven. And to avoid co^fusio^ herin, ye manner of this our prouison making
must be sundry and diverse, like as the vocations degrees, and estates of men
be sundry and diverse. As the Bishops, Priests and prelates of christ's
church having the flock of Christ committed to their great cure and charge.
They must make their provision for these four last things by a circu^spect
fedinge of Christ's flock with good and wholesome doctrine, by a diligent search
of their parts to be made for the lost sheep which have perished in ye late
plague of errors and Heresies: by a wise bringing of them back again into
the fold and unity of Christ's church, by a merciful binding and knitting of
the wounds of the soore cut and mangled sheep: by a charitable nourishinge and
confortinge of the weak, sick and feeble among them, having in their breasts
toward their flocks the very zeal of a good pastor and sheperde: whose
zeal is such (as Christ witnesses) quod anima sua^det pro ouibus suis, that
he will John. x.
not stick to give his life for his sheep, like as our savior christ has
given us example already, and as Moses desired deleri de libro vitae, to be
blotted Exodus 32.
out of the book of life: and saint Paul Anathema esse a Christo Roma. ix.
pro fratribus, to be accursed from Christ for his brethren. And their
provision for these four last things being on this wise laid for, and
circumspectly made, God shall grant them all, and send unto them a quiet and
blessed death, and a most confortable and merciful judgment, delivering them
from the horrible pains of hell, and restoring them to the eternal bliss and
joys of heaven. All the rest of Sheep of the flock of Christ.
Christ's family or household, which are not shepardes but sheep of his fold
and pasture: You must here begin and make your provision for these iiij. last
things. First by a diligent gyuing ear, and harkening to the voices of your
sheperdes, and by a circumspecte and wise refusal of all counterfeit and
strange voices. When the true sheep of Christ non sequuntur alienum, Joan. x.
sed fugiunt ab illo, quia non noue runt voces alienoru^, do not follow a
strange shepard, but flee from him, for they know not the voices of
strangers. Neither will they be deceived by the strange voices of the Aryans
Aryans.
in deniyng the deity of our Savior Christ: nor by the strange voices of
the Nestorians Nestorius Eutices.
and Eutichianes in deneiynge of Christ's humanity: nor by the strange voices
of the Manichees in their denial of Manes.
the fre choice of man: nor yet by the strange voices of the Pelagianes
Pelagius.
attributing to much to the free will of man. When the true sheep of Christ
will not be deceived by the barreyn voice of Eunomius the Eunomius
Solifidiane, nor by the monstrous voice of Beringarius, Beringarius.
in his denial of Christ's very Real and bodily presence in the most
blessed Sacrament of the altar, nor yet by the evil skreakinge and most
strange voices of Martyn Luther. Bucer. Peter Martyr.
Luther, Martyn Bucer, Peter Martyr, Corolastadius, Zwynglius, Oecola^padius
and Zwinglius. Oecolampadius.
other, the very palebreakers of the unity of christ's church, the breders of
al scismes and co^tentions in the same, ye blasphemers of christ's sacraments,
the subuerters of all good orders and constitutions, the reuiuers of old
cankered and rustie heresies, and now by the^ new furbished and set forth to
the show and therefore their books justly condemned here in this realm by a
late proclamation set forth by the king and Queen's majesty's. Whereunto I do
exhort you to be obedient, and to bring in your books of heresies, according
to the purport thereof: forasmuch as the true sheep of Christ will give no
ear unto their most monstrous and strange voices: when these and al other
like voices which do diswade from the antiquity, unity and universality of
Christ's church must needs be most monstrous and strange voices. Therefore O ye
Londoners and inhabitauntes of this city, Londoners
Cease your great folly I beseech you, and be you no longer sicut gens absque
consilio and sine prudentia, as people without good counsel, and all
foresight what will ensue and follow hereafter: Vtinam saperetis and
intelligeretis, ac nouissima prouideretis Would God you would be wise,
perceive and understand, and make provision for these. iiij. last things, by
eschewyng of all strange voices, and herkeninge unto the voices of your
sheperdes, and by a dyligente calling of your selves into some better
remembrance, considering how long time they have spent in calling upon you,
with how much patience your slothful return from your wicked errors and
herisies has been borne withal at the hands of God, at the hands of our
most noble king and our most merciful lady and Queen, and also at the hands
of your Bishops and preachers among you. Whereas you being persons seduced
with many strange voices of these deceitful Mayremaides do daily recompense
this their most merciful tolleration and gentilenes, with most cursed and
wicked speakynges, blasphemyng God, and reysing up false lies and rumors
against our most gracious king and Queen. In so much that I for my part at
this time occupiynge this place (of very great zeal and love which I have
ever borne unto you,) am forsed thus much to say unto you: that except you
give better ear to the voices of your shepardes: except ye shortly return
from your wicked heresies into the unity of Christ's church again: and
except you become wise and understand, and shortly amend this your small
regard and most evil provision making for these four last things:
Doutles your evil beleuynge and corrupt living shall bring you unto a
miserable and lamentable death and ending: and to receive therefore at the
hands of God, a strayte and most vpryghte judgment, to your great loss of
eternal joy and bliss everlasting: and to the wynninge of the perpetual
torments and pains of hell.

Ye gentlemen and noble men which in living here in this Gentlemen and noble
men.
world be very politic and full of all manner of worldly provisions, Vtinam
saperetis and intelligeretis ac nouissima prouideretis: Would God you would
be wise, and understand, and make provision for these four last things,
that you may finishe the race and course of this short life with a quiet
death, and fynallye to receive at the hands of God a merciful judgment. into
joy and bliss, and not to sustain the torments of hell. The manner of this
your provision making must be, by the maintenance of Gods glory and
honor, by your vprighte ministration of Justice, and by the authority
committed unto you of God, to defend the catholic faith and religion of God,
his church and most blessed sacraments, and all the ministers of the same,
seruinge God in their byshopriches, Cathedral churches, houses of religion,
universities, colleges or else where. When otherwise doubtless your provision
made for these four last things shall be all to short and after a wrong
sort. O ye therefore that are sicut gens absque consilio et fine prudentia, as
people void of counsel, wisedo^ and all forsight: vtinam saperetis Would God
you would be wise and understand whether this your provision by you and your
advise and counsel made here (as for an example) in this Cathedral church of
Paul's, where of the nu^bre of. lviij. or. lx. priests, be now left by your
provision, but only twelve priests, called Peticanones, here daily to serve
God in the Queere: whether this your prete^ced sekyng of Gods glory and
honor in all your doing, may be called a prouysion, or rather a subtraction
or plain diminution of the same. O ye that are wandrynge here in this world
sicut gens absque consilio et sieve prudentia, as people without counsel and
void of wisdom and all forsyghte: Is this a provision for the upholding of
Christ's catholic faith and religion here in this reaulme by night and day
prayer, by reading, preachinge and teaching, by liberal alms geuinge and
releiuynge of the poor members of Christ, to overthrow monasteries, colleges
and hospitalles, to spoil bishopriches and their Cathedral churches, so
craftily to cra^pe and fleese ye universities by a covetous exchaungynge of
their lands? Is this your provision? O gens absque consilio and sine
prudentia. O ye people void of counsel, understanding and foresight: Vtina^
saperetis. O would God you would once beco^e wise, to perceive and understand
that except ye shortly repent and do penance here in season for your great
wyckednes, here to confess and acknowledge ye same, here to make satisfaction
and to restore again, doubtless your provision for these. iiij. last things
will be very slender and right naught worth. When otherwise you shall be
sure here to finishe your lives with a lamentable and most miserable death, and
finally receive at the hands of God a fearful and terrible judgment: to the
loss of perpetual joy and bliss: and to the winninge of the everlasting
pains and torments of hell. And here a little further, and somewhat more
generally to speak touching the provision making for these four last things
after such sort, and as the Apostle Paul has already prescribed unto us in
his Epistle to the Ephesians the.v. and.vi. chaptres, as first: Such among us
as be married and have wives, Married me^
let them provide by a godly love unto their wives: like as Saint Paul
teaches, saying: Viri diligite Ephesians. v*
vxores vestras, sicut christus dilexit sponsam suam ecclesiam, et semetipsum
tradidit pro ea. Ye husbands, says saint Paul love your wives like as
Christ loved his spouse the church, and gave him self for her. Ye married
Married women.
women and wives, you must make your provision by your due obeysaunce unto
your husbands. The Apostle Paul willing the same, says. Mulieres Ephesians. v.
viris suis subditae sint, sicut domino, quoniam vircaput est mulieris, sicut
christus caput est ecclesiae Sicut igitur ecclesia subiecta est christo, ita
and mulieres virissuis in omnibus. Ye women, fayeth he, be you subject unto
your husbands as unto the Lord. For the husband is the head of the woman,
as Christ is the head of the church. Therefore like as the church is subject
unto christ, so let women be to their husbands in all things. Such as be
fathers and have children, you Fathers.
must provide by a godly and virtuous education of your children. Et vos
patres, says saint Paul, Ephesi. vi.
nolite ad iracu^diam prouocare filios vestros: Sed educate illos in disciplina
et correctione domini. And ye O fathers, says he, provoke not your children to
anger, but bring them up in the discipline and correction of our lord. And ye
children, ye must make Children.
your provision by re^dryng your dew obedience unto your parents, and by
honourynge and reuerencing of them. For so S. Paul teaches you saying. Filij
Ephesians. vi.
obedite pare^tibus vestris in domino: Hoc enim iustu^ est. Honora patre^ tuum,
et matrem tua^, vt been sit tibi et sis longaeuus super terra^. O ye children,
says the apostle, obey your parents in our lord: for yt is right. Honor thy
father and thy mother, that you may prosper, and live long upon the earth.
And al ye yt be masters and have Masters.
servants you must provide by a dyscrete governance of your servants,
remitte^tes minas, not by ouermuche threatenyng the^: scientes quod et illoru^
et vester dominus est in coelis, et quod personaru^ acceptio no^ est apud deu^.
Knowing that both their master and yours is in heaven, and that there is no
respect of persons with god. And servants Servants
must make their provision by doing their faithful service and obedience unto
their lords and masters. Serui obedite dominis vestris cu^ timore et tremore
in simplicitate cordis vestri, sicut christo, non ad oculum seruientes quasi
hominibus place^tes, sed vt serui christi facientes voluntate^ dei exanimo. O
ye servants, says Paul, obey your masters with fear and trembling in the
singlenes of your heart, as it were unto Christ, not doing service unto the eye,
as they do which go about to please men, but as the servants of Christ,
doing the will of God, even from the very heart. So that all kind of men for
the time of their abode here in this world, must here make their provision
for these four last things, whether they be married or unmarried, wife or
syngle woman, parents or children, masters or servants, superiors or
inferiors, magistrates beari^g rule, or subjects being ruled, whether they be
of the clergy or of the laity: Every man must here provide, by a circumspecte
and dilligent walk in their vocations for the love, favor and friendship of
God, by observation of his commandments, Christ himself witnessynge the
same, and saying: Si praecepta mea seruauerits, manebitis John. xv.
in dilectione mea. If you will keep my precepts, you shall abide in my love,
and have my favor and frendshippe. Whose love and frendshippe at the last
hour of death, shall stand us in better stead then all the riches and
lordshyppes of the world: When at that hour, though all thy friends,
kinnesfolkes and acquaintance should come with millions of gold, or yet by
force of arms, they may not at that dreadful grisely and last hour, do thee
any help or comfort: When other help, refuge or succoure at that time thou
shall have none, but only at the hands of God. Let us therefore in all the
mean space of this present life so dread and fear God, so embrace and love
him, and so honor and worship him, that we at the last hour may have his
favor and friendship. Et si deus pro nobis quis Roma. viij.
contra nos? And if god be on our side, who ca^ be against us? And then we
shall be sure to have at the finishing and knitting up of this life a very
quiet and a joyful death: to receive at the hands of God a very merciful and
most confortable judgment, thereby to avoid and escape the torments of
Hell: and to inherit the joys of heaven. To the which he bring us all that
has so dearly bought it for us, by the effusion of his most precious blood.
To who^ with God the father and the holy ghost be al praise* honor, and glory
for now and evermore.

Amen.
Imprinted at London by Robert Caly, within the precinct of the (...) dissolved
house of the Gr^ye Fr^^rs, now converted to an hospital, called Christ's
hospital*

The.xx. day of August. M.D.L.V.

