Pluto his Travails. OR, The Devils Pilgrimage to the College of Jesuits.

Lately discovered by an English Gentleman.



LONDON, Printed by N. O. for Joseph Hunt, and are to be (...)

To the High and Mighty Prince, Prince Henry, by the grace of God Prince of
great Britain, and Heir apparent to the Imperial Diadems of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland.
EXCELLENT, and most virtuous Prince, my blushing boldness asks forgiveness
for presuming the presentation of these ill tasting lines, to the Princely view
of your high excellency. There are three especial reasons that moved me to
this rashness; The first, in regard I have writ to diverse Princes in Germany,
and the Netherlands, in a borrowed Language, and have tasted the fruits of
their gracious favors: And therefore my hopes can be no less here in my
native Country, using my mother tongue: Secondly, I have been a Soldier, and
write the truth in a plain simple style, which my own eyes have been
witness of, and mybest courage shall affirm: Thirdly, to show some part of
my duty to my Prince, and Country, whose loves may command the best
employment of my life, for both their safeties: I hope your most gracious
acceptance of this simple truth, will rather encourage, then discomfort him,
that had rather bear the rigor of his enemy, then the discontent of his
friend: Thus mighty Prince, with my best wishes of earthly joys, and Heavenly
felicity, I continue your high borne Excellencies unworthiest Soldier, whilst
I have life.

WILLIAM FENNER.

To the Capable, not Captious Readers health.
I Have to thy eye (courteous Reader) set forth a direct course, that is at
this day used in their devilish Pilgrimage: I rest assured some will much
distaste me, but for their dislikes, I pass not, in regard they are favorites
of this detested Society, here discovered: Yet thus much I Will speak for my
self, if the cunningest Equiuocator of them all should accuse me of untruth in
the least, I stand ready to cram the lie down their malicious throats, for I
protest I write no heeresaies, or old wives reports, but that my self has
seen and proved, to my grief; contrariwise, my hopes are these: First many
reformed Christians here in England, have traveled these parts, and seen the
most of what I have reported, and will rejoice at the discovery: Secondly, many
that have not seen them, have heard of many of them, and I doubt not, but will
be ready to believe, and allow of it; And though herein be some particulars
which carry a show of immodesty, yet chaste ears bear with them, I entreat
you, in regard of their truth, for indeed they were more uncivilly acted, then
I have to the worlds vulgar ear reported, I doubt not but many will reap
content from my labor, and I hope the Learned will wink at small faults; as
for the obstinate, and Ignorant I have dispenst with their censures beforehand:
Thus expecting an universal courtesy, I leave my labor to your loves, and
commend my self to your well wishing thoughts.

Your Friend, W. F.

Pluto his Travails: or the Devils Pilgrimage to the College of Jesuits.
BEFORE We show the Jesuits bald Crown, or discover his plottes, it will fall
necessary that we let you understand this perilous Pilgrimage of the Devil,
nay, rather to ye Devil. And for the better proceeding of the Writer, and
larger understanding of the Reader, I have divided this Journey into five
parts, purposing to speak particularly of them in their several places: The
points are these: viz. The Pilgrimage; secondly, the Pilgrim; thirdly, the
Saint whereto they travel; fourthly, the things they offer fifthly and lastly,
ye fruits of their Journey.

The first part of the journey.
The word Pilgrimage signifies a journey of penance, or rather, a kind of
banishment for a certain space: Indeed it is a fearful banishment, not for a
certain space, but (without repentance) an everlasting excluding of the Soul
from grate. And of this word there be three kinds spoken by a figure. The
first, is the life of man upon Earth, or the time of his life compared to a
Pilgrimage. The second, is a journey into a far country. And the third, is
that of which we now spoke, a perseuering in blind superstition, by which we
make with every step that we tread, a fearful Pilgrimage toward the Devil.
But understand me, it is not the use of the word that makes it odious before
God, and good Christians: But the use and abuse of the matter, meant by the
word, as for example: The Pilgrimage of our Savior.
The Conqueror of Sin, Death, and Hell, traveled his Pilgrimage in mean
estate; he had not his Chariot drawn with four or six Palfreys, rarely
trapped, three or four Lackies running by, whilst he sat brisling in ye
company of beautiful Ladies, in a Ueluet Seat, to sport at the poor panting
Boys; he was not attended with such observance in his Pilgrimage: But contrary
wise, he traveled on foot, and the best Beast that ever he mounted was a
silly Ass: At this glorious last Supper, he sat not alone, feeding like a
Churl, whilst his twelve Apostles waited at the Table, but like a kind Lord
and Master, caused them to keep him company: Me thinks the use of his humble
Pilgrimage, is of force sufficient to reprove a number of our Epieures in this
age, that are so greedy, they will scarce keep men to wail upon them, but
where they travel in their Pilgrimage, they trouble the whole house with
attending them; and no Country in the world so vild for that as Italy, and
France; England cannot altogether excuse her self of this culpable guilt; the
exceeding many vanities that are used in this superstitious Pilgrimage, last
spoke of, were much labor to write, and it would prove tedious for you to
read, therefore passing over many, we will only touch a few that are now in
use in Flaunders, and Brabant, our neighbor Countries (as it were) And I fear
me too many here in England knew the^ too well before they read them: But to
our purpose.

Note this Story.
There are two great and especial Pilgrimages in the Country of Brabant, the
one is to our Lady of Seerpenhowell: the other is to S. Sceruias at Mastrike,
which is a City situated upon the famous River the Mase, and borders on the
Land of Luke; which Country is governed by a Bishop.

Their Pilgrimage to our Lady of Scerpenhowell is in this manner: The place
where the Chapel stands was a thick wood, where they affirm many robberies
have been done to the great indamaging of Passengers.

It Chanced upon a night, about the year of our Lord 1597. A flock of Sheep
belonging to a Farmer of a little Town not far off, were strayed from their
accustomed walks, to the place where now the Chapel stands; the Shepherd
missing them, told his Master, who presently took one way, and the Shepherd
the other, to look the strayed flock; but it was the Sheepheards chance to
light on this place, where all his Sheep sat round about a great Oak: The
Shepherd assayed to drive them away, but could not; musing what might be the
reason, he cast his eyes up in the Tree, and saw the Image of our Lady, which
presently he took down, and presently the Sheep came all bleating, and
running about him: The amazed man could not lay down the Image, but hasted
home wards, the Sheep following him, bleating as if they had accused him of
theft. When he was come into the Town, the people wondered, and presently sent
for their Pastor, who caused the Image to be set in the Church; and the Sheep
were driven to their Coats. The next morning the Shepherd mist only one
Sheep: And the Pastor going to the Church to say Mass, mist the new-come
Image; whereupon he requested the Shepherd to bring him to the place where he
first found it, and taking some of the sufficientest men in the Town, they
approached here the place, where they found the Image in the former place, and
the Sheep lying bound at the roate of the tree, and in the Bark of the tree
in Roman letters was this Engraven, Offer this Sheep, build here a Church,
and call it Scerpenhowell: The Priest amazed at this strange accident, put on
his Roabes, and did command y^ company of his parishoners, where a solemn
Mass was sung; ye sheep sacrificed, and the day and place consecrated, for a
remembrance of this much admired Miracle: presently this was rumord to the gates
of Rome, and many thousa^ds came in devotion to this most holy place, and did
offer their bounteous beneuole^ce, toward yt erecting of a Chapel: where by
ye infinite number of People that came, and daily do come, the place is now
become a populous Town: 8. Priests are there richly maintained, of eight
countries, termed by ye name of secular Priests, to advertise all strangers of
this sheepish Miracle.

Note this.
This story before written, I have read in Latin, French, and Dutch: and this
upon my own knowledge I can affirm. There are in private two Chirurgions kept,
of the most skilfullest men in the Country; and many bring sick and lame
Children thithet, which by the cunning of these skillful men are cured, and the
praise ascribed to our Lady of Scerpenhowell. This gross crime is so closely,
and cunningly carried; and every Sabbath two Sermons made, in ye affirming of
this Miracle, ye it remains current, as sterling money: and ye place is much
enriched we gold, and silver; nay corn, wine, wool, eggs, or any other
co^medity is received in good part: But never any fruits come from thence, but
ye Priests absolutions.

If I should recite every thing particularly, it were to much black color for
a quire of paper; only let this sufsice, to prove it no other, but a plain
and direct path, where the Devil, or his servants walk their Pilgrimage.

Now for the second: although it is not so sheepish, yet it is more sottish;
and that is this. In Mastricke, in the year of our Lord 1542. there lived, and
died a reverend Bishop, who for his alms, and chastity, it pleased the Pope,
and the Council of Trent to Cannonise for a Saint; presently his portrature
was raised in brass, gilded with gold: to whom all the country come twice
every year, and bring abundance of wealth. In this year 1611. there came an
exceeding drought, and what happened by the policy of the Jesuits, you shall
at large hears when I come to pluck off ye four cornerd cap from their
politic pates: I could describe the holy blood of Buxall, and ye three Kings
of Cullin; both which are two great frequented Pilgrimages at this day: Saint
Jews in France, S. Jacques in Spain, and many in Italy; but they savor of one
taste; and therefore I should cloy your stomachs excedingly But prepare your
appetites, for here co^es a fresh dish, or ye second course of ye Pilgrims.
The second part of this Journey.
This word Pilgrim is derived from Peregrin, which signifies a Stranger, and
of these three are three sorts, as for example: The constrained Pilgrim;
secondly the dissembling Pilgrim; and lastly ye needy Pilgrim. The
constrained Pilgrim is this, one y^ is appointed penance, for some certain
sin, by his, or her Confessor. Here may be an objection made, in defense of
the Priest, by any favorite of their traditions: They may ask what commodity
the Confessor shall gain, by sending his offendant on Pilgrimage, but only the
discharging of his conscience: To this I answer; It is no small profit that
this brings to the Church of Rome. For consider who these are they send forth,
not their needy Pilgrims, but their richest Benefactors, and with this prouiso
they are sent; first they must offer a certain su^me of riches to some Saint
in his Confessors Church; secondly he must give so many shillings, for Masses
to be said in his absence, to the end he may have a prosperous journey:
thirdly he must visit so many Shrines in his Pilgrimage: Fourthly, hear so
many Masses by the way: Fifthly, give so much to the Saint he travails to, in
honor of the five wounds of our Savior Christ: Sixthly, he must visit the
Jesuits Cloisters in his journey, and go to confession so many times.
Seventhly, and lastly, at his return, Father confessors must not be forgotten.
Thus you ses many wicked eggs are hatched, under the dissembling habit of
holiness, and the constrained Pilgrims must pay for the breeding of the
Chickens.

Now for the second sort of the dissembling Pilgrims, I fear me there are too
many: but omitting the secret, we will only discover the notorious and
capital sort. The third Edward of England had a fair Sister, called Philip,
matched to the Duke of Sauoy, who at a certain time standing before her gates,
espied a Spanish Lady going in devotion to Saint Jews in France, And in
courtesy desired her to take the entertainment of her Court; The Spanish Lady
noting gracious speech and delicate beauty, took occasion to compare the
beauty of the Duchess to the beauty of her Brother in Spain, where at the
Duchess burnt in such desire to see him, that was so highly commended by his
own Sister, that she dissembled her health, and lying sick of a feyned
disease, vowed to God (before the sorrowful Duke) that if God should restore
her to her former health, she would go in devotion to Saint Jacques in Spain,
and offer for her health.

Upon this Ladies return, she Duchess recovered, and according to her vow,
she travailed to Spain for the sight of a Spanish Lord. At their enteruiew
their sights were pleasing to each other, and their beauties admired of each
other; and after some amorous conference, he vowing to serve her as her Knight,
and she most willingly accepting, she returned, but with heavy success, for
the never saw her wedded Lord after: He being employed in wars, against the
Duke of Burgundy, left a Lord of his Country as Deputy in his place, who upon
the return of his Lady, burned in lustful Love with her beauty, and desired
her to grant him favor for his affections: The chaste Lady despising his
motion, derided him for his folly, at which the villain grew so envious, being
poisoned with the Devils bait, that he sought all occasions to defame her, and
by means of a silly Kimsman, he found way to bring her within the compaste of
the law. And being by him accused for adultery, she was condemned to fire, if
none within the space of fifteen weeks should come to fight in her cause:
this Spanish Lord having received a Letter of her wrongs, sent her word back
he could not, neither would he come. Then she repented her long Journey, and
being void of earthly hopes, prepared her self for death, expecting no
deliverance: But contrary to expectation, the Spanish Lord came in the habit
of a Friar, and confessed her in Prison, and afterward sought for her, overthrew
Pendosta, and freed her from death, and shame; and after the Dukes death
married the Duchess.

Although this kind of dissimulation was evil in the Duchess, yet it comes not
near the close dissimulation that is used in these days. I will give you a
taste of some in the City of Cades in Spain. There is a great Monastary of no
small acount. where in many Gentlemen do enclose their Daughtes: And so it
was, there lived a Gentleman in the famous City of Antwerpe, Note this 1603.
who had a great desire to send his only Daughter thiether, for he had no
more: The Girl was about sixteen years of age, and often solicited by a
Merchants son of the same City; the Maid also grew inclyning to his will,
and did much affect his suit, but in regard of her Fathers mind she could allow
him no conference, but in private: And in short time they wrought so privately
together, that they overthrew the voyage; for thus it was: the Father made all
provision necessary for his Girls tourney; And the young couple being loath
to part, practiced how to keep company still, in a disguised fashion: So at
the last, after long study, Lady Lascivious, with her Beldame Opportunity,
growing acquainted with their suite, gave them this counsel: the young man to
transform himself into an effeminate shape, and so unsuspected he might
safely travel as a she Pilgrim in her company: but for the more safety it was
agreed upon between them, that he should take the name of Dalinda, and
present himself to the Gentlewoman so, in the shape of an attendant or poor
Gentlewoman, seeming by her civil show to be more rich in virtue then in
beauty: all which was acted in such quaint manner that they seemed to surpass
the boys of Blacke-fryars. Thus now must we leave to call him by the name of a
Merchants son, but pray you remember Dalinda, and all is well. Imagine you
see the father and child parted with tears: she traveling toward her holy
life, being accompanied with her waiting maid, and the father having brought
her a little on the way returned homewards, joyful that his child was so
accompanied, for it seemed to him that his daughter took much delight in the
society of her maid. But before we pursue these two lovely Pilgrims any
further, I must entreat you to bend your thoughts toward the Merchant, whose
heart was much perplexed for the loss of his son. Many times would he go to
the Gentleman's house and blame him exceedingly, for sending away so rich a
jewel as his child that was in his power to keep; but I qnoth the Merchant
have lost that which if I could attain to, it would make me young again, but
O my son, my son, I have lost thee for ever: then would a fresh fountain of
tears bedew his manly cheeks, that me thought it a pity to behold, the
other Gentleman would then give him comfort, and tell him it was the custom of
women to bewray their grief with tears. Thus will we leave the two
childrenlesse fathers comforting each other, and overtake the Gentlewoman and
her maid Dalinda, for they are but new set forth,

The lovely Pilgrims accompanied each other and made the way short with their
pleasing talk, each commending others wit in the several acting of their
parts, till at length the black eyed night looked from the East, and Phoebus
took his rest in Thetis lap, and this yoke of Pilgrims also according to the
custom of travelers, desired repose. Having taken up their Inn they caused
supper to be provided, and after supper withdrew themselves into a fair
chamber, where the maid counseled the Mistress to accept of a bed fellow,
telling the dangers of spirits, catching cold, idle thoughts, and panting
greise that often haunted the mind of a sole and weak woman. Dalindas words
were of such force that he prevailed, and the kind Gentlewoman affected her
maid so much, that she accepted of her society in bed: for these words she
spoke. Kind Dalinda although in this journey you are to accompany me for a
hand-maide, yet upon the condition you will swear to do me true service by
night as you have done by day, and serve me in bed as well as abroad I here
accep^t of you for my choice bed fellow. In conclusion Dalinda agreed to all
her kind Mistress proposed, And so to bed they went: from whence I think she
rose discharged of the Art of honesty. Thus this young couple past away their
journey merrily, until their long way had brought them to ye ports of Cades,
where they were lovingly received and brought to ye Abbess of yt Monastery.
She without further trial of their intents presented them ye oath of chastity
which they both solemnly took deeply vowing to keep themselves as they
were. Thus they were accepted for sisters, but sister Dalinda shifted bed
fellows so often ye three of the sisters grew sick of ye double disease, which
when Dalinda heard, for fear of punishment, found means to escape, and with
shipping came to Amsterdam in Holland, where he is wealthily married to the
Burgomaisters daughter of the City. The 3 sisters were thrust out of the
Monastery, and came home to their fathers, each of the^ bringing ye honorable
badge of chastity breeding in their bellies.

There are too many of those dissembling Pilgrims now a days. Some I could
write of, that would prove too shameful for the Writer, and cause the Reader
to blush; but leaving these close dissemblers to their most abhorred shame,
that waits on wantons lust: Trouble your selves to turn over these leaves, and
you shall find the dangerous estate of the needy Pilgrims. Let this suffice
for the second, and also to prove that all those that walk in this path, are
without doubt the Devils Pilgrims, or at least, going Pilgrimage unto him.

This needy Traveler is almost in the nature of an English Rogue, there is
small difference, and he is as rank a dissembler as ye other. There are of all
Nations that profess this needy life, but of all, there are most Irish, and I
can not blame them, for by nature they are borne to be lowsy, straglers and
stirrers up of rebellion; And since it has pleased God of his mercy to plant
his peaceable word, and by the means of his Servant, our most gracious
Sovereign Lord, King James (whom God long preserve) to make a civil
Country, of the most barbarous parts in Ireland: There are many that have
harkened to ye Devils whispering, and sworn their true service to his adopted
Son, the Romish Priest. No marvel though they cannot content themselves
under a quiet government, but had rather eat of the Scraps of Spain, and
Italy, then feed of the plenty of their reformed Country: they are borne
wild of brute bringing up, and so they mean to continue: they never knew what
reformation meant, neither do they purpose ever to know, for as they were
brought up, so they bring up their Children, only to shameful begging, in the
manner of Pilgrims, with their Letters of Confession in a Tin Box, which
they hang by their sides: They walk in the name of the Popes Servants; and
indeed the needy Hipocrites do thrive in their vile profession exceedingly. But
there is the mischief; what they g^ with impudent begging, they spend with
immodest abuses. There are also many of our countrymen, of this entreating
trade, which for some offense are constrained to leave the sweet and wholesome
air of their native country, and live in the abominations of the Babilonious
Mistress. And how the English Jesuits of Louaine do entreat them, you shall
plainly see when their caps are of, and their crowns discovered. But
courteous reader, feast no longer upon the needy dish of Pilgrims meat, but
turn thy gentle eye, and see the Saint described whereto they travel.

The third part of this Journey.
The Saints whereto they travel are diverse, and according to the nature of the
crime committed, or otherwise the necessity of the business they take in hand,
for these are the principal uses of Pilgrimage, but we are not to reason of
the voyage, but of the ariuall, for after many a weary step with joyful
hearts they enter the Temple, where their Saint stands, nay rather an
abominable Idol or image of stone, only it retains the shape of a dead man
or woman, according to the pleasure of the Caruer, and after the Caruer has
most artificially finished his Art, comes the Painter, and daubes it over with
his lively colors. Some of their Saints seem to smile, promising with an
auspicious eye, grace (as it were) to the penitent petitioner: others are
framed (by the Painters Art) with a show of weeping, and to your thoughts the
dead eye of the image will present tears, as though it did delacrimate man's
misery, or seem to weep with a grieuing sorrow for the sins of the solemn
suitor: Who can be so blind except the devil has blinded him, to put any
confidence in the Caruers skill, or the Painters Art? And who is not so blind
(but those whom God has opened their eyes that they may discern the clear
light of the Gospel, and give credit to this most heathen like and deuilish
doctrine; this is all that I can describe of their Saint, a carved stone, or a
painted, or gilded piece of wood. And the conclusion of my censure is this,
that all those y^ straggle in devotion to visit these Saints, cannot miss the
way toward the devil, and some travel barefoote too, because they will take
the more pains in this detested Pilgrimage. I am loath my pen should urge so
bare a subject any further, yet one thing gentle Reader with thy patience I
must unfold concerning their Saints, the much honored image of our blessed
Lady is in most places richly decked with robes of diverse colors, as for
example, where the Angel saluted her she is set forth in a white lawne robe
in token of chastity, with her golden tresses of hair hanging down her back,
and a modest blushing bespread her virginlike cheeks. After her conception,
she is adored with scarlet. After the birth of our Savior, in black velvet:
and at his passion she is pictured in a blew veil: thus after their own
inventions, they form the image of the blessed Uirgin, and also of all other
Saints, which I here omit.

The fourth part of this Journey.
The fourth part of our journey consists in the things they offer, which briefly
we will touch, because we long to vncap the dissembling Jesuit. The things
they offer are of three kinds: viz. first, Orisons; secondly, Gifts: and
thirdly Thanks: as for their Orisons, they are in this manner: they commonly
kneel on their bare knees, or else prostrate all along with their beads in
their hands, they say so many Pater-nosters, Aue-Maries, and Creeds as their
Ghostly father has appointed them, then they bless the image, desiring the
Saint in heaven to look down and see in what humble devotion he honors his
or her image, then they cross themselves which they call blessing themselves*
and departing into a celler or a vault under ground, where they say the Saints
bodies lie buried, they first do their devotion in prayers and after offer
such gifts as they bring, be it gold, silver, velvet, silks, cambrike, linen,
woollen, lead, corn, wine, oil, eggs, or any other commodity, but gold and
silver is the pleasingst gifts that the Saints accept of, and bringing good
store of that, no doubt but all shall go well with their suits: This being laid
upon the Altar the Priest consecrates it, absolues the party, and prays to the
Saint for him that he may have his desire: the Pilgrim sufficiently contented,
returns to the former image, and there pouring forth a million of thanks for
his good success, in that the Saint has vouched safe by his Priest to accept
of their unworthy offerings, and so they return discharged of their golden
burden.

Let this suffice for their offerings. Now concerning the fruits of this
journey before rehearsed, it is of two kinds, that is general and particular.
The general fruit is deceit which the poor Pilgrims pluck with greedy
appetites, the tree whereon this fruit grows, is ye Roman Church, and it
never misseth bearing* for neither ye heat of Summer, nor the cold of Winter
can destroy it, it is a forbidden fruit, and whosoever desires to taste
thereof must needs be deceived, it shows fair to the eye, and promises
life, but within it is corrupted and brings death, this is the general
fruit they reap for their travel. My reason is this, the devil is a common
deceiuer, and those that post Pilgrimage toward him must needs taste of this
deceiptfull fruit.

The second fruit they reap is particular, according to the disposition of
the party that desires it: this tree is general but it bears particular
fruits, as vain hope, wilful ignorance, blind zeal, corrupt belief, false
worship, and lastly death and damnation. It would seem idleness in me to
discourse of these severally, or to seem to dissuade men from this, therefore.
I will leave it to your own judgment, and to the learned Divines counsel,
which is of far more force, then my simple persuasions can be. Thus much for
this devilish Pilgrimage.

Friendly Reader, if this long journey has not wearied thee, go on a little
further, and thou shall see my honest simple skill in unmasking the Jesuits
plots, let thy heart be as free from envy, as my pen, which shall put down
nothing but truth, and what I have seen, and dare affirm by oath, were it to
their teethes. Therefore I hope none will tax me of malice, for I had rather
be convicted of simple plainness, having truth on my side, then commended for
an artificial writing where the truth is wronged by false suggestions. But
leaving all to thy kind considerations, I am purposed to go forward with my
unlearned style, relating their learned approved practices.

Here ends the Devils Pilgrimage, and here begins the bare-headed Jesuits.
THere are diverse Orders in the Romish religion, as namely ye Benedicts, ye
Dominictes, the Franciscans, the Augustines, the Carthusians, ye Carmelites, ye
Capucines, and lastly the Jesuits, of whom we purpose to speak, In Latin
they are called societatis Jesus: in Dutch, Iesuiter, which signifies Jesus
fellows, or at least the fellowship of Jesus. This Sect is but of small
continuance, or but of young growth, yet never Sect in the world has flourisht
so for the time, for in them the Devil shows himself to be a true
Politician, and they as his faithful instruments, spread his policy through
the greatest part of Europa:

In Louaine a City in Brabant, eight leagues distant from Antwerpe, is crected
a College at the King of Spaines charges for English Jesuits, wherein at this
present inhabits father Taubut, which is the Superior, father Joseph, father
Kempe, father Anthony, father Minister, and many more, besides punies and
nouicies, They have their College allowed them, for these purposes. First, to
reconcile or convert any of their countrymen that happen into their hands.
Secondly, to disguise themselves, and like Gentlemen to come into England, and
pry into Court and Counsels to know the state of ye land and Church, and to
transport their news to ye Pope, and their Spanish Lord. For these two purposes
they are maintained, but we will come a little nearer. Note this.
If a Gentleman chance to go over, their cinque port descries him presently,
then with letters they inuit him thither where they so work him, that he
shall hardly escape the snares and baits are laid to entangle him: when he is
caught they bring him to confession, where they know his quantity of substance,
and quality of mind, which being known, they shriue and ease him of his
substance, if he be learned they accept of him in their society, otherwise
send him to the Carthusians in Mackelyn, or else to Saint Omers in Flanders, or
to Rome, to make him the fitter for their purpose. This is their usage to
Gentlemen. If a poor man come to them, they accept him willingly, and examine
him concerning his conscience, if they find him not current, they admonish him
showing him books of instruction in the principles of religion: if this catch
him not, they allure him with promises, not only of a heavenly crown, but of
some earthly crowns: the needy snake cannot choose but nibble at this
charitable bait, and rather then fail they will then venture a crown or two,
and with comfortable works tell him that if he continue he shall not want, and
to the furthering of this comfort they give him letters of attestation, where
and when he was converted, from a loathed heriticke, to a godly and blessed
Catholic, then dismissing him the house, they tell him it is no shame to
beg and bid him be bold. Thus he that could live in his own country by his
honest labor, is converted, or rather by them perverted to an impudent and
shameless beggar: this is one of their privy policies, to shadow their
detested covetousness, for if they bestow an Angel of a beggar, they beg a
brace of hundreds from a gallant, thus they buy and sell their conscience but
they will be sure to gain by the bargain.

This abominable sect is luld in the lap, and snuggles in the breasts of the
seven deadly sins (as they call them) yet they have artificial maskes to
shadow all from the vulgar eyes of the world. Their pride is covered with
humility, as appears by their plain habit, and courteous speeches, yet their
hearts heap up ambitious thoughts: here may be a question asked, how I know
the heart? I will resolve you, I have seen them in their Gentlemanlike suits,
swagger in more proud fashion then a Spaniard: secondly, I have observed pride
in their speeches, for they have a kind of puryfied speech, exceeding al men's
in their own thoughts: Here I must compare them to many of our hypocritical
professors in England, which take more care of their words, then their deeds,
I have noted them to scorn all others that seemed any way to distaste their
Sect, and as I take it these are true notes of pride: for rouetousnesse they
cover it with a show of poverty, for they always profess themselves poor,
protesting if they had it, no man should want it, when as indeed they will have
it though all others should want it. You shall hears the proof of this
hereafter, when I speak of their banishment out of Venice, their envy is
colored with a show of desire to make the world wise with their learning, and
indeed they do grudge that any wisdom or learning breathes out of their
Colleges, they hate all good works that are not made by Jesuits, they cloak
wrath with meekness, and in outward show are very gentle and mild, but their
hearts more feirce then Lions: It is not unknown to many, what Peers and
Princes their wrath has brought to untimely ends, and yet these tyrants thirst
in their souls for more royal blood to quench their feirce wrath. But he is
above that preuents their desires and destroys their daily plots. Their sloth
is hidden from the eye of any, but God and themselves, and I think in this
sin they have least and most show: for as the old proverb is, they are
neither idle, nor well occupied, for they are ever busy but it is in the devils
service. And for gluttony, he dwells in their kitchen, but you shall never go
thither to see him. Last Lady letchery puts on this mask, no woman of what
degree soever may enter their second parts or inward door, but by your leave
the Jesuits enter privately within their inward doors, and do the deeds of
darkness with them when they please. But this may be thought a slander,
therefore give me leave to free my self from this suspicion. In Louaine there
is an English Cloister of Gentlewomen, and the Lady Abbess much respected for
her hidden virtues, in which Cloister their dwells a young man called Raph,
which loved a waiting Gentlewoman, whose Lady often frequented the company of
the Lady Abbess, by which means, Raph and the maid had opportunity to
confer. It chanced one of the English Jesuits, a young man repaired thither
often likewise, and in short time grew into such inward acquaintance with the
maid, that Raph took his love with her belly full of young bones, which
afterwads confessed were of the Jesuits making. Raph made his complaint to the
Cloisrer, and told father Talbut one of their holy Family had enjoyed too much
homely familiarity with his wife, and made him a father before his time;
protesting if they would not make him amends, he would publish it through the
whole Country. But the Jesuits agreeing amongst themselves, stopped his mouth
with an hundred Angels: whereupon Raphe was content to father the Jesuits
child. Thus you see, though they are not content a woman should enter their
Cloister, yet they themselves will vouchsafe to enter their closets. But we
will leave to speak more of these loving laborers in the Devils harvest, and
write briefly of the Venetian villains, which shall answer my promise in the
leaf going before, to prove their cloked covetousness.

In this famous City of Venice inhabited certain Colleges of Jesuits, to
whom all the chiese Merchants wives went to confession, and were appointed such
horrible penance, that their husbands riches, which was exceeding great, began
to waste, in such sort that the Merchants began to take a severe account of
their servants, but to small effect; till at last, one perceived his wife to
purse up great store of gold in an evening whilst she thought he had slept:
and being ready to issue out of the the chamber door, belike to hide it
against the next confession day, her husband stepped out of his bed, and stayed
her, using these words: Stay sweet wife, I must talk with you. The amazed
woman made no reply, but stood as it were in a Trance. The Merchant having her
in a private chamber, locked the door, and taking his naked poniard, placing
the point to her breast, threatened with oaths her present death, if she would
not reveal the occasion of pursing up that gold. The poor woman affrighted
with these words, confessed all what she knew of herself and others. This night
past away, and on the morrow the Merchant sent for the men whose wines his wife
had accused, and relating the whole story which she before had demonstrated,
and then before them all affirmed. They all agreed to shroud themselves in ye
chamber behind an Oras, whilst his wife by a private token sent for her
Confessor, who presently came, asking the cause of her importuning him there.
She, with many dissembling sighs, told him about a thing which much troubled
her conscience. Be of good cheer (quoth he) it shall go hard but I will unload
your conscience of any sin whatsoever. Therefore speak your mind. Alas
(quoth she) in my sleep I chanced to dream of you, and in my dream spoke of
the masses of gold and silver that you have had of me: my husband being awake,
ouerheard me, and took hold of my words, casting it in my teeth daily. I
denied it strongly. He affirms it is truth, and vrges me to the revealing of it,
with persuasions and threatenings, so that I know not longer how to dissemble,
or defend it, neither can I furnish you with any more treasure, by reason of
his strict accounts, and narrow prying into my doings: therefore (holy father)
most entirely I do entreat you to resolve me in this most dangerous case what
is best to be done, and I shall most willingly do my endeavor to follow your
often aproued good counsel. You say well (quoth the old Fox) and for your
souls good rest constant, and confess nothing, no though you should incur
the greatest displeasure of your husband; but rather count it a blessing that
you are worthy to suffer reproof for the Mother Church. Go forward in your
holy work, and to bring treasure to the Church, where neither rust nor moth
shall corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal. So shall you be blessed,
and receive for your corruptible gold, an incorruptible crown of glory. But if
you faint and slack in this good work begun, you shall be tormented in your
soul. Whereat the Merchants rushed forth, laying hold of the Jesuit, and told
him they meant he should be tormented in (...) body. And drawing a poniard the
woman's husband spoke as follows: Uillaine, either disclose thy plots in
receiving our substance, or presently prepare for Hell: for this resolved hand
shall send thee past Purgatory. And bending his poniard at the amazed Jesuits
breast, the quaking slave fell down on his knees praying for mercy, and he
would discover all, and restore them their several wealths double. They all
affirmed, you are not worth so much. Yes (queth the Jesuit) I will make a shift
to keep my word: therefore I pray you tell me on your consciences, what may
the sum amount unto that you miss. They answered, eighteen thousand pounds
sterling. Peace (quoth the Priest) if you will promise me faithfully never to
report it, you shall go and receive the sum double. It is enough (said the
Gentlemen:) So they agreed, and marched together to the Jesuits Cloister, where
they were admitted, and a most rich banquet provided. But the Father Superior
caused a mortal potion to be tempered for them all; and taking a beaker of
Ipocras, drunk a health to them all: and pouring forth the infectious wine
with great courtesy, he had them all heartily welcome, affirming they should
possess the fore-written sum with expedition. The Gentleman (whether
mistrusting the deceit, or rather God was not pleased that this villainy should
proceed) took a Stone shell standing by him, and pouring the poison therein,
the shell brake in pieces. Upon this sight the other Gentlemen drew to their
weapons, the Jesuits likewise armed themselves: and in mean while the
Gentlemen played the men, and got out into the streets, crying, Treason,
Treason, with their weapons drawn. At length they got into the Marketplace,
unto whom resorted all the States, and most sufficientest Merchants to know the
cause of this clamor. So one of them got up on the Stage, where their Comedies
are acted, and uttered this speech: Renowned States, and worthy Citizens, whom
all ye world admires for polic^ why will you suffer your selves to be
undermined? you your wives and children, know this, we are all deceived and
ouer-ruled: not by the gracious directions of you the Honorable States, but by
the close dissembling Jesuits; which (if it be not reformed) will be the ruin
of this most famous City. I speak the truth, which some of my brethren here
can witness, and most of our wives, by whom our wealth is transported to the
Jesuits: which when we knew, they invited us to a banquet, affirming us our
money double; but there they sought to poison us: but God has delivered us out
of their hands to discover their villainy. Therefore worthy States, search their
Cloisters, and you shall find infinite store of treasure there. This upon my
souls safety, and lives peril, I affirm it for truth.

Upon this report, the States taking these Merchants along with them, repaired
where all was at full related. Whereupon, the Duke assisting the States, they
were all banished the City, having nothing allowd them but their Books and
Habits. After their departure, their Colleges were searched, wherein was found
infinite treasure. And by a public proclamation of the Duke and States, the
Merchants were summoned to the College, where (upon their oaths) every man
seized on his own, and the ouer-plus, that no man challenged, came to the Duke
and States, to the value of five hundred millions, besides plate and vestures:
yet these dissemblers professed themselves poor.

Thus were these Jesuits banished from Venice, which displeased the Popes
holiness not a little; nevertheless these stragglers were by their false
fellows presently planted and enriched. These Jesuits are much like the Jews,
for let them come where they will, they thrive by their place. Nay that which
is more, let them be now in extreme poverty, yet with one years dealing they
will grow exceeding rich, that other men shall smart for their prosperity, I
think this point of knanery has set his cap on the one side and discovered
half his head, but this plot following shall quite disfurnish him of his cap,
I pray you note it, for it is the fulfilling of a promise that I made, when I
spoke of the Pilgrimage at Mastricke, concerning the drouth of this years, and
so I mean to conclude my little volume, with that most abominable villainy

In Mastricke, as I said before, there is a frequented Pilgrimage, to Saint
Sceruias. You know this year there was an exceeding drought. It was my chance
to be there at ye present, (therefore I will report but what I have seen) And
many a hundred came in blind devotion and offered gifts to ye Saint in hope of
rain: notwithstanding the drouth continued. The Jesuits of ye City being loath
to let so fair and profitable a game slip without chase, let loose their dogs,
which fastened on this fashion. One of their smothest tongues, anointed with
the Devils oil, steps up into the Pulpit, and vtters his Sermon to the people
in this sort. This drouth (quoth he) is sent from heaven to plague the earth
for ye peoples unthankfulness and neglecting of their duties. Here (quoth he)
you bring offerings to this blessed Saint, but it is presented with unhallowed
hands, and polluted hearts, therefore to prevent the Lords wrath, and the Saints
fury, bring your gifts to us, and our holy Society will consecrate them, and
with pure hearts and unspotted hands offer them up to this most holy Saint, who
no doubt but will be pleased in love to accept them. Moreover (quoth he) your
gifts are defiled with covetousness, but Beloved you must bring it willingly,
and according to your ability; and then no doubt but heavens drops will quench
the thirsty earth. This was ye mark he aimed at in his Sermon, which as the
Devil would have it took effect, and profited ye Jesuits very much. For after
this al offerings were first brought to them, which they first under show of
sanctification stole the most and best part away, the Cannons in Saint Sceruias
Church got the rest, but the Picture and the Pilgrims were both cheated. After
along time of drouth it pleased God to send rain; then they sent plackets out
to warn the country to a thanks offering, where after Mass a Sermon was made
in honor of this worshipful image, afterward they were let into a secret
wide room, adjoining to the Church, where his Portrature stands, raised in
lively colors, two Priests kept the door, and every man gave his devotion to
see their tragical show. It appeared much like our stage players, but only
they wanted a fool in the show. Yet ye two Foxes made geese of all them y^
came to behold it: thus their monstrous abuses are made manifest. For what will
not these men deal in for gain, that set price of the weather.

So far has truth ventured to vncap the Jesuits, ye all may plainly
discern a bare-headed cunning knave. I would wish all my friends and
countrymen to take heed of their company, for their Society is dangerous, and
their snares and baits are many; their religion was brought in by Ignatius, but
it shall go out with eternal ignomy, when the Almighty is pleased either to
convert, or utterly root them out. I could prosecute their polliticke close
plots further, and show the manner of their hellish Inquisition, common, and
private Counsels, their Libraries, and confessions, but so much has been
heretofore written, therefore I will not enter into their works. Let him yt
sowes reap, and those that plant eat of their own fruit. As for this I
protest it was mine own observation, which I have willingly set forth, for the
good of my loving countrymen.

To speak of one general point briefly, I hope shall neither tyer me nor
weary you. I pray you observe it. In the Empire of Christendom for one
Protestant there are ten Papists, and it were (...) to think there are no
well conditioned people amongst the^, this I dare affirm upon my conscience,
that without doubt there are many godly men and women, truly devout and
zealous, ye would willingly come to see the clear shining light of truth, but
these men of darkness stand between them and the light, and bar the truth
from them. But for the Jesuits, thus I censure them generally upon my
conscience, that of a hundredth there are scarce two just dealing men. For
breach of oaths they call equivocation, and all their villainies they can
dispense with. But alas their ending illusions without Gods mercy, will turn
to their endless confusions, where they shall curse their tutor the Devil,
for instructing them in these and many more their deceitful and pollitick
(...). Let us give thanks to him y^ suffers none (...) wolves to devour his
chosen Flock here in (...). And lastly you iocond Jesuits, that strut it out
in your dissembling holy habits, look to it, I have only discovered your bald
crowns, but I fear me, if you come masking here into England in your former
and accustomed disguises, the excutioner will rip up your bloody breasts, and
discover your treacherous hearts, And then the Popes Bull will rear at
T^^orne. Till then Farewell.

FINIS.

